Dumping syndrome is a common but underdiagnosed complication of gastric and oesophageal surgery. We initiated a Delphi consensus process with international multidisciplinary experts. We defined the scope, proposed statements and searched electronic databases to survey the literature. Eighteen experts participated in the literature summary and voting process evaluating 62 statements. We evaluated the quality of evidence using grading of recommendations assessment, development and evaluation (GRADE) criteria. Consensus (defined as >80% agreement) was reached for 33 of 62 statements, including the definition and symptom profile of dumping syndrome and its effect on quality of life. The panel agreed on the pathophysiological relevance of rapid passage of nutrients to the small bowel, on the role of decreased gastric volume capacity and release of glucagon-like peptide 1. Symptom recognition is crucial, and the modified oral glucose tolerance test, but not gastric emptying testing, is useful for diagnosis. An increase in haematocrit >3% or in pulse rate >10 bpm 30 min after the start of the glucose intake are diagnostic of early dumping syndrome, and a nadir hypoglycaemia level <50 mg/dl is diagnostic of late dumping syndrome. Dietary adjustment is the agreed first treatment step; acarbose is effective for late dumping syndrome symptoms and somatostatin analogues are preferred for patients who do not respond to diet adjustments and acarbose.
Calorie restriction (CR) can prolong the human lifespan, but enforcing long-term CR is difficult. Therefore, a compound that reproduces the effect of CR without CR is needed. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge on compounds with CR mimetic (CRM) effects. More than 10 compounds have been listed as CRMs, some of which are conventionally categorized as upstream-type CRMs showing glycolytic inhibition, while the others are categorized as downstream-type CRMs that regulate or genetically modulate intracellular signaling proteins. Among these, we focus on upstream-type CRMs and propose their classification as compounds with energy metabolism inhibition effects, particularly glucose metabolism modulation effects. The upstream-type CRMs reviewed include chitosan, acarbose, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, and hexose analogs such as 2-deoxy-d-glucose, d-glucosamine, and d-allulose, which show antiaging and longevity effects. Finally, we discuss the molecular definition of upstream-type CRMs.
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a critical global health issue, affecting nearly half a billion people worldwide, with an increasing incidence rate and mortality. Type 2 diabetes is caused by the body's inability to effectively use insulin, and approximately 95% of patients have type 2 diabetes. alpha-glucosidase has emerged as an important therapeutic target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. In the past years, three alpha-glucosidase inhibitors have been approved for clinical use, namely acarbose, voglibose, and miglitol. However, the undesirable effects associated with these carbohydrate mimic-based alpha-glucosidase inhibitors have limited their clinical applications. Consequently, researchers have shifted their focus towards the development of non-carbohydrate mimic alpha-glucosidase inhibitors that can safely and effectively manage postprandial hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes. Herein, this article provides an overview of the synthetic alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, particularly those based on heterocycles, which have been reported from 2018 to 2022. This article aims to provide useful information for medicinal chemists in further developing clinically available anti-type 2 diabetes drugs.
Postprandial hypoglycemia (PPH) is a complex and multifactorial complication of bariatric surgery (BS). PPH may cause severe symptoms or be asymptomatic. The treatment of this condition requires dietary changes, but severe cases require drug therapy. The number of therapeutic options is limited and are often associated with adverse side effects. Different classes of drugs have been used and tested, but the resolution of PPH remains a challenge for physicians and patients. In this review, we gathered articles on PPH after BS from PubMed searches (2001 to 2022) and focused on the main drugs tested for the treatment of this condition, such as acarbose, somatostatin analogues, type 2 sodium-glucose cotransporter inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, and liraglutide. Avexitide and glucagon pump are two new therapeutic options that have been recently tested. For the search, the terms "postbariatric hypoglycemia," "bariatric surgery," and "late dumping syndrome" were used. PPH after BS is a frequent condition that should always be evaluated after BS. Treatment should be individualized and the available therapeutic options may be useful based on the condition's pathophysiology.
Diabetes is a major health problem worldwide. Glycemic control is the main goal in the management of type 2 diabetes. While many anti-diabetic drugs and guidelines are available, almost half of diabetic patients do not reach their treatment goal and develop complications. The glucose-lowering response to anti-diabetic drug differs significantly between individuals. Relatively little is known about the factors that might underlie this response. The identification of predictors of response to anti-diabetic drugs is essential for treatment personalization. Unfortunately, the evidence on predictors of drugs response in type 2 diabetes is scarce. Only a few trials were designed for specific groups of patients (e.g. patients with renal impairment or older patients), while subgroup analyses of larger trials are frequently unreported. Physicians need help in picking the drug which provides the maximal benefit, with minimal side effects, in the right dose, for a specific patient, using an omics-based approach besides the phenotypic characteristics.
The metabolic syndrome (MetS) is associated with a higher risk for both, type 2 diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease. The cornerstone of treatment is lifestyle modification, encompassing weight reduction and physical exercise. However, pharmacotherapy is usually also required to achieve the recommended target values for the various components of the MetS, such as hypertension, dysglycemia and dyslipidemia. Regarding lipid treatment, statins are the main therapeutic agents while in blood pressure control a significant amount of pathophysiological and clinical evidence would suggest the use, as first line agents, of ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers. Metformin seems to be the drug of choice for dysglycemia, specially since recent evidence questions the safety of thiazolidinediones. New drugs, targeting multiple components of the MetS, are under development but no data are currently available regarding their long-term efficacy and safety profile. In general, a multifactorial approach is recommended to decrease cardiovascular risk in patients with the MetS.
Diabetes is associated with an increase risk for cardiovascular disease (CVD). Recently, macrovascular complications of diabetes have been shown to start before the development of diabetes. Indeed, several clinical studies have confirmed the increased risk of CVD in patients with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT). Since postprandial hyperglycemia and insulin resistance are thought to play a central role in the development and progression of CVD in patients with IGT, amelioration of postprandial hyperglycemia as well as insulin resistance is a therapeutic target for the prevention of CVD in these high-risk patients. Acarbose, an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor, delays the absorption of carbohydrate from the small intestine, thereby reducing postprandial hyperglycemia. Further, recently, acarbose has been shown to improve insulin resistance in vivo. These findings suggest that acarbose is a promising metabolic modifier that could reduce the risk of CVD in patients with the metabolic syndrome. In this paper, we review the clinical utility of acarbose in various cardiometabolic disorders.
Alpha glucosidase inhibitors (AGIs) are a unique class of anti-diabetic drugs. Derived from bacteria, these oral drugs are enzyme inhibitors which do not have a pancreato -centred mechanism of action. Working to delay carbohydrate absorption in the gastrointestinal tract, they control postprandial hyperglycaemia and provide unquestioned cardiovascular benefit. Specially suited for a traditional Pakistani carbohydrate-rich diet, AGIs have been termed the 'untapped diamonds' of diabetology. The use of these oral antidiabetic drugs (OADs) that target pathophysiology in the early stages of type 2 diabetes, notably to reduce postprandial hyperglycaemia and hyperinsulinaemia will inevitably increase with time. This review describes the history of their development, mechanism of action, basic and clinical pharmacology, and suggests practical, evidence-based guidance for their optimal use.
Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a potentially reversible state of impaired cognitive function or altered consciousness in patients with liver disease or portosystemic shunting. Overt HE is a particularly pressing problem. Given the many targets of treatment and lack of a clear singular cause of overt HE, there is no consensus on a single best treatment. Over the past several years, high-quality studies have been conducted on the various pharmacologic therapies for HE and, as more data emerge, hopefully HE will become a much more easily treated complication of decompensated liver disease.
Diabetes mellitus leads to the development of a host of micro- and macrovascular complications, which collectively lead to substantial morbidity and mortality. Among the microvascular complications of diabetes, diabetic kidney disease is the most common. Macrovascular complications from diabetes lead to a 2- to 4-fold increase in the incidence of cardiovascular disease and up to twice the mortality from cardiovascular causes as compared with nondiabetic individuals. This article discusses the various drug classes used to treat diabetes mellitus, and reviews the current clinical evidence linking glycemic control using these drug classes on diabetic kidney and cardiovascular disease.
Dumping syndrome and postprandial hypoglycemia have been reported after Nissen fundoplication. The physiopathologic mechanisms are poorly understood and a variety of therapies have failed to control the hypoglycemia in these patients. We report a series of 6 infants with postprandial hypoglycemia after Nissen fundoplication who were treated successfully with acarbose.
The prospective cohort study, named PURE, found that in >135,000 participants from 18 countries, nutritive carbohydrates increase human mortality, whereas dietary fat reduces it, requesting a fundamental change of current nutritional guidelines. Experimental evidence from animal models provides synergizing mechanistic concepts as well as pharmacological options to mimic low-carb or ketogenic diets.
It is becoming increasingly acknowledged that people with Type 2 Diabetes represent what can be termed "an enriched population": a group that has the greatest risk of morbidity and mortality from cardiovascular diseases such as myocardial infarcts and strokes. Due to the tremendous toll, both human and financial, that these cardiovascular diseases result in, major efforts are being put forth to decrease their occurrence. It is clear that success in this endeavor is optimized by achieving target levels of glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol. Analysis of the individual drugs used to treat these comorbidities of the cardiovascular dysmetabolic syndrome has brought an understanding that frequently monotherapy is ineffective, and a clear appraisal of the benefits of available pharmaceuticals can result in a successful decision about which agents to include in regimens of combination therapy. This success translates into ultimately reducing the untimely death and disability that is unfortunately all too common among the people with these illnesses. As diabetes continues to be increasing alarmingly among all segments of the population, there is an urgency for this need. The knowledge is present; only the application is not.
Insulin has been the mainstay of treatment of diabetes during pregnancy for decades. Although glyburide and metformin are classified as category B during pregnancy, recent research has suggested that these oral agents alone or in conjunction with insulin may be safe for the treatment of gestational diabetes (GDM). This paper summarizes the data on the use of glyburide and metformin for treatment of GDM.
Acanthamoeba keratitis is a sight-endangering eye infection, and causative organism Acanthamoeba presents a significant concern to public health, given escalation of contact lens wearers. Contemporary therapy is burdensome, necessitating prompt diagnosis and aggressive treatment. None of the contact lens disinfectants (local and international) can eradicate Acanthamoeba effectively. Using a range of compounds targeting cellulose, ion channels, and biochemical pathways, we employed bioassay-guided testing to determine their anti-amoebic effects. The results indicated that acarbose, indaziflam, terbuthylazine, glimepiride, inositol, vildagliptin and repaglinide showed anti-amoebic effects. Compounds showed minimal toxicity on human cells. Therefore, effects of the evaluated compounds after conjugation with nanoparticles should certainly be the subject of future studies and will likely lead to promising leads for potential applications.
With the increase in obesity and sedentary lifestyles, the incidence of diabetes among reproductive-aged women is rising globally. Providers are expected to care for a growing number of women with gestational diabetes (GDM) in the coming decades. Traditionally, insulin has been considered the standard for management of GDM, when diet and exercise fail to achieve tight maternal glucose control without the risk of transfer of insulin across the placenta. Understanding the effectiveness and safety of the use of oral diabetes agents during pregnancy for both maternal and neonatal outcomes as an alternative management option is essential to the care of women with GDM and their offspring. In this review, our objectives were to (1) summarise the available evidence on the efficacy these medications, (2) review available data on adverse effect, (3) discuss current gaps in research, outlining limitations in current study designs that deserve attention and (4) summarise key points for the practicing clinician.
BACKGROUND/AIM: Therapy for idiopathic reactive hypoglycemia is ineffective and impractical. Acarbose, an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor, decreases the absorbed glucose load. This study was done to determine the efficacy of acarbose in this syndrome. METHODS: Six patients with symptoms suggestive of postprandial hypoglycemia were chosen consecutively. Three-hour oral glucose tolerance tests using 75 g of glucose were done on each patient. The patients were then treated with acarbose with each meal. RESULTS: All patients had symptomatic hypoglycemia during testing. After 4 weeks of acarbose therapy, all patients were asymptomatic on a regular diet. CONCLUSION: Acarbose is efficacious in the management of idiopathic reactive hypoglycemia.
Secretatogues are a class of agents that achieve their hypoglycemic effects through stimulating insulin release. They include the sulfonylureas, repaglinide, and the investigational agent glucagon-like peptide. The secretagogue agents have been studied extensively as monotherapy and in conjunction with other classes of oral agents, including alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, bijuanides, and thiazolidinediones, for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. This article reviews the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic differences of the secretagogues, as well as the most recent clinical trials. Such information should be helpful when deciding which agent or agents will yield the best glycemic control for an individual patient.
Sucrose is a major sweetener added to various foods and beverages. Excessive intake of sucrose leads to increases in blood glucose levels, which can result in the development and exacerbation of lifestyle-related diseases such as obesity and diabetes. In this study, we established an in vivo evaluation system using silkworms to explore substances that suppress the increase in blood glucose levels caused by dietary intake of sucrose. Silkworm hemolymph glucose levels rapidly increased after intake of a sucrose-containing diet. Addition of acarbose or voglibose, alpha-glycosidase inhibitors clinically used for diabetic patients, suppressed the dietary sucrose-induced increase in the silkworm hemolymph glucose levels. Screening performed using the sucrose-induced postprandial hyperglycemic silkworm model allowed us to identify some lactic acid bacteria that inhibit the increase in silkworm hemolymph glucose levels caused by dietary intake of sucrose. The inhibitory effects of the Lactococcus lactis #Ll-1 bacterial strain were significantly greater than those of different strains of lactic acid bacteria. No effect of the Lactococcus lactis #Ll-1 strain was observed in silkworms fed a glucose diet. These results suggest that the sucrose diet-induced postprandial hyperglycemic silkworm is a useful model for evaluating chemicals and lactic acid bacteria that suppress increases in blood glucose levels.
We report a case of lymphocytic colitis induced by acarbose. Our immunopathological findings shown before and after rechallenge are consistent with a colonic immune-cell activation by the drug.
