Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs (beta-blockers) are one of the most frequently used class of cardiovascular drugs that are mainly used in conventional dosage forms., which have their own limitations including hepatic first-pass metabolism, high incidence of adverse effects due to variable absorption profiles, higher frequency of administration and poor patient compliance. Essentially, attempts have been made to develop novel drug delivery systems for beta-blockers, including transdermal delivery systems, to circumvent the drawbacks of conventional drug delivery. However, so far none of the beta-blocker drugs have been marketed as transdermal delivery systems. Nevertheless, there have been noteworthy research endeavours worldwide at the laboratory level to investigate the skin permeation and to develop transdermal formulations of beta-blockers including: propranolol, metoprolol, atenolol, timolol, levobunolol, bupranolol, bopindolol, mepindolol, sotalol, labetolol, pindolol, acebutolol and oxprenolol. Innovative research exploiting penetration-enhancing strategies, such as iontophoresis, electroporation, microneedles and sonophoresis, holds promise for the successful use of these drugs as consumer-friendly transdermal dosage forms in clinical practice. This paper presents an overview of the transdermal research on this important class of drugs.
In a single-blind, randomised, crossover study in 10 asthmatic patients, the effects of approximately equipotent oral doses of 3 cardioselective beta-blockers-atenolol (100 mg), metoprolol (100 mg), and acebutolol (300 mg)-and 4 non-cardioselective beta-blockers-proranolol (100 mg), oxprenolol (100 mg), pindolol (5 mg), and timolol (10 mg) upon FEV1 were compared. All drugs, except pindolol, produced a significant reduction in standing pulse rate and prevented an increase in heart rate after inhaled isoprenaline (1500 microgram). All drugs caused a fall in FEV1 but only atenolol did not differ significantly from placebo in this respect. The bronchodilator response to inhaled isoprenaline was blocked by the 4 non-cardioselective drugs; the 3 cardioselective agents permitted some bronchodilatation, but only atenolol did not differ from placebo.
Infantile haemangioma (IH) is the most common tumour during early childhood. Although these benign lesions resolve spontaneously, up until recently laryngotracheal sites of IH required invasive management. The dramatic efficacy of beta-blockers on IH has radically changed the prognosis. Surgery is now no longer indicated as first-line therapy, but should only be performed for difficult, refractory cases, or in the presence of absolute contraindications to beta-blockers. Long-term steroid therapy is also no longer indicated. Propranolol can be used as first-line, single-agent therapy.
Beta blockers (beta-adrenoceptor blockers) are known to be used for the prophylactic treatment of migraine. The improvement of migraine in the patients who recieved propranolol for angina pectoris revealed the effectiveness of propranolol in migraine prophylaxis. Many clinical trials have confirmed that propranolol is effective in the prophylactic treatment of migraine. Other beta-blocking drugs, namely nadolol, metoprolol, atenolol, timolol and bisoprolol, have also been demonstrated to be effective in the prophylaxis of migraine. In contrast, several beta blockers with intrinsic sympathetic activity (ISA), such as alprenolol, oxprenolol, pindolol and acebutolol, have not been demonstrated to be effective in migraine prophylaxis. In this review, we have descrived the pharmacologic background and pharmacokinetics of the beta blockers that demonstrated a prophylactic effect for migraine will be described. We have also reviewed the results of clinical trials of beta-blocking drugs for migraine.
We investigated the possibility of a rebound increase in sympathetic response after stopping beta-blocker treatment by measuring heart rate under conditions of increased sympathetic drive, as provided by standing with vasodilatation, or the Valsalva manoeuvure. Significant rebound increases in heart rate were observed after stopping propranolol given for one or more weeks but not when given for only four days. The amplitude of the rebound heart rate relative to the control heart rate off beta-blockers was similar after propranolol, atenolol, oxprenolol, or acebutolol, and in hyperthyroid subjects.
Intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA) characterizes a group of beta blockers that are able to stimulate beta-adrenergic receptors (agonist effect) and to oppose the stimulating effects of catecholamines (antagonist effect) in a competitive way. Partial agonists are ligands that elicit a submaximal response when bound to beta receptors at maximal occupancy. In the isolated rat atrium, acebutolol produces a maximal stimulatory effect that is only 17 +/- 8% of the maximal effect induced by the full beta agonist isoproterenol. The presence of ISA results in less resting bradycardia and less of a reduction in cardiac output than is observed with beta blockers without ISA. In the long term, partial beta agonists may produce arterial vasodilation and increase arterial compliance, possibly leading to additional beneficial effects in the treatment of hypertension. beta blockers with ISA do not have adverse effects on plasma lipoproteins during long-term treatment; in addition, the presence of ISA could counteract the up-regulation of beta adrenoceptors often observed with beta blockers without ISA. Finally, the presence of ISA has been a conflicting issue for the use of such beta blockers in secondary prevention after myocardial infarction. However, the impressive results of the Acebutolol Prevention of Secondary Infarction trial in high-risk patients after myocardial infarction show that acebutolol, a beta blocker with moderate partial agonist activity, can be effective in decreasing the postinfarction mortality rate. By exhibiting a strikingly different hemodynamic profile from that of beta blockers without ISA, the partial beta agonists form an intriguing pharmacologic class of drugs for which prospective clinical trials should be extensively pursued.
INTRODUCTION: Fifteen percent of proliferating infantile hemangioma (IH) require intervention because of the threat to function or life, ulceration, or tissue distortion. Propranolol is the mainstay treatment for problematic proliferating IH. Other beta-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors have been explored as alternative treatments. AREAS COVERED: The demonstration of a hemogenic endothelium origin of IH, with a neural crest phenotype and multi-lineage differentiation capacity, regulated by the renin-angiotensin system, underscores its programmed biologic behavior and accelerated involution induced by propranolol, other beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors. We review the indications, dosing regimens, duration of treatment, efficacy and adverse effects of propranolol, and therapeutic alternatives including oral atenolol, acebutolol, nadolol, intralesional propranolol injections, topical propranolol and timolol, and oral captopril. EXPERT OPINION: Improved understanding of the biology of IH provides insights into the mechanism of action underscoring its accelerated involution induced by propranolol, other beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors. More research is required to understand the optimal dosing and duration, efficacy and safety of these alternative therapies. Recent demonstration of propranolol's actions mediated by non-beta-adrenergic isomer R-propranolol on stem cells, offers an immense opportunity to harness the efficacy of beta-blockers to induce accelerated involution of IH, while mitigating their beta-adrenergic receptor-mediated adverse effects.
Patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension were treated with beta-blockers and diuretics given separately and in combination. During single-drug therapy, the majority of patients exhibited clearly superior antihypertensive responses to either one type of drug or the other; only rarely were the beta-blockers and the diuretic equally effective in an individual patient. A poor response to diuretic therapy tended to predict a good response to a beta-blocker, and vice versa. Pretreatment renin measurements were not helpful in predicting the differing responses to single-drug treatment in this study population. These findings indicate that when one of these types of drug is ineffective as monotherapy in treating hypertension, the other type should be substituted before considering combination treatment. Combined therapy with the beta-blockers and diuretics also gave variable results, although poor antihypertensive responses could be attributed to excessive stimulation of the renin-aldosterone system by the diuretic component of the combination. The effectiveness of this form of treatment might thus be enhanced by the use of low diuretic doses.
The successful management of subglottic hemangioma with propranolol has been reported. We report three cases of subglottic hemangioma treated with the cardioselective beta-blocker acebutolol, 8 mg/kg/day. Treatment was efficient in two cases while an open procedure was necessary in the third child. In our experience, acebutolol could be easily administered in oral form twice-a-day only with a dose that was adaptable according to the growth of the child and showed no side effects. We also report a case of rebound growth after beta-mimetic drug use and the efficiency of propranolol treatment in such a recurrence. Considering the lack of side effects and the advantages in terms of administration, we suggest acebutolol as a first-line treatment of subglottic hemangiomas for which intervention is required.
Systolic blood pressure, heart rate, and blood glucose concentration were measured in the first three days of life in 10 infants born to mothers who had received acebutolol, a cardioselective beta-adrenergic-blocking agent, for hypertension in pregnancy and compared with values in 10 infants whose mothers had received methyldopa. The blood pressure was expressed as a percentage of the expected value. Blood pressure was significantly lower in the infants of the mothers given acebutolol (p less than 0.02, less than 0.01, and less than 0.01 respectively during the three days of observation). Heart rate was also lower, but the significance was only at the 0.05 level. Blood glucose was not significantly different between the two groups. These results suggest that care should be taken in prescribing beta-adrenergic-blocking drugs during pregnancy.
Gastrointestinal absorption of several beta-blockers is inhibited by citrus juices, although molecular mechanism(s) lying on their small intestinal absorption has not yet been identified. Here, we attempted to demonstrate involvement of both influx and efflux transporters in vivo in gastrointestinal absorption of celiprolol in mice. Plasma concentration of celiprolol (3 mg/kg) after oral administration was mostly under the limit of quantification in wild mice, whereas that in mdr1a/b knockout (mdr1a/b(-/-)) mice was much more obvious, indicating P-glycoprotein-mediated efflux. Then, the oral absorption of celiprolol in mdr1a/b(-/-) mice was further examined to investigate influx transport mechanism with avoiding effect of P-glycoprotein. Coadministration of bromosulfophthalein (BSP), an inhibitor of various influx transporters including organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP) reduced plasma celiprolol concentration. Inhibition by BSP of celiprolol uptake from apical membranes was confirmed in Ussing-type chamber of small intestinal tissues. Uptake of celiprolol by human small intestinal transporter OATP-A/1A2 was also confirmed in Xenopus Laevis oocytes. Interestingly, OATP-A/1A2 accepts various beta-blockers including acebutolol, atenolol and sotalol, oral absorption of which is inhibited by coadministration of citrus juice or telithromycin in human. Taken together, these findings have suggested fundamental role of influx transport system(s) in oral absorption of celiprolol.
A fatal case of acebutolol self-poisoning is presented. After single-step liquid-liquid alkaline extraction, acebutolol was identified by using an HPLC/DAD screening procedure. By means of a specific HPLC method, acebutolol was then quantified in a large range of postmortem samples. The blood acebutolol concentration was 34.7 micrograms/mL. The tissue distribution of the drug is discussed in the light of the existing literature.
Higher AUC and Cmax values were obtained for metoprolol, oxprenolol and propranolol in groups receiving the low-dose oestrogen-ethinyl oestradiol oral contraceptive, but statistical significance was reached only with metoprolol AUC. The oral contraceptive had the opposite effect on acebutolol AUC and Cmax but this was not significant. The oral contraceptive had no detectable effects on the tmax and t 1/2 values of any of the beta-adrenoceptor blockers.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the ability of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and beta blockers to slow the development of end stage renal failure in non-diabetic patients with chronic renal failure. DESIGN: Open randomised multicentre trial with three year follow up. SETTING: Outpatient departments of six French hospitals. PATIENTS: 100 hypertensive patients with chronic renal failure (initial serum creatinine 200-400 mumol/l. 52 randomised to enalapril and 48 to beta blockers (conventional treatment). INTERVENTIONS: Enalapril or beta blocker was combined with frusemide and, if necessary, a calcium blocker or centrally acting drug in patients whose diastolic pressure remained above 90 mm Hg. RESULTS: 17 patients receiving conventional treatment and 10 receiving enalapril developed end stage renal failure. The cumulative renal survival rate was significantly better in the enalapril group than in the conventional group (P < 0.05). The slope of the reciprocal serum creatinine concentration was steeper in the conventionally treated patients (-6.89 x 10(-5)l/mumol/month) than in the enalapril group (-4.17 x 10(-5)l/mumol/month; P < 0.05). No difference in blood pressure was found between groups. CONCLUSION: In hypertensive patients with chronic renal failure enalapril slows progression towards end stage renal failure compared with beta blockers. This effect was probably not mediated through controlling blood pressure.
Metoprolol and acebutolol, two supposedly cardio-selective beta-adrenergic recptor blocking agents, were tested in healthy volunteers against propranolol, a non-selective drug, for their effect on blood glucose levels during insulin-induced hypoglycaemia. There was not significant difference between propranolol and metoprolol, which both potentiated the initial hypoglycaemic action of the insulin and delayed the return to normoglycaemia. Acebutolol, even though potentiating the initial hypoglycaemia, did not possess a significant delaying effect. A similar trial should be undertaken in diabetics to determine with certainty the safety of such drugs in diabetes mellitus.
In a double-blind crossover study, 13 patients with pretreatment diastolic blood pressure between 95 and 109 mm Hg received nadolol, 80 mg/day, plus placebo of hydrochlorothiazide and nadolol, plus three different doses of active hydrochlorothiazide. Patients remained on each active regimen for 3 weeks, with an intervening placebo period of 2 to 4 weeks. With 12.5 mg of hydrochlorothiazide daily plus nadolol, there was no greater reduction of blood pressure than with nadolol alone. A dose of 25 mg of hydrochlorothiazide was associated with a significantly greater decrease in systolic but not diastolic pressure, as compared with nadolol alone. A significantly greater reduction in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure was obtained only with the 50 mg/day dose of hydrochlorothiazide. Extension to 6 weeks of treatment with 12.5 mg/day failed to lower the blood pressure more than the level seen at 3 weeks. These results suggest that in combination with nadolol, 12.5 mg of hydrochlorothiazide per day has no significant antihypertensive effect. There was no evidence of a flat dose-response curve in the daily dose range of 12.5 to 50 mg. For most patients, a dose of 50 mg of hydrochlorothiazide was required to lower both systolic and diastolic blood pressure significantly below the level obtained with nadolol alone.
BACKGROUND: Beta-blockers are commonly used in the treatment of hypertension. We do not know whether the blood pressure (BP) lowering efficacy of beta-blockers varies across the day. This review focuses on the subclass of beta-blockers with partial agonist activity (BBPAA). OBJECTIVES: To assess the degree of variation in hourly BP lowering efficacy of BBPAA over a 24-hour period in adults with essential hypertension. SEARCH METHODS: The Cochrane Hypertension Information Specialist searched the following databases for relevant studies up to June 2020: the Cochrane Hypertension Specialised Register; CENTRAL; 2020, Issue 5; MEDLINE Ovid; Embase Ovid; the World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform; and ClinicalTrials.gov. We also contacted authors of relevant papers regarding further published and unpublished work. The searches had no language restrictions. SELECTION CRITERIA: We sought to include all randomised and non-randomised trials that assessed the hourly effect of BBPAA by ambulatory monitoring, with a minimum follow-up of three weeks. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently selected the included trials and extracted the data. We assessed the certainty of the evidence using the GRADE approach. Outcomes included in the review were end-point hourly systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP and DBP) and heart rate (HR), measured using a 24-hour ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) device. MAIN RESULTS: Fourteen non-randomised baseline controlled trials of BBPAA met our inclusion criteria, but only seven studies, involving 121 participants, reported hourly ambulatory BP data that could be included in the meta-analysis. Beta-blockers studied included acebutalol, pindolol and bopindolol. We judged most studies at high or unclear risk of bias for selection bias, attrition bias, and reporting bias. We judged the overall certainty of the evidence to be very low for all outcomes. We analysed and presented data by each hour post-dose. Very low-certainty evidence showed that hourly mean reduction in BP and HR visually showed an attenuation over time. Over the 24-hour period, the magnitude of SBP lowering at each hour ranged from -3.68 mmHg to -17.74 mmHg (7 studies, 121 participants), DBP lowering at each hour ranged from -2.27 mmHg to -9.34 mmHg (7 studies, 121 participants), and HR lowering at each hour ranged from -0.29 beats/min to -10.29 beats/min (4 studies, 71 participants). When comparing between three 8-hourly time intervals that correspond to day, evening, and night time hours, BBPAA was less effective at lowering BP and HR at night, than during the day and evening. However, because we judged that these outcomes were supported by very low-certainty evidence, further research is likely to have an important impact on the estimate of effect and may change the conclusion. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is insufficient evidence to draw general conclusions about the degree of variation in hourly BP-lowering efficacy of BBPAA over a 24-hour period, in adults with essential hypertension. Very low-certainty evidence showed that BBPAA acebutalol, pindolol, and bopindolol lowered BP more during the day and evening than at night. However, the number of studies and participants included in this review was very small, further limiting the certainty of the evidence. We need further and larger trials, with accurate recording of time of drug intake, and with reporting of standard deviation of BP and HR at each hour.
This study analysed the effect of selective beta(1)-blockade on neuromuscular recruitment characteristics during progressive endurance exercise. Ten healthy subjects ingested a selective beta(1)-blocker, acebutolol (200 mg b.d.), for 7 days (for one of two cycling trials), with a 10-day wash-out period between trials. On the last day of acebutolol ingestion subjects performed three successive 15-min rides at 30%, 50% and 70% of their peak power output and then cycled at increasing (15 W min(-1)) work rates to exhaustion. Force output, heart rate, submaximal VO(2), rate of perceived exertion (RPE), electromyographic (EMG) data and blood lactate were captured during the cycling activity. Peak work rate [270 (111) W vs 197 (75) W, CON vs BETA, P <0.01], time to exhaustion [49.7 (23.2) min vs 40.3 (23.7) min, CON vs BETA, P <0.05] and heart rate [mean, for the full ride 135.5 (38.3) beats min(-1) vs 111.5 (30.0) beats min(-1) CON vs BETA, P <0.05] were significantly lower for the group who ingested beta(1)-blockade (BETA) compared to the control group (CON). Although not significant, submaximal VO(2)was reduced in BETA during the ride, while RPE was significantly higher during the ride for BETA (P <0.01). Mean integrated electromyography was higher in the BETA group although these differences were not significant. Mean power frequency values of the BETA group showed a significant (P <0.05) shift to the upper end of the spectrum in comparison to the control group. Lactate values [11.7 (3.5) mmol x l(-1) vs 7.1 (4.1) mmol x l(-1)CON vs BETA] were significantly lower (P <0.05) at exhaustion in BETA. Significant reductions in cycling performance were found when subjects ingested beta(1)-blockers. This study has shown significant shifts to the upper end of the EMG frequency spectrum after beta(1)-blocker ingestion, which could be caused by a change in neuromuscular recruitment strategy to compensate for the impaired submaximal exercise performance.
Two fatal cases of Acebutolol intoxication are presented that demonstrate its clinical characteristics and potential lethality. A review of the literature suggests that acebutolol is one of the most toxic beta blockers when taken as an overdose. In addition to demonstrating characteristics of membrane-stabilizing activity, both fatal cases demonstrate significant QTc prolongation and ventricular tachycardia. The latter findings suggest an impact on ventricular repolarization not seen with Propranolol intoxication. Clarification of these findings has important implications regarding identification and treatment of this potentially fatal intoxication.
In this study, a beta-adrenergic blocker in combination with digoxin provided marginal protection against atrial fibrillation/flutter after coronary artery surgery. The economic comparison of patients who did and did not develop atrial fibrillation/flutter indicates that prevention of these arrhythmias can have a significant impact on length of hospital stay and cost of this common surgical procedure.
