BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Perioral dermatitis is a common cutaneous condition characterized by acneiform facial eruptions often with an eczematous appearance. A granulomatous subtype exists in addition to the classic variant. While topical corticosteroids have been largely implicated in this condition, its etiology is not completely understood. METHODS: Using the keywords "corticosteroids," "dermatology," "fusobacteria," "perioral dermatitis," and "periorificial dermatitis," we searched the databases PubMed, MEDLINE, and EMBASE to find the relevant literature. Only articles in English were chosen. The level of evidence was evaluated and selected according to the highest level working our way downwards using the Oxford Centre of Evidence-Based Medicine 2011 guidance. RESULTS: This systematic review found the strongest evidence to support topical corticosteroid misuse as the principal causative factor in the pathogenesis of perioral dermatitis. CONCLUSION: In terms of treatment, further research is required to robustly investigate promising treatment options including tetracyclines, topical metronidazole, topical azelaic acid, adapalene gel, and oral isotretinoin.
IMPORTANCE: Acne vulgaris is an inflammatory disease of the pilosebaceous unit of the skin that primarily involves the face and trunk and affects approximately 9% of the population worldwide (approximately 85% of individuals aged 12-24 years, and approximately 50% of patients aged 20-29 years). Acne vulgaris can cause permanent physical scarring, negatively affect quality of life and self-image, and has been associated with increased rates of anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation. OBSERVATIONS: Acne vulgaris is classified based on patient age, lesion morphology (comedonal, inflammatory, mixed, nodulocystic), distribution (location on face, trunk, or both), and severity (extent, presence or absence of scarring, postinflammatory erythema, or hyperpigmentation). Although most acne does not require specific medical evaluation, medical workup is sometimes warranted. Topical therapies such as retinoids (eg, tretinoin, adapalene), benzoyl peroxide, azelaic acid, and/or combinations of topical agents are first-line treatments. When prescribed as a single therapy in a randomized trial of 207 patients, treatment with tretinoin 0.025% gel reduced acne lesion counts at 12 weeks by 63% compared with baseline. Combinations of topical agents with systemic agents (oral antibiotics such as doxycycline and minocycline, hormonal therapies such as combination oral contraception [COC] or spironolactone, or isotretinoin) are recommended for more severe disease. In a meta-analysis of 32 randomized clinical trials, COC was associated with reductions in inflammatory lesions by 62%, placebo was associated with a 26% reduction, and oral antibiotics were associated with a 58% reduction at 6-month follow-up. Isotretinoin is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for treating severe recalcitrant nodular acne but is often used to treat resistant or persistent moderate to severe acne, as well as acne that produces scarring or significant psychosocial distress. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Acne vulgaris affects approximately 9% of the population worldwide and approximately 85% of those aged 12 to 24 years. First-line therapies are topical retinoids, benzoyl peroxide, azelaic acid, or combinations of topicals. For more severe disease, oral antibiotics such as doxycycline or minocycline, hormonal therapies such as combination oral conceptive agents or spironolactone, or isotretinoin are most effective.
BACKGROUND: Acne vulgaris commonly affects adults, adolescents, and preadolescents aged 9 years or older. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to provide evidence-based recommendations for the management of acne. METHODS: A work group conducted a systematic review and applied the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation approach for assessing the certainty of evidence and formulating and grading recommendations. RESULTS: This guideline presents 18 evidence-based recommendations and 5 good practice statements. Strong recommendations are made for benzoyl peroxide, topical retinoids, topical antibiotics, and oral doxycycline. Oral isotretinoin is strongly recommended for acne that is severe, causing psychosocial burden or scarring, or failing standard oral or topical therapy. Conditional recommendations are made for topical clascoterone, salicylic acid, and azelaic acid, as well as for oral minocycline, sarecycline, combined oral contraceptive pills, and spironolactone. Combining topical therapies with multiple mechanisms of action, limiting systemic antibiotic use, combining systemic antibiotics with topical therapies, and adding intralesional corticosteroid injections for larger acne lesions are recommended as good practice statements. LIMITATIONS: Analysis is based on the best available evidence at the time of the systematic review. CONCLUSIONS: These guidelines provide evidence-based recommendations for the management of acne vulgaris.
Acne vulgaris is very common and can have significant negative impact on people. While sometimes a transient problem, acne may persist for many years and often leads to permanent scars or pigment changes. Guidelines unanimously advise topical treatments as first-line, although differ in recommending either topical benzoyl peroxide or topical retinoid (mainly adapalene) alone or in combination. Guidance published by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence advises counselling patients regarding avoidance of skin irritation when starting topical treatments and promoting adherence (treatments take 6-8 weeks to work). Oral antibiotics are currently overprescribed for acne but have a role when coprescribed with a non-antibiotic topical treatment. Hormonal treatments, such as the combined contraceptive pill, are also effective and there is growing evidence for the use of spironolactone for women with persistent acne. Recent guidance from the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency regarding isotretinoin has implications for specialist prescribing and monitoring, and increasing public awareness of potential risks of mental health problems and sexual dysfunction. Although acne is associated with psychiatric disorder, the mental health effects of isotretinoin remain controversial.
The principal actors in acne are the sebaceous gland, keratinocytes of the follicle and skin microbiome/innate immunity. Current acne treatments are frequently accompanied by side effects or may cause antibacterial resistance. New formulations and emerging treatments with novel mechanisms of action and improved formulations have recently been made available or are currently under development. This review provides an update on the most recent advances in topical or systemic acne therapy related to recent data on the pathophysiology of acne. A review of the most recent literature about new and emerging acne treatments since 2016 listed in the PubMed and Clinicaltrials.gov database was performed by a group of dermatologists interested in acne (GEA). Several novel treatments have been made available or are currently under development, including Clascosterone, Trifarotene and Sarecy-cline, as well as more effective and better tolerated formulations of existing compounds, such as Minocycline, Tretinoin, Tazarotene and Lidose-isotretinoin, and emerging acne therapies (including hyaluronic acid, cannabidiol, modulators of the skin microbiota, insulin-like growth factor, vaccines, bacteriophages, probiotics and antimicrobial peptides), targeting the sebaceous gland and its activity, inflammation or keratinocytes of the follicle and skin microbiome including Cutibacterium acnes. Recently, in addition to other fixed combinations, a fixed combination of adapalene and benzoyl peroxide that targets acne scars has been made available for the first time. The newly available products and other potentially emerging treatment options will increase the armamentarium of acne therapies and potentially reduce its prevalence worldwide.
Nowadays, numerous skincare routines are used to rejuvenate aging skin. Retinoids are one of the most popular ingredients used in antiaging treatments. Among the representatives of retinoids, tretinoin is considered the most effective agent with proven antiaging effects on the skin and can be found in formulations approved as medicines for topical treatment of acne, facial wrinkles, and hyperpigmentation. Other retinoids present in topical medicines are used for various indications, but only tazarotene is also approved as adjunctive agent for treatment of facial fine wrinkling and pigmentation. The most commonly used retinoids such as retinol, retinaldehyde, and retinyl palmitate are contained in cosmeceuticals regulated as cosmetics. Since clinical efficacy studies are not required for marketing cosmetic formulations, there are concerns about the efficacy of these retinoids. From a formulation perspective, retinoids pose a challenge to researchers as a result of their proven instability, low penetration, and potential for skin irritation. Therefore, novel delivery systems based on nanotechnology are being developed to overcome the limitations of conventional formulations and improve user compliance. In this review, the clinical evidence for retinoids in conventional and nanoformulations for topical antiaging treatments was evaluated. In addition, an overview of the comparison clinical trials between tretinoin and other retinoids is presented. In general, there is a lack of evidence from properly designed clinical trials to support the claimed efficacy of the most commonly used retinoids as antiaging agents in cosmeceuticals. Of the other retinoids contained in medicines, tazarotene and adapalene have clinically evaluated antiaging effects compared to tretinoin and may be considered as potential alternatives for antiaging treatments. The promising potential of retinoid nanoformulations requires a more comprehensive evaluation with additional studies to support the preliminary findings.
BACKGROUND: Topical retinoids are a first-line treatment for acne vulgaris. OBJECTIVE: This systematic review aims to evaluate the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of topical retinoids approved in the United States for the treatment of acne vulgaris. METHODS: A PubMed and Embase search was conducted using the search terms 'adapalene,' 'tretinoin,' 'tazarotene,' and 'acne vulgaris.' Selection of articles fit the following inclusion criteria: clinical trials evaluating both efficacy and safety/tolerability of topical retinoids approved in the United States for the treatment of acne vulgaris and published between January 1, 2008 and September 1, 2018. Exclusion criteria included clinical trials involving 20 subjects or fewer, subjects under 12 years of age, and topical retinoid combination therapies with moisturizers or aloe vera. Of 424 search results found, a total of 54 clinical trials were chosen based on selection criteria. RESULTS: Topical retinoids are superior to vehicle in improving Investigator Global Assessment and Investigator's Static Global Assessment (24.1-28.8% and 13.3-17.3%, respectively; p < 0.001). A topical retinoid combined with benzoyl peroxide led to IGA improvement compared with vehicle (26.1-34.9% vs 7-11.8%; p < 0.001) at Week 12. Topical retinoid plus an oral antibiotic was superior to vehicle in reducing lesion counts (64-78.9% vs 41-56.8%, p < 0.001). There was no significant difference in efficacy between tretinoin and tazarotene. Tretinoin 0.05% resulted in 62% of patients experiencing AEs compared with adapalene 0.1% (19%) and adapalene 0.3% (40%). More patients receiving adapalene were tolerant of the AEs compared with tazarotene (55.4% vs 24.4%; p < 0.0012). CONCLUSIONS: Topical retinoids are safe and efficacious for the treatment of acne vulgaris. They should be used in combination with benzoyl peroxide to optimize results in patients. The differences in efficacy of topical retinoids appears minor; therefore, the type of topical retinoid is not as important as choosing a particular strength of topical retinoid and combining it with an antimicrobial agent. Adapalene has a superior tolerability profile amongst topical retinoids.
Cellular senescence can exert dual effects in tumors, either suppressing or promoting tumor progression. The senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), released by senescent cells, plays a crucial role in this dichotomy. Consequently, the clinical challenge lies in developing therapies that safely enhance senescence in cancer, favoring tumor-suppressive SASP factors over tumor-promoting ones. Here, we identify the retinoic-acid-receptor (RAR) agonist adapalene as an effective pro-senescence compound in prostate cancer (PCa). Reactivation of RARs triggers a robust senescence response and a tumor-suppressive SASP. In preclinical mouse models of PCa, the combination of adapalene and docetaxel promotes a tumor-suppressive SASP that enhances natural killer (NK) cell-mediated tumor clearance more effectively than either agent alone. This approach increases the efficacy of the allogenic infusion of human NK cells in mice injected with human PCa cells, suggesting an alternative therapeutic strategy to stimulate the anti-tumor immune response in "immunologically cold" tumors.
Inducing senescence in tumor cells can stimulate anti-tumor immune responses. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Colucci et al. demonstrate that the combination of the RAR agonist Adapalene with the chemotherapy drug Docetaxel enhances tumor-suppressing senescence and activates an anti-tumor immune response through natural killer cells.
BACKGROUND: Acne is an inflammatory disorder with a high global burden. It is common in adolescents and primarily affects sebaceous gland-rich areas. The clinical benefit of the topical acne treatments azelaic acid, salicylic acid, nicotinamide, sulphur, zinc, and alpha-hydroxy acid is unclear. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of topical treatments (azelaic acid, salicylic acid, nicotinamide, zinc, alpha-hydroxy acid, and sulphur) for acne. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases up to May 2019: the Cochrane Skin Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, and LILACS. We also searched five trials registers. SELECTION CRITERIA: Clinical randomised controlled trials of the six topical treatments compared with other topical treatments, placebo, or no treatment in people with acne. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. Key outcomes included participants' global self-assessment of acne improvement (PGA), withdrawal for any reason, minor adverse events (assessed as total number of participants who experienced at least one minor adverse event), and quality of life. MAIN RESULTS: We included 49 trials (3880 reported participants) set in clinics, hospitals, research centres, and university settings in Europe, Asia, and the USA. The vast majority of participants had mild to moderate acne, were aged between 12 to 30 years (range: 10 to 45 years), and were female. Treatment lasted over eight weeks in 59% of the studies. Study duration ranged from three months to three years. We assessed 26 studies as being at high risk of bias in at least one domain, but most domains were at low or unclear risk of bias. We grouped outcome assessment into short-term (less than or equal to 4 weeks), medium-term (from 5 to 8 weeks), and long-term treatment (more than 8 weeks). The following results were measured at the end of treatment, which was mainly long-term for the PGA outcome and mixed length (medium-term mainly) for minor adverse events. Azelaic acid In terms of treatment response (PGA), azelaic acid is probably less effective than benzoyl peroxide (risk ratio (RR) 0.82, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.72 to 0.95; 1 study, 351 participants), but there is probably little or no difference when comparing azelaic acid to tretinoin (RR 0.94, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.14; 1 study, 289 participants) (both moderate-quality evidence). There may be little or no difference in PGA when comparing azelaic acid to clindamycin (RR 1.13, 95% CI 0.92 to 1.38; 1 study, 229 participants; low-quality evidence), but we are uncertain whether there is a difference between azelaic acid and adapalene (1 study, 55 participants; very low-quality evidence). Low-quality evidence indicates there may be no differences in rates of withdrawal for any reason when comparing azelaic acid with benzoyl peroxide (RR 0.88, 95% CI 0.60 to 1.29; 1 study, 351 participants), clindamycin (RR 1.30, 95% CI 0.48 to 3.56; 2 studies, 329 participants), or tretinoin (RR 0.66, 95% CI 0.29 to 1.47; 2 studies, 309 participants), but we are uncertain whether there is a difference between azelaic acid and adapalene (1 study, 55 participants; very low-quality evidence). In terms of total minor adverse events, we are uncertain if there is a difference between azelaic acid compared to adapalene (1 study; 55 participants) or benzoyl peroxide (1 study, 30 participants) (both very low-quality evidence). There may be no difference when comparing azelaic acid to clindamycin (RR 1.50, 95% CI 0.67 to 3.35; 1 study, 100 participants; low-quality evidence). Total minor adverse events were not reported in the comparison of azelaic acid versus tretinoin, but individual application site reactions were reported, such as scaling. Salicylic acid For PGA, there may be little or no difference between salicylic acid and tretinoin (RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.92 to 1.09; 1 study, 46 participants; low-quality evidence); we are not certain whether there is a difference between salicylic acid and pyruvic acid (1 study, 86 participants; very low-quality evidence); and PGA was not measured in the comparison of salicylic acid versus benzoyl peroxide. There may be no difference between groups in withdrawals when comparing salicylic acid and pyruvic acid (RR 0.89, 95% CI 0.53 to 1.50; 1 study, 86 participants); when salicylic acid was compared to tretinoin, neither group had withdrawals (both based on low-quality evidence (2 studies, 74 participants)). We are uncertain whether there is a difference in withdrawals between salicylic acid and benzoyl peroxide (1 study, 41 participants; very low-quality evidence). For total minor adverse events, we are uncertain if there is any difference between salicylic acid and benzoyl peroxide (1 study, 41 participants) or tretinoin (2 studies, 74 participants) (both very low-quality evidence). This outcome was not reported for salicylic acid versus pyruvic acid, but individual application site reactions were reported, such as scaling and redness. Nicotinamide Four studies evaluated nicotinamide against clindamycin or erythromycin, but none measured PGA. Low-quality evidence showed there may be no difference in withdrawals between nicotinamide and clindamycin (RR 1.12, 95% CI 0.49 to 2.60; 3 studies, 216 participants) or erythromycin (RR 1.40, 95% CI 0.46 to 4.22; 1 study, 158 participants), or in total minor adverse events between nicotinamide and clindamycin (RR 1.20, 95% CI 0.73 to 1.99; 3 studies, 216 participants; low-quality evidence). Total minor adverse events were not reported in the nicotinamide versus erythromycin comparison. Alpha-hydroxy (fruit) acid There may be no difference in PGA when comparing glycolic acid peel to salicylic-mandelic acid peel (RR 1.06, 95% CI 0.88 to 1.26; 1 study, 40 participants; low-quality evidence), and we are uncertain if there is a difference in total minor adverse events due to very low-quality evidence (1 study, 44 participants). Neither group had withdrawals (2 studies, 84 participants; low-quality evidence). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared to benzoyl peroxide, azelaic acid probably leads to a worse treatment response, measured using PGA. When compared to tretinoin, azelaic acid probably makes little or no difference to treatment response. For other comparisons and outcomes the quality of evidence was low or very low. Risk of bias and imprecision limit our confidence in the evidence. We encourage the comparison of more methodologically robust head-to-head trials against commonly used active drugs.
BACKGROUND: Photoaging due to cumulative lifetime ultraviolet light exposure is the greatest contributing factor to facial aging. With the continued growth of the population of individuals aged &ge;65 years and over, demand for safe and effective photoaging treatments will likely increase. METHODS: This qualitative review provides an overview of efficacy and safety of over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription topical treatments for photoaging, including recent data from an investigator-initiated trial of the topical retinoid tazarotene. RESULTS: OTC and cosmeceutical products comprise the majority of treatment options for photoaging, although clinical data in support of their efficacy are generally lacking. Topical retinoids have been shown to increase collagen and elastic fibers and normalize melanocytes and keratinocytes, yielding improvements in wrinkling, texture, elasticity, and skin tone. Prescription topical retinoids (adapalene, tazarotene, tretinoin) are the most studied and efficacious treatments for photoaging, though their use is typically associated with adverse effects such as erythema, peeling, dryness, and burning/stinging in a concentration-dependent manner. In a 12-week, open-label study, lower-dose tazarotene 0.045% lotion led to significantly reduced signs and severity of photoaging vs baseline. CONCLUSION: Prescription topical retinoids are the most potent treatment option for photoaging, though their use may be limited by irritation concerns. Tazarotene 0.045% polymeric emulsion lotion has recently demonstrated significant photoaging improvements with 12 weeks of once-daily treatment, with a favorable safety and tolerability profile. CITATION: Sadick N, Pannu S, Abidi Z, et al. Topical treatments for photoaged skin. J Drugs Dermatol. 2023;22(9):867-873. doi:10.36849/JDD.7753.
High-quality research on the safety and effectiveness of over-the-counter medications in pregnancy is limited. Physicians should explore nonpharmacologic treatments before recommending medication. For nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), H1 antihistamines, and ginger are safe and effective. Physicians can recommend calcium carbonate, H2 antihistamines, and proton pump inhibitors for gastroesophageal reflux disease. Osmotic laxatives, fiber preparations, and probiotics are safe and effective treatments for constipation. Many over-the-counter topical medications are safe in pregnancy due to low systemic absorption, but topical retinoids, such as adapalene, should be avoided. Hypertonic saline nasal rinse and antihistamines are safe, beneficial options for treating pregnancy-induced rhinitis, and intranasal corticosteroids have demonstrated benefit for chronic allergic rhinitis. The safety of acetaminophen for the treatment of headaches and low back pain during pregnancy has come into question with recent studies; therefore, judicious use is advised. Physicians should screen all pregnant patients for their risk of developing preeclampsia and initiate low-dose aspirin from 12 weeks' gestation until delivery for those at increased risk. Data are limited on the safety and effectiveness of herbal supplements during pregnancy.
Aging of skin is an intricate biological process consisting of two types. While intrinsic or chronological aging is an inevitable process, photoaging involves the premature aging of skin occurring due to cumulative exposure to ultraviolet radiation. Chronological and photoaging both have clinically differentiable manifestations. Various natural and synthetic retinoids have been explored for the treatment of aging and many of them have shown histological and clinical improvement, but most of the studies have been carried out in patients presenting with photoaged skin. Amongst the retinoids, tretinoin possibly is the most potent and certainly the most widely investigated retinoid for photoaging therapy. Although retinoids show promise in the treatment of skin aging, irritant reactions such as burning, scaling or dermatitis associated with retinoid therapy limit their acceptance by patients. This problem is more prominent with tretinoin and tazarotene whereas other retinoids mainly represented by retinaldehyde and retinol are considerably less irritating. In order to minimize these side effects, various novel drug delivery systems have been developed. In particular, nanoparticles have shown a good potential in improving the stability, tolerability and efficacy ofretinoids like tretinoin and retinol. However, more elaborate clinical studies are required to confirm their advantage in the delivery of topical retinoids.
BACKGROUND: Acne is a common, economically burdensome condition that can cause psychological harm and, potentially, scarring. Topical benzoyl peroxide (BPO) is a widely used acne treatment; however, its efficacy and safety have not been clearly evaluated. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of BPO for acne. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases up to February 2019: the Cochrane Skin Specialised Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, and LILACS. We also searched five trials registers and checked the reference lists of relevant randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and systematic reviews. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs that compared topical BPO used alone (including different formulations and concentrations of BPO) or as part of combination treatment against placebo, no treatment, or other active topical medications for clinically diagnosed acne (used alone or in combination with other topical drugs not containing BPO) on the face or trunk. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures as expected by Cochrane. Primary outcome measures were 'participant global self-assessment of acne improvement' and 'withdrawal due to adverse events in the whole course of a trial'. 'Percentage of participants experiencing any adverse event in the whole course of a trial' was a key secondary outcome. MAIN RESULTS: We included 120 trials (29,592 participants randomised in 116 trials; in four trials the number of randomised participants was unclear). Ninety-one studies included males and females. When reported, 72 trials included participants with mild to moderate acne, 26 included participants with severe acne, and the mean age of participants ranged from 18 to 30 years. Our included trials assessed BPO as monotherapy, as add-on treatment, or combined with other active treatments, as well as BPO of different concentrations and BPO delivered through different vehicles. Comparators included different concentrations or formulations of BPO, placebo, no treatment, or other active treatments given alone or combined. Treatment duration in 80 trials was longer than eight weeks and was only up to 12 weeks in 108 trials. Industry funded 50 trials; 63 trials did not report funding. We commonly found high or unclear risk of performance, detection, or attrition bias. Trial setting was under-reported but included hospitals, medical centres/departments, clinics, general practices, and student health centres. We reported on outcomes assessed at the end of treatment, and we classified treatment periods as short-term (two to four weeks), medium-term (five to eight weeks), or long-term (longer than eight weeks). For 'participant-reported acne improvement', BPO may be more effective than placebo or no treatment (risk ratio (RR) 1.27, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.12 to 1.45; 3 RCTs; 2234 participants; treatment for 10 to 12 weeks; low-certainty evidence). Based on low-certainty evidence, there may be little to no difference between BPO and adapalene (RR 0.99, 95% CI 0.90 to 1.10; 5 RCTs; 1472 participants; treatment for 11 to 12 weeks) or between BPO and clindamycin (RR 0.95, 95% CI 0.68 to 1.34; 1 RCT; 240 participants; treatment for 10 weeks) (outcome not reported for BPO versus erythromycin or salicylic acid). For 'withdrawal due to adverse effects', risk of treatment discontinuation may be higher with BPO compared with placebo or no treatment (RR 2.13, 95% CI 1.55 to 2.93; 24 RCTs; 13,744 participants; treatment for 10 to 12 weeks; low-certainty evidence); the most common causes of withdrawal were erythema, pruritus, and skin burning. Only very low-certainty evidence was available for the following comparisons: BPO versus adapalene (RR 1.85, 95% CI 0.94 to 3.64; 11 RCTs; 3295 participants; treatment for 11 to 24 weeks; causes of withdrawal not clear), BPO versus clindamycin (RR 1.93, 95% CI 0.90 to 4.11; 8 RCTs; 3330 participants; treatment for 10 to 12 weeks; causes of withdrawal included local hypersensitivity, pruritus, erythema, face oedema, rash, and skin burning), erythromycin (RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.07 to 15.26; 1 RCT; 60 participants; treatment for 8 weeks; withdrawal due to dermatitis), and salicylic acid (no participants had adverse event-related withdrawal; 1 RCT; 59 participants; treatment for 12 weeks). There may be little to no difference between these groups in terms of withdrawal; however, we are unsure of the results because the evidence is of very low certainty. For 'proportion of participants experiencing any adverse event', very low-certainty evidence leaves us uncertain about whether BPO increased adverse events when compared with placebo or no treatment (RR 1.40, 95% CI 1.15 to 1.70; 21 RCTs; 11,028 participants; treatment for 10 to 12 weeks), with adapalene (RR 0.71, 95% CI 0.50 to 1.00; 7 RCTs; 2120 participants; treatment for 11 to 24 weeks), with erythromycin (no participants reported any adverse events; 1 RCT; 89 participants; treatment for 10 weeks), or with salicylic acid (RR 4.77, 95% CI 0.24 to 93.67; 1 RCT; 41 participants; treatment for 6 weeks). Moderate-certainty evidence shows that the risk of adverse events may be increased for BPO versus clindamycin (RR 1.24, 95% CI 0.97 to 1.58; 6 RCTs; 3018 participants; treatment for 10 to 12 weeks); however, the 95% CI indicates that BPO might make little to no difference. Most reported adverse events were mild to moderate, and local dryness, irritation, dermatitis, erythema, application site pain, and pruritus were the most common. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence suggests that BPO as monotherapy or add-on treatment may be more effective than placebo or no treatment for improving acne, and there may be little to no difference between BPO and either adapalene or clindamycin. Our key efficacy evidence is based on participant self-assessment; trials of BPO versus erythromycin or salicylic acid did not report this outcome. For adverse effects, the evidence is very uncertain regarding BPO compared with adapalene, erythromycin, or salicylic acid. However, risk of treatment discontinuation may be higher with BPO compared with placebo or no treatment. Withdrawal may be linked to tolerability rather than to safety. Risk of mild to moderate adverse events may be higher with BPO compared with clindamycin. Further trials should assess the comparative effects of different preparations or concentrations of BPO and combination BPO versus monotherapy. These trials should fully assess and report adverse effects and patient-reported outcomes measured on a standardised scale.
Therapeutic angiogenesis using mesenchymal stem/stromal cell grafts have shown modest and controversial effects in preventing amputation for patients with critical limb ischemia. Through single-cell transcriptomic analysis of human tissues, we identify CD271(+) progenitors specifically from subcutaneous adipose tissue (AT) as having the most prominent pro-angiogenic gene profile distinct from other stem cell populations. AT-CD271(+) progenitors demonstrate robust in vivo angiogenic capacity over conventional adipose stromal cell grafts, characterized by long-term engraftment, augmented tissue regeneration, and significant recovery of blood flow in a xenograft model of limb ischemia. Mechanistically, the angiogenic capacity of CD271(+) progenitors is dependent on functional CD271 and mTOR signaling. Notably, the number and angiogenic capacity of CD271(+) progenitors are strikingly reduced in insulin-resistant donors. Our study highlights the identification of AT-CD271(+) progenitors with in vivo superior efficacy for limb ischemia. Furthermore, we showcase comprehensive single-cell transcriptomics strategies for identification of suitable grafts for cell therapy.
BACKGROUND: Granular parakeratosis is a hyperkeratotic eruption of unknown etiology that occurs in the axilla and other intertriginous areas. The histologic features are unique for the retention of keratohyalin granules in the stratum corneum. OBJECTIVE: The aim of the article is to review the clinical manifestations and treatment of granular parakeratosis. METHODS: A case report and literature review are presented. RESULTS: Twenty-six cases of granular parakeratosis now have been reported and reviewed. CONCLUSION: Granular parakeratosis occurs predominantly in middle age women and most frequently in the axilla. A number of treatments have been applied to the 26 cases reported to date, without consistent responses. No evidence-based therapy can be suggested at present.
Darier's disease (also known as keratosis follicularis or dyskeratosis follicularis) is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder which manifests as hyperkeratotic greasy papules in the first or second decade of life. Aside from symptom management and behavioral modifications to avoid triggers, there are currently no validated treatments for Darier's disease (DD). However, a variety of treatments have been proposed in the literature including retinoids, steroids, vitamin D analogs, photodynamic therapy, and surgical excision. The purpose of this review article is to identify therapeutic options for treating DD and to outline the evidence underlying these interventions. A search was conducted in Medline for English language articles from inception to July 4, 2020. Our search identified a total of 474 nonduplicate studies, which were screened by title and abstract. Of these, 155 full text articles were screened against inclusion/exclusion criteria, and 113 studies were included in our review. We identified Grade B evidence for the following treatments of DD: oral acitretin, oral isotretinoin, systemic Vitamin A, topical tretinoin, topical isotretinoin, topical adapalene gel, topical 5-flououracil, topical calciptriol and tacalcitol (with sunscreen), grenz ray radiation, and x-ray radiation. All other evidence for treatments of DD consisted of case reports or case series, which is considered grade C evidence. Considering the quality and quantity of evidence, clinicians may consider initiating a trial of select topical or oral retinoids first in patients with localized or generalized DD, respectively.
A major issue in treating acne in individuals of color is the need to treat and prevent postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH), which is common in this population. This subset analysis reports the pigmentary changes in subjects of color with acne who were enrolled in a community-based trial comparing 3 different topical therapeutic regimens. All subjects received combination clindamycin 1%-benzoyl peroxide (BPO) 5% topical gel containing glycerin and dimethicone. Subjects were randomized to receive this combination therapy in addition to either a tretinoin microsphere (RAM) gel at concentrations of either 0.04% or 0.1% or adapalene (AP) gel 0.1%. There was a trend toward better resolution of hyperpigmentation in the subjects receiving the clindamycin-BPO topical gel in combination with RAM gel 0.04%.
Barrier damage caused by facial acne vulgaris can be magnified by topical medication, such as adapalene (0.3%) and benzoyl peroxide (2.5%)(A/BPO), which utilizes a retinoid to normalize follicular keratinization and BPO to decrease the C. acnes population. Disease-induced irritation combined with topical medication-induced irritation results in dryness and enhanced inflammation leading to lower compliance and increased skin healing time. Ceramide-based moisturizers have documented barrier repair benefits for eczema but have not been studied for acne. The objective of this double-blind study was to measure the impact of acne treatment on skin barrier function and tolerance when paired with a ceramide routine. Participants were prescribed an A/BPO gel once daily. The treatment group received a ceramide-containing foaming facial cleanser and facial lotion, and the control group received basic foaming face wash for twice-daily use. Participant and investigator tolerability and efficacy were evaluated by both ordinal and clinical measures. Acne lesion counts and Investigator&rsquo;s Global Assessments (IGA) of acne were obtained along with transepidermal water loss (TEWL) measurements for barrier function. TEWL for the treatment group remained significantly lower than the control at all timepoints and significantly improved from baseline by week 12. The treatment group had statistically lower mean investigator scores for dryness at all timepoints. Inflammatory lesion counts were significantly lower for the treatment group. A/BPO damaged the skin barrier, demonstrated by elevated TEWL, contributing to dryness, redness, and scaling. Use of a ceramide-containing cleanser and moisturizer significantly reduced severity and incidence of dryness, erythema, and scaling while more quickly resolving barrier damage and restoring function. Draelos ZD, Baalbaki N, Colon G, et al. Ceramide-containing adjunctive skin care for skin barrier restoration during acne vulgaris treatment. J Drugs Dermatol. 2023;22(6):554-558. doi:10.36849/JDD.7142&nbsp.
BACKGROUND: Acne vulgaris a chronic disease which is caused by blockage of the sebaceous gland is commonly seen in almost every human being at some point in their lives. There are 20-25% chances of progression of acne to severe cases, which leads to permanent scarring that results in psychological problems like depression, social isolation, lowered self-esteem, and lowered self-confidence. OBJECTIVE: Though several conventional treatments are available in the market but still there are various adverse effects associated with topical anti-acne agents due to which it lacks patient compatibility. The present study is undertaken to find out the major shortcoming; why the current therapies do not give the desired therapeutic results. CONCLUSION: Novel drug delivery strategies can play a crucial role in the enhancement of topical delivery of anti-acne agents by escalating their dermal localization and reducing their adverse effects. Consumption of medicinal plants like Aloe vera, Withania somniferia etc. have clinical evidence regarding the effective management of acne. The current inclination towards nanotechnology is considerable due to several changes in the pharmaceutical research area. To secure the research work in different pharmaceutical fields, patents are filed against various agents like Galderma Research & Development have filed patents for adapalene and benzoyl peroxide for the management of acne vulgaris. The current review highlights the potential of various novel drug delivery approaches like liposomes, niosomes, ethosomes, transfersomes etc. in enhancing the topical delivery of anti-acne agents.
