Fentanyl and its derivatives sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil are potent opioids. A comprehensive review of the use of fentanyl and its derivatives in the pediatric population was performed using the National Library of Medicine PubMed. Studies were included if they contained original pharmacokinetic parameters or models using established routes of administration in patients younger than 18 years of age. Of 372 retrieved articles, 44 eligible pharmacokinetic studies contained data of 821 patients younger than 18 years of age, including more than 46 preterm infants, 64 full-term neonates, 115 infants/toddlers, 188 children, and 28 adolescents. Underlying diagnoses included congenital heart and pulmonary disease and abdominal disorders. Routes of drug administration were intravenous, epidural, oral-transmucosal, intranasal, and transdermal. Despite extensive use in daily clinical practice, few studies have been performed. Preterm and term infants have lower clearance and protein binding. Pharmacokinetics was not altered by chronic renal or hepatic disease. Analyses of the pooled individual patients' data revealed that clearance maturation relating to body weight could be best described by the Hill function for sufentanil (R (2) = 0.71, B (max) 876 mL/min, K (50) 16.3 kg) and alfentanil (R (2) = 0.70, B (max (fixed)) 420 mL/min, K (50) 28 kg). The allometric exponent for estimation of clearance of sufentanil was 0.99 and 0.75 for alfentanil clearance. Maturation of remifentanil clearance was described by linear regression to bodyweight (R (2) = 0.69). The allometric exponent for estimation of remifentanil clearance was 0.76. For fentanyl, linear regression showed only a weak correlation between clearance and bodyweight in preterm and term neonates (R (2) = 0.22) owing to a lack of data in older age groups. A large heterogeneity regarding study design, clinical setting, drug administration, laboratory assays, and pharmacokinetic estimation was observed between studies introducing bias into the analyses performed in this review. A limitation of this review is that pharmacokinetic data, based on different modes of administration, dosing schemes, and parameter estimation methods, were combined.
Alfentanil, fentanyl and sufentanil are synthetic opioid analgesics acting at specific opioid receptors. These opioids are widely used as analgesics to supplement general anaesthesia for various surgical procedures or as primary anaesthetic agents in very high doses during cardiac surgery. Fentanyl and sufentanil especially are administered via infusion for long term analgesia and sedation in intensive care patients. Opioid analgesics are mainly administered using the intravenous route. However, other techniques of administration, including epidural, intrathecal, transdermal and intranasal applications, have been demonstrated. Important pharmacokinetic differences between alfentanil, fentanyl and sufentanil have been shown in many reports. Alfentanil has the most rapid analgesic onset and time to peak effect as well as the shortest distribution and elimination half-lives. The volume of distribution and total body clearance of this agent are smaller when compared with those of fentanyl and sufentanil. The pharmacokinetics of the opioid analgesics can be affected by several factors including patient age, plasma protein content, acid-base status and cardiopulmonary bypass, but not significantly by renal insufficiency or compensated hepatic dysfunction. In addition, pharmacokinetic properties can be influenced by changes in hepatic blood flow and administration of drug combinations which compete for the same plasma protein carrier or metabolising pathway. Although comparing specific pharmacokinetic parameters such as half-lives is deeply entrenched in the literature and clinical practice, simply comparing half-lives is not a rational way to select an opioid for specific requirements. Using pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic models, computer simulations based on changes in the effect site opioid concentration or context-sensitive half-times seem to be extremely useful for selecting an opioid on a more rational basis.
We describe the case of a woman who had two penroperative hypertensive crises that may have been due to her use of phentermine, a little-known sympathomimetic anti-obesity medication. The currently available anti-obesity medications are discussed: phentermine, diethylpropion, and sibutramine; all of which are sympathomimetics possessing noradrenaline and serotonin reuptake inhibitor activity. These medications should be discontinued one week preoperatively and have potential interactions with tramadol and antidepressants. The drug orlistat inhibits gastrointestinal lipase and may lead to fat soluble vitamin (A, D, E, and K) deficiency, so consideration should be given to checking coagulation status preoperatively.
Remifentanil is a new selective mu opioid receptor agonist of higher potency than alfentanil, with pharmacological effects that essentially parallel those of alfentanil and other opioids in this class. Unlike other opioids, remifentanil is rapidly hydrolysed by nonspecific plasma and tissue esterases: this imparts brevity of action, precise and rapidly titratable effects (due to rapid onset and offset), non-cumulative opioid effects and rapid recovery after cessation of administration. The onset of action of remifentanil is similar to that of alfentanil, although its offset is considerably more rapid and independent of the duration of infusion. Remifentanil also has a sparing effect on hypnotics and sedatives. Its brevity of action ensures not only a rapid resolution of adverse effects but also a rapid offset of analgesic effect. Therefore, appropriate postoperative analgesia, when necessary, should be established before discontinuation of remifentanil infusion. The unique pharmacokinetic profile of remifentanil facilitates 'real time' management of intraoperative stress, as well as provision of optimal intraoperative analgesia without compromising recovery for a variety of surgical procedures.
INTRODUCTION: Methadone is a synthetic opioid which is being used with increased frequency in the palliative care setting for management of complex pain. There have been cases published reporting the development of oedema with methadone maintenance therapy but no cases on the association with methadone and peripheral oedema in the palliative care setting. As yet, the underlying mechanisms are unclear. CASE PRESENTATION: This case report describes a gentleman with ependymoma and difficult-to-control lower back pain and scrotal pain. This pain had failed to respond to other strong opioids. He was prescribed methadone and then subsequently developed bilateral peripheral oedema. CASE MANAGEMENT: Peripheral oedema resolved following cessation of methadone. CONCLUSIONS: This highlights an important potential adverse effect of methadone in a society of increased methadone prescription for pain control. The published literature to date is reviewed and possible underlying mechanisms explored.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to observe whether there is a difference in the anesthetic effect of remimazolam tosilate and remimazolam besylate in daytime hysteroscopic surgery, so as to provide reference for clinical application. METHODS: Fifty patients, aged 18-65 years, ASA I-II, scheduled for hysteroscopy under total intravenous anesthesia were selected. The patients were randomly divided into two groups (n = 25): remimazolam tosilate group (group T) and remimazolam besylate group ( group R). The main observation index was the induction dose of remimazolam; secondary observation indicators were sleep time, anesthesia maintenance time, recovery time, induction maintenance dose of alfentanil, maintenance dose of remimazolam, and incidence of adverse events during anesthesia ( hypertension, hypotension, bradycardia, tachycardia). RESULTS: There was no significant difference in anesthesia induction dose, recovery time, sleep time, anesthesia maintenance time, and incidence of adverse events during anesthesia ( body movement, cough, hypertension, hypotension, bradycardia, tachycardia) between the two groups (P > 0.05). CONCLUSION: There was no significant difference in the anesthetic effect of remimazolam tosilate and remimazolam besylate in daytime hysteroscopic surgery. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry, ChiCTR2400081688.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) prescription rates rise with age, making it important that treatments be made as effective and safe as possible (Plakiotis et al., 2012). Older people are vulnerable to post-treatment confusion and to subsequent deficits in attention, new learning, and autobiographical memory (Gardner and O'Connor, 2008). Strategies to minimize cognitive side-effects include unilateral electrode placement and stimulus dose titration whereby electrical charge is individually calibrated to seizure threshold (Sackeim et al., 2000). It remains the case, however, that threshold levels typically rise over the treatment course, leading to an increase both in delivered charge and the risk of adverse sequelae.
A rapid and sensitive method for the simultaneous determination of alfentanyl, sufentanyl and fentanyl (and its major metabolite norfentanyl) in urine was developed and validated. The method involved a liquid-liquid extraction in alkaline conditions, derivatization with pentafluoropropionic anhydride to improve the sensitivity for norfentanyl and subsequent analysis in GC/MS. The LODs are 0.08 ng ml(-1) for all substances (0.04 ng ml(-1) for alfentanyl). Intra- and inter-day precision coefficient of variation was always below 15%; mean relative error (accuracy) was always below 15%. The method was linear for all analytes, with quadratic regression of calibration curves always higher than 0.99. The method was applied to real samples of subjects who had received therapeutic doses of fentanyl, showing its suitability for the determination of low levels of these substances. The method was also applied to a subject whose death was attributed to fentanyl overdose.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to establish the 95% effective dose (ED95) of esketamine in combination with propofol for hysteroscopy and then to evaluate its efficacy and safety profile. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This prospective, double-blind, randomized controlled trial consisted of two cohorts. In cohort 1, 45 women aged 18-65 years undergoing hysteroscopy were randomly assigned to either group E (esketamine + propofol) or group A (alfentanil + propofol). Dixon's up-and-down method was used to determine the ED95 of esketamine and alfentanil. In cohort 2, 86 patients were randomized to group E and group A, with the calculated ED95 dose of the study drugs used for induction. The success rate of anesthesia using the ED95% dose, along with parameters related to anesthesia induction, recovery, and adverse events were also recorded. RESULTS: The ED95 of esketamine was 0.254 mg/kg (95% CI: 0.214-1.004), while that of alfentanil was 9.121 mug/kg (95% CI: 8.479-13.364). The anesthesia success rate was 93.0% in group E and 95.2% in group A (p = 0.664). After resuscitation, both groups achieved a 100% success rate. The induction time was significantly shorter in group E (60.0 [55.0-70.0] s) compared to group A (67.0 [61.0-79.3] s) (p = 0.006). Group E had lower rates of respiratory depression (p < 0.001), hypoxia (p = 0.006), minimum perioperative SpO(2) (p = 0.010), and hypotension (p = 0.001). Esketamine had less effect on respiratory rate, heart rate, mean blood pressure, and end-tidal carbon dioxide compared to alfentanil (all p < 0.001). There were no significant differences in postoperative pain between the two groups. CONCLUSION: This study determined the ED 95 dose of esketamine for intravenous general anesthesia during hysteroscopy. Esketamine showed less respiratory and hemodynamic depression, as well as fewer adverse effects compared to alfentanil. Esketamine is an ideal anesthetic agent compared to alfentanil for hysteroscopic anesthesia. TRIAL REGISTRATION: www.chictr.org.cn, (ChiCTR2300077283); registered November 3, 2023.
Five cases of awareness have been identified during total i.v. anaesthesia with mechanically controlled ventilation and neuromuscular block. Two of the cases resulted from inability to deliver the target dose of anaesthetics, while the patient's need for anaesthetics was greater than anticipated in three. It is concluded that all cases were caused primarily by lack of experience, and could have been prevented. These five cases occurred in experience from approximately 2500 patients anaesthetized with this technique. Pre-, per- and postoperative data on the most recent 1727 patients have been entered into a database and may serve to provide data on the group of patients in whom the five cases of awareness occurred.
We have measured in a double-blind study the changes in intraocular pressure (IOP) in 40 consecutive patients (pretreated with fentanyl or alfentanil) who received suxamethonium and tracheal intubation. Although IOP increased significantly following administration of suxamethonium, mean IOP in both groups remained significantly less than control values (P less than 0.002). Tracheal intubation caused a further significant increase in IOP in the fentanyl, but not the alfentanil group. There were no significant differences in mean IOP between the fentanyl and alfentanil groups. Both opioids reduced, but did not abolish the haemodynamic responses to tracheal intubation.
BACKGROUND: Intravenous opioids are administered for the management of visceral pain after laparoscopic surgery. Whether oxycodone has advantages over other opioids in the treatment of visceral pain is not yet clear. METHODS: In this study, the analgesic efficiency and adverse events of oxycodone and other opioids, including alfentanil, sufentanil, fentanyl, and morphine, in treating post-laparoscopic surgery visceral pain were evaluated. This review was conducted according to the methodological standards described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions and the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis statement. The PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane databases were searched in December 2019. RESULTS: Ten studies were included in this review. The sample size was 695 participants. The results showed that compared with morphine and fentanyl, oxycodone had a more potent analgesic efficacy on the first day after laparoscopic surgery, especially during the first 0.5 h. There was no significant difference in sedation between the two groups. Compared to morphine and fentanyl, oxycodone was more likely to lead to dizziness and drowsiness. Overall, patient satisfaction did not differ significantly between oxycodone and other opioids. CONCLUSIONS: Oxycodone is superior to other analgesics within 24 h after laparoscopic surgery, but its adverse effects should be carefully considered.
Incremental doses of alfentanil and propofol were given to anaesthetized healthy patients undergoing routine orthopaedic surgery. Ventilation was recorded by respiratory inductance plethysmography and analysed by microcomputer. Alfentanil affected primarily expiratory time. The onset of effect lasted 82 s (range 25-173 s); offset was exponential, with a half-life of 146 s (range 62-260 s). Alfentanil also reduced tidal volume, but the effect was less obvious and less consistent. Propofol affected primarily tidal volume. The onset of effect lasted 34 s (range 17-69 s); offset was linear, with a time to 50% recovery of 92 s (range 47-161 s). Propofol had little effect on expiratory time. The drugs had little effect on inspiratory time. Three patients showed periods when the distribution of expiratory times was bimodal; the mechanism for this is unknown.
Easy-to-use naloxone formulations are needed to help address the opioid overdose epidemic. The pharmacokinetics of i.v., i.m., and a new i.n. naloxone formulation (2 mg) were compared in six healthy volunteers. Relative to i.m. naloxone, geometric mean (90% confidence interval [CI]) absolute bioavailability of i.n. naloxone was modestly lower (55%; 90% CI, 43-70% vs. 41%; 90% CI, 27-62%), whereas average (+/-SE) mean absorption time was substantially shorter (74 +/- 8.8 vs. 6.7 +/- 4.9 min). The opioid-attenuating effects of i.n. naloxone were compared with i.m. naloxone (2 mg) after administration of oral alfentanil (4 mg) to a separate group of six healthy volunteers pretreated with 240 mL of water or grapefruit juice. The i.m. and i.n. naloxone attenuated miosis by similar extents after water (40 +/- 15 vs. 41 +/- 21 h*%) and grapefruit juice (49 +/- 18 vs. 50 +/- 22 h*%) pretreatment. Results merit further testing of this new naloxone formulation.
We describe a system for controlling postoperative pain, a phenomenon that is difficult to treat by conventional control methods due to interpatient variability, interferences, non-linearity and the lack of a plausible, well-defined mathematical model. The system consists of two phases. In Phase 1 a closed-loop fuzzy controller implementing a suitable control strategy brings the patient to a zero-pain state. In Phase 2, an open-loop computer-assisted continuous infusion controller maintains a constant concentration of the analgesic (alfentanil) in plasma, subject to an upper safety limit on infusion rate; the set-point of this controller is periodically revised (either maintained or reduced) on the basis of feedback on the duration of zero pain (set-point reduction is necessary because the open-loop system has no means of knowing whether analgesic is accumulating in the patient). Pain is quantified by the patient on a numerical scale of 1 to 10 at 1.5-min intervals during Phase 1 and 9-min intervals during Phase 2. In simulation trials in which a fixed approximate model was used for the effect of sedation on pain while the pharmacokinetics of alfentanil were varied from one simulated patient to another, zero pain was achieved in under 15 min with minimal overshoot in plasma drug concentration and was maintained, with only minor deviation, by means of low drug concentrations.
Clinical trials frequently involve pairwise comparisons of different treatments to evaluate their relative efficacy. In this study, we examine methods for conducting pairwise tests of treatments with ordered categorical responses. A modified version of the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test based on a logistic regression model assuming proportional odds is a popular choice for comparing two treatments. This paper discusses the extension of this test to pairwise comparisons involving more than two treatments. However, when the proportional odds assumption is not valid, the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney-type test procedure cannot control the overall type I error rate at the prespecified level of significance. We therefore propose a better strategy in which a latent normal model is employed. We presented a simulated comparative study of power and the overall type I error rate to illustrate the superiority of the latent normal model. Examples are also given for illustrative purposes.
This technique describes a new painless method of injecting local anaesthetic in a highly pain-sensitive area of the body-around the eyes. We describe how a new technique using a bolus of intravenous alfentanil can help alleviate patient discomfort during the injection of the local anaesthetic and also reduce the amount of local anaesthetic injected. This also helps oculoplastic surgeons to work in a relaxed environment, whilst still utilizing the efficiencies that are provided by an ambulatory day surgery unit.
Alfentanil is a tetrazole derivative of fentanyl. Many of the pharmacologic effects of alfentanil are similar to those of fentanyl and sufentanil, but of quicker onset than those of fentanyl and of shorter duration than those of fentanyl and sufentanil. Alfentanil may cause less intense respiratory depression than equianalgesic doses of fentanyl. Alfentanil has a lower total body clearance, smaller volume of distribution, and shorter half-life than fentanyl and sufentanil. Clinical trials indicate alfentanil can be used effectively as an analgesic, an analgesic supplement to anesthesia, an anesthetic induction agent, and as the major component of a general anesthetic. Its short duration of effect makes it attractive as an analgesic supplement for short ambulatory surgical procedures. Alfentanil is recommended for addition to drug formularies, but its use should be restricted to anesthesia personnel.
BACKGROUND: Conscious recall and implicit memory have been shown to depend on hypnotic state as measured by electroencephalographic (EEG) bispectral index (BIS). A third expression of memory (unconscious-controlled memory) was recently observed after moderate to light sedation (BIS, 70-80). The present study investigated memory function during deep sedation (BIS, 60-70). As memory effects are small, the authors studied potential predictors of individual differences in memory performance. METHODS: Memory function and speed of information processing were assessed in 56 outpatients before surgery. During propofol anesthesia supplemented with alfentanil, patients heard a series of words while anesthesia was titrated to BIS, 60-70. In between words, response to command was assessed using the Isolated Forearm Technique. The authors tested memory with a word stem completion task and process dissociation procedure to distinguish explicit from implicit effects. RESULTS: Mean (+/- SD) BIS during word presentation was 64.0 +/- 3. Patients with conscious recall of verbal commands (n = 9) did not recall or recognize presented words. Even so, the process dissociation procedure revealed evidence of memory by a significantly higher hit rate in the inclusion condition (0.26) than in the exclusion condition (0.12). Patients without conscious recall showed no evidence of memory for presented words. Hit scores correlated significantly with scores in the preoperative memory test (r = 0.35). CONCLUSIONS: The authors found evidence of weak explicit memory function during anesthesia titrated to BIS, 60-70. The observations strongly suggest that postoperative memory relates to awareness during anesthesia, but the nature of this relation remains unclear. Memory seems more likely in patients with good preoperative memory performance.
Current measures of the performance of computer-controlled infusion pumps (CCIPs) are poorly defined, of little use to the clinician using the CCIP, and pharmacostatistically incorrect. We propose four measures be used to quantitate the performance of CCIPs: median absolute performance error (MDAPE), median performance error (MDPE), divergence, and wobble. These measures offer several significant advantages over previous measures. First, their definitions are based on the performance error as a fraction of the predicted (rather than measured) drug concentration, making the measures much more useful to the clinician. Second, the measures are defined in a way that addresses the pharmacostatistical issue of appropriate estimation of population parameters. Finally, the measure of inaccuracy, MDAPE, is defined in a way that is consistent with iteratively reweighted least squares nonlinear regression, a commonly used method of estimating pharmacokinetic parameters. These measures make it possible to quantitate the overall performance of a CCIP or to compare the predictive performance of CCIPs which differ in either general approach (e.g., compartmental model driven vs. plasma efflux approach), pump mechanics, software algorithms, or pharmacokinetic parameter sets.
