Recently published data suggest that clinical benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), which is hallmarked by the occurrence of moderate-to-severe lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), occurs in about one quarter of men in their 50s, one third of men in their 60s, and about half of all men 80 years or older. Although effective treatments for LUTS/BPH are available, this condition often occurs in the context of common, age-related comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease, hypertension, and erectile dysfunction. Alpha1-selective adrenergic receptor (a1-AR) antagonists (eg, alfuzosin, doxazosin, tamsulosin, terazosin) remain the cornerstone of therapy for LUTS/BPH. In addition, 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors (ie, dutasteride, finasteride) have been associated with improvements in LUTS/BPH in men with larger prostates, especially when used in combination with a1-AR antagonists. Although all these drugs have been shown to be beneficial for the treatment of BPH, there are differences in side-effect profiles. When selecting an appropriate course of therapy, these side effects and any impact they may have on existing comorbid conditions must be considered.
BACKGROUND: Tamsulosin is one of the most commonly prescribed alpha-1A antagonists for the treatment of benign prostatic syndrome (BPS). Patients treated with tamsulosin often develop intraoperative floppy iris syndrome (IFIS) during cataract surgery. This leads to increasing miosis and an undulating iris, which increases the risk of complications significantly and can cause permanent damage. AIM OF THE WORK: The aim is to raise awareness for the effects of tamsulosin intake before cataract surgery. MATERIAL AND METHODS: We conducted a critical review of publications on the association of IFIS in cataract surgery with alpha-receptor blockers. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Tamsulosin has a risk of complications of up to 80 %, whereas doxazosin and alfuzosin only have a 15-20 % chance of complications. Tamsulosin therefore represents a significant risk factor for permanent secondary damage after cataract surgery. Even after discontinuing tamsulosin, IFIS was still observed after up to 3 years. Nevertheless, pausing of tamsulosin intake is recommended. An alternative preparation should therefore be preferred in patients who have not yet had cataract surgery. If patients are already pseudophakic, tamsulosin can be given without concern.
Drug therapy with alpha blockers has become the standard treatment for patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Medical treatment is often preferred by patients as opposed to minimally invasive therapy or transurethral resection of the prostate. Alpha blockers reduce urethral pressure by blocking the motor sympathetic adrenergic nerve supply to the prostate. Several alpha blockers are available for treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia, including alfuzosin, tamsulosin, terazosin, and doxazosin. Different meta-analyses have shown these agents to be comparable in terms of efficacy in improving symptom score and increasing urinary flow rates. The clinical uroselectivity of these agents differs, however, and translates into differences in side effects. Side effects that have been reported with some alpha blockers include dizziness, headache, postural hypotension, and retrograde ejaculation.
OBJECTIVES: Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common and progressive disease affecting elderly males, often associated with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). alpha1-blockers are the mainstay in symptomatic therapy of BPH. Because of their greater uroselectivity and minimal hemodynamic effects, alfuzosin, tamsulosin, and silodosin are generally preferred. The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy and tolerability of alfuzosin, tamsulosin, and silodosin in patients with BPH and LUTS. METHODS: Ninety subjects with BPH and LUTS were randomized into three groups of thirty in each, to receive alfuzosin sustained release (SR) 10 mg, tamsulosin 0.4 mg, or silodosin 8 mg for 12 weeks. The primary outcome measure was a change in the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), and the secondary outcome measures were changes in individual subjective symptom scores, quality of life score (QLS), and peak flow rate (Qmax) from baseline. The treatment response was monitored at 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks. RESULTS: IPSS improved by 88.18%, 72.12%, and 82.23% in alfuzosin SR, tamsulosin and silodosin groups (P < 0.001) at 12 weeks. Improvement in QLS was >75% in all the three groups (P < 0.001). A significant improvement in Qmax was seen with alfuzosin and tamsulosin (P = 0.025 and P < 0.001) but not with silodosin (P = 0.153). However, the intergroup differences in IPSS, QLS, and Qmax were not significant. Ejaculatory dysfunction was more common with silodosin and corrected QT (QTc) prolongation occurred only with alfuzosin (two subjects) and tamsulosin (three subjects). CONCLUSION: Alfuzosin, tamsulosin, and silodosin showed similar efficacy in improvement of LUTS secondary to BPH, with good tolerability, acceptability, and minimum hemodynamic adverse effects. Alfuzosin, tamsulosin, and silodosin are comparable in efficacy in symptomatic management of BPH. The occurrence of QTc prolongation in three subjects with tamsulosin in the present study is an unexpected adverse event as there are no reports of QTc prolongation with tamsulosin in any of the previous studies.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Watchful waiting is a well known approach to the management of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). In recent years, several large longitudinal studies have published their findings on the natural history of BPH. In addition, several other studies reporting the outcomes of patients randomized to medical treatment versus placebo have been used to extrapolate patients who are at low risk for progression. RECENT FINDINGS: Both longitudinal studies and randomized placebo-controlled trials have confirmed the progressive nature of BPH, with symptom progression being the most common manifestation. Variables such as baseline prostate-specific antigen, prostate volume, symptom score and bother score, decreased flow rate, and increased postvoid residual have all been linked to progression to acute urinary retention and need for surgery. SUMMARY: Historically, not much has been known about the natural history of BPH and thus, who would be a good candidate for watchful waiting. In this review, we discuss the natural history of BPH and the outcomes of affected patients managed with watchful waiting, as well as variables predictive of progression.
Drug-induced hepatic injury is a potential complication of virtually all drugs because the liver is central to the metabolic disposition of almost all drugs, although precise mechanisms often are unknown. We report a case of severe acute mixed hepatitis (cholestatic and hepatocellular), probably induced by alfuzosin. This event has not been reported previously (MEDLINE 1990, March 1999). Viral causes, autoimmune hepatitis and biliary tree obstruction were excluded. After discontinuation of the drug, liver function test results returned to normal.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) result from age-related changes in detrusor function and prostatic growth that are driven by alterations in the ratio of circulating androgens and estrogens. Alpha-adrenergic receptor blockers are commonly used to treat LUTS because they influence urethral tone and intra-urethral pressure. Molecular cloning studies have identified three alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor subtypes (alpha(1A), alpha(1B), and alpha(1D)). The alpha(1A) subtype is predominant in the human prostate but is also present in many parts of the brain that direct cognitive function. Tamsulosin is the most widely used alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor antagonist with 12.6 million prescriptions filled in 2010 alone. When compared to the other common types of alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor antagonists (i.e., terazosin, doxazosin, and alfuzosin), tamsulosin is 10- to 38-fold more selective for the alpha(1A) versus the alpha(1B) subtype. RECENT FINDINGS: Duan et al. have recently shown that men taking tamsulosin have a higher risk of developing dementia when compared to men taking other alpha-adrenergic antagonists or no alpha-adrenergic antagonists at all (HR 1.17; 95% CI 1.14-1.21). Based upon this retrospective analysis, we believe that tamsulosin, because of its unique affinity for alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptors, may increase the risk of developing dementia when used for an extended period of time. If these findings are confirmed, they carry significant public health implications for an aging society.
Alpha blockers (AB) are the main group of drugs used for medical expulsive therapy (MET) in patients with ureteral stones. However, there is no consensus on the relative efficacy and safety of individual AB in MET. Areas covered: The present work is a network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials comparing AB with either placebo or standard of care in patients with ureteral stones. Electronic databases of Medline, Cochrane CENTRAL and Google Scholar were searched for eligible clinical studies. Inverse variance heterogeneity model was used for mixed treatment comparisons. Stone expulsion rate (SER) and stone expulsion time (SET) were the primary outcomes. Sub-group analyses for the following sub-groups were carried out: children; after shockwave lithotripsy; stone size of </=5 mm; >5 mm; proximal and distal ureteral stones. Expert review: AB, phosphodiesterase inhibitors and combined AB with corticosteroids were observed with significant stone expulsion rate compared to control group in a recent network meta-analysis. Due to lack of head-to-head clinical trials within AB, only tamsulosin has been widely recommended by various urological guidelines. The results of this network meta-analysis will guide the future researchers in evaluating other promising ABs as agents for MET.
Alpha1-receptor blockers have become first-line therapy for the medical management of lower urinary tract symptoms associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia. However, adverse effects such as cardiovascular intolerance can limit their use. This article focuses on alfuzosin, a clinically uroselective, alpha1-adrenergic antagonist that is available as a novel once-daily formulation that does not require dose titration. Alfuzosin is less vasoactive than other non-subtype selective alpha1-receptor blockers. In addition to effects on lower urinary tract symptoms, it is also used as an adjunct to urethral catheterisation in patients with acute urinary retention related to benign prostatic hyperplasia, and can improve sexual function and health-related quality of life in benign prostatic hyperplasia sufferers.
Alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists (alpha-blockers) are efficacious in treating lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) suggestive of benign prostatic obstruction (BPO), also termed symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), causing bladder outlet obstruction (BOO). There is little difference among the various alpha-blockers in terms of efficacy in treating LUTS. However, conventional quinazoline derivatives such as terazosin, doxazosin and alfuzosin, originally developed for hypertension, have inherent cardiovascular extension effects, which influence the well being and safety of patients with LUTS by impairing physiological blood pressure (BP) control, even when their effect on unchallenged BP may be quite low. Preclinically, tamsulosin, a sulphonamide-substituted phenethylamine, has a relative selectivity for the alpha 1-adrenoceptors of the lower urinary tract. Clinically, this is associated with fewer cardiovascular extension effects with tamsulosin (modified release capsule) 0.4 mg once daily. This allows the use of convenient regimens of 0.4 mg tamsulosin administered once daily after breakfast from initiation of treatment without the need for 'step-up' increases of dose to avoid 'first-dose' hypotension. Extensive investigation, including multiple orthostatic stress testing (which otherwise is unusual in the characterization of alpha-blockers because of their inherent safety), confirms that tamsulosin 0.4 mg definitely carries a lower risk of impaired BP control.
Alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists have been shown to provide effective relief from symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) with attendant improvements in quality of life. Although the alpha1A-adrenoceptor subtype predominates over other subtypes of alpha1 adrenoceptors in the prostate gland, there is no evidence that a subselective alpha-adrenoceptor antagonist provides a clinical advantage over a selective alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonist in the treatment of patients with BPH. The pharmacokinetic profiles of alpha1A-adrenoceptor antagonists and their documented penetration of the blood-brain barrier (CNS adverse effects) preclude a clinical benefit of subselective alpha-adrenoceptor blockers over selective alpha1 blockers.
PURPOSE: To describe the otorhinolaryngological adverse effects of the main drugs used in urological practice. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A review of the scientific literature was performed using a combination of specific descriptors (side effect, adverse effect, scopolamine, sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil, oxybutynin, tolterodine, spironolactone, furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide, doxazosin, alfuzosin, terazosin, prazosin, tamsulosin, desmopressin) contained in publications until April 2020. Manuscripts written in English, Portuguese, and Spanish were manually selected from the title and abstract. The main drugs used in Urology were divided into five groups to describe their possible adverse effects: alpha-blockers, anticholinergics, diuretics, hormones, and phosphodiesterase inhibitors. RESULTS: The main drugs used in Urology may cause several otorhinolaryngological adverse effects. Dizziness was most common, but dry mouth, rhinitis, nasal congestion, epistaxis, hearing loss, tinnitus, and rhinorrhea were also reported and varies among drug classes. CONCLUSIONS: Most of the drugs used in urological practice have otorhinolaryngological adverse effects. Dizziness was most common, but dry mouth, rhinitis, nasal congestion, epistaxis, hearing loss, tinnitus, and rhinorrhea were also reported. Therefore, doctors must be aware of these adverse effects to improve adherence to the treatment and to minimize damage to the health of patients.
Four alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonists are currently available for the medical treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms suggestive of benign prostatic obstruction in Germany: alfuzosin, doxazosin, tamsulosin, and terazosin. Indirect comparison based on randomized, placebo-controlled trials as well as several direct comparative studies have shown equal efficacy of all four drugs on urinary flow and symptom relief if suggested dosing regimens are applied. A dosing regimen below this recommendation should be restricted to those patients who have a proven satisfactory response to a lower dose.
Treatment utility can be defined as a combination of objective clinical efficacy and quality-of-life results (i.e. subjective criteria). It is a particularly useful concept in diseases such as benign prostatic hyperplasia where important differences may exist between the results of objective measurements and the assessment of subjective complaints and quality-of-life impairment. The collection of data regarding treatment utility involves the generation of large patient care databases which provide long-term data in representative, general practice, patient populations. Such data provide overall information for physicians, health care providers, patients, insurance companies and health care decision-makers and enable them to define the long-term effectiveness of each treatment. In addition, predictive or risk factors which may assist in appropriate clinical decision-making may be identified. Such data also provide cost/ utility information. Finally, the data could be used in daily practice to allow the physician to make rapid therapeutic decisions.
BACKGROUND: Alfuzosin has been widely used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatitis, and is claimed to be a selective agent for the lower urinary tract with low incidence of adverse side-effects and hypotensive changes. Recently, several randomized controlled trials have reported using Alfuzosin as an expulsive therapy of ureteral stones. Tamsulosin, another alpha blocker, has also been used as an agent for the expulsive therapy for ureteral stones. It is unclear whether alfuzosin has similar efficacy as Tamsulosin in the management of ureteral stones. OBJECTIVE: To perform a systematic review and analysis of literatures comparing Alfuzosin with Tamsulosin or standard conservative therapy for the treatment of ureteral stones less than 10 mm in diameter. METHODS: A systematic literature review was performed in December 2014 using Pubmed, Embase, and the Cochrane library databases to identify relevant studies. All randomized and controlled trials were included. A subgroup analysis was performed comparing Alfuzosin with control therapy on the management of distal ureteral stones. RESULTS: Alfuzosin provided a significantly higher stone-free rate than the control treatments (RR: 1.85; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.35-2.55; p<0.001), and a shorter stone expulsion time (Weighted mean difference [WMD]: -4.20 d, 95%CI, -6.19 to -2.21; p<0.001), but it has a higher complication rate (RR: 2.02; 95% CI, 1.30-3.15; p<0.01). When Alfuzosin was compared to Tamsulosin, there was no significant difference in terms of stone-free rate (RR: 0.90; 95% CI, 0.79-1.02; p = 0.09) as well as the stone expulsion time (WMD: 0.52 d, 95%CI, -1.61 to 2.64; p = 0.63). The adverse effects of Alfuzosin were similar to those of Tamsulosin (RR: 0.88; 95% CI, 0.61-1.26; p = 0.47). CONCLUSIONS: Alfuzosin is a safe and effective agent for the expulsive therapy of ureteral stones smaller than 10 mm in size. It is more effective than therapeutic regiment without alpha blocker. It is equivalent to Tamsulosin in its effectiveness and safety profile. Adverse effects should always be kept in mind when use this class of drugs.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Terazosin, doxazosin, and alfuzosin (Tz/Dz/Az) are alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonists that also bind to and activate a key adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-producing enzyme in glycolysis. It is hypothesized that the increase in energy availability in the brain may slow or prevent neurodegeneration, potentially by reducing the accumulation of alpha-synuclein. Recent work has suggested a potentially neuroprotective effect of the use of Tz/Dz/Az in Parkinson disease in both animal and human studies. We investigated the neuroprotective effects of Tz/Dz/Az in a closely related disease, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). METHODS: We used a new-user active comparator design in the Merative Marketscan database to identify men with no history of DLB who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az or 2 comparator medications. Our comparator medications were other drugs commonly used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia that do not increase ATP: the alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist tamsulosin or 5alpha-reductase inhibitor (5ARI). We matched the cohorts on propensity scores and duration of follow-up. We followed up the matched cohorts forward to estimate the hazard of developing DLB using Cox proportional hazards regression. RESULTS: Men who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az had a lower hazard of developing DLB than matched men taking tamsulosin (n = 242,716, 728,256 person-years, hazard ratio [HR] 0.60, 95% CI 0.50-0.71) or 5ARI (n = 130,872, 399,316 person-years, HR 0.73, 95% CI 0.57-0.93). while the hazard in men taking tamsulosin was similar to that of men taking 5ARI (n = 159,596, 482,280 person-years, HR 1.17, 95% CI 0.96-1.42). These results were robust to several sensitivity analyses. DISCUSSION: We find an association in men who are taking Tz/Dz/Az and a lower hazard of DLB compared with similar men taking other medications. When combined with the literature of Tz/Dz/Az on Parkinson disease, our findings suggest that glycolysis-enhancing drugs may be broadly protective in neurodegenerative synucleinopathies. A future randomized trial is required to assess these associations for causality. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class III evidence that Tz/Dz/Az use reduces the rate of developing DLB in adult men.
Intraoperative Floppy iris syndrome(IFIS) remains a challenge for surgeons during phacoemulsification. Initially, it was related to the use of tamsulosin, an alpha adrenergic receptor blocker used in benign prostatic hyperplasia. Subsequently, other alpha adrenergic receptor such as alfuzosin, terazosin and doxazosin alongwith different other class of medications and systemic risk factors were identified. Other class of medications includes 5-alpha reductase inhibitor, angiotensin receptor antagonist, benzodiazepines, antipsychotics and antidepressants. Other risk factors include increasing age, male gender, diabetes, hypertension and decreased preoperative pupil diameter. It is very important for surgeons to identify these risk factors preoperatively and take appropriate preoperative and intraoperative measures to tackle the dreaded complications of IFIS. Sometimes, it is important for an ophthalmologist to work in cooperation with physician and urologist to minimize the complications. In conclusion, awareness of the risk factors associated with IFIS, their detailed preoperative assessment and intraoperative measures and surgical intervention is crucial in addressing IFIS. Lack of awareness can turn a routine, uneventful surgery into one with significant visual morbidity.
PURPOSE: Although it is known that alpha-adrenergic receptor antagonists have positive effects on metabolic parameters such as glucose metabolism, lipid profile, and insulin sensitivity, it is unclear whether this is a class effect. Tamsulosin is reported to have adverse effects on glucose metabolism and insulin resistance, and this may be because of its lack of glycolysis-enhancing effect compared with other alpha-adrenergic receptor antagonists with glycolysis-enhancing effects such as doxazosin, terazosin, and alfuzosin. The aim of this study was to compare the effect of tamsulosin on metabolic parameters with another alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist, doxazosin. METHODS: In this prospective, observational, controlled, 12-week clinical study, a total of 60 male patients aged >/= 40 years who were first started on tamsulosin (n = 30; 0.4 mg/day, oral; mean age, 59.20 +/- 8.97 years) or doxazosin (n = 30; 4 or 8 mg/day, oral; mean age, 58.50 +/- 8.93 years) for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) or lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) were enrolled. The groups were compared according to the changes in anthropometric and biochemical parameters (glycemia, lipid profile, and insulin sensitivity) at the end of treatment. RESULTS: In intragroup analyses, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, total cholesterol, and HbA1c levels decreased significantly in the doxazosin group compared with baseline (p < 0.05 for all), while no significant change was observed in the tamsulosin group. In comparisons between groups, systolic blood pressure, total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels showed a significant decrease in the doxazosin group compared with the tamsulosin group (percent change: - 6.68 +/- 13.08 vs. 0.53 +/- 11.02, p = 0.025; - 3.63 +/- 9.56 vs. 4.02 +/- 10.86, p = 0.005; and - 5.62 +/- 18.18 vs. 5.24 +/- 15.42, p = 0.015, respectively). CONCLUSION: Although these results do not support previous findings that tamsulosin has adverse effects on metabolic parameters, they suggest that doxazosin treatment may be a reason for preference in patients with BPH or LUTS accompanied by metabolic disorder.
In this study we test whether functional screening of compounds to adrenergic G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) would provide data that correlated significantly with radiolabeled binding data, thereby permitting researchers to replace expensive radioligand-binding experiments with non-radioactive screening. An increase in intracellular calcium levels represents an important second messenger signal for several recombinant GPCRs. In this study, we describe the affinities of three alpha adrenoceptor antagonists (terazosin, tamsulosin and alfuzosin), determined by monitoring the changes in intracellular calcium levels and comparing them with their radioligand-binding affinities. In addition to determining the functional affinities of the three alpha adrenoceptor antagonists, we evaluate their binding at two alpha adrenoceptor subtypes and optimized the assay for high-throughput screening.
The chemistry, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, and adverse effects of alfuzosin hydrochloride in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) are discussed. Alfuzosin is a functionally uroselective alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist indicated for the management of moderate to severe BPH. It can improve urinary voiding symptoms and increase urinary flow rates while causing few cardiovascular adverse effects. When administered as an immediate-release (IR) formulation, alfuzosin must be administered twice or thrice daily. The extended-release (ER) formulations of alfuzosin for once- or twice-daily administration are associated with small variations in peak and trough serum drug levels, which may contribute to the lower frequency of cardiovascular adverse effects reported with ER versus IR alfuzosin. Alfuzosin has been shown to improve patients' perception of quality of life, allowing patients to increase their physical activities and improve their ability to handle day-to-day activities. Less significant improvements in patients' sense of well-being and improved sexual functioning have been reported. The usual dose of alfuzosin for patients with BPH is 2.5 mg twice or thrice daily of the IR formulation or 5 mg of ER alfuzosin twice daily or 10 mg of ER alfuzosin once daily. The Food and Drug Administration is currently reviewing the ER 10-mg formulation for once-daily administration. IR alfuzosin is similar to all other second-generation alpha 1-adrenergic antagonists in mechanism of action, clinical efficacy, and adverse effects. No dosage titration is needed for ER alfuzosin, and its onset of peak action is within days of the start of treatment.
