There are many options for acute migraine attack treatment, but none is ideal for all patients. This study aims to review current medical office-based acute migraine therapy in adults and provides readers with an organized approach to this important facet of migraine treatment. A general literature review includes a review of several recent published guidelines. Acetaminophen, 4 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (ibuprofen, acetylsalicylic acid [ASA], naproxen sodium, and diclofenac potassium), and 7 triptans (almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan, and zolmitriptan) have good evidence for efficacy and form the core of acute migraine treatment. NSAID-triptan combinations, dihydroergotamine, non-opioid combination analgesics (acetaminophen, ASA, and caffeine), and several anti-emetics (metoclopramide, domperidone, and prochlorperazine) are additional evidence-based options. Opioid containing combination analgesics may be helpful in specific patients, but should not be used routinely. Clinical features to be considered when choosing an acute migraine medication include usual headache intensity, usual rapidity of pain intensity increase, nausea, vomiting, degree of disability, patient response to previously used medications, history of headache recurrence with previous attacks, and the presence of contraindications to specific acute medications. Available acute medications can be organized into 4 treatment strategies, including a strategy for attacks of mild to moderate severity (strategy one: acetaminophen and/or NSAIDs), a triptan strategy for patients with severe attacks and for attacks not responding to strategy one, a refractory attack strategy, and a strategy for patients with contraindications to vasoconstricting drugs. Acute treatment of migraine attacks during pregnancy, lactation, and for patients with chronic migraine is also discussed. In chronic migraine, it is particularly important that medication overuse is eliminated or avoided. Migraine treatment is complex, and treatment must be individualized and tailored to the patient's clinical features. Clinicians should make full use of available medications and formulations in an organized approach.
OBJECTIVE: A review of treatment options for menstrual migraine. BACKGROUND: Migraine affects  approximately 30 million people in the US. A subset of female migraineurs have migraines that are mainly associated with menstruation. Menstrual migraine (MM) is divided into pure MM and menstrually related migraine. Pure MM attacks occur only with menstruation and have a prevalence of 1%. Menstrually related migraine has a prevalence of 6-7%, and occurs both during menstruation as well as during the rest of the cycle. MM is usually without aura and is more severe, longer lasting, and more resistant to treatment due to the effects of ovarian hormones, specifically estrogen. MM treatment is divided into acute, short-term prophylaxis, and daily prevention. The best-studied acute treatments are triptans. For short-term prophylaxis, triptans, non-triptans, or combinations are used. Some preventive medications may be used daily to prevent MM. Many anti-epileptic medications used in migraine prevention can affect the efficacy of oral contraceptives and hormonal treatments, so caution is indicated when these are used. METHODS: PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane, and Embase were searched for MM and treatments. RESULTS: Many randomized, placebo-controlled, prospective studies have evaluated the efficacy of sumatriptan, rizatriptan, naratriptan, zolmitriptan, and almotriptan in MM. Reviewing numerous studies with statistically significant results, rizatriptan has the best overall evidence for acute treatment of MM, ranging from pain-free responses of 33-73% at 2 hours. Sumatriptan and rizatriptan have shown similar efficacies of 61-63% in terms of 2 hour pain freedom. Rizatriptan showed sustained pain relief between 2 and 24 hours with an efficacy of 63% and sustained pain freedom for MM between 2 and 24 hours with an efficacy of 32%. For short-term prevention of MM, there were four randomized controlled trials for frovatriptan taken twice daily, one trial for zolmitriptan taken three times daily, and two studies for naratriptan taken twice daily, all of which showed statistically significant results. Among studies on non-triptans for short-term prevention of MM, magnesium, estrogen, naproxen sodium, and dihydroergotamine all had statistically significant results. Many antiepileptic medications taken for prevention of MM can cause enzyme induction affecting oral contraceptives (OCs) and hormonal treatments to different degrees. Topiramate has the least effect on OCs at doses below 200 mg/day. Lamotrigine noticeably decreases oral contraceptive levels; however, the evidence for it as a preventive medication is not strong. CONCLUSION: MM can be very difficult to treat. For acute treatments, rizatriptan has the best overall evidence. For short-term prevention, frovatriptan, zolmitriptan, or naratriptan, as well as magnesium, estrogen, naproxen sodium, or dihydroergotamine may be useful.
The triptans are a class of tryptamine-based drugs indicated for in the treatment of migraine headaches. The triptans act as serotonin (5-hydroxytriptamine) (5-HT) agonists by binding to various serotonin receptors, causing vasoconstriction and neuronal inhibition to alleviate migraines. There are 7 types of triptans currently available on the U.S. market: almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan and zolmitriptan. The objective of this study was to examine the use and effects of triptans in pregnancy. Although three of the triptans have pregnancy registries maintained by the manufacturer, triptan use in pregnancy has not been extensively studied. Information on the use of sumatriptan during pregnancy is relatively more abundant, because it has been on the market longer than the other triptans and may also have a higher percentage of the market share. There are no data to suggest teratogenicity for any of the triptans, although preterm birth rates appear to be elevated.
The study aims to provide an updated assessment of the evidence for individual pharmacological therapies for acute migraine treatment. Pharmacological therapy is frequently required for acutely treating migraine attacks. The American Academy of Neurology Guidelines published in 2000 summarized the available evidence relating to the efficacy of acute migraine medications. This review, conducted by the members of the Guidelines Section of the American Headache Society, is an updated assessment of evidence for the migraine acute medications. A standardized literature search was performed to identify articles related to acute migraine treatment that were published between 1998 and 2013. The American Academy of Neurology Guidelines Development procedures were followed. Two authors reviewed each abstract resulting from the search and determined whether the full manuscript qualified for review. Two reviewers studied each qualifying full manuscript for its level of evidence. Level A evidence requires at least 2 Class I studies, and Level B evidence requires 1 Class I or 2 Class II studies. The specific medications - triptans (almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan [oral, nasal spray, injectable, transcutaneous patch], zolmitriptan [oral and nasal spray]) and dihydroergotamine (nasal spray, inhaler) are effective (Level A). Ergotamine and other forms of dihydroergotamine are probably effective (Level B). Effective nonspecific medications include acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin, diclofenac, ibuprofen, and naproxen), opioids (butorphanol nasal spray), sumatriptan/naproxen, and the combination of acetaminophen/aspirin/caffeine (Level A). Ketoprofen, intravenous and intramuscular ketorolac, flurbiprofen, intravenous magnesium (in migraine with aura), and the combination of isometheptene compounds, codeine/acetaminophen and tramadol/acetaminophen are probably effective (Level B). The antiemetics prochlorperazine, droperidol, chlorpromazine, and metoclopramide are probably effective (Level B). There is inadequate evidence for butalbital and butalbital combinations, phenazone, intravenous tramadol, methadone, butorphanol or meperidine injections, intranasal lidocaine, and corticosteroids, including dexamethasone (Level C). Octreotide is probably not effective (Level B). There is inadequate evidence to refute the efficacy of ketorolac nasal spray, intravenous acetaminophen, chlorpromazine injection, and intravenous granisetron (Level C). There are many acute migraine treatments for which evidence supports efficacy. Clinicians must consider medication efficacy, potential side effects, and potential medication-related adverse events when prescribing acute medications for migraine. Although opioids, such as butorphanol, codeine/acetaminophen, and tramadol/acetaminophen, are probably effective, they are not recommended for regular use.
Gateways to Clinical Trials is a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables has been retrieved from the Clinical Studies Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: Abetimus sodium, Ad5-FGF4, adeno-Interferon gamma, AE-941, AERx, alemtuzumab, alicaforsen sodium, almotriptan, alpharadin, anakinra, anatumomab mafenatox, ANG-453, anti-CTLA-4 Mab, AP-12009, aprepitant, aripiprazole, arsenic trioxide, astemizole, atlizumab, atomoxetine hydrochloride; Bevacizumab, BG-9928, BMS-188667, botulinum toxin type B, BufferGel; Caffeine, CDP-870, cetuximab, cilomilast, ciluprevir, clofarabine, continuous erythropoiesis receptor activator, CP-461; Darbepoetin alfa, deferasirox, desloratadine, desoxyepothilone B, diflomotecan, dolasetron, drotrecogin alfa (activated), duloxetine hydrochloride; ED-71, efalizumab, efaproxiral sodium, EKB-569, eletriptan, EMD-72000, enfuvirtide, erlotinib hydrochloride, escitalopram oxalate, etoricoxib; Fampridine, ferumoxytol, fondaparinux sodium; Gadofosveset sodium, gastrazole, gefitinib, gemtuzumab ozogamicin, gepirone hydrochloride glutamine; hLM609, HSPPC-96, human insulin; IDD-1, imatinib mesylate, indisulam, inhaled insulin, ixabepilone; Keratinocyte growth factor; Lapatinib, laquinimod, LDP-02, LE-SN38, levetiracetam, levosimendan, licofelone, liposomal doxorubicin, liposomal NDDP, lopinavir, lumiracoxib, LY-156735; Morphine hydrochloride, morphine-6-glucuronide, motexafin gadolinium, MS-27-275, MVA-5T4, MVA-Muc1-IL-2; Nemifitide ditriflutate, neridronic acid nitronaproxen, NSC-683864, NSC-703940, NVP-LAF-237; Oblimersen sodium, ocinaplon, oncomyc-NG, OPC-28326, ortataxel, ospemifene; Palonosetron hydrochloride, PEG-filgrastim peginterferon alfa-2(a), peginterferon alfa-2b, pegsunercept, pemetrexed disodium, pregabalin, prilocaine, pyridoxamine; RDP-58, recombinant glucagon-like peptide-1 (7-36) amide, recombinant human ApoA-I milano/phospholipid complex; SB-715992, soblidotin, sodium dichloroacetate, St. John's Wort extract; TAS-102, terfenadine, TG-1024, TG-5001, 4'-Thio-ara-C, tipranavir, topixantrone hydrochloride, trabectedin, transdermal selegiline, trimethoprim, troxacitabine, TT-232; Vatalanib succinate, vinflunine; Ximelagatran; Ziprasidone hydrochloride, Zoledronic acid monohydrate.
The vascular hypothesis of migraine has now been superseded by a more integrated theory that involves both vascular and neuronal components. It has been demonstrated that the visual aura experienced by some migraineurs arises from cortical spreading depression, and that this neuronal event may also activate perivascular nerve afferents, leading to vasodilation and neurogenic inflammation of the meningeal blood vessels and, thus, throbbing pain. The involvement of the parasympathetic system supplying the meninges also causes increased vasodilation and pain. As an acute attack progresses, sensory neurones in the trigeminal nucleus caudalis become sensitized, resulting in the phenomenon of cutaneous allodynia. Triptans may act at several points during the progression of a migraine attack. However, the development of central sensitization impacts upon the effectiveness of triptan therapy.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article provides a systematic, evidence-based approach to acute medication choices for the patient with migraine. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent clinical trials, meta-analyses, and practice guidelines have confirmed that four nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) with randomized controlled trial evidence for efficacy in migraine (ibuprofen, naproxen sodium, diclofenac potassium, and acetylsalicylic acid) and seven triptans (sumatriptan, rizatriptan, eletriptan, zolmitriptan, almotriptan, frovatriptan, and naratriptan) are appropriate medications for acute migraine treatment. Dihydroergotamine (DHE) is also suitable for selected patients. SUMMARY: NSAIDs and triptans are the mainstays of acute migraine therapy, and antiemetic drugs can be added as necessary. Opioids and combination analgesics containing opioids should not be used routinely. Patient-specific clinical features should help guide the selection of an acute medication for an individual patient. Acute medications can be organized into four treatment strategies for use in various clinical settings. The acetaminophen-NSAID strategy is suitable for patients with attacks of mild to moderate severity. The triptan strategy is suitable for patients with severe attacks and for those with attacks of moderate severity who do not respond well to NSAIDs. The refractory migraine strategies may be useful for patients who do not respond well to the NSAIDs or triptans alone and include using triptans and NSAIDs simultaneously in combination, DHE, and rescue medications (eg, dopamine antagonists, combination analgesics, and corticosteroids) when the patient's usual medications fail. Strategies for patients with contraindications to vasoconstricting drugs include use of NSAIDs, combination analgesics, and dopamine antagonists.Acetaminophen is the safest acute migraine drug during pregnancy, and acetaminophen with codeine is also an option. Sumatriptan may be an option during pregnancy for selected patients and is compatible with breast-feeding.
Clinical observations have shown that migraine is a progressive disorder, both within an acute attack, and within the disease itself. Rates of diagnosis for migraine have increased in the last decade, but more than half of migraineurs remain undiagnosed. Patient expectations of migraine therapies have also increased (patients require rapid and sustained pain relief with a treatment that has good tolerability), and can differ greatly from those of physicians. Management decisions should be made with these expectations in mind, to enhance patient outcomes and compliance with treatment. Improved understanding of acute migraine attack pathophysiology has led to the strategy of early treatment to modify both the progression of the current attack and, potentially, the progression of the disease itself in the individual. The triptans are effective acute migraine therapies. Each agent has its own distinct profile of efficacy and tolerability, enabling individualization of treatment.
Pure menstrual migraine (PMM) and menstrually related migraine (MRM) are difficult challenges in migraine management. Triptans are a class of highly selective serotonin receptor agonists, which interfere with the pathogenesis of migraine and are effective in relieving the associated neurovegetative symptoms. In recent years triptans have been extensively proposed for the treatment of severe, disabling, and recurrent perimenstrual migraine attacks. This review summarizes the different levels of recommendations for the use of triptans in the treatment of perimenstrual migraine. This review is also intended to offer an updated reasonable guide to physicians treating perimenstrual migraine in daily practice.
Recent studies of the pathophysiology of migraine provide evidence that the headache phase is associated with multiple physiologic actions. These actions include the release of vasoactive neuropeptides by the trigeminovascular system, vasodilation of intracranial extracerebral vessels, and increased nociceptive neurotransmission within the central trigeminocervical complex. The 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonists, collectively known as triptans, are a major advance in the treatment of migraine. The beneficial effects of the triptans in patients with migraine are related to their multiple mechanisms of action at sites implicated in the pathophysiology of migraine. These mechanisms are mediated by 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors and include vasoconstriction of painfully dilated cerebral blood vessels, inhibition of the release of vasoactive neuropeptides by trigeminal nerves, and inhibition of nociceptive neurotransmission. The high affinity of the triptans for 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors and their favorable pharmacologic properties contribute to the beneficial effects of these drugs, including rapid onset of action, effective relief of headache and associated symptoms, and low incidence of adverse effects.
Introduction: Almotriptan (ALT), a serotonin 5-HT(1B/1D) agonist has been used in the acute treatment of migraine with or without aura for 20 years, accumulating data on more than 15,000 patients in studies and from an estimated >150 million treated migraine attacks in daily clinical practice. The last major review of ALT was written almost 10 years ago. The current narrative review provides an overview of the experience gained with almotriptan over that time, and highlights data published in the last decade. Areas covered: Randomized clinical trials, observational studies, postmarketing studies and meta-analyses involving ALT for the treatment of acute migraine identified through a systematic literature search. Expert opinion: Triptans are a mainstay of anti-migraine treatment. Findings with ALT over the last 10 years have reinforced the positive efficacy and tolerability results that were reported during the first 10 years following its introduction. In particular, more recent clinical results have confirmed its efficacy in women with menstrual migraine, the usefulness of early intervention, long-term benefit in adults, and also its efficacy and safety in adolescents. Overall, ALT can be considered an optimal choice for managing acute migraine resistant to first-line drugs.
The current management approach to migraine headaches advocates use of triptan medications early in the course of an attack while pain is still mild, rather than waiting to treat the pain when it has progressed to moderate-severe. Recently, strong new evidence for the benefits of early intervention has become available. The AEGIS, AIMS and AwM studies of almotriptan in patients with migraine indicate that earlier treatment initiation and lower pain intensity at the time of treatment are important predictors of enhanced therapeutic outcomes. The opportunity to treat early exists for about 50% of all migraine attacks, which offers considerable scope for improving migraine management. Importantly, treating pain early and before it has progressed beyond 'mild' meets many of the expectations patients have of their migraine treatment. It is believed that consistent, positive outcomes may assist in overcoming the various physician- and patient-perceived barriers to adoption of this beneficial treatment strategy.
Variability in drug response is a major barrier to the successful treatment of migraine, and most treatments are only optimal in a subset of patients. Although triptans provide the best therapeutic option for the treatment of acute migraine, it has not previously been possible to predict how well patients will respond to a specific triptan or whether they will experience unpleasant adverse events. Hence, it has been difficult for physicians to match individual patients with the most suitable agent to treat their migraine pain. Intrapatient variability has been associated with polymorphisms in genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes, drug transporters and drug targets. Pharmacogenetics provides the possibility of tailoring the therapeutic approach to individual patients, in order to maximize treatment efficacy while minimizing the potential for unwanted side-effects. This review demonstrates how almotriptan may overcome genetically determined responses by utilizing diverse metabolic pathways to provide therapeutic benefit to many migraineurs.
(1) A wide array of data regarding acute migraine treatment are available, but few trials strictly adhere to International Headache Society guidelines for patient inclusion criteria.(2) Triptans appear to have similar efficacy profiles, but among newer triptans, almotriptan offers improved tolerability over sumatriptan.(3) Combination indomethacin/caffeine/prochlorperazine most likely has similar therapeutic efficacy to triptan therapy, with further research needed to complete understanding of any potential differences between these treatments.(4) Multi-targeted combination therapy with a triptan plus a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID), such as sumatriptan/naproxen sodium, is more effective in acute migraine treatment than monotherapy with either agent alone.(5) It is unclear whether triptans offer clinically relevant benefits over aspirin or NSAIDs in migraine patients. Thus NSAIDs, particularly effervescent aspirin, should be considered the first-line treatment of migraine attacks.
In 3 randomized clinical trials (n = 1585) the calcitonin gene-related peptide antagonist telcagepant 300 mg orally had an incidence of adverse events similar to placebo when used in the acute treatment of migraine. Telcagepant, thus, has excellent tolerability in migraine. Only a quarter (26%) (334/1307) of patients were, however, pain free after 2 hours, while 56% (729/1297) of patients had pain relief at 2 hours. Telcagepant 300 mg in one randomized clinical trial was equipotent to zolmitriptan 5 mg. Based on results from a meta-analysis, rizatriptan 10 mg (41%) and almotriptan (35%) seem superior to telcagepant (26%) for pain free at 2 hours whereas rizatriptan 10 mg (25%) showed no difference from telcagepant 300 mg (19 %) for sustained pain free (2-24 hours). The introduction of calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonism in the acute treatment of migraine is a major step forward but so far mostly because of its specific mode of action and excellent tolerability.
Effective acute treatment of migraine is possible with the 4HT(1B/1D) agonists (triptans), but their use has been limited in the UK because of concerns about limited efficacy, recurrence of attacks, adverse events, and cost. Almotriptan (Almogran, Lundbeck Ltd, Milton Keynes), the most recently available member of the class, offers some advantages over previously available agents.
Although triptans are highly effective for the acute treatment of migraine, sustained pain-free rates--considered the optimal end-point--are in the range of 18%-27% for all triptans in clinical trials. A recently proposed strategy for treating migraine attacks is that triptans should be given early, when the pain is mild, rather than moderate or severe. Studies with different triptans have shown that early intervention can result in higher pain-free rates, together with reductions in rescue medication use and recurrence rates. However these studies suffer from methodological pitfalls: most were retrospective analyses of trials not designed to evaluate the benefit of early intervention; the definition of "early" differed from study to study; and placebo effects were not correctly evaluated. Furthermore, the disadvantages of this strategy in clinical practice, particularly the risk of medication overuse, have not been evaluated. We propose that only patients with particularly severe migraines and in whom attacks are always characterised by rapid progression of pain and other symptoms, should be advised to take a triptan as early as possible.
Introduction Migraine headache is a neurological disorder whose attacks are associated with nausea, vomiting, photophobia and phonophobia. Treatments for migraine aim to either prevent attacks before they have started or relieve attacks (abort) after onset of symptoms and range from complementary therapies to pharmacological interventions. A number of treatment-related adverse events such as somnolence, fatigue, and chest discomfort have previously been reported in association with triptans. The comparative tolerability of available agents for the abortive treatment of migraine attacks has not yet been systematically reviewed and quantified. Methods We performed a systematic literature review and Bayesian network meta-analysis for comparative tolerability of treatments for migraine. The literature search targeted all randomized controlled trials evaluating oral abortive treatments for acute migraine over a range of available doses in adults. The primary outcomes of interest were any adverse event, treatment-related adverse events, and serious adverse events. Secondary outcomes were fatigue, dizziness, chest discomfort, somnolence, nausea, and vomiting. Results Our search yielded 141 trials covering 15 distinct treatments. Of the triptans, sumatriptan, eletriptan, rizatriptan, zolmitriptan, and the combination treatment of sumatriptan and naproxen were associated with a statistically significant increase in odds of any adverse event or a treatment-related adverse event occurring compared with placebo. Of the non-triptans, only acetaminophen was associated with a statistically significant increase in odds of an adverse event occurring when compared with placebo. Overall, triptans were not associated with increased odds of serious adverse events occurring and the same was the case for non-triptans. For the secondary outcomes, with the exception of vomiting, all triptans except for almotriptan and frovatriptan were significantly associated with increased risk for all outcomes. Almotriptan was significantly associated with an increased risk of vomiting, whereas all other triptans yielded non-significant lower odds compared with placebo. Generally, the non-triptans were not associated with decreased tolerability for the secondary outcomes. Discussion In summary, triptans were associated with higher odds of any adverse event or a treatment-related adverse event occurring when compared to placebo and non-triptans. Non-significant results for non-triptans indicate that these treatments are comparable with one another and placebo regarding tolerability outcomes.
Almotriptan is a serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine)(1B/1D) receptor agonist (triptan) that has shown consistent efficacy in the acute treatment of migraine with excellent tolerability. It is an effective, well-tolerated and cost-effective triptan, as demonstrated by improvement in rigorous, patient-orientated end points, such as 'sustained pain-free without adverse events'. Results from post hoc analyses, observational studies and well-controlled, prospective clinical trials have shown that significant improvements can be achieved if almotriptan 12.5 mg is administered within an hour of migraine onset, particularly when pain is mild, rather than waiting until pain is moderate-to-severe. Benefits were also achieved with early treatment of moderate-to-severe pain. Time-to-treatment was the best predictor of headache duration, whereas initial headache intensity best predicted most other efficacy outcomes. Early administration of almotriptan 12.5 mg not only produced rapid symptomatic relief, it also improved the patient's quality of life and ability to resume normal daily functioning. Furthermore, the efficacy of almotriptan is not significantly affected by allodynia (purported to reduce the efficacy of triptans). Thus, the excellent efficacy and tolerability profile of almotriptan administered early in a migraine attack indicate that it may be a first-line treatment option in this common, underdiagnosed and undertreated disorder.
INTRODUCTION: Migraine is increasingly recognized as an extremely burdensome and disabling disorder in both children and adolescents. A proper treatment plan is needed to improve the quality of life of both children and families as well as to minimize the risk of disease progression. AREAS COVERED: This review focuses on the current pharmacotherapy for acute migraine in pediatric populations, taking into account specific considerations for those drugs tested in randomized, placebo-controlled trials (RCTs). EXPERT OPINION: A large number of RCTs have documented the efficacy, tolerability, and safety of different compounds. Triptans appears more effective than placebo but results are variable and inconsistent. Almotriptan and rizatriptan are effective as oral formulations, as well as sumatriptan and zolmitriptan as both oral and nasal spray formulations. Adding non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reinforces triptan's effectiveness. Furthermore, small RCTs have documented both the efficacy of ibuprofen and the ineffectiveness of acetaminophen. Naproxen, ketoprofen, diclofenac, and indomethacin - NSAIDs effective in acute migraines in adults - should be tested also in pediatric subjects. Furthermore, the authors suggest that dopamine receptor antagonists should be considered in cases of severe migraines. Lastly, better designed RCTs are needed to fine-tune current therapeutic resources.
