Irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhoea (IBS-D) and functional diarrhoea (FDr) are the two major functional bowel disorders characterized by diarrhoea. In spite of their high prevalence, IBS-D and FDr are associated with major uncertainties, especially regarding their optimal diagnostic work-up and management. A Delphi consensus was performed with experts from 10 European countries who conducted a literature summary and voting process on 31 statements. Quality of evidence was evaluated using the grading of recommendations, assessment, development, and evaluation criteria. Consensus (defined as >80% agreement) was reached for all the statements. The panel agreed with the potential overlapping of IBS-D and FDr. In terms of diagnosis, the consensus supports a symptom-based approach also with the exclusion of alarm symptoms, recommending the evaluation of full blood count, C-reactive protein, serology for coeliac disease, and faecal calprotectin, and consideration of diagnosing bile acid diarrhoea. Colonoscopy with random biopsies in both the right and left colon is recommended in patients older than 50 years and in presence of alarm features. Regarding treatment, a strong consensus was achieved for the use of a diet low fermentable oligo-, di-, monosaccharides and polyols, gut-directed psychological therapies, rifaximin, loperamide, and eluxadoline. A weak or conditional recommendation was achieved for antispasmodics, probiotics, tryciclic antidepressants, bile acid sequestrants, 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 antagonists (i.e. alosetron, ondansetron, or ramosetron). A multinational group of European experts summarized the current state of consensus on the definition, diagnosis, and management of IBS-D and FDr.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common functional gastrointestinal disorder associated with significant disease burden. This American Gastroenterological Association Guideline is intended to support practitioners in decisions about the use of medications for the pharmacological management of IBS with predominant diarrhea (IBS-D) and is an update of a prior technical review and guideline. METHODS: The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation framework was used to assess evidence and make recommendations. The technical review panel prioritized clinical questions and outcomes according to their importance for clinicians and patients and conducted an evidence review of the following agents: eluxadoline, rifaximin, alosetron, loperamide, tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and antispasmodics. The guideline panel reviewed the evidence and used the Evidence-to-Decision Framework to develop recommendations. CONCLUSIONS: The panel agreed on 8 recommendations for the management of patients with IBS-D. The panel made conditional recommendations for eluxadoline, rifaximin, alosetron, (moderate certainty), loperamide (very low certainty), tricyclic antidepressants, and anstispasmodics (low certainty). The panel made a conditional recommendation against the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (low certainty).
The objectives are to review the role of pharmacogenomics in drug metabolism of medications typically used in patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) focusing predominantly on cytochrome P450 metabolism. Other aims are to provide examples of genetic variation of receptors or intermediary pathways that are targets for IBS drugs and to critically appraise the situations where precision medicine is impacting health in IBS. Pharmacogenomics impacts both pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Although large clinical trials have not incorporated testing for genetic variations that could impact the efficacy of medications in IBS, there are therapeutic advantages to inclusion of pharmacogenomics testing for individual patients, as has been demonstrated particularly in the treatment with central neuromodulators in psychiatry practice. Clinical practice in IBS is moving in the same direction with the aid of commercially available tests focused on drug metabolism. Specific mechanisms leading to pathophysiology of IBS are still poorly characterized, relative to diseases such as cancer and inflammatory bowel disease, and, therefore, pharmacogenomics related to drug pharmacodynamics is still in its infancy and requires extensive future research. With increased attention to pharmacogenomics affecting drug metabolism, it is anticipated that pharmacogenomics will impact care of IBS.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional GI disorder that affects a large percentage of the population and presents a significant socio-economic burden on the society. In this article, we reviewed the evidence supporting various pharmacological treatment options for IBS. RECENT FINDINGS: Rifaximin, eluxadoline, and alosetron have demonstrated that they reduce symptom severity improving quality of life in patients with IBS-diarrhea. Ramosetron is a promising agent in development. Peppermint oil has also demonstrated a positive impact on some symptoms of IBS. For IBS with constipation, traditional laxatives have failed to demonstrate significant benefit. However, lubiprostone, linaclotide, and plecanatide have demonstrated improvement of IBS with constipation in large, placebo-controlled trials. Tenapanor, a sodium/hydrogen exchanger 3 inhibitor, appears to be a promising treatment option in the pipeline. There are multiple pharmacologic agents with a variety of mechanisms that have demonstrated efficacy in IBS with diarrhea and constipation. There are no established pharmacologic agents for IBS with a mixed bowel pattern. There is a promising pipeline for additional novel therapies for IBS.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is one of the most common gastrointestinal disorders and it is characterized by episodes of abdominal pain and altered bowel functions. The specific bowel disturbances of diarrhea, constipation or an alternation between the two defines the IBS subtypes of diarrhea-predominant, constipation-predominant, and mixed or alternating IBS. Because of the abnormalities in bowel states associated with each IBS subtype, it is not likely that one agent would successfully treat all three subtypes. As a result, clinical trials have focused, for the most part, on one IBS subtype. Over the past 2 decades very few agents have achieved regulatory approval for the treatment of IBS. In the present article we review publications reporting on phase 2 and phase 3 studies evaluating agents to potentially be used in the treatment of patients with IBS.
Serotonin is an important gastrointestinal signaling molecule. It is a paracrine messenger utilized by enterochromaffin (EC) cells, which function as sensory transducers. Serotonin activates intrinsic and extrinsic primary afferent neurons to, respectively, initiate peristaltic and secretory reflexes and to transmit information to the central nervous system. Serotonin is also a neurotransmitter utilized by a system of long descending myenteric interneurons. Serotonin is synthesized through the actions of 2 different tryptophan hydroxylases, TpH1 and TpH2, which are found, respectively, in EC cells and neurons. Serotonin is inactivated by the serotonin reuptake transporter (SERT)-mediated uptake into enterocytes or neurons. The presence of many serotonin receptor subtypes enables selective drugs to be designed to therapeutically modulate gastrointestinal motility, secretion, and sensation. Current examples include tegaserod, a 5-HT(4) partial agonist, which has been approved for treatment of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) with constipation in women and for chronic constipation in men and women. The 5-HT(3) antagonists, granisetron and ondansetron, are useful in combating the nausea associated with cancer chemotherapy, and alosetron is employed in the treatment of IBS with diarrhea. Serotonergic signaling abnormalities have also been putatively implicated in the pathogenesis of functional bowel diseases. Other compounds, for which efficacy has not been rigorously established, but which may have value, include tricyclic antidepressants and serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors to combat IBS, and 5-HT(1) agonists, which enhance gastric accommodation, to treat functional dyspepsia. The initial success encountered with serotonergic agents holds promise for newer and more potent insights and therapies of brain-gut disorders.
A 28-year-old woman presents with a 7-month history of recurrent, crampy pain in the left lower abdominal quadrant, bloating with abdominal distention, and frequent, loose stools. She reports having had similar but milder symptoms since childhood. She spends long times in the bathroom because she is worried about uncontrollable discomfort and fecal soiling if she does not completely empty her bowels before leaving the house. She feels anxious and fatigued and is frustrated that her previous physician did not seem to take her distress seriously. Physical examination is unremarkable except for tenderness over the left lower quadrant. How should her case be evaluated and treated?
INTRODUCTION: The prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) varies depending on the criteria used to diagnose it, but it ranges from about 5% to 20%. IBS is associated with abnormal gastrointestinal motor function and enhanced visceral perception, as well as psychosocial and genetic factors. People with IBS often have other bodily and psychiatric symptoms, and have an increased likelihood of having unnecessary surgery compared with people without IBS. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of treatments in people with IBS? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to August 2011 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 27 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: 5HT(3) receptor antagonists (alosetron and ramosetron), 5HT(4) receptor agonists (tegaserod), antidepressants (tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs]), antispasmodics (including peppermint oil), cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), hypnotherapy, loperamide, and soluble and insoluble fibre supplementation.
The epidemiology and current understanding of the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome is reviewed, beginning with a historical perspective. The roles of genetics, environment, allergy, infection and inflammation, bacterial overgrowth, hormones and motility abnormalities are discussed. Using the current evidence-based literature, the practical approach of diagnosis and treatment is outlined, including traditional modalities and newer therapeutic agents such as serotonin modulators.
The therapeutic management of functional dyspepsia remains a major challenge for the gastroenterologist. Current therapies available are based on putative underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms, including gastric acid sensitivity, slow gastric emptying and Helicobacter pylori infection, but only a small proportion of patients achieve symptomatic benefit from these therapeutic approaches. Relatively novel mechanistic concepts under testing include impaired gastric accomodation, visceral hypersensitivity, and central nervous system dysfunction. Serotonergic modulators (e.g. the 5-HT4 agonist tegaserod, the 5-HT3 antagonist alosetron and the 5-HT1P agonist sumatriptan), CCK-1 antagonists (e.g. dexloxiglumide), opioid agonists (e.g. asimadoline), N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists (e.g dextromethorphan), neurokinin antagonists (e.g. talnetant), capsaicin-like agents and antidepressants are among the agents currently under investigation. It seems unlikely, however, that targeting a single mechanism with an individual drug will result in complete symptom remission in most cases.
INTRODUCTION: The prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) varies depending on the criteria used to diagnose it, but it ranges from about 5% to 20%. IBS is associated with abnormal gastrointestinal motor function and enhanced visceral perception, as well as psychosocial and genetic factors. People with IBS often have other bodily and psychiatric symptoms, and have an increased likelihood of having unnecessary surgery compared with people without IBS. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of treatments in people with IBS? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to July 2009 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 18 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: 5HT(3) receptor antagonists (alosetron and ramosetron); 5HT(4) receptor agonists (tegaserod); antidepressants (tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs]); antispasmodics (including peppermint oil); cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT); hypnotherapy; soluble and insoluble fibre supplementation; and loperamide.
Irritable bowel syndrome, which affects 5-10% of the population includes around 25% with predominantly diarrhoea (IBS-D). Several lines of evidence suggest an increase in mucosal 5-HT availability in IBS-D including a decrease in the serotonin transporter (SERT) which is also seen following acute diverticulitis. 5-HT(3) receptor antagonists have proved effective in suppressing urgency, prolonging small and large bowel transit and relieving symptoms in IBS-D. Alosetron continues to be used under restricted availability without any serious morbidity despite ischemic colitis which occurs at a rate of <1/1000 patient year. Other agents such as ramosetron and ondansetron are still in use and have not been associated with ischemic colitis. 5-HT(3) receptor agonists stimulate intestinal motility, shorten transit times and in a pilot trial accelerated transit in patients with IBS-C.
BACKGROUND: Multiple clinical trials within the past decade have aimed to study the safety and efficacy of various probiotic strains in treating patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). However, there exists much heterogenicity in study design among these trials, namely, in bacterial strain, dose, dosage form, sample size, study duration, and population demographics. AIM: The aim of this study was to identify the shortcomings of clinical trials using probiotic treatments in subjects with IBS, so that researchers may realize where limitations exist, allowing them to curtail these limitations in future trials. METHODS: An extensive PubMed search was conducted using the following keywords: probiotics in irritable bowel syndrome, probiotic pharmacokinetics, Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, Alosetron, Tegaserod, Alosetron, and Tegaserod safety profile. A total of 62 articles were used in constructing this review, with 20 original articles. RESULTS: Stark differences in study design existed among the 20 original articles analyzed, as well as an outstandingly high "placebo effect," making the ability to compare these articles as a means for evidence-based treatment therapy in IBS very difficult. CONCLUSIONS: Future large, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials must be conducted, embodying minimal variability in study designs, to appropriately assess the efficacy of specific probiotic strains over placebo.
INTRODUCTION: Irritable bowel syndrome diarrhea predominant (IBS-D) is a highly prevalent GI disease, affecting nearly a third of all patients diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome. Current treatment options are limited. AREAS COVERED: This review discusses the pharmacotherapeutic options for IBS-D including currently used medications, the two newly FDA approved medications, as well as emerging therapies with potential benefit in IBS-D. Particular emphasis is placed on rifaximin and eluxadoline and their possible use in IBS-D. EXPERT OPINION: Current pharmacological treatment of IBS-D includes loperamide, bile acid sequestrants, antispasmodics, tricyclic antidepressants, alosetron, eluxadoline and rifaximin. The latter two treatments have significantly added to the pharmacotherapeutic options for patients suffering from IBS-D.
INTRODUCTION: Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) has a significant impact on society and quality of life. Current treatments are ineffective, and new investigational drugs are necessary. AREAS COVERED: Numerous potential therapies are developing, targeting different areas such as cannabinoid signaling, opioid receptors, tachykinin (NK2) receptors, beta3-adrenergic receptors, intestinal microbiota, inflammation, and 5HT receptors. Clinical trial evidence has shown that loperamide, eluxadoline, alosetron, ramosetron, bile acid sequestrants, and rifaximin can modulate GI alterations and benefit patients with IBS-D. Among the potential therapies, ibodutant, ibudilast, blautix, BOS-589, solabegron, vibegron, olorinab, ebastine, and ORP-101 have demonstrated possible effects but remain confirmed. EXPERT OPINION: Individuals with IBS-D require cost-effective treatment options that do not impede their productivity or that of their caregivers. This is necessary for consistent healthcare and improved quality of life. Therefore, we should focus on developing new, efficient, and affordable medications for IBS-D. The government, insurers, and society must recognize this need and collaborate to ensure its fulfillment.
Gastroenterology is full of examples of drugs being enthusiastically promoted only to be withdrawn or prescription curtailed once the harms of the medication are realized. Cox-2 inhibitors, alosetron, and tegaserod are all recent examples of this phenomenon. The problem is that potential harms of drugs are being highlighted in the medical literature all the time and it can be difficult to determine whether these represent a genuine risk to our patients or are just spurious epidemiological associations. The association between proton pump inhibitor therapy and hip fracture is a good illustration of this dilemma. We use this example to highlight an approach that can be taken to critically evaluate the evidence for harms of medication.
Relieving abdominal pain is the principal treatment objective for patients with irritable bowel syndrome. No single drug stands out in the treatment strategy for this illness. Antispasmodics, magnesium aluminum silicates, and alverine citrate drugs all remain initial options for treatment, although their prescription is impeded by the fact that an increasing number are no longer approved for reimbursement. Increased dietary fibers often have a harmful effect on symptoms. Some patients are probably intolerant to some foods but there is no satisfactory proof on which to base a restrictive diet. Improved knowledge of the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome has made it possible to diversify treatments that act first on one of the key pathophysiologic elements, visceral hypersensitivity. Antidepressants (especially tricyclics) can be used at low doses. Among the serotonergic drugs, serotonin 5-HT4 receptors agonists (tegaserod) may be available soon, but the development of 5-HT3 antagonists (alosetron, cilansetron) has been stopped for safety reasons (ischemic colitis and severe constipation). Non-drug options such as hypnosis, psychotherapy, relaxation, or yoga, may also be proposed to some patients. Probiotics are a possible treatment in the future.
The irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) remains a therapeutic challenge in part because of the limited understanding of the pathophysiology. The placebo response rate varies in randomized controlled trials from 20 to 70%, and can persist for up to at least 1 year. It is contentious whether dietary fibre and bulking agents relieve the symptoms of IBS; constipation probably improves. Anticholinergic and antispasmodic agents are of questionable benefit in IBS despite positive meta-analyses of poor quality trials. A meta-analysis concluded that the tricyclic antidepressants were superior to placebo in IBS, although the individual trial results were variable. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are of uncertain benefit. Laxatives are used for constipation but probably poorly control the IBS symptom complex. Loperamide is superior to placebo in improvement of diarrhoea but not abdominal pain in IBS. Tegaserod is a well- tolerated aminoguanidine indole derivative of serotonin that is a partial 5HT4-receptor agonist with prokinetic properties; a therapeutic gain over placebo of 5% to 15% has been observed in constipation-predominant IBS in females. Alosetron is a 5HT3-receptor antagonist that is efficacious in females with diarrhoea-predominant IBS, with a 12% to 17% therapeutic gain; the risk of ischaemic colitis is 1 in 350, with very severe constipation occurring in about 1 in 1000. Optimizing study design remains a challenge in IBS. New visceral analgesic and motility modifying agents, as well as anti-inflammatory agents are in trials, and hopefully additional efficacious therapeutic options for patients with IBS will soon emerge.
Alosetron is a potent and highly selective serotonin 5-HT3 receptor antagonist which has been evaluated for the management of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). It blocked the fast 5HT3-mediated depolarisation of guinea-pig myenteric and submucosal neurons in vitro, with half-maximal inhibition at approximately 55 nmol/L. Alosetron attenuated the visceral nociceptive effect of rectal distension in conscious or anaesthetised dogs. It increased the compliance of the colon to distension in patients with IBS and delayed colonic transit in patients with IBS or carcinoid diarrhoea and in healthy volunteers. A single dose of alosetron 4 mg increased in vivo fluid absorption in normal human small intestine. In clinical trials in patients with IBS, alosetron 1 mg twice daily was effective in relieving abdominal pain and discomfort. Alosetron was most effective in female patients and particularly in those with diarrhoea-predominant IBS. In patients with IBS and healthy volunteers who received alosetron, the most common adverse event was constipation.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common functional gastrointestinal disorder with a wide variety of presentations that may include abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, constipation, or alternating bowel habits. Symptom-based criteria and a limited medical evaluation are used for diagnosis. The heterogeneity of IBS presenting symptoms, together with the pathophysiology of the disorder, is unclear, making treatment challenging. Treatment strategies are focused on specific symptoms, potential underlying disorders in stress responsiveness, and predisposing psychological features. Although only two medications, tegaserod for constipation-predominant IBS and alosetron for diarrhea-predominant IBS, are specifically indicated, a wide variety of treatment options are available and are discussed in this review.
