: Alprazolam is one of the most widely prescribed benzodiazepines for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Its clinical use has been a point of contention as most addiction specialists consider it to be highly addictive, given its unique psychodynamic properties which limit its clinical usefulness, whereas many primary care physicians continue to prescribe it for longer periods than recommended. Clinical research data has not fully shed light on its "abuse liability," yet it is one of the most frequently prescribed benzodiazepines. "Abuse liability" is the degree to which a psychoactive drug has properties that facilitate people misusing it, or becoming addicted to it, and is commonly used in the literature. We have replaced it in our manuscript with "misuse liability" as it reflects a more updated terminology consistent with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). In this paper, we have reviewed alprazolam's indications for use, its effect on pregnant women, misuse liability, withdrawal syndrome, pharmacodynamic properties, and suggest better clinical prescription practice of alprazolam by presenting an indepth theory of its clinical effects with use and withdrawal.
Oxazepam is an anxiolytic with established clinical efficacy. Compared to other benzodiazepines it may offer advantages in some patient populations, such as the elderly. Oxazepam has not been associated with more or different risks than other benzodiazepines, and there is no evidence that physiological dependence occurs more frequently with oxazepam than other benzodiazepines. Available evidence suggests that oxazepam may be associated with a lower risk of seizure-induction than lorazepam and alprazolam, and that compared to diazepam, oxazepam may have lower abuse potential.
Until recently, the benzodiazepines were believed to be ineffective in the treatment of panic disorder, with and without agoraphobic avoidance. Recent trials have shown, however, that panic disorder patients respond to benzodiazepines as well as to tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor antidepressants. Most of the controlled-trial investigations of benzodiazepines in panic disorder patients have evaluated the effects of alprazolam. However, early uncontrolled trials using other benzodiazepines have documented their effectiveness in panic disorder as well. This article reviews the evidence of the efficacy of alprazolam and other benzodiazepines in the treatment of panic disorder and their clinical use.
The increasingly extensive use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors will probably increase the number of cases of cutaneous reactions due to these drugs. This report describes a case of generalized exanthema due to paroxetine. Positive results to patch tests indicated delayed hypersensitivity.
A cumulative review of case reports in the literature describing withdrawal reactions secondary to alprazolam is presented. In four of eight reports, the primary withdrawal manifestations were grand mal seizures. One case was characterized by painful myoclonus. In the remaining three cases, the major complications consisted of rebound anxiety with psychotic features. Despite tapering of the daily dosage according to manufacturer guidelines, a withdrawal syndrome was precipitated in three of the cases. As a result of alprazolam's atypical pharmacodynamic profile, the issue is raised as to whether alprazolam is pharmacologically cross-tolerant with other benzodiazepines.
Two cases of intranasal benzodiazepine use are presented. The methods of preparation and administration of the powder and accounts of the pharmacological effects of the drugs used are described. The pattern of development and progress of the habit and its associated features are delineated. Snorting benzodiazepines appears to be more common than is currently appreciated, and the clinical complications and implications of this habit are discussed.
This paper addresses current issues associated with medication discontinuation in panic disorder, with specific focus on one of the most frequently used medication classes for this indication, the benzodiazepines. The majority of patients, when slowly tapered, are able to discontinue the benzodiazepines without a great deal of difficulty, particularly after short-term therapy. Patients treated with long-term therapy at high therapeutic doses may experience greater difficulty with discontinuation. If patients are adequately prepared and if discontinuation is conducted slowly and gradually, discontinuation symptoms, if they occur, are transient, mild to moderate, and generally tolerable. However, return of the original condition (relapse) during discontinuation can greatly complicate clinical management.
Experimental neurochemical provocation of panic attacks in susceptible human subjects has considerably expanded our knowledge of the pathophysiology and psychopharmacology of panic disorder. Some panicogens also elicit short-lived panic-like states in healthy man. This offers the opportunity to assess the anti-panic action of drugs in proof-of-concept studies. However, from current data it is still unclear whether experimental panic in healthy man is a valid translational model. Most such studies in healthy volunteers have been performed using a cholecystokinin tetrapeptide (CCK-4) challenge. While CCK-4 panic was blocked by alprazolam pretreatment, escitalopram showed negative results in healthy man. Preliminary findings on novel investigational drugs and a few problematic results will be reviewed. Small sample sizes in many panic provocation studies, lack of dose-response aspects, and still-insufficient knowledge about the biological underpinning of experimental and spontaneous panic limit the interpretation of existing findings and should inspire further research.
Different aspects on the structure-activity relationships, the pharmacokinetic and the pharmacodynamic properties of the benzodiazepines (BDZs) are briefly outlined, followed by a more thorough description of the current hypothesis on the mode of action of these drugs, focusing on the supramolecular GABA-BDZ-chloride-ionophore receptor complex. The existence of different synthetic ligands for the receptor exerting opposite effects is discussed together with the recent finding in mammals of an endogenous ligand with anxiogenic-like effects. The possibility of the anxiolytic effects of the BDZs being related to actions on monoaminergic systems is also briefly mentioned. A new group of BDZs, the triazolo-BDZs, is described. One of these compounds, alprazolam (APZ), exhibits a different clinical profile as compared to traditional BDZs. Apart from being effective in the treatment of generalized anxiety, it has been proven effective also in the treatment of panic disorder. Some studies also indicate anti-depressant effects of the compound. The reason for these apparent unique effects of APZ is not clear. A brief description of a commonly applied animal model (the Vogel conflict model) for the study of anxiety-related mechanisms is given and original animal data from experiments aiming at elucidating the mechanism behind the anti-panic effect of APZ are presented. The results indicate that tolerance to different pharmacodynamic effects of APZ and the traditional BDZ diazepam (DIZ) develop to different extents. Thus, tolerance development to the ataxic/sedative effects of APZ was pronounced, whereas no significant tolerance developed to the anxiolytic-like effects. For DIZ, however, tolerance development was pronounced to both the anxiolytic-like and the ataxic/sedative effects.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Three categories of treatments for premenstrual syndrome (PMS) have been proposed: those designed to correct the cause of the disorder; those designed for symptom relief; and those aimed at eliminating the menstrual cycle. Many of these recommendations are based on poor research with loose definitions of the disorder and uncontrolled open trials. This paper reviews the literature on treatment methods with emphasis on recent random, placebo controlled, double-blind studies. The most effective current management of PMS is a conservative one including accurate diagnosis, stress control, sensible levels of diet and exercise and perhaps the use of alprazolam in the premenstrual period. Other approaches such as the use of mefenamic acid and evening oil of primrose remain unproven. Progesterone has been proven uneffective. Further research is required into the value of antidepressant medication.
Transdermal gels are designed to deliver sustained drug amounts, resulting in systemically consistent levels. They represent an improvement compared with transdermal delivery by patches because they offer more dosage flexibility, less irritation potential and a better cosmetic appearance. Advanced Transdermal Delivery (ATD) gel technology was developed in order to provide enhanced passive skin permeation of various active drugs for the treatment of many conditions, including hypogonadism, female sexual dysfunction, postmenopausal symptoms, overactive bladder and anxiety. The technology consists of a combination of solvent systems and permeation enhancers enabling systemic drug delivery, and is covered by many patents. Pharmaceutical development of formulations based on the technology allowed optimisation of physicochemical parameters (rheological profile, pH) as well as skin permeation properties (type and concentration of permeation enhancers, thermodynamic activity of the drug). This gel technology has demonstrated to be efficient for many drugs, as shown in the preclinical and clinical pharmacokinetic studies presented in this technology evaluation.
The metabolic profile and human pharmacokinetics of alprazolam, a benzodiazepine of unique chemical structure, are discussed. Alprazolam's pharmacokinetics may be altered by age and sex, body weight, and concurrent treatment with cimetidine. The unique structure of alprazolam may be associated with a wider range of biologic activity than is seen with other benzodiazepines.
For two decades it has been hypothesized that schizophrenia and depression are related to alterations in the activity of specific neurotransmitters in brain; to a great extent, these theories are based on the assumed mode of action of antipsychotic and antidepressant drugs. With the available knowledge of how panic anxiety can be effectively treated (and elicited) with drugs, it is now reasonable to formulate hypotheses also regarding the contribution of central neurotransmitters to the generation of panic. As will be discussed in this brief review, three substances seem to be of particular importance in this context: serotonin, noradrenaline and GABA. In view of this concept, the putative mode of action of the atypical benzodiazepine derivative alprazolam, which in contrast to other benzodiazepines has been attributed effectiveness in the treatment of panic, will also be discussed.
Benzodiazepine withdrawal delirium is thought to be uncommon. Only two clear reports of alprazolam withdrawal appear in the literature, but the use of this drug is expected to increase because of its recent approval for the treatment of panic disorder. We report on a patient with severe alprazolam withdrawal delirium that developed immediately after an accidental reduction of the dose. This case demonstrates importance of clinician awareness of the previous use of alprazolam in individual patients, especially in hospital settings where free patient use of drugs is prohibited.
Benzodiazepines treat anxiety, but can also produce euphoric effects, contributing to abuse. Using perfusion magnetic resonance imaging, we provide the first direct evidence in humans that alprazolam (Xanax) acutely increases perfusion in the nucleus accumbens, a key reward-processing region linked to addiction.
BACKGROUND: Although alprazolam is approved only for use in panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, it is used for numerous other conditions, not only by psychiatrists but also by medical professionals in general. This commentary critically analyzes the use of alprazolam. METHODS: A narrative review approach was adopted, using relevant articles and textbooks, to compile pertinent literature for the aforementioned topic. RESULTS: Among all its adverse reactions, the most bothersome concern about the use of alprazolam is its potential for abuse and dependence. This can be attributed to certain unique pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of this benzodiazepine. Also, the withdrawal triggered by use of alprazolam is challenging to treat. Alternate pharmacological and non-pharmacological strategies for use in anxiety and insomnia are available, which might be safer than alprazolam. Also, policy changes can serve as an answer to curb alprazolam abuse to some extent. Alprazolam might still be a good choice for individuals who do not have a history of abuse of other substances, with adequate psychoeducation and close monitoring of their usage pattern. CONCLUSION: There is a need to reconsider the need for long-term use of benzodiazepines in general, and alprazolam in particular. However, they still might be an appropriate choice in individuals where abuse and dependence are less likely.
Duloxetine, a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, is used for diabetic neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia as well as major depressive disorder. Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors may lead to increased blood pressure via their noradrenergic effects in addition to their cardiovascular side effects. In this paper, we report a case with increased blood pressure after the initiation of duloxetine that recovered by discontinuation of the medication.
We tested the ventilatory and anxiety response to hypercapneic (CO2) challenge in women with panic disorder as well as in normal women in the premenstrual phase and mid-points of their menstrual cycles. Panic disorder patients were challenged on two occasions, each time while in the premenstrual phase of the menstrual cycle, receiving an open trial of alprazolam through the intervening 8 weeks between tests. This study confirms previous reports indicating increased sensitivity to CO2 in patients with panic disorder and that this sensitivity can be attenuated by treatment. We found a significant decrease in the ventilatory response of panic disorder patients comparing pre- and post-therapy. We also observed that normal females, while in the premenstrual phase of their menstrual cycle, have a heightened anxiety response to CO2 challenge.
Alprazolam was evaluated in chronic insomniacs in a 1-mg bedtime dose. The 16-night sleep laboratory protocol included four placebo-baseline nights followed by seven nights of drug administration and five placebo-withdrawal nights. On the first three drug nights (nights 5 to 7), the drug was highly effective in inducing and maintaining sleep with this short-term use. By the end of the one week of administration (nights 9 to 11), however, the drug had lost about 40% of its efficacy. During drug use, one subject reported some difficulty in controlling expression of inappropriate emotions when interacting with others, which suggested the presence of disinhibition. On the third night following drug termination, there was a significant increase in sleep difficulty above baseline levels (rebound insomnia). This worsening was of comparable magnitude to the peak improvement of sleep with drug administration. Thus, the clinical utility of alprazolam when administered to insomniac patients appears to be limited because of a relatively rapid development of tolerance and possible disinhibitory reactions during drug use and the occurrence of rebound insomnia following withdrawal.
"Agitation" is a term that is used to describe a wide range of dysfunctional behaviours in geriatric populations. The term is so widely used that in many cases it loses clinical meaning and therefore a more restricted use of the term is suggested. When patients with agitation are identified it is important to look for underlying treatable pathology which is often present. Controversy surrounding the most appropriate medications is reviewed with particular reference to both neuroleptics and benzodiazepines. A randomized double-blind comparison of lorazepam and alprazolam in demented patients with agitation was carried out. While both drugs were efficacious for some patients, there were significantly more serious side-effects with lorazepam. It appears that there is a role for benzodiazepines such as alprazolam in the management of the agitated demented patient.
