The efficacy of amantadine in the symptomatic treatment of patients with Parkinson's disease, discovered serendipitously more than 50 years ago, has stood the test of time and the drug is still commonly used by neurologists today. Its pharmacological actions are unique in combining dopaminergic and glutamatergic properties, which account for its dual effect on parkinsonian signs and symptoms and levodopa-induced dyskinesias. Furthermore, amantadine has additional and less well-defined pharmacological effects, including on anticholinergic and serotonergic activity. Evidence from randomised controlled trials over the past 5 years has confirmed the efficacy of amantadine to treat levodopa-induced dyskinesias in patients with Parkinson's disease, and clinical studies have also provided support for its potential to reduce motor fluctuations. Other uses of amantadine, such as in the treatment of drug-induced parkinsonism, atypical parkinsonism, Huntington's disease, or tardive dyskinesia, lack a strong evidence base. Future trials should examine its role in the management of motor and non-motor symptoms in patients with early Parkinson's disease and those with other movement disorders.
Amantadine is an N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor agonist with secondary dopaminergic activity that is used to treat Parkinson's disease-related dyskinesia and to treat fatigue in multiple sclerosis. It is primarily renally excreted and so impaired kidney function prolongs its half-life and may lead to toxicity. We describe a woman with multiple sclerosis taking amantadine who developed acute renal impairment, which triggered florid visual hallucinations that resolved on stopping the medication.
BACKGROUND: Methylphenidate, modafinil, and amantadine are commonly prescribed medications for alleviating fatigue in multiple sclerosis; however, the evidence supporting their efficacy is sparse and conflicting. Our goal was to compare the efficacy of these three medications with each other and placebo in patients with multiple sclerosis fatigue. METHODS: In this randomised, placebo-controlled, four-sequence, four-period, crossover, double-blind trial, patients with multiple sclerosis who reported fatigue and had a Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS) score of more than 33 were recruited at two academic multiple sclerosis centres in the USA. Participants received oral amantadine (up to 100 mg twice daily), modafinil (up to 100 mg twice daily), methylphenidate (up to 10 mg twice daily), or placebo, each given for up to 6 weeks. All patients were intended to receive all four study medications, in turn, in one of four different sequences with 2-week washout periods between medications. A biostatistician prepared a concealed allocation schedule, stratified by site, randomly assigning a sequence of medications in approximately a 1:1:1:1 ratio, in blocks of eight, to a consecutive series of numbers. The statistician and pharmacists had no role in assessing the participants or collecting data, and the participants, caregivers, and assessors were masked to allocation. The primary outcome measure was the MFIS measured while taking the highest tolerated dose at week 5 of each medication period, analysed by use of a linear mixed-effect regression model. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03185065 and is closed. FINDINGS: Between Oct 4, 2017, and Feb 27, 2019, of 169 patients screened, 141 patients were enrolled and randomly assigned to one of four medication administration sequences: 35 (25%) patients to the amantadine, placebo, modafinil, and methylphenidate sequence; 34 (24%) patients to the placebo, methylphenidate, amantadine, and modafinil sequence; 35 (25%) patients to the modafinil, amantadine, methylphenidate, and placebo sequence; and 37 (26%) patients to the methylphenidate, modafinil, placebo, and amantadine sequence. Data from 136 participants were available for the intention-to-treat analysis of the primary outcome. The estimated mean values of MFIS total scores at baseline and the maximal tolerated dose were as follows: 51.3 (95% CI 49.0-53.6) at baseline, 40.6 (38.2-43.1) with placebo, 41.3 (38.8-43.7) with amantadine, 39.0 (36.6-41.4) with modafinil, and 38.6 (36.2-41.0) with methylphenidate (p=0.20 for the overall medication effect in the linear mixed-effect regression model). As compared with placebo (38 [31%] of 124 patients), higher proportions of participants reported adverse events while taking amantadine (49 [39%] of 127 patients), modafinil (50 [40%] of 125 patients), and methylphenidate (51 [40%] of 129 patients). Three serious adverse events occurred during the study (pulmonary embolism and myocarditis while taking amantadine, and a multiple sclerosis exacerbation requiring hospital admission while taking modafinil). INTERPRETATION: Amantadine, modafinil, and methylphenidate were not superior to placebo in improving multiple sclerosis fatigue and caused more frequent adverse events. The results of this study do not support an indiscriminate use of amantadine, modafinil, or methylphenidate for the treatment of fatigue in multiple sclerosis. FUNDING: Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute.
Various pharmacological approaches to potentiate the therapeutic actions of levodopa and reduce side-effects are reviewed. Of currently available drugs, anticholinergic agents and amantadine have been studied extensively. Inhibition of extracerebral decarboxylase appears to be the most promising new area of investigation, though experience is at present limited. Other methods discussed include inhibition of enzymes catechol-O-methyl transferase, monoamine oxidase and dopamine beta hydroxylase. Conflicting evidence on 3-O-methyldopa is discussed.
Although the mortality of Parkinsonism is negligible, it is one of the major causes of progressive and often pitiful disability in the elderly. Treatment of the condition, whether medical or surgical, is still only palliative. The successes and limitations of the various forms of treatment are discussed. Despite the spectacular gains which have been achieved during the past 25 years by sterotactic thalamotomy and treatment with levodopa, the patient's disabilities tend to progress slowly and the fundamental enigma of Parkinson's disease and of its cure still awaits solution.
Pharmacologic interventions are commonly used to support rehabilitation efforts of patients with disorders of consciousness (DoC). The 2018 practice guidelines recommend amantadine in adults with traumatic DoC to promote functional recovery, though several other stimulants are used off-label in clinical practice and trials, such as methylphenidate, bromocriptine, levodopa, and zolpidem. Differences in the mechanisms of action, adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, and drug-drug interactions should be considered when selecting the best agent for each individual patient. Overall, pharmacologic stimulants may provide a safe and inexpensive pathway to increased functionality and participation in rehabilitation. This article provides a concise summary of scientific evidence supporting the use of pharmacologic therapies to stimulate recovery of consciousness in patients with DoC.
BACKGROUND: Amantadine hydrochloride is one of the most commonly prescribed medications for patients with prolonged disorders of consciousness after traumatic brain injury. Preliminary studies have suggested that amantadine may promote functional recovery. METHODS: We enrolled 184 patients who were in a vegetative or minimally conscious state 4 to 16 weeks after traumatic brain injury and who were receiving inpatient rehabilitation. Patients were randomly assigned to receive amantadine or placebo for 4 weeks and were followed for 2 weeks after the treatment was discontinued. The rate of functional recovery on the Disability Rating Scale (DRS; range, 0 to 29, with higher scores indicating greater disability) was compared over the 4 weeks of treatment (primary outcome) and during the 2-week washout period with the use of mixed-effects regression models. RESULTS: During the 4-week treatment period, recovery was significantly faster in the amantadine group than in the placebo group, as measured by the DRS score (difference in slope, 0.24 points per week; P=0.007), indicating a benefit with respect to the primary outcome measure. In a prespecified subgroup analysis, the treatment effect was similar for patients in a vegetative state and those in a minimally conscious state. The rate of improvement in the amantadine group slowed during the 2 weeks after treatment (weeks 5 and 6) and was significantly slower than the rate in the placebo group (difference in slope, 0.30 points per week; P=0.02). The overall improvement in DRS scores between baseline and week 6 (2 weeks after treatment was discontinued) was similar in the two groups. There were no significant differences in the incidence of serious adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: Amantadine accelerated the pace of functional recovery during active treatment in patients with post-traumatic disorders of consciousness. (Funded by the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00970944.).
Fatigue is a common symptom in patients with multiple sclerosis. Rapid exhaustion and reduced exercise tolerance leads to difficulties in maintaining a normal daily life for many patients. Regular resting and short breaks can help to compensate this to a certain degree. The pathophysiology of fatigue is currently unknown. Damage of specific neuroanatomic regions or a more generalized effect of inflammatory mediators in the central nervous system could be the causes of fatigue. Some drugs (e.g. amantadine) have proven effective in therapy of fatigue. Recent therapeutic approaches have begun using aminopyridines (4-aminopyridine, 3,4-diaminopyridine). These two substances are thought to improve nerve conduction, but there might be a central stimulatory effect as well. Overdosage leads to an elevated risk of epileptic seizures and confusion.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in Western countries. The benefits presently observed with the approved treatments are mainly symptomatic without clear evidence of neuroprotection. N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists have very extensive therapeutic potential in several central nervous system disorders and can be used as neuroprotective treatment in chronic neurodegenerative diseases and as symptomatic treatment in other neurologic diseases as epilepsy. Memantine, an antagonist of the glutamatergic NMDA receptor, has been recently approved for the treatment of advanced AD. Due to its action mechanism, memantine is considered a neuroprotective drug, whose utility has been demonstrated in preclinical studies, and a useful symptomatic treatment for AD and vascular dementia. We will review both aspects as well as the basic mechanisms mediating glutamatergic neurodegeneration and the implication of glutamate in cognition.
The new neuraminidase inhibitors zanamivir and oseltamivir are important additions to the treatment of influenza, being the first class of agents active against both influenza A and influenza B. The decision to use these agents rather than amantadine or rimantadine, which are effective only against influenza A, should be based on the age of the patient, antiviral activity, side effect profile, ease of administration, drug interactions, and cost. All of these agents are effective only when started within 24 to 48 hours of onset of symptoms. To avoid inappropriate use of these agents, treatment should be continued only in patients with a confirmed diagnosis of influenza. Although effective in decreasing symptoms, none of these agents prevent pneumonia or hospitalization secondary to influenza.
Only a few agents with antiviral activity are available for regular clinical use. Amantadine hydrochloride is effective in the prophylaxis of influenza A2. Idoxuridine and adenine arabinoside have found application as topical agents in the treatment of herpes simplex keratitis. Adenine arabinoside is also under investigation in the treatment of disseminated infections due to herpes zoster and herpes simplex. Ribavirin, an agent with a wide spectrum of activity in vitro, has not fulfilled expectations in clinical trials. Because of the near eradication of smallpox, methisazone has become less important as a prophylactic agent in smallpox.
The treatment of hepatitis C has dramatically improved over the past decade. Unlike any other chronic viral infection, a significant proportion of patients with chronic hepatitis C can be cured. However, the current standard therapy--pegylated interferon alpha and ribavirin--has its limitations. Limited efficacy in patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) genotype 1 and the side effect profile will necessitate the development of new therapeutic approaches. This review describes the efficacy and optimisation of the current standard therapy of hepatitis C and its problems in special patient populations. New treatment directions beyond interferon alpha based therapies are on the horizon.
In the EU, once-daily memantine 20 mg (Axura((R)), Ebixa((R))) is an option for the management of patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease (AD). In pooled clinical trials and studies in the clinical practice setting, memantine 20 mg/day improved cognition, functional ability and behavioural symptoms in this patient population. The beneficial effects of memantine are associated with delays in the need for full-time care, which were predicted to result in cost savings relative to standard care in recent cost-utility analyses in patients with moderate to severe AD conducted in EU countries. Memantine is well tolerated, with an adverse event profile that is similar to that with placebo.
The drug treatment of Parkinson's disease has progressed through 3 main stages: firstly, the use of anticholinergic drugs and amantadine; then the introduction of levodopa and its association with peripheral decarboxylase inhibitors; and finally the use of direct acting dopamine agonist drugs. Levodopa, however, remains the most effective single drug in Parkinson's disease. Unfortunately, the side effects associated with long term levodopa treatment today constitute an important cause of functional disability. 'Positive' side effects such as involuntary movements and psychiatric disorder remain difficult to manage without causing an increase in Parkinsonian immobility; conversely, management of the 'negative' phenomenon of the 'off' period is limited by these same side effects. This has generated renewed interest in the highly complex pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of levodopa, with the aim of reducing fluctuations in plasma levodopa (and hence brain dopamine) concentrations by sustained release oral or continuous parenteral administration of the drug.
Livedo is a cutaneous sign of striking violaceous netlike patterned erythema of the skin. This dermatological phenomenon is of special interest in the differential diagnosis in neurological patients. In 1907 Ehrmann distinguished two different patterns of livedo: the pathological livedo racemosa and the physiological livedo reticularis. Despite important clinical differences, in the English language literature the heading livedo reticularis is still used for all types of livedo. A literature review about the spectrum of differential diagnosis in patients with livedo reticularis (especially cutis marmorata and amantadine-induced livedo reticularis) and livedo racemosa (especially Sneddon's syndrome, Divry-van Bogaert syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, polyarteritis nodosa, cholesterol embolization syndrome, livedoid vasculopathy and haematological diseases) is provided.
This review comprises an exhaustive analysis of 120 case reports of neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) representing the majority of published clinical data on this syndrome. Epidemiological, clinical and biological parameters, as well as those concerning the agent and the treatment of the syndrome, are critically evaluated on the basis of this data. The rate of neuroleptic loading is shown to play a cardinal role in the development of NMS. Rechallenge and aftercare of patients who need anti-psychotic treatment after NMS are considered.
Over stimulation of the NMDA receptor by glutamate has long been considered to have a role in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Memantine, a non-competitive antagonist of NMDA receptors, has recently been tested in moderate-to-severe AD. At 28 weeks, there was a small significant mean difference of 0.3 in favour of memantine, showing benefit in the Clinician's Interview-Based Impression of Change Plus Caregiver Input (CIBIC-Plus) global score. The other primary efficacy variable was the Alzheimer's disease Cooperative Study Activities of Daily Living Inventory, modified for more severe dementia (ADCS-ADL-sev) and there was significantly less deterioration in the ADCSADL-sev score in the memantine group than in the placebo group (2.1 versus 3.4, respectively). As there are no drugs commonly used for their effectiveness in moderate-to-severe AD, any drug that causes a benefit, however small, as memantine has been shown to do in this trial, represents a breakthrough.
BACKGROUND: Amantadine is a drug that can help in the prevention of SARS-CoV-2 symptomatology, as has been demonstrated in observational clinical studies. METHODS: We searched in the PubMed database Clinical Studies of coronavirus-infected patients who have been treated with amantadine in a preventive manner as well as patients with Parkinson's disease. RESULTS: Four clinical studies were found in which relatives of patients with COVID-19 had been prescribed the use of amantadine in a preventive manner to avoid the symptoms caused by the coronavirus. CONCLUSION: Amantadine is a drug that can be prescribed as a prophylactic that prevents symptomatology caused by SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus.
A 63-year old women developed livedo reticularis during treatment with amantadine. This reversible side effect of amantadine has been most often seen in women and is frequently associated with persistent ankle edema. We discuss the signs and symptoms, pathogenesis and treatment of amantadine-induced livedo reticularis.
Different families of dopaminergic agents have allowed to increase the availability of dopamine within the central nervous system by different mechanisms of action. Each drug family has specific efficacious properties, as well as a different profile of adverse events. The knowledge in detail of these specificities is mandatory to avoid severe systemic or neuropsychiatric complications. Despite these limitations, the development of new drugs within the past 20 years has prolonged survival in Parkinson's disease, increasing the time with preserved daily day functionality compared with the levodopa era, when this drug was the only dopaminergic drug available. The correct combination of dopaminergic drugs with different mechanisms of action allows the management of Parkinson's disease motor symptoms within safety dose ranges, and up to day, this appears as the best algorithm to maintain functionality for longer periods of time.
