Methotrexate (MTX) is used as an anchor disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) in treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA) because of its potent efficacy and tolerability. MTX benefits a large number of RA patients but partially suffered from side effects. A variety of side effects can be associated with MTX when treating RA patients, from mild to severe or discontinuation of the treatment. In this report, we reviewed the possible side effects that MTX might cause from the most common gastrointestinal toxicity effects to less frequent malignant diseases. In order to achieve regimen with less side effects, the administration of MTX with appropriate dose and a careful pretreatment inspection is necessary. Further investigations are required when combining MTX with other drugs so as to enhance the efficacy and reduce side effects at the same time. The management of MTX treatment is also discussed to provide strategies for occurred side effects. Thus, this review will provide scholars with a comprehensive understanding the side effects of MTX administration by RA patients.
A 79-year-old woman with psoriasis presented to the emergency department with new-onset eruptions on the trunk, extremities, and oral mucosa for 8-9 days. For psoriasis, she had been taking 15 mg of methotrexate weekly for over 18 years, and had discontinued folic acid a few months prior to this.
The pharmacokinetics, therapeutic index, neurotoxicities, methods of administration, and dosages of intrathecal methotrexate are reviewed. The intrathecal administration of methotrexate can provide therapeutic concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) without the use of high-dose intravenous methotrexate. Major neurologic complications have been reported to occur in 3--40% of patients following intrathecal methotrexate. The development of neurotoxicity is related to dose, concentration of methotrexate in the CSF, age of the patient, anatomical and physiological abnormalities in the CNS, type of dilutional vehicle, intracranial radiation, and intravenous methotrexate. Substantial evidence is lacking that chemical preservatives and methotrexate breakdown products are risk factors. The use of intrathecal methotrexate is a reasonably safe and effective chemotherapeutic modality when proper administrative techniques are observed.
OBJECTIVE: To review the evidence for benefits and harms of folate (folic acid or folinic acid) supplementation on methotrexate (MTX) treatment for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), to assess whether or not folate supplementation would reduce MTX toxicity or reduce MTX benefits, and to decide whether a higher MTX dosage is essential. METHODS: We performed a sensitive search strategy and searched systematically the Medline, Embase, Web of Science and Cochrane Library databases from inception to 2 June 2016. Abstracts from major rheumatology meetings and major trial registers were also searched to retrieve all randomized controlled trials that interested us. RESULTS: Seven studies with 709 patients were included. No significant heterogeneity was found between these trials. For RA patients treated with MTX, those supplied with folate were less likely to have elevated transaminase (odds ratio [OR] 0.15; 95% confidence interval [95% CI] 0.10, 0.23 [p < 0.00001]) and gastrointestinal side-effects such as nausea and vomiting (OR 0.71; 95% CI 0.51, 0.99 [p = 0.04]). Folate appeared to promote compliance to MTX as it reduced patient withdrawal compared to placebo (OR 0.29; 95% CI 0.21, 0.42 [p < 0.00001]). There was no statistical difference for mouth sores between folate and placebo (OR 0.83; 95% CI 0.57, 1.22 [p = 0.35]). As the markers of disease activity in those trials were not consistent, it was impossible to decide whether folate supplementation reduced MTX efficacy. Besides, we compared high-dose folate (>/=25 mg per week) and low-dose folate (</=10 mg per week) on MTX efficacy, finding no statistical difference (OR 2.07; 95% CI 0.81, 5.30 [p = 0.13]), nor on MTX toxicity (OR 1.56; 95% CI 0.80,3.04 [p = 0.19]). CONCLUSION: Folate supplementation can reduce the incidence of hepatotoxicity and gastrointestinal side-effects of MTX in patients with RA. It can also reduce patient withdrawal from MTX treatment. Although it tended to reduce mouth sores, it had no statistical significance. No significant difference was found between high-dose folate and low-dose folate on MTX efficacy or toxicity.
BACKGROUND: For decades, methotrexate (MTX; amethopterin) has been known as an antifolate inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), and it is widely used for the treatment of various malignancies and autoimmune diseases. Although the inclusion of MTX in various therapeutic regimens is based on its ability to inhibit DHFR and consequently to suppress the synthesis of pyrimidine and purine precursors, recent studies have shown that MTX is also able to target other intracellular pathways that are independent of folate metabolism. SCOPE OF REVIEW: The main aim of this review is to summarize the most important, up-to-date findings of studies regarding the non-DHFR-mediated mechanisms of MTX action. MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: The effectiveness of MTX is undoubtedly caused by its capability to affect various intracellular pathways at many levels. Although the most important therapeutic mechanism of MTX is strongly based on the inhibition of DHFR, many other effects of this compound have been described and new studies bring new insights into the pharmacology of MTX every year. GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Identification of these new targets for MTX is especially important for a better understanding of MTX action in new protocols of combination therapy.
BACKGROUND: Low-dose methotrexate (LD-MTX) is the most commonly used drug for systemic rheumatic diseases worldwide and is the recommended first-line agent for rheumatoid arthritis. Despite extensive clinical use for more than 30 years, few data on adverse event (AE) rates derive from randomized, placebo-controlled trials, where both causality and magnitude of risk can be inferred. OBJECTIVE: To investigate AE rates, risk, and risk differences comparing LD-MTX versus placebo. DESIGN: Prespecified secondary analyses of a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01594333). SETTING: North America. PARTICIPANTS: Adults with known cardiovascular disease and diabetes or metabolic syndrome. INTERVENTION: Random allocation to LD-MTX (</=20 mg/wk) or placebo. All participants received folic acid, 1 mg/d, 6 days per week. MEASUREMENTS: Risks for specific AEs of interest, as well as for all AEs, were compared across treatment groups after blinded adjudication. RESULTS: After an active run-in period, 6158 patients were enrolled and 4786 randomly assigned to a group; median follow-up was 23 months and median dosage 15 mg/wk. Among the randomly assigned participants, 81.2% were male, median age was 65.7 years, and median body mass index was 31.5 kg/m2. Of 2391 participants assigned to LD-MTX, 2080 (87.0%) had an AE of interest, compared with 1951 of 2395 (81.5%) assigned to placebo (hazard ratio [HR], 1.17 [95% CI, 1.10 to 1.25]). The relative hazards of gastrointestinal (HR, 1.91 [CI, 1.75 to 2.10]), pulmonary (HR, 1.52 [CI, 1.16 to 1.98]), infectious (HR, 1.15 [CI, 1.01 to 1.30]), and hematologic (HR, 1.15 [CI, 1.07 to 1.23]) AEs were elevated for LD-MTX versus placebo. With the exception of increased risk for skin cancer (HR, 2.05 [CI, 1.28 to 3.28]), the treatment groups did not differ in risk for other cancer or mucocutaneous, neuropsychiatric, or musculoskeletal AEs. Renal AEs were reduced in the LD-MTX group (HR, 0.85 [CI, 0.78 to 0.93]). LIMITATION: The trial was done in patients without rheumatic disease who tolerated LD-MTX during an active run-in period. CONCLUSION: Use of LD-MTX was associated with small to moderate elevations in risks for skin cancer and gastrointestinal, infectious, pulmonary, and hematologic AEs, whereas renal AEs were decreased. PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: National Institutes of Health.
General mechanisms of drug interactions are reviewed, as well as the effects of various drugs on the absorption, distribution, protein binding, eliminations and cellular transport of methotrexate. Published studies demonstrate that prior or concomitant administration of other drugs can alter the efficacy and toxicity of methotrexate. Nonabsorbable antibiotics can decrease methotrexate absorption. Nephrotoxic drugs can decrease methotrexate renal clearance. Salicylates and probenecid may decrease the plasma protein binding and renal tubular secretion of methotrexate. However, the clinical significance of many of these drug interactions is not known or has not been substantiated by extensive clinical observations.
INTRODUCTION: Methotrexate polyglutamates (MTXPGs) are intracellular metabolites of methotrexate (MTX) that play a critical role in the drug's activity, influencing both its efficacy and toxicity. As the exact implications of MTXPGs in these processes remain a subject of debate, a comprehensive review of MTXPGs could provide valuable insights for clinicians and pharmacists, potentially minimizing adverse reactions and enhancing therapeutic outcomes. AREAS COVERED: A comprehensive search of relevant literature was conducted in PubMed and Web of Science databases, including studies from their inception to April 2024. Eligible studies included reviews, clinical trials, and real-world analyses. Additional manual searches and citation reviews were also performed. This review aims to explore MTXPGs with a primary focus on their pharmacokinetics, analytical methods, determinants of drug exposure, and their correlation with MTX efficacy and toxicity. EXPERT OPINION: MTXPGs have not yet garnered significant attention in clinical practice. However, multiple studies have demonstrated a relationship between MTXPGs and the efficacy and toxicity of MTX, suggesting a potential avenue for personalized treatment strategies. Future research should aim to further validate and refine this correlation. Additionally, attention should also be directed toward other metabolites of MTX, which may hold clinical significance.
Methotrexate at low doses (5-25 mg/week) is first-line therapy for rheumatoid arthritis. However, there is inter- and intrapatient variability in response, with contribution of variability in concentrations of active polyglutamate metabolites, associated with clinical efficacy and toxicity. Prescribing remains heterogeneous across population groups, disease states and regimens. This review examines current knowledge of dose-response of oral methotrexate in the setting of rheumatoid arthritis, and how this could help inform dosage regimens.
Methotrexate is a useful antimetabolite for the treatment of both benign and malignant proliferative disorders. When the pharmacokinetics and potential toxicity of this drug are understood, treatment regimens can be tailored to the underlying kinetics of the target population. With the appropriate knowledge of the importance of urinary excretion of methotrexate and factors that influence this and with the ready availability of leucovorin, toxicity can be avoided in all but the most unusual of circumstances.
The clinical relevance of the concept of bioavailability rests on two main principles. First, that measurement of the active component at the site of action is generally not possible and, secondly, that a relationship exists between on the one hand efficacy and/or safety and on the other hand concentration of the active compound or its active metabolite(s) in the systemic circulation. Applying these principles to the current knowledge on methotrexate (MTX), it is clear that bioavailability of MTX is an important parameter for optimal dosing. In this manuscript the current knowledge on MTX bioavailability is reviewed. This review reveals that bioavailability of MTX in higher oral doses is decreased, most probably by limitation of absorption from the gastro-intestinal tract. It is suggested that higher doses can be given either by splitting the oral dose or by parenteral administration. Both will result in improved bioavailability as compared with one higher oral dose. However, larger, prospective studies directly comparing the efficacy and safety of the splitted oral dose strategy and the switch to parenteral MTX are needed.
Eighty-six adults with malignant disease were given high doses of methotrexate with folinic acid rescue, with acceptable toxicity. Protocal violations in two cases led to death. The results of therapy in some diagnostic groups are encouraging.
Microemulsions combine the advantages of emulsions with those of nanocarriers, overcoming the stability problems of the former and providing facile scalable systems with compartments adequate for high drug loadings. Recently, microemulsions are gaining attention in the formulation of anticancer drugs not only for topical treatment, but also for systemic delivery as well as for the development of theranostic systems. The aim of this paper is two-fold. First, an updated review about general features, preparation, characterization and pharmaceutical applications, with a special focus on colorectal cancer, is provided. Second, a case study of formulation of methotrexate in microemulsions is presented. Various essential oils (menthol, trans-anethole, alpha-tocopherol) and surfactants (TPGS-1000, Maxemul 6112, Noigen RN-20) were investigated for the preparation of o/w microemulsions for the delivery of methotrexate, and the ability of methotrexate-loaded microemulsions to inhibit cancer cell growth was then evaluated. Disregarding the surfactants used, menthol and trans-anethole led to cytotoxic microemulsions, whereas alpha-tocopherol based-formulations induced cell proliferation. These findings highlight the role that the oily component may play in the efficacy and safety of the microemulsions.
Methotrexate may be very helpful for your illness if proper care is taken in the use of this medication. Follow your physician's instructions faithfully. Take methotrexate weekly as directed. Notify your physician at once if an accidental overdose is suspected or if you develop fever, cough or shortness of breath. If you develop vomiting, there is a change in your pattern of diarrhea or you suspect that you are dehydrated, notify your physician before taking the next dose of methotrexate. Do not start or change any medicine without first checking with your physician. Avoid or severely restrict alcohol, including wine and beer. Obtain the blood tests ordered by your physician. Avoid pregnancy during and for several months after taking methotrexate. Keep methotrexate out of the reach of children. It has been prescribed for your current medical problem and must not be given to other people.
High-dose methotrexate (HDMTX) is used in the treatment of a range of adult and childhood cancers. Although HDMTX can provide effective anti-tumor activity with an acceptable safety profile for most patients, delayed methotrexate elimination (DME) develops in a minority of patients receiving HDMTX and may be accompanied by renal dysfunction and potentially life-threatening toxicity. A panel of European physicians with experience in the use of HDMTX as well as of glucarpidase convened to develop a series of consensus statements to provide practical guidance on the prevention and treatment of DME, including the use of glucarpidase. Robust implementation of supportive measures including hyperhydration and urine alkalinization emerged as critical in order to reduce the risk of DME with HDMTX treatment, with leucovorin rescue critical in reducing the risk of DME complications. Early recognition of DME is important to promptly implement appropriate treatment including, intensified hydration, high-dose leucovorin and, when appropriate, glucarpidase.
Methotrexate (MTX) is used in low doses to treat a variety of diseases. Although the mechanism responsible for its therapeutic action is unknown, MTX membrane transport proteins (influx and/or efflux) can be major determinants of pharmacokinetics, adverse drug reactions and clinical response profiles. With progess in pharmacogenomics, the improvement of the prediction of patients' therapeutic outcome treated with low doses of MTX will offer a powerful tool for the translation of transporter SNPs into clinical practice and will be essential to sustain a breakthrough in the field of personalized medicine. Therefore, this paper provides an update on the current data on SNPs in genes encoding low-dose MTX membrane transport proteins and their relevance as possible biomarkers of MTX therapeutic outcome.
Methotrexate is an effective agent for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. It is now widely prescribed for patients who have not tolerated or responded to gold compounds or penicillamine. Minor adverse reactions are common, and fatal pulmonary toxicity or cirrhosis can occur. The drug does not produce disease remissions, but continued administration helps reduce pain, stiffness and swelling. Within the past year, the Food and Drug Administration has approved methotrexate for use in treating rheumatoid arthritis.
Drug-induced leukoencephalopathy is a devastating adverse event that can cause significant morbidity and mortality. Risk factors include advanced age, administration of certain chemotherapies, presence of an Ommaya device, central nervous system malignancy, and most important, exposure to cranial radiation. A 73-year-old woman developed leukoencephalopathy 2 months after her last dose of intraventricular methotrexate. Although leukoencephalopathy is a severe adverse effect of the agent, her case is different because it occurred without prior exposure to cranial radiation.
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) therapy is now clearly accepted as the primary treatment for rheumatoid arthritis, with an increasing emphasis on use of combination therapy. Data on combination therapy have highlighted the difficulties in performing these studies and the large number of patients required to produce meaningful results. Combination studies have focused on use of rapidly decreasing high-dose steroids as a part of the combination and emphasize the importance of using patients with early rheumatoid arthritis. Even with relatively aggressive use of DMARDs, the majority of patients develop erosions. Adverse reactions to DMARDs continue to concern clinicians, although evaluation of the frequency of these events has led to a reappraisal of previously accepted monitoring strategies in some cases. For example, it may not be cost-effective to subject patients on antimalarials to regular review by an ophthalmologist because of the low frequency of serious eye defects. Studies have also identified risk factors for the development of pulmonary toxicity in association with methotrexate. That DMARDs are effective in treating rheumatoid arthritis is beyond question-just how effective they are and what combinations of DMARDs will show improved efficacy will provide data for the next annual review.
Methotrexate for treatment of ectopic tubal pregnancy has become an accepted alternative to surgical options. Methotrexate is a folic acid analog that interferes with DNA synthesis. Protocols using planned multiple doses of methotrexate alternating with citrovorum rescue factor and one protocol using only a single planned dose are both currently used in the treatment of ectopic pregnancy. In remains unclear which protocol is superior. This article reviews the indications, contraindications, and specifics of using methotrexate for this purpose. Also reviewed are predictors of success and management of usual complications associated with methotrexate therapy.
