To protect organisms from ionizing radiation (IR), and to reduce morbidity or mortality, various agents, called radioprotectors, have been utilized. Because radiation-induced cellular damage is attributed primarily to the harmful effects of free radicals, molecules with radical-scavenging properties are particularly promising as radioprotectors. Early development of such agents focused on thiol synthetic compounds, known as WR protectors, but only amifostine (WR-2721) has been used in clinical trials as an officially approved radioprotector. Besides thiol compounds, various compounds with different chemical structure were investigated, but an ideal radioprotector has not been found yet. Plants and natural products have been evaluated as promising sources of radioprotectors because of their low toxicity, although they exhibit an inferior protection level compared to synthetic thiol compounds. Active plant constituents seem to exert the radioprotection through antioxidant and free radical-scavenging activities. Our research established that plants containing polyphenolic compounds (raspberry, blueberry, strawberry, grape, etc.) exhibit antioxidative activities and protect genetic material from IR.
Current therapeutic approaches for lung cancer favor treatment intensification, with the presumption that dose-intense chemotherapy regimens and/or higher radiation therapy (RT) doses or novel fractionation schemes will result in increased patient survival. Also, the trend for non-operative therapy has favored concurrent over sequential regimens. The incidence of severe acute esophagitis in patients treated for lung cancer with standard (once daily) RT alone is 1.3%, and induction chemotherapy increases the risk of severe acute esophagitis slightly over that of standard RT alone. In contrast, a strong radiosensitizing effect of chemotherapy given concurrently with standard thoracic RT (chemoRT) is associated with an incidence of severe esophagitis of 14% to 49%. Acute esophagitis may be severe and disabling, and result in hospitalization, placement of a feeding tube in the stomach or intravenous feedings, and steady supportive care. Also, RT may need to be halted temporarily to allow for healing of the esophageal lining; treatment breaks in turn decrease survival of patients with unresectable lung cancer. Therefore, esophagitis as a dose-limiting toxicity of chemoRT may have a direct impact on tumor control and survival. Aggressive types of RT fractionation have also been associated with worsening esophagitis grades and duration. Moreover, it is commonly assumed in the radiation oncology clinic that the longer the length of the esophagus segment included in the RT field the higher the probability of esophageal toxicity, although differing opinions are commonly expressed. Recent advances in 3-dimensional conformal RT allow a unique chance to gain volumetric data pertaining to organ damage rather than rely on older estimates based on organ length (eg, esophagus) or portion (ie, lung, spinal cord). The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) conducted a large phase III, randomized study RTOG 98-01 examining chemoRT with or without the amifostine (Ethyol; MedImmune, Inc, Gaithersburg, MD), a cyto- and radioprotectant in locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer (n = 243). While amifostine did not significantly reduce severe esophagitis based on National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria and weekly physician dysphagia logs, swallowing dysfunction over time (based on patient diaries, the equivalent of Esophagitis Index) was significantly lower in the amifostine arm ( P = .03). Therefore, significant progress has been accomplished in our understanding of the basis of esophageal injury resulting from thoracic RT, and future effort may find other effective strategies to either minimize or eliminate esophagitis.
Editor's note: The mission of Cochrane Nursing is to provide an international evidence base for nurses involved in delivering, leading, or researching nursing care. Cochrane Corner provides summaries of recent systematic reviews from the Cochrane Library. For more information, see https://nursing.cochrane.org.
Anticancer agents play a vital role in the cure of patients suffering from malignancy. Though, the chemotherapeutic agents are associated with various adverse effects which produce significant toxic symptoms in the patients. But this therapy affects both the malignant and normal cells and leads to constricted therapeutic index of antimalignant drugs which adversely impacts the quality of patients' life. Due to these adversities, sufficient dose of drug is not delivered to patients leading to delay in treatment or improper treatment. Chemoprotective agents have been developed either to minimize or to mitigate the toxicity allied with chemotherapeutic agents. Without any concession in the therapeutic efficacy of anticancer drugs, they provide organ specific guard to normal tissues.
INTRODUCTION: Mucositis is a significant complication of cancer therapy, with important clinical and economic implications. In June 2005, the Mucositis Study Group of the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer/International Society for Oral Oncology (MASCC/ISOO) conducted an evidence-based update review of the literature on mucositis. The goal of this literature review is to update previously published guidelines for the management of mucositis. RESULTS: This article reports the findings of the subgroup charged with reviewing the literature related to amifostine.
Cisplatin is not directly toxic to bone, but cisplatin nephrotoxicity leading to magnesium wasting may affect magnesium and calcium metabolism, both of which contribute to bone integrity. The specificity of the magnesium lesion suggests that cisplatin may have an affinity for proteins that regulate magnesium absorption. Sulfhydryls such as amifostine can reduce the toxicity of cisplatin in adults, but current pediatric data do not indicate a role for sulfhydryl therapy to reduce cisplatin toxicity in children.
Hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation is often associated with severe mucosal toxicity. The need for parenteral analgesics and parenteral nutrition are evidence of the severity of the problem in individual patients. However, the increased risk for systemic infection related to bacteremia associated with the breakdown of mucosal barriers is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality as well. There is a multitude of grading scales, demonstrating the lack of consensus among clinicians in this area. Multiple agents have been used prophylactically and therapeutically to address mucositis. While efforts have been less successful in the past, the advent of newer agents including amifostine, keratinocyte growth factor, transforming growth factor beta and interleukin-11 provides hope that this toxicity will be significantly decreased in the near future.
Carcinoma of the uterine cervix affects approximately 13,000 women annually in the United States. Radiotherapy is a commonly applied therapy, either as definitive treatment or combined with surgery. Although highly effective, radiotherapy can be associated with significant complications. Amifostine has been shown to be an effective radioprotector in head and neck malignancies. Preliminary evidence suggests a role in cervical cancer.
Amifostine is an organic thiophosphate prodrug used for cytoprotection against toxic effects of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. In a European prospective study of SJS/TEN, six patients were suspected to have SJS/TEN associated with amifostine. Our findings suggest that the risk of life-threatening cutaneous adverse reactions to amifostine could be significantly increased.
Introduction: A radiation countermeasure that can be used prior to radiation exposure to protect the population from the harmful effects of radiation exposure remains a major unmet medical need and is recognized as an important area for research. Despite substantial advances in the research and development for finding nontoxic, safe, and effective prophylactic countermeasures for the acute radiation syndrome (ARS), no such agent has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Area covered: Despite the progress made to improve the effectiveness of amifostine as a radioprotector for ARS, none of the strategies have resolved the issue of its toxicity/side effects. Thus, the FDA has approved amifostine for limited clinical indications, but not for non-clinical uses. This article reviews recent strategies and progress that have been made to move forward this potentially useful countermeasure for ARS. Expert opinion: Although the recent investigations have been promising for fielding safe and effective radiation countermeasures, additional work is needed to improve and advance drug design and delivery strategies to get FDA approval for broadened, non-clinical use of amifostine during a radiological/nuclear scenario.
Concurrent chemoradiation regimens for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer have resulted in improved treatment outcomes. However, they are also more toxic. Acute esophagitis and pneumonitis are experienced by a large number of treated patients. Cytoprotective agents are used to reduce treatment-related toxicity. The cytoprotectant amifostine has been shown to reduce some of the toxicity associated with concurrent chemoradiation. Clinical studies of its role in reducing esophagitis and radiation pneumonitis are discussed. Lung irradiation also leads to a reduction in lung diffusion capacity (DLCO). The magnitude of this reduction is related to the volume of lung irradiated as well as to the use and timing of chemotherapy. Concurrent chemoradiation regimens result in a larger reduction in DLCO than radiation alone. Small changes in DLCO can be detected with sensitive pulmonary function tests, but are subclinical. Larger reductions in DLCO correlate with significant clinical symptoms. Preliminary data show that amifostine can significantly decrease the treatment-related reduction in DLCO associated with concurrent chemoradiation (42% v 24%; P = .004). Additional studies are being designed to verify these results and to further define the evolving role of cytoprotection in cancer care.
The platinum derivative oxaliplatin is widely used in colorectal cancer. Its side effects differ from those of the other platinum compounds cisplatin and carboplatin. An acute, painful hyperexcitability syndrome (HES) accompanied by cold induced paresthesia, dysesthesia and myotonia is unique to oxaliplatin, whereas a chronic, peripheral sensory neuropathy (PSN) can be caused by all platinum compounds. It is believed that HES is the result of peripheral nerve hyperexcitability as a consequence of voltage-gated sodium channel dysfunction, which may be caused by calcium level imbalance. Therapeutic options for HES are the administration of calcium and magnesium, the serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine and the thiophosphate amifostine.
Current standard treatments for cancer are associated with major dose-limiting toxic effects on healthy tissue. The mucosal layers of the body are particularly sensitive to regimen-induced damage, with patients suffering many unpleasant and potentially life-threatening side-effects. In recent years, there has been an increase in the understanding of the pathobiology of regimen-related mucosal injury which has lead to a number of exciting inventions for its prevention and treatment being recently patented. Agents such as growth factors, cytokines, receptor agonists/antagonists and anti-inflammatory agents are among those in development in this emerging field. The complexity of mucosal injury poses a challenge for researchers, however rational targeting of intervention strategies to critical mechanisms will lead to further progress.
Amifostine (AMF, also known as WR-2721) is the only approved broad-spectrum small-molecule radiation protection agent that can combat hematopoietic damage caused by ionizing radiation and is used as an antitumor adjuvant and cell protector in cancer chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Amifostine is usually injected intravenously before chemotherapy or radiotherapy and has been used in the treatment of head and neck cancer. However, the inconvenient intravenous administration and its toxic side effects such as hypotension have severely limited its further application in clinic. In order to reduce the toxic and side effects, scientists are trying to develop a variety of drug administration methods and are devoted to developing a wide application of amifostine in radiation protection. This paper reviews the research progress of amifostine for radiation protection in recent years, discusses its mechanism of action, clinical application, and other aspects, with focus on summarizing the most widely studied amifostine injection administration and drug delivery systems, and explored the correlation between various administrations and drug efficacies.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Oral mucositis remains a frequent debilitating toxicity associated with drug and radiation regimens used to treat cancer. This review highlights the recent understanding of the biological basis, risk factors for, and management for oral mucositis. RECENT FINDINGS: Prevalence and incidence data for mucositis are inconsistent and often underreported. The pathogenesis of mucositis encompasses a sequence of biological events possibly influenced by the oral microbiome and environment. Despite its frequency and severity, there is currently no effective treatment available for the majority of patients at risk. However, with the better understanding of the pathogenesis of mucositis a number of new drugs and biological agents are under investigation. Genome-wide risk prediction tools will allow the identification of patients at risk of developing mucositis. SUMMARY: Oral mucositis is a common complication of cancer treatment that may negatively impact the patient's cancer treatment outcome. Despite its frequency and consequences, the lack of effective interventions has frustrated patients and caregivers. Fortunately, a broad range of mechanistically targeted compounds are being developed.
Cytoprotection utilising amifostine (Ethyol, WR-2721) is an evolving strategy to protect normal cells from the toxicity of chemotherapy. The dosing and administration guidelines are reviewed. The recommended dose of amifostine is 910 mg/m2 as a 15-min infusion prior to chemotherapy. Toxicity of this agent is moderate with hypotension and nausea/vomiting being observed in variable numbers of patients. Administration of amifostine with chemotherapy is simple and is associated with acceptable toxicity.
Amifostine (Ethyol; MedImmune Inc, Gaithersburg, MD) is a cytoprotective and radioprotective agent for normal tissues against the deleterious effects of chemotherapeutic agents and/or ionizing radiation. We have compiled a unique database for meta-analysis that aims to address the controversial concept of the tumor protection. The proposed meta-analysis on survival outcome, which is based on individual patient data, will be more useful than literature-based meta-analyses because of the superiority of reliable, longer follow-up patient data. It will be also possible to study the effect(s) of amifostine in different tumor types.
Fanconi anaemia (FA) is a rare genetic chromosomal instability syndrome caused by impairment of DNA repair and reactive oxygen species (ROS) imbalance. This disease is also related to bone marrow failure and cancer. Treatment of these complications with radiation and alkylating agents may enhance chromosomal breakage. We have evaluated the effect of amifostine (AMF) on basal and mitomycin C (MMC)-induced chromosomal breakage in FA blood cells using the micronucleus assay. The basal micronuclei count was higher among FA patients than healthy subjects. Pre-treatment with AMF significantly inhibited micronucleation induced by MMC in healthy subjects (23.4 +/- 4.0 - MMC vs 12.3 2.9 - AMF --> MMC) MN/1000CB, p < 0.01, one way ANOVA) as well as in FA patients (80.0 +/- 5.8 - MMC vs 40.1 +/- 5.8 - AMF --> MMC) MN/1000CB, p < 0.01, ANOVA). Release of ROS by peripheral blood mononuclear cells treated with AMF -> MMC and measured by chemoluminometry showed that AMF-protection was statistically higher among FA patients than in healthy individuals. Based on these results we suggest that AMF prevents chromosomal breakage induced by MMC, probably by its antioxidant effect.
Radiation-induced mucositis is a common toxicity, especially in patients with head and neck cancers. Despite recent technological advances in radiation therapy, such as intensity-modulated radiotherapy, radiation-induced mucositis is still causing treatment disruptions, negatively affecting patients' long and short term quality of life, and impacting medical resources use with economic consequences. The objective of this article was to review the latest updates in the management of radiation-induced mucositis, with a focus on pharmaceutical strategies for the prevention or treatment of mucositis. Although numerous studies analysing the prevention and management of oral radiation-induced mucositis have been conducted, there are still few reliable data to guide daily clinical practice. Furthermore, most of the tested drugs have shown no (anti-inflammatory cytokine, growth factors) or limited (palifermin) effect. Therapies for acute oral mucositis are predominantly focused on improving oral hygiene and providing symptoms control. Although low-level laser therapy proved efficient in preventing radiation-induced oral mucositis in patients with head and neck cancer, this intervention requires equipment and trained medical staff, and is therefore insufficiently developed in clinical routine. New effective pharmacological agents able to prevent or reverse radio-induced mucositis are required.
A number of recent developments in the supportive care of hematological malignancies have been selected for critical discussion. The first section focuses on the role of evidence-based guidelines in influencing the use of hematopoietic growth factors in medical practice. The next section updates the current clinical status of amifostine (Ethyol, Alza Corp., Palo Alto CA, USA, and US Bioscience, West Conshohocken, PA, USA) the first broad-spectrum cytoprotective agent available. The management of invasive fungal infections and the use of liposomal antifungal agents are reviewed next. Finally, the current status of transfusion support is presented.
