Although the pathogenesis of migraine is not fully understood, accumulating evidence indicates migraine may be driven by impaired brain energy metabolism in the context of pathologically high levels of adenosine. Considerable evidence indicates that aminophylline, an adenosine receptor antagonist, can provide strong therapeutic relief in pain, particularly post-dural headache. Moreover, direct observations from a previously published observational case series have demonstrated a strong therapeutic impact of low-dose aminophylline in patients with severe, unremitting migraine attacks. Although higher doses of aminophylline are associated with an unfavourable adverse effect profile, low doses of aminophylline are associated with minimal adverse effects. Despite this promise, double-blinded randomized trials will be needed to determine the true therapeutic efficacy of low-dose aminophylline in migraine.
Cold urticaria is characterized by the development of urticaria, usually superficial and/or angioedematous reaction after cold contact. It was found predominantly in young women. The diagnosis is based on the history and ice cube test. Patients with a negative ice cube test may have represented systemic cold urticaria (atypical acquired cold urticaria) induced by general body cooling. The pathogenesis is poorly understood. Cold urticaria can be classified into acquired and familial disorders, with an autosomal dominant inheritance. Idiopathic cold urticaria is most common type but the research of a cryopathy is necessary. Therapy is often difficult. It is essential that the patient be warned of the dangers of swimming in cold water because systemic hypotension can occur. H1 antihistamines can be used for treatment of cold urticaria but the clinical responses are highly variable. The combination with an H2 antagonists is more effective. Doxepin may be useful in the treatment. Leukotriene receptor antagonists may be a novel, promising drug entity. In patients who do not respond to previous treatments, induction of cold tolerance may be tried.
Aminophylline therapy has undergone change in the past decade. With the changes in usage and dosage forms, the frequency of toxicity in the pediatric population, especially in adolescents, has increased dramatically. Two distinct patterns, chronic and acute, have been recognized and treatment methods for both are changing. Table 4 summarizes the emerging state-of-the-art therapy for aminophylline toxicity. Judging from the activity seen in the literature, investigation into aminophylline toxicity will continue to be a priority. We will see a greater understanding of the disease process and a refining of the therapeutic process. The ultimate goal is the elimination of mortality and the minimization of morbidity from aminophylline toxicity.
There were an estimated 656 cases of vaporizer-related injuries seen in hospital emergency departments in 1979. Two cases of burns with respiratory involvement are described. Both children were directly exposed to steam from commercial vaporizers and suffered cutaneous and respiratory burns. These cases emphasize the hazards of steam vaporizers, devices that have no proven therapeutic benefits.
BACKGROUND: Asthma is an illness that commonly affects adults and children, and it serves as a common reason for children to attend emergency departments. An asthma exacerbation is characterised by acute or subacute worsening of shortness of breath, cough, wheezing, and chest tightness and may be triggered by viral respiratory infection, poor compliance with usual medication, a change in the weather, or exposure to allergens or irritants. Most children with asthma have mild or moderate exacerbations and respond well to first-line therapy (inhaled short-acting beta-agonists and systemic corticosteroids). However, the best treatment for the small proportion of seriously ill children who do not respond to first-line therapy is not well understood. Currently, a large number of treatment options are available and there is wide variation in management. OBJECTIVES: Main objective - To summarise Cochrane Reviews with or without meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials on the efficacy and safety of second-line treatment for children with acute exacerbations of asthma (i.e. after first-line treatments, titrated oxygen delivery, and administration of intermittent inhaled short-acting beta(2)-agonists and oral corticosteroids have been tried and have failed) Secondary objectives - To identify gaps in the current evidence base that will inform recommendations for future research and subsequent Cochrane Reviews - To categorise information on reported outcome measures used in trials of escalation of treatment for acute exacerbations of asthma in children, and to make recommendations for development and reporting of standard outcomes in future trials and reviews - To identify relevant randomised controlled trials that have been published since the date of publication of each included review METHODS: We included Cochrane Reviews assessing interventions for children with acute exacerbations of asthma. We searched the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. The search is current to 28 December 2019. We also identified trials that were potentially eligible for, but were not currently included in, published reviews. We assessed the quality of included reviews using the ROBIS criteria (tool used to assess risk of bias in systematic reviews). We presented an evidence synthesis of data from reviews alongside an evidence map of clinical trials. Primary outcomes were length of stay, hospital admission, intensive care unit admission, and adverse effects. We summarised all findings in the text and reported data for each outcome in 'Additional tables'. MAIN RESULTS: We identified 17 potentially eligible Cochrane Reviews but extracted data from, and rated the quality of, 13 reviews that reported results for children alone. We excluded four reviews as one did not include any randomised controlled trials (RCTs), one did not provide subgroup data for children, and the last two had been updated and replaced by subsequent reviews. The 13 reviews included 67 trials; the number of trials in each review ranged from a single trial up to 27 trials. The vast majority of comparisons included between one and three trials, involving fewer than 100 participants. The total number of participants included in reviews ranged from 40 to 2630. All studies included children; 16 (24%) included children younger than two years of age. Most of the reviews reported search dates older than four years. We have summarised the published evidence as outlined in Cochrane Reviews. Key findings, in terms of our primary outcomes, are that (1) intravenous magnesium sulfate was the only intervention shown to reduce hospital length of stay (high-certainty evidence); (2) no evidence suggested that any intervention reduced the risk of intensive care admission (low- to very low-certainty evidence); (3) the risk of hospital admission was reduced by the addition of inhaled anticholinergic agents to inhaled beta(2)-agonists (moderate-certainty evidence), the use of intravenous magnesium sulfate (high-certainty evidence), and the use of inhaled heliox (low-certainty evidence); (4) the addition of inhaled magnesium sulfate to usual bronchodilator therapy appears to reduce serious adverse events during hospital admission (moderate-certainty evidence); (5) aminophylline increased vomiting compared to placebo (moderate-certainty evidence) and increased nausea and nausea/vomiting compared to intravenous beta(2)-agonists (low-certainty evidence); and (6) the addition of anticholinergic therapy to short-acting beta(2)-agonists appeared to reduce the risk of nausea (high-certainty evidence) and tremor (moderate-certainty evidence) but not vomiting (low-certainty evidence). We considered 4 of the 13 reviews to be at high risk of bias based on the ROBIS framework. In all cases, this was due to concerns regarding identification and selection of studies. The certainty of evidence varied widely (by review and also by outcome) and ranged from very low to high. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This overview provides the most up-to-date evidence on interventions for escalation of therapy for acute exacerbations of asthma in children from Cochrane Reviews of randomised controlled trials. A vast majority of comparisons involved between one and three trials and fewer than 100 participants, making it difficult to assess the balance between benefits and potential harms. Due to the lack of comparative studies between various treatment options, we are unable to make firm practice recommendations. Intravenous magnesium sulfate appears to reduce both hospital length of stay and the risk of hospital admission. Hospital admission is also reduced with the addition of inhaled anticholinergic agents to inhaled beta(2)-agonists. However, further research is required to determine which patients are most likely to benefit from these therapies. Due to the relatively rare incidence of acute severe paediatric asthma, multi-centre research will be required to generate high-quality evidence. A number of existing Cochrane Reviews should be updated, and we recommend that a new review be conducted on the use of high-flow nasal oxygen therapy. Important priorities include development of an internationally agreed core outcome set for future trials in acute severe asthma exacerbations and determination of clinically important differences in these outcomes, which can then inform adequately powered future trials.
Theophylline has been utilized widely as a bronchodilator. However, recent studies have shown the potential for administering this drug to enhance cardiovascular performance in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Administered to COPD patients orally as a sustained-action preparation or intravenously as aminophylline, theophylline enhances both right and left heart systolic pump function and lowers both pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance. These favorable cardiovascular actions suggest an additional use for theophylline in COPD beyond its effects as a bronchodilator.
Although aminophylline/theophylline has been relegated to third- and fourth-line status in the cardiopulmonary armamentarium, its use in specific pathophysiologic states, especially those of cardiac etiology, can be of significant benefit. The consulting clinician should maintain an awareness of its potential as adjunctive therapy in cases of atrioventricular block, cardiac arrest, heart failure, and bradyarrhythmias in particular. It should not yet be shelved as an archaic agent.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether the previously demonstrated improvement in contractile tension of diaphragmatic muscle with aminophylline results in improved ventilatory endurance. We measured the maximal sustained ventilatory levels during prolonged isocapnic hyperpnea as an index of ventilatory muscle function. This measurement was made in 7 normal subjects and 7 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease during the intravenous administration of saline and aminophylline on 2 separate days. The order of administration of the infusions was randomized. Although both groups showed slightly higher sustained ventilatory levels during aminophylline infusion, the magnitude of change was small and unlikely to have a significant clinical benefit in the setting of respiratory muscle fatigue.
We used cyclosporin to treat 12 adult patients with severe bronchial asthma who had been on systemic steroids for an average of 16 years. During the baseline period, lasting 4-6 months, therapy with high doses of inhaled beclamethasone, aminophylline and salbutamol was standardized and a minimum necessary dose of systemic steroids was established. After 9 months' treatment with low-dose cyclosporin (average whole-blood trough levels of 105 ng/ml), in six patients the daily dose of oral prednisone could be reduced from mean 30 mg to mean 11 mg, while daily symptom scores and peak expiratory flows improved significantly. This was accompanied by a reduction in exacerbations of asthma. However, in six other patients attempts to taper the steroid doses were unsuccessful, and cyclosporin was stopped after 4 to 7 months. These preliminary results suggest that cyclosporin might be of benefit in some patients with steroid-dependent asthma.
BACKGROUND: The etiology of cold contact urticaria is unknown and the therapy is therefore usually rather disappointing. METHODS: This study reports therapeutic data on 42 patients with cold urticaria treated with a combination of terbutaline (3 x 5 mg a week, later 3 x 2.5 mg) and aminophylline-containing drugs (3 x 150 mg). RESULTS: Complete remission of the urticarial response was achieved in 37 of the 42 patients. CONCLUSIONS: The therapy was tolerated relatively well and the results are promising.
Clenbuterol was compared to an aminophylline preparation in a double-blind crossover trial involving 47 patients with asthma and reversible airways obstruction. Following a 2-week control period, each drug was given for a 4-week period. The patients made daily records of the severity of symptoms and recorded PEFR morning and night. Both drugs produced a highly significant reduction in severity and duration of wheeze by day during the first 4 weeks, but only clenbuterol produced further significant reduction in these symptoms during the second 4 weeks. Only clenbuterol produced a significant reduction in the severity of wheeze at night. When clenbuterol was given first there was a significant increase in the mean PEFR both night and morning but no other significant changes with either drug at other periods. Combining the results from the two treatment groups showed a significant difference between them in favour of clenbuterol in respect of duration of daytime wheeze only (p less than 0.05).
It is generally agreed that a high release of noradrenaline in the heart may elicit cardiac arrhythmia. Furthermore, administration of aminophylline to patients with ischaemic heart disease frequently elicits ventricular premature beats and ventricular tachycardia. Recent data from animal experiments demonstrate that methylxanthines (aminophylline, caffeine, theophylline) can facilitate noradrenaline release from sympathetic nerve endings. Such facilitation of transmitter release is amplified when myocardial oxygenation is impaired, stressing its clinical significance in relation to ischaemic heart disease. If a similar amplification is also operative in man, a dose of methylxanthine causing a very modest increase in myocardial sympathetic transmitter release in the heart of a healthy subject may be sufficient to cause a three- to six-fold elevation in the local myocardial concentration of noradrenaline in a patient with ischaemic heart disease. We hypothesize that such hypoxia-induced facilitation of sympathetic transmitter release lies behind the reported connection between cardiac events and methylxanthines, for instance sudden cardiac death following coffee consumption.
This paper is an examination of irritable behaviour in very low-birth-weight infants in relation to caffeine or aminophylline. We assessed tremulous movement (a sub-score of General Movements Optimality Score) in 18 caffeine-treated subjects and 18 aminophylline-treated subjects. Caffeine, unlike aminophylline, was not associated with irritable behaviour at standard dose.
Rectal suppositories as an alternative to intravenous aminophylline in the management of recurrent apnoea were studied in 41 preterm infants of mean gestation 28.3 weeks and mean birthweight 1176 g. Therapeutic blood concentrations were obtained two hours after a rectal loading dose of 10 mg/kg, with steady concentrations and maximum reduction in apnoeic episodes (from a mean of 0.5 per hour to 0.09 per hour) within 24 hours on a maintenance dose of 10 mg/kg/day. There was good correlation between the rectal dose and the plasma theophylline concentration. Several infants showed a significant reduction in Pco2 when treated with aminophylline. Side effects were related to the plasma theophylline concentration and were not seen at concentrations less than 14 mg/l.
Photosensitisation of riboflavin (Rf) activates aminophylline (Am) resulting into the formation of a highly pro-oxidant Am-Rf system. We have previously shown its macromolecular damaging response in human peripheral lymphocytes, however, its potential inside a cancer cell is yet to be explored. Since, altered redox status of a cancer cell is a reliable therapeutic window in designing anticancer strategies, therefore, it's imperative to investigate whether the reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated by this system readily triggers apoptosis or it is countered by elevated antioxidant machinery of a cancer cell. Here, we have demonstrated DNA damaging and cytotoxic potential of this system in benzopyrene induced lung carcinoma cells. Using various biochemical assays significant macromolecular damage was observed along with mitochondrial membrane disruption as evaluated by rhodamine 6G membrane permeant. The 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay showed decreased cell viability, confirming cytotoxic action whereas fluorescence and electron microscopic evaluation confirmed apoptosis. ROS scavengers ameliorated the oxidative damage and inhibited cell death, thus confirming, pivotal role of ROS in causing cell death. It was evidently found out that the lung cancer cells were more sensitive towards the photodynamic action of this system, which can be attributed to the upregulated riboflavin metabolism in cancer cell. Hence, we propose a photodynamic mechanism to kill lung cancer cell that exhibits enhanced sensitivity towards cancer cells.
To investigate the effects of diltiazem on theophylline pharmacokinetics, nine healthy male subjects (four smokers and five nonsmokers) received intravenous aminophylline (6 mg/kg) prior to and following 10 days of oral diltiazem therapy. Theophylline half-life increased significantly whereas total body clearance showed a significant decrease following diltiazem. Volume of distribution was unchanged. The small group of smokers had a significantly greater increase in theophylline half-life than the nonsmokers. Inhibition of metabolism of theophylline by diltiazem likely explains the significant changes in theophylline pharmacokinetics. A clinically important drug interaction may occur with theophylline when diltiazem therapy is given concurrently.
This article describes the changes that have occurred in the last decade with respect to theophylline: its analogs, its mode of action, and its pharmacokinetics. The underlying principles of the selection of oral, intravenous, or combination therapy with theophylline are presented, along with methods for avoiding and treating theophylline toxicity.
The absolute bioavailability of a new aminophylline sustained-release formulation (BY108) was determined. A crossover study was performed with drug intake under fasting conditions and after a standardized breakfast in order to investigate the effect of food on the absorption process. In addition, steady-state theophylline serum levels obtained after administering the new aminophylline formulation twice daily (corresponding to 386 mg anhydrous theophylline twice daily) were compared in a crossover study with those obtained from comparable doses of a commercially available theophylline sustained-release preparation (Theo-Dur, 400 mg anhydrous theophylline twice daily). Bioavailability of BY 108 was complete in reference to both the intravenous standard and Theo-Dur. The tolerance of BY 108 parallelled that of Theo-Dur and was good, considering the relatively high average dose of 10.4 mg/kg/day.
Recent investigations have shown that theophylline improves diaphragmatic contractility of the respiratory muscles in isolated muscle preparations in animals and in normal human subjects. It has also been demonstrated that theophylline can reverse diaphragmatic fatigue and prevent fatigue of the diaphragm when given prophylactically. These effects have also been demonstrated in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, all of whom retained CO2 (PaCO2 53 +/- 3 mm Hg) and had hypoxia (PaO2 57 +/- 8 mm Hg). Theophylline, which increases respiratory muscle strength and delays the onset of diaphragmatic fatigue therefore could be a very useful agent in the treatment of patients with chronic airway obstruction.
The pharmacokinetics of theophylline and ethylenediamine were examined in 6 patients with septicaemia and multiorgan failure (MOF). The patients received a bolus injection of 4 mg/kg aminophylline. Aminophylline is the ethylenediamine salt of theophylline. The clearance of theophylline was reduced in all our patients ranging from 10-66% of the value obtained in healthy volunteers. The median t 1/2 beta was 18.8 h (range 5.8-25.5) compared to a normal value of 6 h. The median clearance of ethylenediamine was 54% of the normal value, while the peripheral volume of distribution was increased to 650%. Due to this t 1/2 beta was 2.3 (2.0-2.7) h, which is 5 times the normal value of 0.55 h. There was no correlation between clearance of theophylline and ethylenediamine. As theophylline has a narrow therapeutic range, routine monitoring with measurements of serum theophylline is mandatory in patients with MOF.
