A neuropathy is a disturbance of function or pathological change in nerves. In some cases, peripheral neuropathic pain may occur due to a lesion or disease of the peripheral somatosensory nervous system. Efficacy of different agents for peripheral neuropathic pain conditions is less than optimal. The administration of topical analgesics might be an option, due to the potential of reduced adverse effects and increased patient compliance. There is major interest in compounding topical analgesics for peripheral neuropathic pain, but several challenges remain for this approach. Topical analgesics have the potential to be a valuable additional approach for the management of peripheral neuropathic pain. Topical amitriptyline-ketamine combination (AK) is a promising agent for peripheral neuropathic pain conditions. Some studies have shown its efficacy in neuropathic pain conditions. However, this data was not uniformely obtained and its role remains still controversial. Efficacy may depend on many factors, including the choice of the vehicle, the concentration, the pain site, and specific diseases. More studies are necessary to support the use of AK in clinical practice.
A 66-year-old woman presented with new-onset complete left bundle branch block and congestive heart failure. She had had chronic paranoid schizophrenia for 35 years and had been taking medications to control her psychiatric disorder for the past 10 years. A 2-dimensional echocardiogram performed at the onset of congestive heart failure showed dilated cardiomyopathy with global impairment of left ventricular function (ejection fraction <0.25). Despite withdrawal of the medications most likely responsible for the heart problems (perphenazine, 2 mg; and amitriptyline, 25 mg), the patient died of refractory congestive heart failure 2 years later. Histologic examination at autopsy showed evidence of persistent toxic myocarditis with fibrosis of the heart and persistent chronic hepatitis. These autopsy findings were considered to be drug related.
The muscle-relaxing 5-HT(2) receptor antagonist cyclobenzaprine is structurally closely related to amitriptyline. It is widely used to treat patients presenting with back pain and fibromyalgia. Very rarely cyclobenzaprine toxicity can result in extrapyramidal symptoms, but occurrence of torticollis has not been reported so far. We report on a patient presenting with torticollis and myoclonic movements after treatment with cyclobenzaprine, who was successfully treated with intravenous biperiden. This case might be additional evidence for the necessity of appropriate dosage in case of liver impairment. Secondly there are possibly consequences as regards the therapy of motor side effects.
The authors compared the nontricyclic antidepressant trazodone with amitriptyline and placebo in a double-blind study of 202 unipolar depressed outpatients. Trazodone's clinical efficacy was similar to that of amitriptyline, with both active drugs producing significantly more clinical improvement than placebo. The incidence of anticholinergic side effects was lower for the patients taking trazodone than for those taking amitriptyline.
In this article, studies on the disposition of amitriptyline after administration of a single dose, as well as following long term administration are reviewed. While long term studies showed bias towards a higher mean apparent oral clearance, studies in normal subjects nevertheless indicated a higher apparent oral clearance than that calculated from steady-state concentrations in depressed patients. Methodological issues could account for some of the discrepancies in mean values of the pharmacokinetic parameters of amitriptyline. Broad individual variability in the elimination rate of amitriptyline has been confirmed but could not be attributed to the clinical characteristics of the subjects.
IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: Cyclobenzaprine immediate-release (CIR) is a widely prescribed skeletal muscle relaxant with an established efficacy and safety profile in patients with muscle spasm associated with acute, painful conditions, although it is commonly associated with sedation. CIR is typically prescribed at a dosage of 10 mg three-times-daily. This review focuses on the pharmacokinetic profile of a new formulation, cyclobenzaprine extended-release (CER), which delivers a sustained plasma cyclobenzaprine concentration over 24 h, allowing once-daily dosing. AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: Results from CER pharmacokinetic studies conducted through August 2010 are summarized. WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: This review provides information on the first four studies assessing the single-dose and steady-state pharmacokinetic profile of CER. TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Once-daily CER 30 mg and three-times-daily CIR 10 mg produced comparable systemic exposures to cyclobenzaprine, but pharmacokinetic profiles were qualitatively different. CER was characterized by a single daily peak in cyclobenzaprine concentration versus three peaks/day for CIR. With once-daily dosing of CER, cyclobenzaprine concentration is sustained over 24 h. CER 30 mg provides approximately twice the exposure as CER 15 mg. Systemic exposure to CER is increased in the presence of food and in elderly subjects. Steady-state is achieved by day 7 of dosing.
Due to the stringent regulatory environment for therapeutics, common side-effects of drugs in the general population are largely well-documented. This is however less the case with certain patient subgroups who may exhibit significant adverse responses to therapeutics that are otherwise well-tolerated. We report a case of psychosis induced by exposure to a commonly prescribed drug to treat muscle spasms and associated pain cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril(R)). Cyclobenzaprine is structurally very similar to tricyclic anti-depressants, such as amyltriptine. While it is well known that agitation caused by cyclobenzaprine is not an uncommon occurrence in the elderly, there have also been sporadic reports of significant psychosis in association with the use of cyclobenzaprine in younger patients. We report a case of reversible mania in a susceptible 44-year-old patient with a lengthy history of mild borderline personality and bipolar disorder. Shortly after being treated with cyclobenzaprine for pain due to a minor injury, this patient exhibited significant signs of mania although these signs were readily reversible upon termination of the treatment with cyclobenzaprine. The patient's severe adverse reaction to this normally innocuous drug adds weight to the notion that there is reason for caution with its prescription for potentially susceptible patient subgroups.
The pharmacokinetics of amitryptyline (AMI) have been evaluated in six healthy elderly volunteers (72-83 years of age) after a single dose of 125 mg of AMI-HCl. AMI was absorbed rather slowly (mean peak time 10.4 +/- 1.6 hrs) but very efficiently (F: 0.59-0.75). The rate of formation of nortriptyline (NT) as well as the appearance clearance values (0.18-0.45 l/h/kg) of AMI were significantly lower than those previously described for younger subjects. Reversible alterating ECG were observed in 5 cases concomitantly with AMI peak plasma concentrations. The results indicate the desirability of reduced and/or divided daily doses of AMI in the elderly.
In a double-blind clinical study, electrocardiogram, blood pressure and systolic time intervals were measured in 40 depressive patients treated with either paroxetine (30 mg/day) or amitriptyline (150 mg/day) for 6 weeks. While amitriptyline significantly increased the heart rate, the QTc interval and the PEP/LVET ratio, paroxetine did not alter any of the cardiovascular parameters measured.
The initiation of a prophylactic treatment for migraine depends on the frequency of migraine attacks and the extent of the function disability associated with these attacks. Antidepressants have good evidence of efficacy in the prophylactic treatment for migraine. In general, among the antidepressants, amitriptyline is the most frequently prescribed by headache specialists. Several clinical trials on this drug have also evidenced the remarkable benefits of amitriptyline in the prophylactic treatment of migraine attack. In evidence-based guidelines developed by Japanese Headache Society and American Neurological Association, it is classified as a Group 1 drugs (effective drug for the prevention of migraine attack). Moreover, these drugs are more useful in cases where there is comorbidity with conditions such as depression. The side-effects of these drugs are sleepiness and dry mouth. Administration of amytriptyline at low dose can reduce the frequency of side effects such as sleepiness.
The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical trials, side effects, and dosage of amoxapine are reviewed. Amoxapine is a tricyclic dibenzoxazepine antidepressant that is chemically similar to the antipsychotic agent loxapine. In animal tests, amoxapine and its metabolites block reuptake of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine, with little effect on serotonin. It is rapidly and virtually completely absorbed when administered orally; peak serum concentrations occur one to two hours after ingestion. Amoxapine is widely distributed throughout body tissues and is 90% bound to serum proteins. Aromatic hydroxylation in the liver produces two major metabolites, which are excreted in the urine primarily but also in the feces. Amoxapine's elimination half-life is eight hours; one of the metabolites has a long half-life (30 hours). In clinical trials, amoxapine has been compared with amitriptyline and imipramine in several types of depressed patients. In some studies, amoxapine's therapeutic effects were measurable earlier (at one or two weeks after initiation of therapy) than those of the amitriptyline or imipramine, but generally only a portion of the depression-rating scales yielded statistically significant differences. Side effects noted during amoxapine therapy include hypotension (42%), drowsiness (14%), xerostomia (14%), constipation (12%), blurred vision (7%), fatigue (5%), and vertigo (5%). Amoxapine is approved by FDA for use in patients with neurotic or reactive depressive disorders, endogenous or psychotic depression, and depression accompanied by anxiety or agitation. The usual adult dosage is 200-300 mg daily, either in divided doses or a single bedtime dose. Amoxapine is a safe and effective antidepressant with no striking advantages over other available agents.
We report a clinical multicentre experience with antidepressant agents (trazodone and amitriptyline) in the treatment of chronic pain due to deafferentation. Forty five patients were admitted to the study; most of them with oncological peripheral nerve lesions. Almost all of them were already being treated with NSAID in association with weak or strong opioids. A random double blind study was performed: 23 patients were treated with trazodone, 22 with amitriptyline. In the assessment of results, pain intensity, hours of sleep, hours standing and lying, side effects, mood, anxiety and weakness were all taken into consideration. The therapeutic analgesic efficacy of the two drugs proved to be similar.
Pharmaceutical care of the hospice patient offers unique challenges in the management of pain and other symptoms. Lessons learned in providing hospice care can be used in the care of nonterminal patients as well to optimize patient-specific care, regardless of care setting or life expectancy.
Cyclobenzaprine is commonly used as a muscle relaxant and analgesic. Given its tricyclic properties, serotonin syndrome is a potential side effect of this drug. We report an unusual case of a patient who experienced symptoms of delirium and hyperkinetic movement disorders shortly after initiating treatment with cyclobenzaprine and oxycodone. Symptoms resolved within 48 h of discontinuing cyclobenzaprine. This case serves to remind clinicians to monitor for serotonin syndrome when initiating cyclobenzaprine, and when adding opiate or antidepressant medications to the regimen.
The linearity of the (AMT) kinetics of amitriptyline has been tested in 135 depressed dosed twice daily by measuring plasma. Their (AMT) and nortriptyline (NT) levels under steady-state conditions. The AMT concentration/dose ratios at low and high dosages were not significantly different and there was a linear relationship between the dose ratios and the concentration ratios. No change in the metabolic ratio (AMT/NT) was observed between the two dosages. Although the results are consistent with linear AMT kinetics, there may have been nonlinear kinetics in some patients as the ratio between the concentration/dose ratios in them at low and high dosages was greater than one. Those patients were characterized by a low concentration/dose ratio at low dosage. No clinical adverse effect appeared in the study.
DTB commentaries provide an overview of, and commentary on, a clinical trial, systematic review or observational study.
Clozapine is an antipsychotic drug recommended for resistant schizophrenia, but its widespread use is limited by adverse effects. Sialorrhea is a common and troublesome adverse effect seen with clozapine which leads to poor compliance. Several treatment strategies are advocated, no single treatment is considered superior. Amitriptyline, a tricyclic antidepressant, has been found to be useful for clozapine-associated sialorrhea at 87-100 mg per day. We report the effect of very low dose amitriptyline (10 mg per day) in a patient with clozapine-associated sialorrhea. There was rapid and complete resolution of sialorrhea after three days without any emergent adverse effect.
Medication was discontinued under a placebo-controlled, double-blind, six-month protocol with 17 chronically depressed patients who had been taking an average daily dose of 138 mg amitriptyline (AMI) for an average of 3.7 years. Only one of nine patients became depressed on active medication, while of the 15 patients receiving a placebo trial, 11 had a depressive recurrence at an average time of 9.3 weeks. These 11 were subsequently restarted on AMI, and responded similarly to the way in which acutely depressed patients respond, although the patients showed either a need for less AMI or decreased symptoms, compared to entry. Tolerance did not develop to anticholinergic side-effects during long-term medication. Twelve of the 15 patients on placebo showed a withdrawal reaction during the first few weeks of tapered AMI discontinuation which could be distinguished from recurrence of depression. This study suggests that the majority of patients on long-term antidepressant will suffer a recurrence of depressive symptoms when the medication is discontinued.
A report is given about a 57-year-old woman with a major depression, melancholic subtype. While under amitriptyline 75 mg/day no adverse effects were observed, immediately after increasing the dosage to 150 mg/day "head spasms" with headache, profuse sweating and arterial hypertension appeared. The diagnosis of a pheochromcytoma was made and adrenalectomy was performed. This is the first case of unmasking a pheochromcytoma by amitriptyline; furthermore a connexion was found with the daily dosage of the antidepressant.
The response of patients with major depressive illness to citalopram of amitriptyline was compared in a double-blind multi-centre trial. No differences in efficacy were observed, but citalopram had less hypnotic effect, and a remarkably lower profile of side-effects.
