Amlodipine, a third-generation dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, has a mode of action and pharmacodynamic profile which are comparable to those of conventional compounds in this series, such as nifedipine. Its physicochemical behavior, however, appears to be somewhat different. A pKa value of 8.7 means that amlodipine is predominantly present in the ionized form at a physiologic pH. It possesses, therefore, a strong affinity for cell membranes. These phenomena apparently contribute to amlodipine's unique pharmacokinetic profile, which is characterized by almost complete absorption, late-peak plasma concentrations, high bioavailability, and slow hepatic biodegradation. This profile translates into potential clinical benefits by virtue of a slow onset of action and long duration of effect. The slow onset of action may explain why there seems to be very little reflex tachycardia and a lower incidence of vasodilator side effects when comparing amlodipine with conventional dihydropyridines. The slow elimination of amlodipine explains the long duration of action, which allows a convenient once-daily dosage schedule.
Single risk factors, such as hypertension and dyslipidemia, can combine to exacerbate the development and severity of cardiovascular disease. Treatment goals may be more effectively achieved if multiple disease factors are targeted with combination treatment. We enrolled 202 patients who were randomly divided into the following three groups: telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg, telmisartan 80 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg, and telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg. The primary efficacy variables were changes from baseline in mean sitting systolic blood pressure (MSSBP) between telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan 80 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg at 8 weeks, and the percent changes from baseline in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol between telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg at 8 weeks. The secondary efficacy variables were changes in MSSBP, mean sitting diastolic blood pressure (MSDBP), LDL cholesterol and other lipid levels at 4 weeks and 8 weeks, as well as observed adverse events during follow-up. There were no significant differences between the three groups in demographic characteristics and no significant difference among the three groups in terms of baseline characteristics for the validity evaluation variables. The mean overall treatment compliance in the three groups was, respectively, 98.42%, 96.68%, and 98.12%, indicating strong compliance for all patients. The Least-Square (LS) mean (SE) for changes in MSSBP in the two (telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan 80 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg) groups were -19.3 (2.68) mm Hg and -6.69 (2.76) mm Hg. The difference between the two groups was significant (-12.60 (2.77) mm Hg, 95% CI -18.06 to -7.14, P < .0001). The LS Mean for the percent changes from baseline in LDL cholesterol in the two (telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg) groups were -52.45 (3.23) % and 2.68 (3.15) %. The difference between the two groups was significant (-55.13 (3.20) %, 95% CI -61.45 to -48.81, P < .0001). There were no adverse events leading to discontinuation or death. Combined administration of telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg and rosuvastatin 20 mg for the treatment of hypertensive patients with dyslipidemia significantly reduces blood pressure and improves lipid control. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03067688.
Gingival overgrowth is a common feature of periodontal diseases. Rarely it occurs as an unwanted side effect of drugs such as anticonvulsants mainly phenytoin, immunosuppressants like cyclosporine and calcium channel blockers particularly nifedipine. Among calcium channel blockers, nifedipine causes gingival overgrowth in 10% of patients whereas amlodipine-induced gingival overgrowth is very limited. Here we report four cases in hypertensives on amlodipine.
Amlodipine is a calcium channel blocker used in the management of angina and hypertension. We report 3 cases of gingival overgrowth in adult dentate patients associated with chronic usage of this drug. Gingival changes occurred within 3 months of dosage and appeared to be compounded by the patient's existing periodontal condition. In all 3 patients, there was sequestration of amlodipine in their crevicular fluid. The significance of this finding in relation to the pathogenesis of this unwanted effect remains to be elucidated.
Thalassemia is a genetic mutation of the alpha- or beta-globin chains that lead to defective erythropoiesis. This study aimed to collect evidences from all published studies that investigated the clinical effectiveness of calcium channel blockers (CCBs) in conjunction with chelation therapy for reducing iron overload in patients with thalassemia. A systematic search was conducted in PubMed, Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) Web of Science, Scopus, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and Virtual Health Library. Original studies reporting the use of CCBs in patients with thalassemia were included for meta-analysis. A total of five randomized studies including 210 patients were included with a follow-up period of 3-12 months. There was no significant difference between amlodipine and control groups in increasing the heart T2* magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [mean difference (MD) 95% confidence interval (95% CI) = -1.9 (-4.4 to 0.5), p = 0.119] or reducing the liver iron concentration [MD 95% CI = -0.046 (-0.325 to 0.2), p = 0.746]. Although there were no serious adverse events reported in the included trials, further studies are recommended to strengthen our findings.
black triangle Olmesartan medoxomil/amlodipine is a fixed-dose combination of olmesartan medoxomil and amlodipine, both established antihypertensive agents. Dose titration with the individual constituent drugs is recommended before switching to the equivalent fixed-dose combination. black triangle In a randomized, double-blind, factorial trial in patients with mild to severe hypertension, 8 weeks of olmesartan medoxomil/amlodipine was more effective in reducing diastolic BP (DBP) and systolic BP (SBP) than placebo or equivalent dosages of olmesartan medoxomil or amlodipine as monotherapy. black triangle In two randomized, double-blind trials in patients with moderate to severe hypertension not adequately treated with amlodipine or olmesartan medoxomil monotherapy, 8 weeks of olmesartan medoxomil/amlodipine 20 mg/5 mg, 40 mg/5 mg or 40 mg/10 mg per day was more effective in reducing DBP and SBP than continuing treatment with olmesartan medoxomil 20 mg/day or amlodipine 5 mg/day monotherapy. black triangle More patients receiving olmesartan medoxomil/amlodipine at approved dosages than monotherapy recipients at equivalent dosages reached BP goals (42.5-51.0% vs 21.1-36.3% in the factorial trial and 44.5-54% vs 28.5-30% in the monotherapy comparisons). black triangle In the comparison with amlodipine monotherapy, >70% of olmesartan medoxomil/amlodipine recipients, some requiring upwards dosage adjustment, met BP goals. black triangle Olmesartan medoxomil/amlodipine was generally well tolerated in clinical trials. Peripheral oedema was significantly less common in olmesartan medoxomil/amlodipine 40 mg/10 mg per day than amlodipine monotherapy 10 mg/day recipients.
BACKGROUND: Single-pill combinations (SPCs) of three low-dose antihypertensive drugs can improve hypertension control but are not widely available. A key issue for any combination product is the contribution of each component to efficacy and tolerability. This trial compared a new triple SPC called GMRx2, containing telmisartan, amlodipine, and indapamide, with dual combinations of components for efficacy and safety. METHODS: In this international, randomised, double-blind, active-controlled trial, we enrolled adults with hypertension receiving between zero and three antihypertensive drugs, with a screening systolic blood pressure (SBP) ranging from 140-179 mm Hg (on no drugs) to 110-150 mm Hg (on three drugs). Participants were recruited from Australia, the Czech Republic, New Zealand, Poland, Sri Lanka, the UK, and the USA. In a 4-week active run-in, existing medications were switched to GMRx2 half dose (telmisartan 20 mg, amlodipine 2.5 mg, and indapamide 1.25 mg). Participants were then randomly allocated (2:1:1:1) to continued GMRx2 half dose or to each possible dual combination of components at half doses (telmisartan 20 mg with amlodipine 2.5 mg, telmisartan 20 mg with indapamide 1.25 mg, or amlodipine 2.5 mg with indapamide 1.25 mg). At week 6, doses were doubled in all groups, unless there was a clinical contraindication. The primary efficacy outcome was mean change in home SBP from baseline to week 12, and the primary safety outcome was withdrawal of treatment due to an adverse event from baseline to week 12. Secondary efficacy outcomes included differences in clinic and home blood pressure levels and control rates. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04518293, and is completed. FINDINGS: The trial was conducted between July 9, 2021 and Sept 1, 2023. We randomly allocated 1385 participants to four groups: 551 to GMRx2, 276 to telmisartan-indapamide, 282 to telmisartan-amlodipine, and 276 to amlodipine-indapamide groups. The mean age was 59 years (SD 11), 712 (51%) participants self-reported as female and 673 (48.6%) male, and the mean clinic blood pressure at the screening visit was 142/85 mm Hg when taking an average of 1.6 blood pressure medications. Following the run-in on GMRx2 half dose, the mean clinic blood pressure level at randomisation was 133/81 mm Hg and the mean home blood pressure level was 129/78 mm Hg. At week 12, the mean home SBP was 126 mm Hg in the GMRx2 group, which was lower than for each of the dual combinations: -2.5 (95% CI -3.7 to -1.3, p<0.0001) versus telmisartan-indapamide, -5.4 (-6.8 to -4.1, p<0.0001) versus telmisartan-amlodipine, and -4.4 (-5.8 to -3.1, p<0.0001) versus amlodipine-indapamide. For the same comparisons, differences in clinic blood pressure at week 12 were 4.3/3.5 mm Hg, 5.6/3.7 mm Hg, and 6.3/4.5 mm Hg (all p<0.001). Clinic blood pressure control rate below 140/90 mm Hg at week 12 was superior with GMRx2 (74%) to with each dual combination (range 53-61%). Withdrawal of treatment due to adverse events occurred in 11 (2%) participants in the GMRx2 group, four (1%) in telmisartan-indapamide, three (1%) in telmisartan-amlodipine, and four (1%) in amlodipine-indapamide, with none of the differences being statistically significant. INTERPRETATION: A novel low-dose SPC product of telmisartan, amlodipine, and indapamide provided clinically meaningful improvements in blood pressure reduction compared with dual combinations and was well tolerated. This SPC provides a new therapeutic option for the management of hypertension and its use could result in a substantial improvement in blood pressure control in clinical practice. FUNDING: George Medicines.
BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that calcium channel blockers can cause cutaneous adverse reactions; however, the amounts of data collected are limited. Recently, there have been new drugs available for which only a few reports have been published with regard to cutaneous adverse reactions. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of our study was to estimate the rate and to study clinical patterns of cutaneous adverse drug reactions to calcium channel blockers. METHODS: Medical records of patients who had cutaneous adverse reactions to calcium channel blockers between January 2004 and December 2010, at the Adverse Drug Reaction Center of Siriraj hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand were reviewed. RESULTS: From 996,583 prescriptions of calcium channel blockers, forty six patients developed cutaneous adverse effects. Diltiazem was the drug that showed the highest rate of cutaneous reactions per million prescriptions. Maculopapular rash was the most common dermatologic manifestation (41.7%), followed by ankle/pedal edema (18.8%). Three patients (6.2%) developed Stevens-Johnson syndrome due to amlodipine and 1 patient (2.1%) developed toxic epidermal necrolysis due to manidipine. Four patients (8.7%) had renal or cardiovascular involvement. CONCLUSIONS: It is important to keep in mind that some patients may develop cutaneous adverse reactions, including severe reactions, from calcium channel blockers.
Preclinical studies indicate that dihydropyridine-type calcium channel antagonists modulate dopamine neurotransmitter function and can reduce cocaine-reinforced behaviors. Amlodipine, a long-acting dihydropyridine-type calcium channel antagonist related to isradipine and nifedipine, was administered in open label fashion for 12 weeks to 26 cocaine-dependent patients. In subjects expressing cocaine craving, craving significantly declined during the course of the 12 weeks. Five individuals reported flushing, headache, fatigue, nocturia, nausea, and lightheadedness. No conclusions regarding efficacy can be made due to the small number of subjects and the open-label design.
Nowadays, fixed drug combinations are very important part of pharmacotherapy in essential arterial hypertension. The ameliorated activity of RAAS system (ACE inhibitors or sartans) along with calcium-ion channel inhibitor results in additive decrease of blood pressure with concomitant beneficial safety profile. Both telmisartan and amlodipine possess very favorable pharmacological properties, what is reflected in results of performed clinical trials, in which they were used as combinations.Key words: amlodipine - calcium channel blockers - fixed combination - hypertension - sartans - telmisartan.
OBJECTIVE: To describe what we believe is the first reported case of synergistic gynecomastia during treatment of depressive and anxiety disorders when sertraline was added to a stable medication regimen including duloxetine, rosuvastatin, and amlodipine. CASE SUMMARY: A 67-year-old male with major depression, dysthymia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, social anxiety, hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia presented with new-onset gynecomastia and breast tenderness. Mammography revealed bilateral gynecomastia (fibroglandular tissue posterior to the nipples bilaterally) without suspicious mass, calcification, or other abnormalities. These new symptoms developed after sertraline was added to his stable medication regimen (duloxetine, alprazolam, rosuvastatin, metoprolol, amlodipine, hydrochlorothiazide/triamterene, metformin, and sitagliptin). These symptoms were dose-dependent, with gynecomastia and breast tenderness more severe as sertraline was titrated from 25 mg/day to 50 mg/day and then to 75 mg/day. When sertraline was discontinued, gynecomastia and breast tenderness rapidly resolved. DISCUSSION: Mammoplasia and gynecomastia are associated with altered dopamine neurotransmission and/or perturbations in sexual hormones. These adverse effects may be medication induced. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (duloxetine), rosuvastatin, and amlodipine have been reported to cause these adverse effects. This case was unique, since the patient had been on both sertraline and duloxetine previously as independent psychotropics without the development of gynecomastia. In the context of an additive drug adverse effect, the probability of sertraline as the precipitant drug was determined by both the Naranjo probability scale and the Horn drug interaction probability scale as probable. CONCLUSIONS: Gynecomastia is associated with antidepressants and other medications but is rarely addressed. Gynecomastia may be antidepressant selective or may be the result of additive adverse effects. Clinicians are advised to question patients regarding this potential adverse effect. Further education of clinicians is indicated.
Hypertension is one of the most frequent chronic disease in Hungary and one of the most important cardiovascular risk factor. Treatment of blood pressure to target value lowers significantly the risk of coronary artery disease, stroke and chronic renal disease as well as it decreases mortality. Blood pressure control has a great importance in high risk patients. In addition to life style changes, drug treatment plays an essential role in the management of hypertensive patients. The complexity of drug regimen, characteristics of drug class, age and gender are all exert impacts on patient adherence. Antihypertensive drugs should preferably have metabolically neutral properties and cardiovascular protective effects. Ramipril/amlodipine fixed combination meets these criteria and adherence of patients is favorable.
This is a case report of a 71-year-old male with known diabetes, hypertension and diabetic nephropaty who over the course of one year developed an unrecognized myopathy due to concomitant treatment with high-dose simvastatin and amlodipin. Due to rhabdomyolysis he was after seven days of treatment with roxithromycin admitted to hospital with loss of the ability to walk. We wish to raise awareness of the potentially severe side effects of simvastatin and to emphasize that these can be limited by increased attention to patients with risk factors and to interactions with other drugs.
We are presenting a current view on a fixed-dose combination of amlodipine and candesartan in the treatment of hypertension. Major studies on the individual preparations as well as studies examining their combination are included. This fixed-dose combination expands our possibilities with regard to attaining the blood pressure target values, in particular in patients with risk factors or patients with comorbidities. Finally, the benefit mainly consists in the greater compliance of the patient with a minimum adverse effects.
Osteoarthritis constitutes one of the leading causes of pain and disability worldwide with a significant impact on health-care costs. Patients with osteoarthritis are often affected by a number of cardiovascular comorbidities, including hypertension, which is present in about 40% of cases. Just recently, a single tablet combination of amlodipine besylate, a calcium channel blocker, and celecoxib, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, indicated for patients for whom treatment with amlodipine for hypertension and celecoxib for osteoarthritis are appropriate, has been recently approved. Areas covered: We reviewed data from clinical studies that investigated safety and efficacy of the combination of amlodipine and celecoxib in hypertensive patients with osteoarthritis published before 31 August 2018. The literature search was conducted using research Methodology Filters. Expert commentary: The advantages of this single formulation over sequential administration include increased compliance, possibly reduced cost, and less likelihood of dosage-related issues. Moreover, this single tablet formulation combines the anti-inflammatory activity of the celecoxib with the systemic vasodilatation induced by the amlodipine. It is a promising treatment for patients with osteoarthritis and hypertension. Nevertheless, celecoxib may cause a variable degree of blood pressure increase and only a small clinical trial has been conducted before approval to assess interactions related to blood pressure effect between these two molecules.
The subanalysis of a 4 x 4 factorial, 8-week study to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of telmisartan (T) 40-80 mg/amlodipine (A) 5-10 mg used in treatment-naive patients (n = 231) and patients previously treated with antihypertensive agents (n = 880). Similar blood pressure (BP) reductions were achieved with T + A, regardless of their pretreatment status. Highest reductions were achieved with T80 + A10 (treatment-naive -26.5/-18.2 mm Hg and previously treated -25.6/-19.9 mm Hg). Most patients (treatment-naive 72.4% and previously treated 77.6%), including those with added risk, achieved BP goal (<140/90 mm Hg) with T80 + A10. Tolerability was comparable in both groups.
Gingival hypertrophy (GH) is a well-known physical manifestation due to inflammatory conditions, pregnancy, vitamin C deficiency, systemic diseases like leukemia, Wegners granulomatosis, and various drugs like anticonvulsants, immunosuppresant, and calcium channel blockers (CCBs).We present here a case of a 45-year-old woman, who has been taking Amlodipine 10mg once a day together with Atenelol 50mg per day for one and half years, and has subsequently developed gum hypertrophy. This manifestation was reversed after stopping of Amlodipine. Though this case presentation is described in literature, we hereby present it in a pictorial form, to sensitize the treating physician toward it.
A disturbing pattern in the management of hypertension is emerging worldwide. More patients are being treated for hypertension, but blood pressures are not decreasing to target levels. Inadequate reduction in blood pressure is a risk factor for coronary artery disease. Poor drug efficacy, side effects, and lack of compliance are important factors leading to inadequate control of blood pressure. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists provide adequate 24-hour blood pressure control, as measured by ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, and have a side-effect profile similar to placebo. They also provide better patient compliance through once-daily dosing. This article compares the safety and efficacy of angiotensin II receptor antagonists with other antihypertensive agents.
New approaches are needed to lower blood pressure (BP) given persistently low control rates. QUARTET USA sought to evaluate the effect of four-drug, quarter-dose BP lowering combination in patients with hypertension. QUARTET USA was a randomized (1:1), double-blinded trial conducted in federally qualified health centers among adults with hypertension. Participants received either a quadpill of candesartan 2 mg, amlodipine 1.25 mg, indapamide 0.625 mg, and bisoprolol 2.5 mg or candesartan 8 mg for 12 weeks. If BP was >130/>80 mm Hg at 6 weeks in either arm, then participants received open label add-on amlodipine 5 mg. The primary outcome was mean change in systolic blood pressure (SBP) at 12 weeks, controlling for baseline BP. Secondary outcomes included mean change in diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and safety included serious adverse events, relevant adverse drug effects, and electrolyte abnormalities. Among 62 participants randomized between August 2019-May 2022 (n = 32 intervention, n = 30 control), mean (SD) age was 52 (11.5) years, 45% were female, 73% identified as Hispanic, and 18% identified as Black. Baseline mean (SD) SBP was 138.1 (11.2) mmHg, and baseline mean (SD) DBP was 84.3 (10.5) mmHg. In a modified intention-to-treat analysis, there was no significant difference in SBP (-4.8 mm Hg [95% CI: -10.8, 1.3, p = 0.123] and a -4.9 mmHg (95% CI: -8.6, -1.3, p = 0.009) greater mean DBP change in the intervention arm compared with the control arm at 12 weeks. Adverse events did not differ significantly between arms. The quadpill had a similar SBP and greater DBP lowering effect compared with candesartan 8 mg. Trial registration number: NCT03640312.
