Amphetamine was discovered over 100 years ago. Since then, it has transformed from a drug that was freely available without prescription as a panacea for a broad range of disorders into a highly restricted Controlled Drug with therapeutic applications restricted to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and narcolepsy. This review describes the relationship between chemical structure and pharmacology of amphetamine and its congeners. Amphetamine's diverse pharmacological actions translate not only into therapeutic efficacy, but also into the production of adverse events and liability for recreational abuse. Accordingly, the balance of benefit/risk is the key challenge for its clinical use. The review charts advances in pharmaceutical development from the introduction of once-daily formulations of amphetamine through to lisdexamfetamine, which is the first d-amphetamine prodrug approved for the management of ADHD in children, adolescents and adults. The unusual metabolic route for lisdexamfetamine to deliver d-amphetamine makes an important contribution to its pharmacology. How lisdexamfetamine's distinctive pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic profile translates into sustained efficacy as a treatment for ADHD and its reduced potential for recreational abuse is also discussed.
BACKGROUND: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) affects approximately 3% of adults globally. Many pharmacologic treatments options exist, yet the comparative benefits and harms of individual treatments are largely unknown. We performed a systematic review and network meta-analysis to assess the relative effects of individual pharmacologic treatments for adults with ADHD. METHODS: We searched English-language published and grey literature sources for randomized clinical trials (RCTs) involving pharmacologic treatment of ADHD in adults (December 2018). The primary outcome was clinical response; secondary outcomes were quality of life, executive function, driving behaviour, withdrawals due to adverse events, treatment discontinuation, serious adverse events, hospitalization, cardiovascular adverse events, and emergency department visits. Data were pooled via pair-wise meta-analyses and Bayesian network meta-analyses. Risk of bias was assessed by use of Cochrane's Risk of Bias tool, and the certainty of the evidence was assessed by use of the GRADE framework. RESULTS: Eighty-one unique trials that reported at least one outcome of interest were included, most of which were at high or unclear risk of at least one important source of bias. Notably, only 5 RCTs were deemed at overall low risk of bias. Included pharmacotherapies were methylphenidate, atomoxetine, dexamfetamine, lisdexamfetamine, guanfacine, bupropion, mixed amphetamine salts, and modafinil. As a class, ADHD pharmacotherapy improved patient- and clinician-reported clinical response compared with placebo (range: 4 to 15 RCTs per outcome); however, these findings were not conserved when the analyses were restricted to studies at low risk of bias, and the certainty of the finding is very low. There were few differences among individual medications, although atomoxetine was associated with improved patient-reported clinical response and quality of life compared with placebo. There was no significant difference in the risk of serious adverse events or treatment discontinuation between ADHD pharmacotherapies and placebo; however, the proportion of participants who withdrew due to adverse events was significantly higher among participants who received any ADHD pharmacotherapy. Few RCTs reported on the occurrence of adverse events over a long treatment duration. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, despite a class effect of improving clinical response relative to placebo, there were few differences among the individual ADHD pharmacotherapies, and most studies were at risk of at least one important source of bias. Furthermore, the certainty of the evidence was very low to low for all outcomes, and there was limited reporting of long-term adverse events. As such, the choice between ADHD pharmacotherapies may depend on individual patient considerations, and future studies should assess the long-term effects of individual pharmacotherapies on patient-important outcomes, including quality of life, in robust blinded RCTs. REGISTRATION: PROSPERO no. CRD 42015026049.
BACKGROUND: Here we review the safety and tolerability profile of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (LDX), the first long-acting prodrug stimulant for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). METHODS: A PubMed search was conducted for English-language articles published up to 16 September 2013 using the following search terms: (lisdexamfetamine OR lisdexamphetamine OR SPD489 OR Vyvanse OR Venvanse OR NRP104 NOT review [publication type]). RESULTS: In short-term, parallel-group, placebo-controlled, phase III trials, treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) in children, adolescents, and adults receiving LDX were typical for those reported for stimulants in general. Decreased appetite was reported by 25-39 % of patients and insomnia by 11-19 %. The most frequently reported TEAEs in long-term studies were similar to those reported in the short-term trials. Most TEAEs were mild or moderate in severity. Literature relating to four specific safety concerns associated with stimulant medications was evaluated in detail in patients receiving LDX. Gains in weight, height, and body mass index were smaller in children and adolescents receiving LDX than in placebo controls or untreated norms. Insomnia was a frequently reported TEAE in patients with ADHD of all ages receiving LDX, although the available data indicated no overall worsening of sleep quality in adults. Post-marketing survey data suggest that the rate of non-medical use of LDX was lower than that for short-acting stimulants and lower than or equivalent to long-acting stimulant formulations. Small mean increases were seen in blood pressure and pulse rate in patients receiving LDX. CONCLUSIONS: The safety and tolerability profile of LDX in individuals with ADHD is similar to that of other stimulants.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the pharmacology and abuse potential of oral dexamphetamine and lisdexamfetamine (LDX). METHODS: A search of Medline and Embase was conducted to identify relevant articles for this literature review. RESULTS: Dexamphetamine and LDX, a prodrug of dexamphetamine, are indicated for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. It has been suggested that LDX may have a reduced potential for oral abuse compared to immediate-release dexamphetamine. As a prodrug, LDX has the same pharmacodynamic properties as dexamphetamine. A study in healthy adults showed that the pharmacokinetic profile of dexamphetamine following oral administration of LDX is essentially identical to that of an equimolar dose of dexamphetamine administered 1 h later. In addition, dexamphetamine produced subjective drug liking effects comparable to those produced by LDX. LDX showed linear dose proportional pharmacokinetics up to a dose of 250 mg, indicating a lack of overdose protection at supratherapeutic doses. Furthermore, the exposure to dexamphetamine released from LDX may be prolonged by the consumption of alkalizing agents. CONCLUSIONS: The available evidence from pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic and abuse liability studies suggests a comparable potential for oral abuse of dexamphetamine and LDX.
Amphetamine ('Speed'), methamphetamine ('Ice') and its congener 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; 'Ecstasy') are illicit drugs abused worldwide for their euphoric and stimulant effects. Despite compelling evidence for chronic MDMA neurotoxicity in animal models, the physiological consequences of such toxicity in humans remain unclear. In addition, distinct differences in the metabolism and pharmacokinetics of MDMA between species and different strains of animals prevent the rationalisation of realistic human dose paradigms in animal studies. Here, we attempt to review amphetamine toxicity and in particular MDMA toxicity in the pathogenesis of exemplary human pathologies, independently of confounding environmental factors such as poly-drug use and drug purity.
Objective: A retrospective cohort study was performed to evaluate whether birthweight was less among infants of women taking amphetamine-dextroamphetamine during pregnancy at our academic institution. Method: We identified mother-infant pairs with documented exposure to amphetamine-dextroamphetamine in pregnancy from 2005 through 2015. Patients were matched 2:1 with unexposed controls. Charts were reviewed for known causes of intrauterine growth restriction. Analysis of birthweight used generalized estimating equation blocking on matching. Medical histories were analyzed with chi(2) test or Fisher's exact test. Results: We identified 53 exposed mother-infant pairs. The difference in mean birthweight of infants exposed to amphetamine-dextroamphetamine versus those not exposed was 26.9 g, which is not significant (95% confidence interval [CI] = [-141, 195 g]; p = .75). A significant difference was noted for exposed versus unexposed mothers for comorbid psychiatric illness and history of substance abuse (p < .001). Conclusion: With a limited sample size, our study suggests no significant difference in birthweight.
BACKGROUND: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a childhood-onset disorder characterised by inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. ADHD can persist into adulthood and can affects individuals' social and occupational functioning, as well as their quality of life and health. ADHD is frequently associated with other mental disorders such as substance use disorders and anxiety and affective disorders. Amphetamines are used to treat adults with ADHD, but uncertainties about their efficacy and safety remain. OBJECTIVES: To examine the efficacy and safety of amphetamines for adults with ADHD. SEARCH METHODS: In August 2017, we searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, 10 other databases, and two trials registers, and we ran citation searches for included studies. We also contacted the corresponding authors of all included studies, other experts in the field, and the pharmaceutical company, Shire, and we searched the reference lists of retrieved studies and reviews for other published, unpublished, or ongoing studies. For each included study, we performed a citation search in Web of Science to identify any later studies that may have cited it. SELECTION CRITERIA: We searched for randomised controlled trials comparing the efficacy of amphetamines (at any dose) for ADHD in adults aged 18 years and over against placebo or an active intervention. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors extracted data from each included study. We used the standardised mean difference (SMD) and the risk ratio (RR) to assess continuous and dichotomous outcomes, respectively. We conducted a stratified analysis to determine the influence of moderating variables. We assessed trials for risk of bias and drew a funnel plot to investigate the possibility of publication bias. We rated the quality of the evidence using the GRADE approach, which yielded high, moderate, low, or very low quality ratings based on evaluation of within-trial risk of bias, directness of evidence, heterogeneity of data; precision of effect estimates, and risk of publication bias. MAIN RESULTS: We included 19 studies that investigated three types of amphetamines: dexamphetamine (10.2 mg/d to 21.8 mg/d), lisdexamfetamine (30 mg/d to 70 mg/d), and mixed amphetamine salts (MAS; 12.5 mg/d to 80 mg/d). These studies enrolled 2521 participants; most were middle-aged (35.3 years), Caucasian males (57.2%), with a combined type of ADHD (78.8%). Eighteen studies were conducted in the USA, and one study was conducted in both Canada and the USA. Ten were multi-site studies. All studies were placebo-controlled, and three also included an active comparator: guanfacine, modafinil, or paroxetine. Most studies had short-term follow-up and a mean study length of 5.3 weeks.We found no studies that had low risk of bias in all domains of the Cochrane 'Risk of bias' tool, mainly because amphetamines have powerful subjective effects that may reveal the assigned treatment, but also because we noted attrition bias, and because we could not rule out the possibility of a carry-over effect in studies that used a cross-over design.Sixteen studies were funded by the pharmaceutical industry, one study was publicly funded, and two studies did not report their funding sources.Amphetamines versus placeboSeverity of ADHD symptoms: we found low- to very low-quality evidence suggesting that amphetamines reduced the severity of ADHD symptoms as rated by clinicians (SMD -0.90, 95% confidence interval (CI) -1.04 to -0.75; 13 studies, 2028 participants) and patients (SMD -0.51, 95% CI -0.75 to -0.28; six studies, 120 participants).Retention: overall, we found low-quality evidence suggesting that amphetamines did not improve retention in treatment (risk ratio (RR) 1.06, 95% CI 0.99 to 1.13; 17 studies, 2323 participants).Adverse events: we found that amphetamines were associated with an increased proportion of patients who withdrew because of adverse events (RR 2.69, 95% CI 1.63 to 4.45; 17 studies, 2409 participants).Type of amphetamine: we found differences between amphetamines for the severity of ADHD symptoms as rated by clinicians. Both lisdexamfetamine (SMD -1.06, 95% CI -1.26 to -0.85; seven studies, 896 participants; low-quality evidence) and MAS (SMD -0.80, 95% CI -0.93 to -0.66; five studies, 1083 participants; low-quality evidence) reduced the severity of ADHD symptoms. In contrast, we found no evidence to suggest that dexamphetamine reduced the severity of ADHD symptoms (SMD -0.24, 95% CI -0.80 to 0.32; one study, 49 participants; very low-quality evidence). In addition, all amphetamines were efficacious in reducing the severity of ADHD symptoms as rated by patients (dexamphetamine: SMD -0.77, 95% CI -1.14 to -0.40; two studies, 35 participants; low-quality evidence; lisdexamfetamine: SMD -0.33, 95% CI -0.65 to -0.01; three studies, 67 participants; low-quality evidence; MAS: SMD -0.45, 95% CI -1.02 to 0.12; one study, 18 participants; very low-quality evidence).Dose at study completion: different doses of amphetamines did not appear to be associated with differences in efficacy.Type of drug-release formulation: we investigated immediate- and sustained-release formulations but found no differences between them for any outcome.Amphetamines versus other drugsWe found no evidence that amphetamines improved ADHD symptom severity compared to other drug interventions. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Amphetamines improved the severity of ADHD symptoms, as assessed by clinicians or patients, in the short term but did not improve retention to treatment. Amphetamines were associated with higher attrition due to adverse events. The short duration of studies coupled with their restrictive inclusion criteria limits the external validity of these findings. Furthermore, none of the included studies had an overall low risk of bias. Overall, the evidence generated by this review is of low or very low quality.
Psychostimulant medications have been used clinically and investigated in psychiatric populations, the medically ill, cancer patients and healthy people. This article discusses the pharmacology of dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate, pemoline (and other psychostimulants such as caffeine and ephedrine), their use in general medicine and cancer care, side effects, and abuse potential. Therapeutic use in children is addressed only insofar as it illustrates facets of their use in adults.
Oral lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (Vyvanse((R)); lisdexamfetamine), a prodrug of dextroamfetamine, is currently the only drug to be approved in the USA for the treatment of moderate to severe binge eating disorder (BED) in adult patients. Its approval was based on the results of two pivotal short-term (12 weeks) phase III studies, which showed a significantly greater reduction in binge eating days/week at the end of the study with lisdexamfetamine 50-70 mg/day than with placebo. The findings of these studies have been supported and extended by the results of longer-term (</= 52 weeks) phase III studies, including one with a randomized 26-week withdrawal phase, which showed that lisdexamfetamine markedly reduced the risk of BED relapse relative to placebo. Lisdexamfetamine was generally well tolerated in clinical trials in patients with moderate to severe BED, with a tolerability profile similar to that observed in ADHD patients; most treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) were of mild or moderate intensity. The most common TEAEs in phase III trials included dry mouth, headache and insomnia; TEAEs infrequently led to study drug discontinuation. In conclusion, lisdexamfetamine 50-70 mg/day is an effective and generally well tolerated option for treating moderate to severe BED in adults.
This article reviews the unique prodrug stimulant lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (LDX, Vyvanse), an approved treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. LDX is an inactive prodrug in which l-lysine is chemically bonded to d-amphetamine. Although its efficacy is not significantly different from that of other stimulants, LDX may be different with respect to potential toxicity and abuse liability. In this article, I will review the short-term controlled studies that were the basis for LDX's approval for both children and adults; the lack of and need for more long-term studies; two double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover studies that examined LDX's abuse liability; and clinical uses for the drug. The clinical implications stemming from LDX's unique characteristics are also discussed.
The authors reviewed the studies of the neuroendocrine secretion of growth hormone, prolactin, and cortisol as they relate to attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Studies to date have focused on the hormonal responses to the stimulants (amphetamines and methylphenidate) in children and adults. The authors discuss the methodologic limitations of current studies, the implications of this research for an understanding of the pathophysiology of ADHD, as well as the mechanisms of action of the stimulants and the side effect of stimulant-related growth suppression. They also suggest directions for future research.
Lisdexamfetamine is an amphetamine prodrug, comprising an l-lysine amino acid covalently bonded to dextroamphetamine (d-amphetamine). Lisdexamfetamine is approved in the US for the treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in children aged 6-12 years. Lisdexamfetamine is a therapeutically inactive molecule. After oral ingestion, lisdexamfetamine is hydrolyzed to l-lysine, a naturally occurring essential amino acid, and active d-amphetamine, which is responsible for the activity of the drug. In a well designed pharmacodynamic study in adult stimulant abusers, 50 or 100 mg doses of oral lisdexamfetamine had less likability than d-amphetamine 40 mg, suggesting a reduced abuse potential. Through rate-limited hydrolysis in the body, l-lysine is cleaved, gradually releasing pharmacologically active d-amphetamine. The pharmacokinetics of lisdexamfetamine suggest a reduced potential for abuse. In two well designed trials in children aged 6-12 years with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), the efficacy of lisdexamfetamine was superior to that of placebo in improving symptoms associated with ADHD. Adverse events with lisdexamfetamine were, in general, mild to moderate in severity and consistent with those commonly reported with amphetamine.
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common condition during childhood that is associated with significant psychosocial dysfunction. Psychostimulants are the compounds that have been most extensively studied for the treatment of ADHD in children. There is substantial scientific evidence that several methylphenidate- and amphetamine-based preparations have acute efficacy in the treatment of this condition in children. The short-term safety and tolerability of these compounds has been reasonably well-studied and the risks associated with psychostimulant therapy in the short-term are generally acceptable. However, the amount of long-term effectiveness and safety data relating to these compounds is relatively small. Data that do exist suggest that long-term treatment with psychostimulants in appropriately diagnosed patients may be associated with salutary effects as well as relatively modest risks. Until more extensive, methodologically rigorous data are available, it appears that judicious psychostimulant pharmacotherapy of ADHD in children may be justified.
The hospital charts of 17 patients with post-stroke depression who were treated with either dextroamphetamine or methylphenidate during a 5-year period at the Massachusetts General Hospital were examined. Eighty-two percent of the patients showed improvement after psychostimulant treatment. Forty-seven percent of all patients showed marked or moderate improvement in depressive symptoms. The authors saw no significant differences in efficacy between the two psychostimulants or across the diagnostic categories for depression. Patients improved quickly, usually within the first 2 days of treatment. Adverse reactions necessitating the termination of psychostimulant treatment occurred in three patients. Anorexia was not observed as a side effect of either dextroamphetamine or methylphenidate treatment. Psychostimulants appear to be a safe and rapidly effective alternative to tricyclic antidepressants in inpatients with post-stroke depression.
This article is a review of studies conducted on the effects of amphetamine on behavior in animals by the late Walter Isaac and his associates. The principle findings and hypotheses developed over the 20 or more years of research are outlined and discussed. d-Amphetamine is thought to affect an organism's behavior by influencing the arousal level, mainly via the visual system.
Background: Cocaine use disorder (CUD) is a substantial public health problem with no FDA-approved medication treatments. Psychostimulants have shown promise as pharmacotherapy for CUD. Lisdexamfetamine, a novel prodrug psychostimulant, is roughly 40-50% as potent as dextroamphetamine.Objectives: To evaluate the safety, tolerability, and optimal dosing of lisdexamfetamine for treating CUD.Methods: Open-label, 8-week trial of 17 CUD adults. Participants were titrated to the maximum tolerated dose of 140 mg over 2-week period and maintained for 4 weeks, followed by a two-week taper period. The primary outcome measures were the maximum daily dose achieved during the study period and tolerability as measured by medication-related study drop-out.Results: Among the 16 participants with post-enrollment data, the mean dose of lisdexamfetamine achieved was 118.1 mg (standard deviation (SD) = 40.4), mean retention was 6.5 weeks (SD = 2.0), and no participants discontinued study medication due to adverse effects. Four participants had dose reductions due to adverse effects and continued in the trial. Six participants (37.5%) were abstinent for the last 3 weeks of their study participation. Mean dollars of cocaine spent per day significantly decreased from $19.72 at baseline to $7.57 during the last 3 weeks of study participation (t(15) = 3.60, p = .003). The mean percent of using days significantly decreased from 25% at baseline to 12% during the last 3 weeks of study participation (t(15) = 3.33, p = .005).Conclusion: The use of lisdexamfetamine for CUD in doses ranging to 140 mg daily was safe and generally well tolerated.
Thirty schizophrenic patients received intravenous dextro-amphetamine while on and off pimozide. The results provide evidence that negative symptoms and depressed mood in schizophrenia respond in part to intravenous challenges of dextro-amphetamine. Improvement in negative symptoms while on d-amphetamine correlated significantly with subsequent improvement in the same negative symptoms while on pimozide. These results do not support the Type II model of irreversible negative symptoms in schizophrenia in our patient sample. Changes in negative symptoms may be related to state dependent changes in the dopamine system, but noradrenergic mechanisms cannot be excluded either.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the presentation, management, and postmortem examination findings in a dog with confirmed lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (LDX) toxicosis. CASE SUMMARY: A 3-year-old female neutered mixed breed dog initially presented with neurological signs suspected to be secondary to LDX toxicosis. The dog was treated as typical for amphetamine toxicoses but developed severe respiratory and cardiovascular signs throughout their hospitalization. The progression of the cardiopulmonary signs led to cardiopulmonary arrest, for which CPR was unsuccessful. Postmortem examination exhibited severe hemorrhage throughout multiple organ systems. Toxicology testing confirmed the presence of unaltered LDX and its metabolite, amphetamine. NEW OR UNIQUE INFORMATION PROVIDED: This is the first case report documenting a severe progression of clinical signs and postmortem examination findings in a case of confirmed LDX toxicosis in a dog. Although the patient did not survive treatment, postmortem examination and microscopic evaluation of tissues allowed visualization of the extent of systemic pathophysiology. With prompt treatment, the prognosis of amphetamine toxicosis in dogs is generally considered good; however, this case report demonstrates a severe case in which even prompt and appropriate treatment did not prevent mortality. This suggests a need to establish negative prognostic indicators for which to monitor in cases of amphetamine toxicosis. Finally, this report is also unique in the fact that the LDX toxicosis was confirmed using a toxicological analysis technique not previously described clinically in dogs.
Dextroamphetamine (0.15 mg/kg) intravenously administered to a group of normal postmenopausal women induced a dysphoric reaction with drowsiness, annoyance, sadness and anger. Young normal men, receiving the same dosage, responded with elation of mood and alertness. It is suggested that age and hypoestrogenism may alter the behavioural response to amphetamine.
The present review examines 36 previous research reports involving over 1,400 hyperkinetic children in an effort to determine which variables have proven useful in predicting which hyperkinetic children will respond favorably to stimulant drugs. The research is summarized under eight types of predictor variables: (1) psychophysiological, (2) neurologist, (3) familial, (4) demographic/sociological, (5) diagnostic category, (6) parent/teacher/clinician ratings, (7) psychological, and (8) profile types. The results of this review indicate that, to date, measures of attention span or concentration and its correlates have proven to be the most useful predictors of the response of hyperactive children to drugs. The results also suggest that hyperkinetic children are heterogeneous with respect to levels of CNS arousal and that this variable may prove useful in predicting their response to stimulant drugs. Problems involved in drawing conclusions in a review of this area of research as well as directions which future research might pursue also are briefly discussed.
