BACKGROUND: The benefits and risks of augmenting or switching antidepressants in older adults with treatment-resistant depression have not been extensively studied. METHODS: We conducted a two-step, open-label trial involving adults 60 years of age or older with treatment-resistant depression. In step 1, patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio to augmentation of existing antidepressant medication with aripiprazole, augmentation with bupropion, or a switch from existing antidepressant medication to bupropion. Patients who did not benefit from or were ineligible for step 1 were randomly assigned in step 2 in a 1:1 ratio to augmentation with lithium or a switch to nortriptyline. Each step lasted approximately 10 weeks. The primary outcome was the change from baseline in psychological well-being, assessed with the National Institutes of Health Toolbox Positive Affect and General Life Satisfaction subscales (population mean, 50; higher scores indicate greater well-being). A secondary outcome was remission of depression. RESULTS: In step 1, a total of 619 patients were enrolled; 211 were assigned to aripiprazole augmentation, 206 to bupropion augmentation, and 202 to a switch to bupropion. Well-being scores improved by 4.83 points, 4.33 points, and 2.04 points, respectively. The difference between the aripiprazole-augmentation group and the switch-to-bupropion group was 2.79 points (95% CI, 0.56 to 5.02; P = 0.014, with a prespecified threshold P value of 0.017); the between-group differences were not significant for aripiprazole augmentation versus bupropion augmentation or for bupropion augmentation versus a switch to bupropion. Remission occurred in 28.9% of patients in the aripiprazole-augmentation group, 28.2% in the bupropion-augmentation group, and 19.3% in the switch-to-bupropion group. The rate of falls was highest with bupropion augmentation. In step 2, a total of 248 patients were enrolled; 127 were assigned to lithium augmentation and 121 to a switch to nortriptyline. Well-being scores improved by 3.17 points and 2.18 points, respectively (difference, 0.99; 95% CI, -1.92 to 3.91). Remission occurred in 18.9% of patients in the lithium-augmentation group and 21.5% in the switch-to-nortriptyline group; rates of falling were similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: In older adults with treatment-resistant depression, augmentation of existing antidepressants with aripiprazole improved well-being significantly more over 10 weeks than a switch to bupropion and was associated with a numerically higher incidence of remission. Among patients in whom augmentation or a switch to bupropion failed, changes in well-being and the occurrence of remission with lithium augmentation or a switch to nortriptyline were similar. (Funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute; OPTIMUM ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02960763.).
INTRODUCTION: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting approximately 3% of school-age children. The core symptoms are deficits in social communication and restricted and repetitive patterns of behavior. Associated problems in cognition, language, behavior, sleep and mood are prevalent. Currently, no established pharmacological treatment exists for core ASD symptoms. Risperidone and aripiprazole are used to manage associated irritability, but their effectiveness is limited and adverse events are common. AREAS COVERED: This mini-review summarizes existing scientific literature and ongoing clinical trials concerning cannabinoid treatment for ASD. Uncontrolled case series have documented improvements in both core ASD symptoms and related behavioral challenges in children treated with cannabis extracts rich in cannabidiol (CBD). Placebo-controlled studies involving CBD-rich cannabis extracts and/or pure CBD in children with ASD have demonstrated mixed efficacy results. A similar outcome was observed in a placebo-controlled study of pure CBD addressing social avoidance in Fragile X syndrome. Importantly, these studies have shown relatively high safety and tolerability. EXPERT OPINION: While current clinical data suggest the potential of CBD and CBD-rich cannabis extract in managing core and behavioral deficits in ASD, it is prudent to await the results of ongoing placebo-controlled trials before considering CBD treatment for ASD.
INTRODUCTION: Aripiprazole is a third generation antipsychotic approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of schizophrenia. Aripiprazole is available as oral and long-acting injectable (LAI) depot formulations, with a unique mechanism of action comprising partial D(2) and serotonin 5-HT(1A) agonism and antagonism at serotonin 5-HT(2A) receptors. AREAS COVERED: We review short-and-long-term clinical trials, meta-analyses of clinical trials and product information pertaining to the safety and efficacy of aripiprazole in adults with schizophrenia. Formulations of aripiprazole reviewed include oral aripiprazole, Aripiprazole monohydrate LAI (Abilify Maintena(c)) and Aripiprazole lauroxil LAI (Aristada(c)). Clinical studies and product information were collected from PubMed, Psychinfo, Embase, and other web sources. EXPERT OPINION: Aripiprazole is a generally well-tolerated third-generation antipsychotic with low rates of motor side effects and metabolic adverse effects that occur commonly with several alternative antipsychotics. Akathisia and tremor appear to occur at higher rates with aripiprazole compared to placebo but are still generally uncommon with incidences of 10-11% or less. Uniquely, aripiprazole treatment is associated with reduced serum prolactin levels and QT(c) interval. A variety of LAI options with dosing intervals as infrequent as every 8 weeks provide a compelling reason to select aripiprazole in patients with limited oral treatment adherence.
Aripiprazole is an atypical antipsychotic medication, and its use in treating borderline personality disorder (BPD) is debatable because it is not FDA-approved for treating BPD. This study aimed to investigate the efficacy and safety of aripiprazole in patients with BPD. On July 2, 2021, the protocol (CRD42021256647) was registered in PROSPERO. PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, Ovid-Medline, Embase, PsycINFO, and Cochrane (CENTRAL) were searched without regard for language or publication date. We also searched trial registries on ClinicalTrials.gov and the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform. Randomized clinical trials with adult patients diagnosed with BPD met the inclusion criteria. The Cochrane risk of bias for randomized trials (RoB-2) method was used to assess the quality of the included studies. We included two previously published randomized clinical trials. There were 76 patients with BPD, with 38, 12, and 26 assigned to the aripiprazole, olanzapine, and placebo groups, respectively. Most patients (88.16%) were females, with ages ranging from 22.1 to 28.14 yr. Aripiprazole has been proven to reduce anxiety, depression, anger, hostility, clinical severity, and obsessive-compulsive behavior, insecurity, melancholy, anxiety, aggressiveness/hostility, phobic anxiety, paranoid thinking, psychoticism, and somatization. The adverse effects were headache, insomnia, restlessness, tremor, and akathisia. The risk of bias was considerable in both trials, which is somewhat problematic considering that prejudice can lead to incorrect outcomes and conclusions. Aripiprazole has demonstrated encouraging outcomes in the treatment of patients with BPD. More randomized controlled studies are needed.
RATIONALE: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is defined as a group of neurodevelopmental disorders whose symptoms include impaired communication and social interaction, restricted and repetitive patterns of behavior, and varying levels of intellectual disability. ASD is observed in early childhood and is one of the most severe chronic childhood disorders in prevalence, morbidity, and impact on society. It is usually accompanied by attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, anxiety, depression, sleep disorders, and epilepsy. The treatment of ASD has low efficacy, possibly because it has a heterogeneous nature, and its neurobiological basis is not clearly understood. Drugs such as risperidone and aripiprazole are the only two drugs available that are recognized by the Food and Drug Administration, primarily for treating the behavioral symptoms of this disorder. These drugs have limited efficacy and a high potential for inducing undesirable effects, compromising treatment adherence. Therefore, there is great interest in exploring the endocannabinoid system, which modulates the activity of other neurotransmitters, has actions in social behavior and seems to be altered in patients with ASD. Thus, cannabidiol (CBD) emerges as a possible strategy for treating ASD symptoms since it has relevant pharmacological actions on the endocannabinoid system and shows promising results in studies related to disorders in the central nervous system. OBJECTIVES: Review the preclinical and clinical data supporting CBD's potential as a treatment for the symptoms and comorbidities associated with ASD, as well as discuss and provide information with the purpose of not trivializing the use of this drug.
Delirium is a palliative care emergency where patients experience changes in perception, awareness, and behavior. Common features include changes in the sleep-wake cycle, emotional lability, delusional thinking, and language and thought disorders. Delirium results from neurotransmitter imbalances involving several neurotransmitters such as dopamine, glutamate, norepinephrine, acetylcholine, gamma-aminobutyric acid, and serotonin. Untreated delirium causes significant morbidity and mortality. Nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic approaches treat delirium. Current pharmacologic management of delirium involves using agents such as haloperidol or second-generation antipsychotics. Third-generation atypical antipsychotic drugs have emerged as a potential choice for delirium management. Aripiprazole is a third-generation antipsychotic with a dopamine receptor-binding profile distinct from other second-generation antipsychotics. Aripiprazole acts as partial agonist at dopamine D(2) and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)(1A) receptors, stabilizing the dopamine receptor leading to improvement in symptoms. The article reviews the pharmacology, pharmacodynamics, metabolism, and evidence of clinical efficacy for this new antipsychotic agent. This article explores possible roles in palliative care.
In the past two decades, the search for novel pharmacotherapies to treat alcohol addiction has been a global endeavor. This has resulted in several drugs that have been approved and successfully marketed for public use while some are still in the testing phase. These pharmacological agents, though effective for the treatment of alcoholism, are not without shortcomings; such as abuse potential, serious mental and physical adverse effects, interaction with alcohol and also poor metabolism and excretion. As more is being understood about the neurobiology of alcohol addiction as well as the unique pharmacological action of these drugs, new agents are evaluated for potential benefits when used as an adjunct in combination therapy. This review article summarizes the novel pharmacotherapeutic approaches used in the treatment of alcohol addiction by focusing on the drugs, which include neramexane, gabapentin, baclofen, aripiprazole, nalmafene, and quetiapine.
INTRODUCTION: Non-adherence to medication significantly affects bipolar disorder outcomes. Long-Acting Injectable antipsychotics show promise by ensuring adherence and averting relapses. AREAS COVERED: This narrative review sought to evaluate the efficacy of second-generation injectable antipsychotics in bipolar disorder through searches in Embase, MEDLINE, and PsycInfo for randomized controlled trials and mirror-image studies.Risperidone and aripiprazole Long-Acting Injectables demonstrated effectiveness in preventing mood recurrences compared to placebos in adults with bipolar disorder. They showed superiority in preventing mania/hypomania relapses over placebos but did not appear to significantly outperform active oral controls. Notably, active controls seem to be more effective in preventing depression relapses than Long-Acting Injectables. Mirror-Image studies point toward the reduction of hospitalization rates following LAI initiation. EXPERT OPINION: The available evidence points thus toward the efficacy of LAIs, especially in managing manic episodes and reducing hospitalizations, The current evidence does not however immediately support prioritizing LAIs over oral medications in bipolar disorder treatment. More high-quality studies, especially comparing LAIs directly with active controls, are crucial to gain a comprehensive understanding of their efficacy. These findings highlight the need for further research to guide clinicians in optimizing treatment strategies for bipolar disorder.
INTRODUCTION: Antipsychotic polypharmacy (APP), defined as the use of more than one antipsychotic, is common in schizophrenia. However, current guidelines consider that the level of evidence to support APP is weak and mostly recommend monotherapy. AREAS COVERED: Meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) on the efficacy and tolerability of APP, effectiveness studies on its use in clinical practice, as well as theoretical models liable to legitimate this use are reviewed and discussed on the basis of a systematic literature search (PubMed) ranging from 1995 to 2020. EXPERT OPINION: There is now increasing evidence from both efficacy and effectiveness studies, that APP may be beneficial for some schizophrenia patients. The most evidence seems to be for the combination of clozapine and aripiprazole. The choice of this combination may fit in well with the dopamine supersensitivity hypothesis in schizophrenia. Guidelines should be revised, but further studies are needed to confirm the efficacy/effectiveness of this combination, especially in the case of first-episode schizophrenia.
Consensus panel guidelines advocate for the judicious use of antipsychotic drugs to manage delirium in hospitalized patients when nonpharmacologic measures fail and the patient is in significant distress from symptoms, poses a safety risk to self or others, or is impeding essential aspects of his or her medical care. Here, we review the use of haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and aripiprazole for this purpose.
BACKGROUND: Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) are highly prevalent in people living with dementia. Second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) are commonly used to treat BPSD, but their comparative efficacy and acceptability are unknown. METHODS: The standard mean difference (SMD) was used to pool the fixed effects of continuous outcomes. We calculated ORs with corresponding 95% credible intervals (CI) for the categorical variable. Efficacy was defined as the scores improved on the standardised scales. Acceptability was defined as the all-cause dropout rate. Tolerability was defined as the discontinuation rate due to adverse effects (AEs). The relative treatment rankings were reported with the surface under the cumulative curve. The AE outcomes included mortality, cerebrovascular adverse events (CVAEs), falls, sedation, extrapyramidal symptoms and urinary symptoms. RESULTS: Twenty randomised controlled trials with a total of 6374 individuals containing 5 types of SGAs (quetiapine, olanzapine, risperidone, brexpiprazole and aripiprazole) with intervention lengths ranging from 6 weeks to 36 weeks were included in this network meta-analysis. For the efficacy outcome, compared with the placebo, brexpiprazole (SMD=-1.77, 95% CI -2.80 to -0.74) was more efficacious, and brexpiprazole was better than quetiapine, olanzapine and aripiprazole. Regarding acceptability, only aripiprazole (OR=0.72, 95% CI 0.54 to 0.96) was better than the placebo, and aripiprazole was also better than brexpiprazole (OR=0.61, 95% CI 0.37 to 0.99). In terms of tolerability, olanzapine was worse than placebo (OR=6.02, 95% CI 2.87 to 12.66), risperidone (OR=3.67, 95% CI 1.66 to 8.11) and quetiapine (OR=3.71, 95% CI 1.46 to 9.42), while aripiprazole was better than olanzapine (OR=0.25, 95% CI 0.08 to 0.78). Quetiapine presented good safety in CVAE. Brexpiprazole has better safety in terms of falls and showed related safety in sedation among included SGAs. CONCLUSION: Brexpiprazole showing great efficacy in the treatment of BPSD, with aripiprazole showing the highest acceptability and olanzapine showing the worst tolerability. The results of this study may be used to guide decision-making.
Early-onset schizophrenia (EOS) - onset before age 18 - is linked with great disease burden and disability. Decision-making for EOS pharmacological treatment may be challenging due to conflicting information from evidence and guidelines and unidentified care needs may remain unmet.We searched for systematic reviews, meta-analyses and umbrella reviews of EOS pharmacological treatment published in PubMed over the past 10 years and selected five clinical guidelines from Europe, North-America and Australia. Based on predefined outcomes, we critically compared the evidence supporting EOS-approved drugs in Europe and/or North-America with guidelines recommendations. We also evaluated the coverage of these outcomes to identify unmet needs.One systematic review, nine meta-analyses and two umbrella reviews (k=203 trials, N=81,289 participants, including duplicated samples across selected articles) were retrieved. Evidence supported the efficacy of aripiprazole, clozapine, haloperidol, lurasidone, molindone, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone and paliperidone in EOS, all of which obtained approval for EOS either in Europe and/or in North-America. Cognition, functioning and quality of life, suicidal behaviour and mortality and services utilisation and cost-effectiveness were poorly covered/uncovered.Among the antipsychotics approved for EOS, aripiprazole, lurasidone, molindone, risperidone, paliperidone and quetiapine emerged as efficacious and comparably safe options. Olanzapine is known for a high risk of weight gain and haloperidol for extrapyramidal side-effects. Treatment-resistant patients should be offered clozapine. Future long-term trials looking at cognition, functioning, quality of life, suicidal behaviour, mortality, services utilisation and cost-effectiveness are warranted. Closer multi-agency collaboration may bridge the gap between evidence, guidelines and approved drugs.
The objective of this trial, Biomarkers in Autism of Aripiprazole and Risperidone Treatment (BAART), was to provide support and guidance for an evidence-based approach for the selection and monitoring of initial pharmacotherapy in patients with autism by assessing predictors of efficacy, tolerability, and safety. This randomized double-blind parallel-group study was conducted in three academic medical centers and a single private pediatric practice. Eighty children or adolescents (aged 6-17 yrs) with autistic disorder were enrolled, and 61 patients were randomized to the study drug. Of those patients, 51 completed the 10-week trial, and 31 completed an optional 12-week blinded extension phase. All patients were treated with 2 weeks of placebo before random assignment to receive aripiprazole (31 patients) or risperidone (30 patients) for 10 weeks. Sixteen placebo responders (20%) were excluded from further analysis. Drug dosing followed U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) labeling, and weekly dosage adjustments were allowed until week 4; patients were then maintained on a fixed dose for 6 additional weeks. Safety, physical, and psychological assessments were recorded weekly or every 2 weeks. No significant differences in severity of illness between the aripiprazole and risperidone groups were noted at baseline. All patients significantly improved on the Aberrant Behavior Checklist-Irritability subscale after 1 week and continued for the remaining 9 weeks and the extension phase. Improvement was greatest in the risperidone group at every assessment period and was statistically significantly better than that in the aripiprazole group at weeks 3 and 6 (p<0.05). No dose-limiting adverse events occurred during the dose-titration period. Mean weight gain in the aripiprazole group was significantly less than that in the risperidone group at week 4 (0.62 vs 1.38 kg, p=0.033) and week 10 (1.61 vs 3.31 kg, p<0.001), but the difference became nonsignificant for the 31 patients completing the 3-month extension phase (4.36 vs 5.55 kg, p=0.26). Pharmacotherapy of patients with autism spectrum disorder resulted in behavioral improvement within 1 week and lasted at least 22 weeks. Weight gain occurred to a greater degree with risperidone than aripiprazole initially, but the differences became nonsignificant by the end of the trial. Our trial supports previous results of drug efficacy and safety in patients with autism spectrum disorder from other trials and extends the evidence-based support for choosing an FDA-approved drug for initial pharmacotherapy for autism spectrum disorder.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to review the effects of Dopamine Receptor Partial Agonist (DRPA) antipsychotic medications on milk supply and breastfeeding. METHOD: Narrative review of selected literature including animal and human data. RESULTS: Scant case study evidence suggests that DRPAs may lead to reduced milk supply for some. CONCLUSIONS: Women taking DRPAs should be advised of the possibility that these may affect milk supply, and reporting should be encouraged to aid future research.
More than 40 years of research and clinical practice have proven the effectiveness of dopamine receptor antagonists in the pharmacological treatment of tics. A blockade of the striatal dopamine-D2 receptors is mainly responsible for their tic-reducing effect. A broad spectrum of dopamine-modulating agents, such as typical and atypical antipsychotics, but also dopamine receptor agonists are used with an immanent discord between experts about which of them should be considered as first choice. The present Review outlines the state of the art on pharmacological treatment of tics with dopamine-modulating agents by giving an systematic overview of studies on their effectiveness and a critical discussion of their specific adverse effects. It is considered as an update of a previous review of our research group published in 2013. The Review closes with a description of the current resulting treatment recommendations including the results of a first published revised survey on European expert's prescription preferences. Based on the enormously growing evidence on its effectiveness and safety, aripiprazole currently seems to be the most promising agent in the pharmacological treatment of tics. Furthermore, benzamides (especially tiapride), which are commonly used in Europe, have proven their excellent effectiveness-tolerability profile over decades in clinical practice and are therefore also highly recommended for the treatment of tics. Nevertheless, pharmacological treatment of tics remains an indiviual choice depending on each patient's own specific needs.
Bipolar I disorder is a serious and disabling psychiatric illness. It is associated with a significant reduction in quality of life and an increased risk for suicide. Pharmacotherapy is essential for both the acute and maintenance treatment of bi-polar I disorder. While multiple oral medications are recommended for the maintenance treatment, there are not many long-acting injectable medications approved for this indication. New treatments that would improve patient adherence have the potential for decreasing relapses and improving patients' ability to remain functional members of society. In this paper we discuss the available data for safety and efficacy of aripiprazole long-acting injectable in bipolar disorder.
IMPORTANCE: The effectiveness of antipsychotic polypharmacy in schizophrenia relapse prevention is controversial, and use of multiple agents is generally believed to impair physical well-being. OBJECTIVE: To study the association of specific antipsychotic combinations with psychiatric rehospitalization. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this nationwide cohort study, the risk of psychiatric rehospitalization was used as a marker for relapse among 62 250 patients with schizophrenia during the use of 29 different antipsychotic monotherapy and polypharmacy types between January 1, 1996, and December 31, 2015, in a comprehensive, nationwide cohort in Finland. We conducted analysis of the data from April 24 to June 15, 2018. Rehospitalization risks were investigated by using within-individual analyses to minimize selection bias. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Hazard ratio (HR) for psychiatric rehospitalization during use of polypharmacy vs during monotherapy within the same individual. RESULTS: In the total cohort, including 62 250 patients, 31 257 individuals (50.2%) were men, and the median age was 45.6 (interquartile range, 34.6-57.9) years. The clozapine plus aripiprazole combination was associated with the lowest risk of psychiatric rehospitalization in the total cohort, being superior to clozapine, the monotherapy associated with the best outcomes, with a difference of 14% (HR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.79-0.94) in the analysis including all polypharmacy periods, and 18% in the conservatively defined polypharmacy analysis excluding periods shorter than 90 days (HR, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.75-0.89; P < .001). Among patients with their first episode of schizophrenia, these differences between clozapine plus aripiprazole vs clozapine monotherapy were greater (difference, 22%; HR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.63-0.96 in the analysis including all polypharmacy periods, and difference, 23%; HR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.63-0.95 in the conservatively defined polypharmacy analysis). At the aggregate level, any antipsychotic polypharmacy was associated with a 7% to 13% lower risk of psychiatric rehospitalization compared with any monotherapy (ranging from HR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.85-0.88, to HR, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.91-0.95; P < .001). Clozapine was the only monotherapy among the 10 best treatments. Results on all-cause and somatic hospitalization, mortality, and other sensitivity analyses were in line with the primary outcomes. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Combining aripiprazole with clozapine was associated with the lowest risk of rehospitalization, indicating that certain types of polypharmacy may be feasible in the treatment of schizophrenia. Because add-on treatments are started when monotherapy is no longer sufficient to control for worsening of symptoms, it is likely that the effect sizes for polypharmacy are underestimates. Although the results do not indicate that all types of polypharmacy are beneficial, the current treatment guidelines should modify their categorical recommendations discouraging all antipsychotic polypharmacy in the maintenance treatment of schizophrenia.
BACKGROUND: Intravenous racemic ketamine is a promising treatment for treatment-resistant depression. However, its clinical utility compared with intranasal esketamine and the other well-studied conventional pharmacological interventions (i.e., aripiprazole and lithium) as augmentative treatments for treatment-resistant unipolar depression in adults remains unclear. Therefore, we aimed to compare the efficacy, tolerability and acceptability of intravenous racemic ketamine with intranasal esketamine, aripiprazole and lithium under such conditions. METHODS: The Cochrane Library, PubMed, CINHAL and ClinicalTrials.gov databases were systematically searched from their inception to 10 May 2023. Randomised controlled trials evaluating these drugs were included. A random-effects network meta-analysis was also performed. RESULTS: In the primary analysis, all four drugs were significantly more effective than placebo. In addition, intravenous racemic ketamine was significantly more effective and acceptable than intranasal esketamine and aripiprazole. Intravenous racemic ketamine was not significantly different from placebo in tolerability, whereas intranasal esketamine and aripiprazole were significantly less tolerable than placebo. Lithium did not differ significantly from intravenous racemic ketamine in efficacy, tolerability and acceptability. LIMITATIONS: The sample size of patients treated with intravenous racemic ketamine was small. CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous racemic ketamine may be a better augmentative treatment for treatment-resistant unipolar depression than intranasal esketamine and aripiprazole. Whether intravenous racemic ketamine or lithium is superior is unclear currently. A larger head-to-head trial of intravenous racemic ketamine versus conventional augmentative treatments for treatment-resistant unipolar depression is needed.
PURPOSE: This article aims to evaluate management options for antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia and associated treatment considerations such as efficacy, tolerability, drug interactions, contraindications, and dosing regimens. SUMMARY: Hyperprolactinemia is a common adverse effect of antipsychotics. First-line management includes reducing the dose of the offending antipsychotic, discontinuing the antipsychotic, or switching to another antipsychotic associated with a lower risk of hyperprolactinemia. However, these options are not always practical and are associated with a risk of relapse of the psychiatric illness. Other management options include adjunctive aripiprazole, dopamine agonists (cabergoline and bromocriptine), metformin, and herbal supplements. A search of Embase, PubMed, and Google Scholar using key terms such as hyperprolactinemia, prolactin, antipsychotic, treatment guidelines, aripiprazole, dopamine agonist, cabergoline, bromocriptine, metformin, herbals, supplements, and medications was conducted for literature retrieval. Upon evaluation of the available literature we found the following: (1) aripiprazole is safe and effective in lowering prolactin levels within normal limits; (2) adjunctive cabergoline and bromocriptine decrease elevated prolactin levels, while cabergoline may be more effective in reducing prolactin but can also be associated with a more serious adverse effect of cardiac valvular abnormalities; (3) metformin causes a mild reduction of prolactin levels; and (4) there are limited data to support use of herbal medications (chamomile, Peony-Glycyrrhiza decoction, and shakuyaku-kanzo-to) in antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia. CONCLUSION: There are treatments available for antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia in patients who are unable to alter their current antipsychotic regimen. However, there remains a need for additional short- and long-term studies to determine the efficacy and safety of these treatment strategies, given that patients taking antipsychotics typically require chronic, life-long treatment for their illnesses.
BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS: Long-acting injectable antipsychotic drugs (LAIs) are mainly used for relapse prevention but could also be advantageous for acutely ill patients with schizophrenia. STUDY DESIGN: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized-controlled-trials (RCTs) comparing the second-generation long-acting injectable antipsychotics (SGA-LAIs) olanzapine, risperidone, paliperidone, and aripiprazole with placebo or their oral counterparts in acutely ill patients with schizophrenia. We analyzed 23 efficacy and tolerability outcomes, with the primary outcome being overall symptoms of schizophrenia. The results were obtained through random effects, pairwise meta-analyses, and subgroup tests. The study quality was assessed using the Cochrane-Risk-of-Bias-Tool version-1. STUDY RESULTS: Sixty-six studies with 16 457 participants were included in the analysis. Eleven studies compared second-generation long-acting injectable antipsychotics (SGA-LAIs) with a placebo, 54 compared second-generation oral antipsychotics (SGA-orals) with a placebo, and one compared an SGA-LAI (aripiprazole) with its oral formulation. All 4 SGA-LAIs reduced overall symptoms more than placebo, with mean standardized differences of -0.66 (95% CI: -0.90; -0.43) for olanzapine, -0.64 (-0.80; -0.48) for aripiprazole, -0.62 (-0.76; -0.48) for risperidone and -0.42 (-0.53; -0.31) for paliperidone. The side-effect profiles of the LAIs corresponded to the patterns known from the oral formulations. In subgroup tests compared to placebo, some side effects were less pronounced under LAIs than under their oral formulations. CONCLUSIONS: SGA-LAIs effectively treat acute schizophrenia. Some side effects may be less frequent than under oral drugs, but due to the indirect nature of the comparisons, this finding must be confirmed by RCTs comparing LAIs and orals head-to-head.
