Aspirin has demonstrated a clear benefit in secondary prevention of coronary syndrome, while aspirin's effect in primary prevention is unclear. This report will explore the role of aspirin as primary prevention for various vascular events. It strives to provide a clear guide for clinicians on whether or not to prescribe aspirin for their patients for primary prevention. Current guidelines and recent trials failed to show clear benefit against primary prevention, with risks outweighing benefits in moderate to high risk patients. A thoughtful discussion between patients and their doctors should be conducted before beginning aspirin use. More studies are needed to gain a better understanding of aspirin use in primary prevention.
Clinical trials have demonstrated the superior clinical efficacy of dual antiplatelet therapy with a thienopyridine (a P2Y(12) receptor blocker) and aspirin (COX-1 inhibitor) in patients undergoing stenting as well as patients with acute coronary syndromes. However, clopidogrel treatment is associated with a wide response variability and non-responsiveness in selected patients. The latter phenomenon is linked to the occurrence of recurrent ischaemic events including stent thrombosis in the recent studies. Prasugrel is a new thienopyridine derivative that produces more potent platelet inhibition and a rapid onset of action that is associated with irreversible P2Y(12) receptor blockade. The latter properties of prasugrel may provide a superior alternative to clopidogrel, with less response variability and a decreased prevalence of non-responsiveness.
Pre-eclampsia affects 3-4% of pregnancies and is associated with maternal and infant mortality and morbidity. High-risk pregnancies in Denmark are recommended prophylactic low-dose acetylsalicylic acid (LDA). If new screening algorithms are implemented, LDA will be recommended to around 10% of pregnant women. The use of LDA may slightly increase the risk of minor bleeding disturbances. Otherwise, there is a lot of promising data regarding the safety of LDA use during pregnancy, as argued in this review.
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid), the oldest synthetic drug, was originally used as an anti-inflammatory medication. Being an irreversible inhibitor of COX (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase) enzymes that produce precursors for prostaglandins and thromboxanes, it has gradually found several other applications. Sometimes these applications are unrelated to its original purpose for example its use as an anticoagulant. Applications such as these have opened opportunities for new treatments. In this case, it has been tested in patients with cardiovascular disease to reduce the risk of myocardial infarct. Its function as an anticoagulant has also been explored in the prophylaxis and treatment of pre-eclampsia, where due to its anti-inflammatory properties, aspirin intake may be used to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer. It is important to always consider both the risks and benefits of aspirin's application. This is especially important for proposed use in the prevention and treatment of neurologic ailments like Alzheimer's disease, or in the prophylaxis of myocardial infarct. In such cases, the decision if aspirin should be applied, and at what dose may be guided by specific molecular markers. In this revived paper, the pleiotropic application of aspirin is summarized.
Aspirin's antithrombotic effects have a long-established place in the prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD), and its traditional use as a core therapy for secondary prevention of CVD is well recognized. However, with the advent of newer antiplatelet agents and an increasing understanding of aspirin's bleeding risks, its role across the full spectrum of modern CVD prevention has become less certain. As a consequence, recent trials have begun investigating aspirin-free strategies in secondary prevention. For example, a contemporary metanalysis of trials that assessed P2Y(12) inhibitor monotherapy versus prolonged (>/= 12 months) dual antiplatelet therapy (which includes aspirin) after percutaneous coronary intervention reported a lower risk of major bleeding and no increase in stent thrombosis, all-cause mortality, myocardial infarction (MI), or stroke in the P2Y(12) monotherapy group. In contrast to secondary prevention, aspirin's role in primary prevention has always been more controversial. While historical trials reported a reduction in MI and stroke, more contemporary trials have suggested diminishing benefit for aspirin in this setting, with no reduction in hard outcomes, and some primary prevention trials have even indicated a potential for harm. In this review, we discuss how changing population demographics, enhanced control of lipids and blood pressure, changes in the definition of outcomes like MI, evolution of aspirin formulations, and updated clinical practice guidelines have all impacted the use of aspirin for primary and secondary CVD prevention.
During the past 30 years, several developments have occurred in the antiplatelet field, including the role of aspirin in primary prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. There have been several attempts to develop antiplatelet drugs more effective and safer than aspirin and a shift in emphasis from efficacy to safety, advocating aspirin-free antiplatelet regimens after percutaneous coronary intervention. Evidence supporting a chemopreventive effect of low-dose aspirin against colorectal (and other digestive tract) cancer has also strengthened. The aim of this article is to revisit the role of aspirin in the prevention of atherothrombosis across the cardiovascular risk continuum, in view of developments in the antiplatelet field. The review will offer a clinical perspective on aspirin's mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics. This will be followed by a detailed discussion of its clinical efficacy and safety.
Reye syndrome is an extremely rare but severe and often fatal disease. Death occurs in about 30-40% of cases from brainstem dysfunction. The disease typically is preceded by a viral infection with an intermediate disease-free interval of 3-5 days. The biochemical explanation for Reye-like symptoms is a generalized disturbance in mitochondrial metabolism, eventually resulting in metabolic failure in the liver and other tissues. The etiology of 'classical' Reye syndrome is unknown. Hypothetically, the syndrome may result from an unusual response to the preceding viral infection, which is determined by host genetic factors but can be modified by a variety of exogenous agents. Thus, several infections and diseases might present clinically with Reye-like symptoms. Exogenous agents involve a number of toxins, drugs (including aspirin [acetylsalicylic acid]), and other chemicals. The 'rise and fall' in the incidence of Reye syndrome is still poorly understood and unexplained. With a few exceptions, there were probably no new Reye-like diseases reported during the last 10 years that could not be explained by an inherited disorder of metabolism or a misdiagnosis. This may reflect scientific progress in the better understanding of cellular and molecular dysfunctions as disease-determining factors. Alternatively, the immune response to and the virulence of a virus might have changed by alteration of its genetic code. The suggestion of a defined cause-effect relationship between aspirin intake and Reye syndrome in children is not supported by sufficient facts. Clearly, no drug treatment is without side effects. Thus, a balanced view of whether treatment with a certain drug is justified in terms of the benefit/risk ratio is always necessary. Aspirin is no exception.
Many randomized trials have shown aspirin as an effective antiplatelet drug for the secondary prevention of cardiovascular events. The NNT (number needed to treat) to prevent 1 vascular event is about 25. The NNH (number needed to harm) inducing one cerebral bleeding is about 1'000, to provoke one severe extracerebral bleeding about 100-200. The primary prevention can be recommended only for high risk patients for cardiovascular events (annual risk of 1-1.5% or more), calculated on the basis of the Framingham data, the Sheffield tables or in analysis of U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. The mechanisms of action, interactions and the "aspirin-resistance" are briefly discussed.
Adverse reactions to aspirin, a potentially hepatotoxic drug, are believed to be dose related. This article reviews the medical literature and described two children with aspirin hepatitis. Hepatic dysfunction recurred in one of these patients at salicylate concentrations in serum previously considered nontoxic.
Aspirin, when administered at low doses, has emerged as a powerful anticancer drug due to both chemopreventive activity against many forms of cancer and its ability to block metastases when administered postdiagnosis. Platelets, which are often elevated in circulation during the latter stages of cancer, are known to promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition, cancer cell growth, survival in circulation, and angiogenesis at sites of metastases. Low-dose aspirin has been demonstrated to block this procarcinogenic action of platelets. In this article, we present evidence that aspirin's unique ability to irreversibly inhibit platelet cyclooxygenase-1 is a key mechanism by which aspirin exerts anticancer activity.
The fixed-dose acetylsalicylic acid (ASA)/esomeprazole capsule combines the cardiovascular (CV) protective effects of low-dose ASA with the gastroprotective effects of the proton pump inhibitor esomeprazole. It is approved for use as a convenient once-daily regimen in the prevention of CV and cerebrovascular events in patients requiring continuous low-dose ASA who are at risk of developing gastric and/or duodenal (peptic) ulcers. In two large, 26-week, randomized, double-blind, multinational, phase III trials (ASTERIX and OBERON) in patients who were receiving low-dose ASA for the prevention of CV events and who had an increased risk of ulcer development, the incidence of endoscopy-proven peptic ulcers (primary endpoint) was significantly lower with the addition of esomeprazole 20 mg/day versus placebo. Moreover, patient-reported dyspeptic symptoms (epigastric pain and epigastric burning) were reported in significantly fewer patients in the low-dose ASA plus esomeprazole group than in the low-dose ASA plus placebo group. Low-dose ASA plus esomeprazole treatment was generally well tolerated, with a similar adverse event profile to that seen with low-dose ASA plus placebo.
Aspirin has shown efficacy in preventing PE with a 10 % incidence reduction. The treatment must be started between the 12(th) and 14(th) week of amenorrhea with a dose of 75 to 160 mg once daily. This treatment is all the more effective as it is given to a high risk population. The supplementation with 1,5 g of calcium per day appears effective as well in the prevention of PE, especially in the malnourished and young patents. Insufficient data is currently available to recommend antioxidant supplementation. Low molecular weight heparin is potentially beneficial in the prevention of PE, however its efficacy remains to be demonstrated and indications determined. Nitric oxide (NO) or NO releasers are not effective and can cause headaches. Diuretics reduce the birth weight without improving the incidence of PE.
Low-dose aspirin (LDA) has been increasingly used worldwide to prevent atherothrombotic events. At the same time, the adverse events, most frequent of which are gastrointestinal (GI) ulcers and complications have been raising a big concern with its wider use. These adverse events including reflux and dyspeptic symptoms not only jeopardize adherence of LDA, but my cause more serious outcomes. To reduce GI events by informing best evidence for physicians prescribing LDA, guidelines were published some years ago. Since then, more clinical evidence concerning preventive strategies for upper GI events has been accumulated. Notable differences between East and West are also recognized in terms of primary prevention strategy. Among several options to provide cardiovascular protection with LDA while reducing GI risk, PPI co-therapy is considered to be preferred approach for wider populations according to recent cost-effectiveness analyses based on increasing awareness of importance on adherence of LDA together with declining cost of PPI. This review will focus on these new developments on the prevention of upper gastrointestinal ulcer and complications in LDA users.
Indications for aspirin during pregnancy are a matter of debate and there is a recent trend to an extended prescription and an overuse of aspirin in pregnancy. Aspirin is efficient in secondary prevention of preeclampsia essentially in patients with a personal history of preeclampsia. The effect of aspirin on platelet aggregation and on the TXA2/PGI2 balance is dose-dependent. The optimum dosage, from 75mg/day to 150mg/day, needs to be determined. Fetal safety data at 150mg/day are still limited. The efficacy of aspirin seems to be subject to a chronobiological effect. It is recommended to prescribe an evening or bedtime intake. Aspirin, in primary prevention of preeclampsia, given to high-risk patients identified in the first trimester by screening tests, seems to reduce the occurrence of early-onset preeclampsia. Nevertheless, there are insufficient data for the implementation of such screening procedures in practice.
Given the growing number of patients on antithrombotic therapy we are increasingly confronted with the management of this therapy before, during and after vitreoretinal surgery. In the absence of a consensus, the decision to withdraw antithrombotic therapy is based on the cardiovascular thromboembolism risk versus the theoretical risk of bleeding if the antithrombotic treatment is continued. As suggested by the literature, antiplatelet therapy (acetylsalicylic acid or clopidogrel) may be safely continued for vitreoretinal surgery, including retinal detachment repair. However, the risk/benefit ratio for patients being treated with two antiplatelet therapies is unknown. It appears that an International Normalized Ratio (INR) less than 3 for patients treated with anticoagulant therapy does not increase the perioperative risk of ocular bleeding. This risk has not been evaluated in patients treated by new antithrombotic therapies (prasugrel, ticagrelor as antiplatelet medication, or dabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixaban as anticoagulant therapy), and there is a need to study it further.
Aspirin can be more closely controlled than other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs because serum salicylate levels can be measured. Dosages of 80 to 100 mg/kg per day usually lead to the desired serum salicylate levels of 20 to 25 mg/dl. Gastric irritation, the most frequent cause for cessation of aspirin therapy, is significantly reduced by the use of enteric-coated aspirin. At the onset of aspirin therapy in children, there is frequently moderate elevation of SGOT and SGPT liver enzyme levels. With continued treatment these levels usually fall into the range of mild elevations. Although these children with arthritis often take high doses of aspirin for years, Reye's syndrome is virtually never seen.
Most pharmacists know that aspirin's origins lie with willow bark, but they may be unaware of its role in the development of the pharmaceutical industry. Evolving from salacin (the active ingredient in many plant remedies) to salicylic acid (an analgesic in its own right) to the more effective, less toxic acetylsalicylic acid, this pain reliever cornered the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory market for more than 70 years. It helped the dye industry branch into pharmaceuticals, and is now used in multiple indications.
The use of low-dose aspirin in pregnancy should remain a highly targeted indication since its long-term safety has not been established and should be restricted to women at high risk of vascular complications. Indications for which the benefit of aspirin has been shown are women with a history of preeclampsia responsible for a premature birth before 34 weeks, those having at least two history of preeclampsia, those with an antiphospholipid syndrome and those with lupus associated with positive antiphospholipid antibodies or renal failure. In all other cases, the level of evidence of the benefit of aspirin is insufficient to recommend its routine prescription.
Aspirin is a cornerstone in the prevention of ischemic events and guidelines usually recommend a once-daily dosing. This dosing is based at least in part on the platelet renewal rate, which is of only 10-15% a day. A once-daily dosing is now challenged by several studies demonstrating that when platelet turnover is increased, such as in patients with diabetes or essential thrombocytemia, the inhibition of platelet function provided by aspirin is no longer homogeneous between dosing with a significant recovery of platelet function within a day that is blunted by a twice-daily dosing. This review addresses the issue of aspirin dosing in selected patients in the controversial era of personalized antiplatelet therapy.
During the last decade, there has been a tremendous effort to develop different cardiovascular polypills in response to the upsurge in global cardiovascular disease worldwide. The pharmacological development of such a strategy has proven to be extremely complex from a formulation standpoint. Not all drugs are suitable for use in a polypill because of potential drug incompatibilities between them. Candidate agents must be safe, well tolerated, effective, guideline recommended and physiochemically compatible with the other components of the pill. The Fuster-CNIC-Ferrer cardiovascular (CV) polypill has been found to be the first-in-class polypill to be approved and commercialized in Europe and Latinamerican Countries. In this article, we review the pharmacological properties of its three components, including the clinical evidence supporting their use in patients with established cardiovascular disease, their pharmacokinetic properties, adverse effects, drug interactions and contraindications.
