Crystalline nephropathy can occur following treatment with multiple therapeutic agents. We describe a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patient treated for 2 years with combination antiretroviral therapy including atazanavir (ATV). Kidney biopsy revealed a crystalline nephropathy associated with diffuse chronic and granulomatous interstitial inflammation. Following the biopsy, treatment with ATV was discontinued and kidney function returned to pretreatment baseline levels. ATV, which has a well-established association with nephrolithiasis, is a rare but important cause of crystalline nephropathy. Recognition of this association and prompt withdrawal of the offending agent are critical to optimize outcomes.
For over 50 years of azapeptide synthetic techniques, developments have renewed the field of peptidomimetic therapeutics. Azapeptides are close surrogates of natural peptides: they contain a substitution of the amino acid alpha-carbon by a nitrogen atom. Goserelin (1989) and Atazanavir (2003) are two well-known, FDA-approved azapeptide-based drugs for the treatment of cancers and HIV infection, providing evidence for the successful clinical implementation of this class of therapeutic. This review highlights the azapeptides in recent medicinal chemistry applications and synthetic milestones. We describe the current techniques for azapeptide bond formation by introducing azapeptide coupling reagents and chain elongation methods both in solution and solid-phase strategies.
To increase the success in Covid 19 treatment, many drug suggestions are presented, and some clinical studies are shared in the literature. There have been some attempts to use some of these drugs in combination. However, using more than one drug together may cause serious side effects on patients. Therefore, detecting drug-drug interactions of the drugs used will be of great importance in the treatment of Covid 19. In this study, the interactions of 8 drugs used for Covid 19 treatment with 645 different drugs and possible side effects estimates have been produced using Graph Convolutional Networks. As a result of the experiments, it has been found that the hematopoietic system and the cardiovascular system are exposed to more side effects than other organs. Among the focused drugs, Heparin and Atazanavir appear to cause more adverse reactions than other drugs. In addition, as it is known that some of these 8 drugs are used together in Covid-19 treatment, the side effects caused by using these drugs together are shared. With the experimental results obtained, it is aimed to facilitate the selection of the drugs and increase the success of Covid 19 treatment according to the targeted patient.
The scenario of infection by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has been undergoing changes in recent years, both in relation to the understanding of HIV infection and regarding the treatments available. As a result, the disease, which before was associated with high morbidity and mortality, is now seen as a chronic disease that can be controlled, regarding both transmission and symptoms. However, even when the virus replication is well controlled, the infected patient remains at high risk of developing renal involvement, either by acute kidney injury not associated with HIV, nephrotoxicity due to antiretroviral drugs, chronic diseases associated with increased survival, or glomerular disease associated to HIV. This review will cover the main aspects of kidney failure associated with HIV.
This article highlights important prescribing information for some drugs that received FDA approval within the past year. These include: atazanavir and cobicistat (Evotaz(R)), ceftazidime and avibactam (Avycaz(R)), edoxaban (Savaysa(R)), ivabradine (Corlanor(R)), liraglutide (rDNA origin) injection (Saxenda(R)), perindopril arginine and amlodipine besylate (Prestalia(R)), and secukinumab (Cosentyx(R)) subcutaneous injection.
We introduce the use of laser ablation to develop a multi-drug encapsulating theranostic nanoformulation for HIV-1 antiretroviral therapy. Laser ablated nanoformulations of ritonavir, atazanavir, and curcumin, a natural product that has both optical imaging and pharmacologic properties, were produced in an aqueous media containing Pluronic(R) F127. Cellular uptake was confirmed with the curcumin fluorescence signal localized in the cytoplasm. Formulations produced with F127 had improved water dispersibility, are ultrasmall in size (20-25 nm), exhibit enhanced cellular uptake in microglia, improve blood-brain barrier (BBB) crossing in an in vitro BBB model, and reduce viral p24 by 36 fold compared to formulations made without F127. This work demonstrates that these ultrasmall femtosecond laser-ablated nanoparticles are effective in delivering drugs across the BBB for brain therapy and show promise as an effective method to formulate nanoparticles for brain theranostics, reducing the need for organic solvents during preparation.
The introduction of HIV-1 protease inhibitors in 1995 ushered in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. For the first time, inhibition of two key enzymes responsible for HIV replication, reverse transcriptase and protease, was possible. The combination of two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors with a single protease inhibitor proved highly effective at reducing viral burden. In resource-rich countries where such combination therapy is readily available, dramatic reductions in HIV-related morbidity and mortality have been seen. However, long-term use of highly active antiretroviral therapy has led to several issues, including development of drug resistance and metabolic complications. Atazanavir (formerly BMS-232632), a novel azapeptide protease inhibitor, is a potent protease inhibitor that is not associated with significant dyslipidaemia as seen with other protease inhibitors. In this review, the current standard approach to the treatment of HIV in the US will be discussed as background to understand the potential utility of this new antiretroviral agent.
HIV protease inhibitors (PI) have undergone the most significant evolution when considering the different families of antiretrovirals. Marketed in 2003, atazanavir (ATV) is the first azapeptide PI, and is considered a member of the second generation of PIs. Important characteristics make ATV different from other drugs in the same family of antiretrovirals. It is administered once daily, either as two capsules (200 mg) or boosted with ritonavir (100 mg) two capsules (150 mg) or one capsule (300 mg). No elevations in serum levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol or triglycerides have been observed with unboosted ATV. Although some increases in these levels are found with boosted ATV, these were lower when compared with other PIs. Elevation in unconjugated bilirubin levels, which is usually not dose limiting, is the most frequent adverse event. Naive patients receiving ATV boosted with ritonavir do not develop PI mutations at failure, whereas unboosted ATV in the same scenario induces the I50L mutation, which does not confer cross-resistance to other PIs. The best scenario for unboosted ATV is simplification. In PI treatment-experienced patients with PI mutations, susceptibility to ATV is usually reduced, so it should be administered with ritonavir. As with other PIs, careful attention must be given to pharmacokinetic drug interactions; the coadministration of certain commonly used drugs among HIV-infected patients, tenofovir and members of the proton pump inhibitor family, leads to significantly lower plasma levels of ATV.
Atazanavir and darunavir total concentrations (drug bound to plasma proteins plus unbound drug) progressively decrease during pregnancy. This pharmacokinetic variation leads physicians to recommend increasing doses. Conversely, the unbound concentration (Cu), i.e. the pharmacologically active form of the drug, remains unchanged. The explanation of this desynchronization lies in the fact that the clearance of the unbound form, corresponding to the intrinsic metabolic capacity of the hepatocytes, is the only factor driving Cu, and is constant during pregnancy. The attention of HIV physicians should be attracted to this aspect of pharmacokinetics, which is often incompletely understood and could lead to inadequate dose adjustment, which could then cause overexposure of the foetus for many months, with unknown consequences.
Atazanavir is a drug that inhibits HIV protease. It has many of the characteristics of other protease inhibitors and also some advantages over these, such as the single dose of once per day, low capsule load, less gastrointestinal problems and a very friendly metabolic profile, including carbohydrate metabolism. Secondary high plasma bilirubin and jaundice are its main adverse effect which only on rare occasions requires stopping the drug. Other adverse effects, such as nephrolithiasis or ECG changes are extremely rare.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a critical comorbidity for patients living with HIV, with an estimated prevalence between 2.4 and 17%. Such patients are increasingly affected by diseases associated with ageing, including cardiovascular disease and CKD, and the prevalence of risk factors such as smoking and dyslipidaemia is increased in this population. Proteinuria is also now recognized as a common finding in individuals living with HIV. While combination antiretroviral (ARV) treatments reduce CKD in the HIV-infected population overall, some ARV drugs have been shown to be nephrotoxic and associated with worsening renal function. Over the last few years, several highly efficacious new ARV agents have been introduced. This brief review will look at the novel agents dolutegravir, raltegravir, elvitegravir, cobicistat, tenofovir alafenamide fumarate and atazanavir, all of which have been licensed relatively recently, and describe issues relevant to renal function, creatinine handling and potential nephrotoxicity. Given the prevalence of CKD, the wide range of possible interactions between HIV, ARV therapy, CKD and its treatments, nephrologists need to be aware of these newer agents and their possible effect on kidneys.
We document our experience with therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of antiretroviral agents (1807 determinations) carried out as day-by-day clinical practice for the optimization of drug dosing in HIV-infected patients. A significant proportion of patients had lopinavir, atazanavir and nevirapine trough concentrations exceeding the upper therapeutic threshold. Further studies are needed to identify good candidates/drugs for TDM, eventually allowing the selection of patients who may benefit from TDM-driven adjustments in antiretrovirals dosage.
Supersaturating formulations are increasingly being used to improve the absorption of orally administered poorly water-soluble drugs. To better predict outcomes in vivo, we must be able to accurately determine the degree of supersaturation in complex media designed to provide a surrogate for the gastrointestinal environment. Herein, we demonstrate that relying on measurements based on consideration of the total dissolved concentration leads to underestimation of supersaturation and consequently membrane transport rates. Crystalline and amorphous solubilities of two compounds, atazanavir and posaconazole, were evaluated in six different media. Concurrently, diffusive flux measurements were performed in a side-by-side diffusion cell to determine the activity-based supersaturation by evaluating membrane transport rates at the crystalline and amorphous solubilities. Solubility values were found to vary in each medium because of different solubilization capacities. Concentration-based supersaturation ratios were also found to vary for the different media. Activity-based measurements, however, were largely independent of the medium, leading to relatively constant values for the estimated supersaturation. These findings have important consequences for modeling and prediction of supersaturation impact on the absorption rate as well as for better defining the thermodynamic driving force for crystallization in complex media.
The Conidiobolus coronatus-related rhinoentomophthoromycosis in immunocompetent and immunocompromised (HIV negative) individuals has been treated successfully with antifungal drugs. However, C. coronatus infections in first-line antiretroviral therapy (ART)-resistant (HIV infected) individuals particularly with rhinoentomophthoromycosis have not been reported previously. Here, we describe a case of itraconazole non-responding rhinoentomophthoromycosis in an HIV-infected patient with first-line antiretroviral (ART) drug resistance which was successfully managed through systematic diagnostic and therapeutic approaches in dermatologic setting. A 32-year-old HIV-1-infected man presented with painless swelling, nasal redness and respiratory difficulty. The patient was receiving first-line ART and had a history of traumatic injury before the onset of nasopharyngeal manifestations. The patient's previous history included oral candidiasis and pulmonary tuberculosis.
SORCS2 rs73208473 was recently associated with decreased atazanavir (ATV) concentration in the hair of women with seropositive HIV. Herein, we report on a pharmacogenetic study of women with seropositive HIV demonstrating a similar association between rs73208473 and dose-adjusted plasma ATV concentration in African Americans.
BACKGROUND: This population pharmacokinetic-pharmacogenetic study aimed to investigate the optimal dose of RTV-boosted ATV (ATV/RTV) for Thai adult HIV-infected patients. METHODS: A total of 1460 concentrations of ATV and RTV from 544 patients receiving an ATV/RTV-based regimen were analyzed. The CYP3A5 6986 A > G, ABCB1 3435 C > T, ABCB1 2677 G > T, SLCO1B1 521 T > C, and NR1I2 63396 C > T were genotyped. A population pharmacokinetic model was performed using a nonlinear mixed-effect model (NONMEM(R)). Monte Carlo simulations were conducted to compare the percentages of patients achieving the therapeutic range of ATV through concentrations (C(trough)). RESULTS: The apparent oral clearance of ATV (CL/F(ATV)) without RTV was 7.69 L/h with interindividual variability (IIV) of 28.7%. Patients with CYP3A5 6986 GG had a 7.1% lower CL/F(ATV) than those with AA or AG genotype. The CL/F(ATV) decreased by 10.8% for females compared with males. Simulation results showed higher percentages (~70%) of patient receiving doses of 200/100 or 200/50 mg achieved the target ATV C(trough), while more patients (~40%) receiving a standard dose (300/100 mg) had ATV C(trough) above this target. CONCLUSIONS: Both CYP3A5 6986 A > G and female decreased CL/F(ATV) in Thai HIV-infected patients. Simulations supported that the reduced dose of ATV/RTV was sufficient to achieve the target concentration for Thai population.
Long-acting anti-HIV products can substantively change the standard of care for patients with HIV/AIDS. To this end, hydrophobic antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) were recently developed for parenteral administration at monthly or longer intervals. While shorter-acting hydrophilic drugs can be made into nanocarrier-encased prodrugs, the nanocarrier encasement must be boosted to establish long-acting ARV depots. The mixed-lineage kinase 3 (MLK-3) inhibitor URMC-099 provides this function by affecting autophagy. Here, we have shown that URMC-099 facilitates ARV sequestration and its antiretroviral responses by promoting the nuclear translocation of the transcription factor EB (TFEB). In monocyte-derived macrophages, URMC-099 induction of autophagy led to retention of nanoparticles containing the antiretroviral protease inhibitor atazanavir. These nanoparticles were localized within macrophage autophagosomes, leading to a 4-fold enhancement of mitochondrial and cell vitality. In rodents, URMC-099 activation of autophagy led to 50-fold increases in the plasma drug concentration of the viral integrase inhibitor dolutegravir. These data paralleled URMC-099-mediated induction of autophagy and the previously reported antiretroviral responses in HIV-1-infected humanized mice. We conclude that pharmacologic induction of autophagy provides a means to extend the action of a long-acting, slow, effective release of antiretroviral therapy.
Long-acting nanoformulated antiretroviral therapy (nanoART) can sustain plasma drug levels and improve its biodistribution. Cell targeted-nanoART can achieve this and bring drug efficiently to viral reservoirs. However, whether such improvements affect antiretroviral responses remains unknown. To these ends, we tested folic acid (FA)-linked poloxamer407-coated ritonavir-boosted atazanavir (FA-nanoATV/r) nanoparticles for their ability to affect chronic HIV-1 infection in humanized mice. Following three, 100mg/kg FA-nanoATV/r intramuscular injections administered every other week to infected animals, viral RNA was at or below the detection limit, cell-associated HIV-1p24 reduced and CD4+ T cell counts protected. The dosing regimen improved treatment outcomes more than two fold from untargeted nanoATV/r. We posit that these nanoformulations have potential for translation to human use.
OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, virology, pharmacokinetics, resistance profile, clinical efficacy, safety, and drug interactions of atazanavir. DATA SOURCES: A PubMed and NLMGateway search (1966-June 2004) utilizing the key words atazanavir and BMS-232632 was performed. Abstracts from scientific meetings, including the Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections, International AIDS Society Conference on HIV Pathogenesis and Treatment, Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, and the Infectious Diseases Society of America, were also reviewed. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All publications and meeting abstracts were reviewed, and information relevant to the formulary decision-making process was selected. DATA SYNTHESIS: Atazanavir is a once-daily protease inhibitor (PI) that received approval by the Food and Drug Administration in June 2003. In clinical trials in antiretroviral (ARV)-naive patients, atazanavir had efficacy similar to that of efavirenz or nelfinavir. In ARV-experienced patients, atazanavir was inferior to lopinavir/ritonavir unless atazanavir was coadministered with low-dose ritonavir. Following failure of an atazanavir-containing regimen in ARV-naive patients, a unique 150L mutation was seen. Atazanavir resistance is likely when resistance to >/=3 PIs is present. Atazanavir can cause increases in unconjugated bilirubin levels, which rarely leads to jaundice or scleral icterus. In contrast to comparators, atazanavir did not negatively impact the lipid profile. Similar to other PIs, atazanavir is metabolized by and inhibits CYP3A at clinically relevant concentrations; therefore, many potential drug interactions exist. CONCLUSIONS: Atazanavir is a once-daily PI that, unlike other PIs, does not negatively impact the lipid profile. Atazanavir may be particularly desirable in patients with hyperlipidemia or other coronary artery disease risk factors.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review the evidence linking use of HIV protease inhibitors with excess risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in HIV+ populations. RECENT FINDINGS: For the two contemporary most frequently used protease inhibitors, darunavir and atazanavir [both pharmacologically boosted with ritonavir (/r)], darunavir/r has been shown to be associated with increased CVD risk. The effect is cumulative with longer exposure increasing risk and an effect size comparable to what has been observed for previously developed protease inhibitors. Biological mechanisms may be overlapping and include perturbed lipid metabolism and accumulation of cholesterol derivatives within macrophages. Conversely, atazanavir/r has not been shown to be associated with CVD, possibly because of its ability to increase cardioprotective bilirubin levels. SUMMARY: Evidence linking protease inhibitors to CVD is based on observational studies only, whereas plausible biological explanations are well established and derived from randomized trials and controlled experiments. Given the possible association with clinical disease, a conservative approach to apply the data in daily practise is proposed which is focused on individualization of care based on underlying risk of CVD.
