Although well established in treating hypertension and cardiovascular (CV) disease, clinical trial data suggest that beta-blockers (eg, atenolol) may be less effective than other antihypertensive classes in reducing stroke and CV mortality despite similar blood pressure (BP) reductions. One possible explanation is that atenolol is less effective in reducing central aortic pressure. Newer vasodilating beta-blockers may prove more effective in reducing central pressure and cardiovascular events. Carvedilol and labetalol appear to cause vasodilation through alpha(1)-receptor blockade; nebivolol induces endothelium-dependent vasodilation by stimulating nitric oxide bioactivity. Their favorable hemodynamic profile includes reduction of peripheral vascular resistance (PVR) while maintaining or improving cardiac output (CO), stroke volume, and left ventricular function, whereas nonvasodilating beta-blockers tend to raise PVR and reduce CO and left ventricular function. Compared with conventional beta-blockers, vasodilating beta-blockers have beneficial hemodynamic effects including decreased pressure wave reflection from the periphery, leading to decreases in central aortic blood pressure. Larger trials are needed to determine whether reduced central pressure will translate into improved CV outcomes compared with nonvasodilating beta-blockers.
Pharmacological treatment of hypertension is effective in preventing cardiovascular and renal complications. Calcium antagonists (CAs) and blockers of the renin-angiotensin system [angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists (ARBs)] are widely used today to initiate antihypertensive treatment but, when given as monotherapy, do not suffice in most patients to normalise blood pressure (BP). Combining a CA and either an ACE-inhibitor or an ARB considerably increases the antihypertensive efficacy, but not at the expense of a deterioration of tolerability. Several fixed-dose combinations are available (CA + ACE-inhibitors: amlodipine + benazepril, felodipine + ramipril, verapamil + trandolapril; CA + ARB: amlodipine + valsartan). They are expected not only to improve BP control, but also to facilitate long-term adherence with antihypertensive therapy, thereby providing maximal protection against the cardiovascular and renal damage caused by high BP.
In the last year, two large randomized controlled trials of metoprolol (MIAMI, almost 6,000 patients) and atenolol (ISIS 1, over 16,000 patients) given intravenously within 12 hours of the onset of acute myocardial infarction reduced mortality by about 15% in low-risk subjects. The reduction was significant for atenolol (2P = 0.04) but not for metoprolol, probably because of the smaller size of that trial. The reduction in mortality in both trials was nearly all in the first 36 hours, a finding that reduced the fears that the treatment might produce irreversible failure, shock, or heart block. Tolerance in these relatively low-risk subjects (control mortality about 5%) was good. Inotropes were used in 1-2% more subjects in the beta-blocked group but were effective in reversing the side effects without increasing mortality. No clear subgroups (age, sex, site, time from onset, initial blood pressure or heart rate) were found in which treatment was more beneficial. In the ISIS study, patients with higher heart rates were more likely to need inotropes after beta blockade and patients with long PR intervals at entry were more likely to develop block. Neither of these complications resulted in excess mortality in the blocked group, which suggests that these adverse effects were largely reversible.
This article reviews recent developments in the pharmacologic management of arrhythmias in children and provides specific information about six newer antiarrhythmic agents. With the current increase in recognition, frequency, and complexity of rhythm disturbances in children, pediatricians can expect to encounter children on these antiarrhythmic medications in their practices with increasing frequency.
beta-adrenoceptor antagonists, especially atenolol, reduce perioperative cardiac morbidity. Because there are no data on the bioavailability of atenolol given by nasogastric tube in the postoperative period, we assessed the efficacy of this route of administration in 18 patients scheduled for abdominal surgery. We found a 36% reduction in the area under the atenolol concentration curve and a 46% reduction in the peak concentration of atenolol in the postoperative period compared with preoperative values. In addition, patients had more rapid mean heart rates on the second postoperative day compared with the day before surgery. We conclude that the administration of atenolol via nasogastric tube in the postoperative period does not result in adequate plasma concentrations.
This randomised, double-blind, crossover study investigated the haemodynamic effects of a beta-blocker (atenolol 50mg) and a calcium antagonist (sustained release nifedipine 20mg) given either separately or in combination in 3 groups of patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension. Each treatment was administered twice daily. The fixed combination given twice daily for 4 weeks produced reductions in blood pressure which lasted for at least 12 hours after administration of the final dose. The control of blood pressure by the combination was superior to that achieved by its individual components. Side effects normally associated with nifedipine therapy were less frequent when it was administered with atenolol. Compliance with treatment was good, but it was best when the drugs were given together rather than separately. A fixed combination of atenolol and nifedipine may prove useful in treating hypertensive patients inadequately controlled on beta-blocker therapy alone.
beta-Blockers are a standard of care in many clinical settings such as acute myocardial infarction, heart failure and patients at risk for a coronary event. However, not all beta-blockers are the same and they vary in properties such as lipophilicity, metabolic profile, receptor inhibition, hemodynamics, tolerability and antioxidant/anti-inflammatory effects. It has been unclear whether these differences affect outcomes or if one beta-blocker should be preferred over another. This review will summarize the properties of metoprolol, atenolol and carvedilol, as well as comparative experimental and clinical trials between these agents. We will provide compelling evidence of why carvedilol should be a first-line beta-blocker and why it offers many advantages over the beta1-selective beta-blockers.
In this randomized, double-blind, cross-over study we investigated the haemodynamic effects of a beta-blocker (atenolol 50 mg) and a calcium antagonist (nifedipine SR 20 mg) given either separately or in combination in three groups of hypertensive patients. Each treatment was administered twice daily. The fixed combination given twice daily for four weeks produced reductions in blood pressure which lasted for at least 12 h after administration of the last dose. The control of blood pressure by the combination was superior to that achieved by its individual components. Adverse effects normally associated with nifedipine were less frequent when it was given with atenolol. Compliance with treatment was good, but best when the drugs were given together rather than separately. A fixed combination of atenolol and nifedipine may prove useful in treating hypertensive patients inadequately controlled on beta-blocker therapy alone.
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists lower blood pressure by blocking the final step in the renin pathway, whereas ACE inhibitors reduce angiotensin II production. ACE inhibitors also block kinin degradation, which may alter both efficacy and side-effects. Irbesartan, one of the newer receptor antagonists, has confirmed their tolerability and shown similar dose-related efficacy to other major classes.
We compared the efficacy of Chinese traditional treatment for mild hypertension with that of a standard Western medical regimen in a group of 50 well-matched patients (24 allocated to Western medicine and 26 to Chinese traditional medicine) with mild hypertension (diastolic blood pressure 90-104 mmHg). Those receiving Western therapy were treated in a stepped-care fashion with dihydrochlorothiazide and atenolol. Those in the Chinese traditional therapy group received one of two mixtures of nine herbs and other ingredients, depending on symptoms at initial evaluation. Blood pressure dropped significantly in both groups after only a few days on therapy. After 19 days on treatment, the group receiving Western therapy had a fall in blood pressure from 168.2/96.3 mmHg to 137.3/76.7 mmHg (p less than 0.01), while those on Chinese traditional therapy fell from 168.2/95.9 mmHg to 146.4/80.5 mmHg (p less than 0.01). The fall in blood pressure was significantly greater, however, in those given Western therapy. The relief of existing symptoms or development of possible drug side effects was similar in both groups, except for nocturia, occurring more often in the group treated with Western therapy. We conclude that Western therapy is more effective in reducing blood pressure as compared with Chinese traditional therapy, but effective control of blood pressure in mild hypertensives is possible with either form of treatment.
Social phobia is the least well studied phobic disorder of those included in DSM-III. Reports from the British literature indicate that the condition is a distinct one that usually begins in adolescence and affects males more often than females. Patients characteristically complain of somatic symptoms and a fear of humiliation when confronted with specific social stimuli. Ten social phobic patients were openly treated with the cardioselective, peripherally active beta-adrenergic blocking drug atenolol. Five patients had complete response and four had moderate response. Side effects were minimal. Atenolol appears to work in social phobic patients by reducing autonomic nervous system response to phobic stimuli.
The authors report a case of septal panniculitis induced by atenolol in a patient with coronary artery disease. Several tender, erythematous, suppurated subcutaneous nodules appeared over the metacarpal-phalanx and interphalanx joints of both hands. Hematology indicated a transient inflammatory immunomediated disorder, with an increase of cytotoxic suppressor lymphocytes and presence of antinuclear antibodies. The dramatic inflammatory involvement of the subcutaneous connective tissue could have eventually progressed toward fibrosis, if atenolol had not been withdrawn. This raises the possibility that retroperitoneal fibrosis, a recognized adverse effect of beta blockers, may just represent the terminal phase of undetected connective tissue inflammation occurring in districts not easily explorable before overt manifestations of the disease. Since retroperitoneal fibrosis has already been associated with migratory panniculitis and described as mesenteric panniculitis, it is tempting to speculate that these manifestations originate from the same mechanisms.
One hundred thirty-one patients presenting with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) a mean of 3 hours after the onset of symptoms were treated with oral aspirin and intravenous thrombolytic therapy followed by heparin. One hundred eleven patients (85%) also received intravenous followed by oral beta blockers. Twenty-one patients (19%) discontinued the beta blocker because of complications. Five (4.5%) required the addition of diuretic drugs or converting enzyme inhibitors. Six patients (5%) discontinued the beta blocker after complete mechanical revascularization, and 1 patient was noncompliant. Long-term treatment continued in 90 patients (69%) over a 2-year follow-up period (average 13 months). There were 3 infarct extensions and 3 reinfarctions (5%). Overall mortality at 2 years was 10%. Intravenous beta blockers are well tolerated in most patients treated with thrombolytic agents, aspirin and heparin. They may further improve the survival benefit of chronic beta blocker therapy in the period after AMI.
This report describes our experience with 12 patients with thyrotoxic Graves' disease who were prepared for thyroidectomy using only a long-acting orally administered beta-adrenergic blocking agent (nadolol or atenolol); iodides were not used. This form of preparation proved to be very effective, fast acting, and economical. It permitted rapid preparation of patients for surgery and resulted in excellent control of the manifestations of hyperthyroidism in the perioperative period. The surgery was relatively easy and bloodless, and there were no operative complications. We recommend that these long-acting beta-adrenergic blocking agents be considered as the preferred medication for the preparation of thyrotoxic patients for surgery.
Many recommended drug doses are higher than necessary, for two reasons. Drugs are often introduced at a dose that will be effective in around 90% of the target population, because this helps market penetration. Doses are also partly determined by an irrational preference for round numbers. The dose excess due to such digit preference may be as much as 70% of the correct dose and on average is probably 25%. Needlessly high doses are bound to cause avoidable unwanted effects in a proportion of patients. Rigorous methods must be used to determine the doses recommended and the amount of drug to be put into a tablet or other dosage form.
BACKGROUND: The relationship between anaphylaxis and cardiovascular events has been reported in the past. While skin and respiratory symptoms are usually the most common and the first to appear, cardiovascular complications play a key role and represent the leading cause of death in anaphylaxis. METHODS: We report 3 episodes of atrial fibrillation triggered by anaphylaxis. Allergy and cardiology studies were performed. In both patients, the etiological agent was identified: Anisakis simplex hypersensitivity and food allergy. RESULTS: The heart is the source and target of chemical mediators released during an allergic reaction. In the heart, there are plenty of mast cells, and they are predominantly located around the coronary adventitia and in close contact with small vessels in the muscle wall. The release of mediators can influence ventricular function, heart rate, and coronary artery tone. Anaphylaxis can trigger any kind of arrhythmia. In these cases, the very interesting point of discussion was: which should be first, treating anaphylaxis or cardiac events? The other controversial point was the use of epinephrine, the first line of treatment for anaphylaxis. Recommendations about epinephrine in cardiac patients during an anaphylactic event are still a major dilemma. CONCLUSIONS: We emphasize the importance of the priority of establishing protocols between cardiologist and allergist in treatment of cardiac complications during anaphylaxis, and we warn about the correct diagnosis of arrhythmias in anaphylaxis in order to treat them as soon as possible, to prevent other consequences and complications.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the anaesthesiologists' attitude concerning the perioperative administration of betablockers (BB), especially prophylactic BB, in order to prevent postoperative cardiac complications. METHODS: A questionnaire including 20 items was sent to 700 anaesthesiologists of 4 French departments (Ain, Isere, Loire et Rhone). RESULTS: The response rate was 30%. Eighty-eight percent of respondents prescribed the BB with the premedication, on the day of the surgery in patients who were on regular BB. Before major surgery, 37% percent of respondents always or usually introduced prophylactic BB in patients with high cardiac risk. Atenolol was the drug of choice for 68% of perioperative BB users. Seventy-one percent of anaesthesiologists using prophylactic BB asked for a cardiologic opinion before starting BB therapy. CONCLUSION: In practice, anaesthesiologists continued BB during the perioperative period in patients who were on chronic treatment with BB. However, prophylactic perioperative administration of BB in patients with high cardiac risk is still inadequate and dependent on a cardiologic opinion.
A double-blind, randomised, parallel-group trial was conducted in patients with essential hypertension in British general practices, of nebivolol 5 mg, atenolol 50 mg, and placebo each given once daily. Both active drugs, in comparison with placebo, caused highly significant and similar reductions in systolic and diastolic pressures without orthostatic effect, and small significant falls in heart rate. Both active drugs were well tolerated, nebivolol marginally more so. Nebivolol, a long-acting, cardioselective, vasodilating beta-blocker which acts partly via the l-arginine/nitric oxide mechanism, appears potentially valuable for the treatment of hypertension.
In the final analysis of this study at Week 26, 26% of the patients randomized to receive amlodipine attained blood pressure control with amlodipine alone compared with 33% of the patients allocated to hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ). Neither amlodipine nor HCTZ produced clinically significant changes in pulse rate or in the electrocardiogram. Amlodipine treatment did not appear to produce clinically significant changes in blood lipids; HCTZ, however, produced an increase in total plasma cholesterol (delta 22.9 +/- 8.6 mg/dl). The incidence of side effects and the rate of patient withdrawal in the amlodipine and HCTZ groups were comparable. As expected, HCTZ therapy caused well-recognized biochemical alterations in cholesterol and potassium levels, whereas amlodipine was metabolically neutral.
We investigated the dose proportionality after the intake of oral atenolol 25, 50, 100 and 150 mg. Standard tablets were taken by 8 healthy volunteers in randomised order of doses. The area under the curve divided by dose did not differ between the doses, indicating that the absorption of this hydrophilic compound, with known incomplete bioavailability, was constant over the range tested.
