Babesiosis is caused by intraerythrocytic parasites that are transmitted primarily by ticks, infrequently through blood transfusion, and rarely through transplacental transmission or organ transplantation. Human babesiosis is found throughout the world, but the incidence is highest in the Northeast and upper Midwestern United States. Babesiosis has clinical features that resemble malaria and can be fatal in immunocompromised and older patients. Diagnosis is confirmed by identification of Babesia parasites on blood smear or Babesia DNA with polymerase chain reaction. Standard treatment consists of atovaquone and azithromycin or clindamycin and quinine for 7 to 10 days.
Pretravel consultation is important and effective in preventing the spread of malaria. Travelers to high-risk malaria-endemic areas should receive antimalarial advice: a combination of mosquito avoidance measures and chemoprophylaxis. Malaria prevention can be complex owing to the individual characteristics of the traveler, travel destination, duration of stay, and type of travel. Health care providers need to obtain a complete travel history on all returned travelers with clinical infectious features and with a history of travel or migration from malaria-endemic areas. Considering the diagnosis of malaria in febrile travelers with risk factors increases the likelihood of a timely diagnosis and treatment.
Malaria is the most important infectious disease imported by travelers and migrants from tropical and subtropical areas. It is imported quite frequently. It is a life-threatening disease. Symptoms are nonspecific and cannot easily be distinguished from a wide range of other febrile conditions. Therefore, travel history must be taken in all patients with fever of unknown origin and malaria diagnostics must be performed immediately on suspicion of malaria. Uncomplicated falciparum malaria should be treated in the hospital with either atovaquone-proguanil or with an artemisinin-based combination preparation. If there is evidence of severe malaria, the patient must be moved to an intensive care unit. The antiparasitic agent of choice is then artesunate.
Rapid emergence of resistance to atovaquone, which targets electron transport in the malaria parasite mitochondrion, relegated its use to prophylaxis and even cast a shadow over the development of drugs targeting other parasite mitochondrial pathways. Here we argue for a renewed focus on the mitochondrion as a drug target, focusing particularly on the issues of resistance. We posit a hypothesis for why atovaquone resistance emerges so quickly, and we explain how facile acquisition of resistance is apparently offset by an inability of parasites to spread this resistance. We also explore the utility and resistance issues for emerging new drugs targeting parasite mitochondria, concluding that the mitochondrion is indeed an excellent target.
Epidemic RNA viruses seem to arise year after year leading to countless infections and devastating disease. SARS-CoV-2 is the most recent of these viruses, but there will undoubtedly be more to come. While effective SARS-CoV-2 vaccines are being deployed, one approach that is still missing is effective antivirals that can be used at the onset of infections and therefore prevent pandemics. Here, we screened FDA-approved compounds against SARS-CoV-2. We found that atovaquone, a pyrimidine biosynthesis inhibitor, is able to reduce SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lung cells. In addition, we found that berberine chloride, a plant-based compound used in holistic medicine, was able to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection in cells through direct interaction with the virion. Taken together, these studies highlight potential avenues of antiviral development to block emerging viruses. Such proactive approaches, conducted well before the next pandemic, will be essential to have drugs ready for when the next emerging virus hits.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review provides the most recent evidence of the challenges that occur in the management of babesiosis in immunocompromised hosts. RECENT FINDINGS: The epidemiology of babesiosis is affected by climate change leading to increasing numbers of cases as well as increasing areas of endemicity. Immunosuppressed hosts, especially with asplenia or B-cell defects, are at high risk of having severe disease as well as persistent and relapsed infection. Resistance to the primary therapies azithromycin and atovaquone can develop leading to further challenges in treating persistent or relapsed disease in the immunocompromised host. SUMMARY: Babesiosis is likely to become a more frequent infectious complication in immunosuppressed hosts as the areas of endemicity expand. Reduced efficacy of standard therapies is likely to continue emerging so more effort needs to be placed on methods of assessing resistance in vitro and developing more reliable treatments for resistant infections.
Herein, we report a case of uncomplicated falciparum malaria with late parasitological failure in a 45-year-old businessman returning from Ghana. The patient visited the emergency department with high fever, headache, and dizziness. He traveled without antimalarial chemoprophylaxis. Laboratory tests led to the diagnosis of uncomplicated falciparum malaria with an initial density of 37,669 parasites per muL of blood (p/muL). The patient was treated with intravenous artesunate followed by atovaquone/proguanil. He was discharged with improved condition and decreased parasite density of 887 p/muL. However, at follow-up, parasite density increased to 7,630 p/muL despite the absence of any symptoms. Suspecting treatment failure, the patient was administered intravenous artesunate and doxycycline for seven days and then artemether/lumefantrine for three days. Blood smear was negative for asexual parasitemia after re-treatment but positive for gametocytemia until day 101 from the initial diagnosis. Overall, this case highlights the risk of late parasitological failure in patients with imported uncomplicated falciparum malaria.
Babesiosis is a tick-borne infectious disease, caused by an intraerythrocytic parasite of the genus Babesia. It has clinical, biological and microbiological similarities with Plasmodium related infections. In rare cases, babesiosis may be complicated by hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, which occurs preferentially in the immunodeficient patient. We report here the case of a non-immunocompromised patient living in Manhattan, New York hospitalized for a complicated babesiosis of a hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. After 7 days of hospitalization and treatment by azithromycin 500 mg/day and atovaquone 750 mg twice a day, the patient was discharged with an improvement in clinical symptoms and biological parameters.
Chemoprophylaxis is currently the best available prevention from malaria, but its efficacy is compromised by non-adherence to medication. Here we develop a long-acting injectable formulation of atovaquone solid drug nanoparticles that confers long-lived prophylaxis against Plasmodium berghei ANKA malaria in C57BL/6 mice. Protection is obtained at plasma concentrations above 200 ng ml(-1) and is causal, attributable to drug activity against liver stage parasites. Parasites that appear after subtherapeutic doses remain atovaquone-sensitive. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic analysis indicates protection can translate to humans at clinically achievable and safe drug concentrations, potentially offering protection for at least 1 month after a single administration. These findings support the use of long-acting injectable formulations as a new approach for malaria prophylaxis in travellers and for malaria control in the field.
BACKGROUND: Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) is a common opportunistic infection among people living with HIV (PWH), particularly among new and untreated cases. Several regimens are available for the prophylaxis of PCP, including trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), dapsone-based regimens (DBRs), aerosolized pentamidine (AP), and atovaquone. OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of PCP prophylaxis regimens in PWH by network meta-analysis. METHODS: DATA SOURCES: Embase, MEDLINE, and CENTRAL from inception to June 21, 2023. STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Comparative randomized controlled trials (RCTs). PARTICIPANTS: PWH. INTERVENTIONS: Regimens for PCP prophylaxis either compared head-to-head or versus no treatment/placebo. ASSESSMENT OF RISK OF BIAS: Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for RCTs 2. METHODS OF DATA SYNTHESIS: Title or abstract and full-text screening and data extraction were performed in duplicate by two independent reviewers. Data on PCP incidence, all-cause mortality, and discontinuation due to toxicity were pooled and ranked by network meta-analysis. Subgroup analyses of primary versus secondary prophylaxis, by year, and by dosage were performed. RESULTS: A total of 26 RCTs, comprising 55 treatment arms involving 7516 PWH were included. For the prevention of PCP, TMP-SMX was ranked the most favourable agent and was superior to DBRs (risk ratio [RR] = 0.54; 95% CI, 0.36-0.83) and AP (RR = 0.53; 95% CI, 0.36-0.77). TMP-SMX was also the only agent with a mortality benefit compared with no treatment/placebo (RR = 0.79; 95% CI, 0.64-0.98). However, TMP-SMX was also ranked as the most toxic agent with a greater risk of discontinuation than DBRs (RR = 1.25; 95% CI, 1.01-1.54) and AP (7.20; 95% CI, 5.37-9.66). No significant differences in PCP prevention or mortality were detected among the other regimens. The findings remained consistent within subgroups. CONCLUSIONS: TMP-SMX is the most effective agent for PCP prophylaxis in PWH and the only agent to confer a mortality benefit; consequently, it should continue to be recommended as the first-line agent. Further studies are necessary to determine the optimal dosing of TMP-SMX to maximize efficacy and minimize toxicity.
U.S. military aviators are currently restricted to the use of chloroquine or doxycycline for malaria prophylaxis. Ground forces are allowed the additional option of taking mefloquine. These medications are begun before deployment, must be taken for 4 weeks after leaving the malarious area, and primaquine must be added to the regimen the last 2 of those 4 weeks. Compliance with this regimen is often poor, especially in populations who travel abroad frequently for short periods of time. Causal malaria prophylaxis offers potential benefits of decreased length of postdeployment regimens and obviates the need for a second medication for terminal prophylaxis. Potential obstacles include adverse drug reactions, cost, and rapid development of resistance to new medications by Plasmodium species, which should be weighed against the risks to health and mission success in each deployment.
Ferroptosis is a promising therapeutic approach for combating malignant cancers, but its effectiveness is limited in clinical due to the adaptability and self-repair abilities of cancer cells. Mitochondria, as the pivotal player in ferroptosis, exhibit tremendous therapeutic potential by targeting the intramitochondrial anti-ferroptotic pathway mediated by dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH). In this study, an albumin-based nanomedicine was developed to induce augmented ferroptosis in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) by depleting glutathione (GSH) and inhibiting DHODH activity. The nanomedicine (ATO/SRF@BSA) was developed by loading sorafenib (SRF) and atovaquone (ATO) into bovine serum albumin (BSA). SRF is an FDA-approved ferroptosis inducer and ATO is the only drug used in clinical that targets mitochondria. By combining the effects of SRF and ATO, ATO/SRF@BSA promoted the accumulation of lipid peroxides within mitochondria by inhibiting the glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4)-GSH pathway and downregulating the DHODH-coenzyme Q (CoQH(2)) defense mechanism, triggers a burst of lipid peroxides. Simultaneously, ATO/SRF@BSA suppressed cancer cell self-repair and enhanced cell death by inhibiting the synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and pyrimidine nucleotides. Furthermore, the anti-cancer results showed that ATO/SRF@BSA exhibited tumor-specific killing efficacy, significantly improved the tumor hypoxic microenvironment, and lessened the toxic side effects of SRF. This work presents an efficient and easily achievable strategy for TNBC treatment, which may hold promise for clinical applications.
Understanding the mode of action of and mechanism of resistance to drugs is central to optimising their use, and discovering new therapeutics with novel targets. We have limited understanding of how antimalarial drugs work and how resistance emerges. With few exceptions, antimalarial drugs in current use belong to a limited collection of chemical structures that act on a small number of partially characterised biochemical targets. Resistance has emerged to many of these compounds. The use of closely related compounds has promoted the spread of multidrug resistant parasites. This review intends to collate contemporary knowledge, and also to highlight conflicting views on unresolved issues.
Drug repositioning offers an effective alternative to de novo drug design to tackle the urgent need for novel antimalarial treatments. The antiamoebic compound emetine dihydrochloride has been identified as a potent in vitro inhibitor of the multidrug-resistant strain K1 of Plasmodium falciparum (50% inhibitory concentration [IC(50)], 47 nM +/- 2.1 nM [mean +/- standard deviation]). Dehydroemetine, a synthetic analogue of emetine dihydrochloride, has been reported to have less-cardiotoxic effects than emetine. The structures of two diastereomers of dehydroemetine were modeled on the published emetine binding site on the cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structure with PDB code 3J7A (P. falciparum 80S ribosome in complex with emetine), and it was found that (-)-R,S-dehydroemetine mimicked the bound pose of emetine more closely than did (-)-S,S-dehydroisoemetine. (-)-R,S-dehydroemetine (IC(50) 71.03 +/- 6.1 nM) was also found to be highly potent against the multidrug-resistant K1 strain of P. falciparum compared with (-)-S,S-dehydroisoemetine (IC(50), 2.07 +/- 0.26 muM), which loses its potency due to the change of configuration at C-1'. In addition to its effect on the asexual erythrocytic stages of P. falciparum, the compound exhibited gametocidal properties with no cross-resistance against any of the multidrug-resistant strains tested. Drug interaction studies showed (-)-R,S-dehydroemetine to have synergistic antimalarial activity with atovaquone and proguanil. Emetine dihydrochloride and (-)-R,S-dehydroemetine failed to show any inhibition of the hERG potassium channel and displayed activity affecting the mitochondrial membrane potential, indicating a possible multimodal mechanism of action.
The rapid emergence of drug-resistant malaria parasites during the course of an infection remains a major challenge for providing accurate treatment guidelines. This is particularly important in cases of malaria treatment failure. Using a previously well-characterized case of malaria treatment failure, we show the utility of using next-generation sequencing for early detection of the rise and selection of a previously reported atovaquone-proguanil (malarone) drug resistance-associated mutation.
Despite intensive research extending back to the 1930s, when the first synthetic antimalarial drugs made their appearance, the repertoire of clinically licensed formulations remains very limited. Moreover, widespread and increasing resistance to these drugs contributes enormously to the difficulties in controlling malaria, posing considerable intellectual, technical and humanitarian challenges. A detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying resistance to these agents is emerging that should permit new drugs to be rationally developed and older ones to be engineered to regain their efficacy. This review summarizes recent progress in analysing the causes of resistance to the major antimalarial drugs and its spread.
An increasing number of families, including children and the elderly, are seeking more adventurous travel in exotic parts of the world. Holiday destinations now include once-remote regions such as subSaharan Africa and New Guinea. This increase in visits to tropical and subtropical regions, combined with widespread chloroquine-resistant malaria, now places millions of Western travelers at risk of infection annually. At least 30,000 travelers from industrialized countries are reported to contract malaria each year and approximately 1 in 100 travelers who acquire Plasmodium falciparum malaria will die.
Kidney transplant recipients who are switched to atovaquone (ATO) from trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) prophylaxis because of adverse events or complications may miss opportunities to be re-challenged with TMP/SMX, the first-line agent. This single-site, retrospective study assessed kidney transplant recipients for documented reasons for switching from TMP/SMX to alternate PJP prophylaxis and outcomes of TMP/SMX re-challenge. Out of 166 patients, 155 initially received TMP/SMX; of these, 31 were switched to ATO for various reasons. Fourteen patients receiving ATO were re-challenged with TMP/SMX; all were successfully re-initiated on TMP/SMX therapy. Most patients switched to ATO post kidney transplant secondary to non-hypersensitivity reasons should be re-challenged with TMP/SMX because of the advantages it provides over other agents.
Living organisms have developed a wide variety of energy metabolism to survive within the specialized environments. There is a remarkable diversity in mitochondrial electron transport system, which might be potential targets for chemotherapy. Atovaquone, clinically used to treat malaria and pneumocystis pneumonia, is a specific inhibitor of Qo site in the cytochrome bc(1) complex of Plasmodium falciparum and Pneumocystis jirovecii. Phytopathogenic fungus, Ascochyta viciae produces two antibiotics, ascochlorin and ascofuranone. Ascochlorin specifically binds to inhibit the electron transport of both Qi and Qo sites in cytochrome bc(1) complex. Besides the unique respiratory inhibition, further investigation is in progress to elucidate the effects on cancer cells. On the other hand, ascofuranone specifically inhibits cyanide-insensitive trypanosome alternative oxidase, which is a sole terminal oxidase in the mitochondrion of Trypanosoma brucei, causative of African trypanosomiasis. In vivo study suggests that ascofuranone is a promising candidate for chemotherapeutic agents to treat African trypanosomiasis.
Human babesiosis continues to spread in multiple regions of the US. It is transmitted by Ixodes species ticks, as are Lyme disease and anaplasmosis. Its variable clinical presentations, together with serologic detection limitations, require that a high index of clinical suspicion be present for prompt diagnosis. This article discusses case examples showing the wide range of symptoms and presentations that are possible with babesiosis.
