Iron homeostasis is essential for health; moreover, hepcidin-deficiency results in iron overload in both hereditary hemochromatosis and iron-loading anemia. Here, we identified iron modulators by functionally screening hepcidin agonists using a library of 640 FDA-approved drugs in human hepatic Huh7 cells. We validated the results in C57BL/6J mice and a mouse model of hemochromatosis (Hfe(-/-) mice). Our screen revealed that the anti-rheumatoid arthritis drug auranofin (AUR) potently upregulates hepcidin expression. Interestingly, we found that canonical signaling pathways that regulate iron, including the Bmp/Smad and IL-6/Jak2/Stat3 pathways, play indispensable roles in mediating AUR's effects. In addition, AUR induces IL-6 via the NF-kappaB pathway. In C57BL/6J mice, acute treatment with 5 mg/kg AUR activated hepatic IL-6/hepcidin signaling and decreased serum iron and transferrin saturation. Whereas chronically treating male Hfe(-/-) mice with 5 mg/kg AUR activated hepatic IL-6/hepcidin signaling, decreasing systemic iron overload, but less effective in females. Further analyses revealed that estrogen reduced the ability of AUR to induce IL-6/hepcidin signaling in Huh7 cells, providing a mechanistic explanation for ineffectiveness of AUR in female Hfe(-/-) mice. Notably, high-dose AUR (25 mg/kg) induces ferroptosis and causes lipid peroxidation through inhibition of thioredoxin reductase (TXNRD) activity. We demonstrate the ferroptosis inhibitor ferrostatin significantly protects liver toxicity induced by high-dose AUR without comprising its beneficial effect on iron metabolism. In conclusion, our findings provide compelling evidence that TXNRD is a key regulator of ferroptosis, and AUR is a novel activator of hepcidin and ferroptosis via distinct mechanisms, suggesting a promising approach for treating hemochromatosis and hepcidin-deficiency related disorders.
Sepsis is a common complication of infections that significantly impacts the survival of critically patients. Currently, effective pharmacological treatment strategies are lacking. Auranofin, known as an inhibitor of Thioredoxin reductase (TrxR), exhibits anti-inflammatory activity, but its role in sepsis is not well understood. Here, we demonstrate the significant inhibitory effect of Auranofin on sepsis in a cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) mouse model. In vitro, Auranofin inhibits pyroptosis triggered by Caspase-11 activation. Further investigations reveal that inhibiting TrxR1 suppresses macrophage pyroptosis induced by E. coli, while TrxR2 does not exhibit this effect. TrxR1, functioning as a reductase, regulates the oxidative-reductive status of Thioredoxin-1 (Trx-1). Mechanistically, the modulation of Trx-1's reductive activity by TrxR1 may be involved in Caspase-11 activation-induced pyroptosis. Additionally, inhibiting TrxR1 maintains Trx-1 in its oxidized state. The oxidized form of Trx-1 interacts with Caveolin-1 (CAV1), regulating outer membrane vesicle (OMV) internalization. In summary, our study suggests that inhibiting TrxR1 suppresses OMV internalization by maintaining the oxidized form of Trx-1, thereby restricting Caspase-11 activation and alleviating sepsis.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: We aim to evaluate the effects of auranofin, a known antioxidant, on hepatic steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis, contributing to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) development in vivo and in vitro. METHODS: Transcriptome analysis of LX-2 cells was that expression patterns of genes changed by auranofin, and their related pathways were estimated. We used the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) program to determine the pathway involved in overall genetic change. In vitro, LX-2 and HepG2 cells were treated with transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 and palmitic acid (PA), respectively, and the antifibrotic and antiadipogenic effect function of auranofin was evaluated. RESULTS: Transcriptome analysis revealed that auranofin decreased the expression of 15 genes, including thrombospondin 1, endothelin 1 (ET-1), fibronectin 1, and LOX. The molecular functions of these genes are involved in collagen binding. GSEA of the overall gene expression pattern revealed that many genes increased in the reactive oxygen species pathway and decreased in the inflammatory response. Auranofin decreased nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) and IkappaBalpha in TGF-beta1-induced LX-2 cells, thereby reducing ET-1 and fibrosis. Furthermore, increased pNRF2 in PA-induced HepG2 cells led to increased antioxidant marker expression and decreased lipid accumulation. In the bile duct ligation model mice, auranofin reduced the fibrosis area and increased the survival rate. Auranofin reduced liver fibrosis and lipid accumulation in NASH model mice fed on a Western diet. CONCLUSION: Auranofin inhibits lipogenesis and fibrosis formation and is a proposed candidate for NASH treatment.
It has been a long story of the development of anticancer metallopharmaceuticals since the identification of cisplatin. Advances in metallodrugs discovery during the past 40 years have made it an ever-growing area of research in medicinal inorganic chemistry. Meanwhile, the emerging of N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) chemistry has stimulated the newly burgeoning interests in the biomedical applications of metal-NHC complexes. This review will detail what have been achieved hitherto in the research of metal-NHC complexes as potential anti-tumor agents coupled with gold, silver, copper, platinum and palladium. Their mechanism of action will also be discussed. All the results obtained indicate that this promising approach is worthy of more focuses and further studies.
Drugs like penicillamine act slowly, benefit extraarticular features of the disease as well as the joints, reduce erythrocyte sedimentation rate and rheumatoid factor titer and may slow the progression of radiographic changes and alter the outcome of the disease. Their action is to some extent disease-dependent. The 1st choice of drugs of this type is now penicillamine. It compares favourably with other drugs of the same type including gold, azathioprine and levamisole. A number of compounds in the development stage offer potential advantages over currently available drugs of this class. A compound which was safe enough to be recommended for widespread use would take over the role of first-line treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
The effects of Auranofin (AF) on protein expression and protein oxidation in A2780 cancer cells were investigated through a strategy based on simultaneous expression proteomics and redox proteomics determinations. Bioinformatics analysis of the proteomics data supports the view that the most critical cellular changes elicited by AF treatment consist of thioredoxin reductase inhibition, alteration of the cell redox state, impairment of the mitochondrial functions, metabolic changes associated with conversion to a glycolytic phenotype, induction of ER stress. The occurrence of the above cellular changes was extensively validated by performing direct biochemical assays. Our data are consistent with the concept that AF produces its effects through a multitarget mechanism that mainly affects the redox metabolism and the mitochondrial functions and results into severe ER stress. Results are discussed in the context of the current mechanistic knowledge existing on AF.
In this study, we demonstrate that ferroptosis is a component of the cell death mechanism induced by auranofin in HT-1080 cells, in contrast to the gold(III) compounds [Au(phen)Cl(2)]PF(6) and [Au(bnpy)Cl(2)]. Additionally, we identify a potential role of Prdx6 in modulating the sensitivity of A-375 cells to auranofin treatment, whereas the gold(III) compounds evaluated here exhibit Prdx6-independent cytotoxicity. Finally, using mass spectrometry, we show that auranofin binds selectively to the catalytic Cys47 residue of Prdx6 in vitro under acidic conditions. No binding was observed with the C47S mutant or at neutral pH.
Auranofin (AF), a former rheumatoid polyarthritis treatment, gained renewed interest for its use as an antimicrobial. AF is an inhibitor of thioredoxin reductase (TrxB), a thiol and protein repair enzyme, with an antibacterial activity against several bacteria including C. difficile, an enteropathogen causing post-antibiotic diarrhea. Several studies demonstrated the effect of AF on C. difficile physiology, but the crucial questions of resistance mechanisms and impact on microbiota remain unaddressed. We explored potential resistance mechanisms by studying the impact of TrxB multiplicity and by generating and characterizing adaptive mutations. We showed that if mutants inactivated for trxB genes have a lower MIC of AF, the number of TrxBs naturally present in clinical strains does not impact the MIC. All stable mutations isolated after AF long-term exposure were in the anti-sigma factor of sigma(B) and strongly affect physiology. Finally, we showed that AF has less impact on human gut microbiota than vancomycin.
Breast cancers (BCs) may present dramatic diagnoses, both for ineffective therapies and for the limited outcomes in terms of lifespan. For these types of tumors, the search for new drugs is a primary necessity. It is widely recognized that gold compounds are highly active and extremely potent as anticancer agents against many cancer cell lines. The presence of the metal plays an essential role in the activation of the cytotoxicity of these coordination compounds, whose activity, if restricted to the ligands alone, would be non-existent. On the other hand, gold exhibits a complex biochemistry, substantially variable depending on the chemical environments around the central metal. In this review, the scientific findings of the last 6-7 years on two classes of gold(I) compounds, containing phosphane or carbene ligands, are reviewed. In addition to this class of Au(I) compounds, the recent developments in the application of Auranofin in regards to BCs are reported. Auranofin is a triethylphosphine-thiosugar compound that, being a drug approved by the FDA-therefore extensively studied-is an interesting lead gold compound and a good comparison to understand the activities of structurally related Au(I) compounds.
Exploitation of drug-drug synergism and allostery could yield superior therapies by capitalizing on the immensely diverse, but highly specific, potential associated with the biological macromolecular landscape. Here we describe a drug-drug synergy mediated by allosteric cross-talk in chromatin, whereby the binding of one drug alters the activity of the second. We found two unrelated drugs, RAPTA-T and auranofin, that yield a synergistic activity in killing cancer cells, which coincides with a substantially greater number of chromatin adducts formed by one of the compounds when adducts from the other agent are also present. We show that this occurs through an allosteric mechanism within the nucleosome, whereby defined histone adducts of one drug promote reaction of the other drug at a distant, specific histone site. This opens up possibilities for epigenetic targeting and suggests that allosteric modulation in nucleosomes may have biological relevance and potential for therapeutic interventions.
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease characterized by complex molecular and cytogenetic abnormalities. Pro-oxidant cellular redox status is a common hallmark of AML cells, providing a rationale for redox-based anticancer strategy. We previously discovered that auranofin (AUF), initially used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and repositioned for its anticancer activity, can synergize with a pharmacological concentration of vitamin C (VC) against breast cancer cell line models. In this study, we observed that this drug combination synergistically and efficiently killed cells of leukaemic cell lines established from different myeloid subtypes. In addition to an induced elevation of reactive oxygen species and ATP depletion, a rapid dephosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and p70S6K, together with a strong inhibition of protein synthesis were early events in response to AUF/VC treatment, suggesting their implication in AUF/VC-induced cytotoxicity. Importantly, a study on 22 primary AML specimens from various AML subtypes showed that AUF/VC combinations at pharmacologically achievable concentrations were effective to eradicate primary leukaemic CD34(+) cells from the majority of these samples, while being less toxic to normal cord blood CD34(+) cells. Our findings indicate that targeting the redox vulnerability of AML with AUF/VC combinations could present a potential anti-AML therapeutic approach.
Vasomotor reactions after administration of gold sodium thiomalate (GST) are well recognized, but such reactions have not been reported to occur in association with oral gold treatment. We describe a woman with rheumatoid arthritis who experienced typical nitritoid reactions after treatment with GST, and later, with auranofin.
The mammalian thioredoxin reductases (TrxRs) are a family of selenium-containing pyridine nucleotide disulfide oxidoreductases playing a central role in cellular redox homeostasis and signaling pathways. Recently, these selenoproteins have emerged as promising therapeutic targets for anticancer drug development, often being overexpressed in tumor cells and contributing to drug resistance. Herein, we summarize the current knowledge on metal- and semimetal-containing molecules capable of hampering mammalian TrxRs, with an emphasis on compounds reported in the last decade.
The treatment of asthma is undergoing significant change with an emphasis on anti-inflammatory therapy. While glucocorticoids are the most potent anti-inflammatory agent, certain patients fail to respond. These patients may be candidates for alternative anti-inflammatory therapy, such as troleandomycin, methotrexate, gold, hydroxychloroquine, or dapsone. In addition, the application of immunomodulator therapy, such as intravenous gamma globulin or cyclosporine, may be useful.
We report that the gold containing antirheumatoid drug auranofin is amoebicidal against human pathogenic Naegleria fowleri. Treatment of N. fowleri cultures at biologically relevant concentrations of 0.75-3.0 mug/ml auranofin reduced amoeba counts, metabolic activity, and increased cell permeability. These results suggest that the addition of auranofin may benefit the treatment of N. fowleri-infected patients afflicted by the rapidly fatal disease primary amoebic meningoencephalitis.
Auranofin (AF), a gold compound, has been used to treat rheumatoid arthritis (RA) for more than 40 years; however, its mechanism of action remains unknown. We revealed that AF inhibited the induction of proinflammatory proteins and their mRNAs by the inflammatory stimulants, cyclooxygenase-2 and inducible nitric oxide synthase, and their upstream regulator, NF-kappaB. AF also activated the proteins peroxyredoxin-1, Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1, and NF-E2-related factor 2, and inhibited thioredoxin reductase, all of which are involved in oxidative or electrophilic stress under physiological conditions. Although the cell membrane was previously considered to be permeable to AF because of its hydrophobicity, the mechanisms responsible for transporting AF into and out of cells as well as its effects on the uptake and excretion of other drugs have not yet been elucidated. Antibodies for cytokines have recently been employed in the treatment of RA, which has had an impact on the use of AF. Trials to repurpose AF as a risk-controlled agent to treat cancers or infectious diseases, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2/coronavirus disease 2019, are ongoing. Novel gold compounds are also under development as anti-cancer and anti-infection agents.
Pediatric gliomas comprise a broad range of brain tumors derived from glial cells. While high-grade gliomas are often resistant to therapy and associated with a poor outcome, children with low-grade gliomas face a better prognosis. However, the treatment of low-grade gliomas is often associated with severe long-term adverse effects. This shows that there is a strong need for improved treatment approaches. Here, we highlight the potential for repurposing disulfiram to treat pediatric gliomas. Disulfiram is a drug used to support the treatment of chronic alcoholism and was found to be effective against diverse cancer types in preclinical studies. Our results show that disulfiram efficiently kills pediatric glioma cell lines as well as patient-derived glioma stem cells. We propose a novel mechanism of action to explain disulfiram's anti-oncogenic activities by providing evidence that disulfiram induces the degradation of the oncoprotein MLL. Our results further reveal that disulfiram treatment and MLL downregulation induce similar responses at the level of histone modifications and gene expression, further strengthening that MLL is a key target of the drug and explaining its anti-oncogenic properties.
Targeting overexpressed thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) in cancer cells to induce oxidative stress has been proved to be an effective strategy for cancer therapy. However, the treatment was hindered by the low efficiency and frequent administration of TrxR inhibitors, and hence more potent TrxR inhibitors were urgently needed. Herein, we designed and synthesized a series of TrxR inhibitors based on arsenicals. Among these, compound 1d inhibited the proliferation of a variety of cancer cells at low micromolar concentrations and exhibited low toxicity to normal cells. Importantly, compound 1d induced the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by inhibiting the TrxR activity, further causing the collapse of the redox system, mitochondrial dysfunction, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and DNA damage, followed by oxidative stress-induced cell apoptosis. In vivo data showed that, compared with the clinical TrxR inhibitor auranofin (AUR), compound 1d could more effectively eliminate tumors by 90 % at a dose of 1.5 mg/kg without any obvious side effects. These results indicated that compound 1d was a potent TrxR inhibitor against cancer.
A full range of gold compounds is currently being investigated for their potential as anti-tumor agents. Gold(I) compounds related to the anti-arthritic drug continue to attract attention, especially those carrying biologically active molecules with anti-tumor activity in their own right. Tetrahedrally coordinated gold(I) compounds, that possibly target mitochondria, are under development with a particular focus upon moderating their hydrophilicity. A resurgence of interest in square-planar gold(III) compounds has occurred in the last decade. A wide variety of species: mono- and di-nuclear, neutral and charged, coordination and organometallic, etc. are being developed. Supporting many investigations are studies of mechanistic aspects of gold compounds but a clear understanding of the mechanism of action of these compounds has yet to be delineated.
Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the leading causes of cancer mortality in the world. In addressing the need of treatments for relapsed disease, we report the identification of an existing U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved small-molecule drug to repurpose for GC treatment. Auranofin (AF), clinically used to treat rheumatic arthritis, but it exhibited preclinical efficacy in GC cells. By increasing intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, AF induces a lethal endoplasmic reticulum stress response and mitochondrial dysfunction in cultured GC cells. Blockage of ROS production reversed AF-induced ER stress and mitochondrial pathways activation as well as apoptosis. In addition, AF displays synergistic lethality with an ROS-generating agent piperlongumine, which is a natural product isolated from the long pepper Piper longum L. Taken together, this work provides a novel anticancer candidate for the treatment of gastric cancer. More importantly, it reveals that increased ROS generation might be an effective strategy in treating human gastric cancer.
