Autoimmune hepatitis is a corticosteroid-responsive liver disease arising consequent to immunogenetic and environmental risk factors. The clinical course reflects relapsing and remitting, hepatocyte targeted immunologic damage, which is countered by reparative responses to cell injury. Appropriate and timely immunosuppressive therapy drives the disease into remission, albeit with inevitable side effects. Many challenges faced in the clinic reflect practice that must capture a heterogeneous disease presentation, course, and treatment response, as well as treatment tolerability. In this Grand Round we appraise the evidence supporting current treatment approaches, address the impact of autoimmune liver disease 'crossover or overlap' presentations, explore important clinical correlates to immune-serological classifiers, and discuss the factors influencing choice of alternative therapy in difficult-to-treat situations.
The management of myasthenia gravis (MG) during pregnancy requires special skills as both diseases as well as its treatment can have deleterious effects on mother and fetus. MG often affects women in second and third decades of life during the childbearing age. Exacerbations of MG are likely to occur during the first trimester and postpartum period. The treatment of MG during pregnancy needs to be individualized depending on the severity of MG as well as the efficacy of various treatment modalities and their possible harmful effects on pregnancy. In addition, special attention has to be given to avoid drugs and other factors (such as urinary tract infections) which may worsen MG. The key to successful outcome during pregnancy in myasthenic women lies in multidisciplinary care involving obstetricians, neurologists, anesthetist as well as neonatologist. In this review, we discuss various therapeutic options available for the management of MG during pregnancy and provide recommendations based on the current best evidence.
We evaluated renal function in 107 patients with active lupus nephritis who participated in long-term randomized therapeutic trials (median follow-up, seven years). For patients taking oral prednisone alone, the probability of renal failure began to increase substantially after five years of observation. Renal function was better preserved in patients who received various cytotoxic-drug therapies, but the difference was statistically significant only for intravenous cyclophosphamide plus low-dose prednisone as compared with high-dose prednisone alone (P = 0.027). The advantage of treatment with intravenous cyclophosphamide over oral prednisone alone was particularly apparent in the high-risk subgroup of patients who had chronic histologic changes on renal biopsy at study entry. Patients treated with intravenous cyclophosphamide have not experienced hemorrhagic cystitis, cancer, or a disproportionate number of major infections. We conclude that, as compared with high-dose oral prednisone alone, treatment of lupus glomerulonephritis with intravenous cyclophosphamide reduces the risk of end-stage renal failure with few serious complications.
In this review we summarize selected articles that have been published about immunosuppressive agents in the past year. These studies fall into three major categories: 1) use of pulse cyclophosphamide in autoimmune diseases other than systemic lupus erythematosus; 2) use of newer immunosuppressive agents such as cyclosporine and FK506 in a variety of rheumatic diseases; and 3) toxicity.
Thiopurines are effective in maintaining remission in chronic inflammatory bowel diseases, but incomplete response or side effects are common during standard-dose treatment. In this article thiopurine metabolism and pharmacogenetic aspects are summarized showing their benefits in improving therapy in chronic inflammatory bowel disease. An increasing body of evidence suggests that a large part of the observed non-pancreatic side effects and poor responses can be solved by tailoring thiopurine therapy using measurement of thiopurine methyltransferase and metabolites and by using a combination therapy with low-dose thiopurines and allopurinol.
Ideally, immunosuppressive drugs would not be necessary in pregnancy. However, in connective tissue disease (especially systemic lupus erythematosus, SLE) vasculitis, and sometimes antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, their use is necessary both to protect the health of the mother and to insure the success of the pregnancy. The more commonly used drugs will be reviewed, with an emphasis on human data, when available. Methotrexate and leflunamide will not be considered, for they should never be used in pregnancy.
Despite recent advances, the therapeutic armamentarium for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is still limited. In addition, a step-up approach is recommended for most IBD patients. Thus, optimizing each medical therapy before switching to another drug class is the rule in clinical practice. Conventional therapies for IBD have not received the same amount of attention as biologic therapies over the last decade. However, due to their efficacy, safety, and low cost the thiopurine drugs azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine remain the backbone of therapy for IBD. Pharmacogenomic advances and increased knowledge of their metabolism are allowing dosage optimization. Herein, after describing the pharmacogenetics and pharmacokinetics of thiopurines, we will discuss how to optimize thiopurine therapy. We will then underscore the need to take into account safety issues when optimizing thiopurine treatment.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: The thiopurine medications are standard inflammatory bowel disease treatments. Therapeutic failure is observed, however, often because of variable drug metabolism. Allopurinol can enhance the potency of thiopurine treatment. Our objective is to review the relevant literature, and our own experience, to determine if allopurinol enhancement of thiopurine treatment is a reasonable therapeutic strategy. COMMENT: Published reports of, and our own experience using, allopurinol-thiopurine combination therapy indicate that the addition of allopurinol will enhance thiopurine treatment in up to 60% of patients. There are risks to this approach, but with appropriate monitoring, these risks should approximate those observed with thiopurine therapy alone. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Combination therapy with allopurinol and a thiopurine is a reasonable alternative for inflammatory bowel disease patients not responding to thiopurine monotherapy. Physicians experienced in thiopurine treatment, who have familiarity with thiopurine metabolism, and are willing to engage in appropriate therapeutic monitoring, should consider this strategy.
Thiopurine agents have been shown to be effective in maintaining remission in patients with Crohn's disease. There is less evidence for the efficacy of these treatments in ulcerative colitis. Consequently, the effect of thiopurines in the latter disease continues to be the subject of debate and controversy remains on whether these drugs are equally effective in both diseases. The present article aims to review, from a practical point of view, the evidence of the efficacy of thiopurines in ulcerative colitis, current indications for this treatment, safety in patients with inflammatory bowel disease and the treatment optimization strategies proposed.
Treatment strategies for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV) are evolving. Cyclophosphamide (CYC) plus corticosteroids (CSs) is the mainstay of therapy for generalized, multisystemic AAV. Historically, the combination of CYC plus CS was used for a minimum of 12 months, but concern about late toxicities associated with CYC has led to novel treatment approaches. Currently, short-course (3 to 6 months) induction treatment with CYC plus CS, followed by maintenance therapy with less toxic agents (eg, methotrexate, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil) is recommended. Further, methotrexate combined with CS may be adequate for limited, non-life-threatening AAV. Recent studies suggest that rituximab may be useful for induction therapy or for CYC-refractory AAV. This article reviews the key agents used to treat AAV, with a focus on pharmacology, toxicities, and monitoring.
Azathioprine (AZA) is a well-known immunosuppressant used for many years for its ability to ensure long term disease remission in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) at an affordable cost to the public. However, the side effect profile has raised many concerns with numerous investigations into the risk, cause and prevention of these effects. Much of the side effect profile of AZA can be linked to a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) gene which ensures the breakdown and efficacy of AZA. Mutated TPMT alleles result in low or deficient TPMT levels which directly correlate to cytotoxity. This is a review of the role of AZA in the treatment of IBD. Knowing a patient's TPMT status allows the prescribing doctor to make an informed decision about dosage and be more alert to the signs of cytotoxicity. It is essential to include "early warning" SNP testing into common practice to ensure therapeutic efficacy.
OBJECTIVE: This paper describes the first reported case of progressive sensorineural hearing loss caused by azathioprine, which was reversed on stoppage of the drug. CASE REPORT: A female patient with previously normal hearing presented with progressive sensorineural hearing loss after being started on azathioprine. Otological and neurological examination findings were unremarkable. After stopping the drug, the patient reported an improvement in hearing, which was confirmed on pure tone audiometry. CONCLUSION: This previously unreported side effect of azathioprine is highlighted in order to increase clinical awareness. Early recognition of this adverse effect is important to minimise the possibility of permanent sensorineural hearing loss.
Cyclophosphamide, a drug that has not previously had an important role in whole-organ transplantation, was given as a primary immunosuppressant to one liver and eleven kidney recipients, in combination with prednisone and horse antilymphocyte globulin. One of the patients died despite good renal-graft function. Two kidneys from a common cadaveric donor failed. The other nine patients have excellent function of their homografts after 2-3 months. Cyclophosphamide was substituted for azathioprine in one hepatic and five renal recipients who were suspected of having liver toxicity from azathioprine 3 months to almost 8 years post-transplantation. Graft function was maintained after this change, and the evidence of liver injury subsided.
Several studies have indicated the harmful effect of flare-up periods in pregnant women with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) on their newborns. Therefore, an effective and safe medical treatment during pregnancy is of great concern in IBD patients. The aim of this study was to perform a meta-analysis on the outcomes of thiopurines use and a systematic review of antitumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) drugs used during pregnancy in women with IBD. The results of cohorts evaluating the safety of anti-TNF drugs during pregnancy up to July 2013 were collected and analyzed. In the meta-analysis, a total of 312 pregnant women with IBD who used thiopurines were compared with 1149 controls (women with IBD who were not treated with any medication and women who were exposed to drugs other than thiopurines) to evaluate the drug effect on different pregnancy outcomes, including prematurity, low birth weight, congenital abnormalities, spontaneous abortion, and neonatal adverse outcomes. Results of statistical analysis demonstrated that congenital abnormalities were increased significantly in thiopurine-exposed group in comparison with control group who did not receive any medicine for IBD treatment. The summary odds ratio was 2.95 with 95% confidence interval = 1.03-8.43 (p = 0.04). We observed no significant differences in occurrence of other adverse pregnancy outcomes between compared groups. The results of cohorts evaluated the safety of anti-TNF drugs during pregnancy demonstrated no increase in occurrence of adverse pregnancy outcomes in comparison with controls except for the significant decrease in gestational age of newborns of drug-exposed mothers in one trial. In conclusion, a benefit-risk ratio should be considered in prescribing or continuing medicinal therapy during pregnancy of IBD patients.
INTRODUCTION: Systemic corticosteroids are widely used in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (CHP); however, there is not much evidence to support their use, besides being associated with significant side effects. Azathioprine (AZA) use is common in CHP, although not prospectively tested in randomized controlled trials. Our objective was to evaluate the lung function trajectory of CHP patients after AZA initiation, as well as to assess the safety profile of this drug. METHODS: Retrospective analysis of patients initiated on AZA following a multidisciplinary team diagnosis of CHP. The longitudinal trajectory of lung function in the first 2 years of treatment was assessed. RESULTS: Thirty-five out of 62 patients (56.5%) remained on treatment after 2 years. AZA treatment was associated with a significant improvement in forced vital capacity (FVC) at 12 and 24 months (p = 0.015 and p < 0.001, respectively). A slight increase in total lung capacity (TLC) and 6-min walking test (6MWT) were also reported, although it did not reach statistical differences at the end of 2 years. No changes in diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) were observed. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study identifying an improvement in lung function (FVC) of CHP patients on AZA treatment for 2 years. Prospective studies are needed to confirm these results and to more adequately select CHP patients who may benefit from AZA.
Nodular regenerative hyperplasia (NRH) is a poorly understood liver condition, which is increasingly recognized in thiopurine-treated patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).(1) It is difficult to establish an optimal approach to NRH patients, because its manifestations are highly variable (from asymptomatic to symptoms of noncirrhotic portal hypertension [NCPH]) and the prognosis is unknown.(2) The aim of this study was to identify NRH cases in IBD patients treated with azathioprine, mercaptopurine, and/or thioguanine, and to describe its clinical course.
BACKGROUND: Combining a thiopurine with the human anti-tumour necrosis factor-alpha monoclonal antibody adalimumab for Crohn's disease [CD] treatment is controversial with regard to efficacy and safety. By conducting a subanalysis of a multicentre, randomised, prospective, open-label trial [the DIAMOND study, UMIN registration number 000005146], we studied the risk of discontinuation of thiopurine in combination with adalimumab. METHODS: In the preceding DIAMOND study, we analysed the: [i] timing and reasons for dropout in the monotherapy group and combination group; [ii] risk factors for dropout in the combination group. RESULTS: There was no significant difference in the dropout rate up to Week 52 between the monotherapy group and combination group [p = 0.325]. The main reason for study dropout was active CD in the monotherapy group, whereas it was adverse effects in the combination group [Fisher's exact test, p <0.001]. Kaplan-Meier analyses revealed significantly earlier dropout in the combination group [log-rank test, p = 0.001]. Multivariable analysis revealed low body weight to be a risk for dropout due to adverse effects in the combination group. CONCLUSIONS: Combination of azathioprine with adalimumab resulted in dropout in the early stage of the study due to side effects of azathioprine, in comparison with late dropout due to active CD in the adalimumab monotherapy group.
QUESTION: Quite a few of my female patients with rheumatic diseases and inflammatory bowel disease are using azathioprine. They are afraid to take a "cancer drug" during pregnancy. What is known about the risks? ANSWER: An increasing body of evidence from prospective cohort studies suggests that azathioprine is safe for the fetus during pregnancy.
The ability of azathioprine to reduce the corticosteroid requirements of patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis was tested under double-blind conditions against placebo. After 12 months a significant mean dose reduction of 36% was achieved without undue side-effects. This form of therapy promises to be an advance in the management of severe rheumatoid arthritis.
