PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is an emerged opportunistic pathogen. Intrinsic multidrug resistance makes treating infections caused by S. maltophilia a great clinical challenge. Herein, we provide an update on the most recent literature on treatment options for severe S. maltophilia infections. RECENT FINDINGS: Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (SXT) is recognized as the first-line therapy for S. maltophilia infections. However, its clinical use is based on good in vitro activity and favorable clinical outcomes, rather than on solid minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) correlations with pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamics (PK/PD) and/or clinical outcomes. The same is true for other treatment options like levofloxacin (LVX) and minocycline (MIN). Recent PK/PD studies question the current clinical breakpoints for SXT, LVX, and MIN. Based on this, the latest guidance issued by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) recommends using these agents only as part of a combination therapy. Alternatively, novel therapeutic options such as cefiderocol (FDC) and ceftazidime-avibactam plus aztreonam (CZA-ATM) are suggested, based on limited but promising clinical data. SUMMARY: PK/PD data and controlled clinical studies are needed to optimize current treatment options. Presently, combination therapy of SXT, LVX, MIN, or FDC, or monotherapy with CZA-ATM are recommended therapeutic options for severe-to-moderate S. maltophilia infections.
BACKGROUND: Ceftobiprole is a cephalosporin that may be effective for treating complicated Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia, including methicillin-resistant S. aureus. METHODS: In this phase 3, double-blind, double-dummy, noninferiority trial, adults with complicated S. aureus bacteremia were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive ceftobiprole at a dose of 500 mg intravenously every 6 hours for 8 days and every 8 hours thereafter, or daptomycin at a dose of 6 to 10 mg per kilogram of body weight intravenously every 24 hours plus optional aztreonam (at the discretion of the trial-site investigators). The primary outcome, overall treatment success 70 days after randomization (defined as survival, bacteremia clearance, symptom improvement, no new S. aureus bacteremia-related complications, and no receipt of other potentially effective antibiotics), with a noninferiority margin of 15%, was adjudicated by a data review committee whose members were unaware of the trial-group assignments. Safety was also assessed. RESULTS: Of 390 patients who underwent randomization, 387 (189 in the ceftobiprole group and 198 in the daptomycin group) had confirmed S. aureus bacteremia and received ceftobiprole or daptomycin (modified intention-to-treat population). A total of 132 of 189 patients (69.8%) in the ceftobiprole group and 136 of 198 patients (68.7%) in the daptomycin group had overall treatment success (adjusted difference, 2.0 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], -7.1 to 11.1). Findings appeared to be consistent between the ceftobiprole and daptomycin groups in key subgroups and with respect to secondary outcomes, including mortality (9.0% and 9.1%, respectively; 95% CI, -6.2 to 5.2) and the percentage of patients with microbiologic eradication (82.0% and 77.3%; 95% CI, -2.9 to 13.0). Adverse events were reported in 121 of 191 patients (63.4%) who received ceftobiprole and 117 of 198 patients (59.1%) who received daptomycin; serious adverse events were reported in 36 patients (18.8%) and 45 patients (22.7%), respectively. Gastrointestinal adverse events (primarily mild nausea) were more frequent with ceftobiprole. CONCLUSIONS: Ceftobiprole was noninferior to daptomycin with respect to overall treatment success in patients with complicated S. aureus bacteremia. (Funded by Basilea Pharmaceutica International and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; ERADICATE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03138733.).
In February 2010, aztreonam for inhalation solution (Cayston; Gilead) - an inhalable formulation of the monobactam antibiotic aztreonam and lysine - was approved by the US FDA to improve respiratory symptoms in patients with cystic fibrosis infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review focuses on the management of severe Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in critically ill patients. RECENT FINDINGS: Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the most common pathogen in intensive care; the main related infections are nosocomial pneumonias, then bloodstream infections. Antimicrobial resistance is common; despite new antibiotics, it is associated with increased mortality, and can lead to a therapeutic deadlock. SUMMARY: Carbapenem resistance in difficult-to-treat P. aeruginosa (DTR-PA) strains is primarily mediated by loss or reduction of the OprD porin, overexpression of the cephalosporinase AmpC, and/or overexpression of efflux pumps. However, the role of carbapenemases, particularly metallo-beta-lactamases, has become more important. Ceftolozane-tazobactam, ceftazidime-avibactam and imipenem-relebactam are useful against DTR phenotypes (noncarbapenemase producers). Other new agents, such as aztreonam-ceftazidime-avibactam or cefiderocol, or colistin, might be effective for carbapenemase producers. Regarding nonantibiotic agents, only phages might be considered, pending further clinical trials. Combination therapy does not reduce mortality, but may be necessary for empirical treatment. Short-term treatment of severe P. aeruginosa infections should be preferred when it is expected that the clinical situation resolves rapidly.
BACKGROUND: Neonatal sepsis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. It is the third leading cause of neonatal mortality globally constituting 13% of overall neonatal mortality. Despite the high burden of neonatal sepsis, high-quality evidence in diagnosis and treatment is scarce. Due to the diagnostic challenges of sepsis and the relative immunosuppression of the newborn, many neonates receive antibiotics for suspected sepsis. Antibiotics have become the most used therapeutics in neonatal intensive care units, and observational studies in high-income countries suggest that 83% to 94% of newborns treated with antibiotics for suspected sepsis have negative blood cultures. The last Cochrane Review was updated in 2005. There is a need for an updated systematic review assessing the effects of different antibiotic regimens for late-onset neonatal sepsis. OBJECTIVES: To assess the beneficial and harmful effects of different antibiotic regimens for late-onset neonatal sepsis. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following electronic databases: CENTRAL (2021, Issue 3); Ovid MEDLINE; Embase Ovid; CINAHL; LILACS; Science Citation Index EXPANDED and Conference Proceedings Citation Index - Science on 12 March 2021. We also searched clinical trials databases and the reference lists of retrieved articles for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-RCTs. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs comparing different antibiotic regimens for late-onset neonatal sepsis. We included participants older than 72 hours of life at randomisation, suspected or diagnosed with neonatal sepsis, meningitis, osteomyelitis, endocarditis, or necrotising enterocolitis. We excluded trials that assessed treatment of fungal infections. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three review authors independently assessed studies for inclusion, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias. We used the GRADE approach to assess the certainty of evidence. Our primary outcome was all-cause mortality, and our secondary outcomes were: serious adverse events, respiratory support, circulatory support, nephrotoxicity, neurological developmental impairment, necrotising enterocolitis, and ototoxicity. Our primary time point of interest was at maximum follow-up. MAIN RESULTS: We included five RCTs (580 participants). All trials were at high risk of bias, and had very low-certainty evidence. The five included trials assessed five different comparisons of antibiotics. We did not conduct a meta-analysis due to lack of relevant data. Of the five included trials one trial compared cefazolin plus amikacin with vancomycin plus amikacin; one trial compared ticarcillin plus clavulanic acid with flucloxacillin plus gentamicin; one trial compared cloxacillin plus amikacin with cefotaxime plus gentamicin; one trial compared meropenem with standard care (ampicillin plus gentamicin or cefotaxime plus gentamicin); and one trial compared vancomycin plus gentamicin with vancomycin plus aztreonam. None of the five comparisons found any evidence of a difference when assessing all-cause mortality, serious adverse events, circulatory support, nephrotoxicity, neurological developmental impairment, or necrotising enterocolitis; however, none of the trials were near an information size that could contribute significantly to the evidence of the comparative benefits and risks of any particular antibiotic regimen. None of the trials assessed respiratory support or ototoxicity. The benefits and harms of different antibiotic regimens remain unclear due to the lack of well-powered trials and the high risk of systematic errors. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence is insufficient to support any antibiotic regimen being superior to another. RCTs assessing different antibiotic regimens in late-onset neonatal sepsis with low risks of bias are warranted.
Aztreonam is the first monobactam and is unique among beta-lactam antibiotics for its spectrum of activity that is exclusively active against gram-negative aerobic bacteria. Broad clinical experience with this agent supports its use in the treatment of adults with severe or complicated urologic infections. Aztreonam may be safely used in patients with penicillin allergy. With a spectrum of activity that is comparable to the aminoglycosides but without the potential for ototoxicity or nephrotoxicity, aztreonam represents a rational choice of therapy for treatment of systemic urinary tract infections due to susceptible organisms.
BACKGROUND: There is a need for additional therapeutic options for serious infections caused by Gram-negative pathogens. In the phase 3, descriptive REVISIT study, we investigated the safety and efficacy of aztreonam-avibactam in the treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections or hospital-acquired pneumonia or ventilator-associated pneumonia (HAP-VAP) caused, or suspected to be caused, by Gram-negative bacteria. METHODS: This prospective, multinational, open-label, central assessor-masked study enrolled adults who were hospitalised with a complicated intra-abdominal infection or HAP-VAP. Patients were randomly allocated via block randomisation using interactive response technology stratified by infection type in a 2:1 ratio to aztreonam-avibactam (with metronidazole for complicated intra-abdominal infection) or meropenem with or without colistin for 5-14 days for complicated intra-abdominal infection or 7-14 days for HAP-VAP. The primary endpoint was clinical cure at the test-of-cure visit (within 3 days before or after day 28) in the intention-to-treat (ITT) population. Secondary endpoints included 28-day mortality in the ITT population and safety in patients in the ITT population who received study drug (safety analysis set). No formal hypothesis testing was planned. The study was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03329092) and EudraCT (2017-002742-68) and is complete. FINDINGS: Between April 5, 2018, and Feb 23, 2023, we screened 461 patients. 422 patients were enrolled and randomly allocated (282 in the aztreonam-avibactam group and 140 in the meropenem group, forming the ITT analysis set), of whom ten patients (seven in the aztreonam-avibactam group and three in the meropenem group) were randomly allocated but did not receive study treatment. 271 (64%) of 422 patients had at least one Gram-negative pathogen from an adequate specimen identified at baseline. The most frequent baseline pathogens were Enterobacterales (252 [93%] of 271). Overall, 19 (24%) of 80 isolates tested for carbapenemases were carbapenemase-positive (serine, metallo-beta-lactamase, or both). 193 (68.4%) of 282 patients in the aztreonam-avibactam group and 92 (65.7%) of 140 in the meropenem group had clinical cure at the test-of-cure visit (treatment difference 2.7% [95% CI -6.6 to 12.4]). For patients with complicated intra-abdominal infection, the adjudicated clinical cure rate was 76.4% (159 of 208) for the aztreonam-avibactam group and 74.0% (77 of 104) for the meropenem group. Cure rates in patients with HAP-VAP were 45.9% (34 of 74) for aztreonam-avibactam and 41.7% (15 of 36) for meropenem. 28-day all-cause mortality rates were 4% (12 of 282) for aztreonam-avibactam and 7% (ten of 140) for meropenem; in patients with complicated intra-abdominal infection, mortality was 2% (four of 208) and 3% (three of 104) for aztreonam-avibactam and meropenem, respectively, and in patients with HAP-VAP, mortality was 11% (eight of 74) and 19% (seven of 36), respectively. Aztreonam-avibactam was generally well tolerated, and safety findings were consistent with the known safety profile of aztreonam monotherapy. There were no treatment-related serious adverse events in the aztreonam-avibactam group. INTERPRETATION: These phase 3 efficacy and safety data provide support for aztreonam-avibactam as a potential therapeutic option for complicated intra-abdominal infection or HAP-VAP caused by Gram-negative bacteria. FUNDING: Pfizer.
INTRODUCTION: Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales (CRE) due to Metallo-beta-lactamase (MBL) production are treated with either polymyxins or the novel combination of ceftazidime-avibactam and aztreonam (AA). This study aims to evaluate the 30-day mortality of AA in patients with BSI caused by MBL-CRE infections. METHODOLOGY: In this systematic review and meta-analysis, all articles up to June 2023 were screened using search terms like 'CRE', 'MBL', 'AA' and 'polymyxins'. The risk ratio for AA vs polymyxins was pooled using a random-effect model, and the results were represented by a point estimate with a 95% confidence interval. RESULTS: After removing the duplicates, the titles and abstracts of 455 articles were screened, followed by a full-text screening of 50 articles. A total of 24 articles were included for systematic review, and four comparative studies were included in the meta-analysis. All four studies had a moderate or serious risk of bias. The pooled risk ratio for 30-day mortality for AA vs. polymyxins was 0.51 (95%CI: 0.34-0.76), p < 0.001. There was no significant heterogeneity. CONCLUSION: The meta-analysis from studies with a high risk of bias shows that AA is associated with lesser 30-day mortality when compared to polymyxins in patients with MBL-producing CRE BSI. Registration with PROSPERO- CRD42023433608.
Aztreonam belongs to the monobactam group of naturally occurring antibiotic compounds characterized by a monocycling ring structure. Aztreonam is the first monobactam that has been approved for use in pediatric medicine by US FDA in the year 1998.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate pharmacokinetics (PK) and safety (primary objectives) and efficacy (secondary objective) of the investigational monobactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor combination aztreonam/avibactam in patients with complicated intra-abdominal infection (cIAI). METHODS: This Phase 2a open-label, multicentre study (NCT02655419; EudraCT 2015-002726-39) enrolled adults with cIAI into sequential cohorts for 5-14 days treatment. Cohort 1 patients received an aztreonam/avibactam loading dose of 500/137 mg (30 min infusion), followed by maintenance doses of 1500/410 mg (3 h infusions) q6h; Cohort 2 received 500/167 mg (30 min infusion), followed by 1500/500 mg (3 h infusions) q6h. Cohort 3 was an extension of exposure at the higher dose regimen. Doses were adjusted for creatinine clearance of 31-50 mL/min (Cohorts 2 + 3). All patients received IV metronidazole 500 mg q8h. PK, safety and efficacy were assessed. RESULTS: Thirty-four patients (Cohort 1, n = 16; Cohorts 2 + 3, n = 18) comprised the modified ITT (MITT) population. Mean exposures of aztreonam and avibactam in Cohorts 2 + 3 were consistent with those predicted to achieve joint PK/pharmacodynamic target attainment in >90% patients. Adverse events (AEs) were similar between cohorts. The most common AEs were hepatic enzyme increases [n = 9 (26.5%)] and diarrhoea [n = 5 (14.7%)]. Clinical cure rates at the test-of-cure visit overall were 20/34 (58.8%) (MITT) and 14/23 (60.9%) (microbiological-MITT population). CONCLUSIONS: Observed AEs were consistent with the known safety profile of aztreonam monotherapy, with no new safety concerns identified. These data support selection of the aztreonam/avibactam 500/167 mg (30 min infusion) loading dose and 1500/500 mg (3 h infusions) maintenance dose q6h regimen, in patients with creatinine clearance >50 mL/min, for the Phase 3 development programme.
The combination of ceftazidime-avibactam (CAZ-AVI) and aztreonam (ATM) is used to treat MBL-producing Enterobacterales-related infections. The new combination aztreonam-avibactam (AZA) is currently in development. We compared results obtained with the new MIC test strip (MTS) AZA (Liofilchem) with broth microdilution method (BMD) on 41 MBL-producing Enterobacterales from 41 clinical samples. The MTS AZA was also compared to combination testing method using CAZ-AVI and ATM strips. Compared to BMD, categorical agreement (CA) was 100%. Compared with combination testing method, CA was 97.6%. The MTS AZA can be used to determine MICs levels of AZA or CAZ-AVI/ATM combinations.
We report a fatal case of New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase (NDM)-producing Escherichia coli in a bacteremic patient with sequential failure of aztreonam plus ceftazidime-avibactam followed by cefiderocol. Acquired resistance was documented phenotypically and mediated through preexisting and acquired mutations. This case highlights the need to rethink optimal treatment for NDM-producing organisms.
Aztreonam, the first commercially available monobactam, has a wide range of activity against aerobic gram-negative bacilli. It can be administered two to three hours daily because its half-life is 1.6 to 2 hours. Excellent blood and tissue concentrations are attained. The MIC of aztreonam against most Enterobacteriaceae is less than or equal to 2 micrograms/ml and against P aeruginosa less than or equal to 16 micrograms g/ml. Aztreonam has been used in a wide array of infections of the urinary tract and respiratory tract, blood, intra-abdominal and gynecologic infections and infections of the skin, bones and joints. As empiric therapy, aztreonam is usually combined with another antimicrobial agent active against anaerobes and/or aerobic gram-positive cocci until culture results are available. One exception is empiric therapy for gram-negative urinary tract infections in which aztreonam can be used initially as monotherapy against susceptible gram-negative pathogens. In general, the efficacy of aztreonam is equal or superior to that of the aminoglycosides. Adverse reactions to aztreonam are unusual, and it as been shown to be a poor hapten, permitting its administration to patients with proven allergy to the penicillins and cephalosporins. Aztreonam is a useful addition to the available antibiotics for treatment of gram-negative infections.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to report the in vitro activity of two novel antimicrobial drugs, including imipenem-relebactam (IMR) and aztreonam-avibactam (AZA), toward carbapenem-resistant and hypervirulent Klebsiella pneumoniae (CR-hvKP) strains. Our in vitro activity study revealed that only few antibacterial agents (including several novel agents) exhibit high antimicrobial activity toward carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae (CRKP) and CR-hvKP isolates. IMR and AZA may be promising therapeutic agents for the treatment of infections caused by CRKP and CR-hvKP isolates.
Aztreonam is a monocyclic beta-lactam antibiotic that is active exclusively against the aerobic gram-negative bacilli. It is not ototoxic or nephrotoxic and so is used as an alternative to aminoglycosides in a variety of clinical situations. In polymicrobial infections or when used for empiric therapy, aztreonam must be combined with other antimicrobial agents active against gram-positive and anaerobic species. Aztreonam is often effective against resistant strains of gram-negative organisms, which are often involved in nosocomial infections. Overuse of aztreonam should be avoided to prevent the emergence of resistant P. aeruginosa strains. Except in the treatment of P. aeruginosa infections, aztreonam should not be added to beta-lactam regimens for additional gram-negative coverage.
Antibiotic administration in the perioperative period is the foundation of preventing surgical site infections. beta-Lactam antibiotics, notably the first-generation cephalosporin cefazolin, are the drugs of choice for this indication. However, reported antibiotic allergies often result in the use of suboptimal alternative agents that can lead to an increased risk of infection and adverse effects. A comprehensive allergy history and risk stratification should be completed preoperatively to determine whether or not a patient can be rechallenged with a beta-lactam antibiotic and what testing may be necessary prior to administration. Nursing staff can play a critical role in understanding the implications and management of reported antibiotic allergies in surgical patients in order to optimize patient care.
Aztreonam is a monobactam antibacterial with bactericidal activity against a wide range of aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Aztreonam lysine for inhalation solution (AZLI) does not contain the potentially inflammatory component arginine, which is used as a buffer in the intravenous formulation. Two phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled trials (AIR-CF1 and AIR-CF2) have been completed with AZLI in cystic fibrosis patients with pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection. In AIR-CF1, respiratory symptoms were significantly improved with AZLI compared with placebo, as assessed by the respiratory symptoms domain of the Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised, a disease-specific, patient-reported outcome instrument. The mean treatment effect exceeded the minimal clinically important difference. In AIR-CF2, AZLI was compared with placebo following a 28-day course of tobramycin inhalation solution. AZLI was associated with a significant delay in the need for inhaled or intravenous antipseudomonal antibacterials, as determined by the presence of one of four predefined symptoms shown to be predictive of pulmonary exacerbations. An open-label extension of these trials (AIR-CF3) also demonstrated clinical efficacy with repeated courses of AZLI over 18 months and was not associated with sustained reductions in P. aeruginosa susceptibility. AZLI was also associated with improved pulmonary function and reductions in P. aeruginosa density in sputum in clinical trials. The tolerability profile of AZLI was generally similar to that of placebo in randomized controlled trials, with respiratory symptoms being the most frequently reported adverse events.
Aztreonam is a synthetic monobactam antibiotic that has excellent activity against aerobic gram-negative bacilli. It can be used as a single agent for the treatment of upper urinary tract infections caused by organisms resistant to the cephalosporins and ampicillin. It also can be administered in combination with a drug such as clindamycin for treatment of pelvic inflammatory disease or postoperative pelvic infections.
An aerosol form of aztreonam lysinate has recently been developed as a treatment for cystic fibrosis patients suffering from chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung colonization. Local administration means the drug can reach mucus concentrations in the order of hundreds of times the MIC(50) of Pseudomonas associated with severe lung disease in cystic fibrosis, resulting in a significant reduction in airway bacterial density and a parallel improvement in lung function. These advantages are maintained over prolonged periods of treatments. Administration of the drug is optimized by the use of a specific eFlow((R)) system, resulting in considerable reductions in treatment times when compared with conventional nebulizers. The drug has been proven safe and no concomitant induction of resistance to Pseudomonas was found during the clinical trial period of 18 months. Aztreonam lysinate has been shown to ameliorate pulmonary function in cystic fibrosis patients with chronic airway Pseudomonas infection and this is paralleled by a reduction in bacterial density in the lungs. The increased availability of new aerosolized antibiotics for cystic fibrosis will lead to new scenarios in the treatment of the disease.
Aztreonam is the first monobactam available for use in this country. A parenteral antibiotic, its antibacterial spectrum is limited to gram-negative aerobic pathogens. The drug's pharmacologic, pharmacokinetic, and toxicologic properties are reviewed. Based on early experience in pediatric patients, certain recommendations can be made for the use of aztreonam.
