AIM: To update a systematic review of evidence published up to December 2015 for pharmacological/neurosurgical interventions among individuals with cerebral palsy (CP) and dystonia. METHOD: Searches were updated (January 2016 to May 2020) for oral baclofen, trihexyphenidyl, benzodiazepines, clonidine, gabapentin, levodopa, botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT), intrathecal baclofen (ITB), and deep brain stimulation (DBS), and from database inception for medical cannabis. Eligible studies included at least five individuals with CP and dystonia and reported on dystonia, goal achievement, motor function, pain/comfort, ease of caregiving, quality of life (QoL), or adverse events. Evidence certainty was evaluated using GRADE. RESULTS: Nineteen new studies met inclusion criteria (two trihexyphenidyl, one clonidine, two BoNT, nine ITB, six DBS), giving a total of 46 studies (four randomized, 42 non-randomized) comprising 915 participants when combined with those from the original systematic review. Very low certainty evidence supported improved dystonia (clonidine, ITB, DBS) and goal achievement (clonidine, BoNT, ITB, DBS). Low to very low certainty evidence supported improved motor function (DBS), pain/comfort (clonidine, BoNT, ITB, DBS), ease of caregiving (clonidine, BoNT, ITB), and QoL (ITB, DBS). Trihexyphenidyl, clonidine, BoNT, ITB, and DBS may increase adverse events. No studies were identified for benzodiazepines, gabapentin, oral baclofen, and medical cannabis. INTERPRETATION: Evidence evaluating the use of pharmacological and neurosurgical management options for individuals with CP and dystonia is limited to between low and very low certainty. What this paper adds Meta-analysis suggests that intrathecal baclofen (ITB) and deep brain stimulation (DBS) may improve dystonia and pain. Meta-analysis suggests that DBS may improve motor function. Clonidine, botulinum neurotoxin, ITB, and DBS may improve achievement of individualized goals. ITB and DBS may improve quality of life. No direct evidence is available for oral baclofen, benzodiazepines, gabapentin, or medical cannabis.
There are 3 surgical procedures that patients with cerebral palsy (CP) undergo that may be considered major procedures: femoral osteotomies combined with pelvic osteotomies, spine fusion, and intrathecal baclofen pump implant for the treatment of spasticity. Many complications are known to occur at a higher rate in this population, and some may be avoided with prior awareness of the preoperative pathophysiology of the patient with CP.
This article reviews the incidence, management, and complications of scoliosis in patients with cerebral palsy. Treatment of scoliosis in patients with cerebral palsy includes both nonoperative and operative management and often the decision to proceed with surgery is a multidisciplinary decision. Because of severe spasticity, many of these patients undergo intrathecal baclofen pump placement before, during, or after posterior spinal fusion. The complication rates can be high with intrathecal baclofen pump placement, but many patients can have significant benefit with this therapy.
Intrathecal baclofen is perhaps the most effective treatment for significant spasticity regardless of the origin. For appropriately selected patients, it can provide qualitative and quantitative improvements in quality of life. This article discusses the practical aspects and patient selection, trial, implant, and ongoing management of patients with intrathecal baclofen pump therapy.
In carefully selected groups of patients, intrathecal baclofen therapy offers well-proven benefits in reducing spasticity, notably in cases of spinal injury and multiple sclerosis. The initial costs of implantation are high, and there must be a long-term commitment by both patient and medical personnel to careful and proper management. Nevertheless, in suitable cases, the techniques should generally be properly considered before proceeding to any irreversible destructive neurosurgical procedure.
Intrathecal baclofen therapy (ITB) is an established treatment for intractable spasticity. More than 1,100 patients have undergone ITB in Japan, and there are about 50 hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) The features of ITB in HSP are 1. small doses of baclofen may often be enough, 2. small changes of doses later the symptoms remarkably, 3. doses can be decreased after long term ITB.
The management of childhood spasticity requires a multidisciplinary effort. With input from pediatricians, physical and occupational therapists, neurologists, orthotists, orthopedic surgeons, neurological surgeons, and other healthcare personnel, effective treatment for spasticity can be initiated and maintained that can lead to meaningful improvements in quality of life for vast numbers of children. Neurosurgical treatment of spasticity will continue to evolve and be refined as procedures and techniques are appropriately evaluated with reliable and validated outcome measures.
Intrathecal baclofen (ITB), administered by an implanted pump, has emerged as an efficacious therapy for the treatment of hypertonicity in pediatrics. Although ITB has been used for more than 20 years clinically, much is still unknown about the most optimal dosing regimens and intrathecal catheter tip placement. Clinician experience, animal research, and advanced imaging is guiding the use of ITB. The rationale for high cervical catheter tip placement and pulsating flex dosing is described.
BACKGROUND: Intrathecal baclofen (ITB) treatment is frequently used for individuals with severe, but non-progressive, spasticity refractory to oral treatment. However, experiences with ITB in patients with progressive neurological disorders of childhood causing spasticity are limited. AIM: To investigate whether ITB is an option in patients with progressive neurological disorders causing spasticity in childhood. DESIGN: A systematic literature search in Embase, Pubmed and the Cochrane Library was performed. RESULTS: We identified six eligible studies considering patients with progressive neurological disease in childhood and receiving ITB treatment. The studies included a total of seven paediatric patients and four adult patients. Improvement was reported in spasticity, spasms, pain, gait, activities of daily life and providing care. High satisfaction is described. CONCLUSIONS: ITB has beneficial effects in paediatric patients with progressive neurological disease. However, the level of evidence is limited due to the small number of available studies and due to the poor quality of these studies.
Baclofen is a gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonist approved for the treatment of spasticity and commonly used in the management of many types of neuropathic pain. Controlled studies have demonstrated the efficacy of this drug in trigeminal neuralgia. Although its precise mechanism of analgesic action is unknown, it is likely that a drug-induced increase in inhibitory activity is sufficient to interrupt the cascade of neural events that culminates in aberrant activity of wide dynamic range neurons, or more rostral neurons in nociceptive pathways, that is the substrate for some types of neuropathic pain. The optimal use of baclofen as an adjuvant analgesic requires an understanding of its pharmacology, side effect spectrum, and dosing guidelines that have proven useful in clinical practice. Failure of baclofen therapy following a prolonged trial requires dose tapering prior to discontinuation due to the potential for a withdrawal syndrome.
Spasticity is a clinical condition characterized by a velocity-dependent increase of muscle tone due to "parapyramidal" disturbance of the inhibitory afferents to the second motor neuron. Intrathecal baclofen (ITB) is at present the most effective treatment tor generalized spasticity provided that an accurate assessment of patients to be candidates for ITB is made. The most important patient ,election criterion is lack of positive response to any oral antispastic drug or appearance of undesired side effects of such oral treatment. Spasticity should not be treated in patients in whom it may be helpful to maintain posture due to their very poor muscle strength. When assessing a spastic patient alternative treatments such as Botox and peripheral neurotomies must also be considered, particularly in cases of predominantly focal spasticity. According to our experience, it is advisable to divide spastic patients into two different groups: the first group including wheel-chaired and bed-ridden patients, the second group comprising spastic patients who are still able to move. In each of these two groups treatment goals vary and require different protocols for the patients' evaluation. Assessment of patients is completed with the functional index measurement (FIM) scale in order evaluate changes in patients' quality of life caused by variations in the motor performance. Currently, treatment of spasticity with ITB is the most effective way of reducing spasticity regardless of its cause.
Control of severe spasticity and its associated features with administration of baclofen directly into the CSF via an intrathecal pump has radically improved the management of patients resistant to oral therapy. This article reviews the rationale and clinical indications for this technique, and the outcome and complications encountered.
Intrathecal baclofen (ITB) application has become the first choice in the management of otherwise intractable generalized spasticity. The mechanism whereby ITB alleviates increased skeletal muscle tone is generally accepted; however, less is known about its effect on smooth muscles. The authors present two patients who developed a paralytic ileus during ITB infusion for supraspinal spasticity. In addition, they performed a retrospective chart analysis of another 12 patients receiving ITB with respect to their intestinal function. They calculated the cumulative sum of days without bowel movements plus the cumulative sum of interventions intended to promote intestinal peristalsis before and during ITB treatment. Intestinal function deteriorated in 10, remained unchanged in one, and improved in three patients compared to baseline, irrespective of concomitant oral baclofen medication. This is the first study addressing a previously unnoticed, but potentially deleterious side effect of ITB treatment. The findings suggest, however, that close observation of intestinal activity in conjunction with the generous use of prokinetic, laxantic or eubiotic drugs may allow for continuation of ITB treatment, even in particularly sensitive patients.
Intrathecal baclofen (ITB) has become a standard treatment for spasticity in patients with cerebral palsy (CP) over the last ten years. This review summarizes and assesses the evidence for the safety of ITB in patients with CP. The literature was searched using electronic databases and reference lists from March 2000 through April 2007. There were 36 studies identified reporting on the complications of ITB in patients with CP in non-controlled case series or single case reports; about half of these report only on the issue of complications, while the other half report on treatment effects as well. The majority of the participants reported on in these studies are in the pediatric or adolescent age range, but many studies include some adult patients with CP as well as a minority of patients with diagnoses other than CP. Conclusions on the basis of these disparate studies are limited; however, the available literature suggests that a relatively high rate of complications is associated with ITB treatment and that certain complications are associated with significant morbidity. Children appear to be at higher risk for complications than adults. However, until we have consistent, reliable reports of complications, it will not be possible to perform specific risk/benefit analyses. Recommendations for improving investigation in this important area are discussed.
With the introduction of the antispasticity agent, tizanidine hydrochloride (Zanaflex), physicians have requested information about the optimal way to switch appropriate patients from baclofen to tizanidine. A group of neurologists and rehabilitation specialists with a particular interest in spasticity was therefore asked to draw up a suitable approach to changing treatment.
BACKGROUND: Intrathecal drug delivery has been used clinically since the 1970's. Significant clinical advances have been made combining new technology with pharmacology and surgery. Continuous infusion of medication for both analgesia and spasticity has become a part of the armamentarium for specialists in these areas. Significant recent advances in technology promise further enhancements and improvements for intrathecal therapy. METHODS: A review of the literature combined with 20 years personal experience with intrathecal drug delivery. FINDINGS/DISCUSSION: Intrathecal therapy has established a role in the treatment of malignant pain, benign pain and severe spasticity. Significant literature and the current state of practice in the United States are reviewed. Recent therapeutic enhancements are discussed, and a wish list of future technological enhancements presented.
In 2018, France granted an approval to baclofen for the treatment of alcohol-dependency. It is the culmination of a long saga that began in 2005 with the publication of the personal case of Dr Ameisen, followed in 2008 by a public book which achieved great success and an important echo in the French population and in the media. The weakness of scientific data contradicting peremptory positions on its effectiveness has generated strong tensions between supporters of scientific medicine and activists supporting baclofen. Indeed, the data from published clinical trials do not confirm a high level of efficacy. Nevertheless, baclofen has allowed new patients to consult in the hope of an improvement. This long story confirms the need to evaluate therapeutics according to scientifically validated experimental protocols in order to avoid the risks of deviance.
21 schizophrenic patients were treated in a single blind study with para-chlorphenyl-GABA (baclofen) for 20 days after a placebo period of at least 1 week. Global clinical impression identified five patients as behaviorally unchanged, seven as improved and nine as worsened during the active drug administration. Four patients had to be withdrawn from the trial because of serious and unmanageable psychotic exacerbations. Overall incidence of psychotic symptoms in the group of the schizophrenic patients did not change substantially neither did the remission coefficient as calculated from the AMP documentation system. No differential effect was detected either on selected Schneiderian first rank symptoms or on symptoms more characteristic for chronic defectuous schizophrenia. It is concluded that baclofen is not a useful drug in the therapy of schizophrenia.
Intrathecal baclofen therapy, given via an implanted pump in the abdominal wall either as a continuous infusion or bolus dosing, has been used for more than 25 years to treat the spasticity and dystonia associated with various brain and spinal cord conditions. Pediatric clinicians occasionally encounter baclofen pumps, and in the pediatric setting, significant morbidity can arise from their use. This article presents the background, mechanism of action, uses, and complications of intrathecal baclofen therapy and discusses various management strategies should complications occur.
Baclofen was given intrathecally to six patients with severe lower limb spasticity due to traumatic spinal cord injury. The effects of the drug on spasticity and the ratio between the maximum amplitude of the H reflex and the M response from the soleus (Hmax/Mmax ratio) were assessed. In each patient, spasticity was reduced following intrathecal baclofen and in four patients there was a reduction in the amplitude of the H reflex and Hmax/Mmax ratio. These results suggest that the Hmax/Mmax ratio may be helpful in establishing optimum drug dosage, particularly when the drug is used on a chronic basis.
