Experience with beclomethasone dipropionate during the past 5 years has confirmed and extended the original observation that it is an effective, topically active corticosteroid of great value in treating asthma. Most steroid-dependent asthmatic patients can be successfully controlled with the drug, at least most of the time, and the therapeutic effect is dose dependent. Although high doses may be associated with some adrenal suppression such doses do not cause systemic symptoms, and side effects are of little consequence. It is important that patients treated with steroid aerosols continue to receive other effective therapeutic agents, notably adrenergic drugs, particularly by aerosol, and theophylline compounds; that they learn how to inhale the aerosol properly; and, most important, that they promptly start taking oral steroids when they experience an exacerbation of asthma.
INTRODUCTION: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a common chronic disorder, affecting 10 -30% of populations. AR has significant morbidity and expense. AR patients treat themselves with over-the-counter medications. However the usual H1 antihistamines are often inadequate. Intranasal corticosteroids effectively diminish AR symptoms. Beclomethasonedipropionate (BDP) was reported to effectively treat adults and children with AR. BDP was a chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) propellant pressurized metered dose inhaler (pMDI). Subsequently BDP appeared in an aqueous format. Some patients preferred the dryer sensation of pMDI to aqueous formulations. The protocol of Montreal, removed CFC devices from medical practice. The remaining intranasal steroids were in aqueous format. Many patients did not like the sensory perceptions using liquids intranasal. They were unlikely to be compliant. BDP hydrofluoroalkanepMDI (BDP HFA) was developed. AREAS COVERED: The need of active treatment of AR will be reviewed. Chemistry, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of BDP HFA will be presented. Clinical efficacy studies and safety data which led to the approval of BDP for use in adults and children will be reviewed. EXPERT OPINION: BDP HFA is an option to treat AR, demonstrating a favorable therapeutic index in large double-blind placebo-controlled studies. BDP HFA appeals to select AR patients.
Inhaled therapy is often considered the cornerstone of asthma management and international guidelines recommend combination therapy of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting-beta2-agonists (LABA) in a large proportion of asthmatic patients. The effectiveness of ICS/LABA is dependent on the correct choice of device and proper inhalation technique, this influences drug delivery and distribution along the bronchial tree, including the most peripheral airways. The fixed combination of beclometasone dipropionate/formoterol fumarate (BDP/FF) is the only extrafine formulation available in pressurized metered dose inhaler (pMDI) and in dry powder inhaler (DPI). Here, we focus on the recent significant advances regarding BDP/FF fixed combination for the treatment of asthma.
The high-strength formulation of extrafine beclometasone dipropionate/formoterol fumarate (BDP/Form) 200/6 microg has been developed to step up inhaled corticosteroid treatment, without increasing the dose of the bronchodilator, in patients who are not controlled with previous therapies. Two clinical studies have evaluated efficacy of high-strength BDP/Form as compared with another high-dose fixed combination and BDP monotherapy. Overall, data show that BDP/Form 200/6 mug improves lung function and has beneficial effects on symptoms, use of rescue medication and asthma control, with an acceptable safety profile comparable with that of high-dose fluticasone propionate/salmeterol. Therefore, BDP/Form 200/6 mug could be considered as an effective and safe treatment for patients with asthma who are not adequately controlled with high doses of inhaled corticosteroid monotherapy or medium doses of inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist combinations.
Peristomal skin complications (PSCs) are relatively common in ostomy patients, particularly in those with ileostomies. Non-healing irritation presents a clinical challenge and leads to pain and impaired quality of life for patients. METHODS: The cases of four ileostomy patients experiencing severe, challenging PSCs refractory to appliance changes, conventional dressings and barrier creams are discussed. FINDINGS: The cases of one male and one female patient with an end ileostomy post-subtotal colectomy for ulcerative colitis, one female with a defunctioning ileostomy post-anterior resection for sigmoid carcinoma and one male with an end ileostomy with a complex Crohn's surgical history are described. Two puffs of a 250 mcg metered dose beclometasone inhaler were applied to the affected skin once or twice daily. Treatment ranged from 6 to 21 days. Complete resolution was seen in all cases. CONCLUSION: Topical use of a beclometasone inhaler was effective for severe peri-ileostomy PSC secondary to four different aetiologies. Further studies are warranted to determine the effectiveness of this treatment in a larger patient cohort.
Inhaled corticosteroids have a key role in the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In recent times, beclometasone dipropionate has been reformulated in pressurised metered dose inhalers (pMDIs), using hydrofluoroalkanes (HFAs) as a propellant. Extensive toxicological testing has shown that HFA-propellants are well tolerated. Among the reformulated beclometasone dipropionate-containing pMDIs, only the characteristics of the two Qvar formulations have been thoroughly explored. Compared to the reference beclometasone dipropionate formulation, the mass median aerodynamic diameter of the Qvar formulations are substantially smaller (1.1 vs 4.0 microm), whereas that of Modulite averages 2.6 microm. Scintigraphic and pharmacokinetic studies indicate a higher lung deposition for both the Qvar and the Beclazone formulations, compared with reference beclometasone dipropionate formulation. Since the 2- to 3-fold increase in pulmonary deposition results in a 2.6- to 3-fold difference in relative efficacy for Qvar, half the dose of the reference beclometasone dipropionate formulation has been currently recommended in adult patients with asthma, a recommendation that is supported by a large number of clinical trials. Conversely, the design of the studies conducted to compare the efficacy of Qvar with fluticasone propionate and budesonide does not allow establishing their equivalence on a milligram per milligram basis. Good studies on the bioequivalence between the reference beclometasone dipropionate formulation and the Modulite or Beclazone formulations are not available.
A fixed-dose inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist (ICS/LABA) combination of extrafine beclometasone dipropionate and formoterol fumarate (BDP/FF) has been recently approved for use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Small airway inflammation and remodelling are cardinal features of COPD; therefore, the ability of this extrafine formulation to reach the small, as well as the large, airways is likely to be therapeutically important by enabling treatment of inflammatory processes in the whole bronchial tree. The clinical development of extrafine BDP/FF has demonstrated significant benefits over extrafine FF in terms of lung function improvement and reduction of the exacerbation rate, thus supporting the beneficial effect of an ICS combined to a LABA in COPD patients. Head-to-head comparison studies versus other ICS/LABA combinations have shown that the extrafine formulation enables the clinical benefits to be achieved with a lower dose of ICS. Extrafine BDP/FF showed lung function and dyspnoea improvements comparable to other ICS/LABAs, and a significantly faster onset of action was observed when compared with a salmeterol-containing fixed-dose combination. This review summarises the clinical evidence supporting the efficacy of extrafine BDP/FF in COPD and confirming that extrafine BDP/FF achieves the type of health benefit expected from such a targeted ICS/LABA combination in COPD.
Inhaled corticosteroids remain the most important therapy for chronic asthma in both adults and children. As all inhaled corticosteroids act by binding to a common glucocorticoid receptor there is little evidence of any real difference in clinical efficacy between the different inhaled corticosteroids. The main potential differences are in their propensity to cause side effects. Local side effects such as a hoarse voice do occur in a proportion of adults and there is some limited evidence that ciclesonide may cause less local side effects. In adults there is little evidence for clinically important systemic side effects from doses of inhaled steroids below 800 mcg/day (beclomethasone equivalent). Above this dose a proportion of patients may show some adrenocortical suppression, though it is unlikely to be of clinical importance. Data on bone mineral density and fracture rates is discrepant, but an overview would suggest that below 800 mcg/day there is no increase in fracture risk whereas above this dose there might be an increased fracture risk. The properties of ciclesonide would suggest that it has less propensity for systemic side effects, but large long term studies are needed to confirm this. In children using inhaled steroids at above-licensed doses reductions in short-term growth can occur, but there is little evidence for reductions in long-term growth at normal doses. At above-licensed doses, biochemical adrenocortical suppression can occur with some unusual but documented cases of clinical Addisonian crisis. Limited evidence in paediatric age groups would suggest that ciclesonide may have some advantage although it is not as yet licensed in all countries for paediatric use. Data on differences in side effects between normal and asthmatic patients, and between asthmatic patients with near-normal lung function compared to those with impaired lung function, indicate that inhaled corticosteroids (particularly fluticasone) are absorbed more in those with normal lung function; this strongly supports stepping down the inhaled steroid dose when asthma is controlled - as is recommended in asthma guidelines.
The reformulation of asthma medications with non-ozone depleting propellants such as hydrofluoroalkane-134a (HFA) has provided the opportunity to apply new knowledge and inhaler technology to improve significantly the delivery of aerosol drugs to the respiratory tract. Beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP), the most commonly prescribed inhaled corticosteroid for asthma therapy, is effective therapy; however currently available chlorofluorocarbon (CFC)-BDP metered dose inhalers typically deliver no more than 10% of the inhaled drug to the lungs with the remainder deposited in the oropharynx. Compared with an average particle size of 3.5-4.0 microns for CFC-BDP, the new HFA-BDP formulation has an average particle size of 1.1 microns and a respirable fraction of approximately 60%. The lung deposition of 99mTc-radiolabelled HFA-BDP has been investigated in healthy volunteers and patients with asthma. Results showed that the HFA-BDP formulation reverses the pattern of distribution seen with CFC-BDP products, delivering most of the dose of inhaled steroid directly to the lungs rather than to the oropharynx and gut where it may lead to unwanted side-effects. As such, HFA-BDP is likely to achieve equivalent efficacy to existing CFC-BDP formulations with lower doses and with reduced potential for local adverse effects.
Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) after allogeneic stem-cell transplantation causes significant morbidity and mortality. An important site of GVHD is the gastrointestinal (GI) tract because development of acute GI GVHD is prognostic of overall survival. The standard of care to treat acute GI GVHD is systemic corticosteroids and immunosuppressants; however, the use of these therapies can cause life-threatening opportunistic infections. To limit the adverse effects of systemic immunosuppression, the topically active corticosteroid beclometasone dipropionate has been investigated in case studies and in randomized placebo-controlled trials for the treatment of acute GI GVHD. In this review, we appraise these studies with beclometasone dipropionate, and discuss future randomized studies to clarify the role of beclometasone dipropionate for the treatment and prevention of acute GVHD. At present, more data are required before the addition of beclometasone dipropionate to systemic corticosteroids for the treatment of acute GVHD can be considered the standard of care.
The class label warning in the United States for inhaled corticosteroids (ICS's) states that these drugs may reduce growth velocity in children. In this paper, the evidence for this warning is reviewed from a clinical point of view. Children with asthma tend to grow slower than their healthy peers during the prepubertal years because they go into puberty at a later age. However, asthmatic children do achieve a (near) normal adult height. In randomized controlled clinical trials, the use of inhaled beclomethasone, budesonide and fluticasone is associated with a reduced growth during the first months of therapy, in the order of magnitude of approximately 0.5-1.5 cm x yr(-1). It is, however, unlikely that such an effect continues or persists because accumulating evidence shows that asthmatic children, even when they have been treated with ICS for years, attain normal adult height. Individual rare cases have been reported, however, where ICS use was associated with clinically relevant growth suppression. Inhaled corticosteroids are the most effective therapy available for maintenance treatment of childhood asthma. Fear of reduced growth velocity is based on exceptional cases and not on group data. It should, therefore, not be a reason to withhold or withdraw such highly effective treatment in children with asthma.
Since the 1950s, corticosteroid aerosols have proved useful in the treatment of asthma. Although their precise mechanism of action is not known, these topical agents have beneficial antiinflammatory and decongestive effects on the bronchial tree in both the allergic and nonallergic forms of this disease. Four of the newer aerosolized steroids--beclomethasone dipropionate, triamcinolone acetonide, flunisolide and budesonide--have been evaluated in clinical trials. The last drug is still investigational. Their side effects are minimal, the major ones being oral candidiasis and dysphonia. They are most effective when used prophylactically and should not be administered during acute asthmatic attacks, as insufficient amounts of drug are inhaled when the airways are obstructed. Patients must be instructed in the correct techniques of administering steroid aerosols to ensure optimal therapy.
Reformulation of beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP) in the chlorofluorocarbon (CFC)-free propellant hydrofluoroalkane-134a (HFA) gave the opportunity to produce a solution formulation that provides a greater total mass of fine drug particles than the current CFC suspension metered dose inhaler (MDI). The HFA-BDP MDI was studied in three pharmacokinetic trials in asthmatic patients. Serum levels of BDP plus metabolites [total beclomethasone (total BOH) assay] were used to test whether the increased fine particle mass of HFA-BDP would result in improved intrapulmonary deposition and subsequent differences in serum profiles. Serum levels, maximum serum concentrations and area under the serum concentration-time curves of total BOH following both single and multiple doses of HFA-BDP were similar to those obtained with approximately twice the dose of CFC-BDP. The observed lower bioavailability of CFC-BDP compared with HFA-BDP could be explained if most of each inhaled dose from the CFC-BDP MDI was swallowed and absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, while most of each inhaled dose from the HFA-BDP MDI was absorbed from the lungs. Deposition studies have confirmed this explanation. These results suggest that asthmatic patients can be treated with lower total daily doses of drug from HFA-BDP extrafine aerosol than from CFC-BDP.
From the experience above, it may be concluded that corticosteroid therapy in allergic disease has become more effective than ever before. The expected variations in usage of new important pharmacologic agents is seen with special clarity in the use of corticosteroids. The wide acclaim for the "miracle drug of the 1950's", which followed penicillin of the 1940's, soon gave away to anguish about side-effects that threatened to abolish its use entirely in the late 1950's. The 1960's brought alternate day therapy for chronic usage and recognition that short term usage was relatively safe. The 1970's saw proliferation of topically active steroids similar to those so important to the practice of Dermatology in the previous decade. Results in treating asthma and nasal diseases have been excellent and extensive research for adverse effects has been largely unrevealing.
In 1999, a robust dose-finding study showed that the chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) -free formulation of beclometasone dipropionate (BDP), QVAR (hydrofluoroalkane-134a BDP), produced equivalent asthma control to CFC-BDP at approximately half the daily dose in adults. Since then, a wealth of clinical and pharmaco-vigilance studies have been undertaken to confirm these results and establish dose-potency ratios with other inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). This review summarises the results of studies performed by the manufacturer that have been published since the last comprehensive review of the efficacy and safety of QVAR in 2000. Long-term comparisons with CFC-BDP have confirmed the durability of the 2:1 daily dosing ratio of CFC-BDP:QVAR in adults. Clinical comparisons with other ICS in both symptomatic and asymptomatic patients have established dose-potency ratios of 2: 1 for budesonide:QVAR and 1:1 for fluticasone:QVAR. Furthermore, QVAR has been associated with benefits on asthma symptomatology and quality of life, compared with other ICS that probably arises from its peripheral deposition in the lung.
Corticosteroids have represented the mainstay of medical treatment for induction of remission in inflammatory bowel disease. Aim of this paper is to review mechanisms of action, safety and efficacy of beclomethasone dipropionate, a steroid with enhanced topical intestinal activity and low systemic activity, in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.
At doses similar to those used in the treatment of chronic bronchial asthma, intranasal beclomethasone dipropionate is effective in alleviating nasal symptoms of seasonal allergic and perennial rhinitis in about three-quarters of patients. Eye symptoms are not relieved. The carry-over effect of the evening dose is useful in preventing early morning attacks of sneezing. Intranasal beclomethasone dipropionate is useful in controlling symptoms persisting after polypectomy and may possibly delay or eliminate the need for the surgical removal of nasal polyps, which may shrink after several weeks or months of treatment.
Inflammatory rhinitis is a very common disorder. It includes allergic rhinitis (AR) and non-allergic rhinitis (NAR). Nasal inflammation is shared by both disorders. So, anti-inflammatory treatment is indicated for both. Beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP) is a corticosteroid that is long time available both as intranasal spray and aerosol solution. BDP is a corticosteroid with proved efficacy in the treatment of rhinitis, both as spray and aerosol. Safety issue has been satisfactory explored, thus BDP is usually safe and well tolerated. Hyaluronic acid (HA) with high molecular weight has anti-inflammatory activity associated with wetting-lubricating effect. BDP may be usefully employed in acute forms, HA may be also used in chronic ones.
BACKGROUND: According to international treatment guidelines, inhaled rapid-acting beta2 agonists should be used for the control of symptoms in patients with asthma. We compared the efficacy and safety of an extrafine combination inhaler containing a corticosteroid (beclometasone) plus a rapid-onset, long-acting beta2 agonist (formoterol) with a short-acting beta2 agonist (salbutamol) as reliever strategies in patients taking beclometasone-formoterol combination as maintenance treatment. METHODS: In a double-blind trial undertaken in 183 centres in 14 European countries over 48 weeks, patients (aged >/=18 years) with asthma that was not fully controlled, with a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of at least 60% predicted, had a 2-week run in. During this period, patients were treated with a combination of beclometasone 100 mug and formoterol 6 mug per one inhalation twice daily plus salbutamol 100 mug as required delivered by use of a pressurised metered-dose inhaler. They were then randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio with a computer-generated randomisation list to receive beclometasone 100 mug plus formoterol 6 mug or salbutamol 100 mug as reliever in addition to maintenance with beclometasone 100 mug plus formoterol 6 mug twice daily. Primary outcome was the time to first severe exacerbation (admission to hospital or visit to emergency department, or use of systemic steroids for >/=3 consecutive days). Secondary outcomes were number of severe exacerbations (events per 100 patients per year), time to and number of mild exacerbations, additional exacerbation variables, lung function, symptom scores, and asthma control. Analysis was by intention to treat. The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00861926. FINDINGS: 1714 patients were randomly assigned to the as-needed beclometasone-formoterol (n=857) and as-needed salbutamol groups (n=857), and 1701 were analysed (852 and 849, respectively). 326 severe exacerbations were reported by 251 patients during the study, and 99 versus 152 patients had at least one exacerbation during the 48 weeks, respectively. Compared with beclometasone-formoterol plus salbutamol as needed, beclometasone-formoterol for both maintenance and reliever treatment significantly increased the time to first exacerbation (209 days vs 134 days) by 75 days, with a 36% reduction in risk (hazard ratio 0.64 [95% CI 0.49 to 0.82]; p=0.0005), and the estimated probability was 12% and 18%, respectively (p=0.0003). The number of days with mild asthma exacerbations was also lower with as-needed beclometasone-formoterol than with as-needed salbutamol (56.04 days per patient per year vs 65.11 days per patient per year; 0.86 [0.76 to 0.98]; p=0.021). From the run-in period to week 48, both treatments improved symptoms (mean change -1.59 [-1.94 to -1.25] in the as-needed beclometasone-formoterol group vs -1.44 [-1.78 to -1.10] in the as-needed salbutamol group, difference -0.15 [-0.60 to 0.30]; p=0.507), percentage of asthma control days (9.5% [7.3 to 11.8] vs 10.9% [8.7 to 13.1], respectively, -1.4 [-4.3 to 1.6]; p=0.359), use of reliever (-0.29 [-0.38 to -0.20] vs -0.27 [-0.36 to -0.19], respectively, -0.02 [-0.13 to 0.10]; p=0.794), and lung function (FEV1, 0.090 [0.060 to 0.120] vs 0.090 [0.060-0.120], respectively, 0.001 [-0.040 to 0.040]; p=0.969), and were well tolerated (patients with serious adverse events, 32 [4%] and 41 [5%], respectively). INTERPRETATION: Our results lend support to the use of the combination of a single inhaled corticosteroid plus a rapid-onset, long-acting beta2 agonist for maintenance and relief in patients with moderate to severe asthma and provide encouraging data for the formulation of beclometasone-formoterol for this use. FUNDING: Chiesi Farmaceutici.
