Drugs classified as beta-blockers have proved to be valuable in the treatment of patients with glaucoma. Timolol has become the most widely used ocular hypotensive agent. Actual and potential side effects associated with its non-selective beta-blockade have prevented its use in patients with reactive airways disease, and to a lesser extent, with various cardiovascular conditions. Betaxolol is a relatively selective beta-1 blocker which in most patients is almost as effective as timolol in lowering intraocular pressure, and may be partly additive with dipivefrin. It is probably safer in patients unable to tolerate non-selective beta-blockers. However, it needs to be used with caution in these patients, who are unpredictably susceptible to systemic side effects.
Adrenergic beta-blockers are used to treat many conditions, including hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, heart failure, angina pectoris, migraine, and tremors. The majority of the beta-blockers including Propranolol, Metoprolol, Acebutolol, Alprenolol, Betaxolol, Carvedilol, Nebivolol and Oxprenolol are metabolised majorly by CYP2D6, and Bisoprolol is primarily metabolised by CYP3A4 enzymes. The drugs inhibiting or inducing them may alter the pharmacokinetics of those beta-blockers. The plasma concentrations of Propranolol might be elevated by the concomitant use of drugs, such as SSRIs (Fluoxetine, Paroxetine), SNRIs (Duloxetine) and Cimetidine, while the plasma concentrations of Metoprolol increased by the concurrent use of SSRIs (Fluoxetine, Paroxetine), Amiodarone, Celecoxib, Cimetidine, Terbinafine, and Diphenhydramine. beta-blockers can also interact pharmacodynamically with drugs, including fluoroquinolones, antidiabetic agents and NSAIDs. In addition, beta-blockers may interact with herbs, such as curcumin, Ginkgo biloba, Schisandra chinensis, green tea, guggul, hawthorn, St. John's wort and Yohimbine. This article focuses on clinically relevant drug interactions of beta-blockers with commonly prescribed medications. In addition to Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of the drug interactions, recommendations for clinical practice are highlighted. The prescribers and the pharmacists are needed to be aware of the drugs interacting with beta-blockers to prevent possible adverse drug interactions.
TOPIC: Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is a highly prevalent condition worldwide and the most common cause of irreversible sight loss. The objective is to assess the comparative effectiveness of first-line medical treatments in patients with POAG or ocular hypertension through a systematic review and network meta-analysis, and to provide relative rankings of these treatments. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Treatment for POAG currently relies completely on lowering the intraocular pressure (IOP). Although topical drops, lasers, and surgeries can be considered in the initial treatment of glaucoma, most patients elect to start treatment with eye drops. METHODS: We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that compared a single active topical medication with no treatment/placebo or another single topical medication. We searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the Food and Drug Administration's website. Two individuals independently assessed trial eligibility, abstracted data, and assessed the risk of bias. We performed Bayesian network meta-analyses. RESULTS: We included 114 RCTs with data from 20 275 participants. The overall risk of bias of the included trials is mixed. The mean reductions (95% credible intervals) in IOP in millimeters of mercury at 3 months ordered from the most to least effective drugs were as follows: bimatoprost 5.61 (4.94; 6.29), latanoprost 4.85 (4.24; 5.46), travoprost 4.83 (4.12; 5.54), levobunolol 4.51 (3.85; 5.24), tafluprost 4.37 (2.94; 5.83), timolol 3.70 (3.16; 4.24), brimonidine 3.59 (2.89; 4.29), carteolol 3.44 (2.42; 4.46), levobetaxolol 2.56 (1.52; 3.62), apraclonidine 2.52 (0.94; 4.11), dorzolamide 2.49 (1.85; 3.13), brinzolamide 2.42 (1.62; 3.23), betaxolol 2.24 (1.59; 2.88), and unoprostone 1.91 (1.15; 2.67). CONCLUSIONS: All active first-line drugs are effective compared with placebo in reducing IOP at 3 months. Bimatoprost, latanoprost, and travoprost are among the most efficacious drugs, although the within-class differences were small and may not be clinically meaningful. All factors, including adverse effects, patient preferences, and cost, should be considered in selecting a drug for a given patient.
OBJECTIVES: The Early Manifest Glaucoma Trial (EMGT) will evaluate the effectiveness of reducing intraocular pressure (IOP) in early, previously untreated open-angle glaucoma. Its secondary aims are to explore factors related to glaucoma progression and to study the natural history of the disease. This article describes the EMGT design and presents baseline data. DESIGN: Randomized, clinical trial. PARTICIPANTS: Newly diagnosed patients 50 to 80 years of age with early glaucomatous visual field defects were mainly identified from a population-based screening of more than 44,000 residents of Malmo and Helsingborg, Sweden. Exclusion criteria were advanced visual field loss; mean IOP greater than 30 mmHg or any IOP greater than 35 mmHg; visual acuity less than 0.5; and inability to complete follow-up protocols. INTERVENTIONS: After informed consent, patients were randomized to treatment or no initial treatment with close follow-up. Treated patients had laser trabeculoplasty and started receiving topical betaxolol twice daily in eligible eyes. Follow-up visits include computerized perimetry and tonometry every 3 months and fundus photography every 6 months. Decisions to change or begin treatment are made jointly with the patient when EMGT progression occurs and also later if clinically needed. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The EMGT progression is defined by sustained increases of visual field loss in three consecutive C30-2 Humphrey tests, as determined from computer-based analyses, or by optic disc changes, as determined from flicker chronoscopy and side-by-side comparisons of fundus photographs performed by masked, independent graders. RESULTS: A total of 255 patients were randomized between 1993 and 1997 and will be followed for at least 4 years. All had generally good health status; mean age was 68.1 years, and 66% were women. At baseline, mean IOP was 20.6 mmHg and 80% of eyes had IOP less than 25 mmHg. CONCLUSIONS: The Early Manifest Glaucoma Trial is the first large randomized, clinical trial to evaluate the role of immediate pressure reduction, as compared to no initial reduction, in patients with early glaucoma and normal or moderately elevated IOP. Its results will have implications for: (1) the clinical management of glaucoma; (2) understanding the role of IOP and the natural history of glaucoma; and (3) evaluating the rationale for glaucoma screening.
Beta-adrenergic antagonists are one of the most commonly used class of agents in the treatment of hypertension. They have also demonstrated utility in the treatment of angina pectoris and certain arrhythmias and for the reduction in mortality following a myocardial infarction. The use of this class of agents creates the potential for beta-blocker exposure among lactating women. This review focuses on the most up-to-date data regarding the more common agents--metoprolol, atenolol, propranolol, carvedilol, nadolol, sotalol, and betaxolol--and their safety in lactating women.
In the past five years, new therapeutic modalities have been discovered that have revolutionized the medical and surgical management of glaucoma. New methods of drug delivery have been developed for pilocarpine and epinephrine. Timolol maleate has become the most widely used drug in the treatment of glaucoma since it was approved for general use in 1978. This chapter reviews the pharmacology of the newer antiglaucoma medications and gives a perspective on the role of laser surgery in open-angle glaucoma.
The aim of this research is to describe one of the most frequent ophthalmology disease-glaucoma and to look at their neurodegenerative nature and methods to stop disease. We use neuroprotection in glaucoma from a short time but despite of ethiological reasons neuroprotection seems to be one of the main mechanism to slow their progression. This research is talking about new opinions about neuroprotection in glaucoma and their epidemiology and etiology.
Betaxolol is a relatively cardioselective beta-adrenoceptor blocking drug, with no partial agonist (intrinsic sympathomimetic) activity and weak membrane-stabilizing (local anesthetic) activity. Betaxolol selectively and competitively binds to and blocks beta-1 (beta1) adrenergic receptors in the heart, thereby decreasing cardiac contractility and rate. This leads to a reduction in cardiac output and lowers blood pressure. When applied topically in the eye, this agent reduces aqueous humor secretion and lowers the intraocular pressure (IOP). In addition, betaxolol prevents the release of renin, a hormone secreted by the kidneys that causes constriction of blood vessels. Betaxolol (S)-(-)-enantiomer shows higher pharmacological activity. This chapter provides a complete review of nomenclature, physiochemical properties, methods of preparation, identification techniques and various qualitative and quantitative analytical techniques as well as pharmacology of betaxolol. In addition, the chapter also includes review of several methods for enantiomeric separation betaxolol using chromatographic techniques.
OBJECTIVE: To provide the results of the Early Manifest Glaucoma Trial, which compared the effect of immediately lowering the intraocular pressure (IOP), vs no treatment or later treatment, on the progression of newly detected open-angle glaucoma. DESIGN: Randomized clinical trial. PARTICIPANTS: Two hundred fifty-five patients aged 50 to 80 years (median, 68 years) with early glaucoma, visual field defects (median mean deviation, -4 dB), and a median IOP of 20 mm Hg, mainly identified through a population screening. Patients with an IOP greater than 30 mm Hg or advanced visual field loss were ineligible. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to either laser trabeculoplasty plus topical betaxolol hydrochloride (n = 129) or no initial treatment (n = 126). Study visits included Humphrey Full Threshold 30-2 visual field tests and tonometry every 3 months, and optic disc photography every 6 months. Decisions regarding treatment were made jointly with the patient when progression occurred and thereafter. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Glaucoma progression was defined by specific visual field and optic disc outcomes. Criteria for perimetric progression were computer based and defined as the same 3 or more test point locations showing significant deterioration from baseline in glaucoma change probability maps from 3 consecutive tests. Optic disc progression was determined by masked graders using flicker chronoscopy plus side-by-side photogradings. RESULTS: After a median follow-up period of 6 years (range, 51-102 months), retention was excellent, with only 6 patients lost to follow-up for reasons other than death. On average, treatment reduced the IOP by 5.1 mm Hg or 25%, a reduction maintained throughout follow-up. Progression was less frequent in the treatment group (58/129; 45%) than in controls (78/126; 62%) (P =.007) and occurred significantly later in treated patients. Treatment effects were also evident when stratifying patients by median IOP, mean deviation, and age as well as exfoliation status. Although patients reported few systemic or ocular conditions, increases in clinical nuclear lens opacity gradings were associated with treatment (P =.002). CONCLUSIONS: The Early Manifest Glaucoma Trial is the first adequately powered randomized trial with an untreated control arm to evaluate the effects of IOP reduction in patients with open-angle glaucoma who have elevated and normal IOP. Its intent-to-treat analysis showed considerable beneficial effects of treatment that significantly delayed progression. Whereas progression varied across patient categories, treatment effects were present in both older and younger patients, high- and normal-tension glaucoma, and eyes with less and greater visual field loss.
A review of the literature has identified 10 agents causing contact dermatitis among topically administered drugs for glaucoma. These agents include beta-blockers (timolol, befunolol, betaxolol, levobunolol, carteolol, metipranolol), a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (dorzolamide), a parasympathomimetic (pilocarpine), and sympathomimetics (dipivefrin, apraclonidine). Patch testing has been documented in certain individuals as well as cross sensitization and reactivity. Systemic reactions to these topically applied medications have been briefly noted.
Rieger syndrome (RS) is a multiple malformation syndrome characterized by ocular manifestations and extraocular defects. Herein, we report a 9-year-old boy who exhibited Rieger Syndrome phenotype as well as congenital hypothyroidism which may be an underappreciated feature of RS.
Betaxolol hydrochloride, 0.5%, and timolol maleate, 0.5%, were compared in a 26-week randomized, double-masked study involving 46 patients with primary open-angle glaucoma. The two drugs were comparable with regard to both intraocular pressure-lowering efficacy and side effects. Since betaxolol is a selective beta 1-adrenergic antagonist, it may be advantageous for patients in whom beta 2-blockade could be harmful.
The effects of timolol and betaxolol were compared for blocking beta agonist stimulation of cyclic-AMP in cultured human trabecular meshwork cells. Epinephrine (10(-5) M) produced a large and rapid increase in HTM cyclic-AMP; timolol (10(-6) M), at concentrations readily achieved in the aqueous humor after 0.5% eyedrops, completely blocked this effect. Recovery from timolol treatment appeared to be relatively slow, with only a 30-40% recovery observed by 9 hours. In comparison, betaxolol (10(-6) M) produced a smaller blockade of the epinephrine effects; a rapid recovery from the betaxolol effects was observed, with a greater than half-maximal response to epinephrine observed 15 minutes after removal of this beta blocker. These findings may help to explain the clinical observations of an outflow facility effect of epinephrine when used in combination protocols with betaxolol, but not with timolol.
Up-regulation of utrophin in muscles represents a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy. We previously demonstrated that eEF1A2 associates with the 5'UTR of utrophin A to promote IRES-dependent translation. Here, we examine whether eEF1A2 directly regulates utrophin A expression and identify via an ELISA-based high-throughput screen, FDA-approved drugs that upregulate both eEF1A2 and utrophin A. Our results show that transient overexpression of eEF1A2 in mouse muscles causes an increase in IRES-mediated translation of utrophin A. Through the assessment of our screen, we reveal 7 classes of FDA-approved drugs that increase eEF1A2 and utrophin A protein levels. Treatment of mdx mice with the 2 top leads results in multiple improvements of the dystrophic phenotype. Here, we report that IRES-mediated translation of utrophin A via eEF1A2 is a critical mechanism of regulating utrophin A expression and reveal the potential of repurposed drugs for treating DMD via this pathway.
INTRODUCTION: beta-Blockers are essential for cardiovascular disease management but can induce respiratory issues, particularly with non-selective beta-blockers. Their safety in asthmatic patients is debated. OBJECTIVE: This study investigates the link between different classes of beta-blockers and the risk of asthma and asthma-like adverse events (AEs) using data from the Food and Drug Administration's Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS). METHODS: beta-Blockers were first reviewed according to European Society of Cardiology classification and then using the Vashistha and Kumar classification. The risk associated with different beta-blocker classes was evaluated through disproportionality analysis using the reporting odds ratio (ROR). RESULTS: Among 251,145 AEs reported for beta-blockers, 4104 were asthma-related. Selective beta(1)-blockers had a higher asthma risk signal (ROR: 1.15) compared to non-selective beta-blockers (ROR: 0.90). alpha- and beta-Blockers showed the lowest risk (ROR: 0.51). The Vashistha and Kumar classification detailed risk profiles for various beta-blockers, highlighting differences even within the same class. Dual alpha- and beta-blockers, hydrophilic, and lipophilic beta-blockers posed lower asthma risks, while selective beta(1)-blockers had higher risks regardless of intrinsic sympathomimetic activity. CONCLUSION: Although the signals detected by disproportionality analysis are only candidate risks, the risk stratification resulting from our analysis highlights the need for cautious beta-blocker selection in asthmatic patients or those predisposed to asthma. Furthermore, despite the limitations associated with the FAERS data, the study reveals significant variability in risk among different beta-blocker classes, crucial for clinical decisions and patient management. Drugs like esmolol, metoprolol, nebivolol, and nadolol may be safer for asthmatic patients, whereas betaxolol, bisoprolol, timolol, and propranolol should be avoided.
PURPOSE: beta-Blockers have recently become the main form of treatment of infantile hemangiomas. Due to the potential systemic adverse effects of beta-blockers, topical skin treatment of the drugs is preferred. However, the effect and mechanism of dosage form pH upon skin permeation of these weak bases is not well understood. To develop an effective topical skin delivery system for the beta-blockers, the present study evaluated skin permeation of beta-blockers propranolol, betaxolol, timolol, and atenolol. METHODS: Experiments were performed in side-by-side diffusion cells with human epidermal membrane (HEM) in vitro to determine the effect of donor solution pH upon the permeation of the beta-blockers across HEM. RESULTS: The apparent permeability coefficients of HEM for the beta-blockers increased with their lipophilicity, suggesting the HEM lipoidal pathway as the main permeation mechanism of the beta-blockers. The pH in the donor solution was a major factor influencing HEM permeation for the beta-blockers with a 2- to 4-fold increase in the permeability coefficient per pH unit increase. This permeability versus pH relationship was found to deviate from theoretical predictions, possibly due to the effective stratum corneum pH being different from the pH in the donor solution. CONCLUSIONS: The present results suggest the possibility of topical treatment of hemangioma using beta-blockers.
Purpose: Our aim was to evaluate the effects of topical antiglaucomatous medications on conjunctival thickness using anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT). Methods: Thirty eyes of 30 patients with primary open angle glaucoma, who had never used any antiglaucomatous medications, enrolled in this prospective study. Followed by a full ophthalmologic examination, the conjunctival thickness was measured before treatment and at 1, 3, and 6-month post-treatment by AS-OCT. Measurements were taken from the superior bulbar conjunctiva, 3-4 mm from the limbus. Results: The mean age of patients was 67.7 +/- 8.6; fourteen cases (46.7%) were given latanoprost, 2 cases (6.7%) brinzolamide+timolol, 2 cases (6.7%) betaxolol, 4 cases (13.3%) travoprost, and 8 cases (26.7%) brimonidine. The mean baseline conjunctival thickness was 222.9 +/- 38 mum, while the mean conjunctival thickness was 212.8 +/- 36.0 mum in the first month, 198.2 +/- 35.8 mum in the third month, and 187.5 +/- 40.2 mum in the sixth month. Decrease in conjunctival thickness at each examination was statistically significantly compared to baseline. (P < 0.05) Decrease in conjunctival thickness in Latanoprost subgroup was statistically significant, whereas the decreases in other active ingredients were not. Conclusion: Topical antiglaucomatous medications especially prostaglandin analogs may affect conjunctival thickness even during the first few months. This thinning effect may be crucial for the conjunctiva, as the basis of the possible filtration surgery.
AIM: To evaluate the effects of four glaucoma medications on the cardio-respiratory system. METHOD: All newly diagnosed glaucoma (primary open-angle glaucoma--POAG--or normal tension glaucoma) patients were recruited into a 12-month prospective audit. RESULTS: The study has resulted in glaucoma patients having a spirometry lung function test before being prescribed beta-blocker eye drops. The results of this study demonstrate a high level of both systemic and ocular side-effects caused by these topical glaucoma medications. CONCLUSION: This study confirms the findings of previous studies, which have shown topical beta-blockers to be harmful to older people with glaucoma and 'hidden' reversible airways disease. It also shows the consequences of using topical beta-blockers on patients who have previously undiagnosed respiratory and cardiac disease.
BACKGROUND: In recent years, there have been reports of contact dermatitis due to the beta-blockers that are used in the treatment of glaucoma, such as timolol, levubonolol, carteolol, or betaxolol. CASE REPORT: A 37-year-old male patient, who was diagnosed with bilateral primary open-angle glaucoma two years ago, was in therapy with dorzolamide and a topical beta-adrenergic blocker (timolol) in drops twice a day. Months later, he reported conjunctival hyperemia, stinging, and inflammation of both eyelids, followed by erythematous dermatitis, which improved upon treatment discontinuation. The patch test came back negative, but the conjunctival provocation test came back positive 48 hours later. CONCLUSION: Sensitization to the ophthalmic drops that are used to control glaucoma proved to be the mechanism that was causing the clinical picture of the patient. Performing a tolerance test for active anti-glaucoma agents may be helpful in improving tolerance to the medical treatment of some patients, thus, avoiding laser procedures and/or precipitated antiglaucomatous surgeries.
Glaucoma is a chronic optic neuropathy in which retinal ganglion cells die over a number of years. The initiation of the disease and its progression may involve an ischaemic-like insult to the ganglion cell axons caused by an alteration in the quality of blood flow. Thus, to effectively treat glaucoma it may be necessary to counteract the ischaemic-like insult to the region of the optic nerve head. Studies on the isolated optic nerve suggest that substances that reduce the influx of sodium would be particularly effective neuroprotectants. Significantly, of the presently used antiglaucoma substances, only beta-blockers can reduce sodium influx into cells. Moreover, they also reduce the influx of calcium and this would be expected to benefit the survival of insulted neurones. Betaxolol is the most effective antiglaucoma drug at reducing sodium/calcium influx. Our electroretinographic data indicated that topical application of levobetaxolol to rats attenuated the effects of ischaemia/reperfusion injury. Timolol was also effective but to a lesser extent. Based on these data we conclude that beta-blockers may be able to blunt ganglion cell death in glaucoma, and that levobetaxolol may be a more effective neuroprotectant than timolol because of its greater capacity to block sodium and calcium influx.
