Metastatic prostate cancer is treated with drugs that antagonize androgen action, but most patients progress to a more aggressive form of the disease called castration-resistant prostate cancer, driven by elevated expression of the androgen receptor. Here we characterize the diarylthiohydantoins RD162 and MDV3100, two compounds optimized from a screen for nonsteroidal antiandrogens that retain activity in the setting of increased androgen receptor expression. Both compounds bind to the androgen receptor with greater relative affinity than the clinically used antiandrogen bicalutamide, reduce the efficiency of its nuclear translocation, and impair both DNA binding to androgen response elements and recruitment of coactivators. RD162 and MDV3100 are orally available and induce tumor regression in mouse models of castration-resistant human prostate cancer. Of the first 30 patients treated with MDV3100 in a Phase I/II clinical trial, 13 of 30 (43%) showed sustained declines (by >50%) in serum concentrations of prostate-specific antigen, a biomarker of prostate cancer. These compounds thus appear to be promising candidates for treatment of advanced prostate cancer.
Female pattern hair loss (FPHL) is the most common form of alopecia in women. FPHL may compromise body image and strongly affect self-esteem, negatively impacting quality of life. Currently, the only Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drug for its treatment is topical minoxidil, with a variable response rate. Recently, a few studies in FPHL have pointed out bicalutamide as an emergent selective androgen receptor antagonist with a favorable safety and tolerability profile. This review aimed to summarize and discuss the key information on this new therapy for FPHL. Bicalutamide has no diuretic effect. It does not cross the blood-brain barrier, and it has little effect on serum luteinizing hormone. Additionally, bicalutamide was found to be effective on women presenting with other features of hyperandrogenism such as seborrhea, acne, and hirsutism with mild and well-tolerated adverse effects. Despite the high prevalence and psychosocial impairment, FPHL treatment remains challenging. Therefore, although future prospective, comparative, randomized clinical trials are essential to establish the ideal dose and efficacy of the drug, oral bicalutamide appears to be a promising option to expand the arsenal of FPHL treatment.
A 78-year-old man receiving bicalutamide for prostate cancer was referred for a PSMA PET/CT scan to evaluate his gradually rising prostate-specific antigen level. The PSMA PET/CT revealed gynecomastia with radiotracer uptake in bilateral breast parenchyma, a known but rarely reported effect of bicalutamide monotherapy. This scan also demonstrated metastatic progression of his disease in bone and lymph nodes, and he was started on leuprolide injections. Three months after a decrease in his testosterone level, the radiotracer uptake in his breast tissue had resolved, demonstrating that PSMA-avid bicalutamide-induced gynecomastia is reversible.
Continued reliance on the androgen receptor (AR) is now understood as a core mechanism in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), the most advanced form of this disease. While established and novel AR pathway-targeting agents display clinical efficacy in metastatic CRPC, dose-limiting side effects remain problematic for all current agents. In this study, we report the discovery and development of ARN-509, a competitive AR inhibitor that is fully antagonistic to AR overexpression, a common and important feature of CRPC. ARN-509 was optimized for inhibition of AR transcriptional activity and prostate cancer cell proliferation, pharmacokinetics, and in vivo efficacy. In contrast to bicalutamide, ARN-509 lacked significant agonist activity in preclinical models of CRPC. Moreover, ARN-509 lacked inducing activity for AR nuclear localization or DNA binding. In a clinically valid murine xenograft model of human CRPC, ARN-509 showed greater efficacy than MDV3100. Maximal therapeutic response in this model was achieved at 30 mg/kg/d of ARN-509, whereas the same response required 100 mg/kg/d of MDV3100 and higher steady-state plasma concentrations. Thus, ARN-509 exhibits characteristics predicting a higher therapeutic index with a greater potential to reach maximally efficacious doses in man than current AR antagonists. Our findings offer preclinical proof of principle for ARN-509 as a promising therapeutic in both castration-sensitive and castration-resistant forms of prostate cancer.
The use of combined androgen blockade therapy in prostate cancer management remains controversial. This article reviews the effect of the different non-steroid androgens in blocking androgen-independent activation of the androgen receptor in the androgen-depleted environment, and the potential benefit of bicalutamide in comparison to the first generation of anti-androgens (flutamide and nilutamide). An estimate of the benefit of combined therapy with bicalutamide suggests there is a high probability that bicalutamide 50 mg as combined therapy provides a survival advantage over castration alone. This treatment must be balanced against the potential for an increase in side-effects and a consequent adverse effect on the patient's quality of life.
BACKGROUND: Salvage radiation therapy is often necessary in men who have undergone radical prostatectomy and have evidence of prostate-cancer recurrence signaled by a persistently or recurrently elevated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level. Whether antiandrogen therapy with radiation therapy will further improve cancer control and prolong overall survival is unknown. METHODS: In a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial conducted from 1998 through 2003, we assigned 760 eligible patients who had undergone prostatectomy with a lymphadenectomy and had disease, as assessed on pathological testing, with a tumor stage of T2 (confined to the prostate but with a positive surgical margin) or T3 (with histologic extension beyond the prostatic capsule), no nodal involvement, and a detectable PSA level of 0.2 to 4.0 ng per milliliter to undergo radiation therapy and receive either antiandrogen therapy (24 months of bicalutamide at a dose of 150 mg daily) or daily placebo tablets during and after radiation therapy. The primary end point was the rate of overall survival. RESULTS: The median follow-up among the surviving patients was 13 years. The actuarial rate of overall survival at 12 years was 76.3% in the bicalutamide group, as compared with 71.3% in the placebo group (hazard ratio for death, 0.77; 95% confidence interval, 0.59 to 0.99; P=0.04). The 12-year incidence of death from prostate cancer, as assessed by means of central review, was 5.8% in the bicalutamide group, as compared with 13.4% in the placebo group (P<0.001). The cumulative incidence of metastatic prostate cancer at 12 years was 14.5% in the bicalutamide group, as compared with 23.0% in the placebo group (P=0.005). The incidence of late adverse events associated with radiation therapy was similar in the two groups. Gynecomastia was recorded in 69.7% of the patients in the bicalutamide group, as compared with 10.9% of those in the placebo group (P<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: The addition of 24 months of antiandrogen therapy with daily bicalutamide to salvage radiation therapy resulted in significantly higher rates of long-term overall survival and lower incidences of metastatic prostate cancer and death from prostate cancer than radiation therapy plus placebo. (Funded by the National Cancer Institute and AstraZeneca; RTOG 9601 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00002874 .).
BACKGROUND: Rezvilutamide, a novel androgen-receptor inhibitor with low blood-brain barrier penetration, has shown potent antitumour activity against metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of rezvilutamide versus bicalutamide in combination with androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) for high-volume, metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. METHODS: CHART is a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study done at 72 hospitals in China, Poland, Czech Republic, and Bulgaria. Eligible patients were aged 18 years or older, had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 or 1, and had high-volume metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. Previous chemotherapy or other localised treatment for prostate cancer were not allowed. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive ADT plus either rezvilutamide (240 mg) or bicalutamide (50 mg) orally once daily. Randomisation was done via an interactive response technology system (block size of four) and stratified according to ECOG performance status and presence of visceral metastasis (excluding lymph nodes). Herein, we present the results of the preplanned interim analyses for the two co-primary endpoints of radiographic progression-free survival assessed by a blinded independent review committee and overall survival in the intention-to-treat population. Safety was assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of study medication. This study is ongoing, but is closed to recruitment. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03520478. FINDINGS: Between June 28, 2018, and Aug 6, 2020, 792 patients were screened and 654 patients were randomly assigned to receive rezvilutamide plus ADT (n=326) or bicalutamide plus ADT (n=328). At the preplanned interim analysis for radiographic progression-free survival (data cutoff May 16, 2021), the median follow-up duration was 21.2 months (IQR 16.6-25.8). Rezvilutamide significantly improved radiographic progression-free survival compared with bicalutamide (median radiographic progression-free survival not reached [95% CI not reached-not reached] vs 25.1 months [95% CI 15.7-not reached]; hazard ratio [HR] 0.44 [95% CI 0.33-0.58]; p&lt;0.0001). At the preplanned interim analysis for overall survival (data cutoff Feb 28, 2022), the median follow-up duration was 29.3 months (IQR 21.0-33.3). Rezvilutamide significantly improved overall survival compared with bicalutamide (HR 0.58 [95% CI 0.44-0.77]; p=0.0001; median overall survival was not reached [95% CI not reached-not reached] vs not reached [36.2-not reached]). The most common grade 3 or worse adverse events of any cause in the safety population were hypertension (26 [8%] of 323 patients in the rezvilutamide group vs 24 [7%] of 324 patients in the bicalutamide group), hypertriglyceridaemia (24 [7%] vs seven [2%]), increased weight (20 [6%] vs 12 [4%]), anaemia (12 [4%] vs 16 [5%]), and hypokalaemia (11 [3%] vs four [1%]). Serious adverse events were reported in 90 (28%) of 323 patients in the rezvilutamide group and 69 (21%) of 324 patients in the bicalutamide group. No treatment-related deaths occurred in patients in the rezvilutamide group; one treatment-related death of unknown specific cause (&lt;1%) occurred in the bicalutamide group. INTERPRETATION: In the two interim analyses, rezvilutamide plus ADT significantly improved radiographic progression-free survival and overall survival compared with bicalutamide plus ADT in patients with high-volume, metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer, with a tolerable safety profile. FUNDING: Jiangsu Hengrui Pharmaceuticals.
In 1989 the unanticipated agonist effect of antiandrogens on LNCaP prostate cancer cells was detected. A "flutamide withdrawal syndrome" was first described by Kelly and Scher [15], who reported a decrease in serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels after the removal of flutamide from the treatment regimen. In the last few years the paradoxical response to antiandrogens has also been reported for bicalutamide, chlormadinone acetate and others. Therefore the name of the syndrome has changed to "antiandrogen withdrawal syndrome." Several reasons such as mutations in the androgen receptor or a direct stimulatory effect of the antiandrogen for this effect have been discussed, but the exact molecular mechanism remains unclear. However, in patients with hormonally relapsed prostate cancer, a trial of "withdrawal therapy" is required prior to the initiation of toxic therapies.
The randomized phase 3 CHART trial (NCT03520478) revealed that rezvilutamide (REZ) plus androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) in high-volume, metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (mHSPC) significantly enhanced radiographic progression-free and overall survival than bicalutamide (BIC)-ADT. Accordingly, we examined patient-reported outcomes (PROs) results, which were exploratory endpoints in the CHART trial. The patients were randomly allocated to receive REZ-ADT or BIC-ADT in a 1:1 ratio. The PROs were evaluated with the Brief Pain Inventory-Short Form (BPI-SF) and the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Prostate (FACT-P) questionnaires. Both study groups displayed comparable baseline pain scores and functional status. Patients administered REZ-ADT had an extended time to progression of worst pain intensity in comparison to those treated with BIC-ADT (25th percentile, 9.2 [95% CI 7.4-16.6] vs. 6.4 months [95% CI 5.5-8.3]; HR 0.75 [95% CI 0.57-0.97]; p = 0.026). Similarly, patients received REZ-ADT exhibited a delayed time to progression of pain interference in comparison to those receiving BIC-ADT (25th percentile, 20.2 [95% CI 12.9-31.3] vs. 10.2 months [95% CI 7.4-11.1]; HR 0.70 [95% CI 0.52-0.93]; p = 0.015). Additionally, the REZ-ADT group demonstrated a prolonged delay in the deterioration of the total score on the FACT-P questionnaire (25th percentile, 12.8 [95% CI 7.4-20.3] vs. 6.0 months [95% CI 4.6-9.2]; HR 0.66 [95% CI 0.50-0.86]; p = 0.002), as well as most of the FACT-P subscale scores, in comparison to the BIC-ADT group. In conclusion, REZ-ADT is superior to BIC-ADT regarding the pain alleviation and enhancement of functional scales for high-volume mHSPC.
A series of PROTACs (PROteolysis-TArgeting Chimeras) consisting of bicalutamide analogs and thalidomides were designed, synthesized, and biologically evaluated as novel androgen receptor (AR) degraders. In particular, we found that PROTAC compound 13b could successfully demonstrate a targeted degradation of AR in AR-positive cancer cells and might be a useful chemical probe for the investigation of AR-dependent cancer cells, as well as a potential therapeutic candidate for prostate cancers.
Prostate cancer is an important healthcare issue in men worldwide. With the advent of prostate-specific antigen screening and improved diagnostic techniques, prostate cancer is now being diagnosed in younger men and at earlier disease stages. As a result, patients often live with their disease for many years after diagnosis. This shift in the patient profile has focused attention to the impact of treatment on quality of life. Medical/surgical castration has traditionally been the mainstay of hormonal therapy but is associated with side effects including loss of libido and impotence. Nonsteroidal antiandrogens such as bicalutamide (Casodex) offer an effective alternative to castration with potential quality-of-life benefits. This paper reviews the evidence concerning the use of bicalutamide at all stages of the disease.
Cholestasis has numerous causes. We present the case of a 78-year-old man with a common diagnosis in this age group and gender but with an unusual presentation. There are only 11 articles published of patients with jaundice due to a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with prostate cancer. Interleukin 6 and other proinflammatory cytokines appear to contribute to the pathophysiology of this syndrome. Our patient remains symptom free 4 months after treatment initiation.
The aim of the study was to evaluate the feasibility of utilizing peripheral androgen blockade in men with biochemical recurrent castrate-sensitive prostate cancer. A registration study to track outcomes of men with biochemical recurrent castrate-sensitive prostate cancer treated with peripheral androgen blockade utilizing concomitant administration of finasteride and bicalutamide. Men were on intermittent peripheral blockade for a median 20.2 months, continuous peripheral blockade for a median 6.8 months, intermittent triple dose peripheral androgen blockade for a median 10.7 months, and continuous triple dose peripheral androgen blockade for 4.4 months before failing therapy. Six men (21%) had additional therapies during treatment that included metastasis-directed therapy (5/37, 14%), systemic Lu-177 (2/37, 5%), and salvage RT (1/37, 3%). The median time to progression, which includes time from initiation through all therapies to the initiation of ADT, was 37.6 months (IQR 20-74.7). From the start of PAB, median time to castrate resistance was 49.8 months (IQR 40.9-NR). After starting ADT, median time to castrate resistance was 8.8 months (IQR 4.6-17.7). Our data support the exploration of PAB as a treatment option in carefully selected patients who present with biochemical recurrence after failure of definitive local therapy for prostate cancer.
BACKGROUND: There is no standard first-line chemotherapy for recurrent/metastatic (RM) or unresectable locally advanced (LA) salivary gland carcinoma (SGC). PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a single institution, open-label, single arm, phase II trial of combined androgen blockade (CAB) for androgen receptor (AR)-positive SGC. Leuprorelin acetate was administered subcutaneously at a dose of 3.75 mg every 4 weeks. Bicalutamide was administered orally at a daily dose of 80 mg. Patients were treated until progressive disease or unacceptable toxicities. RESULTS: Thirty-six eligible patients were enrolled. Thirty-three patients had RM disease and three patients had LA disease. The pathological diagnoses were salivary duct carcinoma (34 patients, 94%) and adenocarcinoma, NOS (two patients, 6%). The best overall response rate was 41.7% [n = 15, 95% confidence interval (CI), 25.5%-59.2%], the clinical benefit rate was 75.0% (n = 27, 95% CI, 57.8%-87.9%). The median progression-free survival was 8.8 months (95% CI, 6.3-12.3 months) and the median overall survival was 30.5 months (95% CI, 16.8 months to not reached). Additional analyses between treatment outcomes and clinicopathological factors or biomarkers including AR positivity, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 status, and its complex downstream signaling pathway gene mutations showed no statistically significant differences. Elevated grade 3 liver transaminases and increased serum creatinine were reported in two patients, respectively. Discontinuation of leuprorelin acetate or bicalutamide due to adverse event occurred in one patient. CONCLUSION: This study suggests that CAB has equivalent efficacy and less toxicity for patients with AR-positive RM or unresectable LA SGC compared with conventional chemotherapy, which warrants further study. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: UMIN-CTR (http://www.umin.ac.jp/ctr/index-j.htm), identification number: UMIN000005703.
Mr. J is a 68-year-old African American man with a history of advanced prostate cancer. He was diagnosed nine months prior with adenocarcinoma of the prostate, with a Gleason score of 9 and tumor, node, metastasis staging of T3 NO M1. His prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was 483 ng/ml at the time of diagnosis. He immediately began treatment with total androgen blockade after the staging workup was completed.
Casodex (bicalutamide, Zeneca Ltd), has been developed for prostate cancer therapy. Its preclinical, pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, clinical efficacy and tolerability data are described. Casodex is a potent and specific non-steroidal antiandrogen. Clinical studies indicated that Casodex is orally bioavailable and well absorbed, with a plasma half-life of around 1 week. A Casodex dose of 50 mg daily decreased prostatic acid phosphatase comparable with castration. This dose was, therefore, evaluated initially as monotherapy and later as a component of maximal androgen blockade. Using prostate specific antigen as an end point, Casodex 150 mg daily was well-tolerated with demonstrable evidence of activity. Casodex 150 mg monotherapy was less effective than castration in terms of efficacy in patients with metastatic disease at entry. However, in patients non-metastatic at entry, Casodex 150 mg monotherapy appeared to be equivalent to castration in terms of time to death (data immature). Casodex was well-tolerated. In combination treatment, Casodex at 50 mg daily was at least as effective as 750 mg flutamide (Eulexin, Schering-Plough International) with respect to time to treatment failure, equivalent in terms of survival, and better tolerated with respect to diarrhoea. In conclusion, Casodex is a good option for the antiandrogen component of maximal androgen blockade.
In men with locally advanced prostate cancer, bicalutamide 150 mg monotherapy provides a similar disease outcome to medical or surgical castration. However, castration is associated with loss of sexual interest and function, decreased energy and an increased risk of osteoporotic fractures. Bicalutamide 150 mg monotherapy has less impact on sexual interest and physical capacity than castration.
BACKGROUND: Bicalutamide (BIC) is an alternative treatment to castration for advanced prostate cancer. Breast events are common adverse effects which can be effectively prevented by the concurrent administration of tamoxifen, a selective estrogen receptor modulator. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the effects of BIC, 4-hydroxy Tamoxifen (4OHT), the active metabolite of tamoxifen, and their combination on the expression of a panel of genes implicated in prostate cancer development and progression in LNCaP cells stimulated with dihydrotestosterone. RESULTS: Our findings confirm the anti-proliferative activity of BIC on LNCaP cell growth but also show the down-regulating function of this anti-androgen on the expression of genes involved in tumor proliferation and invasion [cyclins, caspases, epidermal growth factor (EGF)]. The combination with 4OHT exerts a synergistic effect on the downregulation of some genes involved in prostate cancer progression. CONCLUSION: The observation that the expression of several genes [such as B-cell lymphoma-2 (BCL2), myelocytomatosis oncogene (MYC), caspases] is modulated midly-to-moderately, after 4OHT addition suggests that this combined approach in the clinical setting should be further investigated through appropriate trials.
Glycosylation is recognized as one of the most common modifications on proteins. Recent studies have shown that aberrant expression of alpha (1,6) fucosyltransferase (FUT8), which catalyzes the transfer of fucose from GDP-fucose to core-GlcNAc of the N-linked glycoproteins, modulates cellular behavior that could lead to the development of aggressive prostate cancer. While the relationship between the abnormal expression of FUT8 and glycoprotein fucosylation in different prostate cancer cells has been demonstrated, there is no evidence that shows dysregulated fucosylation might be involved in prostate cancer progression from androgen-dependent to castration-resistant prostate cancer. In this study, using a proteomics approach, we analyzed androgen-dependent and androgen-resistant LAPC4 cells and identified FUT8 to be significantly overexpressed in the androgen-resistant LAPC4 cells. These findings were independently confirmed in LAPC4 cells that were treated with non-steroidal anti-androgen (bicalutamide) and in the in vivo castrated tumor xenograft models. Similarly, we also demonstrated that overexpression of FUT8 might be responsible for the decreased PSA expression in prostate cancer specimens. To our knowledge, this is the first study reporting the functional role of fucosylated enzyme in the development of castration-resistant prostate cancer.
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter trial involving 107 men receiving bicalutamide ('Casodex') 150 mg/day therapy following radical therapy for prostate cancer assessed tamoxifen ('Nolvadex') 20 mg/day and anastrozole ('Arimidex') 1 mg/day for the prophylaxis and treatment of gynecomastia/breast pain. Tamoxifen, but not anastrozole, significantly reduced the incidence of gynecomastia/breast pain when used prophylactically and therapeutically. Serum testosterone levels increased with tamoxifen relative to placebo but prostate-specific antigen levels declined in all treatment groups. Further studies are needed to define the optimum tamoxifen dose and to assess any impact on cancer control. The use of tamoxifen in this setting remains to be investigated.
