BACKGROUND: Most trials that have shown a benefit of beta-blocker treatment after myocardial infarction included patients with large myocardial infarctions and were conducted in an era before modern biomarker-based diagnosis of myocardial infarction and treatment with percutaneous coronary intervention, antithrombotic agents, high-intensity statins, and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system antagonists. METHODS: In a parallel-group, open-label trial performed at 45 centers in Sweden, Estonia, and New Zealand, we randomly assigned patients with an acute myocardial infarction who had undergone coronary angiography and had a left ventricular ejection fraction of at least 50% to receive either long-term treatment with a beta-blocker (metoprolol or bisoprolol) or no beta-blocker treatment. The primary end point was a composite of death from any cause or new myocardial infarction. RESULTS: From September 2017 through May 2023, a total of 5020 patients were enrolled (95.4% of whom were from Sweden). The median follow-up was 3.5 years (interquartile range, 2.2 to 4.7). A primary end-point event occurred in 199 of 2508 patients (7.9%) in the beta-blocker group and in 208 of 2512 patients (8.3%) in the no-beta-blocker group (hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% confidence interval, 0.79 to 1.16; P = 0.64). Beta-blocker treatment did not appear to lead to a lower cumulative incidence of the secondary end points (death from any cause, 3.9% in the beta-blocker group and 4.1% in the no-beta-blocker group; death from cardiovascular causes, 1.5% and 1.3%, respectively; myocardial infarction, 4.5% and 4.7%; hospitalization for atrial fibrillation, 1.1% and 1.4%; and hospitalization for heart failure, 0.8% and 0.9%). With regard to safety end points, hospitalization for bradycardia, second- or third-degree atrioventricular block, hypotension, syncope, or implantation of a pacemaker occurred in 3.4% of the patients in the beta-blocker group and in 3.2% of those in the no-beta-blocker group; hospitalization for asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in 0.6% and 0.6%, respectively; and hospitalization for stroke in 1.4% and 1.8%. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with acute myocardial infarction who underwent early coronary angiography and had a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (>/=50%), long-term beta-blocker treatment did not lead to a lower risk of the composite primary end point of death from any cause or new myocardial infarction than no beta-blocker use. (Funded by the Swedish Research Council and others; REDUCE-AMI ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03278509.).
OBJECTIVES: Beta-blockers have long been successfully used for the treatment of both supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias. However, differences exist between their chemical structure, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties (absorption, bioavailability, metabolism, hydrophilic or lipophilic character, selective or non-selective nature, the presence or absence of intrinsic sympathomimetic activity), which may confer different antiarrhythmic properties to different beta-blockers. The aim of this study was to analyze the current existing evidence for bisoprolol for the treatment of both supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Using the keywords "bisoprolol" and "arrhythmias" or "atrial fibrillation" or "ventricular tachycardia" or "premature ventricular complexes" or "ventricular fibrillation", the Medline database was searched for articles in English or French until April 2020 assessing the role of bisoprolol in the treatment of arrhythmias. Data was then analyzed according to the type of arrhythmia treated and the quality of evidence using the GRADE approach. RESULTS: A total of 325 studies were identified, of which 28 were considered relevant to the current topic. Among these studies, 19 assessed the role of bisoprolol for the treatment of supraventricular arrhythmias, 8 its role in treating ventricular arrhythmias and 1 its role in supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias. The quality of evidence varied from low (7 studies) to high (5 studies). CONCLUSION: Current evidence exists supporting the use of bisoprolol for the treatment of supraventricular arrhythmias, especially for rate control during atrial fibrillation. Evidence also exists for its efficacy in the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias, both in primary and in secondary prevention.
IMPORTANCE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Observational studies report that beta-blocker use may be associated with reduced risk of COPD exacerbations. However, a recent trial reported that metoprolol did not reduce COPD exacerbations and increased COPD exacerbations requiring hospital admission. OBJECTIVE: To test whether bisoprolol decreased COPD exacerbations in people with COPD at high risk of exacerbations. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The Bisoprolol in COPD Study (BICS) was a double-blind placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial conducted in 76 UK sites (45 primary care clinics and 31 secondary clinics). Patients with COPD who had at least moderate airflow obstruction on spirometry (ratio of forced expiratory volume in the first second of expiration [FEV1] to forced vital capacity <0.7; FEV1 <80% predicted) and at least 2 COPD exacerbations treated with oral corticosteroids, antibiotics, or both in the prior 12 months were enrolled from October 17, 2018, to May 31, 2022. Follow-up concluded on April 18, 2023. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomly assigned to bisoprolol (n = 261) or placebo (n = 258). Bisoprolol was started at 1.25 mg orally daily and was titrated as tolerated during 4 sessions to a maximum dose of 5 mg/d, using a standardized protocol. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary clinical outcome was the number of patient-reported COPD exacerbations treated with oral corticosteroids, antibiotics, or both during the 1-year treatment period. Safety outcomes included serious adverse events and adverse reactions. RESULTS: Although the trial planned to enroll 1574 patients, recruitment was suspended from March 16, 2020, to July 31, 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Two patients in each group were excluded postrandomization. Among the 515 patients (mean [SD] age, 68 [7.9] years; 274 men [53%]; mean FEV1, 50.1%), primary outcome data were available for 514 patients (99.8%) and 371 (72.0%) continued taking the study drug. The primary outcome of patient-reported COPD exacerbations treated with oral corticosteroids, antibiotics, or both was 526 in the bisoprolol group, with a mean exacerbation rate of 2.03/y, vs 513 exacerbations in the placebo group, with a mean exacerbation rate of 2.01/y. The adjusted incidence rate ratio was 0.97 (95% CI, 0.84-1.13; P = .72). Serious adverse events occurred in 37 of 255 patients in the bisoprolol group (14.5%) vs 36 of 251 in the placebo group (14.3%; relative risk, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.62-1.66; P = .96). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among people with COPD at high risk of exacerbation, treatment with bisoprolol did not reduce the number of self-reported COPD exacerbations requiring treatment with oral corticosteroids, antibiotics, or both. TRIAL REGISTRATION: isrctn.org Identifier: ISRCTN10497306.
Bisoprolol and nebivolol are highly selective beta(1)-adrenoceptor antagonists, with clinical indications in many countries within the management of heart failure with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (HFrEF), ischaemic heart disease (IHD), and hypertension. Nebivolol has additional vasodilator actions, related to enhanced release of NO in the vascular wall. In principle, this additional mechanism compared with bisoprolol might lead to more potent vasodilatation, which in turn might influence the effectiveness of nebivolol in the management of HFrEF, IHD and hypertension. In this article, we review the therapeutic properties of bisoprolol and nebivolol, as representatives of "second generation" and "third generation" beta-blockers, respectively. Although head-to-head trials are largely lacking, there is no clear indication from published studies of an additional effect of nebivolol on clinical outcomes in patients with HFrEF or the magnitude of reductions of BP in patients with hypertension.
IMPORTANCE: There is little evidence to support selection of heart rate control therapy in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation, in particular those with coexisting heart failure. OBJECTIVE: To compare low-dose digoxin with bisoprolol (a beta-blocker). DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Randomized, open-label, blinded end-point clinical trial including 160 patients aged 60 years or older with permanent atrial fibrillation (defined as no plan to restore sinus rhythm) and dyspnea classified as New York Heart Association class II or higher. Patients were recruited from 3 hospitals and primary care practices in England from 2016 through 2018; last follow-up occurred in October 2019. INTERVENTIONS: Digoxin (n = 80; dose range, 62.5-250 mug/d; mean dose, 161 mug/d) or bisoprolol (n = 80; dose range, 1.25-15 mg/d; mean dose, 3.2 mg/d). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was patient-reported quality of life using the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey physical component summary score (SF-36 PCS) at 6 months (higher scores are better; range, 0-100), with a minimal clinically important difference of 0.5 SD. There were 17 secondary end points (including resting heart rate, modified European Heart Rhythm Association [EHRA] symptom classification, and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide [NT-proBNP] level) at 6 months, 20 end points at 12 months, and adverse event (AE) reporting. RESULTS: Among 160 patients (mean age, 76 [SD, 8] years; 74 [46%] women; mean baseline heart rate, 100/min [SD, 18/min]), 145 (91%) completed the trial and 150 (94%) were included in the analysis for the primary outcome. There was no significant difference in the primary outcome of normalized SF-36 PCS at 6 months (mean, 31.9 [SD, 11.7] for digoxin vs 29.7 [11.4] for bisoprolol; adjusted mean difference, 1.4 [95% CI, -1.1 to 3.8]; P = .28). Of the 17 secondary outcomes at 6 months, there were no significant between-group differences for 16 outcomes, including resting heart rate (a mean of 76.9/min [SD, 12.1/min] with digoxin vs a mean of 74.8/min [SD, 11.6/min] with bisoprolol; difference, 1.5/min [95% CI, -2.0 to 5.1/min]; P = .40). The modified EHRA class was significantly different between groups at 6 months; 53% of patients in the digoxin group reported a 2-class improvement vs 9% of patients in the bisoprolol group (adjusted odds ratio, 10.3 [95% CI, 4.0 to 26.6]; P < .001). At 12 months, 8 of 20 outcomes were significantly different (all favoring digoxin), with a median NT-proBNP level of 960 pg/mL (interquartile range, 626 to 1531 pg/mL) in the digoxin group vs 1250 pg/mL (interquartile range, 847 to 1890 pg/mL) in the bisoprolol group (ratio of geometric means, 0.77 [95% CI, 0.64 to 0.92]; P = .005). Adverse events were less common with digoxin; 20 patients (25%) in the digoxin group had at least 1 AE vs 51 patients (64%) in the bisoprolol group (P < .001). There were 29 treatment-related AEs and 16 serious AEs in the digoxin group vs 142 and 37, respectively, in the bisoprolol group. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with permanent atrial fibrillation and symptoms of heart failure treated with low-dose digoxin or bisoprolol, there was no statistically significant difference in quality of life at 6 months. These findings support potentially basing decisions about treatment on other end points. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02391337 and clinicaltrialsregister.eu Identifier: 2015-005043-13.
BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with significant morbidity, mortality and healthcare costs. Beta blockers are well-established drugs widely used to treat cardiovascular conditions. Observational studies consistently report that beta blocker use in people with COPD is associated with a reduced risk of COPD exacerbations. The bisoprolol in COPD study (BICS) investigates whether adding bisoprolol to routine COPD treatment has clinical and cost-effective benefits. A sub-study will risk stratify participants for heart failure to investigate whether any beneficial effect of bisoprolol is restricted to those with unrecognised heart disease. METHODS: BICS is a pragmatic randomised parallel group double-blind placebo-controlled trial conducted in UK primary and secondary care sites. The major inclusion criteria are an established predominant respiratory diagnosis of COPD (post-bronchodilator FEV(1) < 80% predicted, FEV(1)/FVC < 0.7), a self-reported history of >/= 2 exacerbations requiring treatment with antibiotics and/or oral corticosteroids in a 12-month period since March 2019, age >/= 40 years and a smoking history >/= 10 pack years. A computerised randomisation system will allocate 1574 participants with equal probability to intervention or control groups, stratified by centre and recruitment in primary/secondary care. The intervention is bisoprolol (1.25 mg tablets) or identical placebo. The dose of bisoprolol/placebo is titrated up to a maximum of 4 tablets a day (5 mg bisoprolol) over 4-7 weeks depending on tolerance to up-dosing of bisoprolol/placebo-these titration assessments are completed by telephone or video call. Participants complete the remainder of the 52-week treatment period on the final titrated dose (1, 2, 3, 4 tablets) and during that time are followed up at 26 and 52 weeks by telephone or video call. The primary outcome is the total number of participant reported COPD exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids and/or antibiotics during the 52-week treatment period. A sub-study will risk stratify participants for heart failure by echocardiography and measurement of blood biomarkers. DISCUSSION: The demonstration that bisoprolol reduces the incidence of exacerbations would be relevant not only to patients and clinicians but also to healthcare providers, in the UK and globally. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current controlled trials ISRCTN10497306 . Registered on 16 August 2018.
Kotecha D, Bunting KV, Gill SK, et al. Effect of digoxin vs bisoprolol for heart rate control in atrial fibrillation on patient-reported quality of life: the RATE-AF randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2020;324:2497-508. 33351042.
In patients suffering from systemic arterial hypertension, coronary artery disease, or heart failure, beta-blockers and angiotensin-convertase enzyme inhibitors play a major therapeutic and preventive role. Coronary artery disease remains the leading cause of mortality in industrialized countries. Unless adapted preventive strategy, notably pharmacological interventions, cardiovascular events in these patients remain high. One reason for this relative failure is represented by non-adherence to treatment. A treatment consisting in an association in one pill of several different molecules should confer a higher treatment compliance and thus efficacy. This article describes the characteristics of the first available dual association between a cardioselective beta-blocker agent, bisoprolol, and an angiotensin-convertase enzyme inhibitor, perindopril arginine.
While beta-adrenergic blockers have been used for decades in a variety of cardiovascular illnesses, they have traditionally been avoided in chronic heart failure. In spite of significant advances in management, mortality in patients suffering from heart failure remains unacceptably high and new therapies are urgently needed. Recently, several large clinical trials have shown a significant reduction in both morbidity and mortality in heart failure patients when beta-blockers are added to standard therapy. While further investigation is warranted in certain subgroups, the use of beta-adrenergic blockers in New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II to IV heart failure should now be considered routine. The purpose of this article is to outline and review the five major clinical trials of beta-blocker therapy in chronic heart failure; the US Carvedilol heart failure Program (USCP), the Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study II (CIBIS-II), the Metoprolol CR/XL Randomized Intervention Trial in chronic Heart Failure (MERIT-HF), the Beta-blocker Evaluation of Survival Trial (BEST) and the Carvedilol Prospective Randomized Cumulative Survival trial (COPERNICUS), and to aid the reader in the selection of appropriate candidates for beta-blocker therapy.
beta-blockers are an important treatment of heart failure (HF) and are useful in reducing the progression of the syndrome. They should be considered for patients with asymptomatic left ventricular (LV) dysfunction. Evidence-based beta-blocker therapy (bisoprolol, carvedilol, or metoprolol succinate) in combination with standard therapy is a mainstay of treatment of all symptomatic patients with LV systolic dysfunction. Patients in stage B also benefit from the early introduction of beta-blockers, but there are no large randomized clinical trials to support this strategy. Whether there is a role for ivabradine in the treatment of HF is not clear.
Hypertensive left ventricular hypertrophy (HTN LVH) is associated with almost threefold increased risk of ventricular tachycardia (VT)/ventricular fibrillation (VF). Furthermore, HTN LVH increases the risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD). The reverse LV remodeling due to efficient antihypertensive therapy lowers the incidence rates of cardiovascular events and SCD and the vast majority of available arterial hypertension (HTN) guidelines recommend renin angiotensin system (RAS) blockers and calcium channel blockers (CCBs) for HTN LVH aiming for LVH regression. On the other hand, beta blockers (BBs) as a class are not recommended in HTN LVH due to their insufficient capacity to reverse LVH remodeling even though they are recommended as the first-line drugs for prevention/treatment of VT/VF (in general, unrelated to HTN LVH). Moreover, BBs are the best antiarrhythmic (against VT/VF) among antihypertensive drugs. Despite that, BBs are currently not recommended for LVH treatment in HTN Guidelines. It is important to prevent VT/VF in patients at high risk, such as those with HTN LVH. Therefore, certain BBs (such as Bisoprolol) may be reevaluated in guidelines for HTN (in the section of HTN LVH).
Beta-blockers are effective antiarryhthmic agents for certain types of supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias. They are able to prevent arrhythmias associated with sympathetic hyperactivity, suppress automaticity, and slow conduction in myocardial tissue with predominant slow-response activity. In animal experiments, beta-blockers have been shown to exert pronounced antifibrillatory effects following occlusion of a main coronary artery. This effectiveness may be the basis for the improved survival of patients with chronic coronary artery disease under long-term beta-blockade. Side effects are often dose-related; the optimal and minimal effective doses of the beta-blocker are critical in limiting adverse effects. As conventional antiarrhythmic agents have not been shown to reduce the risk of mortality in postmyocardial infarction patients, a broader application of beta-blockers as antiarrhythmic agents within the future, possibly in combination with class I or III drugs, seems conceivable.
Hypertension is currently one of the greatest global health care challenges. Although many effective drugs are available, combinations of 2 or more medications are often required to meet clinical targets. Combination therapy has several advantages over monotherapy: lower doses of each drug can be used to achieve therapeutic goals; lower doses may lead to fewer adverse events, facilitating patient adherence; and using multiple drugs with different modes of action may be more effective in treating multifactorial diseases, including hypertension. Adherence is an important consideration when requiring patients to self-administer multiple medications; as the number of concurrent medications increases, patient adherence tends to decrease. Recent evidence suggests that fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) may be more effective than free-dose combinations, as they provide all necessary medications in a single convenient tablet/single-pill combination. Among combinations of hypertension medications, a beta-blocker such as bisoprolol with a calcium channel blocker such as amlodipine is an effective combination therapy for hypertension, with distinct and complimentary modes of action. With advantages over free-dose combinations, the FDC of bisoprolol/amlodipine is thus an effective and convenient treatment for hypertension, allowing more patients to achieve their therapeutic goals, while potentially reducing the burden of hypertension on health care systems.
Heart failure, the only cardiovascular disease with an increasing incidence, is associated with significant mortality and poses a considerable economic burden. Traditionally, beta blockers have been considered to be contraindicated in patients with heart failure. Recently, however, several large randomized, controlled mortality trials have been stopped early because of significant improvement in mortality rates in patients with heart failure who were given beta blockers in addition to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, diuretics and, sometimes, digoxin. Beta blockers should now be considered standard therapy in patients with New York Heart Association class II or class III heart failure who are hemodynamically stable, who do not have dyspnea at rest and who have no other contraindications to the use of these agents.
There are important pharmacodynamic differences between the various beta-adrenoceptor-blocking drugs, whereas the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors differ mainly in their pharmacokinetic properties. The differing properties of the beta-blocking drugs may contribute to their antihypertensive effect; possibly, the beta1-selective agents are slightly more effective. Comparisons between groups of drugs may not be fully applicable to all members of the group. Overall, however, beta-blocking drugs and ACE inhibitors appear to control the resting blood pressure to a similar degree, whereas on exercise the rise in blood pressure is inhibited to a greater extent by beta1-blockade. ACE inhibitors reverse the hemodynamic changes of hypertension in contrast to beta1-blocking drugs without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA). Neither group of drugs interferes with cardiovascular reflexes such as the response to posture. The beta-blocking drugs have specific contraindications such as asthma and heart failure. Although some earlier studies suggested otherwise, more recent smaller investigations suggest that overall patient acceptability of ACE inhibitors and beta-blockers is similar. In certain instances, particularly in the presence of diuretics, a large first-dose effect with a profound fall in blood pressure may be seen with ACE inhibitors. In contrast to other drugs, there is some evidence that beta-blocking drugs have a cardioprotective effect. ACE inhibitors and beta-blocking drugs have a similar spectrum of activity, with black patients responding less well. Although in dispute, drugs are often useful in the elderly. Both groups possess additional therapeutic indications that may influence the choice to treat hypertension.
A couple of days after increasing the dosage of betaadrenergic- and adding calcium channel blockers due to an increased heart rate in atrial fibrillation, a 77 year old female was found in cardiogenic shock. After exclusion of further causes a therapy with catecholamines, calcium, high dose insulin and phosphodiesterase inhibitors was initiated. Despite this combined therapy the shock persisted. Only after administration of levosimendan, a calcium sensitizer, a normalization of the heart function could be observed. We discuss the danger of combining drugs with negative inotropic properties for rate control in atrial fibrillation and review the therapy with focus on the effects on cardiac cells of all recommended drugs in the treatment of intoxication with betareceptor- and calcium channel blockers.
Beta-blockers, once considered contraindicated in patients with heart failure, are now the standard of care in such patients. This change is the result of several large-scale clinical trials, including Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study II (CIBIS-II), Metoprolol CR/XL Randomized Intervention Trial in Congestive Heart Failure (MERIT-HF), and the Carvedilol Prospective Randomized Cumulative Survival (COPERNICUS) trial, that have demonstrated significant morbidity and mortality benefits of beta-blockers in patients with heart failure caused by left ventricular systolic dysfunction. beta-blockade also improves quality of life and causes regression of cardiac remodeling, a phenomenon characteristic of chronic heart failure. This article provides an overview of the history of beta-blockade in the treatment of heart failure, beginning with the early misconception that beta-blockers are detrimental to patients with heart failure. Mechanistic and early clinical trials are reviewed, along with the results from CIBIS-II, MERIT-HF, and COPERNICUS. Barriers to the use of beta-blocker therapy also are discussed.
Cardioselective beta-blockade is generally well tolerated in practice and contraindications to this therapy are uncommon. beta-blockers are a diverse therapeutic class, and their individual tolerability profiles are influenced strongly by their pharmacodynamic effects across different adrenergic receptors. Bisoprolol, probably the beta-blocker with the highest selectivity for blockade of beta(1)- vs. beta(2)-adrenoceptors, does not block beta(2)-adrenoceptors to an appreciable extent at doses in therapeutic use. Side-effects often attributed to beta-blockers, such as erectile dysfunction and adverse metabolic effects are uncommon with bisoprolol and other beta-blockers used at doses which only block beta(1)-adrenoceptors. Cautious use of a cardioselective beta-blocker is not contraindicated in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma and the outcomes benefits of beta-blockers in patients with coronary heart disease or heart failure are also apparent in patients with concurrent COPD. Starting with a low dose and titrating upwards carefully is important for optimising the tolerability of a beta-blocker. Most people with hypertension will receive combination antihypertensive therapy in practice, and the low-dose combination therapy approach provides a useful strategy for optimising the efficacy and tolerability of a regimen that includes a beta-blocker, compared with up-titrating an existing monotherapy.
BACKGROUND: Treatment inertia is a recognised barrier to blood pressure control, and simpler, more effective treatment strategies are needed. We hypothesised that a hypertension management strategy starting with a single pill containing ultra-low-dose quadruple combination therapy would be more effective than a strategy of starting with monotherapy. METHODS: QUARTET was a multicentre, double-blind, parallel-group, randomised, phase 3 trial among Australian adults (>/=18 years) with hypertension, who were untreated or receiving monotherapy. Participants were randomly assigned to either treatment, that started with the quadpill (containing irbesartan at 37.5 mg, amlodipine at 1.25 mg, indapamide at 0.625 mg, and bisoprolol at 2.5 mg) or an indistinguishable monotherapy control (irbesartan 150 mg). If blood pressure was not at target, additional medications could be added in both groups, starting with amlodipine at 5 mg. Participants were randomly assigned using an online central randomisation service. There was a 1:1 allocation, stratified by site. Allocation was masked to all participants and study team members (including investigators and those assessing outcomes) except the manufacturer of the investigational product and one unmasked statistician. The primary outcome was difference in unattended office systolic blood pressure at 12 weeks. Secondary outcomes included blood pressure control (standard office blood pressure <140/90 mm Hg), safety, and tolerability. A subgroup continued randomly assigned allocation to 12 months to assess long-term effects. Analyses were per intention to treat. This trial was prospectively registered with the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry, ACTRN12616001144404, and is now complete. FINDINGS: From June 8, 2017, to Aug 31, 2020, 591 participants were recruited, with 743 assessed for eligibility, 152 ineligible or declined, 300 participants randomly assigned to intervention of initial quadpill treatment, and 291 to control of initial standard dose monotherapy treatment. The mean age of the 591 participants was 59 years (SD 12); 356 (60%) were male and 235 (40%) were female; 483 (82%) were White, 70 (12%) were Asian, and 38 (6%) reported as other ethnicity; and baseline mean unattended office blood pressure was 141 mm Hg (SD 13)/85 mm Hg (SD 10). By 12 weeks, 44 (15%) of 300 participants had additional blood pressure medications in the intervention group compared with 115 (40%) of 291 participants in the control group. Systolic blood pressure was lower by 6.9 mm Hg (95% CI 4.9-8.9; p<0.0001) and blood pressure control rates were higher in the intervention group (76%) versus control group (58%; relative risk [RR] 1.30, 95% CI 1.15-1.47; p<0.0001). There was no difference in adverse event-related treatment withdrawals at 12 weeks (intervention 4.0% vs control 2.4%; p=0.27). Among the 417 patients who continued, uptitration occurred more frequently among control participants than intervention participants (p<0.0001). However, at 52 weeks mean unattended systolic blood pressure remained lower by 7.7 mm Hg (95% CI 5.2-10.3) and blood pressure control rates higher in the intervention group (81%) versus control group (62%; RR 1.32, 95% CI 1.16-1.50). In all randomly assigned participants up to 12 weeks, there were seven (3%) serious adverse events in the intervention group and three (1%) serious adverse events in the control group. INTERPRETATION: A strategy with early treatment of a fixed-dose quadruple quarter-dose combination achieved and maintained greater blood pressure lowering compared with the common strategy of starting monotherapy. This trial demonstrated the efficacy, tolerability, and simplicity of a quadpill-based strategy. FUNDING: National Health and Medical Research Council, Australia.
