Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) is a significant clinical problem characterized by refractory and severe hypoxemia secondary to elevated pulmonary vascular resistance resulting in right-to-left extrapulmonary shunting of deoxygenated blood. PPHN is associated with diverse cardiopulmonary disorders and a high early mortality rate for infants with severe PPHN. Surviving infants with PPHN have an increased risk of long-term morbidities. PPHN physiology can be categorized by (1) maladaptation: pulmonary vessels have normal structure and number but have abnormal vasoreactivity; (2) excessive muscularization: increased smooth muscle cell thickness and increased distal extension of muscle to vessels that are usually not muscularized; and (3) underdevelopment: lung hypoplasia associated with decreased pulmonary artery number. Treatment involves adequate lung recruitment, optimization of cardiac output and left ventricular function, and pulmonary vasodilators such as inhaled nitric oxide. Infants who fail to respond to conventional therapy should be evaluated for lethal lung disorders including alveolar-capillary dysplasia, T-box transcription factor 4 gene, thyroid transcription factor-1, ATP-binding cassette A3 gene, and surfactant protein diseases.
BACKGROUND: Treatment options for pulmonary arterial hypertension target the prostacyclin, endothelin, or nitric oxide pathways. Tadalafil, a phosphodiesterase type-5 inhibitor, increases cGMP, the final mediator in the nitric oxide pathway. METHODS AND RESULTS: In this 16-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 405 patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (idiopathic or associated), either treatment-naive or on background therapy with the endothelin receptor antagonist bosentan, were randomized to placebo or tadalafil 2.5, 10, 20, or 40 mg orally once daily. The primary end point was the change from baseline to week 16 in the distance walked in 6 minutes. Changes in World Health Organization functional class, clinical worsening, and health-related quality of life were also assessed. Patients completing the 16-week study could enter a long-term extension study. Tadalafil increased the distance walked in 6 minutes in a dose-dependent manner; only the 40-mg dose met the prespecified level of statistical significance (P<0.01). Overall, the mean placebo-corrected treatment effect was 33 m (95% confidence interval, 15 to 50 m). In the bosentan-naive group, the treatment effect was 44 m (95% confidence interval, 20 to 69 m) compared with 23 m (95% confidence interval, -2 to 48 m) in patients on background bosentan therapy. Tadalafil 40 mg improved the time to clinical worsening (P=0.041), incidence of clinical worsening (68% relative risk reduction; P=0.038), and health-related quality of life. The changes in World Health Organization functional class were not statistically significant. The most common treatment-related adverse events reported with tadalafil were headache, myalgia, and flushing. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension, tadalafil 40 mg was well tolerated and improved exercise capacity and quality of life measures and reduced clinical worsening.
BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play important roles in remodeling the extracellular matrix and in the pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). MMP19, which is an MMP, was significantly upregulated in hyperplastic alveolar epithelial cells in IPF lung tissues and promoted epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Recent studies have demonstrated that endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (E(nd)MT) contributes to pulmonary fibrosis. However, the role of MMP19 in pulmonary vascular injury and repair and E(nd)MT remains unclear. METHODS: To determine the role of MMP19 in E(nd)MT and pulmonary fibrosis. MMP19 expressions were determined in the lung endothelial cells of IPF patients and bleomycin (BLM)-induced mice. The roles of MMP19 in E(nd)MT and endothelial barrier permeability were studied in the MMP19 cDNA-transfected primary human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HPMECs) and MMP19 adenoassociated virus (MMP19-AAV)-infected mice. The regulatory mechanism of MMP19 in pulmonary fibrosis was elucidated by blocking its interacting proteins SDF1 and ET1 with AMD3100 and Bosentan, respectively. RESULTS: In this study, we found that MMP19 expression was significantly increased in the lung endothelial cells of IPF patients and BLM-induced mice compared to the control groups. MMP19 promoted E(nd)MT and the migration and permeability of HPMECs in vitro, stimulated monocyte infiltration into the alveolus, and aggravated BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis in vivo. SDF1 and Endothelin-1 (ET1) were physically associated with MMP19 in HPMECs and colocalized with MMP19 in endothelial cells in IPF patient lung tissues. AMD3100 and bosentan alleviated the fibrosis induced by MMP19 in the BLM mouse model. CONCLUSION: MMP19 promoted E(nd)MT by interacting with ET1 and stimulated monocyte infiltration into lung tissues via the SDF1/CXCR4 axis, thus aggravating BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Vascular integrity regulated by MMP19 could be a promising therapeutic target for suppressing pulmonary fibrosis. Video abstract.
INTRODUCTION: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare condition characterised by progressively elevated pulmonary arterial resistance leading to right heart failure. STATE OF THE ART: A recent classification distinguishes idiopathic PAH, familial PAH and PAH secondary to other conditions (connective tissue disease, congenital heart disease, portal hypertension, human immunodeficiency virus infection or appetite suppressant exposure). Echocardiography is the initial investigation of choice for non-invasive detection of PAH but measurement of pulmonary pressures and cardiac output during right-heart catheterization are necessary to confirm the diagnosis of PAH. Conventional treatment includes non-specific drugs (warfarin, diuretics, oxygen). Intravenous epoprostenol is the first-line treatment for the most severely affected patients. In less severe cases, the first-line treatment may include bosentan or a prostacyclin analogue. PERSPECTIVES AND CONCLUSIONS: Recent advances in the management of PAH have markedly improved prognosis. The avai-lability of novel specific drugs including type 5 phosphodiesterase inhibitors offers novel therapeutic perspectives but their exact role in the treatment of PAH is still uncertain. The evolution of therapy from vasodilators to antiproliferative agents reflects the advancement in our understanding of the mechanisms mediating pulmonary arterial hypertension.
IMPORTANCE TO THE FIELD: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a morbid condition with high mortality if left untreated. Bosentan is an effective treatment option for group 1 pulmonary arterial hypertension. Bosentan improves exercise tolerance and functional class and delays the time to clinical worsening in these patients. Investigation is ongoing to determine its efficacy in other groups of pulmonary hypertension. AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: This review provides a background on endothelin activity in PAH, as a rationale for the use of bosentan in this disease. It also presents evidence from key clinical trials of bosentan and discusses future directions in the study of bosentan to help the clinician better understand the role of bosentan in PAH management. WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: i) An understanding of the rationale for using endothelin receptor antagonists in treating PAH; ii) an understanding of the clinical evidence to support bosentan for the treatment of PAH; and iii) an understanding of how to use bosentan optimally in the treatment of PAH. TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Bosentan is an effective and safe treatment for patients with PAH. Patients with suspected PAH should be evaluated carefully as the use of bosentan in non-group 1 pulmonary hypertension is still being investigated. Patients on bosentan should be monitored with monthly liver transaminase testing. Coadministration with other drugs should be reviewed carefully as drug-drug interactions may be important.
The endothelin (ET) system is comprised of 4 active ETs, with ET-1 being the predominant isoform in the cardiovascular system. Because of the potent vasoconstricting and mitogenic effects of ET-1 and its involvement in various cardiovascular diseases, blockade of the ET receptor has received considerable attention. ET receptor antagonism has been demonstrated to be beneficial in patients with pulmonary hypertension. The nonselective ET receptor antagonist bosentan improves exercise capacity and increases time to clinical worsening in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. The selective ET A receptor antagonist sitaxsentan also improves hemodynamics and exercise capacity in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. Results with ET receptor antagonists in congestive heart failure have been disappointing. Although some studies have suggested benefit, larger studies have been neutral. The use of ET receptor antagonists for other conditions has not been fully explored. Future studies with the use of ET receptor antagonists as part of a multidrug regimen are also needed.
The endothelin system appears to play an important role in the pathophysiology of congestive heart failure (CHF). Endothelin receptor antagonists represent a novel class of agents that are being evaluated for their potential benefits in treating various cardiovascular disorders. Bosentan is an orally active endothelin receptor antagonist that has been studied for the treatment of CHF. Early clinical experience with bosentan has confirmed some benefits on hemodynamic parameters in patients with CHF. Its role in slowing the progression of the disease and improving survival remains to be elucidated.
Pediatric pulmonary hypertension (PAH) is a rare disease that carries a poor prognosis if left untreated. Although there are published guidelines for the treatment of children with pulmonary hypertension, due to the limited number of robust pediatric clinical trials, recommendations are often based on limited data or clinical experience. Furthermore, many practical aspects of care, particularly for the pediatric patient, are learned through experience and best navigated with a multidisciplinary team. While newer PAH therapies have been approved for adults, there is still limited but expanding experience in pediatrics. This new information will help improve the targets of goal-oriented therapy. Lastly, this review highlights practical aspects in the use of the different therapies available for the treatment of pediatric pulmonary hypertension.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a progressive disease with poor survival outcomes. Bosentan is an oral endothelin-1 receptor antagonist (ERA) that has been shown in a large randomized placebo-controlled trial (BREATHE-1) to be effective at improving exercise tolerance in patients with PAH in functional class III and IV. Further studies have been conducted showing: benefit in smaller subgroups of PAH, eg, congenital heart disease, efficacy in combination with other PAH therapies, eg, sildenafil, improved long-term survival compared with historical controls. More recently, controlled trials of new ERAs have included patients with milder symptoms; those in functional class II. Analysis of the functional class II data is often limited by small numbers. These trials have generally shown a similar treatment effect to bosentan, but there are no controlled trials directly comparing these new ERAs. The EARLY trial exclusively enrolled functional class II patients and assessed hemodynamics at 6 months. Though significant, the reduction in pulmonary vascular resistance is merely a surrogate marker for the intended aim of delaying disease progression. Significant adverse effects associated with bosentan include edema, anemia and transaminase elevation. These may preclude a long duration of treatment. Further studies are required to determine optimum treatment strategy in mild disease.
Bosentan (Tracleer, Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd) is an oral dual endothelin receptor antagonist approved for use in functional class III to IV pulmonary arterial hypertension. In two placebo-controlled trials, patients receiving bosentan showed improved functional class, 6-minute walk distance and hemodynamics over a 12- to 16-week period. Follow-up data over 3 years has shown few deteriorations,with the majority of patients maintaining their response to bosentan alone. Investigations exploring the use of bosentan as an add-on agent to intravenous epoprostenol (Flolan, GlaxoSmithKline Plc) in those with the most severe disease are ongoing. Bosentan may also have antifibrotic properties and its use in pulmonary fibrosis is being explored. Ease of administration of bosentan with twice-daily oral dosing will provide many patients with pulmonary hypertension an option for treatment without the risks and discomforts of continuous intravenous medication.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a pathophysiological condition characterized by increased pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), initially due to abnormal pulmonary vasoconstriction in response to endothelial injury. Recent studies confirmed the key role of endothelin (ET)-1 in the vasoconstriction and remodeling of pulmonary microcirculation during PAH. In responders patients, classical treatments for PAH are prostanoids, phosphodiesterase (PDE)-5 inhibitors and endothelin receptor antagonists (ERAs), which target prostaglandin I2, nitric oxide and endothelin pathways, respectively. Randomised, placebo-controlled trials have shown that ERAs improves haemodynamic parameters of the pulmonary circulation, functional capacity and clinical outcome in patients affected by PAH. Here, we will review the definition, classification and pathophysiology of PH. Furthermore, we will provide an up-to-date overview of currently recommended diagnostic and therapeutic work-up in PAH.
AIMS: The demonstration that endothelin production is upregulated in pulmonary artery hypertension (PAH) served as the rationale for developing endothelin-receptor antagonists (ERAs) as a treatment for PAH. This article reviews the primary studies demonstrating efficacy of ERAs in PAH. MAIN METHODS: Multicenter, placebo-controlled trials and open-label extension studies. KEY FINDINGS: Two orally active ERAs are currently approved for the treatment of PAH - the dual receptor antagonist bosentan, and the more selective ET(A) receptor antagonist ambrisentan-based on multicenter randomized clinical trials demonstrating efficacy and safety. Long-term experience with both agents supports maintenance of therapeutic effects in most patients. Adverse effects, including altered liver function and edema may occur and require careful monitoring. SIGNIFICANCE: Despite failure to demonstrate efficacy of ERAs in other cardiopulmonary conditions, ERAs have a major role in the treatment algorithm for PAH.
The dual endothelin receptor antagonist, bosentan, is an orally active therapy, which has been proved to be effective in the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). This review critically addresses and highlights pharmacological aspects of bosentan such as safety, tolerability and drug interactions. The biological basis of its mode of action is demonstrated in preclinical studies on animal models of PH and an up-to-date review of clinical data is provided, supporting its practical use with a view to achieve optimal treatment goals. Major pivotal randomized placebo-control clinical trials are discussed, together with recently published data concerning its promising role as part of combination therapy. Furthermore, recent patents of novel pharmaceutical interventions in the field of PAH, expanding treatment options, are presented.
Digital ulcers (DU's) are one of the main symptoms of systemic scleroderma and occur in approximately 60% of all scleroderma patients. Due to possible complications such as infections, gangrene or amputation, they require regular medical attention and a good wound treatment by doctors and nursing staff. A definition of DU's has not yet been established. In 2009 the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) published guidelines for the treatment of DU's. An improvement of the healing of active ulcers has been described with Iloprost. Bosentan significantly reduced the frequency of occurrence of new DU's. In some small studies PDE-5 inhibitors appear helpful. Further studies with other therapeutic approaches will follow in the next few years.
Approaches to prolong responses to BRAF targeting drugs in melanoma patients are challenged by phenotype heterogeneity. Melanomas of a "MITF-high" phenotype usually respond well to BRAF inhibitor therapy, but these melanomas also contain subpopulations of the de novo resistance "AXL-high" phenotype. > 50% of melanomas progress with enriched "AXL-high" populations, and because AXL is linked to de-differentiation and invasiveness avoiding an "AXL-high relapse" is desirable. We discovered that phenotype heterogeneity is supported during the response phase of BRAF inhibitor therapy due to MITF-induced expression of endothelin 1 (EDN1). EDN1 expression is enhanced in tumours of patients on treatment and confers drug resistance through ERK re-activation in a paracrine manner. Most importantly, EDN1 not only supports MITF-high populations through the endothelin receptor B (EDNRB), but also AXL-high populations through EDNRA, making it a master regulator of phenotype heterogeneity. Endothelin receptor antagonists suppress AXL-high-expressing cells and sensitize to BRAF inhibition, suggesting that targeting EDN1 signalling could improve BRAF inhibitor responses without selecting for AXL-high cells.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Since the late 1990 s, when a more uniform definition of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) was proposed, more than 3000 patients have been enrolled in clinical studies exploring novel therapies. Some of the most relevant trials have been published only recently. RECENT FINDINGS: This review describes and comments on the randomized clinical trials in IPF published within the past 18 months, with emphasis on the studies evaluating pirfenidone, which at present is the only drug approved for IPF (at least in Europe and Japan), and bosentan. This latter represents the largest single trial performed in IPF so far. SUMMARY: Despite multiple clinical trials, there is no strong, definitive evidence in favor of any agent to treat IPF. On the other hand, the placebo arms of these large trials have provided us with important critical information on the natural history of this disease. Clinical heterogeneity represents a critical issue to be taken into account in designing future clinical trials. The limited effectiveness of current treatment regimes has fuelled the search for a variety of new therapeutic approaches.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a progressive disease that, without treatment, ultimately results in right heart failure and death. For the majority of patients with advanced PAH, therapy requires cumbersome drug delivery devices with serious side effects. Endothelin, a potent endogenous vasoconstrictor, is increased in individuals with PAH. The development of bosentan, a novel, well-tolerated, orally active endothelin antagonist, has significantly changed the therapeutic approach to PAH. Recent clinical trials have demonstrated that treatment with bosentan produces favourable effects on cardiopulmonary haemodynamics, exercise capacity, WHO functional class and time to clinical worsening in PAH.
Chronic heart failure (CHF) is characterized by impaired left ventricular function, increased peripheral and pulmonary vascular resistance, reduced exercise tolerance, and dyspnea. Despite considerable progress in the treatment of CHF, especially in targeting activated neurohumoral systems, mortality in these patients remains high. Therefore, new treatment approaches are warranted. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) plasma levels are elevated in CHF and correlate with both hemodynamic severity and symptoms. Plasma levels of ET-1 are strong independent predictors of mortality in CHF. Combined ET(A/B) selective ET(A) receptor antagonists have been evaluated in patients with CHF showing impressive hemodynamic improvements. These results indicate that ET receptor antagonists indeed have a potential to improve hemodynamics, symptoms, and potentially prognosis in patients with CHF, which still carries a high mortality.
INTRODUCTION: Endothelin is a key mediator in the pathophysiology of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Its effects are mediated through the activation of two associated receptor subtypes, termed A and B. Therapeutic strategies that modulate the activity of endothelin are, therefore, of interest to improve the functional status of patients with PAH. AREAS COVERED: The rationale for the use of endothelin receptor antagonists as a therapeutic class in PAH and pertinent data from important clinical studies are presented in this review. Areas for future research are also suggested. EXPERT OPINION: The availability of the endothelin receptor antagonist class of agents represents a significant addition to the therapeutic armamentarium which is available for the treatment of PAH. Comparative studies are warranted to establish whether selective endothelin-A receptor antagonism is more advantageous than dual receptor antagonism. Future studies of endothelin receptor antagonists will increasingly focus on the potential of a combination of different PAH therapeutic classes and will employ 'harder' clinical end points. This is of crucial importance to ensure that future developments are both worthwhile and acceptable to patients, physicians, health system payers and regulatory authorities.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a disease characterized by an elevation in pulmonary artery pressure that can lead to right ventricular failure and death. Conventional treatment is based on non-specific drugs (warfarin, oxygen, diuretics). Pure vasodilators like calcium channel antagonists have little or no effect on the vast majority of patients. Although there is no cure for PAH, newer medical therapies have been shown to improve a variety of clinically relevant end-points including survival, functional class, exercise tolerance, haemodynamics, echocardiographic parameters and quality of life measures. Intravenous prostacyclin, was the first introduced drug for treatment of PAH and remains the first-line treatment for the most severe patients. Since then the list of approved drugs for PAH has expanded to include prostacyclin analogues with differing routes of administration, a dual endothelin receptor antagonist, and a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor. Novel drugs have also shown promise in experimental trials and are likely to be added to the list of options. This article reviews the current treatments strategies for PAH.
