The diagnosis and classification of rosacea has been modified to reflect presenting features. On exclusion of differentials, the diagnosis of rosacea is based on the presence of either (1) phymatous changes, or (2) centrofacial persistent erythema. In their absence, diagnosis can be established by presence of any two of: flushing/transient erythema, papules and pustules, telangiectases, or ocular manifestations. Management of rosacea depends on presenting feature(s), their severity, and impact. General management includes gentle skin care, sun protection, and trigger avoidance. Evidence-based treatment recommendations include topical brimonidine and oxymetazoline for persistent erythema; topical azelaic acid, ivermectin, metronidazole, minocycline and oral doxycycline, tetracycline and isotretinoin for papules and pustules; vascular lasers and light devices for telangiectases; and omega-3 fatty acids and cyclosporine ophthalmic emulsion for ocular rosacea. While surgical or laser therapy can be considered for clinically noninflamed phyma, there are no trials on their utility. Combination therapies include topical brimonidine with topical ivermectin, or topical metronidazole with oral doxycycline. Topical metronidazole, topical ivermectin, and topical azelaic acid are appropriate for maintenance therapy. In conclusion, the updated phenotype approach, based on presenting clinical features, is the foundation for current diagnosis, classification, and treatment of rosacea.
Post-acne erythema (PAE) is a common sequela of acne inflammation, and it refers to telangiectasia and erythematous lesions remaining after the acne treatment. Although some PAE lesions may improve over time, persisting PAE might be esthetically undesirable for patients. The efficacy of various treatment options for PAE has been investigated in many studies but there exists no gold standard treatment modality. In this study, we aimed to give a systematic literature review on various treatment options for PAE, the advantage of each modality, and compare their efficacy, safety, and feasibility. By using the selected keywords, we carried out a systematic search for articles published from the inception to 28 April 2021 in PubMed/Medline and Embase databases. Of the 5796 initially retrieved articles, 18 of them were fully eligible to be enrolled in our study. In this study, we found that light and laser-based devices were the most frequently used treatments for PAE. Generally, pulsed-dye lasers were the most commonly used laser devices for PAE. Neodymium:yttrium aluminum-garnet lasers were the second most commonly used modalities in treating PAE. Topical treatments such as oxymetazoline, tranexamic acid, and brimonidine tartrate are promising treatments in reducing PAE lesions. In our study, no severe side effects were found. In conclusion, both laser devices and topical agents seem to be effective for PAE lesions; however, further randomized clinical trials are needed in this field.
BACKGROUND: Exacerbation of rosacea may occur during pregnancy and there are multiple associated cases of rosacea fulminans (RF). Treatment during pregnancy poses a significant challenge as many rosacea treatments are contraindicated or have limited evidence regarding potential adverse fetal effects. OBJECTIVE: Review the pregnancy categories of various treatments and develop algorithms for treating pregnant patients with rosacea and RF. METHODS: Rosacea treatments showing efficacy in randomized controlled trials were searched through DailyMed to review pregnancy labelling. Searching the PubMed/MEDLINE database for English articles using keywords "rosacea fulminans AND pregnancy" without publishing-time restrictions yielded 8 articles. We summarized treatments used in cases of RF during pregnancy. RESULTS: Topical ivermectin was more effective than metronidazole, but has a more concerning pregnancy category. Three pregnant women with RF were treated successfully with topical metronidazole in combination with other therapies. Azithromycin is the only oral rosacea therapy that is considered safe for pregnant patients and it has been used to treat RF. CONCLUSIONS: This review highlights the challenging aspects of treating pregnant patients with rosacea, as there is limited pregnancy-related treatment efficacy and safety data. The pregnancy categories of therapeutic options are summarized. Further studies are needed to learn which therapies are effective and safe for use during pregnancy.
Rosacea is a chronic skin disorder involving central facial erythema secondary to vascular instability and cutaneous inflammation. Rosacea is divided into different subtypes based on the morphology of the rash &mdash; erythematotelangiectatic, papulopustular, phymatous, and ocular rosacea. A less-known subtype called neurogenic rosacea has been proposed to categorize patients suffering from rosacea with erythematous flushing and burning sensation that is refractory to traditional treatment. There is minimal data on this subgroup of rosacea patients and its potential treatment options. This review aims to explore current medical literature to define characteristics of neurogenic rosacea and its management. We performed a systematic search of PubMed database and identified 6 articles meeting inclusion criteria with a total of 37 patients with suspected neurogenic rosacea. Combination treatments with topicals (eg, metronidazole, brimonidine), as well as oral medications including vascular (eg, beta blockers), psychiatric (eg, diazepam, duloxetine), neurologic (eg, pregabalin, sumatriptan), and antibiotic agents (eg, rifaximin), were often cited to have better outcomes, but this finding was highly variable between patients. There were isolated reports of effective management with onabotulinumtoxinA intradermal injections and endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy treatment. Current literature supports selecting agents aimed at treating the major symptom pattern (eg, erythema, telangiectasias, burning sensation). Neurogenic rosacea treatment: a literature review. Ivanic MG, Oulee A, Norden A, et al. J Drugs Dermatol. 2023;22(6):566-571. doi:10.36849/JDD.7181 &nbsp.
Acne and rosacea are common conditions seen every day by dermatologists. This review will discuss the most recent therapeutic options for patients with these conditions. Specifically, for acne, there will be a discussion of the use of isotretinoin at higher cumulative doses as well as a new formulation of isotretinoin, isotretinoin-lidose. Adult women with acne represent a growing population of patients who present for treatment of acne; the use of hormonal therapies as well as topical dapsone gel will be reviewed for these patients. For rosacea patients, the new topical agents - brimonidine gel and ivermectin cream - will be reviewed, with a discussion on possible rebound phenomenon from brimonidine. Finally, future treatments in the pipeline will be discussed.
BACKGROUND: Rosacea is a common chronic facial dermatosis. Classification of rosacea has evolved from subtyping to phenotyping. OBJECTIVES: To update our systematic review on interventions for rosacea. METHODS: We searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, LILACS, Science Citation Index and ongoing trials registers (March 2018) for randomized controlled trials. Study selection, data extraction, risk-of-bias assessment and analyses were carried out independently by two authors. Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluations (GRADE) was used to assess certainty of evidence. RESULTS: We included 152 studies (46 were new), comprising 20 944 participants. Topical interventions included brimonidine, oxymetazoline, metronidazole, azelaic acid, ivermectin and other topical treatments. Systemic interventions included oral antibiotics, combinations with topical treatments or other systemic treatments. Several studies evaluated laser or light-based treatment. We present the most current evidence for rosacea management based on a phenotype-led approach. CONCLUSIONS: For reducing temporarily persistent erythema there was high-certainty evidence for topical brimonidine and moderate certainty for topical oxymetazoline; for erythema and mainly telangiectasia there was low-to-moderate-certainty evidence for laser and intense pulsed light therapy. For reducing papules/pustules there was high-certainty evidence for topical azelaic acid and topical ivermectin; moderate-to-high-certainty evidence for doxycycline 40 mg modified release (MR) and isotretinoin; and moderate-certainty evidence for topical metronidazole, and topical minocycline and oral minocycline being equally effective as doxycycline 40 mg MR. There was low-certainty evidence for tetracycline and low-dose minocycline. For ocular rosacea, there was moderate-certainty evidence that oral omega-3 fatty acids were effective and low-certainty evidence for ciclosporin ophthalmic emulsion and doxycycline.
Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory skin condition that negatively impacts patients' quality of life. We sought to review important aspects of the pathogenesis of rosacea and the role of new treatment options in its management. New, emerging treatments show promise; however, quality randomized controlled trials for many of these drugs are lacking. Brimonidine tartrate is an effective newly approved treatment for erythematotelangiectatic rosacea. Topical oxymetazoline has potential for the treatment of erythematotelangiectatic rosacea, with efficacy described in case reports and randomized controlled trials currently underway. Both oral and topical ivermectin have been studied for the treatment of papulopustular rosacea, both showing benefit; however, only topical ivermectin 1 % cream has been studied in randomized controlled trials. As our understanding of the etiology of rosacea continues to evolve, so will our options for therapeutic interventions. Further studies need to be performed to assess the long-term safety and efficacy of these treatments.
BACKGROUND: Rosacea is a chronic and common cutaneous condition characterised by symptoms of facial flushing and a broad spectrum of clinical signs. The clinical presentation for rosacea is varied, and there are four primary subtypes, which may overlap - erythrotelangiectatic, inflammatory, phymatous and ocular. It is important to recognise the different subtypes because of the differences in therapy. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this article is to provide evidence-based clinical updates to clinicians, specifically general practitioners (GPs), to assist with their everyday practice, and effective assessment and treatment of rosacea. DISCUSSION: Therapeutic modalities are chosen on the basis of the subtypes and clinical features identified; often a combination of these therapies is required.
Persistent centrofacial erythema is a predominant component of rosacea. The authors review the topical and systemic treatments for rosacea-related erythema and flushing to aid in treatment decision making in clinical practice. Databases were searched for literature pertaining to treatment options for erythema related to rosacea. The paucity of large-scale clinical trials in patients with the erythematotelangiectatic rosacea subtype makes it difficult to draw firm conclusions regarding treatment. Although certain topical and oral treatments appear to have modest benefit in reducing erythema, there is a need for high-quality, well-designed, and rigorously reported studies for the treatments for rosacea.
Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH) is an acquired hypermelanosis that can result from inflammatory dermatologic disease, trauma, or iatrogenesis from procedures. This condition disproportionately affects individuals with skin of color, and it can place a significant psychosocial burden on affected patients. The management of PIH is, therefore, of great interest to clinicians, especially dermatologists. The treatment of established PIH has long been a principal focus within the literature, with publications on the topic outnumbering publications on prophylaxis of PIH. Prophylaxis strategies to prevent PIH vary greatly in clinical practice, likely due to the absence of an evidence-based consensus. Published approaches to PIH prophylaxis include pretreatment (topical alpha hydroxy acids, retinoids, hydroquinone, and brimonidine) and post-treatment strategies (photoprotection, corticosteroids, and tranexamic acid). This review will examine the current literature on prophylaxis of PIH from energy-based device treatments.
Brimonidine is a highly selective 2-adrenoceptor agonist that lowers intraocular pressure (IOP) by decreasing aqueous humor production and increasing aqueous humor outflow via the uveoscleral route. Brimonidine is used to treat glaucoma and other eye conditions. Brimonidine is a topical medication that is used mainly to treat open-angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension in the eyelids. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive discussion of Brimonidine's nomenclature, physiochemical properties, preparation methods, identification procedures, and numerous qualitative and quantitative analytical techniques, as well as its ADME profiles and pharmacological effects. In addition, the chapter contains numerous approaches for separating brimonidine from other medications in combination formulations utilizing chromatographic techniques and other spectroscopic approaches.
Rosacea is an inflammatory condition of the skin, primarily affecting the central convexities of the face. Various topical and oral therapeutic approaches exist. Most have been developed to treat the papulopustular subtype of rosacea; however, other approaches can be used to treat the erythematotelangiectatic, ocular, and phymatous subtypes. This review provides a summary of available topical and oral approaches for the treatment of rosacea.
At present, medical therapy is the first line of attack against primary open-angle glaucoma. beta-blockers, miotics, sympathomimetics, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and prostaglandins have been used with varying degrees of success. The alpha 2-agonists, clonidine, apraclonidine, and now brimonidine are powerful inhibitors of aqueous humor production, thereby lowering intraocular pressure (IOP) in these patients. Brimonidine is emerging as a potential first-line therapy for primary open-angle glaucoma, with a peak IOP-lowering efficacy comparable to that of timolol, but without timolol's adverse cardiopulmonary side effects. Brimonidine promises to be an important new drug to help meet the therapeutic challenges faced by ophthalmologists in treating glaucoma.
Rosacea is a common chronic inflammatory disorder that affects approximately 16 million Americans. The multifactorial pathophysiology of rosacea is not fully understood. Several new treatment options were recently US Food and Drug Administration approved or are in clinical trials. This paper reviews new treatment options including ivermectin, brimonidine, the new foam formulation of azelaic acid, and oxymetazoline. The potential role in therapy, patient selection, and adverse effects of these agents are discussed.
We reviewed the medical charts of five patients diagnosed with brimonidine tartrate (BT)-related corneal disorders. A fan-shaped corneal opacity was present in four patients and limbal corneal infiltrations were present in one patient. In vivo confocal microscopy revealed dendritic cells and lipid deposits in the fan-shaped opacity as well as neutrophils in limbal infiltrations. BT instillation was discontinued and topical administration of a corticosteroid was initiated for all patients. The limbal infiltrations improved after BT discontinuation. Conversely, the fan-shaped opacity remained in all affected patients. After a fan-shaped opacity has developed in a patient with a BT-related corneal disorder, the lesion is difficult to resolve. However, limbal infiltrations respond well to treatment. Therefore, BT should be discontinued and anti-inflammatory treatment initiated before a fan-shaped opacity forms.
Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory dermatologic condition that can often be disfiguring with significant negative impact on patients' quality of life. Sanrosa (brimonidine tartate) is a novel therapeutic agent targeting the facial flushing and erythema of rosacea through its alpha(2) adrenergic receptor agonist activity. The goal of this article is to discuss current treatment options for rosacea and the properties of brimonidine tartate as well as the evidence surrounding its efficacy and safety profile.
Clonidine hydrochloride, apraclonidine hydrochloride, and brimonidine tartrate constitute the three topical alpha agonists that are used in the treatment of elevated intraocular pressure. All the alpha agonists have prejunctional (alpha 2) as well as postjunctional (alpha 1) effects. Within the past year, questions have arisen about their local and systemic effects, and their effects upon the optic nerve. We will, therefore, attempt to clarify these points, to provide a greater understanding of the role of alpha agonists in glaucoma therapy.
In the last years, neuroprotective therapies have attracted the researcher interests as modern and challenging approach for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases, aimed at protecting the nervous system from injuries. Glaucoma is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive excavation of the optic nerve head, retinal axonal injury and corresponding vision loss that affects millions of people on a global scale. The molecular basis of the pathology is largely uncharacterized yet, and the therapeutic approaches available do not change the natural course of the disease. Therefore, in accordance with the therapeutic regimens proposed for other neurodegenerative diseases, a modern strategy to treat glaucoma includes prescription of drugs with neuroprotective activities. With respect to this, several preclinical and clinical investigations on a plethora of different drugs are currently ongoing. In this review, first, the conceptualization of the rationale for the adoption of neuroprotective strategies for retina is summarized. Second, the molecular aspects highlighting glaucoma as a neurodegenerative disease are reported. In conclusion, the molecular and pharmacological properties of most promising direct neuroprotective drugs used to delay glaucoma progression are examined, including: neurotrophic factors, NMDA receptor antagonists, the alpha2-adrenergic agonist, brimonidine, calcium channel blockers, antioxidant agents, nicotinamide and statins.
