A recent Phase II randomized, controlled trial of bumetanide as an adjunctive treatment for neonatal seizures showed a robust efficacy signal and no evidence of toxicity. Concerns regarding bumetanide as an adjunctive anticonvulsant are addressed here. An adequately powered multi-institutional trial is needed to accurately determine efficacy.
A 62-year-old woman with chronic kidney disease stage 4, sleep apnoea on continuous positive airway pressure and recent admission for acute-on-chronic diastolic heart failure presented to emergency room with weakness. She was hypotensive and had symptomatic bradycardia in the 30 s secondary to hyperkalaemia and beta-blockers, raising concern for BRASH syndrome. Antihypertensives were immediately held. Potassium-lowering agents (with calcium gluconate for cardiac stability) were begun, as were fluids and dopamine for vasopressor support. The patient was admitted to intensive care unit and electrophysiology was consulted. Over the next 2 days, the patient clinically improved: she remained off dopamine for over 24 hours; potassium levels and renal function improved; and heart rate stabilised in 60 s. The patient was eventually discharged and advised to avoid metolazone, bumetanide and carvedilol, with primary care provider and cardiology follow-up.
The loop diuretics are drugs that increase the excretion of water and electrolytes in the urine by their action on the cells in the loop of Henle. Clinical reports of ototoxicity of these agents are reviewed, and the results of a number of studies in experimental animals are discussed. These drugs can cause either a temporary, or in some cases, a permanent loss of hearing in patients. Animal experiments show that these drugs act on the stria vascularis, producing edema of these tissues and a temporary loss of function, resulting in a decrease of the endocochlear potential. This can result in secondary effects on sound-evoked measures of hearing. As new information unfolds about protective agents, it may be possible to preserve hearing and maintain the desired therapeutic effect.
Identification of the aquaporin (AQP) protein family more than twenty years ago has ushered in an era where water and neutral solute trafficking is considered a prime target for pharmacological intervention. Using AQP modulation as a basis for the treatment of human disorders has been suggested by phenotype analysis involving specific AQP-null animals, as well as by pathohistological studies. Based on those reports, a wide variety of disorders, such as cerebral edema, cancer and malaria, are considered indications for AQP modulators. Recent studies have also identified several small molecule AQP modulators that can be used to test those hypotheses in disease models. We believe these studies and compounds form the basis from which future treatments and diagnostic protocols of aquaporin-based disorders will be developed.
In his editorial, Kevin Staley criticizes our recent work demonstrating the lack of effect of bumetanide in a novel model of neonatal seizures. The main points in our response are that (1) our work is on an asphyxia model, not one on "hypercarbia only"; (2) clinically relevant parenteral doses of bumetanide applied in vivo lead to concentrations in the brain parenchyma that are at least an order of magnitude lower than what would be sufficient to exert any direct effect-even a transient one-on neuronal functions, including neonatal seizures; and (3) moreover, bumetanide's molecular target in the brain is the Na-K-2Cl cotransporter NKCC1, which has vital functions in neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes as well as microglia. This would make it impossible even for highly brain-permeant NKCC1 blockers to specifically target depolarizing and excitatory actions of gamma-aminobutyric acid in principal neurons of the brain, which is postulated as the rationale of clinical trials on neonatal seizures.
Bumetanide and furosemide are potent loop diuretics; the former is 40 to 50 times more potent than the latter on a weight basis. Bumetanide is absorbed more quickly than furosemide and is twice as bioavailable. Both drugs exhibit changes in elimination in the presence of renal insufficiency as well as changes in the time course of absorption in congestive heart failure. More data are needed to assess potential differences between them in various clinical conditions.
BACKGROUND: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a common child neurodevelopmental disorder, whose pathogenesis is not completely understood. Until now, there is no proven treatment for the core symptoms of ASD. However, some evidence indicates a crucial link between this disorder and GABAergic signals which are altered in ASD. Bumetanide is a diuretic that reduces chloride, shifts gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA) from excitation to inhibition, and may play a significant role in the treatment of ASD. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to assess the safety and efficacy of bumetanide as a treatment for ASD. METHODS: Eighty children, aged 3-12 years, with ASD diagnosed by Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS), ⩾ 30 were included in this double-blind, randomized, and controlled study. Group 1 received Bumetanide, Group 2 received a placebo for 6 months. Follow-up by CARS rating scale was performed before and after 1, 3, and 6 months of treatment. RESULTS: The use of bumetanide in group 1 improved the core symptoms of ASD in a shorter time with minimal and tolerable adverse effects. There was a statistically significant decrease in CARS and most of its fifteen items in group 1 versus group 2 after 6 months of treatment (p-value <0.001). CONCLUSION: Bumetanide has an important role in the treatment of core symptoms of ASD.
Careful management of fluid and electrolytes has long been an intrinsic part of pediatric practice. However, the augmentation of these manipulations through the rational use of diuretic agents requires considerable skill. In pediatric medicine, the regulation of pharmacokinetic processes and their interface with pharmacodynamic processes show dramatic age-related changes. These ontogenetic processes and their modification by various disease states must be considered carefully before selection and application of diuretic agents. The available data concerning the ontogeny of renal function and the attempts to apply diuretic therapy to pediatric disease are reviewed. It is concluded that results obtained to date suffer from the absence of a rigorous attempt to answer the fundamental therapeutic questions: What drug? What dose? What duration of therapy? A rational "target-effect" strategy is proposed for the application of diuretic agents to pediatric medicine.
The loop diuretics furosemide and bumetanide are commonly used in neonatal intensive care units (NICUs). Furosemide, because of its actions on the ubiquitous Na(+) -K(+) -2Cl(-) isoform cotransporter and its promotion of prostanoid production and release, also has non-diuretic effects on vascular smooth muscle, airways, the ductus arteriosus and theoretically the gastrointestinal tract. Loop diuretics also affect the central nervous system through modulation of the GABA-A chloride channel. CONCLUSION:   The loop diuretics have a variety of biological effects that are potentially harmful as well as beneficial. Care should be taken with the use of these agents because the range of their effects may be broader than the single action sought by the prescribing physician.
We recently showed that constraining eye contact leads to exaggerated increase of amygdala activation in autism. Here, in a proof of concept pilot study, we demonstrate that administration of bumetanide (a NKCC1 chloride importer antagonist that restores GABAergic inhibition) normalizes the level of amygdala activation during constrained eye contact with dynamic emotional face stimuli in autism. In addition, eye-tracking data reveal that bumetanide administration increases the time spent in spontaneous eye gaze during in a free-viewing mode of the same face stimuli. In keeping with clinical trials, our data support the Excitatory/Inhibitory dysfunction hypothesis in autism, and indicate that bumetanide may improve specific aspects of social processing in autism. Future double-blind placebo controlled studies with larger cohorts of participants will help clarify the mechanisms of bumetanide action in autism.
Food significantly affects the pharmacokinetics of oral loop diuretics in healthy individuals, but studies have not been performed in patients with edema. Because of this omission, food's effect on pharmacokinetics has been overlooked and may decrease the pharmacodynamic response in patients who rely on diuretics. Despite this potential interaction, reference manuals do not provide warnings about the effects of food on loop diuretic absorption. We reviewed the published human studies investigating the effects of food on loop diuretics. Peak plasma concentrations and urinary recovery were significantly decreased when taken with food, but only one study showed a corresponding decrease in total urine output, which is likely related to the diuretic threshold effect. These healthy subjects probably were always above the diuretic threshold under both fed and fasting conditions and thus could not augment their urine output. Based on these data in healthy subjects, the special implications for patients who routinely take diuretics are discussed. Therefore, food is more likely to have a clinical effect on the diuretic threshold given its effect in healthy subjects and the special considerations for patients with edema. Additional studies are needed to help answer these questions. Until such data are available, the most conservative, effective clinical approach is to administer oral loop diuretics without food.
INTRODUCTION: Mortality from heart failure remains high. Many subjects who have been hospitalized with acute decompensated heart failure leave hospital with residual congestion, despite treatment with loop diuretics. In an attempt to improve this, the Acetazolamide in Decompensated heart failure with Volume OveRload (ADVOR) trial was undertaken, where acetazolamide was added to the loop diuretic bumetanide. AREAS COVERED: This article discusses ADVOR. The primary endpoint of ADVOR was the reversal of congestion, which was increased by adding acetazolamide to bumetanide. However, acetazolamide did not shorten hospital stay or the composite of rehospitalisation and death after three months. EXPERT OPINION: The limitations of ADVOR include that acetazolamide did not improve quality of life and that the testing was in white subjects only. During the hospital stay for decompensation, medicines that inhibit the angiotensin and mineralocorticoid systems were increased, which suggests that the treatment for heart failure was not ideal on hospitalization. As the death rates in ADVOR were lower than in previous studies, this suggests that the overall treatment of decompensated/heart failure is improving. However, in the author's opinion, although the addition of acetazolamide is a small improvement in the treatment of acute decompensated heart failure with volume overload, more options need to be considered.
The Na-K-2Cl cotransporter NKCC1 and the neuron-specific K-Cl cotransporter KCC2 are considered attractive CNS drug targets because altered neuronal chloride regulation and consequent effects on GABAergic signaling have been implicated in numerous CNS disorders. While KCC2 modulators are not yet clinically available, the loop diuretic bumetanide has been used in clinical studies to treat brain disorders and as a tool for NKCC1 inhibition in preclinical models. Bumetanide is known to have anticonvulsant and neuroprotective effects under some pathophysiological conditions. However, as shown in several species from neonates to adults (mice, rats, dogs, and by extrapolation in humans), at the low clinical doses of bumetanide approved for diuresis, this drug has negligible access into the CNS, reaching levels that are much lower than what is needed to inhibit NKCC1 in cells within the brain parenchyma. Several drug discovery strategies have been used over the last  approximately 15 years to develop brain-permeant compounds that, ideally, should be selective for NKCC1 to eliminate the diuresis mediated by inhibition of renal NKCC2. The strategies employed to improve the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of NKCC1 blockers include evaluation of other clinically approved loop diuretics; development of lipophilic prodrugs of bumetanide; development of side-chain derivatives of bumetanide; and unbiased high-throughput screening approaches of drug discovery based on large chemical compound libraries. The main outcomes are that (1), non-acidic loop diuretics such as azosemide and torasemide may have advantages as NKCC1 inhibitors vs. bumetanide; (2), bumetanide prodrugs achieve significantly higher brain levels of the parent drug and have lower diuretic activity; (3), the novel bumetanide side-chain derivatives do not exhibit any functionally relevant improvement of CNS accessibility or NKCC1 selectivity vs. bumetanide; (4) novel compounds discovered by high-throughput screening may resolve some of the inherent problems of bumetanide, but as yet this has not been achieved. Thus, further research is needed to optimize the design of brain-permeant NKCC1 inhibitors. Another major challenge is to identify the mechanisms whereby various NKCC1-expressing cellular targets of these drug within (e.g., neurons, oligodendrocytes or astrocytes) and outside the brain parenchyma (e.g., blood-brain barrier, choroid plexus, endocrine and immune system), as well as molecular off-target effects, might contribute to their reported therapeutic and adverse effects.
In their article in the Journal, Sprengers et al.(1) conclude that bumetanide does not attenuate autism spectrum disorder (ASD) despite a nominally significant treatment effect in repetitive behaviors, which is a core symptom of ASD but was defined as a secondary measure in this trial. Four earlier studies performed by 3 independent institutes, including 2 studies(2,3) not mentioned by Sprengers et al., testing a total of 169 children (versus 122 placebo) showed a significant amelioration of ASD symptoms. Bumetanide also significantly attenuated behavioral features of patients with tuberous sclerosis according to another study by Sprengers' same group.(4).
The behavioral phenotypes emerge from cognitive architecture comprising attention, executive functions, and primary communication skills that all have shown remarkable deficits in Down's Syndrome (DS). These states arise from the proper functional interactions of the contributing neurotransmission and neuromodulation systems and other coding platforms. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is an integral part of the neural interaction and regulation networks that its reverse action leads to broad detrimental consequences. This inhibitory substance needs an appropriate balance of co-transporters that largely shape the ionic milieu. Bumetanide, a specific NKCC1 inhibitor used for an eighteen-month interval, showed promising effects in restoring some behavior deficits in a fourteen-year-old boy diagnosed with genetically confirmed mosaic Down's Syndrome.
The efficacy of bumetanide (oral liquid formulation 0.5 mg bid) as a treatment for the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorders in children and adolescents aged 7-17 years is being investigated in an international, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study. The primary endpoint is the change in Childhood Autism Rating Scale 2 (CARS2) total raw score after 6 months of treatment. At baseline, the 211 participants analysed are broadly representative of autistic subjects in this age range: mean (SD) age, 10.4 (3.0) years; 82.5% male; 47.7% with intelligence quotient >/= 70. Mean CARS2 score was 40.1 (4.9) and mean Social Responsiveness Scale score was 116.7 (23.4). Final study results will provide data on efficacy and safety of bumetanide in autistic children and adolescents.
Loop diuretics such as furosemide, piretanide, and bumetanide bind reversibly to the Na+2Cl-K+ carrier. This transporter is responsible for the uptake of Cl- into the thick ascending limb segment. As a consequence, these compounds reduce or abolish NaCl reabsorption in this nephron segment and lead to a decreased interstitial hypertonicity and thus to a reduced water absorption. Apart from these profound effects, loop diuretics also inhibit Ca2+ and Mg2+ reabsorption in the thick ascending limb in a manner which is still not clear. They also increase urinary K+ excretion by an increase in distal tubule NaCl and water delivery and probably also by the reduction of K+ reabsorption which goes on under in vivo conditions in the thick ascending limb segment. Finally, by the reduction of the transport work in the thick ascending limb, these compounds reduce dramatically the substrate and oxygen dependence of this nephron segment.
We assessed the response to and handling of furosemide and bumetanide in 30 experiments with the former and 46 with the latter in normal subjects. Oral doses of furosemide (20, 40, and 80 mg) were used, and subjects received oral doses of 0.5, 1, and 2 mg bumetanide and intravenous doses of 0.5 and 1 mg bumetanide. both drugs were quickly absorbed and peak urinary amounts were reached at 75 min (median). Approximately 30% of an oral dose of each drug was excreted unchanged in the urine with no evidence of dose-dependent elimination. After intravenous injection, 36% of the bumetanide was excreted unchanged. Consequently, bumetanide has an estimated bioavailability of 80% (approximately 40% for furosemide). The relationship between the logarithm of the urinary bumetanide excretion rate and the logarithm of the sodium excretion rate was described by a sigmoid-shaped dose-response curve, with a dose inducing half-maximal response of 1 +/- 0.04 micrograms/min; it was 69.8 micrograms/min for furosemide. Overall, the distinguishing features between the two drugs are the 200% greater bioavailability and the much greater potency of bumetanide.
The efficacy and safety of bumetanide oral solution for the treatment of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in children and adolescents was evaluated in two international, multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III trials; one enrolled patients aged 7-17 years (SIGN 1 trial) and the other enrolled younger patients aged 2-6 years (SIGN 2). In both studies, patients were randomized to receive bumetanide oral solution twice daily (BID) or placebo BID during a 6-month double-blind treatment period. The primary endpoint was change in Childhood Autism Rating Scale 2 (CARS2) total raw score from baseline to Week 26. Key secondary endpoints included changes in Social Responsiveness Scale-2, Clinical Global Impression Scale, and Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale. Each study enrolled 211 patients (bumetanide, n = 107; placebo, n = 104). Both studies were terminated early due to absence of any significant difference between bumetanide and placebo in the overall studied populations. In both studies, CARS2 total raw score decreased from baseline to Week 26 in the bumetanide and placebo groups, with no statistically significant difference between groups. No differences were observed between treatment groups for any of the secondary efficacy endpoints in either study. In both studies, treatment-emergent adverse events that occurred more frequently with bumetanide than placebo included thirst, polyuria, hypokalemia, and dry mouth. These large phase III trials failed to demonstrate a benefit of bumetanide for the treatment of pediatric ASD compared with placebo. Consequently, the sponsor has discontinued the development of bumetanide for the treatment of this condition. Trial registration: https://clinicaltrials.gov: SIGN 1: NCT03715166; SIGN 2: NCT03715153.
Bullous pemphigoid is a rare complication of frusemide therapy. We present two patients in whom the link between frusemide and this condition was not recognised early, and continued frusemide therapy resulted in prolonged leg blistering and ulceration. On withdrawing the drug, all lesions in both patients resolved completely. Although uncommon, this frusemide reaction needs to be borne in mind as it can add to the morbidity of elderly patients with heart failure.
