BACKGROUND: It is widely believed that the choice between isobaric bupivacaine and hyperbaric bupivacaine formulations alters the block characteristics for the conduct of surgery under spinal anesthesia. The aim of this study was to systematically review the comparative evidence regarding the effectiveness and safety of the 2 formulations when used for spinal anesthesia for adult noncesarean delivery surgery. METHODS: Key electronic databases were searched for randomized controlled trials, excluding cesarean delivery surgeries under spinal anesthesia, without any language or date restrictions. The primary outcome measure for this review was the failure of spinal anesthesia. Two independent reviewers selected the studies and extracted the data. Results were expressed as relative risk (RR) or mean differences (MDs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RESULTS: Seven hundred fifty-one studies were identified between 1946 and 2016. After screening, there were 16 randomized controlled clinical trials, including 724 participants, that provided data for the meta-analysis. The methodological reporting of most studies was poor, and appropriate judgment of their individual risk of bias elements was not possible. There was no difference between the 2 drugs regarding the need for conversion to general anesthesia (RR, 0.60; 95% CI, 0.08-4.41; P = .62; I = 0%), incidence of hypotension (RR, 1.15; 95% CI, 0.69-1.92; P = .58; I = 0%), nausea/vomiting (RR, 0.29; 95% CI, 0.06-1.32; P = .11; I = 7%), or onset of sensory block (MD = 1.7 minutes; 95% CI, -3.5 to 0.1; P = .07; I = 0%). The onset of motor block (MD = 4.6 minutes; 95% CI, 7.5-1.7; P = .002; I = 78%) was significantly faster with hyperbaric bupivacaine. Conversely, the duration of motor (MD = 45.2 minutes; 95% CI, 66.3-24.2; P < .001; I = 87%) and sensory (MD = 29.4 minutes; 95% CI, 15.5-43.3; P < .001; I = 73%) block was longer with isobaric bupivacaine. CONCLUSIONS: Both hyperbaric bupivacaine and isobaric bupivacaine provided effective anesthesia with no difference in the failure rate or adverse effects. The hyperbaric formulation allows for a relatively rapid motor block onset, with shorter duration of motor and sensory block. The isobaric formulation has a slower onset and provides a longer duration of both sensory and motor block. Nevertheless, the small sample size and high heterogeneity involving these outcomes suggest that all the results should be treated with caution.
Levobupivacaine is an enantiomer of the long-acting local anaesthetic bupivacaine, which, although currently the most widely used agent in surgery and obstetrics, is associated with potentially fatal cardiotoxicity. Levobupivacaine 75 to 122 mg was less arrhythmogenic than the same dose range of bupivacaine in healthy volunteers. Its effects on the corrected QT interval were significantly weaker than those of bupivacaine, and it tended to have a weaker effect on QRS duration. The CNS depressant effect of intravenous levobupivacaine 40 mg was less than that of bupivacaine 40 mg in healthy volunteers, both in terms of the magnitude of the effect and the regions of the cortex affected. Clinical studies have demonstrated that epidural levobupivacaine produces a sensory and motor block clinically similar to that of bupivacaine in patients requiring anaesthesia during surgery. However, the duration of sensory block was significantly longer with levobupivacaine 0.75% than with levobupivacaine 0.5% or bupivacaine 0.5% or 0.75% in one study. Levobupivacaine 0.25% was as effective as bupivacaine 0.25% in women requiring epidural anaesthesia during labour with respect to time to onset of pain relief, overall quality of analgesia, extent of sensory blockade and number of patients reporting motor block. Levobupivacaine is as well tolerated as bupivacaine. In a clinical study involving 88 patients who received either drug, intraoperative hypotension was the most commonly reported adverse event with levobupivacaine and no serious arrhythmias occurred.
Although the use of long-acting local anesthetics has become a useful therapeutic approach for managing peri- and postoperative pain, recent evidence reveals unexpected outcomes. This article reviews the clinical use of long-acting local anesthetics, presents current clinical research findings, and makes recommendations for their use.
Brugada syndrome (BS) is an inherited cardiac disease with increased risk of ventricular tachyarrythmias, cardiac arrest and sudden death. BS is diagnosed on various criteria including specific electrocardiographic abnormalities in a structurally normal heart. Many drugs have been reported to induce fatal arrhythmias in patients with BS and in particular sodium channel blockers i.e. local anaesthetics such as bupivacaine. We report the anaesthetic management of two women with BS during caesarean section and provide a general discussion on the use of bupivacain for neuraxial blockade for patients with BS.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has become the standard treatment for gallbladder diseases. However, there are still some patients for whom conversion to open surgery is required. This surgery can produce significant post-operative pain. Opioids drugs have traditionally been used to treat this pain, but side effects have led to seeking alternatives (plexus, nerve or fascia blocks or wound). The cases are presented of 4 patients subjected to ultrasound-guided intercostal branches blocks in the mid-axillary line from T6 to T12 with levobupivacaine as an analgesic alternative in open surgery of gallbladder, with satisfactory results.
A 45-year-old woman was accidentally administered an epidural infusion of paracetamol instead of levobupivacaine for postoperative pain therapy during the postoperative period of abdominal hysterectomy under general anesthesia combined with epidural analgesia. The patient had no neurological symptoms at any time, although a slight tendency to arterial hypotension that did not require treatment was observed. No rescue analgesia was necessary until 8h after the start of epidural infusion. The incidence of these types of errors is probably underestimated, although there are several cases reported with various drugs.
The use of levobupivacaine and of ropivacaine may increase the safety of regional anaesthesia. These pure enantiomers have similar pharmacokinetic properties as those of the racemic mixtures. However, they are less cardiotoxic than the racemic mixtures, especially at the high heart rate usually encountered in infants. We may then recommend the use of these agents in the paediatric patients.
In the multimodal approach to the management of postoperative pain, local infiltration and regional blocks have been increasingly utilized for pain control. One of the limitations of local anesthetics in the postoperative setting is its relatively short duration of action. Multivesicular liposomes containing bupivacaine have been increasingly utilized for their increased duration of action. Compared with bupivacaine HCl, local infiltration of liposomal bupivacaine has shown to have an increase in duration of action and causes delay in peak plasma concentration. In this article, we attempt to review the clinical literature surrounding liposomal bupivacaine and its evolving role in perioperative analgesia. This new bupivacaine formation may have promising implications in postoperative pain control, resulting in increased patient satisfaction and a decrease in both hospital stay and opioid-induced adverse events (AEs). Although more studies are needed, the preliminary clinical trials suggest that liposomal bupivacaine has predictable pharmacokinetics, a similar side effect profile compared with bupivacaine HCl, and is effective in providing increased postoperative pain control.
Serious neurological complications after neuraxial block, including permanent neurological injury, are rare in contemporary anesthetic practice. We report a case of a 36 year old female undergoing a venous stripping operation under combined spinal epidural anesthesia (CSE). The CSE procedure was completed after a second attempt at the L4-L5 level and the surgery was completed uneventfully. After full recovery of motor block in the recovery room, the patient was discharged to the surgical ward. Epidural patient controlled analgesia with levobupivacine 0.125% and fentanyl 2 microg/ml was initiated. 10 hours after surgery, right lower limb sensory loss and monoplegia occurred. The epidural catheter was removed and normal MRI findings were noted. After one month of physical therapy treatment and two months follow up the patient was able to walk with the aid of a walking stick. We discuss factors that might have contributed to radiculopathy and neurotoxicity as a cause of neurologic deficit.
The Practice Advisory on Liposuction published by the American Society of Plastic Surgeons provides a thorough review of anesthetic techniques and guidelines for surgeons who perform liposuction. However, there is evidence to support several changes to the anesthetic infiltrate guidelines that will improve patient safety. These proposed recommendations will have the most impact on patients undergoing office-based procedures, where dedicated anesthesia providers may not be present, but they should also guide practice in both ambulatory care centers and hospitals. The primary foci of the proposed changes include restrictions on bupivacaine use and creation of lidocaine concentration guidelines.
The effects of intrathecal injection of 0.5% bupivacaine in solutions containing various concentrations of glucose have been studied in four groups of 20 patients. When solutions containing 0.8% glucose were injected at the L3-4 interspace the median maximum extent of block was higher, and the range of blocks wider, with the 8% solutions. All patients receiving 0.8% glucose had blocks between the T5 and T10 dermatomes, confirming previous work on the benefits of this concentration of glucose. In the two other groups 0.5% bupivacaine containing 0 or 0.8% glucose was injected at the L2-3 interspace. In both groups of patients a wider range of blocks, with a median maximum extent that was higher, was produced. These results demonstrate how glucose concentration may be used to influence the spread of intrathecal solutions and how other factors can obscure the effect of glucose concentration.
Plain 0.5% bupivacaine 3 ml was compared with plain 0.25% bupivacaine 6 ml for spinal anaesthesia during transurethral surgery in 40 patients. The solutions were injected over 30 s at the L3/4 space with the patient in the sitting position. The patient was kept sitting for 2 min, supine for 5 min and then placed in the lithotomy position. No significant differences were found in onset time, extent of cephalad spread, duration of sensory or motor blockade, or side effects. The use of a 0.5% plain solution of bupivacaine did not appear to confer any advantage over the 0.25% solution.
Prolonged-release (PR; as ascribed in the EU) or extended-release (as ascribed in the USA) bupivacaine/meloxicam (HTX-011; hereafter referred to as bupivacaine/meloxicam PR; Zynrelef((R))) is a synergistic fixed-dose combination (FDC) of the local anaesthetic bupivacaine and the NSAID meloxicam. It is approved in the EU and the USA to treat postoperative pain. After needle-free application at the surgical site, the novel polymer technology allows simultaneous diffusion of bupivacaine and meloxicam over 72 h. In clinical trials, bupivacaine/meloxicam PR significantly reduced postoperative pain and opioid consumption relative to bupivacaine hydrochloride (HCl) and placebo in patients undergoing bunionectomy, herniorrhaphy or total knee arthroplasty (TKA). When used as the foundation of a scheduled non-opioid multimodal analgesia (MMA) regimen, bupivacaine/meloxicam PR further improved pain control and reduced the need for opioids following surgery. Bupivacaine/meloxicam PR was generally well tolerated, with a lower incidence of opioid-related adverse events than bupivacaine HCl and placebo. Although additional data would be beneficial, current evidence indicates that bupivacaine/meloxicam PR is a promising non-opioid treatment option for the management of postoperative pain.
Spinal myoclonus following neuraxial anesthesia is rare. This report describes a case of myoclonus-like involuntary movement that occurred during the recovery from epidural anesthesia for a cesarean delivery. The patient's symptom improved with the administration of benzodiazepine, and the patient recovered with no neurological sequelae. In conclusion, epidural anesthesia can cause spinal myoclonus, which can be treated with a benzodiazepine.
OBJECTIVE: Femoral nerve block (FNB) is increasingly used as an analgesic modality in patients with femoral fracture both in the emergency department and preoperatively. We describe an occurrence of unexpected dislocation of the fracture after FNB. CASE REPORT: An FNB was administered to treat pain in a 48-year-old patient with metastatic breast carcinoma and multiple bone metastases. A diagnostic FNB with 20 mL of 0.25% levobupivacaine resulted in analgesia but also in unexpected gross deformity in the proximal right femur. An x-ray revealed a pathologic fracture of the proximal third femur diaphysis, with reduction and angulation of fragments, necessitating urgent surgery. CONCLUSIONS: Femoral nerve block confers effective analgesia for femur fracture. However, relaxation of the quadriceps femoris muscle may destabilize the fracture because of an unopposed tone of the hamstrings and/or thigh adductors.
In a double-blind study of spinal anaesthesia with 0.5% bupivacaine 3 ml with no glucose, 5% glucose or 8% glucose all three solutions gave consistently good nerve blocks. The hyperbaric solutions (5% and 8% glucose) produced a greater cephalad spread and were suitable for lower abdominal surgery, whereas the plain solution (no glucose) seldom affected the thoracic nerves. Cardiovascular changes were more marked with the hyperbaric solutions but only necessitated treatment on two occasions. The duration of block was not affected by baricity and was in the range 140-160 min.
By inhibiting sodium channels, local anesthetics (LAs) prevent sodium entering the cell and inhibit cellular depolarization. Although undesired drug reactions caused by LA usage are common, real allergic reactions are rare. The objective of this study was to discuss allergic reactions developing after application of spinal anesthetic.
BACKGROUND: Retro-bulbar anesthesia is one of the most common regional blocks used for intraocular surgeries. Complications associated with regional blocks may be limited to the eye or may be systemic. CASE REPORT: After a retro-bulbar block for glaucoma surgery, a 60-year-old man developed loss of consciousness, apnea with hypotension and bradycardia-features of brainstem anesthesia. We present the clinical features, treatment and comments on how to prevent the problem as well as a review of the literature on reported cases. CONCLUSION: Although it is rare, treating physicians should be aware of the potentially lethal consequences of retro-bulbar block, understand measures to reduce the risks and early recognition and treatment. Facilities where ophthalmic surgeries are performed under local anesthesia should be properly equipped and staffed for advanced resuscitation.
Priapism is a rare complication of epidural anaesthesia, and the pathophysiology is poorly understood. In general, 95% of all priapism episodes are ischemic because of decreased penile blood flow, and therefore requires immediate treatment. A case is reported of a 45-year-old male patient in which a clear relation is demonstrated between continuous thoracic epidural analgesia and priapism after transabdominal nephrectomy. The level of epidural anaesthesia supports the theory that the erection is a consequence of increased penile blood flow, thus a relatively harmless condition. However, confirmation by serial cavernous blood gas analysis or colour duplex ultrasonography is mandatory. Until this hypothesis is confirmed, termination of epidural infusion is advised as a primary treatment.
OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to determine the effect of epidural analgesia on nulliparous labor and delivery. STUDY DESIGN: Normal term nulliparous women in early spontaneous labor were randomized to receive either narcotic or epidural analgesia. RESULTS: When compared with the group receiving narcotic analgesia (n = 45), the group receiving epidural analgesia (n = 48) had a significant prolongation in the first and second stages of labor, an increased requirement for oxytocin augmentation, and a significant slowing in the rate of cervical dilatation. Epidural analgesia was associated with a significant increase in malposition (4.4% vs 18.8%, p < 0.05). Cesarean delivery occurred more frequently in the epidural group (2.2% vs 25%, p < 0.05), primarily related to an increase in cesarean section for dystocia (2.2% vs 16.7%, p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: In a randomized, controlled, prospective trial epidural analgesia resulted in a significant prolongation in the first and second stages of labor and a significant increase in the frequency of cesarean delivery, primarily related to dystocia.
