Tobacco use disorder is highly prevalent; more than a billion individuals use tobacco worldwide. Popular views on the addictive potential of tobacco often underestimate the complex neural adaptations that underpin continued use. Although sometimes trivialized as a minor substance, effects of nicotine on behavior lead to profound morbidity over a lifetime of exposure. Innovations in processing have led to potent forms of tobacco and delivery devices. Proactive treatment strategies focus on pharmacotherapeutic interventions. Innovations on the horizon hold promise to help clinicians address this problem in a phenotypically tailored manner. Efforts are needed to prevent tobacco use for future generations.
BACKGROUND: The use of naltrexone plus bupropion to treat methamphetamine use disorder has not been well studied. METHODS: We conducted this multisite, double-blind, two-stage, placebo-controlled trial with the use of a sequential parallel comparison design to evaluate the efficacy and safety of extended-release injectable naltrexone (380 mg every 3 weeks) plus oral extended-release bupropion (450 mg per day) in adults with moderate or severe methamphetamine use disorder. In the first stage of the trial, participants were randomly assigned in a 0.26:0.74 ratio to receive naltrexone-bupropion or matching injectable and oral placebo for 6 weeks. Those in the placebo group who did not have a response in stage 1 underwent rerandomization in stage 2 and were assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive naltrexone-bupropion or placebo for an additional 6 weeks. Urine samples were obtained from participants twice weekly. The primary outcome was a response, defined as at least three methamphetamine-negative urine samples out of four samples obtained at the end of stage 1 or stage 2, and the weighted average of the responses in the two stages is reported. The treatment effect was defined as the between-group difference in the overall weighted responses. RESULTS: A total of 403 participants were enrolled in stage 1, and 225 in stage 2. In the first stage, 18 of 109 participants (16.5%) in the naltrexone-bupropion group and 10 of 294 (3.4%) in the placebo group had a response. In the second stage, 13 of 114 (11.4%) in the naltrexone-bupropion group and 2 of 111 (1.8%) in the placebo group had a response. The weighted average response across the two stages was 13.6% with naltrexone-bupropion and 2.5% with placebo, for an overall treatment effect of 11.1 percentage points (Wald z-test statistic, 4.53; P<0.001). Adverse events with naltrexone-bupropion included gastrointestinal disorders, tremor, malaise, hyperhidrosis, and anorexia. Serious adverse events occurred in 8 of 223 participants (3.6%) who received naltrexone-bupropion during the trial. CONCLUSIONS: Among adults with methamphetamine use disorder, the response over a period of 12 weeks among participants who received extended-release injectable naltrexone plus oral extended-release bupropion was low but was higher than that among participants who received placebo. (Funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse and others; ADAPT-2 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03078075.).
OBJECTIVE: To describe the prevalence of hyponatremia in older adults related to antidepressive agents and identify potential alternative options in older adults with a low-baseline serum sodium concentration and/or when a patient has experienced hyponatremia as a result of taking an antidepressant. DATA SOURCES: A PubMed search was conducted on November 10, 2015. Search terms included: antidepressive agents, antidepressive agents second-generation, bupropion, citalopram, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, hyponatremia, milnacipran, mirtazapine, paroxetine, reboxetine, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone, sertraline, trazodone, venlafaxine, and vilazodone. Filters included English language. A search of product labeling was also conducted. STUDY SELECTION: Out of 363 results, 124 publications were identified and reviewed along with 11 additional references. Publications were chosen based on relevance to the review: case reports of patients 60 years of age or older or clinical investigations of the association between hyponatremia and antidepressants in older adults. DATA EXTRACTION: Hyponatremia was counted as an adverse effect if an antidepressant was the likely cause of hyponatremia, and hyponatremia was resolved after withdrawal. DATA SYNTHESIS: Antidepressant-induced hyponatremia in older adults is fairly common. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, and mirtazapine were implicated in the majority of the case reports and clinical studies evaluating older adults. Bupropion, trazodone, and tricyclic antidepressants were implicated less often in the same literature. CONCLUSION: Given its unique mechanism of action, bupropion may be the most appropriate antidepressant for older adults at risk for antidepressant-induced hyponatremia.
Bupropion is an atypical antidepressant of the aminoketone group, structurally related to cathinone, associated with a wide interindividual variability. An extensive pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic review of bupropion was performed, also focusing on chemical, pharmacological, toxicological, clinical and forensic aspects of this drug without a limiting period. Bupropion is a chiral, basic, highly lipophilic drug, clinically used as racemate that undergoes extensive stereoselective metabolism. Its major active metabolites, hydroxybupropion, threohydrobupropion, and erythrohydrobupropion reach higher plasma concentrations than bupropion. Bupropion exerts its effects mainly by inhibiting dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake and by blocking several nicotinic receptors. Recent reports highlight recreational use of bupropion via intranasal insufflation and intravenous use. Seizures, insomnia, agitation, headache, dry mouth, and nausea are some of the reported adverse effects. Neurologic effects are major signs of intoxication that should be carefully managed. Finally, the characterization of the polymorphic enzymes involved in the metabolism of bupropion is essential to understand factors that may influence the interindividual and intraindividual variability in bupropion metabolite exposure, including the evaluation of potential drug-drug interactions and pharmacogenetic implications.
Incomplete symptom remission and sexual side effects are common problems for which bupropion often is added to treatment with selective serotonin and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs and SNRIs) for patients with major depressive disorder (MDD). This article reviews the literature on combining bupropion with SSRIs or SNRIs. We used MEDLINE to select studies that included patients diagnosed with MDD treated with any combination of bupropion and an SSRI or SNRI, either to enhance antidepressant response or to ameliorate antidepressant-associated sexual dysfunction. Bibliographies of located articles were searched for additional studies. Controlled and open-label studies support the effectiveness of bupropion in reversing antidepressant-associated sexual dysfunction, whereas open trials suggest that combination treatment with bupropion and an SSRI or SNRI is effective for the treatment of MDD in patients refractory to the SSRI, SNRI, or bupropion alone. The available data suggest that, although not an approved indication, the combination of bupropion and either an SSRI or an SNRI is generally well tolerated, can boost antidepressant response, and can reduce SSRI or SNRI-associated sexual side effects. Additional randomized controlled studies are needed to answer important questions, such as those regarding optimal dose and duration of treatment.
BACKGROUND: Antidepressants are among the most commonly prescribed medications, but evidence on comparative weight change for specific first-line treatments is limited. OBJECTIVE: To compare weight change across common first-line antidepressant treatments by emulating a target trial. DESIGN: Observational cohort study over 24 months. SETTING: Electronic health record (EHR) data from 2010 to 2019 across 8 U.S. health systems. PARTICIPANTS: 183 118 patients. MEASUREMENTS: Prescription data determined initiation of treatment with sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, paroxetine, bupropion, duloxetine, or venlafaxine. The investigators estimated the population-level effects of initiating each treatment, relative to sertraline, on mean weight change (primary) and the probability of gaining at least 5% of baseline weight (secondary) 6 months after initiation. Inverse probability weighting of repeated outcome marginal structural models was used to account for baseline confounding and informative outcome measurement. In secondary analyses, the effects of initiating and adhering to each treatment protocol were estimated. RESULTS: Compared with that for sertraline, estimated 6-month weight gain was higher for escitalopram (difference, 0.41 kg [95% CI, 0.31 to 0.52 kg]), paroxetine (difference, 0.37 kg [CI, 0.20 to 0.54 kg]), duloxetine (difference, 0.34 kg [CI, 0.22 to 0.44 kg]), venlafaxine (difference, 0.17 kg [CI, 0.03 to 0.31 kg]), and citalopram (difference, 0.12 kg [CI, 0.02 to 0.23 kg]); similar for fluoxetine (difference, -0.07 kg [CI, -0.19 to 0.04 kg]); and lower for bupropion (difference, -0.22 kg [CI, -0.33 to -0.12 kg]). Escitalopram, paroxetine, and duloxetine were associated with 10% to 15% higher risk for gaining at least 5% of baseline weight, whereas bupropion was associated with 15% reduced risk. When the effects of initiation and adherence were estimated, associations were stronger but had wider CIs. Six-month adherence ranged from 28% (duloxetine) to 41% (bupropion). LIMITATION: No data on medication dispensing, low medication adherence, incomplete data on adherence, and incomplete data on weight measures across time points. CONCLUSION: Small differences in mean weight change were found between 8 first-line antidepressants, with bupropion consistently showing the least weight gain, although adherence to medications over follow-up was low. Clinicians could consider potential weight gain when initiating antidepressant treatment. PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: National Institutes of Health.
Obesity management requires a multidisciplinary approach, as there are many factors that contribute to the development of obesity, as well as the preservation of excess weight once it has been gained. Diet, exercise, and behavior modification are key components of treatment. In addition to lifestyle changes, weight gain secondary to medications is an important modifiable risk factor. Even after appropriate lifestyle modification, and medication adjustments (where possible) to avoid agents that can contribute to weight gain, many patients are still unable to achieve clinically meaningful weight loss. Pharmacotherapy for obesity management can fill an important role for these patients. This article will review medications that can lead to weight gain and potential alternatives, currently approved anti-obesity medications and best practices to individualize the selection process, and the use of testosterone in men with hypogonadism and obesity.
Bupropion hydrochloride is a norepinephrine-dopamine disinhibitor (NDDI) approved for the treatment of depression and smoking cessation. Bupropion is a trimethylated monocyclic phenylaminoketone second-generation antidepressant, which differs structurally from most antidepressants, and resides in a novel mechanistic class that has no direct action on the serotonin system. Comprehensive chemical, physical, and spectroscopic profiles are presented. This analytical profile provides an extensive spectroscopic investigation utilizing mass spectrometry, one- and two-dimensional NMR, solid-state NMR, IR, NIR, Raman, UV, and X-ray diffraction. The profile also includes significant wet chemistry studies for pH, solubility, solution, and plasma stability. Both HPLC and UPLC methodology are presented for bupropion and its related impurities or major metabolites. The profile concludes with an overview of biological properties that includes toxicity, drug metabolism, and pharmacokinetics.
This article examines the transitions in pharmacological therapy for obesity. It reviews the current options approved by the Food and Drug Administration and several drugs approved for other indications that can be used to treat obesity as well. Because weight regulation is complex and redundant systems protect against perceived starvation, optimal treatment of obesity in individual patients will likely require different combinations of behavioral, nutritional, pharmacologic, endoscopic, and surgical therapies.
Contrave is an investigational fixed-dose combination drug of naltrexone and bupropion currently in Phase III clinical trials for the treatment of obesity. Orexigen Therapeutics, Inc. has demonstrated efficacy of their product and is currently addressing FDA safety concerns and deciding future actions.
Frequently, patients suffering from depressive disorders discontinue antidepressant treatment due to the unpleasant side effects of these medications, particularly in the first month of therapy. Good tolerability (particularly in the early stages of treatment), patient education, and the quality of the relationship between physicians and patients are all common determining factors of patient adherence. Controlled-release antidepressant agents have the potential to improve tolerability early in the course of therapy, one of the most likely periods of dropout from treatment. Side effects for controlled-release formulations are often more favorable because controlled-release formulations exhibit lower peak plasma drug concentrations when compared with immediate-release formulations. Venlafaxine extended-release (XR), bupropion sustained-release (SR), and paroxetine controlled-release (CR) are 3 commonly utilized controlled-release antidepressants that have demonstrated improvement over their immediate-release predecessors in reducing certain adverse effects.
Bupropion is a relatively dopamine-specific antidepressant approved for release by the Food and Drug Administration in 1989. Topics included in this review are pharmacokinetics as related to blood levels and clinical response, bupropion's use in the elderly and in the medically impaired, and drug interactions of note.
Naltrexone-bupropion is a recently approved drug combination for chronic weight management. In this article, we discuss the rationale for its use as a combination followed by a comprehensive review of safety and efficacy data from major preclinical, phase II and III clinical trials.
Auvelity, an extended-release fixed combination of dextromethorphan and bupropion, is approved for the treatment of major depressive disorder in adults.Like all antidepressants, dextromethorphan-bupropion carries a boxed warning that it may increase the risk of suicidal thoughts and behaviors in pediatric and young adult patients. Seizures can also occur and are more likely at higher doses.The most common adverse effects of dextromethorphan-bupropion include dizziness, nausea, headache, diarrhea, somnolence, dry mouth, sexual dysfunction, hyperhidrosis, anxiety, constipation, decreased appetite, and insomnia.
Smoking tobacco is the leading cause of preventable death. Bupropion is the only antidepressant recommended as first-line pharmacotherapy for smoking cessation. Bupropion is as effective as nicotine replacement therapy and can be used in diverse populations.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of naltrexone/bupropion (NB) combination therapy on weight and weight-related risk factors in overweight and obese participants. DESIGN AND METHODS: CONTRAVE Obesity Research-II (COR-II) was a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 1,496 obese (BMI 30-45 kg/m(2) ) or overweight (27-45 kg/m(2) with dyslipidemia and/or hypertension) participants randomized 2:1 to combined naltrexone sustained-release (SR) (32 mg/day) plus bupropion SR (360 mg/day) (NB32) or placebo for up to 56 weeks. The co-primary endpoints were percent weight change and proportion achieving >/= 5% weight loss at week 28. RESULTS: Significantly (P < 0.001) greater weight loss was observed with NB32 versus placebo at week 28 (-6.5% vs. -1.9%) and week 56 (-6.4% vs. -1.2%). More NB32-treated participants (P < 0.001) experienced >/= 5% weight loss versus placebo at week 28 (55.6% vs. 17.5%) and week 56 (50.5% vs. 17.1%). NB32 produced greater improvements in various cardiometabolic risk markers, participant-reported weight-related quality of life, and control of eating. The most common adverse event with NB was nausea, which was generally mild to moderate and transient. NB was not associated with increased events of depression or suicidality versus placebo. CONCLUSION: NB represents a novel pharmacological approach to the treatment of obesity, and may become a valuable new therapeutic option.
Sexual dysfunction is a common side effect of most antidepressants. Lower rates are reported with some newer agents such as reboxetine and bupropion. The evidence base for its management is limited but growing, with most approaches only tested in a small number of trials. Available strategies include watchful waiting, the use of short drug holidays, and a change of antidepressant. Many specific antidotes have been trialed but with lack of convincing benefit in most cases. However, where antidepressants cause erectile dysfunction, the use of sildenafil has the largest and most consistent evidence base.
Bupropion was initially developed and licensed for the treatment of major depressive disorder in the United States in 1989. It was licensed as a pharmacotherapy for smoking cessation in the United States in 1997 and in the United Kingdom in 2000, and for the prevention of seasonal major depressive episodes in patients with seasonal affective disorder in the United States in 2006. Its main mechanism of action is believed to be via dopamine and noradrenalin reuptake inhibition. In addition to proven clinical efficacy for the treatment of major depression, the prevention of depressive episodes in patients with seasonal affective disorder, and as an aid to smoking cessation treatment, bupropion has demonstrated efficacy for attenuation of symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and more recently it has shown anti-inflammatory action against proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), which may be implicated in a number of inflammatory diseases such as Crohn's disease. The twice-daily sustained-release formulation has been extensively evaluated for smoking cessation and has shown continuous smoking abstinence rates at one year of the order of 20% across many clinical groups including healthy smokers, and smokers with cardiovascular disease, chronic obstructive airways disease, depression and schizophrenia. Bupropion is well tolerated with side effects including insomnia, headache, dry mouth, dizziness and nausea. Bupropion is a cytochrome p450 2D6 inhibitor and care must be taken when coprescribing with drugs cleared by this enzyme and when coprescribing with drugs that lower seizure threshold. Despite the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of bupropion as an aid to smoking cessation, its uptake for this indication remains low when compared with nicotine replacement therapy.
