Benzodiazepines have traditionally been used to treat acute anxiety disorders, but they are not ideal in the treatment of chronic generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). Following long-term therapy, benzodiazepines have the potential to produce dependency and withdrawal symptoms. In addition, although agents such as the benzodiazepines and buspirone alleviate anxiety, they have little effect on depression, which is a common comorbidity of GAD. Antidepressants have long been viewed as promising alternatives to benzodiazepines for the treatment of some types of anxiety. Although they have been shown to be useful in the treatment of panic disorder, social anxiety disorder/social phobia, and obsessive-compulsive disorder, they have not until recently been regarded as potential therapies for GAD. Treatment with antidepressants has opened up a new area of investigation into the pharmacotherapy of GAD, with a growing body of evidence supporting the role of therapies such as paroxetine and venlafaxine extended release.
BACKGROUND: Prolonged treatment with benzodiazepines is common practice despite clinical recommendations of short-term use. Benzodiazepines are used by approximately 4% of the general population, with increased prevalence in psychiatric populations and the elderly. After long-term use it is often difficult to discontinue benzodiazepines due to psychological and physiological dependence. This review investigated if pharmacological interventions can facilitate benzodiazepine tapering. OBJECTIVES: To assess the benefits and harms of pharmacological interventions to facilitate discontinuation of chronic benzodiazepine use. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following electronic databases up to October 2017: Cochrane Drugs and Alcohol Group's Specialised Register of Trials, CENTRAL, PubMed, Embase, CINAHL, and ISI Web of Science. We also searched ClinicalTrials.gov, the WHO ICTRP, and ISRCTN registry, and checked the reference lists of included studies for further references to relevant randomised controlled trials. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials comparing pharmacological treatment versus placebo or no intervention or versus another pharmacological intervention in adults who had been treated with benzodiazepines for at least two months and/or fulfilled criteria for benzodiazepine dependence (any criteria). DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. MAIN RESULTS: We included 38 trials (involving 2543 participants), but we could only extract data from 35 trials with 2295 participants. Many different interventions were studied, and no single intervention was assessed in more than four trials. We extracted data on 18 different comparisons. The risk of bias was high in all trials but one. Trial Sequential Analysis showed imprecision for all comparisons.For benzodiazepine discontinuation, we found a potential benefit of valproate at end of intervention (1 study, 27 participants; risk ratio (RR) 2.55, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.08 to 6.03; very low-quality evidence) and of tricyclic antidepressants at longest follow-up (1 study, 47 participants; RR 2.20, 95% CI 1.27 to 3.82; low-quality evidence).We found potentially positive effects on benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms of pregabalin (1 study, 106 participants; mean difference (MD) -3.10 points, 95% CI -3.51 to -2.69; very low-quality evidence), captodiame (1 study, 81 participants; MD -1.00 points, 95% CI -1.13 to -0.87; very low-quality evidence), paroxetine (2 studies, 99 participants; MD -3.57 points, 95% CI -5.34 to -1.80; very low-quality evidence), tricyclic antidepressants (1 study, 38 participants; MD -19.78 points, 95% CI -20.25 to -19.31; very low-quality evidence), and flumazenil (3 studies, 58 participants; standardised mean difference -0.95, 95% CI -1.71 to -0.19; very low-quality evidence) at end of intervention. However, the positive effect of paroxetine on benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms did not persist until longest follow-up (1 study, 54 participants; MD -0.13 points, 95% CI -4.03 to 3.77; very low-quality evidence).The following pharmacological interventions reduced symptoms of anxiety at end of intervention: carbamazepine (1 study, 36 participants; MD -6.00 points, 95% CI -9.58 to -2.42; very low-quality evidence), pregabalin (1 study, 106 participants; MD -4.80 points, 95% CI -5.28 to -4.32; very low-quality evidence), captodiame (1 study, 81 participants; MD -5.70 points, 95% CI -6.05 to -5.35; very low-quality evidence), paroxetine (2 studies, 99 participants; MD -6.75 points, 95% CI -9.64 to -3.86; very low-quality evidence), and flumazenil (1 study, 18 participants; MD -1.30 points, 95% CI -2.28 to -0.32; very low-quality evidence).Two pharmacological treatments seemed to reduce the proportion of participants that relapsed to benzodiazepine use: valproate (1 study, 27 participants; RR 0.31, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.90; very low-quality evidence) and cyamemazine (1 study, 124 participants; RR 0.33, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.78; very low-quality evidence). Alpidem decreased the proportion of participants with benzodiazepine discontinuation (1 study, 25 participants; RR 0.41, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.99; number needed to treat for an additional harmful outcome (NNTH) 2.3 participants; low-quality evidence) and increased the occurrence of withdrawal syndrome (1 study, 145 participants; RR 4.86, 95% CI 1.12 to 21.14; NNTH 5.9 participants; low-quality evidence). Likewise, magnesium aspartate decreased the proportion of participants discontinuing benzodiazepines (1 study, 144 participants; RR 0.80, 95% CI 0.66 to 0.96; NNTH 5.8; very low-quality evidence).Generally, adverse events were insufficiently reported. Specifically, one of the flumazenil trials was discontinued due to severe panic reactions. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Given the low or very low quality of the evidence for the reported outcomes, and the small number of trials identified with a limited number of participants for each comparison, it is not possible to draw firm conclusions regarding pharmacological interventions to facilitate benzodiazepine discontinuation in chronic benzodiazepine users. Due to poor reporting, adverse events could not be reliably assessed across trials. More randomised controlled trials are required with less risk of systematic errors ('bias') and of random errors ('play of chance') and better and full reporting of patient-centred and long-term clinical outcomes. Such trials ought to be conducted independently of industry involvement.
Our understanding of the biological basis of anxiety is far from complete, although our knowledge of both the neuropharmacologic and molecular basis of anxiety has increased. This article reviews our current knowledge of the possible biological basis of generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder.
The article reviews current publications on the epidemiology, psychopathology, diagnostic criteria and comorbidity of most frequently encountered in the practice anxiety disorders: generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Special attention is paid to the pharmacotherapy of anxiety disorders in the aspect of efficacy of main classes of drugs, including buspirone. The results of clinical trials of buspirone are presented.
Established efficacy and tolerability in large multicentre controlled studies have made serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) the mainstay of monotherapy for adult obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). When compared with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), the tricyclic compound clomipramine has a higher incidence of adverse effects but is well tolerated by most OCD patients and may confer the best overall antiobsessional effects. Consideration of specific adverse effect profiles, special patient population characteristics, drug interactions and relative cost of the various agents may direct clinicians in choosing the most appropriate first-line drug. Alternative agents as monotherapies have been explored, but none has consistently proven effective to date. Investigations of SRI augmentation with serotonin-enhancing agents have also failed to demonstrate substantial benefits for treatment-refractory OCD. Combination treatment with SRIs and dopamine receptor antagonist drugs appears to provide an improved response for the subpopulation of OCD patients who have comorbid 'tic-spectrum' disorders, though large-scale studies of the efficacy and tolerability of these regimens are not yet available.
Paroxetine is a selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor useful in the treatment of a wide range of psychiatric disorders. Generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) is characterised by excessive persistent anxiety and worry about a number of events and activities occurring on more days than not for at least 6 months. GAD is the most common anxiety disorder in primary care settings. Paroxetine was the second antidepressant to receive an FDA indication for the treatment of GAD. In contrast to benzodiazepines, which had been the mainstay of treatment for anxiety disorders for many years, antidepressants, such as paroxetine, are more effective for the psychic symptoms of anxiety, which include worry, tension, irritability and concentration difficulties, and carry a more tolerable and safe side effect profile.
Historically, the use of anxiolytic drugs has been associated with a relatively high incidence of side effects, particularly those related to central nervous system depression and sedation. These side effects can impair the patient's ability to function and, thus, interfere with the full achievement of therapeutic goals. In this article, the evolution of anxiolytic drug therapy from the perspective of safety and side effects is reviewed. Moreover, data concerning the safety of buspirone--a novel, non-benzodiazepine anxiolytic that has been shown to provide anxiolytic efficacy comparable to that of the benzodiazepines, but with a significantly lower potential for central nervous system depressant effects, interactions with alcohol, dependence, and abuse--are discussed.
Benzodiazepines have come under scrutiny and attack over recent years because of their abuse liability, withdrawal reactions and development of tolerance. Consequently, practitioners worldwide are discouraged from prescribing them. While some of these risks may have been exaggerated, benzodiazepines remain a useful therapeutic tool, alone or in combination, in a number of psychiatric and medical conditions. Withholding such treatment may be unjustified and detrimental to the patients' health. Further, benzodiazepines have helped researchers in their attempts to elucidate the neurobiological mechanisms underlying anxiety. This, in return, leads to the development of new effective anxiolytic treatments, with fewer problems compared to the traditional benzodiazepine compounds. Such new agents are already available or at the closing stages of clinical trials.
Sexual dysfunction is a common side effect of most antidepressants. Lower rates are reported with some newer agents such as reboxetine and bupropion. The evidence base for its management is limited but growing, with most approaches only tested in a small number of trials. Available strategies include watchful waiting, the use of short drug holidays, and a change of antidepressant. Many specific antidotes have been trialed but with lack of convincing benefit in most cases. However, where antidepressants cause erectile dysfunction, the use of sildenafil has the largest and most consistent evidence base.
The introduction into clinical practice of new and highly effective antidepressants has certainly helped to resolve the problem of depression therapy. However, achieving a complete remission, which is a key point for therapy in depressed patients, remains a difficult task. It is known that a significant number of patients do not respond to antidepressants. So, special attention has been paid in recent years towards investigation of methods that could improve the treatment effectiveness in depressive. In this review presents the results of clinical trials of buspirone as an adjunctive therapy in cases with previous ineffective use of antidepressants in patients with major depressive disorder.
The Food and Drug Administration approved the use of buspirone for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) in 1986. Since then, numerous studies have examined the efficacy and safety of buspirone for patients with not only generalized feelings of anxiety, but also panic disorder, major depressive disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, social phobia, posttraumatic stress disorder, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor-induced adverse events, dementia, behavioral disturbances, attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder, and tobacco dependency. Although relatively few placebo-controlled trials have been conducted on patients with problems other than GAD, an ever-growing body of research suggests future directions for the use of buspirone. This article reviews the body of research relating to new uses for buspirone.
Buspirone, an azaspirone serotonin (5-HT) 1A partial agonist, has been approved by the FDA as an anxiolytic. It has been tested for use in depression, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and schizophrenia as well. Several trials have indicated that it may prove to be a useful agent for augmentation of other psychotropic medications in these disorders. We review the literature supporting the potential use of buspirone as an augmenting agent.
Anxiety has historically been treated by agents with a sedative component to their action. In the last decade or so it has been determined that gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors may mediate the anxiolytic actions of the benzodiazepines, propanediol carbamates, barbiturates, and ethanol. However, inasmuch as these drugs have additional pharmacological properties (sedation, muscle relaxation, seizure control), the search for an anxioselective drug was continued. Buspirone appears to be such a drug. Clinical studies have clearly demonstrated the efficacy of buspirone in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder without the ancillary pharmacology of earlier anxiolytics. Buspirone does not act on the GABA receptor. Rather, its most salient interaction with neurotransmitter receptors occurs at the 5-HT1A serotonin receptor. This action is supported by studies focused on receptor binding, anatomical localization, biochemistry, neurophysiology, and animal behavior. The recognition that action at 5-HT1A receptors may be a viable approach to the pharmacotherapy of anxiety is evidenced by the number of other agents of this class under development by a number of pharmaceutical companies.
Augmentation strategies and combination treatments have become a popular method of treating refractory depression, enhancing therapeutic response in partial responders and increasing the likelihood of more rapid response. The evidence supporting these strategies will be reviewed, their methods of administration discussed, and the relative advantages and disadvantages considered.
BACKGROUND: When patients suddenly become restless and are unable to sit or stand still, especially in general medical settings, anxiety is often the topmost differential on every clinician's mind. However, the possibility of the very subjectively distressing condition called 'akathisia' should always be considered. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this article is to discuss a clinical approach to the management of akathisia, drawing on the presentation of a patient who was admitted to a general medical ward. DISCUSSION: Akathisia, a subjective and very distressing feeling of restlessness, has been found to be caused by a wide range of medications used in general medical settings, such as azithromycin, antiemetics and antipsychotics. Despite its high incidence and association with an increase in suicidal thoughts, it often goes unrecognised. This paper highlights the need for its early recognition, provides a diagnostic guide and an approach to its management.
Issues related to the epidemiology, nosology, and differential diagnosis of organic aggressive disorders in the elderly are discussed. Rating and monitoring of aggressive events using the Overt Aggression Scale are reviewed. The management of acute aggression with antipsychotic agents and benzodiazepines is presented, as well as an approach for using beta-blockers, anticonvulsant agents, and serotonin-specific antidepressants and an antianxiety agent for the treatment of chronic aggression.
Treatment-resistant depression is commonly encountered by mental health professionals. Strategies for the treatment of resistant depression, including augmentation strategies and switching antidepressants, are reviewed. The potential advantages and disadvantages of each of these strategies are discussed.
BACKGROUND: A patient, with a mental disorder caused by an intracranial infection, treated with olanzapine, fluvoxamine, and buspirone. The plasma exposure of olanzapine was too high at standard doses, with evidence indicating that it was caused by drug-drug interactions. METHODS: Using pharmacogenomics and therapeutic drug monitoring to guide drug dose adjustment for a patient in clinical practice. RESULTS: The patient underwent pharmacogenetic testing in addition to therapeutic drug monitoring as part of a pharmacist-led comprehensive evaluation of medication therapy management in a clinical setting, resulting in improved clinical efficacy that allowed discharge from a psychiatric hospital. CONCLUSIONS: This case study demonstrates that therapeutic drug monitoring combined with pharmacogenetic-guided dose adjustment can aid in the management of patients receiving complex pharmacological treatments.
The pharmacological management of anxiety in children primarily has used antidepressants, such as imipramine. Buspirone, an atypical anxiolytic, has been shown to be of benefit in both adults and children. It has relatively few side effects and is generally well tolerated. Two cases are reported here involving children treated for anxiety with buspirone who subsequently suffered a possible psychotic deterioration.
The effects of oral buspirone (BUS, 10 mg) and diazepam (DZP, 10 mg) were studied in 12 healthy women volunteers using subjective ratings, objective tests of psychomotor and cognitive functions and urinary dosage of catecholamine output. Drugs were randomly administered to the same subjects, in a crossover, double-blind study, each drug administration being separated by at least 1 week. BUS subjective effects were less severe than those of DZP and not accompanied by feelings of sleepiness that characterized DZP sedative effects. Furthermore, BUS did not impair psychomotor functioning while DZP induced both an impairment of central sensory processing and, to a lesser extent, an impairment in delayed memory.
