The Practice Guidelines Committee of the American Society of Blood or Marrow Transplantation (ASBMT) sought to develop an evidence-based review about personalizing busulfan-based conditioning. The Committee sought to grade the relevant published studies (June 1, 2008 through March 31, 2016) according to criteria set forth by the Steering Committee for Evidence Based Reviews from ASBMT. Unfortunately, the published literature was too heterogeneous and lacked adequately powered and sufficiently controlled studies for this to be feasible. Despite this observation, the continued interest in this topic led the Practice Guidelines Committee to develop a list of most frequently asked questions (FAQs) regarding personalized busulfan dosing. This "Considerations" document is a list of these FAQs and their responses, addressing topics of practical relevance to hematopoietic cell transplantation clinicians.
BACKGROUND: Intravenous busulfan combined with therapeutic drug monitoring to guide dosing improves outcomes after allogeneic haemopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). The best method to estimate busulfan exposure and optimum exposure in children or young adults remains unclear. We therefore assessed three approaches to estimate intravenous busulfan exposure (expressed as cumulative area under the curve [AUC]) and associated busulfan AUC with clinical outcomes in children or young adults undergoing allogeneic HCT. METHODS: In this retrospective analysis, patients from 15 centres in the Netherlands, USA, Canada, Switzerland, UK, Italy, Germany, and Australia who received a busulfan-based conditioning regimen between March 18, 2001, and Feb 12, 2015, were included. Cumulative AUC was calculated by numerical integration using non-linear mixed effect modelling (AUC(NONMEM)), non-compartmental analysis (AUC from 0 to infinity [AUC(0-infinity)] and to the next dose [AUC(0-tau)]), and by individual centres using various approaches (AUC(centre)). The main outcome of interest was event-free survival. Other outcomes of interest were graft failure or relapse, or both; transplantation-related mortality; acute toxicity (veno-occlusive disease or acute graft versus-host disease [GvHD]); chronic GvHD; overall survival; and chronic-GvHD-free event-free survival. We used propensity-score-adjusted Cox proportional hazard models, Weibull models, and Fine-Gray competing risk regressions for statistical analyses. FINDINGS: 790 patients were enrolled, 674 of whom were included: 274 (41%) with malignant and 400 (59%) with non-malignant disease. Median age was 4.5 years (IQR 1.4-10.7). The median busulfan AUC(NONMEM) was 74.4 mg x h/L (95% CI 31.1-104.6), which correlated with the standardised method AUC(0-infinity) (r(2)=0.74), but the latter correlated poorly with AUC(centre) (r(2)=0.35). Estimated 2-year event-free survival was 69.7% (95% CI 66.2-73.0). Event-free survival at 2 years was 77.0% (95% CI 72.1-82.9) in the 257 patients with an optimum intravenous busulfan AUC of 78-101 mg x h/L compared with 66.1% (60.9-71.4) in the 235 patients at the low historical target of 58-86 mg x h/L and 49.5% (29.2-66.0) in the 44 patients with a high (>101 mg x h/L) busulfan AUC (p=0.011). Compared with the low AUC group, graft failure or relapse occurred less frequently in the optimum AUC group (hazard ratio [HR] 0.57, 95% CI 0.39-0.84; p=0.0041). Acute toxicity (HR 1.69, 1.12-2.57; p=0.013) and transplantation-related mortality (2.99, 1.82-4.92; p<0.0001) were significantly higher in the high AUC group (>101 mg x h/L) than in the low AUC group (<78 mg x h/L), independent of indication; no difference was noted between AUC groups for chronic GvHD (<78 mg x h/L vs >/=78 mg x h/L, HR 1.30, 95% CI 0.73-2.33; p=0.37). INTERPRETATION: Improved clinical outcomes are likely to be achieved by targeting the busulfan AUC to 78-101 mg x h/L using a new validated pharmacokinetic model for all indications. FUNDING: Research Allocation Program and the UCSF Helen Friller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Mt Zion Health Fund of the University of California, San Francisco.
IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: Despite the marked development in the field of preparative regimens prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) over the last decade, the search for a superior conditioning agent is still continuing. In view of the literature reports, treosulfan (TREO), a structural analog of busulfan (BU), appears to be a promising candidate in terms of myeloablative, immunosuppressive and antimalignancy effects as well as low organ toxicity. AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: The article focuses on pharmacological activity, pharmacokinetics and toxicity of TREO. Compressed description of the drug-based conditioning prior to HSCT is also presented. Finally, TREO and BU characteristics are compared. Specific information of TREO concerning pediatric and adult patients is provided throughout the whole paper. The data refer predominantly to the publications, in majority from the last 10 years. WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: According to our best knowledge, the paper is the first such comprehensive review on TREO, especially in terms of its application in pediatric HSCT. TAKE HOME MESSAGE: TREO offers a great potential as a conditioning agent prior to HSCT but further investigations of the drug are warranted to clearly verify its advantages. However, we expect TREO to be registered as a novel conditioning agent in the near future.
We report a case of severe hemorrhagic cystitis induced by prolonged busulfan therapy. The clinical course and pathological results were similar to irradiation and cyclophosphamide cystitis. Only 1 such case has been described previously. Although hemorrhagic cystitis induced by busulfan is a rare complication it should be considered in the differential diagnosis and busulfan should be discontinued immediately.
Pharmacokinetic studies of high-dose treosulfan were carried out in seven paediatric patients (age range: 2-15 years) undergoing treosulfan-based conditioning regimen prior to allogeneic haematopoietic SCT. Treosulfan was administered intravenously in a daily dose of 10, 12 or 14 g/m(2) within 2 h. Five out of seven patients received 12 g/m(2). The plasma concentrations of treosulfan and its quantity eliminated with urine were determined using a validated HPLC method with refractometric detection. Pharmacokinetic parameters were evaluated following first dose using a two-compartment disposition model. These studies demonstrated a dose-dependent increase of area under the concentration (AUC) and maximum concentrationplasma (C(max)), but there was variability of these parameters. Rapid clearance of tresoulfan was observed, especially in 10 and 12 g/m(2) doses. Terminal half-life (t(0.5)) of treosulfan was in the range of 1.71-2.15 h, but the mean percent of parent drug eliminated with urine was 30%, range 16.3-45.4% of the total dose eliminated during the first 12 h after administration. The results of this study confirmed the linear pharmacokinetics of treosulfan, as used in children. However, variability of pharmacokinetic results observed in children studied demonstrates the need for pharmacokinetic evaluation in each paediatric patient undergoing the treosulfan-based preparative regimen, including those using different doses. This approach could enable further reduction of the risk of early and late organ toxicity related to high-dose treosulfan in paediatric patients.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the use of high-dose busulfan (HDB) with autologous bone marrow transplantation (ABMT) in patients with myeloma. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifteen patients received HDB (16 mg/kg), eight of whom received high-dose melphalan (HDM) but had experienced a short remission or progression-free interval. Two patients had received HDM on two previous occasions, one had no response to low-dose melphalan, and four had impaired renal function (edathamil clearance < 40 mL/min). All patients received induction chemotherapy before HDB. RESULTS: Two patients were in complete remission (CR) after induction chemotherapy before HDB. Of the remaining 13 patients, four (31%) achieved CR and two (15%) achieved a partial remission for an overall response rate of 46%. There were three treatment-related deaths, but the toxicity was otherwise predictable and manageable. CONCLUSIONS: In heavily pretreated patients, HDB results in a relatively high response rate. It can also be used safely in patients with renal impairment who are not suitable for HDM.
The bifunctional alkylating agent busulfan (Bu) was solubilized in a cosolvent mixture of anhydrous dimethylacetamide (DMA), polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG400), and water at a ratio of 1:2:2 (v/v/v), to achieve a Bu concentration of 3 mg/ml, a preparation that would be suitable for parenteral administration in high-dose chemotherapy preceding bone marrow transplantation. The complete formulation was stable for more than 54 h at room temperature (RT, 22 degrees C). An accelerated stability study of Bu in anhydrous DMA or DMA/PEG400 (1:2) as stock solutions indicated shelf-lives of 191 and 180 days respectively, at RT, and 8.2 and 7.5 years, respectively, at 4 degrees C. Although the complete formulation with Bu was very hypertonic, hemolysis studies indicated that the formulation would be safe for intravenous (i.v.) administration, since it would be rapidly diluted to harmless tonicity levels in the blood. Cytotoxicity studies of the complete formulation in vitro proved that Bu retained its activity when dissolved in the complete vehicle. A preliminary pharmacokinetic study in a rodent model after the i.v. administration of Bu at a dose of 1 mg/kg body weight yielded high plasma concentrations of Bu for at least 5 h after injection.
BACKGROUND/AIM: We report three adult patients with primary immunodeficiency (PID) treated with reduced-intensity allogenic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) with fludarabine/treosulfan conditioning and graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) prophylaxis with alemtuzumab and a calcineurin inhibitor. CASE REPORT: Patient 1, a 51-year-old male, had common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) with protein-losing enteropathy. Patient 2 was a 29-year-old woman with STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3)-dependent hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES). Patient 3 was a 25-year-old male with XIAP (X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis)-deficiency presenting as treatment-refractory granulomatous enteropathy. Engraftment occurred in all three patients, with 100% donor chimerism in blood. Two patients survived, whereas the patient with CVID died due to infection. CONCLUSION: This series highlights issues of transplantation for PID in adults and treosulfan-based conditioning, which is feasible for PID patients; infectious complications are the major issue of concern.
We aimed to review the pharmacokinetics (PK) of intravenous busulfan in paediatric patients, identify covariate factors influencing exposure, investigate evidence of changes in PK behaviour over time, and correlate exposure with efficacy and toxicity outcomes. A literature review was undertaken of original research published between 2007 and 2019, investigating the PK and pharmacodynamics (PD) of intravenous busulfan in patients </= 18 years of age. The review identified 41 publications characterising the PK, and 45 publications describing the PD, of busulfan. Median typical clearance (CL) was 0.22 L/h/kg and median typical volume of distribution was 0.69 L/kg. Patient weight, age, glutathione-S-transferase A1 (GSTA1) genotype and busulfan dosing day/time were the most commonly identified factors affecting CL. Of nine studies investigating changes in CL, seven reported reduced CL over the 4-day course of treatment. Exposure monitoring methods and therapeutic targets were heterogeneous across studies. Relationships between busulfan exposure and patient outcomes were observed in five studies. One study observed a cumulative area under the concentration-time curve over all days of treatment of between 78 and 101 mg/L.h, and two studies observed an average concentration at first dose of < 600 ng/mL improved overall survival, transplant-related mortality, or relapse. One study observed increased sinusoidal obstructive syndrome with maximum busulfan concentration > 1.88 ng/mL. Patient weight, age and GSTA1 genotype are important covariates to consider when individualising busulfan therapy. Reduced busulfan CL over time may need to be accounted for, particularly in patients not receiving phenytoin co-therapy. Standardised monitoring of busulfan exposure over the entire course of treatment and further investigation of the role of busulfan metabolites and pharmacogenomics is warranted.
Busulfan (Bu)/cyclophosphamide (Cy) is a standard conditioning platform for allogeneic transplantation. We developed a strategy separating the Cy into two pre/post-transplantation doses (PTCy), providing myeloablative conditioning and single-agent graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis. We investigated the impact of Bu route on treatment-related toxicity for 131 consecutive adult patients. Busulfan was administered in four daily divided doses either orally (n = 72) or intravenously (n = 59) with pharmacokinetics on the first-dose and as necessary on subsequent doses to achieve a target area-under-the-concentration-curve (AUC) of 800-1400 mumol*min/L per dose. BuCy/PTCy with pharmacokinetics is well-tolerated with low treatment-related toxicity. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease incidence was 6% with two fatal events. Bu administration route in the context of BuCy/PTCy did not statistically impact hepatotoxicity, GVHD, relapse, disease-free survival, or overall survival. The BuCy/PTCy platform has a low incidence of treatment-related toxicity, including hepatotoxicity, in hematologic malignancies when using pharmacokinetics for a target AUC of 800-1400 mumol*min/L, irrespective of Bu administration route.
We investigated the administration of i.v. BU combined with melphalan (Mel) in patients with ALL undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic SCT. Forty-seven patients with a median age of 33 years (range 20-61) received a matched sibling (n=27) or matched unrelated donor transplant (n=20) for ALL in first CR (n=26), second CR (n=13), or with more advanced disease (n=8). BU was infused daily for 4 days, either at a fixed dose of 130 mg/m(2) (5 patients) or using pharmacokinetic (PK) dose adjustment (42 patients), to target an average daily area-under-the-curve (AUC) of 5000 mumol/min, determined by a test dose of i.v. BU at 32 mg/m(2). This was followed by a rest day, then two daily doses of Mel at 70 mg/m(2). Stem cells were infused on the following day. The 2-year OS, PFS and non-relapse mortality (NRM) rates were 35% (95% confidence interval (CI), 23-51%), 31% (95% CI, 21-48%) and 37% (95% CI, 23-50%), respectively. Acute NRM at 100 days was favorable at 12% (95% CI, 5-24%); however, the 2-year NRM was significantly higher for patients older than 40 years, 58% vs 20%, mainly due to GVHD.
Busulfan (BU) is included in many conditioning protocols for haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Pharmacokinetic parameters in individual patients have been related to short-term toxicity and risk of relapse after HSCT. In a series of 11 patients receiving the usual 16 x 1 mg/kg schedule over 4 days, we investigated the pharmacokinetics of replacing one dose with an intravenous formulation (BU in DMSO) which we had previously investigated in dogs. A dose of 0.5-0.6 mg/kg was used. No acute side-effects of BU/DMSO infusions administered over 1 h were observed. Bioavailability of BU powder capsules was on average 70% (range, 44-94%). Interindividual variability of the resulting AUC after intravenous doses was still substantial. Further studies are under way to define the possible role of BU/DMSO infusions in conditioning before HSCT.
Busulfan (Bu) is an important component of some myeloablative regimens prior to stem cell transplantation (SCT). Over the last few years it has been shown that other drugs administered concomitantly can influence Bu pharmacokinetics. In the present study, we compared Bu concentrations (trough levels) in three groups of patients. Group A (n=5) received metronidazole as graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis during Bu treatment. Group B (n=9) received Bu only for 2 days followed by 2 days of Bu and metronidazole. Group C (n=10) was a control group that received Bu without metronidazole. The mean Bu levels for Group A receiving metronidazole during conditioning was significantly (P<0.001) higher (948+/-280 ng/ml), compared to those observed in the control group (507+/-75 ng/ml). In Group B, the administration of metronidazole resulted in a significant (P<0.001) increase in Bu levels (807+/-90 ng/ml) during the last 2 days, compared to 452+/-68 ng/ml during the first 2 days. In Group A, one patient died with multiorgan failure, three experienced veno-occlusive disease (VOD) and one developed hemorrhagic cystitis. Elevated liver transaminases (AST, ALT) and bilirubin were detected in all Group A patients. In Group B, six patients had elevated liver function tests but no VOD was observed. We conclude that metronidazole should not be administered simultaneously with Bu to avoid the high plasma levels of Bu, which may lead to severe toxicity and/or treatment related mortality.
Therapeutic dose monitoring is widely adopted for determination of busulfan (Bu) dose for use as a conditioning regimen. However, while dose adjustments are being incorporated, transient fluctuations of Bu levels may occur. We aim to understand if these fluctuations affect clinical outcomes of these patients. We compared outcomes in patients in whom the absolute dose changes and fluctuation of AUC were >/= median% versus < median%. Rates of sinusoidal obstructive syndrome, grades 2-4/grades 3-4 acute and chronic graft versus host disease were not different between the two cohorts. The Kaplan-Meier curves for overall survival showed no significant differences. Six patients required >50% dose adjustment and four had a fluctuation in AUC of >50%. One of these patients died of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome and two died of infections. In our study, the transient fluctuations in Bu levels did not affect clinical outcomes; hence obviating the need for test dose strategy.
The impact of hemodialysis on the clearance of busulfan was determined in a patient with chronic renal failure undergoing autologous peripheral stem cell transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The extraction ratio for busulfan across the dialyzer was 0.530 +/- 0.026 at a blood flow of 400 ml/min, which corresponds to a hemodialysis clearance of 2.23 +/- 0.11 ml/min/kg body weight. Apparent oral clearance of busulfan without hemodialysis was 3.38 +/- 0.56 ml/min/kg. Thus, a 4 h hemodialysis session enhanced the apparent oral clearance of busulfan by 65%. We conclude that hemodialysis effectively removes busulfan from circulating blood, but a standard hemodialysis period (ie, 4 h) does not significantly alter busulfan exposure. Bone Marrow Transplantation(2000) 25, 201-203.
INTRODUCTION: Busulfan is an alkylating agent widely used in the conditioning of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation possessing a complex metabolism and a large interindividual and intra-individual variability, especially in children. Combined with the strong rationale of busulfan PK/PD relationships, factors altering its clearance (e.g. weight, age, and GST-A genetic polymorphism mainly) can also affect clinical outcomes. AREAS COVERED: This review aims to provide an overview of the current knowledge on busulfan pharmacokinetics, its pharmacokinetics variabilities in pediatric populations, drug-drug interactions (DDI), and their consequences regarding dose individualization. This review was based on medical literature up until October 2021. EXPERT OPINION: To ensure effective busulfan exposure in pediatrics, different weight-based nomograms have been established to determine busulfan dosage and provided improved results (65-80% of patients correctly exposed). In addition to nomograms, therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of busulfan measuring plasmatic concentrations to estimate busulfan pharmacokinetic parameters can be used. TDM is now widely carried out in routine practices and aims to ensure the targeting of the reported therapeutic windows by individualizing busulfan dosing based on the clearance estimations from a previous dose.
Bu and Cy is a bone marrow transplant preparative regimen that is effective for ANLL and certain genetic diseases. It has shown promise in CML. Its effectiveness in ALL and lymphomas remains to be explored. The substitution of Bu for TBI in marrow transplant regimens would seem to have a number of practical and theoretical advantages.
During a double-blind study of two years' cytotoxic chemotherapy with busulphan or cyclophosphamide in patients who had had resection of carcinoma of the bronchus the long-term effects of these two drugs were also studied. Four of the 243 patients treated with busulphan developed leukaemia compared with none of the 234 treated with cyclophosphamide and none of the 249 on placebo. None of these four patients received radiotherapy or other cytotoxic chemotherapy before leukaemia was diagnosed, and all four were among the 19 patients who developed pancytopenia while taking busulphan, five to eight years before leukaemia became clinically apparent. These findings suggest that busulphan is leukaemogenic, though its mode of action is uncertain.
Three cases of busulfan-associated convulsions in 28 bone marrow transplant recipients are reported. Convulsions occurred in spite of anticonvulsant prophylaxis in two of the three cases. Fits were generalized; no neurological deficit was found after the episodes and there were no recurrences. Although conditioning regimens including busulfan are used increasingly only rare cases have been reported and little mention of this side effect is made. We emphasize that convulsions are not infrequent side effect of conditioning regimens including high dose busulfan, and efficient anticonvulsant prophylactic regimens should be used.
AIM: A population pharmacokinetic (PPK) analysis was conducted to describe the influence of GSTA1 polymorphisms on intravenous busulfan in adults undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. PATIENTS & METHODS: A PPK model was developed from 36 patients by a one-compartment model with first-order elimination. RESULTS: The typical value of clearance and volume of distribution were 11.0 l/h and 42.4 l, respectively. Clearance decreased by 15% and area under the concentration-time curves (AUCs) increased with GSTA1 variants compared with wild-type (both p < 0.05). Subtherapeutic AUCs were seen only in wild-type patients. CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first PPK study to suggest that GSTA1 polymorphisms in adults are associated with busulfan PK.
