BACKGROUND: Angiotensin receptor antagonists are a relatively new class of cardiovascular drugs for which the clinical application has not yet been completely defined. OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the pharmacology of the various angiotensin receptor antagonists available in Australia, including their mode of action, side effects and potential drug interactions. DISCUSSION: Angiotensin receptor antagonists are effective drugs for the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension which have a side effect profile similar to placebo. Their role in the management of hypertension remains to be defined, but they are of particular use to patients who are intolerant of ACE inhibitors because of cough. It is uncertain at the present time whether the benefits of ACE inhibition in other disorders such as congestive heart failure and following myocardial infarction will be similar for angiotensin receptor blockers.
BACKGROUND: The antihypertensive effects of angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are well recognized. However, conventional meta-analyses have reported inconsistent results on their efficacy and safety. AIM: This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of six ARBs (losartan, valsartan, irbesartan, telmisartan, candesartan, and olmesartan) commonly used to treat hypertension, using a network meta-analysis. METHOD: We retrieved randomized controlled trials on hypertension treatment using ARBs from the PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, CNKI, and Wanfang databases. The efficacy outcomes included absolute changes in office systolic and diastolic blood pressure from baseline, and 24-h ambulatory blood pressure. Safety outcomes were assessed by the total number of adverse events (AEs) during treatment. We conducted the network meta-analysis using the 'bugsnet' and 'gemtc' packages in R. RESULTS: A total of 193 studies were included. Olmesartan had the highest surface under the cumulative ranking in reducing office systolic (91.4%) and diastolic blood pressure (87.2%). Candesartan has the highest ranking in lowering 24 h ambulatory systolic blood pressure (95.4%), while telmisartan reduced 24 h ambulatory diastolic blood pressure (83.4%). Olmesartan also ranked highest in safety (70.8%). CONCLUSION: Valsartan and losartan were less effective in lowering blood pressure than other drugs, with no significant differences. Olmesartan and telmisartan were associated with fewer AEs than losartan, although the incidence of adverse events was similar between the other blockers. Olmesartan and telmisartan demonstrated the best balance of antihypertensive efficacy and minimal adverse events. More research is needed to confirm whether telmisartan and olmesartan are optimal choices for controlling blood pressure in patients.
Candesartan cilexetil is the prodrug of candesartan, an angiotensin II receptor antagonist. Candesartan binds selectively and non-competitively to the angiotensin II receptor type 1, thus preventing the actions of angiotensin II. Clinical trials have demonstrated its efficacy at a dose range of 2 to 32 mg once daily in hypertension of all grades, heart failure, in reducing urinary albumin excretion in diabetes mellitus and in coexisting hypertension and renal failure. Pharmacokinetic properties of candesartan cilexetil in elderly patients are not significantly different from those in younger individuals. Hepatic impairment does not change pharmacokinetics of candesartan cilexetil at doses up to 12 mg/day. No dose adjustment is necessary in patients with mild or moderate renal impairment. Tolerability of candesartan cilexetil is not much different from that of placebo. All adverse events are usually of mild to moderate severity and not dose-related. The most common adverse events were headache, upper respiratory tract infection, back pain, and dizziness. The incidence of these adverse effects, as well as of cough, was similar in patients treated with candesartan cilexetil or placebo. The incidence of adverse events in long-term trials was not different from that in short-term trials. Tolerability of candesartan cilexetil does not differ with either age or gender.
Arterial hypertension is a highly manageable disorder due to a variety of drugs available for its treatment. Since the late 1990s, angiotensin II receptor blockers have been widely prescribed, achieving appropriate control in patients' blood pressure. Few cases of serious adverse effects have been reported to date. Here, we present a case of acute hepatocellular injury secondary to candesartan administration. Further studies should be performed in patients who present with this adverse effect, in order to prevent more serious outcomes.
A low-dose sustained-release (SR) formulation of the thiazide-type diuretic indapamide, indapamide SR (Natrilix SR), retains the antihypertensive activity of the immediate-release (IR) formulation, with a smoother pharmacokinetic profile. In well controlled 12- to 52-week clinical trials, indapamide SR 1.5 mg/day was well tolerated and reduced blood pressure as effectively as therapeutic dosages of amlodipine, candesartan, enalapril, hydrochlorothiazide or indapamide IR. Indapamide SR was also more effective than enalapril in reducing left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), and similar reductions in renal end-organ damage, assessed by microalbuminuria, were seen with indapamide SR- and enalapril-based antihypertensive strategies. Indapamide SR provides an effective option for initial antihypertensive monotherapy and a basis for multidrug antihypertensive strategies.
BACKGROUND: Angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors improve outcome of patients with chronic heart failure (CHF). A substantial proportion of patients, however, experience no benefit from ACE inhibitors because of previous intolerance. We aimed to find out whether candesartan, an angiotensin-receptor blocker, could improve outcome in such patients not taking an ACE inhibitor. METHODS: Between March, 1999, and March, 2001, we enrolled 2028 patients with symptomatic heart failure and left-ventricular ejection fraction 40% or less who were not receiving ACE inhibitors because of previous intolerance. Patients were randomly assigned candesartan (target dose 32 mg once daily) or matching placebo. The primary outcome of the study was the composite of cardiovascular death or hospital admission for CHF. Analysis was by intention to treat. FINDINGS: The most common manifestation of ACE-inhibitor intolerance was cough (72%), followed by symptomatic hypotension (13%) and renal dysfunction (12%). During a median follow-up of 33.7 months, 334 (33%) of 1013 patients in the candesartan group and 406 (40%) of 1015 in the placebo group had cardiovascular death or hospital admission for CHF (unadjusted hazard ratio 0.77 [95% CI 0.67-0.89], p=0.0004; covariate adjusted 0.70 [0.60-0.81], p<0.0001). Each component of the primary outcome was reduced, as was the total number of hospital admissions for CHF. Study-drug discontinuation rates were similar in the candesartan (30%) and placebo (29%) groups. INTERPRETATION: Candesartan was generally well tolerated and reduced cardiovascular mortality and morbidity in patients with symptomatic chronic heart failure and intolerance to ACE inhibitors.
Candesartan is a long-acting angiotensin receptor antagonist that is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, with insurmountable receptor binding abilities. Recent studies have shown candesartan to be an effective therapy for heart failure patients, producing a significant reduction in mortality and morbidity. Importantly, studies have demonstrated that candesartan is effective in heart failure patients who are intolerant to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, in patients already receiving angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and for heart failure patients with preserved systolic function. The primary end point in the latter group failed to achieve statistical significance due to the small number of events. This paper will review the data supporting the use of candesartan to treat all heart failure patients, regardless of their ejection fraction.
Candesartan cilexetil is a highly potent and long-acting angiotensin II type I (AT1) receptor antagonist. This short review summarises results of clinical studies focusing on the duration of action of candesartan cilexetil. Results of previous clinical studies indicate that candesartan has the property to maintain a sustained blood pressure reduction for up to 48 h after dosing. Since lack of compliance is a known problem in patients with hypertension, these findings could be of particular clinical relevance.
Heart failure results in neurohormonal activation of which the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAS) is the main mediator. Activation of this system leads to the production of angiotensin II (ATII), which leads to multiple adverse short-term and long-term effects, including hemodynamic dysfunction, renal dysfunction, inflammation, and cardiac remodeling. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) exert favorable effects in congestive heart failure (CHF) by inhibiting the production of ATII. It has been shown that ACEIs may not be able to suppress the production of ATII completely because there are RAS-independent mechanisms of ATII production. Hence, it was thought that angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) might be more useful in CHF because they directly block the ATII receptors. Many studies have been done to evaluate the role of ARBs in CHF. We reviewed these studies and have attempted to define the place and ARBs in the therapy for CHF.
We are presenting a current view on a fixed-dose combination of amlodipine and candesartan in the treatment of hypertension. Major studies on the individual preparations as well as studies examining their combination are included. This fixed-dose combination expands our possibilities with regard to attaining the blood pressure target values, in particular in patients with risk factors or patients with comorbidities. Finally, the benefit mainly consists in the greater compliance of the patient with a minimum adverse effects.
Protein neddylation is a posttranslational modification of conjugating the neuronal precursor cell-expressed developmentally down-regulated protein 8 (Nedd8) to substrates. Our previous work revealed that neddylation pathway is overactivated in various human lung cancers and correlates with the disease progression, whereas pharmacologically targeting this pathway has emerged as an attractive therapeutic strategy. As a follow-up research, 1331 approved drugs were investigated the inhibitory activities of cullin1 neddylation for screening the hit compounds via an improved enzyme-based assay. An antihypertensive agent, candesartan cilexetic (CDC), was identified as a novel neddylation inhibitor that ATP-competitively suppressing Nedd8-activating enzyme (NAE, E1) in mechanism, which inhibited the cullins neddylation superior than two representative non-covalent NAE inhibitors, M22 and mitoxantrone. Following with the findings such as apoptotic induction and tumor growth suppression in human lung cancer A549 in vitro and in vivo, CDC represents a potential anticancer lead compound with promising neddylation inhibitory activity.
High blood pressure is the leading risk factor for premature deaths and a major cost to societies worldwide. Effective blood pressure-lowering drugs are available, but patient adherence to them is low, likely partly due to side effects. To identify patient-specific differences in treatment effects, a repeated cross-over design, where the same treatment contrasts are repeated within each patient, is needed. Such designs have been surprisingly rarely used, given the current focus on precision medicine. The Precision HYpertenSIon Care (PHYSIC) study aims to investigate if there is a consistent between-person variation in blood pressure response to the common blood pressure-lowering drug classes of a clinically relevant magnitude, given the within-person variation in blood pressure. The study will also investigate the between-person variation in side effects of the drugs. In a double-blind, randomized, repeated cross-over trial, 300 patients with mild hypertension will be treated with four blood pressure-lowering drugs (candesartan, lisinopril, amlodipine, and hydrochlorothiazide) in monotherapy, with two of the drugs repeated for each patient. If the study indicates that there is a potential for precision hypertension care, the most promising predictors of blood pressure and side effect response to the drugs will be explored, as will the potential for development of a biomarker panel to rank the suitability of blood pressure-lowering drug classes for individual patients in terms of anticipated blood pressure effects and side effects, with the ultimate goal to maximize adherence. The study follows a protocol pre-registered at ClinicalTrials.gov with the identifier NCT02774460.
INTRODUCTION: "Amlodipine/valsartan" or "amlodipine/candesartan" combinations represent two effective antihypertensive agents with complementary mechanisms of action. Nevertheless, a study has yet to be done to evaluate the effect of amlodipine/candesartan on central blood pressure and compare it with amlodipine/valsartan combination. To see how "amlodipine plus candesartan combination" reduces peripheral and central blood pressure compared to the most studied combination, "amlodipine plus valsartan". MATERIAL AND METHODS: Eighty-six patients were randomized in an open-label, prospective study by 1:1 ratio to two groups. Group I (n=42) received the amlodipine and valsartan combination, and group II (n=44) received the amlodipine and candesartan combination. Peripheral and central blood pressure (CBP) was measured at baseline, at 6 and 12 weeks of follow-up. DISCUSSION: Both treatment groups reduced peripheral systolic, diastolic, and mean blood pressure. There was no significant difference between and within both groups. The amlodipine/candesartan combination showed more reduction in peripheral systolic blood pressure (PSBP) after 12 weeks of treatment (p=<0.001). Both groups decreased CBP without significant differences between groups. The amlodipine/candesartan combination showed additional efficacy in decreasing CSBP after 12 weeks (p=<0.001). The two treatment groups did not exert significant efficacy in lowering heart rate (HR) and augmentation index% (AIx%). CONCLUSION: To conclude, the amlodipine 10mg/candesartan 16mg combination was non-inferior to the amlodipine 10mg/valsartan 160mg combination in terms of reducing peripheral and CBP over time.
The level of inhibition of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) provided by standard doses of ACE inhibitors may only be partial during long-term treatment in patients with severe chronic heart failure (CHF). Partial ACE inhibition with time is often referred to as escape from ACE inhibition and labeled ACE escape. Several lines of evidence suggest that ACE escape occurs in patients with severe CHF. Plasma levels of angiotensin II rise above initial values during long-term ACE inhibition, and the effects of ACE inhibitors on cardiac remodeling and lowering of sympathetic nervous system activity attenuate after 1 year of treatment. Moreover, angiotensin II type I receptor blockade (ARB) produces clinical and hemodynamic benefits in patients with CHF who are already receiving ACE inhibitors. The therapeutic implications of ACE escape include evaluation of higher- than-standard doses of ACE inhibitors and routine addition of ARB to ACE inhibition in patients with severe CHF. Data are reviewed to demonstrate that ACE escape reflects inadequate ACE dosage rather than a decrease in ACE inhibition occurring with time.
AIM: To evaluate the impact of AGTR1 A1166C (rs5186) on the response to candesartan in patients with heart failure. MATERIALS & METHODS: Prospective, multicentre, open-label study. We studied 299 symptomatic patients with heart failure presenting a left ventricular ejection fraction </=40%. RESULTS: Reductions in the primary end points of natriuretic peptides were not significantly associated with AGTR1 A1166C. Nevertheless, carrying the 1166C allele was associated with a greater compensatory increase in renin activity (p = 0.037) after 16 weeks of treatment with candesartan and a more modest effect on aldosterone concentrations (p = 0.022). CONCLUSION: AGTR1 1166C carriers may experience a greater long-term compensatory renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activation following treatment with candesartan. Whether these associations ultimately influence clinical outcomes requires investigation. Clinicaltrials.gov : NCT00400582.
Prevention and regression of diabetic renal disease can be obtained through the combination of strict blood pressure control, which frequently requires the combination of different antihypertensive drugs, with tight glycaemic control. Recent evidence obtained with the angiotensin receptor blockers has allowed the recognition by most guidelines that this class of agents constitutes the first choice to treat hypertension in type 2 diabetic patients presenting with diabetic renal disease at any stage of evolution, from microalbuminuria to advanced renal failure. Of course this must be accompanied by an integral coverture of the increased global cardiovascular risk that always accompanies this situation. This short review contains the most relevant evidence in favour of angiotensin receptor blockers, with particular emphasis on the capacities of candesartan for controlling blood pressure and protecting the kidney. In patients with type 2 diabetes and varying degrees of albuminuria, treatment with candesartan 8-32mg daily was shown to reduce urinary albumin excretion (UAE) by up to 60%. When given in addition to an ACE inhibitor (dual blockade), reductions in UAE of 25-35% relative to ACE inhibitor monotherapy have been found.
BACKGROUND: Candesartan is a relatively novel antihypertensive agent of the angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB). Several clinical trials have compared candesartan with losartan in the management of essential hypertension. However, systematic assessment of efficacy and safety between candesartan and losartan is still lacking. METHODS: We reviewed randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing candesartan with losartan for net reduction in blood pressure from baseline, response and control rates, and incidences of common and serious adverse events.Weighted mean differences (WMD), and relative risk (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated for continuous and dichotomous data, respectively. RESULTS: A total of 12 RCTs with 3644 patients were included in this meta-analysis. When comparing the efficacy of candesartan and losartan in reducing systolic blood pressure (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) at the end of the follow-up period, results with candesartan were superior to losartan in the reduction SBP and DBP (WMD, -2.97; 95% CI, -4.18 - -1.77; p < 0.001; WMD, -1.76; 95% CI, -2.57 - -0.96; p < 0.001; respectively). Candesartan had better response and control rates than losartan. (RR, 1.12; 95% CI, 1.06-1.18; p < 0.01; RR, 1.26; 95% CI, 1.06-1.50; p = 0.008). Reported common adverse events for the two agents were not significantly different (RR, 0.98; 95% CI, 0.86-1.12; p = 0.78). The incidence of serious adverse events for candesartan was lower than for losartan (RR, 0.48; 95% CI, 0.25-0.92; p = 0.03). The net reduction of DBP showed negative correlation with baseline DBP in both candesartan and losartan groups (regression coefficient -1.81, p = 0.03 and regression coefficient -1.56, p = 0.02, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Candesartan is superior to losartan in reducing blood pressure. Candesartan also causes fewer serious adverse events than losartan.
The results of this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, forced-dose titration study in a diverse population of hypertensive patients in the US indicate that candesartan cilexetil has clinically meaningful dose-related blood pressure-lowering effects and that maximum blood pressure reduction is achieved with doses of 16 and 32 mg given once daily. This study confirms that candesartan cilexetil is a highly effective antihypertensive agent with an excellent tolerability and safety profile, without dose-related adverse effects.
The manuscript is a "Letter to the Editor" concerning the paper: "Ozaydin M, Dede O, Varol E, et al. Effect of renin-angiotensin aldosteron system blockers on postoperative atrial fibrillation. Int J Cardiol 2008; 127: 362-367".
Experimental models recently suggested an interaction between aldosterone and adipose tissue, but clinical investigation has been limited. We studied the effects of eplerenone compared to hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) on blood pressure (BP), glucose, and lipid levels in 50 patients with essential hypertension (EHT) and type 2 diabetes mellitus whose BP failed to reach target levels with 8 mg of candesartan alone. BP improved similarly in both groups over the 12-month study period, but BMI, waist circumference, and LDL-cholesterol were decreased in the eplerenone group, while glycohemoglobin was elevated in the HCTZ group.
