The purpose of this guideline is to provide information for the interpretation of clinical dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPYD) genotype tests so that the results can be used to guide dosing of fluoropyrimidines (5-fluorouracil and capecitabine). Detailed guidelines for the use of fluoropyrimidines, their clinical pharmacology, as well as analyses of cost-effectiveness are beyond the scope of this document. The Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC((R)) ) guidelines consider the situation of patients for which genotype data are already available (updates available at https://cpicpgx.org/guidelines/guideline-for-fluoropyrimidines-and-dpyd/).
Although 5‑fluorouracil (5‑FU)‑based chemotherapy is the major treatment for colorectal cancer, it has disadvantages such as systemic toxicity, lack of effectiveness and selectivity, and development of resistance. Capecitabine, a prodrug form of 5‑FU, was designed to overcome these drawbacks, to fulfill the need for more convenient therapy, and to improve safety, tolerability and intratumor drug concentration levels through a tumor‑specific conversion to the active 5‑FU drug. The purpose of the present review is to provide a comprehensive comparison between 5‑FU therapy and capecitabine. In the current review, anticancer drug classification was discussed and the development of capecitabine from the original fluorinated analogue (5‑FU) to overcome its drawbacks was explained. Specifically, 5‑FU is compared with capecitabine therapy regarding various properties, including drug metabolism, cellular mechanism, effect on the apoptosis pathway and cell cycle phases, safety and tolerability. Moreover, three metabolizing enzymes required for the activation of capecitabine to 5‑FU were discussed. Capecitabine, as monotherapy or in combination with other chemotherapies, exhibited improved drug efficacy and survival. However, the changes that mediate the chemoresistance of capecitabine treatment were classified as intracellular, extracellular or cell surface factors, or cell‑phenotype state. Future studies should examine the efficacy of capecitabine combined with novel and safe drugs other than chemotherapeutic agents that play a role in the inhibition of tumor initiation, progression and metastasis.
PURPOSE: Hand-foot syndrome (HFS) is a dose-limiting side effect of capecitabine. Celecoxib prevents HFS by inhibiting cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) that is upregulated because of the underlying associated inflammation. However, systemic side effects of celecoxib have limited routine prescription. Topical diclofenac inhibits COX-2 locally with minimal risk of systemic adverse events. Therefore, we conducted this study to assess the efficacy of topical diclofenac in the prevention of capecitabine-induced HFS. METHODS: In this single-site phase III randomized double-blind trial, we enrolled patients with breast or GI cancer who were planned to receive capecitabine-based treatment. Participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive topical diclofenac or placebo gel for 12 weeks or until the development of HFS, whichever occurred earlier. The primary end point was the incidence of grade 2 or 3 HFS (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5), which was compared between the two groups using simple logistic regression. RESULTS: In total, 264 patients were randomly assigned to receive topical diclofenac gel (n = 131) or placebo (n = 133). Grade 2 or 3 HFS was observed in 3.8% of participants in the diclofenac group compared with 15.0% in the placebo group (absolute difference, 11.2%; 95% CI, 4.3 to 18.1; P = .003). Grade 1-3 HFS was lower in the diclofenac group than in the placebo group (6.1% v 18.1%; absolute risk difference, 11.9%; 95% CI, 4.1 to 19.6). Capecitabine dose reductions because of HFS were less frequent in the diclofenac group (3.8%) than in the placebo group (13.5%; absolute risk difference, 9.7%; 95% CI, 3.0 to 16.4). CONCLUSION: Topical diclofenac prevented HFS in patients receiving capecitabine. This trial supports the use of topical diclofenac to prevent capecitabine-associated HFS.
Pyrotinib is an irreversible dual pan-ErbB receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor developed for the treatment of HER2-positive advanced solid tumours. Based on positive results in a phase II trial, the drug recently received conditional approval in China for use in combination with capecitabine for the treatment of HER2-positive, advanced or metastatic breast cancer in patients previously treated with anthracycline or taxane chemotherapy. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of pyrotinib leading to this first global approval for the treatment of HER2-positive advanced breast cancer.
IMPORTANCE: Among all subtypes of breast cancer, triple-negative breast cancer has a relatively high relapse rate and poor outcome after standard treatment. Effective strategies to reduce the risk of relapse and death are needed. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and adverse effects of low-dose capecitabine maintenance after standard adjuvant chemotherapy in early-stage triple-negative breast cancer. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Randomized clinical trial conducted at 13 academic centers and clinical sites in China from April 2010 to December 2016 and final date of follow-up was April 30, 2020. Patients (n = 443) had early-stage triple-negative breast cancer and had completed standard adjuvant chemotherapy. INTERVENTIONS: Eligible patients were randomized 1:1 to receive capecitabine (n = 222) at a dose of 650 mg/m2 twice a day by mouth for 1 year without interruption or to observation (n = 221) after completion of standard adjuvant chemotherapy. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was disease-free survival. Secondary end points included distant disease-free survival, overall survival, locoregional recurrence-free survival, and adverse events. RESULTS: Among 443 women who were randomized, 434 were included in the full analysis set (mean [SD] age, 46 [9.9] years; T1/T2 stage, 93.1%; node-negative, 61.8%) (98.0% completed the trial). After a median follow-up of 61 months (interquartile range, 44-82), 94 events were observed, including 38 events (37 recurrences and 32 deaths) in the capecitabine group and 56 events (56 recurrences and 40 deaths) in the observation group. The estimated 5-year disease-free survival was 82.8% in the capecitabine group and 73.0% in the observation group (hazard ratio [HR] for risk of recurrence or death, 0.64 [95% CI, 0.42-0.95]; P = .03). In the capecitabine group vs the observation group, the estimated 5-year distant disease-free survival was 85.8% vs 75.8% (HR for risk of distant metastasis or death, 0.60 [95% CI, 0.38-0.92]; P = .02), the estimated 5-year overall survival was 85.5% vs 81.3% (HR for risk of death, 0.75 [95% CI, 0.47-1.19]; P = .22), and the estimated 5-year locoregional recurrence-free survival was 85.0% vs 80.8% (HR for risk of locoregional recurrence or death, 0.72 [95% CI, 0.46-1.13]; P = .15). The most common capecitabine-related adverse event was hand-foot syndrome (45.2%), with 7.7% of patients experiencing a grade 3 event. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among women with early-stage triple-negative breast cancer who received standard adjuvant treatment, low-dose capecitabine maintenance therapy for 1 year, compared with observation, resulted in significantly improved 5-year disease-free survival. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01112826.
IMPORTANCE: Total neoadjuvant therapy (TNT) is the standard treatment for locally advanced rectal cancer, especially for patients with high-risk factors. However, the efficacy of TNT combined with immunotherapy for patients with proficient mismatch repair (pMMR) rectal cancer is unknown. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of TNT with induction chemoimmunotherapy followed by long-course chemoradiation in patients with high-risk, pMMR rectal cancer and to identify potential molecular biomarkers associated with treatment efficacy. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cohort study was a single-arm phase 2 trial conducted at Gastrointestinal Cancer Center, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, from June 2020 to October 2021. Biopsies and plasma were collected before treatment for whole-exome sequencing and cell-free DNA sequencing, respectively. Data were analyzed from May 2022 to September 2022. INTERVENTIONS: Participants received 3 cycles of induction oxaliplatin and capecitabine combined with camrelizumab and radiotherapy (50.6 Gy in 22 fractions) with concurrent capecitabine. Patients without disease progression received 2 cycles of consolidation oxaliplatin/capecitabine. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was pathologic complete response rate. RESULTS: Of 25 patients enrolled (19 men [76%]; 6 women [24%]; median [IQR] age, 58 [48-64] years), 22 patients (88%) completed the TNT schedule. The pathologic complete response rate was 33.3% (7/21). Twelve patients (48%) achieved clinical complete response, and 4 patients (16%) chose to watch and wait. R0 resection was achieved in 21 of 21 patients, and the major pathologic response rate was 38.1% (8/21). The most common adverse event was nausea (80%, 20/25); grade 3 toxic effects occurred in 9 of 25 patients (36%). Patients with tumor shrinkage of 50% or greater after induction oxaliplatin/capecitabine and camrelizumab or clinical complete response had higher percentages of LRP1B mutation. Mutation of LRP1B was associated with high tumor mutation burden and tumor neoantigen burden. Patients with high tumor mutation burden all benefited from therapy. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study found that TNT with induction chemoimmunotherapy followed by long-course chemoradiation was safe and effective for patients with high-risk rectal cancer with pMMR status. Longer follow-up and larger clinical studies are needed to validate this innovative regimen. There is also an urgent need to further validate the predictive value of LRP1B and discover other novel biomarkers with potential predictive value for rectal cancer.
The capecitabine/temozolomide regimen has significant activity in pancreatic NETs; however, data are limited in NETs of the small bowel (midgut). A retrospective study of all patients with metastatic midgut NETs seen at Moffitt Cancer Center between January 2008 and June 2019 treated with CAPTEM was conducted. 32 patients with proven or suspected well-differentiated primary small bowel NETs (excluding duodenum) were identified. 6 patients were found to have a radiographic response (19%), 5 of whom had high-grade disease. Only one patient among 23 with low/intermediate-grade disease responded (4%), whereas the response rate for patients with high-grade disease was 56%. Among patients with low/intermediate-grade disease, 44% discontinued due to poor tolerability. The CAPTEM regimen appears to have an activity in patients with high-grade small bowel NETs and is largely inactive in patients with low/intermediate-grade tumors.
This study explores the potential use of ChatGPT, an AI-based language model, in assessing herbal-drug interactions (HDi) to enhance clinical decision-making. HDi can pose significant health risks by reducing drug efficacy or causing unwanted side effects. Clinical pharmacists play a key role in identifying these HDIs, and currently, there are limited tools available for checking drug interactions. The research focuses on a case study of a rectal adenocarcinoma patient treated with capecitabine and 26 supplements, which contain a total of 80 herbal substances. ChatGPT 3.5 was asked three questions regarding potential HDIs: "Are there possible HDIs?", "What is the pharmacokinetic mechanism?", and "What is the bibliographic source of the interaction?". The results were reviewed by an oncology clinical pharmacist and compared to existing databases and independent bibliographic research. The findings highlight ChatGPT's advantage in processing large amounts of data quickly, with 16% of interactions classified as "unlikely", confirmed by the pharmacist. However, 73% of the suggested mechanisms were false positives, and 4% were categorized as "hallucinations". Additionally, most of the bibliographic sources provided by ChatGPT were outdated or unavailable. While ChatGPT proves useful for initial HDI screening, its limitations include outdated data (last updated in January 2022), lack of access to private databases, and occasional inaccuracies. Further applications of AI in this area are recommended, though expert validation remains essential in the clinical decision-making process.
In China, the treatment of locally advanced gastric cancer (AGC) faces unique challenges. Chinese patients may harbor more unfavorable prognostic factors than western populations and, in comparison with other Asian populations such as Japan and South Korea, a higher proportion of Chinese patients are diagnosed with AGC due to inadequate early diagnosis of the malignancy. This review summarizes the use of combination chemotherapy regimens with capecitabine as adjuvant therapy in the Chinese AGC population. Based on the available domestic data in China, the review concludes that capecitabine-based chemotherapy regimens, especially XELOX, offer good efficacy following radical gastrectomy in patients with AGC, with a low incidence of adverse events, acceptable tolerance, greater patient convenience and a lower overall cost than other regimens.
BACKGROUND: Fluoropyrimidine treatment can result in severe toxicity in up to 30% of patients and is often the result of reduced activity of the key metabolic enzyme dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), mostly caused by genetic variants in the gene encoding DPD (DPYD). We assessed the effect of prospective screening for the four most relevant DPYD variants (DPYD*2A [rs3918290, c.1905+1G>A, IVS14+1G>A], c.2846A>T [rs67376798, D949V], c.1679T>G [rs55886062, DPYD*13, I560S], and c.1236G>A [rs56038477, E412E, in haplotype B3]) on patient safety and subsequent DPYD genotype-guided dose individualisation in daily clinical care. METHODS: In this prospective, multicentre, safety analysis in 17 hospitals in the Netherlands, the study population consisted of adult patients (>/=18 years) with cancer who were intended to start on a fluoropyrimidine-based anticancer therapy (capecitabine or fluorouracil as single agent or in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents or radiotherapy). Patients with all tumour types for which fluoropyrimidine-based therapy was considered in their best interest were eligible. We did prospective genotyping for DPYD*2A, c.2846A>T, c.1679T>G, and c.1236G>A. Heterozygous DPYD variant allele carriers received an initial dose reduction of 25% (c.2846A>T and c.1236G>A) or 50% (DPYD*2A and c.1679T>G), and DPYD wild-type patients were treated according to the current standard of care. The primary endpoint of the study was the frequency of severe (National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.03 grade >/=3) overall fluoropyrimidine-related toxicity across the entire treatment duration. We compared toxicity incidence between DPYD variant allele carriers and DPYD wild-type patients on an intention-to-treat basis, and relative risks (RRs) for severe toxicity were compared between the current study and a historical cohort of DPYD variant allele carriers treated with full dose fluoropyrimidine-based therapy (derived from a previously published meta-analysis). This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02324452, and is complete. FINDINGS: Between April 30, 2015, and Dec 21, 2017, we enrolled 1181 patients. 78 patients were considered non-evaluable, because they were retrospectively identified as not meeting inclusion criteria, did not start fluoropyrimidine-based treatment, or were homozygous or compound heterozygous DPYD variant allele carriers. Of 1103 evaluable patients, 85 (8%) were heterozygous DPYD variant allele carriers, and 1018 (92%) were DPYD wild-type patients. Overall, fluoropyrimidine-related severe toxicity was higher in DPYD variant carriers (33 [39%] of 85 patients) than in wild-type patients (231 [23%] of 1018 patients; p=0.0013). The RR for severe fluoropyrimidine-related toxicity was 1.31 (95% CI 0.63-2.73) for genotype-guided dosing compared with 2.87 (2.14-3.86) in the historical cohort for DPYD*2A carriers, no toxicity compared with 4.30 (2.10-8.80) in c.1679T>G carriers, 2.00 (1.19-3.34) compared with 3.11 (2.25-4.28) for c.2846A>T carriers, and 1.69 (1.18-2.42) compared with 1.72 (1.22-2.42) for c.1236G>A carriers. INTERPRETATION: Prospective DPYD genotyping was feasible in routine clinical practice, and DPYD genotype-based dose reductions improved patient safety of fluoropyrimidine treatment. For DPYD*2A and c.1679T>G carriers, a 50% initial dose reduction was adequate. For c.1236G>A and c.2846A>T carriers, a larger dose reduction of 50% (instead of 25%) requires investigation. Since fluoropyrimidines are among the most commonly used anticancer agents, these findings suggest that implementation of DPYD genotype-guided individualised dosing should be a new standard of care. FUNDING: Dutch Cancer Society.
In this report, two cases of patients with severe adverse events after an adjuvant treatment with capecitabine are described in detail. The first patient suffered from a severe ileocolitis, where ultimately intensive care treatment, total colectomy and ileum resection was necessary. The second patient experienced a toxic enteritis, which could be managed conservatively. Post-therapeutic DPYD genotyping was negative in the former and positive in the latter case. Patients can be categorised in normal, moderate and poor DPYD metabolisers to predict the risk of adverse events of capecitabine treatment. Guidelines in various European countries recommend pretherapeutic DPYD genotyping, whereas it is not recommended by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network in the USA. Irrespective of DPYD genotyping, strict therapeutic drug monitoring is highly recommended to reduce the incidence and severity of adverse events.
PURPOSETo assess whether the integration of PD-1 inhibitor with total neoadjuvant therapy (iTNT) can lead to an improvement in complete responses (CRs) and favors a watch-and-wait (WW) strategy in patients with proficient mismatch repair or microsatellite stable (pMMR/MSS) locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC).PATIENTS AND METHODSWe conducted a prospective, multicenter, randomized, open-label, phase II trial using a pick-the-winner design. Eligible patients with clinical T3-4 and/or N+ rectal adenocarcinoma were randomly assigned to group A for short-course radiotherapy (SCRT) followed by six cycles of consolidation immunochemotherapy with capecitabine and oxaliplatin and toripalimab or to group B for two cycles of induction immunochemotherapy followed by SCRT and the rest four doses. Either total mesorectal excision or WW was applied on the basis of tumor response. The primary end point was CR which included pathological CR (pCR) after surgery and clinical CR (cCR) if WW was applicable, with hypothesis of an increased CR of 40% after iTNT compared with historical data of 25% after conventional TNT.RESULTSOf the 130 patients enrolled, 121 pMMR/MSS patients were evaluable (62 in group A and 59 in group B). At a median follow-up of 19 months, CR was achieved at 56.5% in group A and 54.2% in group B. Both groups fulfilled the predefined statistical hypothesis (P < .001). Both groups reported a pCR rate of 50%. Respectively, 15 patients in each group underwent WW and remained disease free. The most frequent grade 3 to 4 toxicities were thrombocytopenia and neutropenia. Patients in group A had higher rate of cCR (43.5% v 35.6%) at restaging and lower rate of grade 3 to 4 thrombocytopenia (24.2% v 33.9%) during neoadjuvant treatment.CONCLUSIONThe iTNT regimens remarkably improved CR rates in pMMR/MSS LARC compared with historical benchmark with acceptable toxicity. Up-front SCRT followed by immunochemotherapy was selected for future definitive study.
PURPOSE: A number of studies suggest that older patients may have reduced or no benefit from the addition of oxaliplatin to fluoropyrimidines as adjuvant chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer (CC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied the prognostic impact of age, as well as treatment adherence/toxicity patterns according to age, in patients with stage III CC who received 3 or 6 months of infusional fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin/capecitabine and oxaliplatin (CAPOX) on the basis of data collected from trials from the ACCENT and IDEA databases. Associations between age and time to recurrence (TTR), disease-free survival (DFS), overall survival (OS), survival after recurrence (SAR), and cancer-specific survival (CSS) were assessed by a Cox model or a competing risk model, stratified by studies and adjusted for sex, performance status, T and N stage, and year of enrollment. RESULTS: A total of 17,909 patients were included; 24% of patients were age older than 70 years (n = 4,340). Patients age >/=70 years had higher rates of early treatment discontinuation. Rates of grade >/=3 adverse events were similar between those older and younger than 70 years, except for diarrhea and neutropenia that were more frequent in older patients treated with CAPOX (14.2% v 11.2%; P = .01 and 12.1% v 9.6%; P = .04, respectively). In multivariable analysis, TTR was not significantly different between patients <70 years and those >/=70 years, but DFS, OS, SAR, and CSS were significantly shorter in those patients >/=70 years. CONCLUSION: In patients >/=70 years with stage III CC fit enough to be enrolled in clinical trials, oxaliplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy was well tolerated and led to similar TTR compared with younger patients, suggesting similar efficacy. TTR may be a more appropriate end point for efficacy in this patient population.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article will review the results of recent studies, which have investigated the duration of adjuvant chemotherapy and also suggest, which aspects of adjuvant treatment need investigation in future studies. RECENT FINDINGS: The IDEA collaboration investigated whether the duration of adjuvant chemotherapy with an oxaliplatin doublet could be reduced from 6 to 3 months. Although this study did not demonstrate noninferiority for 3 months treatment, it did show noninferiority for patients receiving 3 months CAPOX chemotherapy and for those patients with low-risk stage III disease receiving 3 months' treatment. There was also significantly less toxicity seen with 3 months' treatment. Recent studies have shown that detectable ctDNA postoperatively can predict those patients most likely to relapse and so benefit from adjuvant treatment. SUMMARY: It has been shown that for patients receiving adjuvant CAPOX chemotherapy, or those receiving adjuvant chemotherapy for low-risk stage III colon 3 months' chemotherapy gives similar outcomes to 6 months' treatment with significantly less toxicity.
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), first introduced in 1996, is a neurotoxic state characterised by seizures, headache, vision change, paresis, nausea and altered mental status. Risk factors include hypertension, eclampsia/pre-eclampsia, infection/sepsis and cancer chemotherapy. Although exposure to toxic agents is a common occurrence in patients who develop PRES, oxaliplatin has rarely been associated with it, with only 10 cases reported worldwide. We present the case of an oxaliplatin-induced PRES in a 23-year-old male patient who was started on oxaliplatin/capecitabine as adjuvant chemotherapy for anal canal adenocarcinoma. The patient developed symptoms of headache, slurred speech and left-sided facial weakness on the ninth day after the first dose of oxaliplatin that lasted for 6-8 hours. The patient experienced another episode next day with similar symptoms that lasted for 8 hours. Oxaliplatin was withheld and the patient was discharged on capecitabine only. The patient had no new episodes since discharge on follow-up.
Patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) suffer from poor prognosis and lack effective drugs. Dihydroartemisinin (DHA) has anti-cancer potential but the mechanism remains unclear. We elucidated the effects and mechanism of DHA on CRC development with the aim of providing an effective, low-toxicity drug and a novel strategy for CRC. Herein, proliferation assay, transwell assay, tube formation assay, metastasis models, PDX model and AOM/DSS model were used to reveal the effects of DHA on CRC. The key pathway and target were identified by RNA-seq, ChIP, molecular docking, pull down and dual-luciferase reporter assays. As a result, DHA showed a strong inhibitory effect on the growth, metastasis and angiogenesis of CRC with no obvious toxicity, and the inhibitory effect was similar to that of the clinical drug Capecitabine (Cap). Indeed, DHA directly targeted GSK-3beta to inhibit CRC development through the GSK-3beta/TCF7/MMP9 pathway. Meaningfully, DHA in combination with Cap enhanced the anti-cancer effect, and alleviated Cap-induced diarrhoea, immunosuppression and inflammation. In conclusion, DHA has the potential to be an effective and low-toxicity drug for the treatment of CRC. Furthermore, DHA in combination with Cap could be a novel therapeutic strategy for CRC with improved efficacy and reduced side effects.
We evaluated modulation of the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment in both local and liver metastatic colorectal cancer (LMCC), focusing on tumor-associated macrophages, which are the predominant immunosuppressive cells in LMCC. We developed an orally administered metronomic chemotherapy regimen, oral CAPOX. This regimen combines capecitabine and a nano-micelle encapsulated, lysine-linked deoxycholate and oxaliplatin complex (OPt/LDC-NM). The treatment effectively modulated immune cells within the tumor microenvironment by activating the cGAS-STING pathway and inducing immunogenic cell death. This therapy modulated immune cells more effectively than did capecitabine monotherapy, the current standard maintenance chemotherapy for colorectal cancer. The macrophage-modifying effect of oral CAPOX was mediated via the cGAS-STING pathway. This is a newly identified mode of immune cell activation induced by metronomic chemotherapy. Moreover, oral CAPOX synergized with anti-PD-1 antibody (alphaPD-1) to enhance the T-cell-mediated antitumor immune response. In the CT26. CL25 subcutaneous model, combination therapy achieved a 91 % complete response rate with a confirmed memory effect against the tumor. This combination also altered the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment in LMCC, which alphaPD-1 monotherapy could not achieve. Oral CAPOX and alphaPD-1 combination therapy outperformed the maximum tolerated dose for treating LMCC, suggesting metronomic therapy as a promising strategy.
This study evaluated the efficacy and tolerability of topical timolol, 0.5%, gel as a treatment of paronychia and pseudopyogenic granuloma induced by antineoplastic agents.
Aim:TYMS gene encodes for TS enzyme involved in 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and capecitabine (CAP) metabolism. This study assessed the association of TYMS-TSER and 3RG>C polymorphisms with 5-FU/CAP adverse event (AE) incidence. Materials & methods:TYMS-TSER and 3RG>C polymorphisms were analyzed by use of PCR/PCR-RFLP in 313 5-FU/CAP-treated cancer patients. Results: Female TYMS-TSER 2R carriers were at increased risk for 5-FU/CAP AEs (odds ratio: 2.195; p = 0.032). 2R/2R genotype was the only factor that increased risk for delayed drug administration or therapy discontinuation (odds ratio: 5.049; p = 0.016). No other associations were found. Conclusion:TYMS-TSER 3R/2R polymorphism was associated with incidence of AEs in female cancer patients. This gender-driven association potentially implicates the ER that, in female patients, potentially regulates TS expression.
BACKGROUND: Whether or not the addition of immunotherapy to current standard-of-care treatments can improve efficacy in proficient mismatch repair (pMMR)/microsatellite-stable (MSS) metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC), the predominant type of mCRC, is unclear. METHODS: This randomized, double-blind, phase 2 part of a phase 2/3 trial was conducted at 23 hospitals across China (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04547166). Patients with unresectable metastatic/recurrent colorectal adenocarcinoma and no prior systemic therapy were randomly assigned 1:1 to receive every-3-weeks intravenous serplulimab (300 mg) plus HLX04 (7.5 mg/kg) and XELOX (serplulimab group) or placebo (300 mg) plus bevacizumab (7.5 mg/kg) and XELOX (placebo group). The primary endpoint was independent radiology review committee (IRRC)-assessed progression-free survival (PFS). Secondary endpoints included other efficacy endpoints and safety. FINDINGS: Between July 16, 2021, and January 20, 2022, 114 patients were enrolled and randomly assigned to the serplulimab (n = 57) or placebo (n = 57) group. All patients had stage IV CRC, and 95.7% of the patients with available microsatellite instability (MSI) status were MSS. With a median follow-up duration of 17.7 months, median PFS was prolonged in the serplulimab group (17.2 vs. 10.7 months; hazard ratio [HR], 0.60; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.31-1.14). Although the median overall survival (OS) was not reached for either group, a trend of an OS benefit was observed for the serplulimab group (HR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.41-1.45). 36 (65.5%) and 32 (56.1%) patients in the serplulimab and placebo groups had grade >/=3 treatment-related adverse events, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Serplulimab plus HLX04 and XELOX exhibits promising efficacy and is safe and tolerable in patients with treatment-naive mCRC. FUNDING: This work was funded by Shanghai Henlius Biotech, Inc.
