In the last 50 years the oncology has experienced remarkable changes resulting in transforming malignant germ-cell testicular tumors from highly fatal to nearly uniformly cured neoplasms. This clinical landmark was justly attributed to the identification of cisplatin by Barnett Rosenberg in his experiments dating to 1965. On this 50th anniversary of this discovery, one is reminded of the following key aspects in cancer therapeutics: 1) the life-story of Barnett Rosenberg and his legacy that included organizing nearly quadrennial "platinum" meetings incorporating advances in cancer biology into evolving therapeutic strategies; 2) the search for less toxic analogs of cisplatin leading to the development of carboplatin; 3) clinical research into attenuation of cisplatin toxicities; 4) oxaliplatin and the expansion of the therapeutic spectrum of platinum compounds; and 5) the ongoing multifaceted investigations into the problem of "platinum resistance".
Carboplatin is a platinum-based anticancer drug that has been long used to treat many types of solid cancer. Because the clearance of carboplatin strongly correlates with the glomerular filtration rate (GFR), its dosage is calculated with the Calvert formula on the basis of the patient's GFR to achieve the target area under the plasma drug concentration-time curve (AUC) for each patient. However, many lines of evidence from previous clinical studies should be interpreted with caution because different methods were used to estimate drug clearance and derive the dosage of carboplatin. There is a particularly high risk of carboplatin overdosing when the dosage is determined on the basis of standardized serum creatinine values. When deciding the dose of carboplatin for adult Japanese patients, preferred methods to assess renal function instead of directly measuring GFR include (1) 24-h urinary collection-based creatinine clearance adjusted by adding 0.2 mg/dl to the serum creatinine concentration measured by standardized methods, and (2) equation-based GFR (eGFR) with a back calculation to units of ml/min per subject. Given the limitations of serum creatinine-based GFR estimations, the GFR or creatinine clearance should be directly measured in each patient whenever possible. To ensure patient safety and facilitate a medical-team approach, the single most appropriate method available at each institute or medical team should be consistently used to calculate the dose of carboplatin with the Calvert formula.
Platinum is the standard drug in the treatment of patients with ovarian cancer. The sample of more than 2,000 patients enrolled in randomised trials and 2 meta-analyses were largely sufficient to prove that carboplatin and cisplatin are equally effective. Carboplatin dose adaptation according to renal function and AUC decreases drug induced thrombopenia and has allowed carboplatin to be used widely and safely. Combining carboplatin with paclitaxel has brought additional protection against thrombopenia. The carboplatin-paclitaxel regimen can be safely administered every 3 weeks in an outpatient setting assuring a better quality of life than the combination of cisplatin and paclitaxel with equal efficacy. Carboplatin-paclitaxel has thus recently become the standard chemotherapy regimen for patients with advanced ovarian cancer. Forthcoming results of ongoing trials will determine if high carboplatin doses with peripheral hematopoeitic stem cell support in consolidation after first line treatment can benefit patients with advanced disease.
Cisplatin is one of the most important anticancer drugs yet developed. It proved critical in the development of curative programs for testicular cancer and in life-prolonging regimens for such diseases as small cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer, and metastatic bladder cancer. Cisplatin currently remains the recommended agent of choice for treatment of several malignancies and is a major reagent in the design of existing clinical trials. Although its analogue, carboplatin, has a constitutional and nonhematologic toxicity profile clearly superior to that of cisplatin, thrombocytopenia associated with carboplatin remains a problem, particularly since it can only be circumvented by means of cellular support, with or without growth factors. Continued laboratory investigations exploring new hypotheses concerning the pharmacodynamics of platinating agents emphasize the importance of the parent compound as well. Thus, in the short term, cisplatin will continue to be used in the therapy of certain major cancers. Ultimately, however, it will be replaced by compounds that both obviate its toxicity and increase its spectrum of activity.
Carboplatin haematological toxicities are clearly related to AUC. It seems likely that therapeutic efficacy is also related to AUC, although the maturation of clinical trials is necessary to establish this point. Using AUC-based dosing compensates for variations in renal function between and within individual patients. Since this variability is considerable, AUC-based dosing is a desirable practice. However, it does not allow for other factors such as previous chemotherapy, previous radiotherapy or performance status. Thus it does not remove the requirement for clinical judgements when managing a patient with cancer; it simply helps to remove one of the subjective elements of such judgements.
We review the pharmacology and clinical administration of the commonly used platinum-based anticancer drugs cisplatin and carboplatin, and the more recently approved diamminocyclohexane-based oxaliplatin. The development of analogues of cisplatin has been focused upon identifying compounds with less toxicity and with a different spectrum of activity. Carboplatin exemplifies the former, while the initial data with oxaliplatin support its activity in cisplatin-resistant tumours. The clinical pharmacokinetics of the drugs are reviewed. Incorporation of these data into the design of clinical regimens has permitted individualised therapy with carboplatin, and has enhanced safety. Additional investigation of the pharmacodynamics of all of these agents is expected to result in their selective application. The clinical effects of these analogues are discussed.
INTRODUCTION: Advanced urothelial carcinoma is associated with a poor prognosis. In the metastatic setting, the response rate to first-line, cisplatin-containing chemotherapy is high, but survival is poor. Second-line treatment options are limited. Advanced age at diagnosis and the presence of comorbidities often preclude treatment with cisplatin-containing regimens. AREAS COVERED: This review addresses the current therapy of urothelial carcinoma, the unmet needs in treatment and the status of drug development in this disease. The molecular targets identified and efforts to incorporate targeted agents into therapy will be addressed. EXPERT OPINION: There have been no major advances in the treatment of urothelial carcinoma in three decades. Despite high response rates in the first-line setting, survival is limited. Major impediments to improved outcomes include poor durability of response to first-line chemotherapy and lack of second-line treatments. Better understanding in tumor biology has identified multiple targets in urothelial carcinoma; however, such discoveries have yet to lead to the incorporation of targeted agents into the routine treatment of urothelial carcinoma. Multiple ongoing clinical trials are investigating the use of targeted agents in urothelial carcinoma. Continued efforts are underway to better understand the molecular drivers of disease and such efforts are likely to identify additional therapeutic targets.
A 71-year-old man with advanced lung adenocarcinoma was treated with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and pembrolizumab in June 2020. Pemetrexed and pembrolizumab maintenance therapy were continued until November 2022. A fever and severe fatigue occurred in December 2022; however, the cause of the infection was inconclusive based on the patient's symptoms, imaging findings, and culture tests. Although the patient was administered antibiotics, his general condition worsened. Considering the possible diagnosis of immune-related cytokine release syndrome (CRS), the patient was administered prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) and showed improvement. In conclusion, CRS can occur even long after the initial administration of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy.
Small cell lung cancer, an aggressive malignancy characterized by early dissemination, is highly responsive to radiotherapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy. Since the introduction of combined-modality regimens that incorporate both radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the median survival time for patients with localized disease has increased to 12 to 15 months, but median length of survival of patients with extensive disease has remained at a plateau of only 6 to 8 months. New cytotoxic agents, such as ifosfamide, etoposide, and carboplatin, have contributed to a reduced toxicity profile and an increase in complete response rates to combination regimens of 40% to 50%, but they have not contributed to any major increase in long-term survival. Potential strategies for improving efficacy and reducing toxicity of the chemotherapy of small cell lung cancer are reviewed.
Chemoreduction is currently the most popular treatment strategy for intraocular retinoblastoma worldwide. Despite the dramatic clinical responses obtained with multiagent systemic chemotherapy regimens, enthusiasm for this treatment approach has been tempered by the potential toxicities of these drugs in the pediatric population. As a response to these concerns, novel approaches for the local delivery of chemotherapeutic agents to ocular structures have been investigated by both clinicians and scientists. Ocular oncologists have developed the periocular injection of carboplatin as a method for controlling intraocular tumor growth of retinoblastoma while minimizing systemic drug exposure. In parallel, the pharmaceutical industry has introduced drug-delivery systems to the posterior segment of the globe for a variety of ocular diseases. One example of the collaborative work by ophthalmologists and biopharmaceutical scientists is the use of fibrin sealants as a targeted drug-administration device, formulated to deliver sustained concentrations of chemotherapy at the site of application. This review integrates the recent ophthalmology and pharmaceutics literature on the potential role of fibrin sealants for periocular chemotherapy administration in the treatment of retinoblastoma.
Cisplatin and carboplatin are important drugs in the treatment of childhood cancers. Extensive data for carboplatin, and more limited results with cisplatin, indicate that there is significant inter-patient pharmacokinetic variability such that adaptive dosing may be necessary for the optimal use of these drugs. Glomerular filtration rate based dosing formulae have been developed for carboplatin and their use is reviewed. Further studies are needed with cisplatin in order to define the reasons for inter-patient pharmacokinetic variability and its relevance in clinical practice. Only very limited data are available on the clinical or molecular pharmacodynamics of cisplatin and carboplatin in paediatric patients. By analogy with adult studies, pharmacologically-guided platinum complex treatment should offer significant advances over empiric dosing.
This overview follows on from part I, which described the current practices used in chemotherapy dosing and the paucity of scientific evidence to support them. In part II, alternative approaches are discussed, both in terms of scientific rationale and practical application. These include therapeutic drug monitoring, the use of pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships, flat-fixed dosing, Bayesian modelling and dose banding.
Combination therapy enhances anticancer efficacy through synergistic effects of different drugs/modalities and can potentially address the challenges in the treatment of metastatic diseases. Here we report the design of carb/pyro nanoscale coordination polymer nanoparticles that carry carboplatin (carb) in the core and the photosensitizer pyrolipid (pyro) on the shell for the treatment of metastatic triple negative breast cancer. Upon light irradiation, carb/pyro generated reactive oxygen species to cause severe cell apoptosis and early calreticulin exposure. Upon intravenous injection and local light irradiation, carb/pyro significantly regressed tumor growth in the 4T1 murine metastatic breast cancer model. When combined with an anti-CD47 antibody, carb/pyro with light irradiation completely eradicated primary and metastatic 4T1 tumors in 50% mice. The anticancer efficacy of carb/pyro was also demonstrated in the CT26 murine colorectal cancer model.
The platinum compounds cisplatin and carboplatin are active against a wide range of adult and pediatric malignancies. Whereas both exert their cytotoxic effect by incorporating into DNA, they have substantially different systemic and cellular pharmacology. In addition, their toxicity profiles are much different. Substantial interpatient pharmacokinetic variability and narrow therapeutic indexes of the two agents led to the development of several dosing strategies. Although these strategies reduce pharmacokinetic variability, their effect on improving patient outcome remains to be determined.
Carboplatin/etoposide is an active combination in small cell lung cancer. In phase II studies, it produces results that appear equivalent to cisplatin/etoposide, but it has not been compared in a randomized study. It has a better toxicity profile than cisplatin/etoposide when compared in non-small cell lung cancer. The combination of carboplatin/etoposide is very well tolerated by elderly patients. Carboplatin/etoposide lacks important nonhematologic side effects, which has led to its assessment in dose escalation studies with colony-stimulating factors and autologous bone marrow transplantation.
PURPOSE: To review preclinical and clinical pharmacokinetic studies of the three most important chemotherapy drugs used for intraocular retinoblastoma and the contribution of the reported results to optimize treatment. METHODS: Systemic review of pharmacokinetic studies identified by a literature search at Pubmed using the keywords carboplatin, melphalan, topotecan, intravitreal, ophthalmic artery chemosurgery, pharmacokinetics, and retinoblastoma. RESULTS: A total of 21 studies were reviewed for assessing the preclinical and clinical pharmacokinetics of carboplatin, topotecan, and melphalan delivered by intravenous, periocular, ophthalmic artery, and intravitreal routes. Some preclinical studies were done before translation to the clinics. Others, despite encouraging preclinical data as reported for periocular topotecan did not correlate with clinical use. In addition, as was the case for melphalan after ophthalmic artery chemosurgery and despite nonfavorable preclinical information, some routes of drug delivery are clinically effective. Besides topotecan, complete knowledge of the pharmacokinetics of melphalan and carboplatin is still lacking. CONCLUSION: Pharmacokinetic knowledge of chemotherapy may aid to guide retinoblastoma treatment in favor of safety and efficacy. Nonetheless, results obtained in preclinical models should be translated with care to the clinics.
Durvalumab (IMFINZI((R))), a fully human monoclonal antibody against programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), is approved for use in combination with etoposide and either carboplatin or cisplatin for the first-line treatment of patients with extensive-stage small cell lung cancer (ES-SCLC). In the pivotal phase III CASPIAN trial in previously untreated adults with ES-SCLC, the addition of durvalumab to chemotherapy for up to 4 cycles followed by maintenance durvalumab was associated with a significantly longer overall survival and a favourable hazard ratio for progression-free survival compared with chemotherapy alone for up to 6 cycles. A higher proportion of patients in the durvalumab plus chemotherapy group had an objective response compared with the chemotherapy alone group. The efficacy of durvalumab was also sustained with longer follow-up. Durvalumab in combination with etoposide and either carboplatin or cisplatin had a manageable tolerability profile in patients with ES-SCLC. Given the available evidence, durvalumab in combination with etoposide and either carboplatin or cisplatin represents a valuable treatment option for the first-line treatment of patients with ES-SCLC, and is an accepted standard of care option in this setting.
A 52-year-old woman with stage IIIC ovarian cancer and stage IA uterine cancer experienced recurring alopecia areata of her eyebrows, eyelashes, arms, legs, and pubic area beginning 5 months after completing chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin. The condition recurred in a cyclic fashion over the ensuing months. Alopecia is a well-recognized adverse event associated with chemotherapy; however, to our knowledge, this cyclic pattern of alopecia has not been reported in a patient with cancer. Our report of a cancer survivor who experienced cyclic alopecia areata indicates that this condition may be related to autoimmune changes instigated by chemotherapy. Oncology health care practitioners should evaluate unusual clinical cases of alopecia for underlying pathology.
Surgery and chemotherapy are the cornerstones of therapy for advanced ovarian cancer. Further improvement of treatment results can be expected from new drugs that act differently from cisplatin. Paclitaxel is one of those drugs. Evidence from several clinical trials has currently established two roles of paclitaxel: salvage therapy for patients who are clinically platinum resistant and front line therapy in combination with cisplatin in newly diagnosed patients with advanced disease. The efficacy of the paclitaxel dose and schedule used in the GOG trial 111 has not been proven and thus needs further evaluation before it should be used in common practice. Continued clinical research in Germany focuses on several questions including 1) the determination of the relative merits of carboplatin and cisplatin in combination with paclitaxel, and 2) the potential role of paclitaxel/platinum combinations in limited disease patients. Answering these questions may help to develop new meaningful approaches in the treatment of ovarian cancer.
