Carbamazepine (CBZ) is used for the treatment of epilepsy and other neurological and psychiatric disorders. The occurrence of adverse reactions (ADRs) to CBZ can negatively impact the quality of life of patients, as well as increase health-care costs. Thus, knowledge of CBZ-induced ADRs is important to achieve safer treatment outcomes. Areas covered: This review describes the clinical features, known mechanisms, and clinical management of the main CBZ-induced ADRs. In addition, pharmacogenetic studies focused on ADRs induced by CBZ are cited. Expert commentary: CBZ-induced ADRs are well known in the literature. The metabolite CBZ-10,11-epoxide plays an important role in the mechanism that underlies the ADRs induced by CBZ. Several factors should be considered for a safer use of CBZ, such as monotherapy prescription when possible, an adequate dose titration, knowledge of previous ADRs in the patient, and routine monitoring of CBZ plasma concentrations in symptomatic patients. Pharmacogenetics is a potential tool for CBZ therapy improvement, and the design of multicenter studies focused on the identification of biomarkers for CBZ-induced ADRs could provide useful information for a safer CBZ therapy.
Neuropathic pain is a frequent condition that can result from a variety of underlying conditions and is frequently chronic and difficult to treat. A number of drugs are used to treat neuropathic pain, including anticonvulsants and antidepressants. Oxcarbazepine, a recently introduced antiepileptic drug, was found to possess antineuralgic properties in animal models of neuropathic pain. Several double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have evaluated oxcarbazepine in painful diabetic neuropathy and trigeminal neuralgia. There is good evidence that oxcarbazepine is effective in relieving the pain associated with trigeminal neuralgia. Its efficacy in treating painful diabetic neuropathy is less clear; however, it seems to be useful when tolerated at doses of 1800 mg/day.
The success of carbamazepine (CBZ) as a broad-spectrum antiepileptic drug (AED) has led to its use as first-line therapy in children and adults for partial and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. The limitations of CBZ include toxicity in sensitive individuals, autoinduction, which requires dose adjustment when therapy is initiated, and chronic hepatic induction, producing drug interactions when CBZ is used with AEDs and other drugs that undergo hepatic metabolism. One of two main products of CBZ microsomal metabolism, CBZ-10,11-epoxide (formed by oxidation of the double bond between C-10 and C-11), appears to provide antiepileptic efficacy but contributes significantly to clinical toxicity. The most common adverse effects of CBZ are central nervous system (CNS) symptoms, followed by gastrointestinal, hepatic, endocrine disturbances, and teratogenic effects. Oxcarbazepine (OXC) was developed to provide a compound chemically similar enough to CBZ to mimic its efficacy and overall safety while improving its side-effect profile. Biotransformation of OXC does not involve formation of an epoxide metabolite. Compared with the parent compound, hepatic microsomal enzyme induction and autoinduction are greatly reduced. The clinical efficacy of OXC compares favorably with CBZ in clinical trials. Clinical development of OXC began in Europe. Results of Phase I trials started to appear in the early 1980s. Controlled clinical trials, reported in the mid- to late 1980s, led to approval of OXC in many European countries, and now in over 50 nations around the world. United States multicenter clinical trials have recently been completed, and at this writing the drug is awaiting approval by the FDA. This article reviews the pharmacology, animal data, outcomes of published controlled clinical trials, postmarketing data, adverse experiences, and current recommendations for clinical use of OXC.
The tricyclic anticonvulsant carbamazepine is being increasingly used to treat a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders. We review the literature on the drug in neurology, psychiatry, and pharmacology, in order to provide the clinical psychiatrist with a comprehensive reference on carbamazepine pharmacokinetics, toxicity, and drug interactions. We also present an overview of the psychiatric disorders in which carbamazepine has been found, or suggested, to be efficacious.
Thirty pediatric cases of carbamazepine overdoses were reviewed retrospectively for the frequency of toxic effects. Patients were divided into three groups, depending on the type of overdose: acute, acute-on-chronic, and chronic. Effects included lethargy in 93%, ataxia in 50%, nystagmus in 13%, and minor arrhythmias in 10%. Major effects included seizures in 20%, coma in 27%, and need for intubation in 20%. Higher serum carbamazepine levels were associated with these major effects in the acute and acute-on-chronic groups but not in the chronic group. Serum levels greater than 35 mg/L (147 mumol/L), were significantly associated with major toxicities.
Principles of complex mechanisms of action of anticonvulsants including latest reports concerning new antiepileptic drugs (AED) are considered. Different aspects of new anticonvulsant drugs (2nd generation) from preclinical and clinical testing, pharmacokinetics, and mono or combination therapy in children and adults are summarized. In the following condensed synopsis pharmacological and clinical characteristics of gabapentin (GBP), lamotrigine (LTG), levetiracetam (LEV), oxcarbazepine (OXC), pregabalin (PGB) and tiagabine (TGB) as well as topiramate (TPM) and zonisamide (ZNS) are discussed. In addition to the mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetics, interactions, indications and dosages as well as side effects are considered. Important data concerning the effect and tolerability of anticonvulsant drugs can be obtained from controlled studies. In comparison to drugs of the first generation (phenobarbital [PB], primidon [PRD], phenytoin [PHT], carbamazepine [CBZ] and valproic acid [VPA]) the potential for interactions and side effects due to enzyme induction or inhibition is reduced by most of the anticonvulsant drugs of the second generation. New anticonvulsant drugs increase the spectrum of treatment and represent further steps with regard to the optimization of an individual therapy of the epilepsies.
A clinical and pharmacokinetic study was carried out progressively substituting a new anticonvulsant oxcarbazepine for its congener carbamazepine in a group of patients with refractory epilepsy. Although oxcarbazepine showed possible though not statistically significant advantages of better seizure control and was probably less sedating, its use was associated with a dose-dependent reduction in plasma sodium levels in 12 of 15 patients. The mean plasma sodium level fell from 137.5 +/- 5.2 (s.d.) to 128.5 +/- 6.1 mE/l. Imposed restriction of fluid intake may have minimized the degree of hyponatraemia. This adverse effect may limit the role of the drug as an anticonvulsant or necessitate special precautions when it is used. However, the possibility of employing the drug in diabetes insipidus may be worth exploring.
We compared zonisamide monotherapy (12 weeks) to carbamazepine monotherapy (12 weeks) after phenytoin baseline monotherapy (8 weeks) in an open crossover pilot study of eight adults with uncontrolled partial seizures. Zonisamide had definite antiepileptic activity in five subjects. In two of these, response to zonisamide was superior to that to either phenytoin or carbamazepine. A third subject became seizure free on zonisamide, but had to be withdrawn after 18 days because of mild Stevens-Johnson syndrome. The other three subjects were withdrawn from the study because of drug toxicity, manifested mainly by impaired higher mental function and increased seizures. The best response to zonisamide was at doses approximating 6 mg/kg/day, with plasma levels of 20-30 mg/L. Plasma levels of greater than 30 mg/L usually were associated with toxicity. The pharmacokinetics of zonisamide are complex and nonlinear, with steady-state plasma levels being approximately three times higher than those predicted from a single-dose study.
Good evidence now exists for a therapeutic action of carbamazepine (CBZ) both in acute mania and in the prophylaxis of manic depression. Comparison with other existing therapies and incidence of adverse effects in psychiatric patients also deserve more clinical research. This paper reviews these clinical issues and then outlines what is known about the pharmacology of CBZ, in particular comparing it to lithium, the drug with the most similar clinical spectrum of action in psychiatry.
A 33-year-old man with complex partial seizures developed de novo hypertension after the initiation of carbamazepine, which resolved on discontinuation. Although rare, a variety of cardiovascular effects including hypertension have been reported with carbamazepine. Numerous mechanisms may be responsible; however, shared pharmacologic properties with the tricyclic antidepressants are suspect. Hypertension is a rare side effect of carbamazepine.
Diabetes Mellitus was observed in a patient given carbamazepine. The diabetes improved when the treatment was discontinued and worsened on re-introduction.
Pregnancies occurring in women who are epileptic are considered to be high risk. These women are at increased risk of seizures during pregnancy, labor, and delivery and of pregnancy complications and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Pregnancy alters the pharmacokinetics of anticonvulsant drugs, the levels of which decline as pregnancy advances. Not all drugs are altered in a similar manner, however. The rate of congenital malformations in infants of epileptic mothers is 2.4 times higher than in the general population. Malformations occur with all of the commonly used anticonvulsant drugs. The possible mechanisms of teratogenicity include folic acid antagonism, fetal tissue binding, and toxic effects of metabolic intermediates. Therapy with more than one drug increases the risk of congenital malformations. A unique hemorrhagic phenomenon in the infants of epileptic mothers has been reported and appears to be the result of a deficiency of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors. When taken by a pregnant woman, all antiepileptic drugs except valproic acid manifest themselves in breast milk, but only if the infant exhibits evidence of sedation should breastfeeding be discontinued. The dilemma for the physician treating the pregnant epileptic woman is to protect the mother from seizures and the fetus from unnecessary exposure to anticonvulsant medications.
In order to measure the effect of carbamazepine (CBZ) on quantitative EEG (qEEG), one dose of CBZ (300 mg) was administered to 10 epileptics and 10 healthy adult volunteers. EEG samples were recorded before and at regular intervals within 24 hours following administration. The EEG activity was processed by power spectral analysis and the drug serum concentration was assessed concomitantly. The results showed that with the increase of serum concentration of CBZ, the percentage of power progressively increased in the theta band while it decreased in the alpha 2 band. The percentage of theta and alpha 2 power was found to reach maximum and minimum levels, respectively, when the peak values of serum concentration of CBZ were attained. The effects on qEEG in anterior scalp areas were more evident than in posterior scalp areas.
Epilepsy affects individuals of all ages. Regimens of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) and side-effect profiles differ for infants, children, adults, and the elderly. Thus, the epileptologist must be familiar with the specific changes of AED metabolism with age. In general, metabolic rates are fastest in children; therefore, AED half-lives are shortest in this group. Rates of AED elimination are slowest in neonates, infants, and children. Thus, children need larger dosages, on a mg/kg basis, than adults. The usual phenytoin (PHT) dosage in adults is 4-6 mg/kg per day, but children may need a dosage three to five times higher. On the other hand, the PHT dosages in the elderly may need to be 3-4 mg/kg per day to achieve therapeutic levels. Likewise, the half-life of carbamazepine (CBZ) is shortest in children and the elderly. Profiles of metabolites may also be age-specific, a difference of particular importance for valproate (VPA). The relative amount of VPA metabolized to 4-ene is more than twofold less in adults than in children, which may explain the different profile of hepatotoxicity seen by age. The elderly may be more vulnerable to adverse effects of AEDs. Many elderly have neurologic deficits that may render them more vulnerable to neurotoxic effects such as ataxia and cognitive disturbances. Also, low serum albumin concentrations, which result in decreased binding, may mask high serum AED concentrations. The hyponatremia associated with CBZ may be a particular concern in the elderly. Gingival hyperplasia, a concern in children, may not be a problem in the elderly.
Oxcarbazepine (OXC) is one of the preferred drugs for partial seizures and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. However, clinical studies have found that there are considerable differences among different populations in OXC therapeutic efficacy or safety that result from the function changes of metabolic enzymes, transporters and other receptors involved in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in vivo. The authors collected all the information on the clinically reported associations between variants of common genes (e.g., UGT1A9, HLA-B, ABCB1) and OXC. In conclusion, these associations based on variants are beneficial for adjusting the medication regimen, which could be useful for individualized treatment with OXC.
In patients with refractory seizures, substitution of oxcarbazepine (OCBZ) for carbamazepine (CBZ) may be associated with reduced seizure frequency and an improved mental state. The recommended dosage of OCBZ as monotherapy for adults with epilepsy is 600-1,200 mg orally per day but may be higher in patients with refractory seizures and in patients requiring combination therapy. When OCBZ is substituted for ongoing CBZ therapy, it is possible to change the dosage immediately so that the patient finishes treatment with CBZ on one day and starts with a full dosage of OCBZ on the next day, even when the full dosage is 50% greater in milligrams than the corresponding CBZ dosage. Allergic skin reactions are rare, and crossreactivity is seen in about 25% of patients hypersensitive to CBZ. Hyponatremia after the use of OCBZ is usually benign, as long as the acute water intoxication is effectively treated. Because of its pharmacokinetic advantages and efficacy, we believe OCBZ is better than CBZ. We therefore consider OCBZ as the drug of first choice for conditions in which CBZ is currently indicated.
BACKGROUND: There is still uncertainty concerning the risk of fetal malformation associated with the intake of various individual antiepileptic drugs in pregnant women. OBJECTIVE: To assess the better-quality available evidence concerning the fetal hazards from exposure to antiepileptic drug monotherapy during human pregnancy. METHOD: Examination of the available English language literature, particularly that dealing with individual antiepileptic drugs used in monotherapy, in the larger case series with better-quality internal comparison data. CONCLUSIONS: There is reasonable evidence that valproate is a significant teratogen during therapeutic use in women; the other older antiepileptic drugs (phenobarbitone, phenytoin, carbamazepine) probably have some teratogenic potential, but less than valproate; the situation regarding the more recently marketed antiepileptic drugs is not yet clear.
Gas-liquid chromatographic methods for determining plasma concentrations of the anticonvulsant drug carbamazepine are described. The pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine (absorption, protein binding, distribution, metabolism, and elimination) are reviewed, as well as the relationship between dose and plasma level and between plasma level and drug effects. Interactions with other drugs are noted.
The authors present case reports of psychosis and idiopathic precocious puberty (IPP) with tall stature in two 7-year-old boys. Other similarities in the two cases are discussed. Review of the literature revealed only one report regarding the role of accelerated sexual maturation in the clinical picture of psychoses in children and one case report of Pervasive Developmental Disorder and IPP in a 5-year-old girl. Possible mechanisms by which psychosis and IPP with tall stature may be related are discussed.
Convergence spasm has frequently been reported as a hysterical manifestation. A case presenting with this sign and diphenylhydantoin intoxication is described. Other previously reported organic associations are discussed. Convergence spasm may be seen in association with significant organic disease of the nervous system affecting the cerebral hemispheres, the brain-stem, or both.
