Skeletal muscle relaxants are a heterogeneous group of medications used to treat two different types of underlying conditions: spasticity from upper motor neuron syndromes and muscular pain or spasms from peripheral musculoskeletal conditions. Although widely used for these indications, there appear to be gaps in our understanding of the comparative efficacy and safety of different skeletal muscle relaxants. This systematic review summarizes and assesses the evidence for the comparative efficacy and safety of skeletal muscle relaxants for spasticity and musculoskeletal conditions. Randomized trials (for comparative efficacy and adverse events) and observational studies (for adverse events only) that included oral medications classified as skeletal muscle relaxants by the FDA were sought using electronic databases, reference lists, and pharmaceutical company submissions. Searches were performed through January 2003. The validity of each included study was assessed using a data abstraction form and predefined criteria. An overall grade was allocated for the body of evidence for each key question. A total of 101 randomized trials were included in this review. No randomized trial was rated good quality, and there was little evidence of rigorous adverse event assessment in included trials or observational studies. There is fair evidence that baclofen, tizanidine, and dantrolene are effective compared to placebo in patients with spasticity (primarily multiple sclerosis). There is fair evidence that baclofen and tizanidine are roughly equivalent for efficacy in patients with spasticity, but insufficient evidence to determine the efficacy of dantrolene compared to baclofen or tizanidine. There is fair evidence that although the overall rate of adverse effects between tizanidine and baclofen is similar, tizanidine is associated with more dry mouth and baclofen with more weakness. There is fair evidence that cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, and tizanidine are effective compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions (primarily acute back or neck pain). Cyclobenzaprine has been evaluated in the most clinical trials and has consistently been found to be effective. There is very limited or inconsistent data regarding the effectiveness of metaxalone, methocarbamol, chlorzoxazone, baclofen, or dantrolene compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions. There is insufficient evidence to determine the relative efficacy or safety of cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, tizanidine, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and chlorzoxazone. Dantrolene, and to a lesser degree chlorzoxazone, have been associated with rare serious hepatotoxicity.
As the population ages, spine-related pain is increasingly common in older adults. While medications play an important role in pain management, their use has limitations in geriatric patients due to reduced liver and renal function, comorbid medical problems, and polypharmacy. This review will assess the evidence basis for medications used for spine-related pain in older adults, with a focus on drug metabolism and adverse drug reactions. A PubMed/OVID search crossing common spine, neck, and back pain terms with key words for older adults and geriatrics was combined with common drug classes and common drug names and limited to clinical trials and age over 65 years. The results were then reviewed with identification of commonly used drugs and drug categories: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, corticosteroids, gabapentin and pregabalin, antispastic and antispasmodic muscle relaxants, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tramadol, and opioids. Collectively, 138 double-blind, placebo-controlled trials were the focus of the review. The review found a variable contribution of high-quality studies examining the efficacy of medications for spine pain primarily in the geriatric population. There was strong evidence for NSAID use with adjustments for gastrointestinal and renal risk factors. Gabapentin and pregabalin had mixed evidence for neuropathic pain. SNRIs had good evidence for neuropathic pain and a more favorable safety profile than TCAs. Tramadol had some evidence in older patients, but more so in persons aged < 65 years. Rational therapeutic choices based on geriatric spine pain diagnosis are helpful, such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen for arthritic and myofascial-based pain, gabapentinoids or duloxetine for neuropathic and radicular pain, antispastic agents for myofascial-based pain, and combination therapy for mixed etiologies. Tramadol can be well tolerated in older patients, but has risks of cognitive and classic opioid side effects. Otherwise, opioids are typically avoided in the treatment of spine-related pain in older adults due to their morbidity and mortality risk and are reserved for refractory severe pain. Whenever possible, beneficial geriatric spine pain pharmacotherapy should employ the lowest therapeutic doses with consideration of polypharmacy, potentially decreased renal and hepatic metabolism, and co-morbid medical disorders.
Carisoprodol (Soma, others) is a commonly prescribed, noncontrolled, skeletal muscle relaxant whose active metabolite is meprobamate. Patients for whom carisoprodol is prescribed are at risk for meprobamate dependence; several such cases have been reported. Toxicity and withdrawal associated with the use of meprobamate is high and has led to abandonment of this agent in clinical practice. Because carisoprodol possesses the same risks it should be avoided when possible, and it should be given schedule IV controlled substance status.
Pharmacogenomics is a useful tool in clinical toxicology for characterizing many gene polymorphisms associated with different pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of exogenously administered drugs. These genetic variants may determine ranges of variation in such fundamental aspects as drug-metabolizing enzymes, drug transporters, drug receptors, or targets of drug action. Toxicologically significant drugs for which the FDA has required the manufacturer to identify relevant pharmacogenomics markers on the label include carisoprodol, citalopram, codeine, and risperidone. For personalized medicine, combining pharmacogenomics testing with therapeutic drug monitoring may allow the identification of individuals who need lower or higher doses, or even a different drug.
Most muscle cramps are benign, but cramps that occur on exertion or in a patient with abnormal findings on physical examination or electromyography are usually caused by significant systemic disease. The most common systemic causes are metabolic diseases; central or peripheral nervous system diseases are less often responsible. Most systemic diseases that cause muscle cramps are amenable to specific treatment. If symptomatic treatment is desired, the first choice would appear to be stretching. If that is ineffective, carisoprodol (Rela, Soma, Soprodol), vitamin E, or verapamil hydrochloride (Calan, Isoptin) may be used. Quinine sulfate (Quine, Quinamm) is potentially toxic and may not be effective.
Methamphetamine is the most abused drug in Korea followed by cannabis and opiates. Recent characteristics of the drug problem in Korea include increased drug smuggling from abroad, drug trafficking by organized gangs, varieties of drug smuggling, foreigners engaged in drug smuggling, and spread among drug abusers and areas. New drugs such as MDMA, Yaba, and LSD are found in greater proportion in the seizure records, indicating diversification of smuggled drugs in Korea. In addition, there is a growing tendency for the abuse of common medicines among young people in Korea because they are easily available. Methamphetamine is so seriously abused that fatalities from its overdose have occurred; since 1985, 20 such fatalities have been reported. Many deaths from the abuse of noncontrolled substances, especially dextromethorphan, zipeprol, and carisoprodol, which are taken for their hallucinogenic effects, were also reported. Recently, there was even a fatality related to smuggling of cocaine by body-packing.
A critical examination of the literature on centrally acting, orally administered skeletal muscle relaxants (SMRs) is presented. The available comparative clinical studies are reviewed, and the pharmacology, metabolism and adverse effects of the oral SMRs are discussed briefly. The drugs covered are carisoprodol, chlorphenesin carbamate, chlorzoxazone, cyclobenzaprine hydrochloride, diazepam, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and orphenadrine citrate. The mechanism of action of these agents is not well defined, and their effects are measured mainly by subjective responses. Thus, acceptable evidence of efficacy is difficult to obtain, especially if clinical studies continue to be designed inadequately. There are inadequate data to support the superiority of any one drug. Further, unique clinical efficacy of any oral SMR in comparison to nonspecific sedation has not been established. Based on subjective responses, all agents, except diazepam, have been shown to be superior to placebo in acute disorders; cyclobenzaprine has not been evaluated in acute conditions. SMRs are less effective in chronic disorders. Combination muscle relaxant-analgesic products appear to be superior to their individual components, but the relative efficacy of these combination products in comparison to combined use of individual sedative and analgesic agents is unknown.
Combining opioids with benzodiazepines and skeletal muscle relaxants ('The Holy Trinity') has been reported to potentiate the 'high'. Through unique interactions with colocalized mu-opioid and GABA(A) receptors, the combined use of these agents induces a synergistic increase in dopamine in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) and depression of respiration. The inhibition of GABA release mediated by mu(1) -opioid receptor activation results in a subsequent increase in dopamine in the NAc. Benzodiazepines activate the GABA(A) R to suppress respiration in the medullary respiratory centres. The skeletal muscle relaxant, carisoprodol, appears to bind to a unique binding domain within the GABA(A) R to further enhance the respiratory depressant effects of the benzodiazepines. Therefore, the opioids, the benzodiazepines and carisoprodol alone or in combination are capable of inducing respiratory depression. Current guidelines for opioid prescribing recommend against the concomitant use of benzodiazepines but do not recognize the potential risk associated with the addition of skeletal muscle relaxants.
The use of psychoactive prescription drugs (PPDs) by young people is part of a broader worldwide trend towards the consumption of pharmaceuticals to improve social, emotional, and sexual performance. Few studies have examined how young people use PPDs in developing countries, where off-label use is likely to be greater due to weaker market controls. This study presents our findings on PPD use among sex workers in Makassar, Indonesia. We focus on one potent painkiller, Somadril, which is freely available over the counter in pharmacies. The sex workers we studied used most of their earnings to purchase Somadril pills, which they used to feel more confident and to make their work more palatable. This paper also traces the history of the active component in Somadril, carisoprodol. This was developed in the United States, where it was soon used recreationally. We found that knowledge of its effects seeped from health professionals into youth networks, where it was spread by word of mouth. The flow of information on carisoprodol's harmful effects, however, was less evident.
Zolpidem (Ambien) is an imidazopyridine hypnotic recently introduced in the USA. We report a case of a fatal overdose of Ambien. A 68-year-old female ingested at least 30 tablets of 10 mg Ambien (300 mg). She was found dead at home. Toxicological analyses revealed blood concentration of 4.1, 19.3 and 2.3 micrograms/ml of zolpidem, meprobamate and carisoprodol, respectively.
In postmortem toxicology, it is important to know what the usual drug level is in blood under ordinary therapy to make correct interpretations with regard to the possible occurrence of poisoning. A commonly used source is The International Association of Forensic Toxicologists (TIAFT) list of drug concentrations providing therapeutic drug levels, usually measured in serum. In this article, published postmortem-derived blood drug reference concentration intervals were related to therapeutic serum levels of drugs from the TIAFT list to assess agreement or discrepancies with focus on the importance of postmortem redistribution. The ratio between the upper limits was evaluated. This ratio ranged from 0.13 to 11.3 for 57 compounds with a median value of 1.5. For about a third of the compounds the ratio exceeded three. There was a tendency that for highly water-soluble drugs with a low propensity for redistribution, the ratio was generally low. For example, for pentobarbital, carisoprodol, meprobamate, carbamazepine, phenazone and theophylline, the ratio ranged from 0.14 to 1.1 with a median of 0.4. For the 15 antidepressants considered, on the other hand, the ratio was relatively high, ranging from 0.6 to 4.7 (median 2.4). For antipsychotics, the ratio ranged from 0.2 to 11.3 with a median of 1.4. In conclusion, there were generally wide discrepancies between serum-based intervals as presented in the TIAFT list and published postmortem blood-based drug reference intervals. More focus on postmortem-derived intervals is encouraged, so that those that have been estimated are cited in reference publications and so that further intervals are estimated. Ultimately, a reliable database of postmortem blood-based drug reference intervals for use by the forensic community is desirable.
A 57-year-old woman ingested 15 to 17 tablets of carbidopa-levodopa 10/100 tablets (carbidopa 150 mg and levodopa 1,500 mg) along with ibuprofen, carisoprodol, hydrocodone, and acetaminophen. The patient developed choreiform movements that persisted despite obtundation and attempts to extinguish them with naloxone, morphine, and diazepam. When the patient developed a rising level of creatine phosphokinase and myoglobinuria, she was treated with ventilatory support and pancuronium. She required paralysis for 60 hours, when her chorea resolved.
We retrospectively analyzed 56 consecutive cases involving acute skeletal muscle relaxant exposure that were reported to the Poison Control Center over a 1-year period. The age range was 9 mo to 56 years (mean 18.9 +/- 13.1) with the site of exposure being the primary residence in 54 cases (96.4%). The reasons for inquiry to the Poison Center were reported to be intentional suicide in 26 cases (46.4%), accidental in 21 cases (37.5%), with intentional misuses in 5 cases (8.9%). No deaths were reported. Eighteen cases (32.1%) were reported with co-ingestants (average number of substances taken was 2.7 +/- 0.8). Of these cases 3 patients (16.7%) had major effects with life-threatening symptoms with 6 (33.3%) patients having no symptoms. Of the remaining 38 cases, 17 (44.7%) wer cyclobenzaprine, 6 (15.8%) were methocarbamol, 5 (13.2%) were carisoprodol, 5 (13.2%) were chlorzoxazone, 3 (7.89%) were Baclofen and the remainder were either life-threatening symptoms (2.6%), while 29 (74.3%) had no or minor effects with symptoms that subsided. We conclude that morbidity and mortality are low in pure skeletal muscle relaxant ingestion, however it may be increased in multiple ingestions.
This report-the second of a series on codeine and its alternates for pain and cough relief-contains a detailed evaluation of experimental and clinical data on newer substances having analgesic properties comparable to and in approximately the same range as those of codeine. The data are discussed under the headings: analgesic effects in animals; clinical usefulness; side-effects with particular reference to dependence and abuse liability.
BACKGROUND: Fibromyalgia is a chronic widespread pain condition affecting millions of people worldwide. Current pharmacotherapies are often ineffective and poorly tolerated. Combining different agents could provide superior pain relief and possibly also fewer side effects. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of combination pharmacotherapy compared to monotherapy or placebo, or both, for the treatment of fibromyalgia pain in adults. SEARCH METHODS: We searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, and Embase to September 2017. We also searched reference lists of other reviews and trials registries. SELECTION CRITERIA: Double-blind, randomised controlled trials comparing combinations of two or more drugs to placebo or other comparators, or both, for the treatment of fibromyalgia pain. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: From all studies, we extracted data on: participant-reported pain relief of 30% or 50% or greater; patient global impression of clinical change (PGIC) much or very much improved or very much improved; any other pain-related outcome of improvement; withdrawals (lack of efficacy, adverse events), participants experiencing any adverse event, serious adverse events, and specific adverse events (e.g. somnolence and dizziness). The primary comparison was between combination and one or all single-agent comparators. We also assessed the evidence using GRADE and created a 'Summary of findings' table. MAIN RESULTS: We identified 16 studies with 1474 participants. Three studies combined a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) with a benzodiazepine (306 participants); two combined amitriptyline with fluoxetine (89 participants); two combined amitriptyline with a different agent (92 participants); two combined melatonin with an antidepressant (164 participants); one combined carisoprodol, paracetamol (acetaminophen), and caffeine (58 participants); one combined tramadol and paracetamol (acetaminophen) (315 participants); one combined malic acid and magnesium (24 participants); one combined a monoamine oxidase inhibitor with 5-hydroxytryptophan (200 participants); and one combined pregabalin with duloxetine (41 participants). Six studies compared the combination of multiple agents with each component alone and with inactive placebo; three studies compared combination pharmacotherapy with each individual component but did not include an inactive placebo group; two studies compared the combination of two agents with only one of the agents alone; and three studies compared the combination of two or more agents only with inactive placebo.Heterogeneity among studies in terms of class of agents evaluated, specific combinations used, outcomes reported, and doses given prevented any meta-analysis. None of the combinations of drugs found provided sufficient data for analysis compared with placebo or other comparators for our preferred outcomes. We therefore provide a narrative description of results. There was no or inadequate evidence in any comparison for primary and secondary outcomes. Two studies only reported any primary outcomes of interest (patient-reported pain relief of 30%, or 50%, or greater). For each 'Risk of bias' item, only half or fewer of studies had unequivocal low risk of bias. Small size and selective reporting were common as high risk of bias.Our GRADE assessment was therefore very low for primary outcomes of pain relief of 30% or 50% or greater, PGIC much or very much improved or very much improved, any pain-related outcome, participants experiencing any adverse event, any serious adverse event, or withdrawing because of an adverse event.Three studies found some evidence that combination pharmacotherapy reduced pain compared to monotherapy; these trials tested three different combinations: melatonin and amitriptyline, fluoxetine and amitriptyline, and pregabalin and duloxetine. Adverse events experienced by participants were not serious, and where they were reported (in 12 out of 16 studies), all participants experienced them, regardless of treatment. Common adverse events were nausea, dizziness, somnolence, and headache. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There are few, large, high-quality trials comparing combination pharmacotherapy with monotherapy for fibromyalgia, consequently limiting evidence to support or refute the use of combination pharmacotherapy for fibromyalgia.
The effects of carisoprodol and a placebo were compared in a sample of 60 patients with the clinical diagnosis of myofascial pain-dysfunction syndrome using double-blind design. Carisoprodol failed to show a significantly greater effect than the placebo. The side effects were about the same with both agents.
Carisoprodol (Soma) is a noncontrolled, skeletal-muscle relaxant whose active metabolite is meprobamate. Despite previous indications that the drug may be abused, it continues to be widely prescribed for musculoskeletal conditions involving muscle spasm. Presented here are three cases demonstrating patterns of carisoprodol abuse not previously reported. Carisoprodol usage should be limited to short-term treatment. Patients for whom carisoprodol is prescribed are at risk for meprobamate dependence.
OBJECTIVE: To review the current legal status and patterns of abuse of carisoprodol. DATA SOURCES: A literature search was conducted through MEDLINE (1950-August 2010), PubMed (1966-August 2010), EMBASE (1966-August 2010), and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970-August 2010) using the search terms carisoprodol and abuse. In addition, reference citations from publications identified were reviewed. State laws and regulations were accessed through NABPLAW Online (2010) using the search term carisoprodol. Federal proposed rules were accessed through the Federal Register (1995 Volume 59-2010 Volume 75) using the search term carisoprodol. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: State laws and federal proposed rules regarding carisoprodol were examined. Case reports and studies involving carisoprodol abuse were evaluated. DATA SYNTHESIS: Carisoprodol is not federally scheduled under the Controlled Substances Act (CSA). However, carisoprodol is scheduled in 36% (n = 18) of states of the US. The Drug Enforcement Administration issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in the Federal Register on November 17, 2009, to place carisoprodol into schedule IV of the CSA, with a deadline to submit written comments by December 17, 2009. Case reports, retrospective studies, and national reports, including reports from the American Association of Poison Control Centers and results from the Monitoring the Future national survey on drug use, have identified carisoprodol's abuse potential. CONCLUSIONS: Carisoprodol should be placed in schedule IV of the CSA based on its abuse potential and current state laws and regulations. Federally scheduling carisoprodol would lead to uniformity among the states and hopefully assist in preventing prescription drug abuse. Larger, well-designed studies evaluating carisoprodol abuse should be performed.
Large inter-individual variability in drug response and toxicity, as well as in drug concentrations after application of the same dosage, can be of genetic, physiological, pathophysiological, or environmental origin. Absorption, distribution and metabolism of a drug and interactions with its target often are determined by genetic differences. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic variations can appear at the level of drug metabolizing enzymes (e.g., the cytochrome P450 system), drug transporters, drug targets or other biomarker genes. Pharmacogenetics or toxicogenetics can therefore be relevant in forensic toxicology. This review presents relevant aspects together with some examples from daily routines.
