Glioblastoma (GBM) remains an almost universally fatal diagnosis. The current therapeutic mainstay consists of maximal safe surgical resection followed by radiation therapy (RT) with concomitant temozolomide (TMZ), followed by monthly TMZ (the "Stupp regimen"). Several chemotherapeutic agents have been shown to have modest efficacy in the treatment of high-grade glioma (HGG), but blood-brain barrier impermeability remains a major delivery obstacle. Polymeric drug-delivery systems, developed to allow controlled local release of biologically active substances for a variety of conditions, can achieve high local concentrations of active agents while limiting systemic toxicities. Polymerically delivered carmustine (BCNU) wafers, placed on the surface of the tumor-resection cavity, can potentially provide immediate chemotherapy to residual tumor cells during the standard delay between surgery and chemoradiotherapy. BCNU wafer implantation as monochemotherapy (with RT) in newly diagnosed HGG has been investigated in 2 phase III studies that reported significant increases in median overall survival. A number of studies have investigated the tumoricidal synergies of combination chemotherapy with BCNU wafers in newly diagnosed or recurrent HGG, and a primary research focus has been the integration of BCNU wafers into multimodality therapy with the standard Stupp regimen. Overall, the results of these studies have been encouraging in terms of safety and efficacy. However, the data must be qualified by the nature of the studies conducted. Currently, there are no phase III studies of BCNU wafers with the standard Stupp regimen. We review the rationale, biochemistry, pharmacokinetics, and research history (including toxicity profile) of this modality.
Malignant glioma is one of the most challenging central nervous system (CNS) diseases, which is typically associated with high rates of recurrence and mortality. Current surgical debulking combined with radiation or chemotherapy has failed to control tumor progression or improve glioma patient survival. Microbubbles (MBs) originally serve as contrast agents in diagnostic ultrasound but have recently attracted considerable attention for therapeutic application in enhancing blood-tissue permeability for drug delivery. MB-facilitated focused ultrasound (FUS) has already been confirmed to enhance CNS-blood permeability by temporally opening the blood-brain barrier (BBB), thus has potential to enhance delivery of various kinds of therapeutic agents into brain tumors. Here we review the current preclinical studies which demonstrate the reports by using FUS with MB-facilitated drug delivery technology in brain tumor treatment. In addition, we review newly developed multifunctional theranostic MBs for FUS-induced BBB opening for brain tumor therapy.
The 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU; carmustine) polymer wafer (Gliadel) was developed for use in malignant glioma to deliver higher doses of chemotherapy directly to tumor tissue while bypassing systemic side effects. Phase III clinical trials for patients with newly diagnosed malignant gliomas demonstrated a small, but statistically significant, improvement in survival. However, the rate of complications, including an increase in cerebrospinal fluid leaks and intracranial hypertension, has limited their use. This article reviews the current data for use of BCNU wafers in malignant gliomas.
BACKGROUND: To date, there is no standard treatment for recurrent glioblastoma. We analyzed the feasibility of second surgery plus carmustine wafers followed by intravenous fotemustine. METHODS: Retrospectively, we analyzed patients with recurrent glioblastoma treated with this multimodal strategy. RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were analyzed. The median age was 53.6; all patients had KPS between 90 and 100; 19 patients (79%) performed a gross total resection > 98% and 5 (21%) a gross total resection > 90%. The median progression-free survival from second surgery was 6 months (95% CI 3.9-8.05) and the median OS was 14 months (95% CI 11.1-16.8 months). Toxicity was predominantly haematological: 5 patients (21%) experienced grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia and 3 patients (12%) grade 3-4 leukopenia. CONCLUSION: This multimodal strategy may be feasible in patients with recurrent glioblastoma, in particular, for patients in good clinical conditions.
The nitrosourea group of antitumor agents was developed by the Division of Cancer Treatment of the National Cancer Institute. Three nitrosoureas (BCNU, CCNU, MeCCNU) have undergone extensive clinical trials, and two of them (BCNU, CCNU) will soon become commercially available. This paper briefly considers the preclinical development of the nitrosoureas and provides an overview and comparison of the extensive clinical data. Information is given regarding any clinical differences. We discuss general conclusions drawn from the nitrosourea development.
Direct comparisons of theoretical modeling with actual drug delivery can lead to improved brain tumor therapy. In this study, normal and brain tumor-bearing rabbits received infusions of BCNU, or carmustine (1,3-bis [2-chlorethyl]-1-nitrosourea), with ethanol or hyperoxygenated perfluorocarbons as BCNU diluent. When ethanol was used as a diluent, right (infused) hemisphere:left (noninfused) hemisphere ratios of BCNU concentrations in both rabbit groups were markedly lower than had been predicted with theoretical pharmacokinetic modeling. When perfluorocarbons were used as a diluent, ratios of BCNU were significantly improved. These laboratory studies were directly translated into a two-phase protocol for human brain tumor patients. This combined research program demonstrates the successful integration of laboratory and clinical programs.
Clinical data are presented on 14 patients undergoing BCNU therapy for a primary intracranial glioma (11 biopsied, 3 suspected) in whom pulmonary fibrosis developed as a consequence of the therapy. Pulmonary diffusion abnormalities, dry hacking cough, and chest x-ray changes herald the onset of the process. Microscopic evaluation of lung specimens revealed a wide spectrum of change including hyaline membrane formation, alveolar septal thickening, interstitial fibrosis, and granuloma formation. It is concluded that BCNU causes pulmonary fibrosis that is primarily but not necessarily dose-related and may not be reversible.
Glioma is extremely difficult to be completely excised by surgery due to its invasive nature. Thus, chemotherapy still is the mainstay in the treatment of glioma after surgery. However, the natural blood-brain barrier (BBB) greatly restricts the penetration of chemotherapeutic agents into the central nervous system. As a front-line anti-glioma agent in clinical, carmustine (BCNU) exerts antitumor effect by inducing DNA damage at the O(6) position of guanine. However, the therapeutic effect of BCNU was largely decreased because of the drug resistance mediated by O(6)-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase (AGT) and insufficient local drug concentrations. To overcome these obstacles, we synthesized a BCNU-loaded hypoxia-responsive nano-micelle with BBB penetrating capacity and AGT inhibitory activity, named as T80-HA-AZO-BG/BCNU NPs. In this nano-system, Tween 80 (T80) serves as a functional coating on the surface of the micelle, promoting transportation across the BBB. Hyaluronic acid (HA) with active tumor-targeting capability was linked with the hydrophobic O(6)-benzylguanine (BG) analog via a hypoxia-sensitive azo bond. Under hypoxic tumor microenvironment, the azo bond selectively breaks to release O(6)-BG as AGT inhibitor and BCNU as DNA alkylating agent. The synthesized T80-HA-AZO-BG/BCNU NPs showed good stability, favorable biocompatibility and hypoxia-responsive drug-releasing ability. T80 modification improved the transportation of the micelle across an in vitro BBB model. Moreover, T80-HA-AZO-BG/BCNU NPs exhibited significantly enhanced cytotoxicity against glioma cell lines with high AGT expression compared with traditional combined medication of BCNU plus O(6)-BG. We expect that the tumor-targeting nano-micelle designed for chloroethylnitrosourea will provide new tools for the development of effective glioma therapy.
Contemporary treatment of malignant brain tumors has been hampered by problems with drug delivery to the tumor bed. Inherent boundaries of the central nervous system, such as the blood-brain barrier or the blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier, and a general lack of response to many chemotherapeutic agents have led to alternative treatment modalities. In general, all these modalities have sought to either disrupt or bypass the physiologic brain barriers and deliver the drug directly to the tumor. This article reviews past, as well as current, methods of drug delivery to tumors of the central nervous system. Special emphasis is placed on biodegradable polymers that can release chemotherapeutic agents against malignant gliomas. A variety of other nonchemotherapeutic drugs, including antiangiogenesis and immunotherapeutic agents, are presented in the context of new polymer technology. Finally, future directions in drug delivery are discussed with an overview on new advances in emerging biotechnology.
Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas are a heterogeneous group of cutaneous non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. In the United States, the incidence of these diseases is rising faster than any other cancer. Environmental triggers may be important in the evolution of malignancy. Current therapy is reviewed with emphasis on a new retinoid, Targretin.
QUESTION: What is the impact of cytotoxic chemotherapy on disease control and survival in the adult patient with progressive glioblastoma? TARGET POPULATION: This recommendation applies to adults patients with progressive glioblastoma. RECOMMENDATIONS LEVEL II: Temozolomide is recommended as superior to procarbazine in patients with first relapse of glioblastoma after having received nitrosourea chemotherapy or no prior cytotoxic chemotherapy at the time of initial therapy. The use of BCNU-impregnated biodegradable polymer wafers is recommended in the management of progressive glioblastoma as a surgical adjunct when cytoreductive surgery is indicated, taking into account the associated toxicities seen with this modality. LEVEL III: Consideration of a variety of cytotoxic chemotherapy agents of uncertain benefit is recommended in the setting of progressive glioblastoma based on the judgment of the treating physician taking into account the individual patients prior treatment exposure, systemic health, and likelihood of tolerance of the toxicities of any given agent. It is recommended in such cases that enrollment in available clinical trials be encouraged.
Seventy-five previously untreated patients with measurable advanced colorectal cancer were treated with 5 fluorouracil 1,000 mg/m2 as a 24-hour intravenous (i.v.) continuous infusion during days 1-5 and 28-32 every cycle, plus 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU), 200 mg/m2 i.v. bolus on day 1, all given every 8 weeks up to 6 cycles. Median Karnofsky performance status (KPS) was 100. Sites of disease at entry were mainly the abdomen (45%) and liver (33%). All patients were evaluable for response and survival. There were two complete responses and seven partial responses (PR) for an overall response rate of 12% (95% confidence limits: 5-20%). Four out of 25 patients with liver metastases alone had PR. Stabilization was seen in 40 patients (53%). Median time to progression was 9.3 months and overall median survival was 12.5 months, whereas median survival for patients with liver metastases alone was 16 months. Toxicity was mild except for 8% with WHO grade 4 mucositis. Only KPS had statistical significance in the multivariate analysis of prognostic factors. It is concluded that this regimen is relatively active and well tolerated in patients with advanced colorectal cancer.
New approaches to malignant glioma are being actively investigated. Local drug delivery directly to the site of the tumor is one novel approach that has been approved by the US FDA and other regulatory agencies worldwide. This agent, Gliadel, delivers the chemotherapeutic drug carmustine (BCNU) from a biodegradable polymer placed in the resection cavity after brain tumor surgery. Gliadel represents the first clinical application of polymer delivery for brain tumors, but the potential for this new methodology is far greater. In this review, we will briefly summarize the development of Gliadel from a laboratory idea to its current role as an approved treatment for gliomas. Then we will present the most recent work being done to expand the potential benefits of polymeric delivery for brain tumors. This work includes trials for its use as the initial therapy for gliomas, as well as its use against metastasis. Further clinical trials exploring the maximum-tolerated dose and the combination of Gliadel with systemic chemotherapeutic treatments such as temozolamide and O(6)-benzylguanine will be reviewed. Finally, we will present preclinical work on the efficacy of polymeric methods for delivering other chemotherapeutic agents, and a variety of novel compounds that modify brain tumor biology. This latter work represents potential future clinical applications of local polymeric drug delivery to the brain and other sites where cancers can occur.
BACKGROUND: Use of interstitial BCNU wafers in the treatment of malignant glioma is currently a controversial topic among neurosurgeons. Initial clinical studies indicated implantation of BCNU wafers into the postoperative tumor bed to be an acceptably safe, partially effective treatment for glioblastoma multiforme. Yet a more recent study has put the efficacy of this treatment in doubt, and there are potential complications associated with BCNU wafer use. OBJECTIVE: This article presents a review of the information presently available on BCNU wafers-both pro and con-to aid in the clinical decision-making process. The article focuses on studies of clinical efficacy (for initial use as well as in the setting of recurrent tumor), complications associated with BCNU wafers, and the experimental data, particularly related to BCNU penetration into the brain. RESULTS: Animal studies and computer simulations have shown that the depth of penetration of BCNU from wafers is limited. Yet in actual clinical use, the interstitial pressure within the wafer-laden tumor bed might be higher, convective flow greater, and delivery of BCNU to the brain more significant than predicted. CONCLUSION: Based on current information, use of interstitial BCNU wafers continues to be an option for treating malignant glioma. Additional clinical studies of BCNU wafers are currently underway.
Radiotherapy has remained the mainstay of treatment for children with intrinsic, diffuse pontine tumors in spite of over 20 years of clinical trials attempting to validate the additional role of chemotherapy. Conventional phase II clinical trials conducted in patients with recurrent or progressive brainstem gliomas using single chemotherapy agents such as cyclophosphamide, carboplatin, cisplatin, etoposide and thiotepa or combinations of chemotherapy agents have produced low response rates in the range of 15-20%. Preradiotherapy chemotherapy phase II trials in newly diagnosed patients have yielded similar results with a therapeutic window as long as 4 months. Preliminary data from protocols employing high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell support have also met with disappointment. The one published phase III trial conducted by the Children's Cancer Study Group comparing radiotherapy with radiotherapy plus chemotherapy (CCNU, vincristine and prednisone) failed to establish a benefit to multimodality therapy. Current studies include the use of radiosensitizing chemotherapy (carboplatin, estramustine and cisplatin) in newly diagnosed patients and more intensive neoadjuvant chemotherapy trials. Major advances in our management await insights into molecular vulnerability of high-grade gliomas.
We report the recent isolation of Cryptococcus laurentii from the feces of a patient with Hodgkin's lymphoma who underwent autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT). The organism was identified using microscopic morphology, cultural characteristics, and biochemical tests including sugar assimilation. Minimum inhibitory concentration of various antifungals was determined by microbroth dilution method. The recovery of pure culture of C. laurentii from stool culture, and the patient's response to treatment with voriconazole support its potential etiological role. To the best of our knowledge, we report the first case of diarrhea caused by C. laurentii in an HSCT recipient.
This paper reports the development of three-dimensional simulations to study the effect of various factors on the delivery of 1-3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU) to brain tumors. The study yields information on the efficacy of various delivery methods, and the optimal location of polymer implantation. Two types of drug deliveries, namely, systemic administration and controlled release from polymers, were simulated using fluid dynamics analysis package (FIDAP) to predict the temporal and spatial variation of drug distribution. Polymer-based delivery provides higher mean concentration, longer BCNU exposure time and reduced systemic toxicity than bolus injection. Polymer implanted in the core gives higher concentration of drug in both the core and viable zone than the polymer in the viable zone case. The penetration depth of BCNU is very short. This is because BCNU can get drained out of the system before diffusing to any appreciable distance. Since transvascular permeation is the dominant means of BCNU delivery, the interstitial convection has minor effect because of the extremely small transvascular Peclet number. The reaction of BCNU with brain tissues reduces the drug concentration in all regions and its effect increases with rate constant. The implantation of BCNU/ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer (EVAc) matrix at the lumen of the viable zone immediately following the surgical removal of 80% of the tumor may be an effective treatment for the chemotherapy of brain tumors. The present study provides a quantitative examination on the working principle of Gliadel wafer for the treatment of brain tumors.
Irreversible and progressive renal parenchymal damage and functional impairment occurred in the majority of patients receiving at least six courses (200 mg/m2 of BCNU and/or methyl CCNU at eight-week intervals) of nitrosoureas for therapy of malignant brain tumors. Seventeen of 18 patients who received at least six courses and all nine patients who received more than ten courses developed impaired renal function as judged by elevation of blood urea nitrogen and/or serum creatinine or decrease in filtration rate as determined by inulin clearance. Four patients have developed uremia. Renal tissue obtained from seven patients demonstrated tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis and glomerular sclerosis. This remarkably high incidence of renal damage occurred without a phase of acute renal failure and in the absence of significant urinary abnormalities, while producing an insidiously progressive interstitial renal lesion.
