L-Carnitine is an endogenous molecule involved in fatty acid metabolism, biosynthesized within the human body using amino acids: L-lysine and L-methionine, as substrates. L-Carnitine can also be found in many foods, but red meats, such as beef and lamb, are the best choices for adding carnitine into the diet. Good carnitine sources also include fish, poultry and milk. Essentially, L-carnitine transports the chains of fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix, thus allowing the cells to break down fat and get energy from the stored fat reserves. Recent studies have started to shed light on the beneficial effects of L-carnitine when used in various clinical therapies. Because L-carnitine and its esters help reduce oxidative stress, they have been proposed as a treatment for many conditions, i.e. heart failure, angina and weight loss. For other conditions, such as fatigue or improving exercise performance, L-carnitine appears safe but does not seem to have a significant effect. The presented review of the literature suggests that continued studies are required before L-carnitine administration could be recommended as a routine procedure in the noted disorders. Further research is warranted in order to evaluate the biochemical, pharmacological, and physiological determinants of the response to carnitine supplementation, as well as to determine the potential benefits of carnitine supplements in selected categories of individuals who do not have fatty acid oxidation defects.
l-Carnitine is an amino acid derivative widely known for its involvement in the transport of long-chain fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix, where fatty acid oxidation occurs. Moreover, l-Carnitine protects the cell from acyl-CoA accretion through the generation of acylcarnitines. Circulating carnitine is mainly supplied by animal-based food products and to a lesser extent by endogenous biosynthesis in the liver and kidney. Human muscle contains high amounts of carnitine but it depends on the uptake of this compound from the bloodstream, due to muscle inability to synthesize carnitine. Mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation represents an important energy source for muscle metabolism particularly during physical exercise. However, especially during high-intensity exercise, this process seems to be limited by the mitochondrial availability of free l-carnitine. Hence, fatty acid oxidation rapidly declines, increasing exercise intensity from moderate to high. Considering the important role of fatty acids in muscle bioenergetics, and the limiting effect of free carnitine in fatty acid oxidation during endurance exercise, l-carnitine supplementation has been hypothesized to improve exercise performance. So far, the question of the role of l-carnitine supplementation on muscle performance has not definitively been clarified. Differences in exercise intensity, training or conditioning of the subjects, amount of l-carnitine administered, route and timing of administration relative to the exercise led to different experimental results. In this review, we will describe the role of l-carnitine in muscle energetics and the main causes that led to conflicting data on the use of l-carnitine as a supplement.
Acylcarnitines are fatty acid metabolites that play important roles in many cellular energy metabolism pathways. They have historically been used as important diagnostic markers for inborn errors of fatty acid oxidation and are being intensively studied as markers of energy metabolism, deficits in mitochondrial and peroxisomal beta -oxidation activity, insulin resistance, and physical activity. Acylcarnitines are increasingly being identified as important indicators in metabolic studies of many diseases, including metabolic disorders, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, depression, neurologic disorders, and certain cancers. The US Food and Drug Administration-approved drug L-carnitine, along with short-chain acylcarnitines (acetylcarnitine and propionylcarnitine), is now widely used as a dietary supplement. In light of their growing importance, we have undertaken an extensive review of acylcarnitines and provided a detailed description of their identity, nomenclature, classification, biochemistry, pathophysiology, supplementary use, potential drug targets, and clinical trials. We also summarize these updates in the Human Metabolome Database, which now includes information on the structures, chemical formulae, chemical/spectral properties, descriptions, and pathways for 1240 acylcarnitines. This work lays a solid foundation for identifying, characterizing, and understanding acylcarnitines in human biosamples. We also discuss the emerging opportunities for using acylcarnitines as biomarkers and as dietary interventions or supplements for many wide-ranging indications. The opportunity to identify new drug targets involved in controlling acylcarnitine levels is also discussed. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This review provides a comprehensive overview of acylcarnitines, including their nomenclature, structure and biochemistry, and use as disease biomarkers and pharmaceutical agents. We present updated information contained in the Human Metabolome Database website as well as substantial mapping of the known biochemical pathways associated with acylcarnitines, thereby providing a strong foundation for further clarification of their physiological roles.
l-Carnitine (l-C) and any of its forms (glycine-propionyl l-Carnitine (GPL-C) or l-Carnitine l-tartrate (l-CLT)) has been frequently recommended as a supplement to improve sports performance due to, among others, its role in fat metabolism and in maintaining the mitochondrial acetyl-CoA/CoA ratio. The main aim of the present systematic review was to determine the effects of oral l-C supplementation on moderate- (50-79% V O(2 max)) and high-intensity (>/=80% V O(2 max)) exercise performance and to show the effective doses and ideal timing of its intake. A structured search was performed according to the PRISMA((R)) statement and the PICOS guidelines in the Web of Science (WOS) and Scopus databases, including selected data obtained up to 24 October 2021. The search included studies where l-C or glycine-propionyl l-Carnitine (GPL-C) supplementation was compared with a placebo in an identical situation and tested its effects on high and/or low-moderate performance. The trials that used the supplementation of l-C together with additional supplements were eliminated. There were no applied filters on physical fitness level, race, or age of the participants. The methodological quality of studies was evaluated by the McMaster Critical Review Form. Of the 220 articles obtained, 11 were finally included in this systematic review. Six studies used l-C, while three studies used l-CLT, and two others combined the molecule propionyl l-Carnitine (PL-C) with GPL-C. Five studies analyzed chronic supplementation (4-24 weeks) and six studies used an acute administration (<7 days). The administration doses in this chronic supplementation varied from 1 to 3 g/day; in acute supplementation, oral l-C supplementation doses ranged from 3 to 4 g. On the one hand, the effects of oral l-C supplementation on high-intensity exercise performance variables were analyzed in nine studies. Four of them measured the effects of chronic supplementation (lower rating of perceived exertion (RPE) after 30 min at 80% V O(2 max) on cycle ergometer and higher work capacity in "all-out" tests, peak power in a Wingate test, and the number of repetitions and volume lifted in leg press exercises), and five studies analyzed the effects of acute supplementation (lower RPE after graded exercise test on the treadmill until exhaustion and higher peak and average power in the Wingate cycle ergometer test). On the other hand, the effects of l-C supplementation on moderate exercise performance variables were observed in six studies. Out of those, three measured the effect of an acute supplementation, and three described the effect of a chronic supplementation, but no significant improvements on performance were found. In summary, l-C supplementation with 3 to 4 g ingested between 60 and 90 min before testing or 2 to 2.72 g/day for 9 to 24 weeks improved high-intensity exercise performance. However, chronic or acute l-C or GPL-C supplementation did not present improvements on moderate exercise performance.
BACKGROUND: L-carnitine (LC) is used as a supplement by recreationally-active, competitive and highly trained athletes. This systematic review aims to evaluate the effect of prolonged LC supplementation on metabolism and metabolic modifications. METHODS: A literature search was conducted in the MEDLINE (via PubMed) and Web of Science databases from the inception up February 2020. Eligibility criteria included studies on healthy human subjects, treated for at least 12 weeks with LC administered orally, with no drugs or any other multi-ingredient supplements co-ingestion. RESULTS: The initial search retrieved 1024 articles, and a total of 11 studies were finally included after applying inclusion and exclusion criteria. All the selected studies were conducted with healthy human subjects, with supplemented dose ranging from 1 g to 4 g per day for either 12 or 24 weeks. LC supplementation, in combination with carbohydrates (CHO) effectively elevated total carnitine content in skeletal muscle. Twenty-four-weeks of LC supplementation did not affect muscle strength in healthy aged women, but significantly increased muscle mass, improved physical effort tolerance and cognitive function in centenarians. LC supplementation was also noted to induce an increase of fasting plasma trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) levels, which was not associated with modification of determined inflammatory nor oxidative stress markers. CONCLUSION: Prolonged LC supplementation in specific conditions may affect physical performance. On the other hand, LC supplementation elevates fasting plasma TMAO, compound supposed to be pro-atherogenic. Therefore, additional studies focusing on long-term supplementation and its longitudinal effect on the cardiovascular system are needed.
Carnitines are quaternary amines involved in various cellular processes such as fatty acid uptake, beta-oxidation and glucose metabolism regulation. Due to their neurotrophic activities, their integrative use has been studied in several different physio-pathological conditions such as anorexia nervosa, chronic fatigue, vascular diseases, Alzheimer's disease and male infertility. Being metabolically active, carnitines have also been proposed to treat reproductive impairment such as functional hypothalamic amenorrhea (FHA) and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) since they improve both hormonal and metabolic parameters modulating the neuroendocrine impairments of FHA. Moreover, they are capable of improving the lipid profile and the insulin sensitivity in patients with PCOS.
This short paper summarizes the current understanding regarding carnitine and gut bacteria which will provide new clues to uncover the background of multifactorial diseases such as cardiovascular disorders (CVD). Carnitine is a quaternary ammonium compound biosynthesized from phosphatidylcholine and the amino acids lysine and methionine (Fig. 3, Ref. 12).
L-carnitine plays an essential role in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids by catalyzing their transport into the mitochondrial matrix. The kidney maintains plasma free L-carnitine levels in the homeostatic range by selective saturable tubular reabsorption. The preferential retention of free L-carnitine over acyl-L-carnitines by the kidney is lost in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Loss of renal parenchyma as a site of carnitine synthesis, as well as nonselective clearance of L-carnitine by the dialysis procedure lead to dialysis-related carnitine deficiency. Numerous studies investigating whether L-carnitine supplementation will alleviate several dialysis-related symptoms, such as intradialytic hypotension, heart failure, muscle weakness, low exercise capacity, and anemia, have reported conflicting results. Many of these studies suffer from a lack of randomization and control groups, heterogeneity in the administration of L-carnitine, and nonstandardized measures of symptom improvement. More data exist to support the use of L-carnitine in selected anemic dialysis patients with very large erythropoietin requirements in whom extensive examination for reversible causes of anemia was unrevealing.
Following the discovery that administration of intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) may reverse the cardiac and neurological toxicity of certain local anesthetic agents, ILE's potential role has recently been explored in the setting of toxicity attributed to a variety of different drugs. The potential mechanisms, safety and efficacy of this approach are considered in this review. Data are reviewed from 76 published reports involving ILE administration for severe drug toxicity, including 55 where toxicity was due to nonanesthetic agents. ILE was reported to exert a positive therapeutic effect in only a proportion of the reported cases, with greatest evidence of efficacy concerning local anesthetic agents. Administration has typically involved bolus administration followed by continuous maintenance infusion, and a number of different mechanisms are proposed, from preferential partitioning of the drug from cardiac tissue to the circulating lipid fraction and direct inotropic effects related to carnitine pathways and fatty acid oxidative metabolism. No major adverse effects have been encountered, but too few data exist to adequately address the safety profile of ILE.
Propionyl-L-carnitine (PLC) may improve exercise performance in patients with peripheral artery disease, but results from clinical trials have been inconsistent. The safety and efficacy of PLC for treatment of claudication was evaluated by a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials for which data were available through September 2010. Eighty-five studies were identified, of which 13 were randomized controlled trials. Owing to database availability for the six phase III studies carried out with PLC (1 g orally, twice daily), a patient-level meta-analysis was conducted as the primary analysis. Treadmill performance data from these six studies were harmonized to peak walking distance (PWD) on a 7% grade at a speed of 3 km/hour. PLC (n = 440) was associated with a net 16 meter improvement (95% CI, 8-20 meters) in PWD as compared with placebo (n = 427) in the primary analysis (p = 0.002). The effect of PLC was similar in subpopulations defined using clinical and demographic variables, with possible enhanced benefit in patients engaged in an exercise program or enrolled at study sites in Russia. The systematic review of the effect of PLCs on claudication identified seven additional randomized controlled trials for a total of 13 trials, which included 681 patients on placebo and 672 on PLC. This meta-analysis confirmed a 45 meter net improvement on PLC using a random-effects model. In conclusion, oral PLC is associated with a statistically significant increase in PWD in patients with claudication, which may be clinically relevant.
PURPOSE: L-carnitine supplementation has been recommended to improve cardiometabolic health markers in diabetic patients. Our purpose was to assess the dose-dependent effects of l-carnitine supplementation on cardiometabolic risk factors in patients with type 2 diabetes. METHODS: PubMed/Medline, Scopus, and Web of Science were searched until May 2022 for randomized controlled trials that examined the impact of l-carnitine supplementation on cardiometabolic risk factors in adults with type 2 diabetes. The mean difference (MD) and its 95% confidence interval (CI) were estimated utilizing a random-effects model. Nonlinear dose-response associations were modeled with restricted cubic splines. The certainty of evidence was rated using the GRADE approach. FINDINGS: Twenty-one randomized trials with 2041 patients with type 2 diabetes were included. We found that every 1 g/d supplementation with l-carnitine significantly reduced body mass index (MD: -0.37 kg/m(2), 95% CI: -0.59, -0.15; I(2) =93%, n=13, GRADE=low), HbA(1c) (MD: -0.16%, 95% CI: -0.32, -0.01; I(2) = 94%, n = 18, GRADE = moderate), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (MD: -0.11 mmol/L, 95% CI: -0.16, -0.05; I(2) = 91%, n = 11, GRADE = high). There were also reductions in serum triglycerides (MD: 0.07 mmol/L), total cholesterol (MD: -0.13 mmol/L), and fasting plasma glucose (MD: -0.17 mmol/L). A U-shaped effect was demonstrated for body mass index, with the largest reduction at 2 g/d. A linear reduction was seen for serum triglycerides, total cholesterol, and fasting plasma glucose up to l-carnitine supplementation of 4 g/d. IMPLICATIONS: L-carnitine supplementation resulted in a small reduction in serum lipids and plasma glucose in patients with type 2 diabetes. However, due to high statistical heterogeneity, the results should be interpreted very cautiously.
References are not cited within this report. However, they are included in the supplement to this issue of the American Journal of Kidney Diseases, which contains reports regarding each topic that was considered by the panel. These recommendations are not intended to be guidelines or standards of care. Instead, they have been developed to provide the best available information and expert opinion in decision-making for the clinician. The recommendations should not be considered as prescribing an exclusive course of management.
Reduction of A. muciniphila relative abundance in the gut microbiota is a widely accepted signature associated with obesity-related metabolic disorders. Using untargeted metabolomics profiling of fasting plasma, our study aimed at identifying metabolic signatures associated with beneficial properties of alive and pasteurized A. muciniphila when administrated to a cohort of insulin-resistant individuals with metabolic syndrome. Our data highlighted either shared or specific alterations in the metabolome according to the form of A. muciniphila administered with respect to a control group. Common responses encompassed modulation of amino acid metabolism, characterized by reduced levels of arginine and alanine, alongside several intermediates of tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, and glutathione metabolism. The global increase in levels of acylcarnitines together with specific modulation of acetoacetate also suggested induction of ketogenesis through enhanced beta-oxidation. Moreover, our data pinpointed some metabolites of interest considering their emergence as substantial compounds pertaining to health and diseases in the more recent literature.
L-Carnitine is a naturally occurring compound that facilitates the transport of fatty acids into mitochondria for beta-oxidation. Exogenous L-carnitine is used clinically for the treatment of carnitine deficiency disorders and a range of other conditions. In humans, the endogenous carnitine pool, which comprises free L-carnitine and a range of short-, medium- and long-chain esters, is maintained by absorption of L-carnitine from dietary sources, biosynthesis within the body and extensive renal tubular reabsorption from glomerular filtrate. In addition, carrier-mediated transport ensures high tissue-to-plasma concentration ratios in tissues that depend critically on fatty acid oxidation. The absorption of L-carnitine after oral administration occurs partly via carrier-mediated transport and partly by passive diffusion. After oral doses of 1-6g, the absolute bioavailability is 5-18%. In contrast, the bioavailability of dietary L-carnitine may be as high as 75%. Therefore, pharmacological or supplemental doses of L-carnitine are absorbed less efficiently than the relatively smaller amounts present within a normal diet.L-Carnitine and its short-chain esters do not bind to plasma proteins and, although blood cells contain L-carnitine, the rate of distribution between erythrocytes and plasma is extremely slow in whole blood. After intravenous administration, the initial distribution volume of L-carnitine is typically about 0.2-0.3 L/kg, which corresponds to extracellular fluid volume. There are at least three distinct pharmacokinetic compartments for L-carnitine, with the slowest equilibrating pool comprising skeletal and cardiac muscle.L-Carnitine is eliminated from the body mainly via urinary excretion. Under baseline conditions, the renal clearance of L-carnitine (1-3 mL/min) is substantially less than glomerular filtration rate (GFR), indicating extensive (98-99%) tubular reabsorption. The threshold concentration for tubular reabsorption (above which the fractional reabsorption begins to decline) is about 40-60 micromol/L, which is similar to the endogenous plasma L-carnitine level. Therefore, the renal clearance of L-carnitine increases after exogenous administration, approaching GFR after high intravenous doses. Patients with primary carnitine deficiency display alterations in the renal handling of L-carnitine and/or the transport of the compound into muscle tissue. Similarly, many forms of secondary carnitine deficiency, including some drug-induced disorders, arise from impaired renal tubular reabsorption. Patients with end-stage renal disease undergoing dialysis can develop a secondary carnitine deficiency due to the unrestricted loss of L-carnitine through the dialyser, and L-carnitine has been used for treatment of some patients during long-term haemodialysis. Recent studies have started to shed light on the pharmacokinetics of L-carnitine when used in haemodialysis patients.
Although carnitine levels and carnitine therapy have been extensively studied in dialysis patients, the pathophysiology of L-carnitine is poorly understood. The usual therapeutic dose is 20-30 mg/kg, resulting in dramatic increases of circulating levels above the normal values. Guided by studies on its lipidic effect and by our experience of its action on haematocrit, we propose the use of 2-3 mg/kg of L-carnitine in future prospective studies.
While the increased rates of survival in childhood cancers have increased progressively in recent decades, many childhood cancer survivors will have at least one chronic health condition within 40 years of age. In this regard, cardiovascular complications have emerged as a leading cause of long-term morbidity and mortality in long-term survivors of childhood cancer, likely due to exposure to anthracycline chemotherapy, and outcomes in patients with anthracycline-related cardiomyopathy remain poor. Some progress has been made in understanding the mechanisms at the basis of anthracycline-related cardiomyopathy, which appear to involve generation of reactive oxygen species, leading to mitochondrial dysfunction, followed by myocyte apoptosis and maladaptive left ventricular remodeling. Even if several guidelines currently exist for monitoring cancer patients treated with cardiotoxic therapies who are at high risk for heart failure, much work remains to be done in finding reliable markers for screening for cardiac dysfunction. Studies from our group have identified alterations in L-carnitine in cancer survivors. While additional investigations are needed, preliminary studies suggest a role for carnitine in primary prevention (during treatment) and secondary prevention (to improve function after treatment).
Approximately 20%-30% of epilepsy patient do not respond adequately to drug treatment. In this population, a dietary treatment has been posed as a therapeutic alternative or coadjuvant tool. This present work has aimed to carry out a review on the dietary alternatives currently available to treat epilepsy (ketogenic diet, Atkins' diet, etc.). The ketogenic diet has been used and studied the most in this neurological disorder. That is why it is also the one that has undergone the greatest change. Furthermore, this diet has caused the most controversy about its action mechanism, efficacy and adverse effects as well as about what would be the best protocol to carry it out. Many observational studies and reviews on this subject that support the beneficial effect of the ketogenic diet have been conducted. However, controlled, randomized clinical trials with larger population samples are needed to confirm these results in order to achieve an optimum and individualized dietary treatment in refractory epilepsy.
Intradialytic hypotension is common complication in stage 5 chronic kidney disease patients on hemodialysis. Incidence ranges from 15 to 30%. These patients have levocarnitine deficiency. A randomized, placebo-controlled quadruple-blinded trial was designed to demonstrate the levocarnitine efficiency on intradialytic hypotension prevention. Patients were randomized into four groups, to receive levocarnitine or placebo. During the intervention period, levocarnitine and placebo was administered 0 and 30 min before each hemodialysis session, respectively. During the trial, 33 patients received 1188 hemodialysis sessions. We identified 239 (21.3%) intradialytic hypotension episodes. The intradialytic hypotension episodes were less frequent in the levocarnitine group (9.3%, 60 IH events) (P < 0.001). Hemodialysis is frequently perplexed by intradialytic hypotension episodes. Levocarnitine supplementation before each hemodialysis session efficiently diminishes the intradialytic hypotension episodes. This is a new application method that must be considered and explored.
The analysis of published data relating to the use in sports practice metabolic non-doping agent--L-carnitine. The review discusses some aspects of the mechanism of its action on the human body. The information is given about the role of carnitine in the energy processes, mechanisms of carnitine deficiency. On the basis of the literature is given scientific rationale for applying this metabolite in athletes, particularly with cardiovascular and immune disorders.
