Portal hypertension (PH) is the most common complication ofcirrhosis and represents the main driver of hepatic decompensation. The overarching goal of PH treatments in patients with compensated cirrhosis is to reduce the risk of hepatic decompensation (i.e development of ascites, variceal bleeding and/or hepatic encephalopathy). In decompensated patients, PH-directed therapies aim at avoiding further decompensation (i.e. recurrent/refractory ascites, variceal rebleeding, recurrent encephalopathy, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis or hepatorenal syndrome) and at improving survival. Carvedilol is a non-selective beta-blocker (NSBB) acting on hyperdynamic circulation/splanchnic vasodilation and on intrahepatic resistance. It has shown superior efficacy than traditional NSBBs in lowering PH in patients with cirrhosis and may be, therefore, the NSBB of choice for the treatment of clinically significant portal hypertension. In primary prophylaxis of variceal bleeding, carvedilol has been demonstrated to be more effective than endoscopic variceal ligation (EVL). In patients with compensated cirrhosis carvedilol achieves higher rate of hemodynamic response than propranolol, resulting in a decreased risk of hepatic decompensation. In secondary prophylaxis, the combination of EVL with carvedilol may prevent rebleeding and non-bleeding further decompensation better than that with propranolol. In patients with ascites and gastroesophageal varices, carvedilol is safe and may improve survival, as long as no impairment of the systemic hemodynamic or renal dysfunction occurs, with maintained arterial blood pressure as suitable safety surrogate. The target dose of carvedilol to treat PH should be 12.5 mg/day. This review summarizes the evidence behind Baveno-VII recommendations on the use of carvedilol in patients with cirrhosis.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Whether non-selective beta-blockers can prevent decompensation of cirrhosis warrants clarification. Carvedilol might be particularly effective since its intrinsic vasodilatory activity may ameliorate hepatic vascular resistance, a major mechanism of portal hypertension in early cirrhosis. We assessed whether carvedilol may prevent decompensation and improve survival in patients with compensated cirrhosis and clinically significant portal hypertension (CSPH). METHODS: By systematic review we identified randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) comparing carvedilol vs. control therapy (no-active treatment or endoscopic variceal ligation [EVL]) in patients with cirrhosis and CSPH without previous bleeding. We performed a competing-risk time-to-event meta-analysis using individual patient data (IPD) obtained from principal investigators of RCTs. Only compensated patients were included. Primary outcomes were prevention of decompensation (liver transplantation and death were competing events) and death (liver transplantation was a competing event). Models were adjusted using propensity scores for baseline covariates with the inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) approach. RESULTS: Among 125 full-text studies evaluated, 4 RCTs were eligible. The 4 provided IPD and were included, comprising 352 patients with compensated cirrhosis, 181 treated with carvedilol and 171 controls (79 received EVL and 92 placebo). Baseline characteristics were similar between groups. Standardized differences were <10% by IPTW. The risk of developing decompensation of cirrhosis was lower with carvedilol than in controls (subdistribution hazard ratio [SHR] 0.506; 95% CI 0.289-0.887; p = 0.017; I(2) = 0.0%, Q-statistic-p = 0.880), mainly due to a reduced risk of ascites (SHR 0.491; 95% CI 0.247-0.974; p = 0.042; I(2) = 0.0%, Q-statistic-p = 0.384). The risk of death was also lower with carvedilol (SHR 0.417; 95% CI 0.194-0.896; p = 0.025; I(2) = 0.0%, Q-statistic-p = 0.989). CONCLUSIONS: Long-term carvedilol therapy reduced decompensation of cirrhosis and significantly improved survival in compensated patients with CSPH. This suggests that screening patients with compensated cirrhosis for CSPH to enable the prompt initiation of carvedilol could improve outcomes. PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42019144786. LAY SUMMARY: The transition from compensated cirrhosis to decompensated cirrhosis is associated with markedly reduced life expectancy. Therefore, preventing decompensation in patients with compensated cirrhosis would be associated with greatly improved patient outcomes. There has been controversy regarding the use of non-selective beta-blockers (portal pressure-lowering medications) in patients with cirrhosis and elevated portal blood pressure (portal hypertension). Herein, using a competing-risk meta-analysis to optimize sample size and properly investigate cirrhosis as a multistate disease and outcomes as time-dependent events, we show that carvedilol (a non-selective beta-blocker) is associated with a reduced risk of decompensating events and improved survival in patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
BACKGROUND: The beneficial effects of beta-blockers on long-term outcome after acute myocardial infarction were shown before the introduction of thrombolysis and angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. Generally, the patients recruited to these trials were at low risk: few had heart failure, and none had measurements of left-ventricular function taken. We investigated the long-term efficacy of carvedilol on morbidity and mortality in patients with left-ventricular dysfunction after acute myocardial infarction treated according to current evidence-based practice. METHODS: In a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled trial, 1959 patients with a proven acute myocardial infarction and a left-ventricular ejection fraction of </=40% were randomly assigned 6.25 mg carvedilol (n=975) or placebo (n=984). Study medication was progressively increased to a maximum of 25 mg twice daily during the next 4-6 weeks, and patients were followed up until the requisite number of primary endpoints had occurred. The primary endpoint was all-cause mortality or hospital admission for cardiovascular problems. Analysis was by intention to treat. FINDINGS: Although there was no difference between the carvedilol and placebo groups in the number of patients with the primary endpoint (340 [35%] vs 367 [37%], hazard ratio 0.92 [95% CI 0.80-1.07]), all-cause mortality alone was lower in the carvedilol group than in the placebo group (116 [12%] vs 151 [15%], 0.77 [0.60-0.98], p=0.03). Cardiovascular mortality, non-fatal myocardial infarctions, and all-cause mortality or non-fatal myocardial infarction were also lower on carvedilol than on placebo. INTERPRETATION: In patients treated long-term after an acute myocardial infarction complicated by left-ventricular systolic dysfunction, carvedilol reduced the frequency of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality, and recurrent, non-fatal myocardial infarctions. These beneficial effects are additional to those of evidence-based treatments for acute myocardial infarction including ACE inhibitors.
A 62-year-old woman with chronic kidney disease stage 4, sleep apnoea on continuous positive airway pressure and recent admission for acute-on-chronic diastolic heart failure presented to emergency room with weakness. She was hypotensive and had symptomatic bradycardia in the 30 s secondary to hyperkalaemia and beta-blockers, raising concern for BRASH syndrome. Antihypertensives were immediately held. Potassium-lowering agents (with calcium gluconate for cardiac stability) were begun, as were fluids and dopamine for vasopressor support. The patient was admitted to intensive care unit and electrophysiology was consulted. Over the next 2 days, the patient clinically improved: she remained off dopamine for over 24 hours; potassium levels and renal function improved; and heart rate stabilised in 60 s. The patient was eventually discharged and advised to avoid metolazone, bumetanide and carvedilol, with primary care provider and cardiology follow-up.
BACKGROUND: Non-selective beta-blockers are recommended for the prevention of bleeding in people with cirrhosis, portal hypertension and gastroesophageal varices. Carvedilol is a non-selective beta-blocker with additional intrinsic alpha(1)-blocking effects, which may be superior to traditional, non-selective beta-blockers in reducing portal pressure and, therefore, in reducing the risk of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. OBJECTIVES: To assess the beneficial and harmful effects of carvedilol compared with traditional, non-selective beta-blockers for adults with cirrhosis and gastroesophageal varices. SEARCH METHODS: We combined searches in the Cochrane Hepato-Biliary's Controlled Trials Register, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, Embase, LILACS, and Science Citation Index with manual searches. The last search update was 08 May 2018. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised clinical trials comparing carvedilol versus traditional, non-selective beta-blockers, irrespective of publication status, blinding, or language. We included trials evaluating both primary and secondary prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in adults with cirrhosis and verified gastroesophageal varices. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three review authors (AZ, RJ and LH), independently extracted data. The primary outcome measures were mortality, upper gastrointestinal bleeding and serious adverse events. We undertook meta-analyses and presented results using risk ratios (RR) or mean differences (MD), both with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and I(2) values as a marker of heterogeneity. We assessed bias control using the Cochrane Hepato-Biliary domains and the quality of the evidence with GRADE. MAIN RESULTS: Eleven trials fulfilled our inclusion criteria. One trial did not report clinical outcomes. We included the remaining 10 randomised clinical trials, involving 810 participants with cirrhosis and oesophageal varices, in our analyses. The intervention comparisons were carvedilol versus propranolol (nine trials), or nadolol (one trial). Six trials were of short duration (mean 6 (range 1 to 12) weeks), while four were of longer duration (13.5 (6 to 30) months). Three trials evaluated primary prevention; three evaluated secondary prevention; while four evaluated both primary and secondary prevention. We classified all trials as at 'high risk of bias'. We gathered mortality data from seven trials involving 507 participants; no events occurred in four of these. Sixteen of 254 participants receiving carvedilol and 19 of 253 participants receiving propranolol or nadolol died (RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.48 to 1.53; I(2) = 0%, low-quality evidence). There appeared to be no differences between carvedilol versus traditional, non-selective beta-blockers and the risks of upper gastrointestinal bleeding (RR 0.77, 95% CI 0.43 to 1.37; 810 participants; 10 trials; I(2) = 45%, very low-quality evidence) and serious adverse events (RR 0.97, 95% CI 0.67 to 1.42; 810 participants; 10 trials; I(2) = 14%, low-quality evidence). Significantly more deaths, episodes of upper gastrointestinal bleeding and serious adverse events occurred in the long-term trials but there was not enough information to determine whether there were differences between carvedilol and traditional, non-selective beta-blockers, by trial duration. There was also insufficient information to detect differences in the effects of these interventions in trials evaluating primary or secondary prevention. There appeared to be no differences in the risk of non-serious adverse events between carvedilol versus its comparators (RR 0.55, 95% CI 0.23 to 1.29; 596 participants; 6 trials; I(2) = 88%; very low-quality evidence). Use of carvedilol was associated with a greater reduction in hepatic venous pressure gradient than traditional, non-selective beta-blockers both in absolute (MD -1.75 mmHg, 95% CI -2.60 to -0.89; 368 participants; 6 trials; I(2) = 0%; low-quality evidence) and percentage terms (MD -8.02%, 95% CI -11.49% to -4.55%; 368 participants; 6 trials; I(2) = 0%; low-quality evidence). However, we did not observe a concomitant reduction in the number of participants who failed to achieve a sufficient haemodynamic response (RR 0.76, 95% CI 0.57 to 1.02; 368 participants; 6 trials; I(2) = 42%; very low-quality evidence) or in clinical outcomes. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found no clear beneficial or harmful effects of carvedilol versus traditional, non-selective beta-blockers on mortality, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, serious or non-serious adverse events despite the fact that carvedilol was more effective at reducing the hepatic venous pressure gradient. However, the evidence was of low or very low quality, and hence the findings are uncertain. Additional evidence is required from adequately powered, long-term, double-blind, randomised clinical trials, which evaluate both clinical and haemodynamic outcomes.
Carvedilol has been identified as a promising agent for the treatment of liver fibrosis. Meanwhile, autophagy and apoptosis have been reported to play key roles in the activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), which can contribute to the progression of liver fibrosis. However, the effects of carvedilol on autophagy and apoptosis in HSCs remain unclear. Our study aimed to detect these effects and identify the underlying mechanisms by which carvedilol mediates HSC autophagy and apoptosis. For this purpose, the LX-2 cell line was used in this study, and the cells were exposed to various concentrations of carvedilol for specific times. First, we found that carvedilol increased autophagic marker levels, the number of GFP-LC3-containing puncta and LC3B-II levels in LX-2 cells. Interestingly, the addition of chloroquine (CQ) failed to enhance the effects on GFP-LC3 puncta and LC3B-II levels, and carvedilol treatment resulted in a significant increase in p62 protein levels. Moreover, carvedilol treatment led to the accumulation of yellow dots only in GFP-RFP-LC3-LX-2 cells, similar to the results following CQ treatment, indicating that carvedilol inhibited autophagic flux. Next, we found evidence that carvedilol inhibited autophagic flux by increasing lysosomal pH and not by impairing the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes. Moreover, carvedilol substantially reduced the viability of LX-2 cells and noticeably induced cell apoptosis, as observed by flow cytometry. In addition, increased levels of cleaved caspase-3, cleaved caspase-8 and cleaved PARP, increased Bax activity and decreased Bcl-2 expression were detected in LX-2 cells. Finally, the carvedilol treatment inhibited autophagy and subsequently induced apoptosis in vitro. In conclusion, carvedilol suppresses autophagy and promotes apoptosis in HSCs and the late-stage inhibition of autophagy preceded the induction of apoptosis.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Carvedilol induces stronger decreases in hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) than conventional nonselective beta-blockers (ie, propranolol). Limited data exist on the efficacy of carvedilol in secondary prophylaxis of variceal bleeding. METHODS: Patients undergoing paired HVPG measurements for guiding secondary prophylaxis with either carvedilol or propranolol were included in this retrospective analysis. All patients also underwent band ligation. Changes in HVPG and systemic hemodynamics were compared between the 2 groups. Long-term follow-up data on rebleeding, acute kidney injury, nonbleeding decompensation, and liver-related death were analyzed applying competing risk regression. RESULTS: Eighty-seven patients (carvedilol/propranolol, n = 45/42) were included in our study. The median baseline HVPG was 21 mm Hg (interquartile range, 18-24 mm Hg), and 39.1%/48.3%/12.6% had Child-Turcotte-Pugh A/B/C cirrhosis, respectively. Upon nonselective beta-blocker initiation, HVPG decreased more strongly in carvedilol users (median relative decrease, -20% [interquartile range: -29% to -10%] vs -11% [-22% to -5%] for propranolol; P = .027), who also achieved chronic HVPG response more often (53.3% vs 28.6%; P = .034). Cumulative incidences for rebleeding (Gray test, P = .027) and liver-related death (P = .036) were significantly lower in patients taking carvedilol compared with propranolol. Notably, ascites development/worsening also was observed less commonly in carvedilol patients (P = .012). Meanwhile, acute kidney injury rates did not differ between the 2 groups (P = .255). Stratifying patients by HVPG response status yielded similar results. The prognostic value of carvedilol intake was confirmed in competing risk regression models. CONCLUSIONS: Carvedilol induces more marked reductions in HVPG than propranolol in secondary prophylaxis of variceal bleeding, and thus is associated with lower rates of rebleeding, liver-related death, and further nonbleeding decompensation.
BACKGROUND: Despite its recommendation by the current guidelines, the role of long-term oral beta-blocker therapy has never been evaluated by randomized trials in uncomplicated ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) patients without heart failure, left ventricular dysfunction or ventricular arrhythmia who underwent primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). METHODS AND RESULTS: In a multi-center, open-label, randomized controlled trial, STEMI patients with successful primary PCI within 24 hours from the onset and with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) >/=40% were randomly assigned in a 1-to-1 fashion either to the carvedilol group or to the no beta-blocker group within 7 days after primary PCI. The primary endpoint is a composite of all-cause death, myocardial infarction, hospitalization for heart failure, and hospitalization for acute coronary syndrome. Between August 2010 and May 2014, 801 patients were randomly assigned to the carvedilol group (N = 399) or the no beta-blocker group (N = 402) at 67 centers in Japan. The carvedilol dose was up-titrated from 3.4+/-2.1 mg at baseline to 6.3+/-4.3 mg at 1-year. During median follow-up of 3.9 years with 96.4% follow-up, the cumulative 3-year incidences of both the primary endpoint and any coronary revascularization were not significantly different between the carvedilol and no beta-blocker groups (6.8% and 7.9%, P = 0.20, and 20.3% and 17.7%, P = 0.65, respectively). There also was no significant difference in LVEF at 1-year between the 2 groups (60.9+/-8.4% and 59.6+/-8.8%, P = 0.06). CONCLUSION: Long-term carvedilol therapy added on the contemporary evidence-based medications did not seem beneficial in selected STEMI patients treated with primary PCI. TRIAL REGISTRATION: CAPITAL-RCT (Carvedilol Post-Intervention Long-Term Administration in Large-scale Randomized Controlled Trial) ClinicalTrials.gov.number, NCT 01155635.
BACKGROUND: Hypercontractility and arrhythmia are key pathophysiologic features of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), the most common inherited heart disease. beta-Adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta-blockers) are the first-line therapy for HCM. However, beta-blockers commonly selected for this disease are often poorly tolerated in patients, where heart-rate reduction and noncardiac effects can lead to reduced cardiac output and fatigue. Mavacamten, myosin ATPase inhibitor recently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration, has demonstrated the ability to ameliorate hypercontractility without lowering heart rate, but its benefits are so far limited to patients with left ventricular (LV) outflow tract obstruction, and its effect on arrhythmia is unknown. METHODS: We screened 21 beta-blockers for their impact on myocyte contractility and evaluated the antiarrhythmic properties of the most promising drug in a ventricular myocyte arrhythmia model. We then examined its in vivo effect on LV function by hemodynamic pressure-volume loop analysis. The efficacy of the drug was tested in vitro and in vivo compared with current therapeutic options (metoprolol, verapamil, and mavacamten) for HCM in an established mouse model of HCM (Myh6(R403Q)(/+) and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes from patients with HCM (MYH7(R403Q/+)). RESULTS: We identified that carvedilol, a beta-blocker not commonly used in HCM, suppresses contractile function and arrhythmia by inhibiting RyR2 (ryanodine receptor type 2). Unlike metoprolol (a beta(1)-blocker), carvedilol markedly reduced LV contractility through RyR2 inhibition, while maintaining stroke volume through alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor inhibition in vivo. Clinically available carvedilol is a racemic mixture, and the R-enantiomer, devoid of beta-blocking effect, retains the ability to inhibit both alpha(1)-receptor and RyR2, thereby suppressing contractile function and arrhythmias without lowering heart rate and cardiac output. In Myh6(R403Q/+) mice, R-carvedilol normalized hyperdynamic contraction, suppressed arrhythmia, and increased cardiac output better than metoprolol, verapamil, and mavacamten. The ability of R-carvedilol to suppress contractile function was well retained in MYH7(R403Q/+) iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. CONCLUSIONS: R-enantiomer carvedilol attenuates hyperdynamic contraction, suppresses arrhythmia, and at the same time, improves cardiac output without lowering heart rate by dual blockade of alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor and RyR2 in mouse and human models of HCM. This combination of therapeutic effects is unique among current therapeutic options for HCM and may particularly benefit patients without LV outflow tract obstruction.
Cocaine is one of the most commonly used substances of abuse. The use of beta-blockers in cocaine induced acute coronary syndrome has long been a matter of debate. While it is widely believed that beta-blockers are contraindicated in cocaine toxicity, there appears to be some recognizable role for certain beta-blockers in ameliorating the cardiovascular as well as central nervous system effects of cocaine. This article explores the role of beta-blockers in the management of cocaine toxicity.
Virus infection may induce excessive interferon (IFN) responses that can lead to host tissue injury or even death. beta-arrestin 2 regulates multiple cellular events through the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling pathways. Here we demonstrate that beta-arrestin 2 also promotes virus-induced production of IFN-beta and clearance of viruses in macrophages. beta-arrestin 2 interacts with cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) and increases the binding of dsDNA to cGAS to enhance cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) production and the downstream stimulator of interferon genes (STING) and innate immune responses. Mechanistically, deacetylation of beta-arrestin 2 at Lys171 facilitates the activation of the cGAS-STING signaling and the production of IFN-beta. In vitro, viral infection induces the degradation of beta-arrestin 2 to facilitate immune evasion, while a beta-blocker, carvedilol, rescues beta-arrestin 2 expression to maintain the antiviral immune response. Our results thus identify a viral immune-evasion pathway via the degradation of beta-arrestin 2, and also hint that carvedilol, approved for treating heart failure, can potentially be repurposed as an antiviral drug candidate.
OBJECTIVES: Beta-blockers and endoscopic variceal band ligation (VBL) have been preferred therapies for primary prophylaxis of variceal bleeding. However, the choice of therapy in patients with advanced liver disease with high-risk varices is not clear. A comparison of these therapies alone or in combination to prevent the first variceal bleed in advanced cirrhosis patients was carried out. DESIGN: 330 Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) B and C cirrhosis patients, with 'high-risk' varices were prospectively enrolled (n=110 per group) to receive carvedilol (group A), VBL (group B) or combination (group C). Primary endpoint was reduction in the incidence of first variceal bleed at 12 months. The secondary endpoints included overall mortality, bleed-related mortality, new-onset decompensation, change in hepatic vein pressure gradient (HVPG) and treatment-related adverse events. RESULTS: The patients were predominantly males (85.2%), aged 51.4+/-10.5 years with CTP score of 8.87+/-1.24, MELD score 15.17+/-3.35 and HVPG-16.96+/-3.57 mm Hg. The overall incidence of variceal bleed was 23.8% (n=78) at 1 year. Intention-to-treat analysis showed that the combination arm (group C) significantly reduced the incidence of first variceal bleed by 62.9% as compared with group B (HR 0.37, 95% CI 0.192 to 0.716, p<0.003) and by 69.3% as compared with group A (HR 0.31, 95% CI 0.163 to 0.578, <0.001). The overall mortality was 13.6% (45/330). The 1-year mortality in group C was lowest among the three groups (A, B, C=20%, 14.5%, 6.3%, p=0.012). Reduction in HVPG (20.8% vs 25.1%, p=0.54) and the rate of non-response to carvedilol (53.4% vs 41.25%, p=0.154) were not different between group A and C patients. The incidence of new-onset ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, shock, and acute kidney injury and postbleed organ failure was also comparable between the groups. CONCLUSION: In CTP B and C cirrhosis patients with high-risk varices, combination of carvedilol and VBL is more effective than either therapy alone, for primary prevention of variceal bleeding. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT03069339.
Although well established in treating hypertension and cardiovascular (CV) disease, clinical trial data suggest that beta-blockers (eg, atenolol) may be less effective than other antihypertensive classes in reducing stroke and CV mortality despite similar blood pressure (BP) reductions. One possible explanation is that atenolol is less effective in reducing central aortic pressure. Newer vasodilating beta-blockers may prove more effective in reducing central pressure and cardiovascular events. Carvedilol and labetalol appear to cause vasodilation through alpha(1)-receptor blockade; nebivolol induces endothelium-dependent vasodilation by stimulating nitric oxide bioactivity. Their favorable hemodynamic profile includes reduction of peripheral vascular resistance (PVR) while maintaining or improving cardiac output (CO), stroke volume, and left ventricular function, whereas nonvasodilating beta-blockers tend to raise PVR and reduce CO and left ventricular function. Compared with conventional beta-blockers, vasodilating beta-blockers have beneficial hemodynamic effects including decreased pressure wave reflection from the periphery, leading to decreases in central aortic blood pressure. Larger trials are needed to determine whether reduced central pressure will translate into improved CV outcomes compared with nonvasodilating beta-blockers.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed at assessing the role of beta-blockers on preventing anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity in adults. METHODS: A systematic review was performed on electronic databases, including relevant studies that analysed beta-blockers as cardioprotective agents before the use of anthracyclines by adult oncologic patients. RESULTS: After application of eligibility and selection criteria, eight articles were considered as high quality, complying with the proposed theme; all eight clinical trials, four of them placebo-controlled, with a total number of 655 patients included. From this sample, 281 (42.9%) used beta-blocker as intervention, and carvedilol was the most frequent (167 patients - 25.5%). Six studies were considered positive regarding the cardioprotection role played by beta-blockers, although only four demonstrated significant difference on left ventricle ejection fraction after chemotherapy on groups that used beta-blockers compared to control groups. Carvedilol and nebivolol, but not metoprolol, had positive results regarding cardioprotection. Other beta-blockers were not analysed in the selected studies. CONCLUSIONS: Despite the potential cardioprotective effect of beta-blockers, as demonstrated in small and unicentric clinical trials, its routine use on prevention of anthracycline-associated cardiotoxicity demands greater scientific evidence.
A 25-year-old woman with left ventricular (LV) dysfunction became pregnant during the diagnostic period. Decompensated heart failure with frequent ventricular arrhythmias necessitated hospitalization in the 21st week of pregnancy. Under careful monitoring, diuretics and sotalol were added to her ongoing treatment of carvedilol and spironolactone due to the risk of hemodynamic collapse. An emergency cesarean section was performed in the 32nd week after the detection of rapid nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. Subsequent genetic testing revealed that the LV dysfunction was associated with Danon cardiomyopathy. This case highlights the importance of careful pregnancy management with LV dysfunction along with early genetic testing.
BACKGROUND: Anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity has a variable incidence, and the development of left ventricular dysfunction is preceded by elevations in cardiac troponin concentrations. Beta-adrenergic receptor blocker and renin-angiotensin system inhibitor therapies have been associated with modest cardioprotective effects in unselected patients receiving anthracycline chemotherapy. METHODS: In a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end-point trial, patients with breast cancer and non-Hodgkin lymphoma receiving anthracycline chemotherapy underwent serial high-sensitivity cardiac troponin testing and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging before and 6 months after anthracycline treatment. Patients at high risk of cardiotoxicity (cardiac troponin I concentrations in the upper tertile during chemotherapy) were randomized to standard care plus cardioprotection (combination carvedilol and candesartan therapy) or standard care alone. The primary outcome was adjusted change in left ventricular ejection fraction at 6 months. In low-risk nonrandomized patients with cardiac troponin I concentrations in the lower 2 tertiles, we hypothesized the absence of a 6-month change in left ventricular ejection fraction and tested for equivalence of +/-2%. RESULTS: Between October 2017 and June 2021, 175 patients (mean age, 53 years; 87% female; 71% with breast cancer) were recruited. Patients randomized to cardioprotection (n=29) or standard care (n=28) had left ventricular ejection fractions of 69.4+/-7.4% and 69.1+/-6.1% at baseline and 65.7+/-6.6% and 64.9+/-5.9% 6 months after completion of chemotherapy, respectively. After adjustment for age, pretreatment left ventricular ejection fraction, and planned anthracycline dose, the estimated mean difference in 6-month left ventricular ejection fraction between the cardioprotection and standard care groups was -0.37% (95% CI, -3.59% to 2.85%; P=0.82). In low-risk nonrandomized patients, baseline and 6-month left ventricular ejection fractions were 69.3+/-5.7% and 66.4+/-6.3%, respectively: estimated mean difference, 2.87% (95% CI, 1.63%-4.10%; P=0.92, not equivalent). CONCLUSIONS: Combination candesartan and carvedilol therapy had no demonstrable cardioprotective effect in patients receiving anthracycline-based chemotherapy with high-risk on-treatment cardiac troponin I concentrations. Low-risk nonrandomized patients had similar declines in left ventricular ejection fraction, bringing into question the utility of routine cardiac troponin monitoring. Furthermore, the modest declines in left ventricular ejection fraction suggest that the value and clinical impact of early cardioprotection therapy need to be better defined in patients receiving high-dose anthracycline. REGISTRATION: URL: https://doi.org; Unique identifier: 10.1186/ISRCTN24439460. URL: https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/ctr-search/search; Unique identifier: 2017-000896-99.
Chronic heart failure (CHF) is common, and increases in incidence and prevalence with age. There are compelling data demonstrating reduced mortality and hospitalizations with adrenergic blockade in older patients with CHF. Despite this, many older patients remain undertreated. The aim of the present article is to review the potential mechanisms of the benefits of adrenergic blockade in CHF and the clinical data available from the large randomized studies, focusing particularly on older patients.
Carvedilol is among the most effective beta-blockers for improving survival after myocardial infarction. Yet the mechanisms by which carvedilol achieves this superior clinical profile are still unclear. Beyond blockade of beta(1)-adrenoceptors, arrestin-biased signalling via beta(2)-adrenoceptors is a molecular mechanism proposed to explain the survival benefits. Here, we offer an alternative mechanism to rationalize carvedilol's cellular signalling. Using primary and immortalized cells genome-edited by CRISPR/Cas9 to lack either G proteins or arrestins; and combining biological, biochemical, and signalling assays with molecular dynamics simulations, we demonstrate that G proteins drive all detectable carvedilol signalling through beta(2)ARs. Because a clear understanding of how drugs act is imperative to data interpretation in basic and clinical research, to the stratification of clinical trials or to the monitoring of drug effects on the target pathway, the mechanistic insight gained here provides a foundation for the rational development of signalling prototypes that target the beta-adrenoceptor system.
Most studies assessing the effects of beta-blockers were carried out with traditional, beta(1)-selective beta-blockers, such as metoprolol and atenolol. Pathophysiologic and pharmacologic studies have documented that not all beta-blockers are created equal. In particular, the pharmacologic and clinical profiles of the newer, vasodilating beta-blockers, such as carvedilol, have been shown to differ from those of the traditional beta-blockers. These differences, although relevant in the younger patient with hypertension, are particularly important in elderly patients in whom traditional beta-blockers may not be as effective or as well tolerated as the newer vasodilating agents.
