Acute otitis media (AOM) is the most common diagnosis in childhood acute sick visits. By three years of age, 50% to 85% of children will have at least one episode of AOM. Symptoms may include ear pain (rubbing, tugging, or holding the ear may be a sign of pain), fever, irritability, otorrhea, anorexia, and sometimes vomiting or lethargy. AOM is diagnosed in symptomatic children with moderate to severe bulging of the tympanic membrane or new-onset otorrhea not caused by acute otitis externa, and in children with mild bulging and either recent-onset ear pain (less than 48 hours) or intense erythema of the tympanic membrane. Treatment includes pain management plus observation or antibiotics, depending on the patient's age, severity of symptoms, and whether the AOM is unilateral or bilateral. When antibiotics are used, high-dose amoxicillin (80 to 90 mg per kg per day in two divided doses) is first-line therapy unless the patient has taken amoxicillin for AOM in the previous 30 days or has concomitant purulent conjunctivitis; amoxicillin/clavulanate is typically used in this case. Cefdinir or azithromycin should be the first-line antibiotic in those with penicillin allergy based on risk of cephalosporin allergy. Tympanostomy tubes should be considered in children with three or more episodes of AOM within six months or four episodes within one year with one episode in the preceding six months. Pneumococcal and influenza vaccines and exclusive breastfeeding until at least six months of age can reduce the risk of AOM.
BACKGROUND: Community-acquired pneumonia is an important cause of morbidity in developed countries and an important cause of morbidity and mortality in developing countries. Prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment are very important. OBJECTIVE: To provide an update on the evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of community-acquired pneumonia in children. METHODS: A PubMed search was completed in Clinical Queries using the key term "communityacquired pneumonia". The search strategy included meta-analyses, randomized controlled trials, clinical trials, observational studies, and reviews. Patents were searched using the key term "community-acquired pneumonia" from www.google.com/patents, http://espacenet.com, and www. freepatentsonline.com. RESULTS: Generally, viruses, notably respiratory syncytial virus, are the most common cause of community- acquired pneumonia in children younger than 5 years. Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common bacterial cause across all age groups. Other important bacterial causes in children younger than 5 years include Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, and Moraxella catarrhalis. In children 5 years or older, in addition to S. pneumoniae, other important bacterial causes include Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydophila pneumonia. In the majority of cases, bacterial and viral pneumonia cannot be reliably distinguished from each other on clinical grounds. In practice, most children with pneumonia are treated empirically with antibiotics; the choice of which depends on the patient's age and most likely pathogen. Recent patents related to the management of community-acquired pneumonia are discussed. CONCLUSION: In previously healthy children under the age of 5 years, high dose amoxicillin is the treatment of choice. For those with type 1 hypersensitivity to penicillin, clindamycin, azithromycin, clarithromycin, and levofloxacin are reasonable alternatives. For children with a non-type 1 hypersensitivity to penicillin, cephalosporins such as cefixime, cefprozil, cefdinir, cefpodoxime, and cefuroxime should be considered. In previously healthy children over the age of 5 years, macrolides such as azithromycin and clarithromycin are the drugs of choice.
Acute otitis media (AOM) is diagnosed based on visualization of a full or bulging tympanic membrane with middle ear effusion. The distribution of bacteria causing AOM in North America under the influence of pneumococcal conjugate vaccination and antibiotic selection pressure has resulted in a predominance of beta-lactamase-producing Haemophilus influenzae followed by penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae. Although guidelines continue to endorse amoxicillin as the preferred treatment, amoxicillin/clavulanate in high dosage would be the preferred treatment based on the otopathogen mix currently. Antibiotic prophylaxis has fallen into disfavor as a preventative strategy for AOM recurrences.
Urinary tract infections are the most common bacterial infections in women. Most urinary tract infections are acute uncomplicated cystitis. Identifiers of acute uncomplicated cystitis are frequency and dysuria in an immunocompetent woman of childbearing age who has no comorbidities or urologic abnormalities. Physical examination is typically normal or positive for suprapubic tenderness. A urinalysis, but not urine culture, is recommended in making the diagnosis. Guidelines recommend three options for first-line treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis: fosfomycin, nitrofurantoin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (in regions where the prevalence of Escherichia coli resistance does not exceed 20 percent). Beta-lactam antibiotics, amoxicillin/clavulanate, cefaclor, cefdinir, and cefpodoxime are not recommended for initial treatment because of concerns about resistance. Urine cultures are recommended in women with suspected pyelonephritis, women with symptoms that do not resolve or that recur within two to four weeks after completing treatment, and women who present with atypical symptoms.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of the study was to compare the antibiotic treatment failure and recurrence rates between antibiotic agents (amoxicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanate, cefdinir, and azithromycin) for children with uncomplicated acute otitis media (AOM). STUDY DESIGN: We completed a retrospective cohort study of children 6 months-12 years of age with uncomplicated AOM identified in a nationwide claims database. The primary exposure was the antibiotic agent, and the primary outcomes were treatment failure and recurrence. Logistic regression was used to estimate ORs, and analyses were stratified by primary exposure, patient age, and antibiotic duration. RESULTS: Among the 1 051 007 children included in the analysis, 56.6% were prescribed amoxicillin, 13.5% were prescribed amoxicillin-clavulanate, 20.6% were prescribed cefdinir, and 9.3% were prescribed azithromycin. Most prescriptions (93%) were for 10 days, and 98% were filled within 1 day of the medical encounter. Treatment failure and recurrence occurred in 2.2% (95% CI: 2.1, 2.2) and 3.3% (3.2, 3.3) of children, respectively. Combined failure and recurrence rates were low for all agents including amoxicillin (1.7%; 1.7, 1.8), amoxicillin-clavulanate (11.3%; 11.1, 11.5), cefdinir (10.0%; 9.8, 10.1), and azithromycin (9.8%; 9.6, 10.0). CONCLUSIONS: Despite microbiologic changes in AOM etiology, treatment failure and recurrence were uncommon for all antibiotic agents and were lower for amoxicillin than for other agents. These findings support the continued use of amoxicillin as a first-line agent for AOM when antibiotics are prescribed.
Cefdinir is a third-generation oral cephalosporin antibiotic. Nomenclature, formulae, elemental analysis, and appearance of the drug are mentioned. The uses and applications and the several methods described for its preparation of the drug are outlined. The profile contains the physical characteristics including: pKa value, solubility, X-ray powder diffraction, melting point, and differential scanning calorimetry. The ultraviolet spectrum, vibrational spectrum, nuclear magnetic resonance ((1)H and (13)C NMR) spectra and the mass spectrum and fragmentation patterns of cefdinir together with the corresponding figures and/or tables are all produced. This profile includes the monographs of the Japanese pharmacopeia and the United States pharmacopeia. The several reported analytical methods that had been reported of the analysis of cefdinir include: spectrophotometric, polarographic, voltammetric, and chromatographic methods. The pharmacokinetics and stability of the drug are also provided. About 80 references are listed at end of this comprehensive profile.
BACKGROUND: Acute otitis media (AOM) is the inflammation of the middle ear. It constitutes one of the most frequent infections which affects children and usually occurs between 6 to 24 months of age. AOM can emerge due to viruses and/or bacteria. The aim of the current systematic review is to assess in children between 6 months and 12 years of age with AOM, the efficacy of any antimicrobial agent or placebo compared with amoxicillinclavulanate, to measure the resolution of AOM or symptoms. METHODS: The medical databases PubMed (MEDLINE) and Web of Science were used. Data extraction and analysis were performed by two independent reviewers. Eligibility criteria were set, and only randomised control trials (RCTs) were included. Critical appraisal of the eligible studies was performed. Pooled analysis was conducted using the Review Manager v. 5.4.1 software (RevMan). RESULTS: Twelve RCTs were totally included. Three (25.0%) RCTs studied the impact of azithromycin, two (16.7%) investigated the impact of cefdinir, two (16.7%) investigated placebo, three (25.0%) studied quinolones, one (8.3%) investigated cefaclor and one (8.3%) studied penicillin V, compared to amoxicillin-clavulanate. In five (41.7%) RCTs, amoxicillin-clavulanate proved to be superior to azithromycin, cefdinir, placebo, cefaclor and penicillin V, while in seven (58.3%) RCTs its efficacy was comparable with other antimicrobials or placebo. The rates of AOM relapse after treatment with amoxicillin-clavulanate were comparable to those of other antimicrobials or placebo. However, amoxicillin-clavulanate was more effective in eradicating Streptococcus pneumoniae from the culture, when compared to cefdinir. The results of the meta-analysis were not evaluated due to substantial heterogeneity between studies. CONCLUSIONS: Amoxicillin-clavulanate should be the treatment of choice for children between 6 months and 12 years of age with AOM.
Treatment guidelines developed by the Sinus and Allergy Health Partnership for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis (ABRS) were originally published in 2000. These guidelines were designed to: (1) educate clinicians and patients (or patients' families) about the differences between viral and bacterial rhinosinusitis; (2) reduce the use of antibiotics for nonbacterial nasal/sinus disease; (3) provide recommendations for the diagnosis and optimal treatment of ABRS; (4) promote the use of appropriate antibiotic therapy when bacterial infection is likely; and (5) describe the current understanding of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics and how they relate to the effectiveness of antimicrobial therapy. The original guidelines are updated here to include the most recent information on management principles, antimicrobial susceptibility patterns, and therapeutic options. BURDEN OF DISEASE: An estimated 20 million cases of ABRS occur annually in the United States. According to National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) data, sinusitis is the fifth most common diagnosis for which an antibiotic is prescribed. Sinusitis accounted for 9% and 21% of all pediatric and adult antibiotic prescriptions, respectively, written in 2002. The primary diagnosis of sinusitis results in expenditures of approximately $3.5 billion per year in the United States. DEFINITION AND DIAGNOSIS OF ABRS: ABRS is most often preceded by a viral upper respiratory tract infection (URI). Allergy, trauma, dental infection, or other factors that lead to inflammation of the nose and paranasal sinuses may also predispose individuals to developing ABRS. Patients with a "common cold" (viral URI) usually report some combination of the following symptoms: sneezing, rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, hyposmia/anosmia, facial pressure, postnasal drip, sore throat, cough, ear fullness, fever, and myalgia. A change in the color or the characteristic of the nasal discharge is not a specific sign of a bacterial infection. Bacterial superinfection may occur at any time during the course of a viral URI. The risk that bacterial superinfection has occurred is greater if the illness is still present after 10 days. Because there may be cases that fall out of the "norm" of this typical progression, practicing clinicians need to rely on their clinical judgment when using these guidelines. In general, however, a diagnosis of ABRS may be made in adults or children with symptoms of a viral URI that have not improved after 10 days or worsen after 5 to 7 days. There may be some or all of the following signs and symptoms: nasal drainage, nasal congestion, facial pressure/pain (especially when unilateral and focused in the region of a particular sinus), postnasal drainage, hyposmia/anosmia, fever, cough, fatigue, maxillary dental pain, and ear pressure/fullness. Physical examination provides limited information in the diagnosis of ABRS. While sometimes helpful, plain film radiographs, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging scans are not necessary for cases of ABRS. MICROBIOLOGY OF ABRS: The most common bacterial species isolated from the maxillary sinuses of patients with ABRS are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis, the latter being more common in children. Other streptococcal species, anaerobic bacteria and Staphylococcus aureus cause a small percentage of cases. BACTERIAL RESISTANCE IN ABRS: The increasing prevalence of penicillin nonsusceptibility and resistance to other drug classes among S pneumoniae has been a problem in the United States, with 15% being penicillin-intermediate and 25% being penicillin-resistant in recent studies. Resistance to macrolides and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) is also common in S pneumoniae. The prevalence of beta-lactamase-producing isolates of H influenzae is approximately 30%, while essentially all M catarrhalis isolates produce beta-lactamases. Resistance of H influenzae to TMP/SMX is also common. ANTIMICROBIAL TREATMENT GUIDELINES FOR ABRS: These guidelines apply to both adults and children. When selecting antibiotic therapy for ABRS, the clinician should consider the severity of the disease, the rate of progression of the disease, and recent antibiotic exposure. The guidelines now divide patients with ABRS into two general categories: (1) those with mild symptoms who have not received antibiotics within the past 4 to 6 weeks, and (2) those with mild disease who have received antibiotics within the past 4 to 6 weeks or those with moderate disease regardless of recent antibiotic exposure. The difference in severity of disease does not imply infection with a resistant pathogen. Rather, this terminology indicates the relative degree of acceptance of possible treatment failure and the likelihood of spontaneous resolution of symptoms-patients with more severe symptoms are less likely to resolve their disease spontaneously. The primary goal of antibiotic therapy is to eradicate bacteria from the site of infection, which, in turn, helps (1) return the sinuses back to health; (2) decrease the duration of symptoms to allow patients to resume daily activities more quickly; (3) prevent severe complications such as meningitis and brain abscess; and (4) decrease the development of chronic disease. Severe or life-threatening infections with or without complications are rare, and are not addressed in these guidelines. Prior antibiotic use is a major risk factor associated with the development of infection with antimicrobial-resistant strains. Because recent antimicrobial exposure increases the risk of carriage of and infection due to resistant organisms, antimicrobial therapy should be based upon the patient's history of recent antibiotic use. The panel's guidelines, therefore, stratify patients according to antibiotic exposure in the previous 4 to 6 weeks. Lack of response to therapy at >/=72 hours is an arbitrary time established to define treatment failures. Clinicians should monitor the response to antibiotic therapy, which may include instructing the patient to call the office or clinic if symptoms persist or worsen over the next few days. The predicted bacteriologic and clinical efficacy of antibiotics in adults and children has been determined according to mathematical modeling of ABRS developed by Michael Poole, MD, PhD, based on pathogen distribution, resolution rates without treatment, and in vitro microbiologic activity. Antibiotics can be placed into the following relative rank order of predicted clinical efficacy for adults: 90% to 92% = respiratory fluoroquinolones (gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin), ceftriaxone, high-dose amoxicillin/clavulanate (4 g/250 mg/day), and amoxicillin/clavulanate (1.75 g/250 mg/day); 83% to 88% = high-dose amoxicillin (4 g/day), amoxicillin (1.5 g/day), cefpodoxime proxetil, cefixime (based on H influenzae and M catarrhalis coverage), cefuroxime axetil, cefdinir, and TMP/SMX; 77% to 81% = doxycycline, clindamycin (based on gram-positive coverage only), azithromycin, clarithromycin and erythromycin, and telithromycin; 65% to 66% = cefaclor and loracarbef. The predicted spontaneous resolution rate in patients with a clinical diagnosis of ABRS is 62%. Antibiotics can be placed into the following relative rank order of predicted clinical efficacy in children with ABRS: 91% to 92% = ceftriaxone, high-dose amoxicillin/clavulanate (90 mg/6.4 mg per kg per day) and amoxicillin/clavulanate (45 mg/6.4 mg per kg per day); 82% to 87% = high-dose amoxicillin (90 mg/kg per day), amoxicillin (45 mg/kg per day), cefpodoxime proxetil, cefixime (based on H influenzae and M catarrhalis coverage only), cefuroxime axetil, cefdinir, and TMP/SMX; and 78% to 80% = clindamycin (based on gram-positive coverage only), cefprozil, azithromycin, clarithromycin, and erythromycin; 67% to 68% = cefaclor and loracarbef. The predicted spontaneous resolution rate in untreated children with a presumed diagnosis of ABRS is 63%. Recommendations for initial therapy for adult patients with mild disease (who have not received antibiotics in the previous 4 to 6 weeks) include the following choices: amoxicillin/clavulanate (1.75 to 4 g/250 mg per day), amoxicillin (1.5 to 4 g/day), cefpodoxime proxetil, cefuroxime axetil, or cefdinir. While TMP/SMX, doxycycline, azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin, or telithromycin may be considered for patients with beta-lactam allergies, bacteriologic failure rates of 20% to 25% are possible. Failure to respond to antimicrobial therapy after 72 hours should prompt either a switch to alternate antimicrobial therapy or reevaluation of the patient (see Table 4).When a change in antibiotic therapy is made, the clinician should consider the limitations in coverage of the initial agent. Recommendations for initial therapy for adults with mild disease who have received antibiotics in the previous 4 to 6 weeks or adults with moderate disease include the following choices: respiratory fluoroquinolone (eg, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin) or high-dose amoxicillin/clavulanate (4 g/250 mg per day). The widespread use of respiratory fluoroquinolones for patients with milder disease may promote resistance of a wide spectrum of organisms to this class of agents. Ceftriaxone (parenteral, 1 to 2 g/day for 5 days) or combination therapy with adequate gram-positive and negative coverage may also be considered. Examples of appropriate regimens of combination therapy include high-dose amoxicillin or clindamycin plus cefixime, or high-dose amoxicillin or clindamycin plus rifampin. While the clinical effectiveness of ceftriaxone and these combinations for ABRS is unproven; the panel considers these reasonable therapeutic options based on the spectrum of activity of these agents and on data extrapolated from acute otitis media studies. Rifampin should not be used as monotherapy, casually, or for longer than 10 to 14 days, as resistance quickly develops to this agent. Rifampin is also a well-known inducer of several cytochrome p450 isoenzymes and therefore has a high potential for drug interactions. Failure of a patient to respond to antimicrobial therapy after 72 hours of therapy should prompt either a switch to alternate antimicrobial therapy or reevaluation of the patient (see Table 4). When a change in antibiotic therapy is made, the clinician should consider the limitations in coverage of the initial agent. Patients who have received effective antibiotic therapy and continue to be symptomatic may need further evaluation. A CT scan, fiberoptic endoscopy or sinus aspiration and culture may be necessary. Recommendations for initial therapy for children with mild disease and who have not received antibiotics in the previous 4 to 6 weeks include the following: high-dose amoxicillin/clavulanate (90 mg/6.4 mg per kg per day), amoxicillin (90 mg/kg per day), cefpodoxime proxetil, cefuroxime axetil, or cefdinir. TMP/SMX, azithromycin, clarithromycin, or erythromycin is recommended if the patient has a history of immediate Type I hypersensitivity reaction to beta-lactams. These antibiotics have limited effectiveness against the major pathogens of ABRS and bacterial failure of 20% to 25% is possible. The clinician should differentiate an immediate hypersensitivity reaction from other less dangerous side effects. Children with immediate hypersensitivity reactions to beta-lactams may need: desensitization, sinus cultures, or other ancillary procedures and studies. Children with other types of reactions and side effects may tolerate one specific beta-lactam, but not another. Failure to respond to antimicrobial therapy after 72 hours should prompt either a switch to alternate antimicrobial therapy or reevaluation of the patient (see Table 5).When a change in antibiotic therapy is made, the clinician should consider the limitations in coverage of the initial agent. The recommended initial therapy for children with mild disease who have received antibiotics in the previous 4 to 6 weeks or children with moderate disease is high-dose amoxicillin/clavulanate (90 mg/6.4 mg per kg per day). Cefpodoxime proxetil, cefuroxime axetil, or cefdinir may be used if there is a penicillin allergy (eg, penicillin rash); in such instances, cefdinir is preferred because of high patient acceptance. TMP/SMX, azithromycin, clarithromycin, or erythromycin is recommended if the patient is beta-lactam allergic, but these do not provide optimal coverage. Clindamycin is appropriate if S pneumoniae is identified as a pathogen. Ceftriaxone (parenteral, 50 mg/kg per day for 5 days) or combination therapy with adequate gram-positive and -negative coverage may also be considered. Examples of appropriate regimens of combination therapy include high-dose amoxicillin or clindamycin plus cefixime, or high-dose amoxicillin or clindamycin plus rifampin. The clinical effectiveness of ceftriaxone and these combinations for ABRS is unproven; the panel considers these reasonable therapeutic options based on spectrum of activity and on data extrapolated from acute otitis media studies. Rifampin should not be used as monotherapy, casually, or for longer than 10 to 14 days as resistance quickly develops to this agent. Failure to respond to antimicrobial therapy after 72 hours of therapy should prompt either a switch to alternate antimicrobial therapy or reevaluation of the patient (see Table 5). When a change in antibiotic therapy is made, the clinician should consider the limitations in coverage of the initial agent. Patients who have received effective antibiotic therapy and continue to be symptomatic may need further evaluation. A CT scan, fiberoptic endoscopy or sinus aspiration and culture may be necessary.
BACKGROUND: Bacterial folliculitis and boils are globally prevalent bacterial infections involving inflammation of the hair follicle and the perifollicular tissue. Some folliculitis may resolve spontaneously, but others may progress to boils without treatment. Boils, also known as furuncles, involve adjacent tissue and may progress to cellulitis or lymphadenitis. A systematic review of the best evidence on the available treatments was needed. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of interventions (such as topical antibiotics, topical antiseptic agents, systemic antibiotics, phototherapy, and incision and drainage) for people with bacterial folliculitis and boils. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases up to June 2020: the Cochrane Skin Specialised Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, and Embase. We also searched five trials registers up to June 2020. We checked the reference lists of included studies and relevant reviews for further relevant trials.  SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that assessed systemic antibiotics; topical antibiotics; topical antiseptics, such as topical benzoyl peroxide; phototherapy; and surgical interventions in participants with bacterial folliculitis or boils. Eligible comparators were active intervention, placebo, or no treatment. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. Our primary outcomes were 'clinical cure' and 'severe adverse events leading to withdrawal of treatment'; secondary outcomes were 'quality of life', 'recurrence of folliculitis or boil following completion of treatment', and 'minor adverse events not leading to withdrawal of treatment'. We used GRADE to assess the certainty of the evidence. MAIN RESULTS: We included 18 RCTs (1300 participants). The studies included more males (332) than females (221), although not all studies reported these data. Seventeen trials were conducted in hospitals, and one was conducted in clinics. The participants included both children and adults (0 to 99 years). The studies did not describe severity in detail; of the 232 participants with folliculitis, 36% were chronic. At least 61% of participants had furuncles or boils, of which at least 47% were incised. Duration of oral and topical treatments ranged from 3 days to 6 weeks, with duration of follow-up ranging from 3 days to 6 months. The study sites included Asia, Europe, and America. Only three trials reported funding, with two funded by industry. Ten studies were at high risk of 'performance bias', five at high risk of 'reporting bias', and three at high risk of 'detection bias'. We did not identify any RCTs comparing topical antibiotics against topical antiseptics, topical antibiotics against systemic antibiotics, or phototherapy against sham light. Eleven trials compared different oral antibiotics. We are uncertain as to whether cefadroxil compared to flucloxacillin (17/21 versus 18/20, risk ratio (RR) 0.90, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.70 to 1.16; 41 participants; 1 study; 10 days of treatment) or azithromycin compared to cefaclor (8/15 versus 10/16, RR 1.01, 95% CI 0.72 to 1.40; 31 participants; 2 studies; 7 days of treatment) differed in clinical cure (both very low-certainty evidence). There may be little to no difference in clinical cure rate between cefdinir and cefalexin after 17 to 24 days (25/32 versus 32/42, RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.73 to 1.38; 74 participants; 1 study; low-certainty evidence), and there probably is little to no difference in clinical cure rate between cefditoren pivoxil and cefaclor after 7 days (24/46 versus 21/47, RR 1.17, 95% CI 0.77 to 1.78; 93 participants; 1 study; moderate-certainty evidence). For risk of severe adverse events leading to treatment withdrawal, there may be little to no difference between cefdinir versus cefalexin after 17 to 24 days (1/191 versus 1/200, RR 1.05, 95% CI 0.07 to 16.62; 391 participants; 1 study; low-certainty evidence). There may be an increased risk with cefadroxil compared with flucloxacillin after 10 days (6/327 versus 2/324, RR 2.97, 95% CI 0.60 to 14.62; 651 participants; 1 study; low-certainty evidence) and cefditoren pivoxil compared with cefaclor after 7 days (2/77 versus 0/73, RR 4.74, 95% CI 0.23 to 97.17; 150 participants; 1 study; low-certainty evidence). However, for these three comparisons the 95% CI is very wide and includes the possibility of both increased and reduced risk of events. We are uncertain whether azithromycin affects the risk of severe adverse events leading to withdrawal of treatment compared to cefaclor (274 participants; 2 studies; very low-certainty evidence) as no events occurred in either group after seven days. For risk of minor adverse events, there is probably little to no difference between the following comparisons: cefadroxil versus flucloxacillin after 10 days (91/327 versus 116/324, RR 0.78, 95% CI 0.62 to 0.98; 651 participants; 1 study; moderate-certainty evidence) or cefditoren pivoxil versus cefaclor after 7 days (8/77 versus 5/73, RR 1.52, 95% CI 0.52 to 4.42; 150 participants; 1 study; moderate-certainty evidence). We are uncertain of the effect of azithromycin versus cefaclor after seven days due to very low-certainty evidence (7/148 versus 4/126, RR 1.26, 95% CI 0.38 to 4.17; 274 participants; 2 studies). The study comparing cefdinir versus cefalexin did not report data for total minor adverse events, but both groups experienced diarrhoea, nausea, and vaginal mycosis during 17 to 24 days of treatment. Additional adverse events reported in the other included studies were vomiting, rashes, and gastrointestinal symptoms such as stomach ache, with some events leading to study withdrawal. Three included studies assessed recurrence following completion of treatment, none of which evaluated our key comparisons, and no studies assessed quality of life. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found no RCTs regarding the efficacy and safety of topical antibiotics versus antiseptics, topical versus systemic antibiotics, or phototherapy versus sham light for treating bacterial folliculitis or boils. Comparative trials have not identified important differences in efficacy or safety outcomes between different oral antibiotics for treating bacterial folliculitis or boils. Most of the included studies assessed participants with skin and soft tissue infection which included many disease types, whilst others focused specifically on folliculitis or boils. Antibiotic sensitivity data for causative organisms were often not reported. Future trials should incorporate culture and sensitivity information and consider comparing topical antibiotic with antiseptic, and topical versus systemic antibiotics or phototherapy.
PURPOSE: Cefdinir and cephalexin are cephalosporin antibiotics commonly used in the treatment of urinary tract infections (UTIs). Their efficacy depends on achieving sufficient time with concentrations exceeding the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). Despite being frequently prescribed for UTIs, cefdinir has markedly lower urine penetration compared to cephalexin. It is possible that differences in pharmacokinetics could result in dissimilar efficacy between these agents; however, comparative studies of cephalosporins in UTIs are lacking. METHODS: This was a retrospective comparative study of patients discharged from emergency departments within a community health system with a diagnosis of acute cystitis who were prescribed cefdinir or cephalexin. Treatment failure rates at 7 and 14 days were compared between the 2 agents using a chi2 or Fisher's exact test, as appropriate. RESULTS: There were no differences in overall treatment failure between the cefdinir and cephalexin groups. Treatment failure at 7 days occurred in 11.6% (n = 14) of patients in the cefdinir group and 8.3% (n = 10) of patients in the cephalexin group (P = 0.389). Treatment failure at 14 days was higher for cefdinir at 20.7% (n = 25) than for cephalexin at 11.8% (n = 14), but this difference was not statistically significant (P = 0.053). There were no differences in the rate of treatment failure in subgroup analyses of uncomplicated or complicated UTIs. CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggest that cefdinir and cephalexin have comparable efficacy for the treatment of lower UTIs. While there was a numerically higher rate of treatment failure with cefdinir, there were no significant differences in treatment failure between the agents.
Acute bacterial rhinosinusitis (ABRS) is a common reason for healthcare visits, and one of the more common reasons for the use of antibiotics. In an effort to improve the diagnosis and appropriate therapy of ABRS, several guidelines have been developed. Current guidelines recommend extended-spectrum cephalosporins as one of the first-line options for the treatment of this condition. In addition, most cephalosporins recommended by recent guidelines (e.g. cefuroxime axetil, cefpodoxime proxetil and cefdinir) are unlikely to be associated with cross-reactivity with penicillins, and may be considered effective alternatives to amoxicillin in adults who are allergic to penicillin.
The therapeutic use of oral cephalosporins to treat infectious diseases continues to challenge clinicians; many attempts have been made over recent years to improve the efficacy and spectrum of these anti-infectives. Many oral cephalosporins are in development and include cefdinir, cefprozil, cefetamet pivoxil, cefcapene pivoxil, cefcanel daloxate hydrochloride in Phase II trials, S-1090 in Phase III trials and the novel compounds E1100, E1101 and BRL-57347. Differences between these drugs are sometimes subtle and the improvement over existing compounds modest, although recent cephalosporins have shown greater activity against Gram-negative bacterial infections. A better knowledge of the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic interrelationships of existing oral cephalosporins is demanded for a more rational use of these compounds and to avoid the subsequent development of resistance. Perhaps with such an approach, the perceived need for new cephalosporins will diminish.
Cefdinir is frequently prescribed for pediatric infections despite lack of first-line indications. We reviewed Kentucky Medicaid claims from 2012 through 2016. Cefdinir prescriptions and spending significantly increased over the study period. Upper respiratory infections accounted for the majority of use. Inappropriate cefdinir use should be a priority for stewardship efforts.
Cefazolin susceptibility of urine isolates of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Proteus mirabilis predicts susceptibility to oral cephalosporins, but cefazolin-resistant isolates may be susceptible to oral third-generation cephalosporins. Among 194 urine isolates, we found >95% categorical agreement among oral third-generation cephalosporins. Surrogate testing of cefpodoxime for cefdinir, and vice versa, resulted in no major or very major errors, while combinations involving cefixime produced rare major and very major errors.
Individuals with compromised lung function and immunity are susceptible to developing chronic Mycobacterium abscessus infection. Current treatment recommendations typically involve using one beta-lactam antibiotic in combination with non-beta-lactam antibiotics. However, a recent case study (B. Becken, K. M. Dousa, J. L. Johnson, S. M. Holland, and R. A. Bonomo, Antimicrob Agents Chemother 68:e00319-24, 2024, https://doi.org/10.1128/aac.00319-24) demonstrated successful treatment of chronic M. abscessus lung disease in a child using two beta-lactam antibiotics simultaneously. This commentary reviews the emerging evidence and outstanding questions regarding dual beta-lactam therapy for M. abscessus infections.
When patented, brand-name antibiotics lose market exclusivity, generics typically enter the market at lower prices, which may increase consumption of the drug. To examine the effect of generic market entry on antibiotic consumption in the United States, we conducted an interrupted time series analysis of the change in the number of prescriptions per month for antibiotics for which at least one generic entered the US market between 2000 and 2012. Data were acquired from the IQVIA Xponent database. Thirteen antibiotics were analyzed. Here, we show that one year after generic entry, the number of prescriptions increased for five antibiotics (5 to 406%)-aztreonam, cefpodoxime, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, ofloxacin-and decreased for one drug: cefdinir. These changes were sustained two years after. Cefprozil, cefuroxime axetil and clarithromycin had significant increases in trend, but no significant level changes. No consistent pattern for antibiotic use following generic entry in the United States was observed.
The reliability of ceftriaxone for inferring susceptibility to higher-generation oral cephalosporins is unknown. Overall, ceftriaxone susceptibility predicted susceptibility to cefuroxime (89%), cefdinir (86%), cefpodoxime (90%), and cefixime (94%) based on disk diffusion results for 409 consecutive Enterobacterales bloodstream isolates from unique patients. Susceptibility percentages to the four oral cephalosporins ranged from 92% to 99% when limited to Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Klebsiella oxytoca, or Proteus mirabilis isolates susceptible to ceftriaxone.
BACKGROUND: The 2011 Infectious Diseases Society of America and European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases guidelines recommend ciprofloxacin or sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (SMX-TMP) as first-line agents to treat uncomplicated acute pyelonephritis (APN). OBJECTIVE: With increasing antimicrobial resistance rates and recent changes in practice patterns, the objective of this systematic review was to describe the effectiveness of cephalosporins for uncomplicated APN in more recently published literature. METHODS: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines were used for reporting. We searched PubMed, Embase, and Scopus for publications between January 2010 and September 2022. Eligible articles detailed patients with uncomplicated APN, treated with first- to fourth-generation cephalosporins, and identified a clinical, microbiological, or health care utilization outcome. Studies with more than 30% of complicated APN patients, non-English-language studies, case reports, case series, pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic studies, and in vitro laboratory or animal studies were excluded. Screening, review, and extraction were performed independently by 2 researchers, plus a third for conflict resolution. Critical appraisal of studies was performed using Joanna Briggs Institute checklists. RESULTS: Eight studies met inclusion, including 5 cohort studies (62.5%), 2 randomized controlled trials (25%), and 1 nonrandomized experimental study (12.5%). Cephalosporins most used across the studies included cefazolin, cephalexin, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, cefdinir, cefditoren, and ceftriaxone. Outcomes assessed were diverse, including clinical or microbiological success and time to defervescence or symptom resolution. Cephalosporins displayed effectiveness for the treatment of acute uncomplicated APN regardless of study design or the presence of a comparison group. No trials reported inferiority of clinical treatment outcomes compared with a fluoroquinolone or SMX-TMP. CONCLUSION: Cephalosporins may be viable treatment options for the management of uncomplicated APN.
High-dose amoxicillin (80 to 90 mg/kg/d divided twice daily) remains the drug of choice for treatment of acute otitis media despite increasing antimicrobial resistance. For persistent or recurrent acute otitis media, guidelines recommend high-dose amoxicillin/clavulanate (90/6.4 mg/kg/d), cefdinir, cefprozil, cefpodoxime, cefuroxime, or ceftriaxone. Increasing the dose of amoxicillin does not cover infection with beta-lactamase-producing pathogens; add the beta-lactamase inhibitor clavulanate to amoxicillin, or choose a cephalosporin with good activity against S pneumoniae and good beta-lactamase stability. Key factors for enhancing compliance are taste of suspension, dosing frequency, and duration of therapy.
