IMPORTANCE: Cefepime and piperacillin-tazobactam are commonly administered to hospitalized adults for empirical treatment of infection. Although piperacillin-tazobactam has been hypothesized to cause acute kidney injury and cefepime has been hypothesized to cause neurological dysfunction, their comparative safety has not been evaluated in a randomized clinical trial. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the choice between cefepime and piperacillin-tazobactam affects the risks of acute kidney injury or neurological dysfunction. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The Antibiotic Choice on Renal Outcomes (ACORN) randomized clinical trial compared cefepime vs piperacillin-tazobactam in adults for whom a clinician initiated an order for antipseudomonal antibiotics within 12 hours of presentation to the hospital in the emergency department or medical intensive care unit at an academic medical center in the US between November 10, 2021, and October 7, 2022. The final date of follow-up was November 4, 2022. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to cefepime or piperacillin-tazobactam. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was the highest stage of acute kidney injury or death by day 14, measured on a 5-level ordinal scale ranging from no acute kidney injury to death. The 2 secondary outcomes were the incidence of major adverse kidney events at day 14 and the number of days alive and free of delirium and coma within 14 days. RESULTS: There were 2511 patients included in the primary analysis (median age, 58 years [IQR, 43-69 years]; 42.7% were female; 16.3% were Non-Hispanic Black; 5.4% were Hispanic; 94.7% were enrolled in the emergency department; and 77.2% were receiving vancomycin at enrollment). The highest stage of acute kidney injury or death was not significantly different between the cefepime group and the piperacillin-tazobactam group; there were 85 patients (n = 1214; 7.0%) in the cefepime group with stage 3 acute kidney injury and 92 (7.6%) who died vs 97 patients (n = 1297; 7.5%) in the piperacillin-tazobactam group with stage 3 acute kidney injury and 78 (6.0%) who died (odds ratio, 0.95 [95% CI, 0.80 to 1.13], P = .56). The incidence of major adverse kidney events at day 14 did not differ between groups (124 patients [10.2%] in the cefepime group vs 114 patients [8.8%] in the piperacillin-tazobactam group; absolute difference, 1.4% [95% CI, -1.0% to 3.8%]). Patients in the cefepime group experienced fewer days alive and free of delirium and coma within 14 days (mean [SD], 11.9 [4.6] days vs 12.2 [4.3] days in the piperacillin-tazobactam group; odds ratio, 0.79 [95% CI, 0.65 to 0.95]). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among hospitalized adults in this randomized clinical trial, treatment with piperacillin-tazobactam did not increase the incidence of acute kidney injury or death. Treatment with cefepime resulted in more neurological dysfunction. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT05094154.
IMPORTANCE: Experimental and observational studies have suggested that empirical treatment for bacterial sepsis with antianaerobic antibiotics (eg, piperacillin-tazobactam) is associated with adverse outcomes compared with anaerobe-sparing antibiotics (eg, cefepime). However, a recent pragmatic clinical trial of piperacillin-tazobactam and cefepime showed no difference in short-term outcomes at 14 days. Further studies are needed to help clarify the empirical use of these agents. OBJECTIVE: To examine the use of piperacillin-tazobactam compared with cefepime in 90-day mortality in patients treated empirically for sepsis, using instrumental variable analysis of a 15-month piperacillin-tazobactam shortage. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In a retrospective cohort study, hospital admissions at the University of Michigan from July 1, 2014, to December 31, 2018, including a piperacillin-tazobactam shortage period from June 12, 2015, to September 18, 2016, were examined. Adult patients with suspected sepsis treated with vancomycin and either piperacillin-tazobactam or cefepime for conditions with presumed equipoise between piperacillin-tazobactam and cefepime were included in the study. Data analysis was conducted from December 17, 2022, to April 11, 2023. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was 90-day mortality. Secondary outcomes included organ failure-free, ventilator-free, and vasopressor-free days. The 15-month piperacillin-tazobactam shortage period was used as an instrumental variable for unmeasured confounding in antibiotic selection. RESULTS: Among 7569 patients (4174 men [55%]; median age, 63 [IQR 52-73] years) with sepsis meeting study eligibility, 4523 were treated with vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam and 3046 were treated with vancomycin and cefepime. Of patients who received piperacillin-tazobactam, only 152 (3%) received it during the shortage. Treatment groups did not differ significantly in age, Charlson Comorbidity Index score, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score, or time to antibiotic administration. In an instrumental variable analysis, piperacillin-tazobactam was associated with an absolute mortality increase of 5.0% at 90 days (95% CI, 1.9%-8.1%) and 2.1 (95% CI, 1.4-2.7) fewer organ failure-free days, 1.1 (95% CI, 0.57-1.62) fewer ventilator-free days, and 1.5 (95% CI, 1.01-2.01) fewer vasopressor-free days. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with suspected sepsis and no clear indication for antianaerobic coverage, administration of piperacillin-tazobactam was associated with higher mortality and increased duration of organ dysfunction compared with cefepime. These findings suggest that the widespread use of empirical antianaerobic antibiotics in sepsis may be harmful.
IMPORTANCE: Cefepime/enmetazobactam is a novel beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor combination and a potential empirical therapy for resistant gram-negative infections. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether cefepime/enmetazobactam was noninferior to piperacillin/tazobactam for the primary outcome of treatment efficacy in patients with complicated urinary tract infections (UTIs) or acute pyelonephritis. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A phase 3, randomized, double-blind, active-controlled, multicenter, noninferiority clinical trial conducted at 90 sites in Europe, North and Central America, South America, and South Africa. Recruitment occurred between September 24, 2018, and November 2, 2019. Final follow-up occurred November 26, 2019. Participants were adult patients aged 18 years or older with a clinical diagnosis of complicated UTI or acute pyelonephritis caused by gram-negative urinary pathogens. INTERVENTIONS: Eligible patients were randomized to receive either cefepime, 2 g/enmetazobactam, 0.5 g (n = 520), or piperacillin, 4 g/tazobactam, 0.5 g (n = 521), by 2-hour infusion every 8 hours for 7 days (up to 14 days in patients with a positive blood culture at baseline). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was the proportion of patients in the primary analysis set (patients who received any amount of study drug with a baseline gram-negative pathogen not resistant to either treatment and >/=105 colony-forming units [CFU]/mL in urine culture or the same pathogen present in concurrent blood and urine cultures) who achieved overall treatment success (defined as clinical cure combined with microbiological eradication [<103 CFU/mL in urine] of infection). Two-sided 95% CIs were computed using the stratified Newcombe method. The prespecified noninferiority margin was -10%. If noninferiority was established, a superiority comparison was also prespecified. RESULTS: Among 1041 patients randomized (mean age, 54.7 years; 573 women [55.0%]), 1034 (99.3%) received study drug and 995 (95.6%) completed the trial. Among the primary analysis set, the primary outcome occurred in 79.1% (273/345) of patients receiving cefepime/enmetazobactam compared with 58.9% (196/333) receiving piperacillin/tazobactam (between-group difference, 21.2% [95% CI, 14.3% to 27.9%]). Treatment-emergent adverse events occurred in 50.0% (258/516) of patients treated with cefepime/enmetazobactam and 44.0% (228/518) with piperacillin/tazobactam; most were mild to moderate in severity (89.9% vs 88.6%, respectively). A total of 1.7% (9/516) of participants who received cefepime/enmetazobactam and 0.8% (4/518) of those who received piperacillin/tazobactam did not complete the assigned therapy due to adverse events. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with complicated UTI or acute pyelonephritis caused by gram-negative pathogens, cefepime/enmetazobactam, compared with piperacillin/tazobactam, met criteria for noninferiority as well as superiority with respect to the primary outcome of clinical cure and microbiological eradication. Further research is needed to determine the potential role for cefepime/enmetazobactam in the treatment of complicated UTI and pyelonephritis. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03687255.
BACKGROUND: Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales species and multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa are global health threats. Cefepime-taniborbactam is an investigational beta-lactam and beta-lactamase inhibitor combination with activity against Enterobacterales species and P. aeruginosa expressing serine and metallo-beta-lactamases. METHODS: In this phase 3, double-blind, randomized trial, we assigned hospitalized adults with complicated urinary tract infection (UTI), including acute pyelonephritis, in a 2:1 ratio to receive intravenous cefepime-taniborbactam (2.5 g) or meropenem (1 g) every 8 hours for 7 days; this duration could be extended up to 14 days in case of bacteremia. The primary outcome was both microbiologic and clinical success (composite success) on trial days 19 to 23 in the microbiologic intention-to-treat (microITT) population (patients who had a qualifying gram-negative pathogen against which both study drugs were active). A prespecified superiority analysis of the primary outcome was performed after confirmation of noninferiority. RESULTS: Of the 661 patients who underwent randomization, 436 (66.0%) were included in the microITT population. The mean age of the patients was 56.2 years, and 38.1% were 65 years of age or older. In the microITT population, 57.8% of the patients had complicated UTI, 42.2% had acute pyelonephritis, and 13.1% had bacteremia. Composite success occurred in 207 of 293 patients (70.6%) in the cefepime-taniborbactam group and in 83 of 143 patients (58.0%) in the meropenem group. Cefepime-taniborbactam was superior to meropenem regarding the primary outcome (treatment difference, 12.6 percentage points; 95% confidence interval, 3.1 to 22.2; P = 0.009). Differences in treatment response were sustained at late follow-up (trial days 28 to 35), when cefepime-taniborbactam had higher composite success and clinical success. Adverse events occurred in 35.5% and 29.0% of patients in the cefepime-taniborbactam group and the meropenem group, respectively, with headache, diarrhea, constipation, hypertension, and nausea the most frequently reported; the frequency of serious adverse events was similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Cefepime-taniborbactam was superior to meropenem for the treatment of complicated UTI that included acute pyelonephritis, with a safety profile similar to that of meropenem. (Funded by Venatorx Pharmaceuticals and others; CERTAIN-1 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03840148.).
BACKGROUND: Cefepime is a widely used antibiotic with neurotoxicity attributed to its ability to cross the blood-brain barrier and exhibit concentration-dependent Upsilon-aminobutyric acid (GABA) antagonism. Neurotoxic symptoms include depressed consciousness, encephalopathy, aphasia, myoclonus, seizures, and coma. Data suggest that up to 15% of ICU patients treated with cefepime may experience these adverse effects. Risk factors include renal dysfunction, excessive dosing, preexisting brain injury, and elevated serum cefepime concentrations. We aimed to characterize the clinical course of cefepime neurotoxicity and response to interventions. METHODS: A librarian-assisted search identified publications describing cefepime-associated neurotoxicity from January 1980 to February 2016 using the CINAHL and MEDLINE databases. Search terms included cefepime, neurotoxicity, encephalopathy, seizures, delirium, coma, non-convulsive status epilepticus, myoclonus, confusion, aphasia, agitation, and death. Two reviewers independently assessed identified articles for eligibility and used the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) for data reporting. RESULTS: Of the 123 citations identified, 37 (representing 135 patient cases) were included. Patients had a median age of 69 years, commonly had renal dysfunction (80%) and required intensive care (81% of patients with a reported location). All patients exhibited altered mental status, with reduced consciousness (47%), myoclonus (42%), and confusion (42%) being the most common symptoms. All 98 patients (73% of cohort) with electroencephalography had abnormalities, including non-convulsive status epilepticus (25%), myoclonic status epilepticus (7%), triphasic waves (40%), and focal sharp waves (39%). As per Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved dosing guidance, 48% of patients were overdosed; however, 26% experienced neurotoxicity despite appropriate dosing. Median cefepime serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations were 45 mg/L (n = 21) and 13 mg/L (n = 4), respectively. Symptom improvement occurred in 89% of patients, and 87% survived to hospital discharge. The median delay from starting the drug to symptom onset was 4 days, and resolution occurred a median of 2 days after the intervention, which included cefepime discontinuation, antiepileptic administration, or hemodialysis. CONCLUSIONS: Cefepime-induced neurotoxicity is challenging to recognize in the critically ill due to widely varying symptoms that are common in ICU patients. This adverse reaction can occur despite appropriate dosing, usually resolves with drug interruption, but may require additional interventions such as antiepileptic drug administration or dialysis.
Cefepime is a broad-spectrum fourth-generation cephalosporin with activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative pathogens. It is generally administered as an infusion over 30-60 min or as a prolonged infusion with infusion times from 3 h to continuous administration. Cefepime is widely distributed in biological fluids and tissues with an average volume of distribution of ~ 0.2 L/kg in healthy adults with normal renal function. Protein binding is relatively low (20%), and elimination is mainly renal. About 85% of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine, with an elimination half-life of 2-2.3 h. The pharmacokinetics of cefepime is altered under certain pathophysiological conditions, resulting in high inter-individual variability in cefepime volume of distribution and clearance, which poses challenges for population dosing approaches. Consequently, therapeutic drug monitoring of cefepime may be beneficial in certain patients including those who are critically ill, have life-threatening infections, or are infected with more resistant pathogens. Cefepime is generally safe and efficacious, with a goal exposure target of 70% time of the free drug concentration over the minimum inhibitory concentration for clinical efficacy. In recent years, reports of neurotoxicity have increased, specifically in patients with impaired renal function. This review summarizes the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and toxicodynamics of cefepime contemporarily in the setting of increasing cefepime exposures. We explore the potential benefits of extended or continuous infusions and therapeutic drug monitoring in special populations.
Since 2017 the world suffers from a piperacillin/tazobactam shortage. Cefepime is then proposed as a broad spectrum antibiotic alternative. Up to 15 % of the patients under treatment develop neurotoxicity, mostly in kidney failure settings. Cefepime serum concentration and electroencephalogram guide diagnosis. Treatment consists in withholding or reducing the dose. Most of the patients recover without neurologic sequelae.
BACKGROUND: Cefepime-induced neurotoxicity (CIN) has been well acknowledged among clinicians, although there are no clear diagnostic criteria or specific laboratory testing to help with its diagnosis. We aimed to summarize the existing evidence regarding CIN and provide future agendas for research. METHODS: Following the PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews, we searched MEDLINE and Embase for all peer-reviewed articles using keywords including 'cefepime', 'neurotoxicity', 'encephalopathy' and 'seizure', from their inception to 20 January 2022. RESULTS: We included 92 articles, including 23 observational studies and 69 cases from case reports and case series, in the systematic review. Among 119 patients with CIN, 23.5% were in the ICU at the time of diagnosis and nearly 90% of the cases showed renal dysfunction.Cefepime overdoses were described in 41%. The median latency period of developing CIN from cefepime initiation was 4 days, and about 12% developed CIN during empirical treatment. CIN patients commonly manifested altered mental status (93%), myoclonus (37%) and non-convulsive seizure epilepticus (28%). A serum cefepime trough level of &gt;20 mg/L would put patients at risk for CIN. CIN-related symptoms were ameliorated in 97.5% by dose reduction or discontinuation of cefepime, with median time to improvement of 3 days. No CIN-associated deaths were reported. CONCLUSIONS: This systematic review summarizes the current evidence and characteristics of CIN. In the current situation where there are no CIN diagnostic criteria and the drug monitoring platform is not routinely available, candidates for cefepime should be carefully selected. Also, based on these findings, it needs to be appropriately dosed to avoid the development of CIN.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Serious infections caused by nonfermenting Gram-negative bacteria (NF-GNB) pose a significant challenge for clinicians due to the limited treatment options available, which are frequently associated with issues of toxicity and unfavourable pharmacokinetic profiles. The aim of this review is to provide a brief overview of the existing data concerning the ongoing development of antiinfective agents targeting NF-GNB. RECENT FINDINGS: Several agents exhibiting efficacy against NF-GNB are under clinical investigation. Durlobactam-sulbactam and cefepime-taniborbactam emerge as promising therapeutic avenues against carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumanii . Cefepime-zidebactam may serve as a suitable treatment option for urinary tract infections caused by a wide range of NF-GNB. Cefepime-enmetazobactam demonstrates potent in vitro activity against various NF-GNB strains; however, its role as an anti- Pseudomonal agent is inadequately substantiated by available data. Xeruborbactam is a wide beta-lactamase inhibitor that can be associated with a range of agents, enhancing in-vitro activity of these against many NF-GNB, including those resistant to newer, broader spectrum options. Lastly, murepavadin appears to be a potential pathogen-specific solution for severe Pseudomonas infections; however, additional investigation is necessary to establish the safety profile of this compound. SUMMARY: Each of the novel molecules reviewed possesses an interesting range of in-vitro activity against NF-GNB. In addition, some of them have already been proved effective in vivo, underscoring their potential as future treatment options.
In a multicenter, observational, propensity-score-weighted cohort of 249 adults with uncomplicated Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteremia, patients receiving short-course (median, 9 days; interquartile range [IQR], 8-10) therapy had a similar odds of recurrent infection or death within 30 days as those receiving longer courses (median, 16 days; IQR, 14-17).
BACKGROUND: Subcutaneous (SC) administration of antibiotics represents an attractive alternative to the intravenous (IV) route. METHODS: We performed a systematic electronic search of PubMed and the Cochrane Library for all articles published prior to April 2022, using the key terms and MeSH terms 'subcutaneous', 'antibiotic' and the international non-proprietary name of antibiotics. RESULTS: A total of 30 studies were selected including data on the efficacy and tolerability of antibiotics, and seven studies that were conducted in healthy subjects, for relevant information regarding the safety and tolerability of antibiotics. Comparative studies have shown that efficacy is similar for the SC and IV routes for ceftriaxone, teicoplanin and ertapenem. The SC use of other antibiotics such as ampicillin, ceftazidime, cefepime, piperacillin/tazobactam, metronidazole and fosfomycin has also been described. These results have largely been corroborated by pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analyses, especially for time-dependent antibiotics. Complications of SC treatment are rarely severe, with no reports of bacteraemia or other invasive infection related to this route of administration. Therapeutic drug monitoring has been proposed to adapt the dose and avoid toxicity. DISCUSSION: The rationale for using SC administration of ceftriaxone, ertapenem and teicoplanin is strong in patients with non-severe infections. It is already commonly practised in some countries, particularly in France. Other antibiotics could be administered subcutaneously, but further studies are needed to validate their use in clinical practice. Further research is needed to safely generalize and optimize this route of administration whenever possible. This would reduce the risk of catheter-related infections and their complications, together with the length of hospital stay.
Kaye KS, Belley A, Barth P, et al. Effect of cefepime/enmetazobactam vs piperacillin/tazobactam on clinical cure and microbiological eradication in patients with complicated urinary tract infection or acute pyelonephritis: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2022;328:1304-14. 36194218.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the activity of cefiderocol, imipenem/relebactam, cefepime/taniborbactam and cefepime/zidebactam against a clinical and laboratory collection of ceftolozane/tazobactam- and ceftazidime/avibactam-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa beta-lactamase mutants. METHODS: The activity of cefiderocol, imipenem/relebactam, cefepime/taniborbactam, cefepime/zidebactam and comparators was evaluated against a collection of 30 molecularly characterized ceftolozane/tazobactam- and/or ceftazidime/avibactam-resistant P. aeruginosa isolates from patients previously treated with cephalosporins. To evaluate how the different beta-lactamases in the clinical isolates affected the resistance to these agents, a copy of each blaPDC, blaOXA-2 and blaOXA-10 ancestral and mutant allele from the clinical isolates was cloned in pUCp24 and expressed in dual blaPDC-oprD (for blaPDC-like genes) or single oprD (for blaOXA-2-like and blaOXA-10-like genes) PAO1 knockout mutants. MICs were determined using reference methodologies. RESULTS: For all isolates, MICs were higher than 4 and/or 8 mg/L for ceftolozane/tazobactam and ceftazidime/avibactam, respectively. Cefiderocol was the most active agent, showing activity against all isolates, except one clinical isolate that carried an R504C substitution in PBP3 (MIC = 16 mg/L). Imipenem/relebactam was highly active against all isolates, except two clinical isolates that carried the VIM-20 carbapenemase. Cefepime/zidebactam and cefepime/taniborbactam displayed activity against most of the isolates, but resistance was observed in some strains with PBP3 amino acid substitutions or that overexpressed mexAB-oprM or mexXY efflux pumps. Evaluation of transformants revealed that OXA-2 and OXA-10 extended-spectrum variants cause a 2-fold increase in the MIC of cefiderocol relative to parental enzymes. CONCLUSIONS: Cefiderocol, imipenem/relebactam, cefepime/taniborbactam and cefepime/zidebactam show promising and complementary in vitro activity against ceftolozane/tazobactam- and ceftazidime/avibactam-resistant P. aeruginosa. These agents may represent potential therapeutic options for ceftolozane/tazobactam- and ceftazidime/avibactam-resistant P. aeruginosa infections.
Cefepime/enmetazobactam (EXBLIFEP((R))), an intravenous (IV) antibacterial fixed-dose combination of a 4th generation cephalosporin and an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) inhibitor, is being developed by Allecra Therapeutics and ADVANZ PHARMA for the treatment of infections caused by multi-drug-resistant (MDR) Gram-negative bacteria. In February 2024, cefepime/enmetazobactam was approved in the USA for use in adults with complicated urinary tract infections (cUTI) including pyelonephritis, caused by susceptible strains of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus mirabilis, and Enterobacter cloacae complex. In March 2024, cefepime/enmetazobactam was approved in the EU for use in adults for the treatment of cUTI, including pyelonephritis, and hospital-acquired pneumonia, including ventilator associated pneumonia, and the treatment of patients with bacteraemia occurring in association with or suspected to be associated with any of these infections. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of cefepime/enmetazobactam leading to this first approval for the treatment of adults with infections caused by MDR Gram-negative bacteria.
Cefepime toxicity is characterized by altered mental status, confusion, and decreased responsiveness. We describe a 14-year-old girl who developed acute encephalopathy associated with supratherapeutic cefepime concentrations in the setting of acute renal failure. The authors were unable to identify any previous reports of this occurrence in a child.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia (DITP) is a rare adverse event. It is often diagnosed using clinical risk criteria, but this can create diagnostic uncertainty. CASE DESCRIPTION: A 35-year-old man with disseminated Serratia marcescens infection developed severe thrombocytopenia. A drug-dependent platelet-reactive antibody test demonstrated cefepime-dependent platelet-reactive antibodies which confirmed the diagnosis of DITP. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: We describe the first case of cefepime-induced DITP confirmed by a drug-dependent platelet-reactive antibody test. To our knowledge, this is the first proven example of DITP in a fourth-generation cephalosporin.
PURPOSE: Cefepime is recommended for treating infections caused by AmpC beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacterales (AmpC-PE), though supporting evidence is limited. Therefore, this study compared outcomes associated with cefepime versus carbapenem therapy for bloodstream infections (BSIs) caused by AmpC-PE after phenotypic exclusion of ESBL-co-producing isolates. METHODS: This retrospective cohort study compared definite cefepime versus carbapenem treatment for AmpC-PE BSI in hospitalized patients of the University Hospital Basel, Switzerland, between 01/2015 and 07/2020. Primary outcomes included in-hospital death, renal impairment and neurologic adverse events; secondary outcomes included length of hospital stay and recurrent infection. RESULTS: Two hundred and seventy episodes of AmpC-PE BSI were included, 162, 77 and 31 were treated with a carbapenem, cefepime and other antibiotics, respectively. Patients treated with carbapenems were more likely to be transferred to the ICU on admission and more frequently had central venous catheter as a source of infection. In uni- and multivariable analyses, primary and secondary outcomes did not differ between the two treatment groups, except for more frequent occurrence of neurological adverse events among patients treated with carbapenems and shorter length of hospital stay among survivors treated with cefepime. CONCLUSION: After excluding isolates with phenotypic ESBL-co-production, cefepime was not associated with adverse outcomes compared to carbapenems when used to treat BSIs caused by AmpC-PE. Our study provides evidence to support the use of cefepime as a safe treatment strategy for AmpC-PE BSI, particularly in clinically stable patients without initial renal impairment or increased susceptibility to neurological adverse events.
BACKGROUND: The optimal treatment regimen for infections caused by wild-type AmpC beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacterales remains controversial. This study compared the outcomes of bloodstream infections (BSI) and pneumonia according to the type of definitive antibiotic therapy: third-generation cephalosporin (3GC), piperacillin +/- tazobactam, cefepime or carbapenem. METHODS: All cases of BSI and pneumonia caused by wild-type AmpC beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacterales over 2 years in eight university hospitals were reviewed. Patients who received definitive therapy consisting of either a 3GC (3GC group), piperacillin +/- tazobactam (piperacillin group), or cefepime or a carbapenem (reference group) were included in this study. The primary endpoint was 30-day all-cause mortality. The secondary endpoint was treatment failure due to infection by emerging AmpC-overproducing strains. Propensity-score-based models were used to balance confounding factors between groups. RESULTS: In total, 575 patients were included in this study: 302 (52%) with pneumonia and 273 (48%) with BSI. Half (n=271, 47%) received cefepime or a carbapenem as definitive therapy, 120 (21%) received a 3GC, and 184 (32%) received piperacillin +/- tazobactam. Compared with the reference group, 30-day mortality was similar in the 3GC [adjusted hazard ratio (aHR) 0.86, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.57-1.31)] and piperacillin (aHR 1.20, 95% CI 0.86-1.66) groups. The likelihood of treatment failure was higher in the 3GC (aHR 6.81, 95% CI 3.76-12.4) and piperacillin (aHR 3.13, 95% CI 1.69-5.80) groups. The results were similar when stratifying the analysis on pneumonia or BSI. CONCLUSION: Treatment of included BSI or pneumonia caused by wild-type AmpC beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacterales with 3GC or piperacillin +/- tazobactam was not associated with higher mortality, but was associated with increased risk of AmpC overproduction leading to treatment failure compared with cefepime or a carbapenem.
Drug-induced thrombocytopenia (DITP) has been described as a sudden and severe hematologic complication of piperacillin/tazobactam. The proposed mechanism by which piperacillin/tazobactam causes DITP involves the formation of a covalent bond to platelet membrane protein thereby inducing a humoral immune response. Given the immunogenic nature of this adverse event and the structural similarities across beta-lactam antibiotics, the potential for cross-reactivity between agents within the class should be considered. However, the structural moiety of piperacillin/tazobactam responsible for this immunogenic response has not been identified-the relationship between structure and activity for this phenomenon remains unknown. Data on the safety and cross-reactivity of other beta-lactam agents in this setting is lacking. We report the first case of piperacillin/tazobactam DITP successfully challenged by the use of cefepime for the treatment of aspiration pneumonia. Further studies are needed to determine the structural moiety of piperacillin/tazobactam responsible for this immunogenic response and evaluate the safety of other beta-lactam antibiotics in this clinical setting.
Wagenlehner and colleagues(1) demonstrated non-inferiority and superiority with respect to a primary endpoint of composite success (microbiological plus clinical) of cefepime/taniborbactam vs. meropenem in treating complicated urinary tract infections and acute pyelonephritis caused by carbapenem-susceptible gram-negative bacteria in adults. A major area of interest in real-world application of cefepime/taniborbactam is its potential role in treating carbapenem-resistant infections, which deserves further investigation.
