Ceftazidime-avibactam (Zavicefta((R))) is an intravenously administered combination of the third-generation cephalosporin ceftazidime and the novel, non-beta-lactam beta-lactamase inhibitor avibactam. In the EU, ceftazidime-avibactam is approved for the treatment of adults with complicated urinary tract infections (cUTIs) [including pyelonephritis], complicated intra-abdominal infections (cIAIs), hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) [including ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP)], and other infections caused by aerobic Gram-negative organisms in patients with limited treatment options. This article discusses the in vitro activity and pharmacological properties of ceftazidime-avibactam, and reviews data on the agent's clinical efficacy and tolerability relating to use in these indications, with a focus on the EU label. Ceftazidime-avibactam has excellent in vitro activity against many important Gram-negative pathogens, including many extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-, AmpC-, Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase- and OXA-48-producing Enterobacteriaceae and drug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates; it is not active against metallo-beta-lactamase-producing strains. The clinical efficacy of ceftazidime-avibactam in the treatment of cUTI, cIAI and HAP (including VAP) in adults was demonstrated in pivotal phase III non-inferiority trials with carbapenem comparators. Ceftazidime-avibactam treatment was associated with high response rates at the test-of-cure visit in patients with infections caused by ceftazidime-susceptible and -nonsusceptible Gram-negative pathogens. Ceftazidime-avibactam was generally well tolerated, with a safety and tolerability profile consistent with that of ceftazidime alone and that was generally typical of the injectable cephalosporins. Thus, ceftazidime-avibactam represents a valuable new treatment option for these serious and difficult-to-treat infections.
BACKGROUND: Carbapenems are frequently the last line of defence in serious infections due to multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria, but their use is threatened by the growing prevalence of carbapenemase-producing pathogens. Ceftazidime-avibactam is a potential new agent for use in such infections. We aimed to assess the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of ceftazidime-avibactam compared with best available therapy in patients with complicated urinary tract infection or complicated intra-abdominal infection due to ceftazidime-resistant Gram-negative pathogens. METHODS: REPRISE was a pathogen-directed, international, randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial that recruited patients from hospitals across 16 countries worldwide. Eligible patients were aged 18-90 years with complicated urinary tract infection or complicated intra-abdominal infection caused by ceftazidime-resistant Enterobacteriaceae or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Patients were randomised (1:1) to 5-21 days of treatment with either ceftazidime-avibactam (a combination of 2000 mg ceftazidime plus 500 mg avibactam, administered via a 2-h intravenous infusion every 8 h) or best available therapy. The primary endpoint was clinical response at the test-of-cure visit, 7-10 days after last infusion of study therapy, analysed in all patients who had at least one ceftazidime-resistant Gram-negative pathogen, as confirmed by the central laboratory, and who received at least one dose of study drug. Safety endpoints were assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of study drug. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01644643. FINDINGS: Between Jan 7, 2013, and Aug 29, 2014, 333 patients were randomly assigned, 165 to ceftazidime-avibactam and 168 to best available therapy. Of these, 154 assigned to ceftazidime-avibactam (144 with complicated urinary tract infection and ten with complicated intra-abdominal infection) and 148 assigned to best available therapy (137 with complicated urinary tract infection and 11 with complicated intra-abdominal infection) were analysed for the primary outcome. 163 (97%) of 168 patients in the best available therapy group received a carbapenem, 161 (96%) as monotherapy. The overall proportions of patients with a clinical cure at the test-of-cure visit were similar with ceftazidime-avibactam (140 [91%; 95% CI 85.6-94.7] of 154 patients) and best available therapy (135 [91%; 85.9-95.0] of 148 patients). 51 (31%) of 164 patients in the ceftazidime-avibactam group and 66 (39%) of 168 in the best available therapy group had an adverse event, most of which were mild or moderate in intensity. Gastrointestinal disorders were the most frequently reported treatment-emergent adverse events with both ceftazidime-avibactam (21 [13%] of 164 patients) and best available therapy (30 [18%] of 168 patients). No new safety concerns were identified for ceftazidime-avibactam. INTERPRETATION: These results provide evidence of the efficacy of ceftazidime-avibactam as a potential alternative to carbapenems in patients with ceftazidime-resistant Enterobacteriaceae and P aeruginosa. FUNDING: AstraZeneca.
Avycaz combines an older cephalosporin antibiotic, ceftazidime, and the beta-lactamase inhibitor avibactam. Ceftazidime targets penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) in the bacterial periplasm that are required for cell wall synthesis. Avibactam blocks beta-lactamases (beta-L) in the periplasm, which would otherwise inactivate the antibiotics resulting in drug resistance.
The treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections (cIAI) is increasingly challenging due to increased resistance of Gram-negative organisms. These multidrug resistant organisms lead to an increase in morbidity and mortality. This has led to renewed interest in use of older beta-lactam antibiotics in combination with newer beta-lactamase inhibitors. Ceftazidime-avibactam is one of the newest such combination antibiotics, which has been released for treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections in combination with metronidazole. Areas covered: In this drug evaluation manuscript cIAI along with the chemistry, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, metabolism and clinical study results of ceftazidime-avibactam are reviewed. Expert opinion: The role of ceftazidime-avibactam in combination with metronidazole in the treatment of cIAI is still to be defined. Patients with cIAI known to be infected with Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae would be clear candidates for treatment with this agent, as would patients infected with more common types of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase producing Gram-negative pathogens if a carbapenem alternative were desired. At present, it is difficult to establish a clear group of patients with cIAI for whom initial empiric therapy with this agent would be warranted.
BACKGROUND: This meta-analysis was conducted to compare the efficacy of ceftazidime-avibactam combination therapy with that of monotherapy in the treatment of carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacterial (CR-GNB). METHODS: A literature search of PubMed, Embase, the Cochrane Library, and ClinicalTrials.gov was conducted until September 1, 2023. Only studies that compared CZA combination therapy with monotherapy for CR-GNB infections were included. RESULTS: A total of 25 studies (23 retrospective observational studies and 2 prospective studies) involving 2676 patients were included. There was no significant difference in 30-day mortality between the study group receiving combination therapy and the control group receiving monotherapy (risk ratio [RR] 0.91; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.71-1.18). In addition, no significant differences were observed between the study and the control group in terms of in-hospital mortality (RR 1.00; 95% CI 0.79-1.27), 14-day mortality (RR 1.54; 95% CI 0.24-9.91), 90-day mortality (RR 1.18; 95% CI 0.62-2.22), and clinical cure rate (RR 0.95; 95% CI 0.84-1.08). However, the combination group had a borderline higher microbiological eradication rate than the control group (RR 1.15; 95% CI 1.00-1.32). CONCLUSIONS: Compared to monotherapy, CZA combination therapy did not yield additional clinical benefits. However, combination therapy may be associated with favorable microbiological outcomes.
BACKGROUND: When combined with ceftazidime, the novel non-beta-lactam beta-lactamase inhibitor avibactam provides a carbapenem alternative against multidrug-resistant infections. Efficacy and safety of ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole were compared with meropenem in 1066 men and women with complicated intra-abdominal infections from 2 identical, randomized, double-blind phase 3 studies (NCT01499290 and NCT01500239). METHODS: The primary end point was clinical cure at test-of-cure visit 28-35 days after randomization, assessed by noninferiority of ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole to meropenem in the microbiologically modified intention-to-treat (mMITT) population (in accordance with US Food and Drug Administration guidance), and the modified intention-to-treat and clinically evaluable populations (European Medicines Agency guidance). Noninferiority was considered met if the lower limit of the 95% confidence interval for between-group difference was greater than the prespecified noninferiority margin of -12.5%. RESULTS: Ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole was noninferior to meropenem across all primary analysis populations. Clinical cure rates with ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole and meropenem, respectively, were as follows: mMITT population, 81.6% and 85.1% (between-group difference, -3.5%; 95% confidence interval -8.64 to 1.58); modified intention-to-treat, 82.5% and 84.9% (-2.4%; -6.90 to 2.10); and clinically evaluable, 91.7% and 92.5% (-0.8%; -4.61 to 2.89). The clinical cure rate with ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole for ceftazidime-resistant infections was comparable to that with meropenem (mMITT population, 83.0% and 85.9%, respectively) and similar to the regimen's own efficacy against ceftazidime-susceptible infections (82.0%). Adverse events were similar between groups. CONCLUSIONS: Ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole was noninferior to meropenem in the treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections. Efficacy was similar against infections caused by ceftazidime-susceptible and ceftazidime-resistant pathogens. The safety profile of ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole was consistent with that previously observed with ceftazidime alone. CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: NCT01499290 and NCT01500239.
Drug hypersensitivity reactions can occur to almost all drugs and antibiotics are among the most common cause for this kind of reactions. Drug hypersensitivity may affect any organ or system, and manifestations range widely in clinical severity from mild pruritus to anaphylaxis. In most cases, the suspected drug is avoided in the future. In case of infection, there is usually a safe antibiotic alternative. Nonetheless, in some cases, no alternative treatment exists for optimal therapy. Under these circumstances, desensitization may be performed. Drug desensitization is defined as the induction of a temporary state of tolerance to a drug which can only be maintained by continuous administration of the medication responsible for the hypersensitivity reaction. Desensitization is mainly performed in IgE-mediated reactions. Increasing doses of the implicated drug are administered over a short period of time, until the therapeutic dose is achieved and tolerated. Very few studies confined to children are found in literature. Most of them are case reports. In general, the proposed desensitization schemes are similar to those used in adults differing only in the final dose administered. The purpose of this study is to review desensitization to antibiotics in children presenting and discussing three clinical practical cases of desensitization in this age group.
BACKGROUND: The global emergence of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae highlights the urgent need to reduce carbapenem dependence. The phase 3 RECAPTURE program compared the efficacy and safety of ceftazidime-avibactam and doripenem in patients with complicated urinary tract infection (cUTI), including acute pyelonephritis. METHODS: Hospitalized adults with suspected or microbiologically confirmed cUTI/acute pyelonephritis were randomized 1:1 to ceftazidime-avibactam 2000 mg/500 mg every 8 hours or doripenem 500 mg every 8 hours (doses adjusted for renal function), with possible oral antibiotic switch after >/=5 days (total treatment duration up to 10 days or 14 days for patients with bacteremia). RESULTS: Of 1033 randomized patients, 393 and 417 treated with ceftazidime-avibactam and doripenem, respectively, were eligible for the primary efficacy analyses; 19.6% had ceftazidime-nonsusceptible baseline pathogens. Noninferiority of ceftazidime-avibactam vs doripenem was demonstrated for the US Food and Drug Administration co-primary endpoints of (1) patient-reported symptomatic resolution at day 5: 276 of 393 (70.2%) vs 276 of 417 (66.2%) patients (difference, 4.0% [95% confidence interval CI, -2.39% to 10.42%]); and (2) combined symptomatic resolution/microbiological eradication at test of cure (TOC): 280 of 393 (71.2%) vs 269 of 417 (64.5%) patients (difference, 6.7% [95% CI, .30% to 13.12%]). Microbiological eradication at TOC (European Medicines Agency primary endpoint) occurred in 304 of 393 (77.4%) ceftazidime-avibactam vs 296 of 417 (71.0%) doripenem patients (difference, 6.4% [95% CI, .33% to 12.36%]), demonstrating superiority at the 5% significance level. Both treatments showed similar efficacy against ceftazidime-nonsusceptible pathogens. Ceftazidime-avibactam had a safety profile consistent with that of ceftazidime alone. CONCLUSIONS: Ceftazidime-avibactam was highly effective for the empiric treatment of cUTI (including acute pyelonephritis), and may offer an alternative to carbapenems in this setting. CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: NCT01595438; NCT01599806.
BACKGROUND: Ceftazidime/avibactam is approved for complicated intra-abdominal and urinary tract infections (UTIs) based on results from randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Data regarding its effectiveness in treating hospital-acquired infections or resistant pathogens have not been systematically compiled. METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis including RCTs evaluating ceftazidime/avibactam versus comparator for the treatment of any infection. Primary outcome was 30 day all-cause mortality. Subgroups of hospital-acquired infections and specific resistance phenotypes were planned. RESULTS: Seven publications (eight trials, 4093 patients) were included, reporting a baseline  approximately 25% of ESBL-carrying Enterobacteriaceae. No significant difference between ceftazidime/avibactam and comparator (mostly carbapenem) was demonstrated for 30 day all-cause mortality, late follow-up mortality and clinical response [relative risk (RR) 1.10, 95% CI 0.70-1.72, P = 0.69; RR 1.23, 95% CI 0.87-1.76, P = 0.25; RR 0.98, 95% CI 0.96-1.01, P = 0.21, respectively, without significant heterogeneity]. Higher microbiological response rate was demonstrated with ceftazidime/avibactam in patients with UTI (RR 1.14, 1.0-1.29, P = 0.05, I2 = 51%). No significant difference in clinical response was demonstrated for patients with ceftazidime-resistant pathogens (RR 1.02, 95% CI 0.94-1.10, P = 0.66, I2 = 0%). Results for other subgroups of resistant pathogens or hospital-acquired infection were not available. Serious adverse events (SAEs) were significantly more common with ceftazidime/avibactam (RR 1.24, 95% CI 1.00-1.54, P = 0.05, I2 = 0%). CONCLUSIONS: Ceftazidime/avibactam is clinically and microbiologically as effective as carbapenems for treatment of infections in a setting of  approximately 25% ESBL-carrying Enterobacteriaceae. Safety of the drug should be further evaluated owing to a higher rate of SAEs compared with carbapenems. Further studies should assess the drug's effectiveness in the treatment of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae.
While shunt infections are regularly treated with intraventricular antibiotics, the validity of such an application in bacterial meningitis of other origin is controversial. We report two cases of partly successful treatment with intraventricular Ceftazidime (10-20 mg twice per week). One patient with pseudomonas aeruginosa meningitis who was treated as an out-patient for nearly two years died after an attempted withdrawal of the intraventricular treatment. In our experience, intraventricular application of antibiotics can be a part of the therapeutic regimen in all cases of chronic meningitis with problematic bacteria. Depending on the bacillus, Ceftazidime, Vancomycin or Netilmicin can be recommended for intrathecal application.
PURPOSE: To describe a case of postkeratoplasty recurrent Alcaligenes xylosoxidans keratitis. METHODS: A 33-year-old man with a history of penetrating keratoplasty developed corneal infiltrate with intact epithelium and then was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Corneal scraping was taken for microbiologic study. RESULTS: The culture result identified A. xylosoxidans, sensitive to piperacillin and ceftazidime. There were 3 recurrent episodes within 2 months after each apparent resolution achieved after the instillation of topical piperacillin (10 mg/mL). During the fourth attack, the lesion responded poorly to piperacillin and ceftazidime (25 mg/mL), so therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty was performed to eradicate the recalcitrant infection. CONCLUSIONS: A. xylosoxidans has probably been underreported as a cause of ocular infection. It does not respond to conventional antibiotic therapy and may be difficult to eradicate. Therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty might be necessary if medical treatment fails.
OBJECTIVES: Ceftazidime/avibactam is a key antibiotic for carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales (CPE) Gram-negative infections, but current dosing may be suboptimal to grant activity. This study explores the population pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics (PK/PD) of continuous infusion (CI) ceftazidime/avibactam for maximizing treatment efficacy in critically ill patients. METHODS: A retrospective analysis of adult patients receiving CI ceftazidime/avibactam and therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of both compounds was performed. Population PK/PD modelling identified the most accurate method for estimating ceftazidime/avibactam clearance based on kidney function and Monte Carlo simulations investigated the relationship between various CI dosing regimens and aggressive joint PK/PD target attainment of ceftazidime/avibactam. RESULTS: The European Kidney Function Consortium (EKFC) equation best described kidney function for ceftazidime/avibactam clearance. The findings challenge the current approach of only reducing the ceftazidime/avibactam dose based on kidney function by identifying dose adjustments in patients with augmented kidney function. Our CI ceftazidime/avibactam dosing strategies, adjusted by TDM, showed promise for achieving optimal aggressive joint PK/PD targets and potentially improving clinical/microbiological outcomes against KPC- and OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales. The risk of neurotoxicity associated with these strategies appears acceptable. CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that adjusting ceftazidime/avibactam dosing regimen based solely on eCLcr might be suboptimal for critically ill patients. Higher daily doses delivered by CI and adjusted based on TDM have the potential to improve aggressive joint PK/PD target attainment and potentially clinical/microbiological outcomes. Further investigations are warranted to confirm these findings and establish optimal TDM-guided dosing strategies for ceftazidime/avibactam in clinical practice.
OBJECTIVES: The use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may alter blood levels of several drugs, including antibiotics, leading to under dosing of these drugs and thus to potential treatment failure. No data exist on pharmacokinetics of new antimicrobial, in particular ceftazidime/avibactam. We therefore perform this study to evaluate ceftazidime/avibactam blood levels in ECMO patients and find factors associated with underdosing. METHODS: Retrospective observational study of patients on ECMO having received ceftazidime/avibactam and in whom trough blood levels of ceftazidime and avibactam were available. Main outcome measurement was the number of patients with ceftazidime and avibactam blood levels above predefined cut-off values, derived from the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) breakpoints for Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, namely 8 mg/L for ceftazidime and 4 mg/L for avibactam, and explored factors associated with underdosing. RESULTS: Twenty-three ceftazidime/avibactam trough levels were available in 14 ECMO patients, all of them having received veno-venous ECMO for SARS-CoV-2-associated pneumonia. Although ceftazidime levels were above 8 mg/L in all except one patient, nine (39%) of the avibactam dosages were below 4 mg/L. Increased renal clearance (creatinine clearance > 130 mL/min) was the main factor associated with under dosing, since 7 out of the 10 dosages below the predefined cut-offs were measured in patients with this condition. CONCLUSIONS: In ECMO patients receiving ceftazidime/avibactam, ceftazidime and avibactam serum levels are above EUCAST breakpoints in most cases, justifying the use of normal dosing in ECMO patients. Increased renal clearance may lead to ceftazidime and avibactam under dosing.
The pharmacokinetics and serum bactericidal activity of vancomycin alone and in combination with ceftazidime were investigated in 10 healthy volunteers. The pharmacokinetic parameters showed no significant differences (P less than 0.05) between single and combined administration. No antagonistic effects were observed in serum bactericidal activity with the combination against 20 gram-positive and 20 gram-negative locally isolated bacteria. A titer of greater than or equal to 1:8 was generated by the combination against all test strains except enterococci. Seven of ten volunteers developed a typical "red man's syndrome" during the administration of 1.0 g of vancomycin.
BACKGROUND: The incidence of methicillin-resistant Gram-positive bacteria infections in febrile neutropenic children is high. Teicoplanin is an alternative treatment to vancomycin in these patients but few pharmacokinetic studies of teicoplanin in children have been conducted and optimal dosages have not been well-established. OBJECTIVES: To assess the pharmacokinetics of teicoplanin in combination with another antibiotic in Gram-positive infections in pediatric patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation and to determine the most appropriate dosage regimen for this type of patient. METHODS: We studied 21 patients divided into 2 groups. In Group A (n = 9) the dosage regimen consisted of 3 loading doses of 10 mg/kg at 12-h intervals, followed by a maintenance dosage of 10 mg/kg/day. Group B (n = 12) received the same loading dose and a maintenance dosage of 20 mg/kg/day. Plasma teicoplanin concentrations were monitored in all patients from the second day after the start of treatment and periodically thereafter. Serum concentrations above 10 mg/l were established as desirable trough values. RESULTS: In Group A trough values > 10 mg/l were not reached in five patients and treatment was modified owing to persistent fever. In Group B all patients attained trough values > 10 mg/l. Tolerance to treatment was excellent. CONCLUSION: In febrile neutropenic pediatric patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation, maintenance dosages of teicoplanin between 15 and 20 mg/kg/day assure serum concentrations above 10 mg/l. Dosages of 10 mg/kg/day do not assure serum through values above 10 mg/l.
OBJECTIVES: Peritonitis is a serious complication in patients undergoing automated peritoneal dialysis (APD) that increases morbidity and frequently disqualifies patients from the peritoneal dialysis programme. Ceftazidime/avibactam (CAZ/AVI) is a potential treatment option for APD patients with peritonitis caused by resistant Gram-negative bacteria, but limited data exist on systemic and target-site pharmacokinetics (PK) in patients undergoing APD. This study set out to investigate the PK of CAZ/AVI in plasma and peritoneal dialysate (PDS) of patients undergoing APD. METHODS: A prospective, open-label PK study was conducted on eight patients undergoing APD. CAZ/AVI was administered as a single intravenous dose of 2 g/0.5 g over 120 minutes. APD cycles were initiated 15 hours after the study drug administration. Dense PDS and plasma sampling was performed for 24 hours after the start of administration. PK parameters were analysed with population PK modelling. Probability of target attainment (PTA) was simulated for different CAZ/AVI doses. RESULTS: PK profiles of both drugs in plasma and PDS were similar, indicating that the two drugs are well suited for a fixed-dose combination. A two-compartment model best described the PK of both drugs. A single dose of 2 g/0.5 g CAZ/AVI led to concentrations that far exceeded the PK/PD targets of both drugs. In the Monte Carlo simulations, even the lowest dose (750/190 mg CAZ/AVI) achieved a PTA of >90% for MICs up to 8 mg/L (The European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing epidemiological cut-off value for Pseudomonas aeruginosa) in plasma and PDS. DISCUSSION: On the basis of PTA simulations, a dose of 750/190 mg CAZ/AVI would be sufficient to treat plasma and peritoneal fluid infections in patients undergoing APD.
Gram-negative resistance has reached a crucial point, with emergence of pathogens resistant to most or all available antibiotics. Ceftazidime-avibactam is a newly approved agent combining ceftazidime and a novel beta-lactamase inhibitor with activity against multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacteria. Avibactam has increased potency and expanded spectrum of inhibition of class A and C beta-lactamases relative to available beta-lactamase inhibitors, including extended-spectrum beta-lactamases, AmpC, and Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC) enzymes. Avibactam expands ceftazidime's spectrum of activity to include many ceftazidime- and carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Early clinical data indicate that ceftazidime-avibactam is effective and well tolerated in patients with complicated urinary tract infections (cUTIs) and complicated intraabdominal infections (cIAI). In a phase II trial of patients with cUTIs, ceftazidime-avibactam produced similar rates of clinical and microbiologic success compared with imipenem-cilastatin (70.5% and 71.4% microbiologic success rates, respectively). Likewise, patients receiving ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole in a phase II study of patients with cIAI had similar response rates to those receiving meropenem (91.2% and 93.4% clinical success rates, respectively). Based on available in vitro, in vivo, and phase II trial data, as well as preliminary phase III trial results in ceftazidime-resistant, gram-negative cUTI and cIAI, ceftazidime-avibactam received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval for treatment of cUTI, including pyelonephritis, and cIAI, in combination with metronidazole, in adult patients with limited or no alternative treatment options. The approved dosage, ceftazidime 2 g-avibactam 0.5 g administered as a 2-hour infusion every 8 hours, was selected based on pharmacodynamic analysis and available clinical data. This dosage is under further investigation in patients with cUTI, cIAI, and nosocomial or ventilator-associated pneumonia. The current body of evidence suggests that ceftazidime-avibactam is a promising addition to our therapeutic armamentarium with potential to answer an urgent unmet medical need. Further data in highly resistant gram-negative infections, particularly those caused by KPC-producing Enterobacteriaceae, are needed. As it is introduced into clinical use, careful stewardship and rational use are essential to preserve ceftazidime-avibactam's potential utility.
Peritoneal dialysis-associated peritonitis (PDAP) can be treated using very different regimens of antimicrobial administration, regimens that result in different pharmacokinetic outcomes and systemic exposure levels. Currently, there is no population-level pharmacokinetic framework germane to the treatment of PDAP. We coupled a differential-equation-based model of antimicrobial kinetics to a Monte Carlo simulation framework, and conducted "in silico" clinical trials to explore the anticipated effects of different antimicrobial dosing regimens on relevant pharmacokinetic parameters (AUC/MIC and time greater than 5 xMIC) and the level of systemic exposure.
Intravenous ciprofloxacin therapy was evaluated in comparison with i.v. ceftazidime in the treatment of skin and soft tissue infections and were found to be comparable. Intravenous or peroral forms of ciprofloxacin may be used instead of intravenously given third generation cephalosporins or aminoglycosides in the treatment of even severe infections of the skin and soft tissue.
A dose-ranging clinical trial of ceftazidime was carried out in patients with respiratory infections. Patients were randomly allocated to receive either 500 mg or 1 g doses of ceftazidime twice-daily intravenously. The organisms isolated from sputum were eradicated in 23 cases, and in 18 cases within 3 days. Five bacteriological failures were found during ceftazidime treatment (2 cases were not assessable), but only 2 of these patients had not clinically improved. There was no significant difference between the two dose regimes. The only adverse reaction was an allergic rash, occurring on the third day of treatment. This rash subsided rapidly on withdrawal of ceftazidime.
