Patiens with psoriasis and mild to moderate skin disease can be treated with topical agents. This review finds that the most effective topical treatment is calcipotriol and betamethasone combination formulations. Pure topical corticosteroids continue to have a role in the treatment of psoriasis, as they are available in many strengths and formulations that facilitate ease of use. In addition, the price is often lower than for the combination formulations. Topical calcineurin inhibitors can treat facial and intertriginous psoriasis to reduce the risk of skin atrophy.
Pemphigus erythematosus occurred in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis who was treated with D-penicillamine. The skin lesions appeared 4 months after the onset of D-penicillamine treatment and persisted 14 years after cessation of this drug. Topical betamethasone dipropionate applications resulted in complete regression of the cutaneous lesions.
IMPORTANCE: The Antenatal Late Preterm Steroids (ALPS) trial changed clinical practice in the United States by finding that antenatal betamethasone at 34 to 36 weeks decreased short-term neonatal respiratory morbidity. However, the trial also found increased risk of neonatal hypoglycemia after betamethasone. This follow-up study focused on long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes after late preterm steroids. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether administration of late preterm (34-36 completed weeks) corticosteroids affected childhood neurodevelopmental outcomes. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Prospective follow-up study of children aged 6 years or older whose birthing parent had enrolled in the multicenter randomized clinical trial, conducted at 13 centers that participated in the Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units (MFMU) Network cycle from 2011-2016. Follow-up was from 2017-2022. EXPOSURE: Twelve milligrams of intramuscular betamethasone administered twice 24 hours apart. MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURES: The primary outcome of this follow-up study was a General Conceptual Ability score less than 85 (-1 SD) on the Differential Ability Scales, 2nd Edition (DAS-II). Secondary outcomes included the Gross Motor Function Classification System level and Social Responsiveness Scale and Child Behavior Checklist scores. Multivariable analyses adjusted for prespecified variables known to be associated with the primary outcome. Sensitivity analyses used inverse probability weighting and also modeled the outcome for those lost to follow-up. RESULTS: Of 2831 children, 1026 enrolled and 949 (479 betamethasone, 470 placebo) completed the DAS-II at a median age of 7 years (IQR, 6.6-7.6 years). Maternal, neonatal, and childhood characteristics were similar between groups except that neonatal hypoglycemia was more common in the betamethasone group. There were no differences in the primary outcome, a general conceptual ability score less than 85, which occurred in 82 (17.1%) of the betamethasone vs 87 (18.5%) of the placebo group (adjusted relative risk, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.73-1.22). No differences in secondary outcomes were observed. Sensitivity analyses using inverse probability weighting or assigning outcomes to children lost to follow-up also found no differences between groups. CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: In this follow-up study of a randomized clinical trial, administration of antenatal corticosteroids to persons at risk of late preterm delivery, originally shown to improve short-term neonatal respiratory outcomes but with an increased rate of hypoglycemia, was not associated with adverse childhood neurodevelopmental outcomes at age 6 years or older.
INTRODUCTION: Paclitaxel (Taxol) is a drug derived from the bark of the Pacific yew tree and is widely used in cancer treatment, especially for breast, ovarian, and lung cancers. It has not previously been reported to induce lupus. CASE: We report the case of a woman with ovarian cancer who developed paclitaxel-induced lupus on two occasions. Both times, the paclitaxel dramatically improved the ovarian cancer. DISCUSSION: The diagnosis of lupus was confirmed by the initial skin appearance, elevated levels of antinuclear antibodies, recurrence on reintroduction, and biopsy results. To our knowledge, it is the first case reported of paclitaxel-induced lupus.
The topical treatment of psoriasis benefits from the alternate use of dermocorticosteroids and vitamin D3 analogues. A new galenic formulation allows to combine them in a single application. Dovobet (LEO Pharma) ointment is the association of calcipotriol 50 microg/g with betamethasone dipoprionate 0.5 mg/g. This formulation boosts the therapeutic activity of calcipotriol. It also decreases the irritative inflammatory reaction due to calcipotriol without increasing the atrophogenic risk of the dermocorticoid.
BACKGROUND: Repeat dose(s) of antenatal betamethasone are recommended for women at <32 weeks with ongoing risk of preterm birth. However, there is concern that use of repeat dose(s) in fetal growth restriction (FGR) may increase the risk of later cardiometabolic disease. METHODS: We undertook secondary analysis of data from the Australasian Collaborative Trial of Repeat Doses of Corticosteroids Midchildhood Outcome Study to determine if FGR influences the effect of repeat betamethasone on growth and cardiometabolic function. At 6 to 8 years, children underwent anthropometry, dual energy x-ray absorptiometry, intravenous glucose tolerance testing, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, and spirometry. FGR was defined as severe FGR at entry, cesarean delivery for FGR, or customized birth weight below the third centile. RESULTS: Of 266 children assessed, FGR occurred in 43 of 127 (34%) exposed to repeat betamethasone and 44 of 139 (32%) exposed to placebo. There was an interaction between FGR and repeat betamethasone treatment for the effect on height (z score mean difference [95% confidence interval]; FGR: 0.59 [0.01 to 1.17]; non-FGR: -0.29 [-0.69 to 0.10]; P = .01). However, FGR did not influence the effect of repeat betamethasone on cardiometabolic function, which was similar in treatment groups, both in FGR and non-FGR subgroups. CONCLUSIONS: Repeat antenatal betamethasone treatment had no adverse effects on cardiometabolic function, even in the presence of FGR. It may have a positive effect on height in FGR. Clinicians should use repeat doses of antenatal corticosteroids when indicated before preterm birth, regardless of FGR, in view of the associated neonatal benefits.
Antenatal glucocorticoids have been used for 30 years to induce maturation of preterm fetal lungs. Stimulation of the pulmonary surfactant system has been regarded as the most important effect of antenatal glucocorticoids; however, as these drugs alter the expression of a large number of genes they affect the maturation of the lung in several other ways. Antioxidant enzyme production, lung fluid absorption and alveolar development are all affected by glucocorticoids administered in the perinatal period. There is evidence that glucocorticoids induce genes associated with the synthesis of surfactant proteins, fatty acid synthase, the epithelial sodium channel and the membrane protein sodium/potassium ATPase as well as several antioxidant enzymes including catalase, glutathione peroxidase and two superoxide dismutases. Glucocorticoids also increase the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor, which may inhibit alveolarization and lead to abnormally large alveoli. The use of both antenatal and postnatal glucocorticoids has increased in the past decade. However, as concerns about possible long-term effects have arisen, the mechanisms of how glucocorticoids alter the structure and function of the lungs needs to be determined to allow the development of more specific agents in the treatment of respiratory distress syndrome.
Psoriasis is a common chronic immune-mediated skin disease which has a significant impact on patients' quality of life, and is associated with numerous comorbidities (i.e., psoriatic arthritis, Crohn's disease and cardiovascular disease). A greater understanding of its immunopathogenesis has guided the development of novel, more targeted therapies. Nonetheless, traditional treatment with topical agents, phototherapy and systemic medications is used in the management of the majority of psoriasis patients. Mainstay topical treatments include corticosteroids and vitamin D derivatives. Calcipotriene/betamethasone dipropionate aerosol foam is a novel single product combination, which seeks to provide superior therapeutic efficacy in addition to enhanced cosmetic properties. This article reviews the literature on the pharmacology and clinical data in terms of safety, efficacy and patient satisfaction of this topical medication.
Intraocular infection due to Blastomyces dermatitidis is rare, and only 10 cases have previously been reported. Manifestations of ocular blastomycosis can range from keratitis to panophthalmitis, and it is often difficult to diagnose ocular blastomycosis early. We report the case of a 45-year-old man who had disseminated blastomycosis that involved the lungs, skin, and ocular uvea and who was successfully treated with systemic and local antifungal therapy. We also review the literature describing the spectrum of clinical findings due to intraocular blastomycosis.
Prenatal corticosteroids administration is one of the major advances in obstetrics and neonatology for the prevention of preterm-birth related complications. However, concerns have been raised about its safety regarding neonatal growth and children development. Therefore, some obstetricians have restricted the use of corticosteroids to precisely defined indications. It remains some uncertainty regarding the choice of antenatal corticosteroids, the interval between injections, the timing of effectiveness and the maximum number of courses per pregnancy that is acceptable without causing complications among children. Thus, we performed a current literature review in 2013 regarding short- and long-term efficacy and safety in order to give clear recommendations to practitioners.
Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is the most common autoimmune blistering skin disease. Until recently the condition was treated with oral corticosteroids. However, high-dose corticosteroids are poorly tolerated in the elderly and their use has probably contributed to the high mortality rates observed in several cohorts. Accordingly, considerable effort has been directed at identifying corticosteroid-sparing agents, such as immunosuppressant drugs, plasma exchange techniques, intravenous immunoglobulins and tetracycline, that can be used in this clinical setting. Many of these options have appeared to be useful in open series, but they have been found to be ineffective or only marginally effective when tested in randomised, controlled trials. An important breakthrough occurred with the demonstration in a large, randomised trial that a 'super-potent' topical corticosteroid (clobetasol propionate) was not only associated with a significant decrease in severe complications and mortality of BP patients, but was also more effective than oral prednisone. New strategies for BP should include topical clobetasol propionate as first-line therapy in the elderly and consider adjuvant therapy only in the very rare cases that are either resistant or intolerant to this treatment.
Skin, particularly the uppermost layer--the stratum corneum--presents a formidable, largely impassable barrier to the entry of most compounds. Recently, a novel thermolabile, low-residue foam vehicle, VersaFoam (Connetics Corp, Palo Alto, Calif), has emerged that offers a number of clinical and cosmetic advantages for the delivery of therapeutic agents through the skin. Two corticosteroids--mid-potency betamethasone valerate and ultra-high-potency clobetasol propionate--are now available in this formulation, and other products are in development to deliver clindamycin and ketoconazole in the foam vehicle. A series of in vitro studies have demonstrated that the new foam has the ability to deliver the active drug at an increased rate compared with other vehicles. These findings suggest that the new foam utilizes a nontraditional "rapid-permeation" pathway for the delivery of drugs. It is likely that components within the foam (probably the alcohols) act as penetration enhancers, and reversibly alter the barrier properties of the outer stratum corneum, thus driving the delivered drug across the skin membrane via the intracellular route. This is in contrast to traditional topical delivery vehicles, which must first rely on hydration of the intercellular spaces in the stratum corneum to achieve drug delivery. The latter mechanism reflects a hydration-dependent process, which may result in comparatively slower drug permeation.
Effects and side effects of injectable depot steroid in the treatment of allergic rhinoconjunctivitis (hay fever) are described. A few controlled studies have shown injectable steroids to be superior to the effect of placebo and locally applied steroid. Over a period of 10 years from 1984-95 only 26 registered side effects were reported to the central Danish register for side effects of drugs (Laegemiddelstyrelsens Bivirkningsregister). Only eight concerned subcutaneous atrophy and in two cases the cutaneous changes persisted. Based on registration of number of treatments in the county of Funen 1996, it is estimated that the use of injectable depot steroids for treatment of hay fever accounts for about 535,000 DDD (defined daily doses corresponding to about 33,000 treatments per year). We conclude that the use of injectable corticosteroids in the treatment of hay fever is common and effective and side effects are very rare. However, injectable corticosteroids should only be used when conventional treatment is not sufficient to control symptoms.
The antepartum administration of fluorinated corticosteroids for fetal maturation represents the most important clinical contribution in the battle against prematurity. This treatment reduces the risk of neonatal death and handicap. It is also known that on corticosteroid exposure, fetuses are subjected to transiently increased physiologic and metabolic demands. Healthy fetuses are able to cope, although emerging evidence suggests this may not be the case with severely growth-restricted fetuses. This review presents evidence of efficacy and safety pertaining to corticosteroid administration in fetal growth restriction-affected pregnancies, offers guidance to clinicians, and points out questions that still need answers.
The fixed-combination of Cal/BD aerosol foam is now entering the Italian market. This drug was developed with a technology that allows an enhanced penetration of the active ingredients into the skin. This enhanced penetration improves local bioavailability and, consequently, Cal/BD aerosol foam therapy is associated with improved clinical outcomes if compared with other products with the same components. The efficacy and safety of Cal/BD aerosol foam were confirmed both in clinical trials and in "field-practice" studies. This short review discusses current evidence on the Cal/BD aerosol foam combination; some preliminary data collected in the Italian clinical practice will be also presented.
BACKGROUND: Ataxia telangiectasia is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar ataxia, telangiectases, immune defects, and a predisposition to malignancy. Quality of life is severely impaired by neurological symptoms. However, curative options for the neurological symptoms are limited. Recent studies have demonstrated short-term improvement in neurological symptoms with betamethasone therapy. However, the long-term and adverse effects of betamethasone are unclear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the long-term effects, benefits, and adverse effects of low-dose betamethasone in ataxia telangiectasia. METHODS: Six patients with ataxia telangiectasia received betamethasone at 0.02 mg/kg/day for two years. After cessation of betamethasone, the patients were observed for two additional years. Neurological assessments were performed, and adverse effects were monitored every three months throughout the four-year study period. RESULTS: Transient improvement of neurological symptom was observed in five of the six patients. However, after two years betamethasone treatment, only one of the six patients showed a slight improvement in the neurological score, one patient showed no change, and the neurological scores of the remaining four patients deteriorated. After the cessation of betamethasone treatment, neurological symptoms worsened in all patients. As an adverse effect of betamethasone, transient adrenal dysfunction was observed in all cases. CONCLUSIONS: Although these findings are in agreement with previous studies suggesting that short-term betamethasone treatment transiently benefits patients with ataxia telangiectasia, the long-term benefits and risks should be carefully considered.
The available data unambiguously support the beneficial, short-term fetal effects of antenatal corticosteroids in women at risk for preterm delivery. There are still several incompletely addressed questions, including the use of corticosteroids in women with preterm premature rupture of membranes, the optimal corticosteroid preparation to be used, and the impact of repeated dosing. These issues are discussed in this review from the perspective of recent scientific evidence on the mechanisms responsible for positive short-term effects on survival and possible harmful long-term effects.
Antenatal glucocorticoid therapy remains one the most striking successes in perinatal management of complicated pregnancies leading to premature birth. All women at risk of preterm delivery before 34 weeks gestation should be treated, given the anti-inflammatory and maturative properties of fluorocorticoids. Betamethasone is preferred to dexamethasone and no more than two courses, two weeks apart, should be given, until the evidence from further controlled trials on repeated doses becomes available.
A 71-year-old man with a penile verrucous carcinoma presenting as a large cutaneous horn is described. Both verrucous carcinoma and penile cutaneous horn are relatively uncommon entities and have not been previously reported to occur concomitantly. A brief review of the relevant medical literature and methods of therapy is included.
Fifteen randomized studies in Crowley's analysis compared a group of patients receiving, a single course of steroids versus placebo between 24 and 34 weeks of gestation. It clearly demonstrated the benefit of a single course of steroids in the prevention of the prematurity-related complications with a decrease in neonatal mortality, a decrease in the incidence of respiratory distress syndrome, a reduction in the incidence of intraventricular haemorrhage and a reduction in necrotizing enterocolitis (NP 1). Because only bethamethasone has proved its efficiency in the reduction of neonatal mortality (NP 2) and antenatal exposition to betamethasone is associated with a decrease in the risk of periventricular leukomalacia in children born prematurely (NP 3) it seems preferable to use betamethasone rather than dexamethasone. Antenatal administration of repeated courses compared with single course of steroids improves fetal lung function with a decrease of RDS notably if the children is born before 28 weeks of gestation (NP 2) but numerous animal studies reported adverse effects of repeated courses. Several studies in women having received of repeated courses steroids report a decrease in birth weight and head circumference at birth but with a 3 years follow up similar to that of children exposed to a single course (NP 3). In conclusion the benefit of a single course of steroids is indisputable for the prevention of the prematurity-related complications but there is today a strong concern about the benefit/risk ratio in relation to the prescription of repeated courses of steroids.
