Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are commonly used in infants, children, and adolescents worldwide; however, despite sufficient evidence of the beneficial effects of NSAIDs in children and adolescents, there is a lack of comprehensive data in infants. The present review summarizes the current knowledge on the safety and efficacy of various NSAIDs used in infants for which data are available, and includes ibuprofen, dexibuprofen, ketoprofen, flurbiprofen, naproxen, diclofenac, ketorolac, indomethacin, niflumic acid, meloxicam, celecoxib, parecoxib, rofecoxib, acetylsalicylic acid, and nimesulide. The efficacy of NSAIDs has been documented for a variety of conditions, such as fever and pain. NSAIDs are also the main pillars of anti-inflammatory treatment, such as in pediatric inflammatory rheumatic diseases. Limited data are available on the safety of most NSAIDs in infants. Adverse drug reactions may be renal, gastrointestinal, hematological, or immunologic. Since NSAIDs are among the most frequently used drugs in the pediatric population, safety and efficacy studies can be performed as part of normal clinical routine, even in young infants. Available data sources, such as (electronic) medical records, should be used for safety and efficacy analyses. On a larger scale, existing data sources, e.g. adverse drug reaction programs/networks, spontaneous national reporting systems, and electronic medical records should be assessed with child-specific methods in order to detect safety signals pertinent to certain pediatric age groups or disease entities. To improve the safety of NSAIDs in infants, treatment needs to be initiated with the lowest age-appropriate or weight-based dose. Duration of treatment and amount of drug used should be regularly evaluated and maximum dose limits and other recommendations by the manufacturer or expert committees should be followed. Treatment for non-chronic conditions such as fever and acute (postoperative) pain should be kept as short as possible. Patients with chronic conditions should be regularly monitored for possible adverse effects of NSAIDs.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: It is generally accepted that inflammatory cells found in the tumor microenvironment are involved in the neoplastic process, promoting cell proliferation, survival, and migration. Therefore, administering anti-inflammatory medication in cancer therapy seems to be justified. A potential pathway associated with the aforementioned issue is cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition, particularly as the overexpression of this enzyme has been proven to occur in cancer tissues and is also associated with a poor prognosis in several types of human malignancies. Celecoxib, a COX-2 selective inhibitor, has been utilized for over 20 years, particularly as an anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic medication. However, to date, its antineoplastic properties have not been sufficiently investigated. In recent years, the number of research studies on the antineoplastic effects of celecoxib has increased considerably. The vast majority of publications refers to preclinical studies attempting to elucidate its mechanisms of action. Clinical trials concerning celecoxib have focused primarily on the treatment of cancers of the colon, breast, lung, prostate, stomach, head and neck, as well as premalignant lesions such as familial adenoma polyposis. In this review article authors attempt to summarise the latest research which has elucidated celecoxib use in the treatment and prevention of cancer. CONCLUSION: Both preclinical and clinical studies have demonstrated promising results of the role of celecoxib in the treatment and prevention of cancer - the best outcome was observed in colon, breast, prostate and head and neck cancers. However, more clinical trials providing real evidence-based clinical advances of celecoxib use are needed.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the safety and tolerability of a fixed-dose co-formulation of ciprofloxacin and celecoxib (PrimeC) in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and to examine its effects on disease progression and ALS-related biomarkers. METHODS: In this proof of concept, open-label, phase IIa study of PrimeC in 15 patients with ALS, participants were administered PrimeC thrice daily for 12 months. The primary endpoints were safety and tolerability. Exploratory endpoints included disease progression outcomes such as forced vital capacity, revised ALS functional rating scale, and effect on algorithm-predicted survival. In addition, indications of a biological effect were assessed by selected biomarker analyses, including TDP-43 and LC3 levels in neuron-derived exosomes (NDEs), and serum neurofilaments. RESULTS: Four participants experienced adverse events (AEs) related to the study drug. None of these AEs were unexpected, and most were mild or moderate (69%). Additionally, no serious AEs were related to the study drug. One participant tested positive for COVID-19 and recovered without complications, and no other abnormal laboratory investigations were found. Participants' survival compared to their predictions showed no safety concerns. Biomarker analyses demonstrated significant changes associated with PrimeC in neural-derived exosomal TDP-43 levels and levels of LC3, a key autophagy marker. INTERPRETATION: This study supports the safety and tolerability of PrimeC in ALS. Biomarker analyses suggest early evidence of a biological effect. A placebo-controlled trial is required to disentangle the biomarker results from natural progression and to evaluate the efficacy of PrimeC for the treatment of ALS. Summary for social media if publishedTwitter handles: @NeurosenseT, @ShiranZimri*What is the current knowledge on the topic? ALS is a severe neurodegenerative disease, causing death within 2-5 years from diagnosis. To date there is no effective treatment to halt or significantly delay disease progression.*What question did this study address? This study assessed the safety, tolerability and exploratory efficacy of PrimeC, a fixed dose co-formulation of ciprofloxacin and celecoxib in the ALS population.*What does this study add to our knowledge? This study supports the safety and tolerability of PrimeC in ALS, and exploratory biomarker analyses suggest early insight for disease related-alteration.*How might this potentially impact the practice of neurology? These results set the stage for a larger, placebo-controlled study to examine the efficacy of PrimeC, with the potential to become a new drug candidate for ALS.
PURPOSE: Hand-foot syndrome (HFS) and hand-foot skin reaction (HFSR) are common toxicities of several systemic cancer treatments. Multikinase inhibitor-induced HFSR is distinguished from chemotherapy-induced HFS in terms of pathogenesis, symptomatology, and treatment. Multiple trials have investigated the efficacy of preventive strategies such as COX-inhibitors, pyridoxine, and urea cream; however, no consensus has been made. This meta-analysis evaluated data from high-quality trials to provide strong evidence in forming recommendations to prevent systemic cancer therapy-induced HFS/HFSR. METHODS: A systematic search of PubMed, Embase, Cochrane, clinical trials databases, and hand searching were utilized to identify randomized trials (RCTs) investigating prophylactic strategies for HFS/HFSR in cancer patients receiving systemic treatment. Trials published until August 2021 were included. Using the random effects model, pooled odds ratios were calculated for rates of all-grade and severe HFS/HFSR. Subgroup analysis based on type of cancer treatment given was done. RESULTS: Sixteen RCTs were included (N=2814). For all-grade HFS/HFSR, celecoxib (OR 0.52, 95% CI 0.32-0.85, p=0.009) and urea cream (OR 0.48, 95% CI 0.39-0.60, p<0.00001) both showed statistically significant risk reduction. Celecoxib was effective in preventing HFS in patients who received capecitabine (50.5% vs 65%, p=0.05), while urea cream was effective in both capecitabine HFS (22.3% vs 39.5%, p=0.02) and sorafenib-induced HFSR (54.9% vs 71.4%, p<0.00001). Pyridoxine at higher doses showed a trend towards benefit in preventing all grade HFS (69.6% vs 74.1%, p=0.23). CONCLUSIONS: Urea cream and celecoxib are both effective in preventing HFS/HFSR in patients receiving systemic cancer treatment. Particularly, celecoxib is more effective in preventing all-grade capecitabine-induced HFS, while urea cream shows more benefit in preventing moderate to severe sorafenib-induced HFSR. Studies investigating optimal dosing for celecoxib and urea cream are recommended. There is inadequate evidence to make recommendations regarding pyridoxine.
INTRODUCTION: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are one of the most prescribed pharmacological groups, especially in elderly patients. AREAS COVERED: The main GI and CV adverse events associated with NSAID use are reviewed. Risk factors and prophylactic strategies are also covered. EXPERT OPINION: COX-2 selective agents are safer to the GI tract but have a worst CV profile. On the contrary, naproxen seems safer for CV system, but it is one of the NSAIDs with higher GI toxicity. Co-therapy with aspirin reduces the GI benefits of COX-2 selective agents, whereas ibuprofen and naproxen may neglect the antiplatelet effect of aspirin. NSAIDs increase the risk of both upper and lower GI complications. Co-therapy with PPI reduces the risk of upper but not lower GI complications, and seems to induce dysbiosis in the small bowel, which may be implicated in the damage induced by NSAIDs. Celecoxib, a COX-2 selective agent, seems safer for both the upper and the lower GI tract. Prescription of type and dose of NSAIDs must be individualized based on the stratification of the CV and GI risk of patients.
Indomethacin-responsive headaches encompass a group of disorders which include a subset of the trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias and other paroxysmal, often precipitated primary headaches. Many patients show a rapid therapeutic response to indomethacin, which is limited by intolerability. Etoricoxib and celecoxib, selective inhibitors of cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2), spare gastroduodenal COX-1 activity and are less likely to cause gastrointestinal adverse effects than indomethacin. We report a case series of eight patients, seven who responded to etoricoxib and one patient who responded to celecoxib.
The US Food and Drug Administration recently granted an approved indication for the first fixed-dose combination antihypertensive (amlodipine) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (celecoxib) for treatment of comorbid hypertension and osteoarthritis. This review summarizes available data on this combination product, to be marketed as Consensi (Kitov Pharmaceuticals, Ltd, Tel Aviv, Israel), and discusses its potential place in therapy.
With a constantly increasing incidence, cutaneous melanoma has raised the need for a better understanding of its complex microenvironment that may further guide therapeutic options. Melanoma is a model tumor in immuno-oncology. Inflammation represents an important hallmark of cancer capable of inducing and sustaining tumor development. The inflammatory process also orchestrates the adaptative immunosuppression of tumor cells that helps them to evade immune destruction. Besides its role in proliferation, angiogenesis, and apoptosis, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is a well-known promoter of immune suppression in melanoma. COX-2 inhibitors are closely involved in this condition. This review attempts to answer two controversial questions: is COX-2 a valuable prognostic factor? Among all COX-2 inhibitors, is celecoxib a suitable adjuvant in melanoma therapy?
BACKGROUND: The analgesic effect of acupuncture is widely recognized, but the mechanical characteristics of acupuncture for pain relief, compared to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAIDs) and placebo medication, remain unknown. AIMS: To compare the modulation effects of acupuncture treatment with NSAIDs and placebo medication on descending pain modulation system (DPMS) in knee osteoarthritis (KOA) patients. METHODS: This study recruited 180 KOA patients with knee pain and 41 healthy controls (HCs). Individuals with KOA knee pain were divided randomly into groups of verum acupuncture (VA), sham acupuncture (SA), celecoxib (SC), placebo (PB), and waiting list (WT), with 36 patients in each group. VA and SA groups included ten sessions of puncturing acupoints or puncturing non-acupoints acupuncture treatment for two successive weeks. Celecoxib capsules were continuously given orally to patients in the SC group at a dosage of 200 mg daily for 2 weeks. In the PB group, patients received a placebo capsule once a day for 2 weeks at the same dosage as celecoxib capsules. In the WL group, patients did not receive any treatment. Patients underwent a resting-state BOLD-fMRI scan pre- and post-receiving the therapy, whereas HCs only underwent a baseline scan. Seed (ventrolateral periaqueductal gray, vlPAG, a key node in DPMS) based resting-state functional connectivity (rs-FC) was applied in the data analysis. RESULTS: All groups demonstrated improved knee pain scores relative to the initial state. There was no statistical difference between the VA and SA groups in all clinical outcomes, and vlPAG rs-FC alterations. KOA knee pain individuals reported higher vlPAG rs-FC in the bilateral thalamus than HCs. KOA knee pain patients in the acupuncture group (verum + sham, AG) exhibited increased vlPAG rs-FC with the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the right angular, which is associated with knee pain improvement. In contrast with the SC and PB group, the AG exhibited significantly increased vlPAG rs-FC with the right DLPFC and angular. Contrary to the WT group, the AG showed greater vlPAG rs-FC with the right DLPFC and precuneus. CONCLUSIONS: Acupuncture treatment, celecoxib, and placebo medication have different modulation effects on vlPAG DPMS in KOA knee pain patients. Acupuncture could modulate vlPAG rs-FC with brain regions associated with cognitive control, attention, and reappraisal for knee pain relief in KOA patients, compared with celecoxib and placebo medication.
There is an urgent need for new antibiotics and alternative strategies to combat bacterial pathogens. Molecular docking, antibacterial evaluation in vitro and in vivo, cytotoxicity assessment and enzyme inhibition analyses were performed. Compound 12 exhibited antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus aureus (MIC: 4 mug/ml), various clinically isolated strains of MRSA (MIC: 4-16 mug/ml) and Acinetobacter baumannii (MIC: 4 mug/ml) when combined with subinhibitory concentrations of colistin B. Compound 12 (20 mg/kg) yielded mild improvement in survival of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)-infected mice. Additionally, enzyme inhibition tests showed that compound 12 exhibited inhibitory effects against S. aureus dihydrofolate reductase (105.1 mug/ml) and DNA gyrase (122.8 mug/ml). Compound 12 is a promising antibacterial candidate for further development.
IMPORTANCE: Aspirin and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors have been associated with a reduced risk of colorectal polyps and cancer in observational and randomized studies. The effect of celecoxib, a COX-2 inhibitor, as treatment for nonmetastatic colon cancer is unknown. OBJECTIVE: To determine if the addition of celecoxib to adjuvant chemotherapy with fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) improves disease-free survival in patients with stage III colon cancer. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Cancer and Leukemia Group B (Alliance)/Southwest Oncology Group 80702 was a 2 x 2 factorial design, phase 3 trial conducted at 654 community and academic centers throughout the United States and Canada. A total of 2526 patients with stage III colon cancer were enrolled between June 2010 and November 2015 and were followed up through August 10, 2020. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to receive adjuvant FOLFOX (every 2 weeks) for 3 vs 6 months with or without 3 years of celecoxib (400 mg orally daily; n = 1263) vs placebo (n = 1261). This report focuses on the results of the celecoxib randomization. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was disease-free survival, measured from the time of randomization until documented recurrence or death from any cause. Secondary end points included overall survival, adverse events, and cardiovascular-specific events. RESULTS: Of the 2526 patients who were randomized (mean [SD] age, 61.0 years [11 years]; 1134 women [44.9%]), 2524 were included in the primary analysis. Adherence with protocol treatment, defined as receiving celecoxib or placebo for more than 2.75 years or continuing treatment until recurrence, death, or unacceptable adverse events, was 70.8% for patients treated with celecoxib and 69.9% for patients treated with placebo. A total of 337 patients randomized to celecoxib and 363 to placebo experienced disease recurrence or died, and with 6 years' median follow-up, the 3-year disease-free survival was 76.3% for celecoxib-treated patients vs 73.4% for placebo-treated patients (hazard ratio [HR] for disease recurrence or death, 0.89; 95% CI, 0.76-1.03; P = .12). The effect of celecoxib treatment on disease-free survival did not vary significantly according to assigned duration of adjuvant chemotherapy (P for interaction = .61). Five-year overall survival was 84.3% for celecoxib vs 81.6% for placebo (HR for death, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.72-1.04; P = .13). Hypertension (any grade) occurred while treated with FOLFOX in 14.6% of patients in the celecoxib group vs 10.9% of patients in the placebo group, and a grade 2 or higher increase in creatinine levels occurred after completion of FOLFOX in 1.7% vs 0.5% of patients, respectively. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with stage III colon cancer, the addition of celecoxib for 3 years, compared with placebo, to standard adjuvant chemotherapy did not significantly improve disease-free survival. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01150045.
In the Digestive Disease Week in 2015 there have been some new contributions in the field of gastrointestinal bleeding that deserve to be highlighted. Treatment of celecoxib with a proton pump inhibitor is safer than treatment with nonselective NSAID and a proton pump inhibitor in high risk gastrointestinal and cardiovascular patients who mostly also take acetylsalicylic acid. Several studies confirm the need to restart the antiplatelet or anticoagulant therapy at an early stage after a gastrointestinal hemorrhage. The need for urgent endoscopy before 6-12 h after the onset of upper gastrointestinal bleeding episode may be beneficial in patients with hemodynamic instability and high risk for comorbidity. It is confirmed that in Western but not in Japanese populations, gastrointestinal bleeding episodes admitted to hospital during weekend days are associated with a worse prognosis associated with delays in the clinical management of the events. The strategy of a restrictive policy on blood transfusions during an upper GI bleeding event has been challenged. Several studies have shown the benefit of identifying the bleeding vessel in non varicose underlying gastric lesions by Doppler ultrasound which allows direct endoscopic therapy in the patient with upper GI bleeding. Finally, it has been reported that lower gastrointestinal bleeding diverticula band ligation or hemoclipping are both safe and have the same long-term outcomes.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is known as an important enzyme in the inflammation process that has tumorigenesis function in various cancers through the induction of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), cell proliferation, migration, and invasion that lead to metastasis. Celecoxib is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that can selectively target COX-2, suppress downstream pathways, and finally lead to anticancer potentiality. microRNAs (miRNAs), as a class of small noncoding RNAs, play pivotal roles in cancers through the tumor-suppressive or oncogenic effects, by post-transcriptional regulation of their target genes. In this regard, shreds of evidence have shown that, COX-2 reveals its action through miRNA regulation. So, in this systematic review, we aimed to highlight the tumorigenic role of COX-2 in cancer development and the therapeutic effects of celecoxib, as a selective COX-2 drug, through the regulation of miRNAs.
Metastasis of colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of mortality among CRC patients. Elevated COX-2 and PD-L1 expression in colon cancer tissue has been linked to distant metastasis of tumor cells. Although COX-2 inhibitors and immune checkpoint inhibitors demonstrate improved anti-tumor efficacy, their toxicity and variable therapeutic effects in individual patients raise concerns. To address this challenge, it is vital to identify traditional Chinese medicine components that modulate COX-2 and PD-1/PD-L1: rosmarinic acid (RA) exerts striking inhibitory effect on COX-2, while ginsenoside Rg1 (GR) possesses the potential to suppress the binding of PD-1/PD-L1. In this study we investigated whether the combination of RA and GR could exert anti-metastatic effects against CRC. MC38 tumor xenograft mouse model with lung metastasis was established. The mice were administered RA (100 mg.kg(-1).d(-1), i.g.) alone or in combination with GR (100 mg.kg(-1).d(-1), i.p.). We showed that RA (50, 100, 150 muM) or a COX-2 inhibitor Celecoxib (1, 3, 9 muM) concentration-dependently inhibited the migration and invasion of MC38 cells in vitro. We further demonstrated that RA and Celecoxib inhibited the metastasis of MC38 tumors in vitro and in vivo via interfering with the COX-2-MYO10 signaling axis and inhibiting the generation of filopodia. In the MC38 tumor xenograft mice, RA administration significantly decreased the number of metastatic foci in the lungs detected by Micro CT scanning; RA in combination with GR that had inhibitory effect on the binding of PD-1 and PD-L1 further suppressed the lung metastasis of colon cancer. Compared to COX-2 inhibitors and immune checkpoint inhibitors, RA and GR displayed better safety profiles without disrupting the tissue structures of the liver, stomach and colon, offering insights into the lower toxic effects of clinical traditional Chinese medicine against tumors while retaining its efficacy.
Angioedema is potentially life-threating swelling of integument and mucosa that has multiple potential aetiologies with varying mechanisms. Drug-induced angioedema is often easily correlated with the offending agent and can be prevented with discontinuation of the medication. Many medications have now been implicated in drug-induced angioedema but the two most common are ACE inhibitors and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). This case highlights severe angioedema secondary to celecoxib and reviews varying aetiologies of angioedema and NSAID hypersensitivity reactions.
Schizophrenia is a severe, chronic and debilitating mental disorder. Past literature has reported various hypotheses about the psychopathology of schizophrenia. Recently, a growing literature has been trying to explain the role of inflammation in the etiopathogenesis of schizophrenia. In the past, numerous immune modulation and anti-inflammatory treatment options have been proposed for schizophrenia, but sometimes the results were inconsistent. Electronic search was carried out in November 2015. PubMed and Scopus databases have been used to find studies to introduce in this review. Only randomized-placebo-controlled add-on trials were taken into account. In this way, six articles were obtained for the discussion. Celecoxib showed beneficial effects mostly in early stages of schizophrenia. In chronic schizophrenia, the data are controversial, possibly in part for methodological reasons.
OBJECTIVE: To review the safety of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors in asthma patients with aspirin hypersensitivity. DATA SOURCES: Clinical studies were identified using MEDLINE (1966-September 2002). Key search terms included cyclooxygenase inhibitors, aspirin, asthma, and hypersensitivity. English-language articles were identified and included. References from the identified articles were also reviewed. DATA SYNTHESIS: The literature provides information regarding the safety of COX-2 inhibitors in asthma patients with aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD). The mechanism of AERD involves inhibition of cyclooxygenase, particularly COX-1. Inhibition of COX-1 causes an increased production of certain inflammatory mediators, which results in the reactions seen with AERD. Considering this mechanism, COX-2 inhibitors may be an alternative to aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in a patient with AERD. This article analyzes 4 studies to evaluate the safety of COX-2 inhibitors in this population. RESULTS: The 4 studies evaluated included a total of 172 patients with AERD. All patients included demonstrated intolerance to aspirin or NSAIDs and tolerated the selective COX-2 inhibitor administered. CONCLUSIONS: COX-2 inhibitors provide a potentially safe alternative for treatment of inflammatory conditions in patients with AERD.
BACKGROUND: The pericapsular nerve group (PENG) block is a novel regional anaesthesia technique that has been proposed as an effective motor-sparing block for total hip arthroplasty. Recent randomised studies show conflicting results regarding the analgesic efficacy of the PENG block for total hip arthroplasty. METHODS: We conducted a randomised controlled observer-blinded single-centre superiority trial comparing the efficacy of the PENG block with no block for patients undergoing primary total hip arthroplasty under spinal anaesthesia. All subjects received multimodal analgesia consisting of paracetamol and celecoxib. The primary outcome was quality of recovery (QoR) at 24 h as measured by the QoR-15 questionnaire. RESULTS: A total of 112 participants (56 in each group) were included in the analysis. The median (inter-quartile range [IQR]) 24-h QoR-15 scores were higher in subjects who received a PENG block (132 [116-138]) compared with subjects who did not (103 [97-112]) with a median difference of 26 (95% confidence interval, 18-31; P<0.001). Similarly, QoR-15 at 48 h was higher in the PENG group, and opioid use at 24 and 48 h postoperatively was significantly lower in the PENG group. However, we did not find significant differences in pain score, distance to ambulation, or anti-emetic use at any time point. We did not observe any PENG block-related complications. CONCLUSION: Adding a PENG block to a multimodal analgesia regimen that includes paracetamol and celecoxib improves the quality of recovery and reduces opioid requirements for patients undergoing primary total hip arthroplasty under spinal anaesthesia. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT04591353.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of chondroitin sulfate plus glucosamine hydrochloride (CS+GH) versus celecoxib in patients with knee osteoarthritis and severe pain. METHODS: Double-blind Multicentre Osteoarthritis interVEntion trial with SYSADOA (MOVES) conducted in France, Germany, Poland and Spain evaluating treatment with CS+GH versus celecoxib in 606 patients with Kellgren and Lawrence grades 2-3 knee osteoarthritis and moderate-to-severe pain (Western Ontario and McMaster osteoarthritis index (WOMAC) score >/=301; 0-500 scale). Patients were randomised to receive 400 mg CS plus 500 mg GH three times a day or 200 mg celecoxib every day for 6 months. The primary outcome was the mean decrease in WOMAC pain from baseline to 6 months. Secondary outcomes included WOMAC function and stiffness, visual analogue scale for pain, presence of joint swelling/effusion, rescue medication consumption, Outcome Measures in Rheumatology Clinical Trials and Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OMERACT-OARSI) criteria and EuroQoL-5D. RESULTS: The adjusted mean change (95% CI) in WOMAC pain was -185.7 (-200.3 to -171.1) (50.1% decrease) with CS+GH and -186.8 (-201.7 to -171.9) (50.2% decrease) with celecoxib, meeting the non-inferiority margin of -40: -1.11 (-22.0 to 19.8; p=0.92). All sensitivity analyses were consistent with that result. At 6 months, 79.7% of patients in the combination group and 79.2% in the celecoxib group fulfilled OMERACT-OARSI criteria. Both groups elicited a reduction >50% in the presence of joint swelling; a similar reduction was seen for effusion. No differences were observed for the other secondary outcomes. Adverse events were low and similarly distributed between groups. CONCLUSIONS: CS+GH has comparable efficacy to celecoxib in reducing pain, stiffness, functional limitation and joint swelling/effusion after 6 months in patients with painful knee osteoarthritis, with a good safety profile. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01425853.
BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common form of arthritis and is caused by degeneration of the joint cartilage and growth of new bone, cartilage and connective tissue. It is often associated with major disability and impaired quality of life. There is currently no consensus on the best treatment to improve OA symptoms. Celecoxib is a selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). OBJECTIVES: To assess the clinical benefits (pain, function, quality of life) and safety (withdrawals due to adverse effects, serious adverse effects, overall discontinuation rates) of celecoxib in osteoarthritis (OA). SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, Embase and clinical trials registers up to April 11, 2017, as well as reference and citation lists of included studies. Pharmaceutical companies and authors of published articles were contacted. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included published studies (full reports in a peer reviewed journal) of prospective randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that compared oral celecoxib versus no intervention, placebo or another traditional NSAID (tNSAID) in participants with clinically- or radiologically-confirmed primary OA of the knee or hip, or both knee and hip. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently performed data extraction, quality assessment, and compared results. Main analyses for patient-reported outcomes of pain and physical function were conducted on studies with low risk of bias for sequence generation, allocation concealment and blinding of participants and personnel. MAIN RESULTS: We included 36 trials that provided data for 17,206 adults: 9402 participants received celecoxib 200 mg/day, and 7804 were assigned to receive either tNSAIDs (N = 1869) or placebo (N = 5935). Celecoxib was compared with placebo (32 trials), naproxen (6 trials) and diclofenac (3 trials). Studies were published between 1999 and 2014. Studies included participants with knee, hip or both knee and hip OA; mean OA duration was 7.9 years. Most studies included predominantly white participants whose mean age was 62 (+/- 10) years; most participants were women. There were no concerns about risk of bias for performance and detection bias, but selection bias was poorly reported in most trials. Most trials had high attrition bias, and there was evidence of selective reporting in a third of the studies. Celecoxib versus placeboCompared with placebo celecoxib slightly reduced pain on a 500-point Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index (WOMAC) pain scale, accounting for 3% absolute improvement (95% CI 2% to 5% improvement) or 12% relative improvement (95% CI 7% to 18% improvement) (4 studies, 1622 participants). This improvement may not be clinically significant (high quality evidence).Compared with placebo celecoxib slightly improved physical function on a 1700-point WOMAC scale, accounting for 4% absolute improvement (95% CI 2% to 6% improvement), 12% relative improvement (95% CI 5% to 19% improvement) (4 studies, 1622 participants). This improvement may not be clinically significant (high quality evidence).There was no evidence of an important difference for withdrawals due to adverse events (Peto OR 0.99, 95% CI 0.85 to 1.15) (moderate quality evidence due to study limitations).Results were inconclusive for numbers of participants experiencing any serious AEs (SAEs) (Peto OR 0.95, 95% CI 0.66 to 1.36), gastro-intestinal events (Peto OR 1.91, 95% CI 0.24 to 14.90) and cardiovascular events (Peto OR 3.40, 95% CI 0.73 to 15.88) (very low quality evidence due to serious imprecision and study limitations). However, regulatory agencies have warned of increased cardiovascular events for celecoxib. Celecoxib versus tNSAIDsThere were inconclusive results regarding the effect on pain between celecoxib and tNSAIDs on a 100-point visual analogue scale (VAS), showing 5% absolute improvement (95% CI 11% improvement to 2% worse), 11% relative improvement (95% CI 26% improvement to 4% worse) (2 studies, 1180 participants, moderate quality evidence due to publication bias).Compared to a tNSAID celecoxib slightly improved physical function on a 100-point WOMAC scale, showing 6% absolute improvement (95% CI 6% to 11% improvement) and 16% relative improvement (95% CI 2% to 30% improvement). This improvement may not be clinically significant (low quality evidence due to missing data and few participants) (1 study, 264 participants).Based on low or very low quality evidence (downgraded due to missing data, high risk of bias, few events and wide confidence intervals) results were inconclusive for withdrawals due to AEs (Peto OR 0.97, 95% CI 0.74 to 1.27), number of participants experiencing SAEs (Peto OR 0.92, 95% CI 0.66 to 1.28), gastro-intestinal events (Peto OR 0.61, 0.15 to 2.43) and cardiovascular events (Peto OR 0.47, 95% CI 0.17 to 1.25).In comparisons of celecoxib and placebo there were no differences in pooled analyses between our main analysis with low risk of bias and all eligible studies. In comparisons of celecoxib and tNSAIDs, only one outcome showed a difference between studies at low risk of bias and all eligible studies: physical function (6% absolute improvement in low risk of bias, no difference in all eligible studies).No studies included in the main comparisons measured quality of life. Of 36 studies, 34 reported funding by drug manufacturers and in 34 studies one or more study authors were employees of the sponsor. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We are highly reserved about results due to pharmaceutical industry involvement and limited data. We were unable to obtain data from three studies, which included 15,539 participants, and classified as awaiting assessment. Current evidence indicates that celecoxib is slightly better than placebo and some tNSAIDs in reducing pain and improving physical function. We are uncertain if harms differ among celecoxib and placebo or tNSAIDs due to risk of bias, low quality evidence for many outcomes, and that some study authors and Pfizer declined to provide data from completed studies with large numbers of participants. To fill the evidence gap, we need to access existing data and new, independent clinical trials to investigate benefits and harms of celecoxib versus tNSAIDs for people with osteoarthritis, with longer follow-up and more direct head-to-head comparisons with other tNSAIDs.
