The incidence of anticholinergic syndrome due to second generation antihistamines is infrequently reported. Largely due to their decreased affinity for central nervous system (CNS) receptors, second generation antihistamines are rarely associated with anticholinergic symptoms, though toxicity is still possible particularly when taken in excess. We report a case of a six year old boy who presented with agitation, hallucinations, fixed and dilated pupils, tachycardia, and hyperthermia consistent with anticholinergic toxicity several hours after accidental overdose of a second generation antihistamine, cetirizine. Early identification of this rare phenomenon is important not only for appropriate emergency management but also for avoidance of potentially invasive and unnecessary tests which may further increase patient morbidity.
Second-generation histamine H(1) receptor antagonists were developed to provide efficacious treatment of allergic rhinitis (AR) and chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) while decreasing adverse effects associated with first-generation agents. When comparing the efficacy and safety profiles of the newest second-generation antihistamines - desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine - many pharmacological and clinical criteria must be considered. Most importantly, these elements should not be evaluated separately but, rather, as parts of a puzzle that create a whole picture. As a class, second-generation antihistamines are highly selective for the H(1) receptor. Some bind to it with high affinity, although there is marked heterogeneity among the various compounds. They have a limited effect on the CNS, and clinical studies have noted almost no significant drug-drug interactions in the agents studied. No major cytochrome P450 inhibition has been reported with desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine, and the bioavailability of desloratadine is minimally affected by drugs interfering with transporter molecules. Of the second-generation antihistamines, desloratadine has the greatest binding affinity for the H(1) receptor. The use of desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine is not associated with clinically relevant antimuscarinic effects. Desloratadine and fexofenadine do not impair cognitive or psychomotor functioning and are comparable with placebo in terms of somnolence. Based on these pharmacological characteristics, as well as clinical endpoints such as symptom scores, quality-of-life surveys, inflammatory cell counts and investigators' global evaluations, we conclude that desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine are all efficacious treatments for AR and CIU. However, differences among the antihistamines in relation to a lack of significant interaction with drug transporter molecules and somnolence in excess of placebo may provide some advantages for the overall profile of desloratadine compared with fexofenadine and levocetirizine.
A patient with recurrent idiopathic urticaria reported exacerbations after treatment with cetirizine. Prick test to cetirizine was negative. Double-blind challenge tests with mizolastine, loratadine, fexofenadine, dexchlorpheniramine, ebastine, ketotifen, and placebo were negative, whereas hydroxyzine and its active metabolite, cetirizine, reproduced the urticaria. Identification of uncommon adverse reactions to H1 antihistamines is important, particularly because they may mimic the underlying disease.
PURPOSE: Prostaglandins play a pivotal role in modulating hair growth cycle. Prostaglandin F2alpha and prostaglandin E have stimulating and prostaglandin D has inhibitory effects on hair follicle. Cetirizine inhibits release of prostaglandin D2 and stimulates the release of prostaglandin E2. In the present study, the efficacy and safety of twice daily application of topical cetirizine 1% versus minoxidil 5% solutions for 16 weeks were compared in male androgenetic alopecia (AGA). METHODS: Forty men, aged 18 to 49 years, ‎were randomly divided into two equal groups to apply either cetirizine 1% or minoxidil 5% solutions. The study was divided into two phases, a 16-week treatment phase either with cetirizine or minoxidil (anagen phase), followed by an 8-week ‎ drug-free (telogen phase) with a follow-up when patients used placebo. Efficacy outcomes included the change in total hair density, vellus and terminal hair density, hair diameter and the percentage of hair in anagen and telogen phases from baseline in 16 and 24 weeks. RESULTS: After 16 weeks, we observed a significant increase in total and vellus hair density in both minoxidil and cetirizine groups, but the improvement was much higher in the minoxidil group. The percentage of hair in the anagen phase also increased in both groups after 16 weeks of treatment, but then diminished after 8 weeks of placebo consumption. No significant adverse reactions associated with the administration of cetirizine solution were reported. CONCLUSION: Cetirizine 1% solution was effective in hair growth without any complications for treatment of male AGA.
Histamine plays a prominent and diverse role in the pathophysiology of allergic disease and therapeutic intervention is therefore typically focused on blocking the effects of this biogenic amine. A new antihistamine, levocetirizine, is the R-enantiomer of cetirizine dihydrochloride and like its parent compound undergoes minimal hepatic metabolism. Levocetirizine has pharmacodynamically and pharmacokinetically favourable characteristics, including high bioavailability, rapid onset of action, limited distribution and a low degree of metabolism. Clinical trials indicate that it is safe and effective for the treatment of allergic rhinitis and chronic urticaria with a minimal number of untoward effects. Furthermore, several recent studies have demonstrated that, in addition to its being a potent antihistamine, levocetirizine has several anti-inflammatory effects that are observed at clinically relevant concentrations that may enhance its therapeutic benefit.
Urticaria pigmentosa is a rare dermatologic syndrome in humans, cats, and dogs. This report documents a case of canine urticaria pigmentosa-like disease with unusual features and no C-kit mutation.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Ocular allergies affect an estimated 40% of the population, 98% of which are because of allergic conjunctivitis. With the current advent of both repurposed drugs for ocular allergies, as well as novel drugs and methods of administration, there is a need for an updated review of current available medications. A clear characterization of each treatment will ultimately allow treating physicians to restore patients' quality of life and decrease burden of disease. RECENT FINDINGS: Currently, there are a number of reformulated antihistamines, with cetrizine being the most recent ophthalmic solution available. Nevertheless, there is ongoing research in the field of immunotherapy, steroids, flavonoids, cannabis, and drug-delivery systems. SUMMARY: Although dual-activity agents remain the keystone for treatment, newer drugs and drug-delivery systems offer other novel directions for delivering appropriate relief with minimal adverse effects.
Antihistamines were investigated for use in asthma shortly after discovery over fifty years ago. Earlier compounds proved ineffective because of side effects: this class of drugs was not thought useful for asthma, and were actually considered contraindicated. More recent drugs have greater potency, fewer side-effects, and no evidence of adverse effects in asthma. There are some studies showing second generation antihistamines, especially cetirizine, improve certain parameters of asthma.
Cetirizine is the carboxylated metabolite of hydroxyzine, and has high specific affinity for histamine H(1) receptors. Pseudoephedrine is a sympathomimetic drug that acts directly on alpha-adrenergic receptors. black triangle Cetirizine/pseudoephedrine 5/120 mg twice daily was significantly more effective than intranasal budesonide 100 microg or placebo at improving nasal obstruction, nasal patency and reducing the volume of nasal secretion, and was significantly more effective than intranasal xylometazoline 0.1% with respect to nasal secretion, during house dust mite faeces challenge in three randomised, cross- over studies among volunteers with seasonal or perennial rhinitis. The onset of action of cetirizine/pseudoephedrine was reported to be approximately 30 minutes. black triangle The bioavailability of cetirizine and pseudoephedrine is similar after administration of cetirizine/pseudoephedrine 5/120 mg bilayer tablets or coadministration of cetirizine 5 mg tablets plus pseudoephedrine sustained-release (SR) 120 mg caplets. black triangle Cetirizine 5mg plus pseudoephedrine SR 120 mg twice daily for 2 to 3 weeks was significantly more effective than each drug given alone at reducing mean total symptom scores for seasonal or perennial allergic rhinitis in two randomised, double-blind, multicentre trials. In both studies, the mean proportion of days during which the five measured symptoms (nasal obstruction, sneezing, rhinorrhoea, nasal pruritus and ocular pruritus) were absent or mild was significantly greater in recipients of the cetirizine plus pseudoephedrine SR. black triangle In one study, cetirizine 5 mg plus pseudoephedrine SR 120 mg was significantly more effective at reducing nasal obstruction than either drug alone. black triangle Cetirizine 5mg plus pseudoephedrine SR 120 mg twice daily for 2 to 3 weeks was well tolerated in patients with seasonal or perennial allergic rhinitis. The most common adverse events were dry mouth, insomnia, headache, somnolence, asthenia and nervousness.
This article reports on a systematic literature review of the costs of allergic rhinitis (AR), the economic value of pharmacotherapy of AR, and the factors affecting costs and economic value of pharmacotherapy. Included studies had carried out a cost-of-illness analysis, cost analysis, cost-effectiveness, cost-utility or cost-benefit analysis. Allergic rhinitis imposes a substantial economic burden on society, with indirect costs of productivity loss being larger than the direct healthcare costs. Cost estimates were biased because of difficulties of diagnosis; exclusion of patients who do not seek healthcare; exclusion of over-the-counter medication; difficulties in estimating productivity loss. There is limited evidence on costs of seasonal/perennial and intermittent/persistent AR. Little is known of the economic value of pharmacotherapy of AR, although levocetirizine appears to be cost-effective as compared with placebo. Economic evaluations suffered limitations from small sample sizes, short trial duration, lack of standardized effectiveness measure, restricted scope of costs. Finally, the economic value of pharmacotherapy of AR is influenced by the perspective of the economic evaluation, relative effectiveness and costs of available drugs, patient compliance with treatment.
Pityriasis rosea is a papulosquamous skin disorder that occurs most commonly between the ages of 10 and 35 years. Recurrent pityriasis rosea is rare. We report a patient suffering from recurrent pityriasis rosea, whose etiology may be related to either vaccine-induced stimulation of the immune system, or some rare vaccine component(influenza A [H1N1] vaccine, hepatitis B vaccine). We believe that such a case is unique and it has not been reported previously. The patient was successfully treated with a combination of oral cetirizine, a topical steroid cream, and narrowband-ultraviolet B phototherapy. The symptoms of this disorder should be recognized by dermatologists.
The second generation H1 antihistamines were considered to have an improved risk/benefit ratio because of their low penetration into the brain and their very low incidence of CNS depressant effects. Nevertheless, the cardiac rhythm disturbances described under terfenadine and astemizole intake drew the attention to the fact that the low penetration into the brain is only one limited item in the evaluation of their respective therapeutic indices. A correct evaluation of the therapeutic index should always comprise a large series of items: all desired and not desired effects and properties should be considered together with the physicobiochemical mechanisms of the drugs at cell and membrane levels.
Androgenetic alopecia (AGA) is the most common cause of hair loss in both genders with a higher psychological impact on females. Currently, topical minoxidil is the only FDA-approved treatment for female AGA and it needs life-long application and causes side effects. Cetirizine is an antihistamine that may be effective in hair loss treatment. This study aimed to compare the efficacy and safety of topical cetirizine with minoxidil (group 1) versus topical minoxidil with placebo (group 2) in female patients with AGA. This was a double-blind, randomized, controlled, parallel study conducted at Dermatology Clinic, Cairo University Teaching Hospital (Kasr- Al- Ainy), Egypt. Sixty-six patients with female AGA, aged 20-50 years, Sinclair (II-IV), were randomly assigned to one of the 2 groups for 24 weeks. The trichoscopic parameters, patients' self-assessment, side effects and global photographic assessment were evaluated. There was a statistically significant change from baseline in frontal and vertex terminal and vellus hair density (P < 0.0005) with a significant increase in vertex hair shaft thickness and average number of hairs per follicular unit in group 1 (P < 0.05). Patients reported significantly better scores in patient self-assessment in group 1 (P < 0.05). Side effects were not significantly different between groups (P > 0.05). Topical cetirizine increases hair shaft thickness and results in a higher clinical improvement from patients' perspective with a good safety profile (NCT04481412, study start date: July 2020).
The absence of blisters, the presence of mild systemic symptoms, and the patient's age guided the diagnosis.
Allergic rhinitis is a common disease of great socio-economic significance. The treatment of this condition is carried out on an individual basis depending on the clinical course of the disease; it includes prevention of contacts with the allergen, medicamental and immunotherapy. The principal pharmaceuticals used to treat the patients include oral and intranasal H1 anti-histaminic preparations, intranasal corticosteroids, intranasal cromones, anti-leukotrien agents, and specific subcutaneous immunotherapy. Glencet (levocetirizine) is one of the modern antihistaminic preparations of the second generation having an advantage over other drugs for the treatment of allergic rhinitis in that it may be prescribed to the patients presenting with concomitant bronchial asthma and cardiac diseases.
The main objectives of the present article were to systematize the modern views of the causes and risk factors of allergic rhinitis, to clarify the manner of its development, to define the leading etiological mechanism underling the pathogenesis of this condition, to consider the methods used for the diagnostics and the treatment of this disease, and to sum up the clinical experience with the use of Levocetirizine (Allerwey) for the management of allergic rhinitis. Special attention is given to the achievement and the maintenance of control of the persistent or intermittent forms of allergic rhinitis and to approaches to its treatment based on the medications registered in the Russian Federation.
Aquagenic urticaria (AU) is a rare disorder, and to be diagnosed other types of physical urticarias must be excluded. In this case report, clinical aspects, investigational methodology, and finally some considerations for the treatment of AU are reviewed, with special attention given to the good response to hydroxyzine in this case, the first one described in Brazil.
Darier disease is an autosomal dominant genodermatosis of abnormal keratinization characterized by hyperkeratotic papules and plaques with a predilection for seborrheic areas. We report a case of a rare vesiculobullous variant of treatment-resistant Darier disease in a 55-year-old woman that failed topical tacrolimus and topical and oral glucocorticoids. Cetirizine was initiated at 10 mg daily and increased to 40 mg daily over four weeks, with resultant marked improvement of the patient's burning sensation. A punch biopsy revealed a perivascular infiltrate of eosinophils. This patient's symptomatic improvement with cetirizine, which has antagonizing properties against eosinophils, highlights the potential role of eosinophils in the pathogenesis of vesiculobullous Darier disease. We suggest that major basic protein secreted by eosinophils may propagate blister formation in vesiculobullous Darier disease by disrupting desmosomes. J Drugs Dermatol. 2019;18(2):213-214.
Levocetirizine is a second-generation nonsedative antihistaminic agent that has been demonstrated to be safe and effective for treating allergic disease. There was only one case report of levocetirizine-induced liver toxicity, but a liver biopsy was not performed. In this article, we present the first case of levocetirizine-induced liver injury with histologic findings. A 48-year-old man was hospitalized with jaundice and generalized pruritus that had developed after 2 months of therapy with levocetirizine for prurigo nodularis. Laboratory findings revealed acute hepatitis with cholestasis. A liver biopsy demonstrated portal inflammation and hepatitis with apoptotic hepatocytes. The patient fully recovered 3 weeks after withdrawing levocetirizine. Although levocetirizine is safe and effective, physicians should be aware of its potential hepatotoxicity.
Histamine receptor-1 (H(1)) antagonists like levocetirizine are frequently used nowadays to treat rhinitis patients who experience rhinorrhea and sneezing. The trachea may be affected by the H(1) antagonist when it is used to treat nasal symptoms, either orally or through inhalation. The purpose of this study was to ascertain in vitro effects of levocetirizine on isolated tracheal smooth muscle. As a parasympathetic mimetic, methacholine (10(-6) M) causes contractions in tracheal smooth muscle, which is how we tested effectiveness of levocetirizine on isolated rat tracheal smooth muscle. We also tested the drug's impact on electrically induced tracheal smooth muscle contractions. The impact of menthol (either before or after) on the contraction brought on by 10(-6) M methacholine was also investigated. According to the results, the addition of levocetirizine at concentrations of 10(-5) M or more caused a slight relaxation in response to methacholine's 10(-6) M contraction. Levocetirizine could prevent spike contraction brought on by electrical field stimulation (EFS). As the concentration rose, it alone had a neglect effect on the trachea's basal tension. Before menthol was applied, levocetirizine might have also inhibited the function of the cold receptor. According to this study, levocetirizine might potentially impede the parasympathetic function of the trachea. If levocetirizine was used prior to menthol addition, it also reduced the function of cold receptors.
