Hypertension is very common and remains often poorly controlled in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Accurate blood pressure (BP) measurement is the essential first step in the diagnosis and management of hypertension. Dietary sodium restriction is often overlooked, but can improve BP control, especially among patients treated with an agent to block the renin-angiotensin system. In the presence of very high albuminuria, international guidelines consistently and strongly recommend the use of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker as the antihypertensive agent of first choice. Long-acting dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers and diuretics are reasonable second- and third-line therapeutic options. For patients with treatment-resistant hypertension, guidelines recommend the addition of spironolactone to the baseline antihypertensive regimen. However, the associated risk of hyperkalemia restricts the broad utilization of spironolactone in patients with moderate-to-advanced CKD. Evidence from the CLICK (Chlorthalidone in Chronic Kidney Disease) trial indicates that the thiazide-like diuretic chlorthalidone is effective and serves as an alternative therapeutic opportunity for patients with stage 4 CKD and uncontrolled hypertension, including those with treatment-resistant hypertension. Chlorthalidone can also mitigate the risk of hyperkalemia to enable the concomitant use of spironolactone, but this combination requires careful monitoring of BP and kidney function for the prevention of adverse events. Emerging agents, such as the non-steroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist ocedurenone, dual endothelin receptor antagonist aprocitentan and the aldosterone synthase inhibitor baxdrostat offer novel targets and strategies to control BP better. Larger and longer term clinical trials are needed to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of these novel therapies in the future. In this article, we review the current standards of treatment and discuss novel developments in pathophysiology, diagnosis, outcome prediction and management of hypertension in patients with CKD.
Thiazide diuretics (hydrochlorothiazide) and << thiazide-like >> (chlorthalidone, indapamide) are widely prescribed due to their effectiveness in the treatment of arterial hypertension. The use of thiazides may be complicated by hyponatremia that is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. The pathophysiology of thiazide-induced hyponatremia is not yet clear. It is currently difficult to predict who will develop thiazide-induced hyponatremia. Genetic predisposition is considered, and several studies are attempting to clarify it in order to identify patients at risk of developing hyponatremia after taking a thiazide. Their reintroduction to a patient who already presented hyponatremia upon thiazide should be avoided.
BACKGROUND: Little evidence has been available to support the use of thiazide diuretics to treat hypertension in patients with advanced chronic kidney disease. METHODS: We randomly assigned patients with stage 4 chronic kidney disease and poorly controlled hypertension, as confirmed by 24-hour ambulatory blood-pressure monitoring, in a 1:1 ratio to receive chlorthalidone at an initial dose of 12.5 mg per day, with increases every 4 weeks if needed to a maximum dose of 50 mg per day, or placebo; randomization was stratified according to previous use of loop diuretics. The primary outcome was the change in 24-hour ambulatory systolic blood pressure from baseline to 12 weeks. Secondary outcomes were the change from baseline to 12 weeks in the urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio, N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide level, plasma renin and aldosterone levels, and total body volume. Safety was also assessed. RESULTS: A total of 160 patients underwent randomization, of whom 121 (76%) had diabetes mellitus and 96 (60%) were receiving loop diuretics. At baseline, the mean (+/-SD) estimated glomerular filtration rate was 23.2+/-4.2 ml per minute per 1.73 m(2) of body-surface area and the mean number of antihypertensive medications prescribed was 3.4+/-1.4. At randomization, the mean 24-hour ambulatory systolic blood pressure was 142.6+/-8.1 mm Hg in the chlorthalidone group and 140.1+/-8.1 mm Hg in the placebo group and the mean 24-hour ambulatory diastolic blood pressure was 74.6+/-10.1 mm Hg and 72.8+/-9.3 mm Hg, respectively. The adjusted change in 24-hour systolic blood pressure from baseline to 12 weeks was -11.0 mm Hg (95% confidence interval [CI], -13.9 to -8.1) in the chlorthalidone group and -0.5 mm Hg (95% CI, -3.5 to 2.5) in the placebo group. The between-group difference was -10.5 mm Hg (95% CI, -14.6 to -6.4) (P<0.001). The percent change in the urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio from baseline to 12 weeks was lower in the chlorthalidone group than in the placebo group by 50 percentage points (95% CI, 37 to 60). Hypokalemia, reversible increases in serum creatinine level, hyperglycemia, dizziness, and hyperuricemia occurred more frequently in the chlorthalidone group than in the placebo group. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with advanced chronic kidney disease and poorly controlled hypertension, chlorthalidone therapy improved blood-pressure control at 12 weeks as compared with placebo. (Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the Indiana Institute of Medical Research; CLICK ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02841280.).
BACKGROUND: Whether chlorthalidone is superior to hydrochlorothiazide for preventing major adverse cardiovascular events in patients with hypertension is unclear. METHODS: In a pragmatic trial, we randomly assigned adults 65 years of age or older who were patients in the Department of Veterans Affairs health system and had been receiving hydrochlorothiazide at a daily dose of 25 or 50 mg to continue therapy with hydrochlorothiazide or to switch to chlorthalidone at a daily dose of 12.5 or 25 mg. The primary outcome was a composite of nonfatal myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure resulting in hospitalization, urgent coronary revascularization for unstable angina, and non-cancer-related death. Safety was also assessed. RESULTS: A total of 13,523 patients underwent randomization. The mean age was 72 years. At baseline, hydrochlorothiazide at a dose of 25 mg per day had been prescribed in 12,781 patients (94.5%). The mean baseline systolic blood pressure in each group was 139 mm Hg. At a median follow-up of 2.4 years, there was little difference in the occurrence of primary-outcome events between the chlorthalidone group (702 patients [10.4%]) and the hydrochlorothiazide group (675 patients [10.0%]) (hazard ratio, 1.04; 95% confidence interval, 0.94 to 1.16; P = 0.45). There were no between-group differences in the occurrence of any of the components of the primary outcome. The incidence of hypokalemia was higher in the chlorthalidone group than in the hydrochlorothiazide group (6.0% vs. 4.4%, P<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In this large pragmatic trial of thiazide diuretics at doses commonly used in clinical practice, patients who received chlorthalidone did not have a lower occurrence of major cardiovascular outcome events or non-cancer-related deaths than patients who received hydrochlorothiazide. (Funded by the Veterans Affairs Cooperative Studies Program; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02185417.).
Hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) has often been contrasted with chlorthalidone, but relatively little is known about HCTZ versus indapamide (INDAP). This systematic review retrieved 9765 publications, and from these, it identified 14 randomized trials with 883 patients comparing HCTZ with INDAP and chlorthalidone on antihypertensive potency or metabolic effects. To make fair comparisons, the dose of the diuretic in each arm was assigned 1 of 3 dose levels. In random effects meta-analysis, INDAP and chlorthalidone lowered systolic blood pressure more than HCTZ: -5.1 mm Hg (95% confidence interval, -8.7 to -1.6); P=0.004 and -3.6 mm Hg (95% confidence interval, -7.3 to 0.0); P=0.052, respectively. For both comparisons, there was minimal heterogeneity in effect across trials and no evidence for publication bias. The HCTZ-INDAP contrast was biased in favor of greater HCTZ potency because of a much greater contribution to the overall effect from trials in which the HCTZ arm had a higher dose level than the INDAP arm. For the HCTZ-INDAP comparison, no single trial was responsible for the overall result nor was it possible to detect significant modifications of this comparison by duration of follow-up, high- versus low-bias trials, or the presence or absence of background medications. There were no detectable differences between HCTZ and INDAP in metabolic adverse effects, including effects on serum potassium. In conclusion, these head-to-head comparisons demonstrate that, like chlorthalidone, INDAP is more potent than HCTZ at commonly prescribed doses without evidence for greater adverse metabolic effects.
Thiazide diuretics are the cornerstone of treatment of hypertension in most patients. Hydrochlorothiazide is the most commonly used thiazide diuretic in the United States, but interest in chlorthalidone is increasing. The authors summarize the literature comparing these two agents.
Diuretics have been used for decades in the treatment of hypertension. Its efficacy has been demonstrated in numerous clinical trials. It is well known that the reduction in cardiovascular risk is a consequence of the reduction in blood pressure levels regardless of the drug used, but thiazide diuretics continue to be first-line drugs, especially in low doses and combined with other drugs. The debate on the advantages of using chlorthalidone or hydrochlorothiazide continues, however hydrochlorothiazide is drug most used and for which there is greater availability. The association with potassium-sparing diuretics increases the effectiveness and reduces the adverse reactions of thiazides. A new group of drugs, close to potassium-sparing diuretics, that antagonise aldosterone synthase are showing promising results as antihypertensives. There are no significant differences between men and women regarding the antihypertensive effect of thiazide diuretics.
Diuretics are now commonly prescribed for women with so-called idiopathic oedema. Two patients with idiopathic oedema, one of whom was oedematous on diuretics, had the diuretics stopped. In one the oedema became much worse, and in the other oedema developed. However, this oedema disappeared spontaneously in both patients and they have remained free of oedema on no treatment. It is suggested that in some patients treated with diuretics compensatory mechanisms to retain sodium and water may be stronger than the diuretic-effect itself and may lead to perpetuation of unnecessary treatment.
IMPORTANCE: Chlorthalidone is currently recommended as the preferred thiazide diuretic to treat hypertension, but no trials have directly compared risks and benefits. OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness and safety of chlorthalidone and hydrochlorothiazide as first-line therapies for hypertension in real-world practice. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This is a Large-Scale Evidence Generation and Evaluation in a Network of Databases (LEGEND) observational comparative cohort study with large-scale propensity score stratification and negative-control and synthetic positive-control calibration on databases spanning January 2001 through December 2018. Outpatient and inpatient care episodes of first-time users of antihypertensive monotherapy in the United States based on 2 administrative claims databases and 1 collection of electronic health records were analyzed. Analysis began June 2018. EXPOSURES: Chlorthalidone and hydrochlorothiazide. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcomes were acute myocardial infarction, hospitalization for heart failure, ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke, and a composite cardiovascular disease outcome including the first 3 outcomes and sudden cardiac death. Fifty-one safety outcomes were measured. RESULTS: Of 730 225 individuals (mean [SD] age, 51.5 [13.3] years; 450 100 women [61.6%]), 36 918 were dispensed or prescribed chlorthalidone and had 149 composite outcome events, and 693 337 were dispensed or prescribed hydrochlorothiazide and had 3089 composite outcome events. No significant difference was found in the associated risk of myocardial infarction, hospitalized heart failure, or stroke, with a calibrated hazard ratio for the composite cardiovascular outcome of 1.00 for chlorthalidone compared with hydrochlorothiazide (95% CI, 0.85-1.17). Chlorthalidone was associated with a significantly higher risk of hypokalemia (hazard ratio [HR], 2.72; 95% CI, 2.38-3.12), hyponatremia (HR, 1.31; 95% CI, 1.16-1.47), acute renal failure (HR, 1.37; 95% CI, 1.15-1.63), chronic kidney disease (HR, 1.24; 95% CI, 1.09-1.42), and type 2 diabetes mellitus (HR, 1.21; 95% CI, 1.12-1.30). Chlorthalidone was associated with a significantly lower risk of diagnosed abnormal weight gain (HR, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.61-0.86). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study found that chlorthalidone use was not associated with significant cardiovascular benefits when compared with hydrochlorothiazide, while its use was associated with greater risk of renal and electrolyte abnormalities. These findings do not support current recommendations to prefer chlorthalidone vs hydrochlorothiazide for hypertension treatment in first-time users was found. We used advanced methods, sensitivity analyses, and diagnostics, but given the possibility of residual confounding and the limited length of observation periods, further study is warranted.
Hypertension is a powerful risk factor strongly linked to adverse cardiovascular outcomes. Because of its high prevalence, health care providers at many levels are involved in treating hypertension. Distinct progress has been made in improving the rates of hypertension awareness and treatment over years, but the overall control of hypertension remains inadequate. Several recent guidelines from different sources have been put forward in an attempt to bridge the gap between existing evidence and clinical practice. Despite this effort, several misconceptions about treating hypertensive cardiovascular disease continue to persist among clinicians. This review highlights some of the misconceptions regarding antihypertensive therapy.
IMPORTANCE: Poorly controlled hypertension is a leading global public health problem requiring new treatment strategies. OBJECTIVE: To assess whether a low-dose triple combination antihypertensive medication would achieve better blood pressure (BP) control vs usual care. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Randomized, open-label trial of a low-dose triple BP therapy vs usual care for adults with hypertension (systolic BP >140 mm Hg and/or diastolic BP >90 mm Hg; or in patients with diabetes or chronic kidney disease: >130 mm Hg and/or >80 mm Hg) requiring initiation (untreated patients) or escalation (patients receiving monotherapy) of antihypertensive therapy. Patients were enrolled from 11 urban hospital clinics in Sri Lanka from February 2016 to May 2017; follow-up ended in October 2017. INTERVENTIONS: A once-daily fixed-dose triple combination pill (20 mg of telmisartan, 2.5 mg of amlodipine, and 12.5 mg of chlorthalidone) therapy (n = 349) or usual care (n = 351). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was the proportion achieving target systolic/diastolic BP (<140/90 mm Hg or <130/80 mm Hg in patients with diabetes or chronic kidney disease) at 6 months. Secondary outcomes included mean systolic/diastolic BP difference during follow-up and withdrawal of BP medications due to an adverse event. RESULTS: Among 700 randomized patients (mean age, 56 years; 58% women; 29% had diabetes; mean baseline systolic/diastolic BP, 154/90 mm Hg), 675 (96%) completed the trial. The triple combination pill increased the proportion achieving target BP vs usual care at 6 months (70% vs 55%, respectively; risk difference, 12.7% [95% CI, 3.2% to 22.0%]; P < .001). Mean systolic/diastolic BP at 6 months was 125/76 mm Hg for the triple combination pill vs 134/81 mm Hg for usual care (adjusted difference in postrandomization BP over the entire follow-up: systolic BP, -9.8 [95% CI, -7.9 to -11.6] mm Hg; diastolic BP, -5.0 [95% CI, -3.9 to -6.1] mm Hg; P < .001 for both comparisons). Overall, 419 adverse events were reported in 255 patients (38.1% for triple combination pill vs 34.8% for usual care) with the most common being musculoskeletal pain (6.0% and 8.0%, respectively) and dizziness, presyncope, or syncope (5.2% and 2.8%). There were no significant between-group differences in the proportion of patient withdrawal from BP-lowering therapy due to adverse events (6.6% for triple combination pill vs 6.8% for usual care). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with mild to moderate hypertension, treatment with a pill containing low doses of 3 antihypertensive drugs led to an increased proportion of patients achieving their target BP goal vs usual care. Use of such medication as initial therapy or to replace monotherapy may be an effective way to improve BP control. TRIAL REGISTRATION: anzctr.org.au Identifier: ACTRN12612001120864; slctr.lk Identifier: SLCTR/2015/020.
The Diuretic Comparison Project (DCP)1 was a real world study planned to evaluate in a pragmatic manner whether Chlorthalidone (CTD), as compared with Hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ), would reduce the risk of major nonfatal cardiovascular disease outcomes in elderly hypertensive participants (>/=65 years) who were receiving HCTZ (25 or 50 mg) at baseline. This study being a real world study lacks the robustness of a randomized controlled trial. The principle limitation being unequal exposure of the two diuretics, prolonged unknown duration of exposure to HCTZ vs a short exposure to CTD (Median 2.4 years). In the high risk population with history of MI/Stroke, CTD conferred a lower risk of primary outcome as compared to low risk population where no significant difference in outcome was seen in both diuretics. Other factors included, lack of established dose equivalency of the two diuretics and absence of use of 12.5 mg HCTZ in older hypertensives. How to cite this article: Pareek A, Messerli FH, Ram CVS. Chlorthalidone vs Hydrochlorothiazide for Hypertension-CV Events: Did the Design Influence the Outcome? J Assoc Physicians India 2023;71(10):93-93.
According to this study: Hyponatremia and hypokalemia occur in approximately 20% of patients who take thiazide diuretics.
Because of its greater reduction of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), chlorthalidone is recommended over hydrochlorothiazide as the preferred diuretic for patients with primary hypertension. However, hydrochlorothiazide is more commonly prescribed than chlorthalidone for this condition. This article reviews recent studies investigating the effectiveness of chlorthalidone and hydrochlorothiazide in reducing MACE, to help clinicians make an evidence-based informed decision on which diuretic to prescribe.
Arterial hypertension is associated with increased morbidity and mortality and research in the field is highly dynamic. This summary reviews the most important clinical trials published in 2022 and early 2023. Findings on new pharmacological approaches to treat resistant hypertension are presented and new knowledge about the optimal timing of the antihypertensive medication intake is discussed. It is focused on optimal blood pressure treatment targets and the problem of treatment and guideline inertia is acknowledged. Information about pregnancy-related hypertension is presented and blood pressure control following percutaneous thrombectomy after ischemic stroke is discussed. Finally, novel clinical data on device-based approaches to treat hypertension are summarized. The hypertension trials update summarizes the most important clincal trials on hypertension research in 2022 and early 2023. CTD - chlorthalidone, CV - cardiovascular, HCT - hydrochlorothiazide, SBP - systolic blood pressure, RDN - renal denervation *depicts systolic blood pressure only.
The optimal diuretic choice [hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) or chlorthalidone (CTD)] for the management of hypertension has been an ongoing debate for several years. HCTZ is widely used in the form of single-pill combinations, whereas CTD is a more potent drug vs. HCTZ, especially in reducing nighttime blood pressure (BP), with some indirect evidence suggesting a superiority in terms of cardiovascular (CV) risk reduction. In addition, recent data showed that CTD was safe and effective in terms of BP lowering in predialysis patients with stage 4 chronic kidney disease. The Diuretic Comparison Project was the first head-to-head pragmatic, open-label trial that randomly assigned elderly patients with hypertension under HCTZ therapy to continue with HCTZ or to switch to CTD (equivalent doses). Office BP was similar for both groups throughout the study. The trial showed no difference in major CV events or non-cancer-related deaths during a median follow-up of 2.4 years; yet, CTD was associated with a benefit in participants with a previous myocardial infarction or stroke, which might be a chance finding but could also indicate that a high-risk population is more suitable for revealing the impact of slight differences in the 24-hour BP profile in a relatively short-term follow-up. Interestingly CTD vs. HCTZ was associated with higher hypokalemia rates apart from the latter group of patients where there was no difference. Overall, the available data do not confirm the superiority of CTD over HCTZ in general, but this could be questionable in selected patients.
Azilsartan-chlorthalidone fixed combination is a new drug in the management of hypertension. Azilsartan has been shown to have greater blood pressure-lowering effects than other angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARBs), and the debate regarding the superiority of chlorthalidone over hydrochlorothiazide has been ongoing for years. The combination is unique because it is the first to partner an ARB with this, possibly more effective, diuretic. This review will address trials involving both components of this drug, as well as phase III trials involving the fixed-combination product. The article will also discuss the benefit of combination therapy in the treatment of hypertension.

This case describes an 85-year-old African-American female with atrial arrhythmias on dofetilide maintenance therapy who presented to an ambulatory cardiology clinic with hypotension. The pharmacist identified a potential major drug-drug interaction between dofetilide and the thiazide diuretic, chlorthalidone. Because of the patient's hypotension, it was decided to discontinue chlorthalidone to avoid the potential drug interaction with dofetilide. A systolic BP goal of 140-145 mmHg was later achieved and maintained with the addition of low-dose amlodipine, in addition to her lisinopril. This case highlights important considerations for prescribing and monitoring dofetilide and reviews hypertension management in the elderly population.
Agarwal R, Sinha AD, Cramer AE, et al. Chlorthalidone for hypertension in advanced chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 2021;385:2507-19. 34739197.
