The treatment of schizophrenic patients who fail to respond to adequate trials of neuroleptics is a major challenge. Clozapine, an atypical antipsychotic drug, has long been of scientific interest, but its clinical development has been delayed because of an associated risk of agranulocytosis. This report describes a multicenter clinical trial to assess clozapine's efficacy in the treatment of patients who are refractory to neuroleptics. DSM-III schizophrenics who had failed to respond to at least three different neuroleptics underwent a prospective, single-blind trial of haloperidol (mean dosage, 61 +/- 14 mg/d) for six weeks. Patients whose condition remained unimproved were then randomly assigned, in a double-blind manner, to clozapine (up to 900 mg/d) or chlorpromazine (up to 1800 mg/d) for six weeks. Two hundred sixty-eight patients were entered in the double-blind comparison. When a priori criteria were used, 30% of the clozapine-treated patients were categorized as responders compared with 4% of chlorpromazine-treated patients. Clozapine produced significantly greater improvement on the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, Clinical Global Impression Scale, and Nurses' Observation Scale for Inpatient Evaluation; this improvement included "negative" as well as positive symptom areas. Although no cases of agranulocytosis occurred during this relatively brief study, in our view, the apparently increased comparative risk requires that the use of clozapine be limited to selected treatment-resistant patients.
There is enormous variation in plasma levels of most neuroleptics in patients on the same dose. Much of the past research on the relation between plasma levels of antipsychotic drugs and clinical change, however, has been difficult to interpret. It does appear that decreased bioavailability, at least in public institutions, is rarely the cause of treatment failure. Aberrantly low plasma levels are more likely due to surreptitious noncompliance or drug interactions with enzyme inducers such as carbamazepine. Therapeutic plasma level ranges, in which good antipsychotic effect occurs without undue side effects, have been tentatively identified for perphenazine, haloperidol, fluphenazine, and chlorpromazine. The extent to which aberrantly high plasma levels are associated with inferior antipsychotic response is unclear. Antipsychotic plasma levels may be most useful when the distinction between side effects and worsening psychosis is unclear. The utility of high neuroleptic plasma levels in the treatment-resistant patient is unclear.
BACKGROUND: Chlorpromazine is the only drug approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of hiccups; however, many other pharmacologic treatments have been proposed for intractable and persistent hiccups. Currently, there is little evidence to support the use of one agent over another. OBJECTIVE: This review aims to identify literature concerning the use of pharmacologic treatments for intractable and persistent hiccups with the goal of evaluating therapies in terms of their level of evidence, mechanism of action, efficacy, dosing, onset of action, and adverse effects. METHODS: A systematic literature search of PubMed, Embase, the Cochrane Library, and the New York Academy of Medicine was performed to find articles where a pharmacologic agent was used to treat intractable or persistent hiccups between the years 1966 and 2016. The GRADE method was used to assess the level of evidence for the studies included in this review. RESULTS: This review identified 26 articles involving 10 pharmacologic treatment options that met our inclusion criteria. Amitriptyline, baclofen, gabapentin, haloperidol, metoclopramide, midazolam, nifedipine, nimodipine, orphenadrine, and valproic acid were found in the literature to be successful in treating hiccups. CONCLUSION: Baclofen, gabapentin, and metoclopramide were the only agents that were studied in a prospective manner, while only baclofen and metoclopramide were studied in randomized controlled trials. No specific recommendations can be made for treating intractable and persistent hiccups with the evidence currently available in the literature. Therapy selection should be specific to individual patients, their underlying comorbidities, etiology of hiccups, and take into account the individual properties of the drugs.
An unexpected precipitous fall in peripheral leucocyte count may occur during treatment of certain sensitised individuals with drugs usually well tolerated by most people. Three basic mechanisms for drug sensitivity have been found. One is characterised by sudden destruction of large numbers of leucocytes in peripheral blood by antibodies elicited in response to drug sensitivity. A prototype for this type of reaction is aminopyrine. A second mechanism involves the production of a lupus-like syndrome followed by leucopenia in response to sensitisation to drugs such as procainamide. A third type involves development of agranulocytosis following a latent period during which a sensitive patient is treated with large amounts of chlorpromazine. This type of reaction is associated with production of bone marrow insufficiency in a patient who is believed to have a limited proliferative potential of bone marrow cells, which limit compensatory bone marrow response during treatment with a drug (e.g. chlorpromazine) that has limited bone marrow toxicity.
Hiccups are a common phenomenon but little is known about their pathophysiological mechanism or function. The concept of a hiccup reflex lacks a scientific basis. Closure of the glottis may be caused by an active contraction or by a passive, sudden myoclonic contraction of the inspiratory musculature, leading to a rapid reduction in intrathoracic pressure. Hiccups are often benign and of short duration but they can sometimes be a serious medical problem due to their chronicity and underlying causes. Many remedies for hiccups have been reported, such as manoeuvres, medical treatment and invasive procedures. Chlorpromazine is the only drug that is registered for the treatment of persistent hiccups but it has many side effects. Baclofen is often used in practice, and favourable experiences with piracetam are known.
Background: The hyperactive subtype of delirium is characterized by agitation, restlessness, delusions, and/or hallucinations, which commonly present near end of life (EoL). Symptom relief often requires the use of medications, such as chlorpromazine (CPZ), to reduce patient distress by inducing proportional sedation. Objective: The purpose of this study was to evaluate CPZ's potential role in managing the distress of hyperactive delirium in patients receiving EoL care. Methods: A retrospective observational study among hospitalized patients with advanced cancer at EoL between January 2020 to December 2021. Results: Sustained improvement in symptoms of delirium was seen in 80% of patients as identified in the palliative psychiatrist's progress notes. Meanwhile, 75% of patient's improvement was reported in nursing-driven Delirium Observation Screening Scale. Conclusion: This study elucidates that at doses of  approximately 100 mg/day, CPZ is potentially an effective medication for patients with advanced cancer, experiencing hyperactive delirium in their final week of life.
Hypogammaglobulinemia in a 22-year-old woman with brief psychotic disorder developed during antipsychotic therapy. Severe decreases in immunoglobulin IgM, IgG, and IgA concentration in serum were observed 4 months after the treatment with chlorpromazine (CPZ) and the other types of antipsychotics. Neither physical diseases nor family history for immunological disturbances was seen. No clinical symptoms in relation to immunological disturbances (i.e. infectious disease), were noted. Gammaglobulin levels in serum returned to a normal range after a replacement of chlorpromazine to timiperone. The hypogammaglobulinemia in the present case was considered to be due to the inhibition of gammaglobulin synthesis by CPZ.
The human genome is constantly attacked by endogenous and exogenous agents (ultraviolet light, xenobiotics, reactive oxygen species), which can induce chemical transformations leading to DNA lesions. To combat DNA damage, cells have developed several repair mechanisms; however, if the repair is defective, DNA lesions lead to permanent mutations. Single-cell gel electrophoresis (COMET assay) is a sensitive and well-established technique for quantifying DNA damage in individual cells. Nevertheless, this tool lacks relationship with mutagenesis. Therefore, to identify errors that give rise to mutations it would be convenient to test an alternative known procedure, such as next generation sequencing (NGS). Thus, the present work aims to evaluate the photomutagenicity of neuroleptic drug chlorpromazine (CPZ), and its N-demethylated metabolites using COMET assay and to test NGS as an alternative method to assess photomutagenesis. In this context, upon exposure to UVA radiation, COMET assay reveals CPZ-photosensitized DNA damage partially repaired by cells. Conversely with this result, metabolites demethylchlorpromazine (DMCPZ) and didemethylchlorpromazine (DDMCPZ) promote extensive DNA-photodamage, hardly repaired under the same conditions. Parallel assessment of mutagenesis by NGS is consistent with these results with minor discrepancies for DDMCPZ. To our knowledge, this is the first example demonstrating the utility of NGS for evaluating drug-induced photomutagenicity.
Among the neuroleptics chlorpromazine has been the most extensively studied despite its complex metabolic pathways. Several metabolites, in particular 7-hydroxychlorpromazine, are psychotropically active. Oral phenothiazines are extensively metabolised "first-pass" through the liver. The relationship between clinical response and plasma concentrations of neuroleptics is tenous. The reasons for the lack of correlation include spontaneous remission in some patients, problems with flexible dosage schedules, the type of patient studied, differences in metabolic patterns, induction of metabolism in the liver, interactions with other drugs, and variations in plasma protein binding. Alternative research strategies might be to study metabolically less complex drugs such as haloperidol or to relate clinical response to autonomic, extrapyramidal, EEG, biochemical or endocrine measures.
These therapeutic approaches to the premedication of children, in our opinion, offer a more rational, probably safer, and at least equally efficacious treatment regimen as the DPT/lytic cocktail. It is understood that controlled, double-blind comparative clinical trials in children are needed of these or other potential premedicant regimens for specific pediatric procedures (e.g., cardiac catheterization, CT scans, bone marrow aspiration, gastrointestinal endoscopy, pleural taps, etc.) to establish the premedication treatment(s) with the greatest benefit-to-risk ratio. Until these data are available, we must maintain prudence in the selection (design) of premedicant regimens and carefully monitor all children receiving these "cocktails."
The serious long-term complications of maintenance antipsychotic therapy led the authors to undertake a critical review of outpatient withdrawal studies. Key findings included the following: 1) for a least 40% of outpatient schizophrenics, drugs seem to be essential for survival in the community; 2) the majority of patients who relapse after drug withdrawal recompensate fairly rapidly upon reinstitution of antipsychotic drug therapy; 3) placebo survivors seem to function as well as drug survivors--thus the benefit of maintenance drug therapy appears to be prevention of relapse; and 4) some cases of early relapse after drug withdrawal may be due to dyskinesia rather than psychotic decompensation. The authors urge clinicians to evaluate each patient on maintenance antipsychotic therapy in terms of feasibility of drug withdrawal and offer practical guidelines for withdrawal and subsequent management.
Four lines of evidence (clinical findings, epidemiology, inhibition of tumor growth together with prolongation of survival time, and mechanism of action) which suggest that certain phenothiazines, particularly chlorpromazine, possess a range of anti-neoplastic activities in man and in rodents which has not been generally recognised are reviewed and discussed. Chlorpromazine interferes with energy production in sensitive tumours; the mode of action appears to correspond to autooxidative cellular injury, a common form of cell death.
Study of the competition between hallucinogens and tranquilizers at cerebral synapses and on behavior in various species of animals indicates a continuum of effects from protection to dominance of tranquilizer toxicity as the dose of tranquilizer increases. Data on cat and monkey behavior, supplementing that on the rat, show that it is possible to arrive at a tranquilizer dose that can aggravate instead of protect, in accord with the competitive inhibitory nature of the interaction of hallucinogen and tranquilizer.
Chlorpromazine (CPZ) equivalents are often used as a relative measure of the antipsychotic potency of neuroleptics. We review the CPZ equivalents of 33 neuroleptics and illustrate why imprecisions or discrepancies will be difficult to eliminate from these values. We nevertheless underline that CPZ equivalents can be clinically useful, since they facilitate the choice of doses of different neuroleptics that should induce comparable antipsychotic effects.
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA), antiphospholipid antibodies (APA), rheumatoid factor (RF), and immunoglobulin (Ig) M levels were determined in 184 male chronic psychiatric patients on long-term therapy with neuroleptics, and in 35 age-matched normal male controls. The prevalence of one or more of these autoantibodies was 70% in the neuroleptic-treated patients and 9% in the normal controls. Polyclonal IgM elevation was frequently seen among patients treated with phenothiazines. There was a significant correlation between the presence of ANA, APA, and RF; ANA and APA were more frequently associated with CPZ therapy, but the prevalence of RF was high in all treatment groups. These findings suggest that antibodies against the Fc fragment of IgG are the most common autoantibody associated with neuroleptics. Alternatively, the presence of RF could be a common finding in patients with neuropsychiatric disorders.
In the case reported, fatal hyperpyrexia resulted from massive doses of chlorpromazine combined with benztropine mesylate given to a paranoid schizophrenic admitted for increased psychotic symptoms. Phenothiazines disturb the thermoregulatory mechanism and also exert anticholinergic effects peripherally, including sweating. The goal of treatment of drug-induced hyperpyrexia is to reduce oxygen demand and core temperature. Ice water soaked towels, fanning, thermal blanket, or immersion in an ice bath can be used. Oxygenation will help combat further tissue anoxia. Severe acidosis may be present and must be corrected with sodium bicarbonate after arterial pH determination. Vasoconstrictors should be avoided if shock is present.
Butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE) is expressed in brain structures involved in cognition, but the effect of selective BuChE inhibitors on human cognitive function is unknown. We report a patient whose cognitive function deteriorated following a reduction and improved following reinstitution of ethopropazine, a selective BuChE inhibitor. We suggest that, because neurons expressing BuChE may be involved in cognition, there is merit to further evaluation of selective BuChE inhibitors in treating cognitive dysfunction.
Five patients with neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) are described. The syndrome developed earlier and took longer to resolve in patients with schizophrenic disorders. Deterioration in the level of consciousness presented earlier than rigidity and fever in all five patients and was thus considered a major criterion. A significant proportion of the patients showed abnormalities of gaze. In four of the five patients spontaneous recovery occurred without the need for specific drugs.
The clinical inequivalence of generic versus trade-name drugs has been reported for nonpsychiatric drugs but rarely for psychotropic drugs. Recent expiration of patents on some psychotropic drugs has made the evaluation of the clinical equivalence of generic versus trade-name drugs a matter of interest from methodological, sociopolitical, and economic aspects. The authors discuss these points, with emphasis on methodology, in their report of a double-blind study of the efficacy of chlorpromazine and Thorazine in the treatment of 54 acute schizophrenic patients. An analysis designed to infer the maximum possible advantage of Thorazine over generic chlorpromazine indicated that differences between the two were clinically insignificant.
When changing from daily oral to long acting injectable neuroleptic therapy, it is essential to choose a dose that will maintain clinical efficacy without increased adverse reactions. Information on pharmacokinetics is needed to achieve this. The authors present guidelines based on this information and observe that previous recommendations sometimes differ substantially from these guidelines. Whether these guidelines will improve the results of long term treatment of psychotic patients remains to be determined.
