BACKGROUND: Recent studies have extended our understanding of the pathophysiology, natural course, and treatment of vestibular vertigo. The relative frequency of the different forms is as follows: benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) 17.1%; phobic vestibular vertigo 15%; central vestibular syndromes 12.3%; vestibular migraine 11.4%; Meniere's disease 10.1%; vestibular neuritis 8.3%; bilateral vestibulopathy 7.1%; vestibular paroxysmia 3.7%. METHODS: Selective literature survey with particular regard to Cochrane reviews and the guidelines of the German Neurological Society. RESULTS: In more than 95% of cases BPPV can be successfully treated by means of liberatory maneuvers (controlled studies); the long-term recurrence rate is 50%. Corticosteroids improve recovery from acute vestibular neuritis (one controlled, several noncontrolled studies); the risk of recurrence is 2-12%. A newly identified subtype of bilateral vestibulopathy, termed cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy, and vestibular areflexia syndrome (CANVAS), shows no essential improvement in the long term. Long-term high-dose treatment with betahistine is probably effective against Meniere's disease (noncontrolled studies); the frequency of episodes decreases spontaneously in the course of time (> 5 years). The treatment of choice for vestibular paroxysmia is carbamazepine (noncontrolled study). Aminopyridine, chlorzoxazone, and acetyl-DL-leucine are new treatment options for various cerebellar diseases. CONCLUSION: Most vestibular syndromes can be treated successfully. The efficacy of treatments for Meniere's disease, vestibular paroxysmia, and vestibular migraine requires further research.
Skeletal muscle relaxants are a heterogeneous group of medications used to treat two different types of underlying conditions: spasticity from upper motor neuron syndromes and muscular pain or spasms from peripheral musculoskeletal conditions. Although widely used for these indications, there appear to be gaps in our understanding of the comparative efficacy and safety of different skeletal muscle relaxants. This systematic review summarizes and assesses the evidence for the comparative efficacy and safety of skeletal muscle relaxants for spasticity and musculoskeletal conditions. Randomized trials (for comparative efficacy and adverse events) and observational studies (for adverse events only) that included oral medications classified as skeletal muscle relaxants by the FDA were sought using electronic databases, reference lists, and pharmaceutical company submissions. Searches were performed through January 2003. The validity of each included study was assessed using a data abstraction form and predefined criteria. An overall grade was allocated for the body of evidence for each key question. A total of 101 randomized trials were included in this review. No randomized trial was rated good quality, and there was little evidence of rigorous adverse event assessment in included trials or observational studies. There is fair evidence that baclofen, tizanidine, and dantrolene are effective compared to placebo in patients with spasticity (primarily multiple sclerosis). There is fair evidence that baclofen and tizanidine are roughly equivalent for efficacy in patients with spasticity, but insufficient evidence to determine the efficacy of dantrolene compared to baclofen or tizanidine. There is fair evidence that although the overall rate of adverse effects between tizanidine and baclofen is similar, tizanidine is associated with more dry mouth and baclofen with more weakness. There is fair evidence that cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, and tizanidine are effective compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions (primarily acute back or neck pain). Cyclobenzaprine has been evaluated in the most clinical trials and has consistently been found to be effective. There is very limited or inconsistent data regarding the effectiveness of metaxalone, methocarbamol, chlorzoxazone, baclofen, or dantrolene compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions. There is insufficient evidence to determine the relative efficacy or safety of cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, tizanidine, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and chlorzoxazone. Dantrolene, and to a lesser degree chlorzoxazone, have been associated with rare serious hepatotoxicity.
As the population ages, spine-related pain is increasingly common in older adults. While medications play an important role in pain management, their use has limitations in geriatric patients due to reduced liver and renal function, comorbid medical problems, and polypharmacy. This review will assess the evidence basis for medications used for spine-related pain in older adults, with a focus on drug metabolism and adverse drug reactions. A PubMed/OVID search crossing common spine, neck, and back pain terms with key words for older adults and geriatrics was combined with common drug classes and common drug names and limited to clinical trials and age over 65 years. The results were then reviewed with identification of commonly used drugs and drug categories: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, corticosteroids, gabapentin and pregabalin, antispastic and antispasmodic muscle relaxants, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tramadol, and opioids. Collectively, 138 double-blind, placebo-controlled trials were the focus of the review. The review found a variable contribution of high-quality studies examining the efficacy of medications for spine pain primarily in the geriatric population. There was strong evidence for NSAID use with adjustments for gastrointestinal and renal risk factors. Gabapentin and pregabalin had mixed evidence for neuropathic pain. SNRIs had good evidence for neuropathic pain and a more favorable safety profile than TCAs. Tramadol had some evidence in older patients, but more so in persons aged < 65 years. Rational therapeutic choices based on geriatric spine pain diagnosis are helpful, such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen for arthritic and myofascial-based pain, gabapentinoids or duloxetine for neuropathic and radicular pain, antispastic agents for myofascial-based pain, and combination therapy for mixed etiologies. Tramadol can be well tolerated in older patients, but has risks of cognitive and classic opioid side effects. Otherwise, opioids are typically avoided in the treatment of spine-related pain in older adults due to their morbidity and mortality risk and are reserved for refractory severe pain. Whenever possible, beneficial geriatric spine pain pharmacotherapy should employ the lowest therapeutic doses with consideration of polypharmacy, potentially decreased renal and hepatic metabolism, and co-morbid medical disorders.
A critical examination of the literature on centrally acting, orally administered skeletal muscle relaxants (SMRs) is presented. The available comparative clinical studies are reviewed, and the pharmacology, metabolism and adverse effects of the oral SMRs are discussed briefly. The drugs covered are carisoprodol, chlorphenesin carbamate, chlorzoxazone, cyclobenzaprine hydrochloride, diazepam, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and orphenadrine citrate. The mechanism of action of these agents is not well defined, and their effects are measured mainly by subjective responses. Thus, acceptable evidence of efficacy is difficult to obtain, especially if clinical studies continue to be designed inadequately. There are inadequate data to support the superiority of any one drug. Further, unique clinical efficacy of any oral SMR in comparison to nonspecific sedation has not been established. Based on subjective responses, all agents, except diazepam, have been shown to be superior to placebo in acute disorders; cyclobenzaprine has not been evaluated in acute conditions. SMRs are less effective in chronic disorders. Combination muscle relaxant-analgesic products appear to be superior to their individual components, but the relative efficacy of these combination products in comparison to combined use of individual sedative and analgesic agents is unknown.
AIMS: To test the in vivo activity of Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2E1 in obese children vs. nonobese children, aged 11-18 years. Secondly, whether the activity of CYP2E1 in these patients is associated with NALFD, diabetes or hyperlipidaemia. METHODS: Seventy children were divided into groups by body mass index (BMI) standard deviation score (SDS). All children received 250 mg oral chlorzoxazone (CLZ) as probe for CYP2E1 activity. Thirteen blood samples and 20-h urine samples were collected per participant. RESULTS: Obese children had an increased oral clearance and distribution of CLZ, indicating increased CYP2E1 activity, similar to obese adults. The mean AUC(0-infinity) value of CLZ was decreased by 46% in obese children compared to nonobese children. The F was was increased twofold in obese children compared to nonobese children, P < 0.0001. Diabetic biomarkers were significantly increased in obese children, while fasting blood glucose and Hba1c levels were nonsignificant between groups. Liver fat content was not associated with CLZ Cl. CONCLUSION: Oral clearance of CLZ was increased two-fold in obese children vs. nonobese children aged 11-18 years. This indicates an increased CYP2E1 activity of clinical importance, and dose adjustment should be considered for CLZ.
We retrospectively analyzed 56 consecutive cases involving acute skeletal muscle relaxant exposure that were reported to the Poison Control Center over a 1-year period. The age range was 9 mo to 56 years (mean 18.9 +/- 13.1) with the site of exposure being the primary residence in 54 cases (96.4%). The reasons for inquiry to the Poison Center were reported to be intentional suicide in 26 cases (46.4%), accidental in 21 cases (37.5%), with intentional misuses in 5 cases (8.9%). No deaths were reported. Eighteen cases (32.1%) were reported with co-ingestants (average number of substances taken was 2.7 +/- 0.8). Of these cases 3 patients (16.7%) had major effects with life-threatening symptoms with 6 (33.3%) patients having no symptoms. Of the remaining 38 cases, 17 (44.7%) wer cyclobenzaprine, 6 (15.8%) were methocarbamol, 5 (13.2%) were carisoprodol, 5 (13.2%) were chlorzoxazone, 3 (7.89%) were Baclofen and the remainder were either life-threatening symptoms (2.6%), while 29 (74.3%) had no or minor effects with symptoms that subsided. We conclude that morbidity and mortality are low in pure skeletal muscle relaxant ingestion, however it may be increased in multiple ingestions.
INTRODUCTION: In Denmark, it is estimated that 3-5% of children are obese. Obesity is associated with pathophysiological alterations that may lead to alterations in the pharmacokinetics of drugs. In adults, obesity was found to influence important drug-metabolising enzyme pathways. The impact of obesity-related alterations on drug metabolism and its consequences for drug dosing remains largely unknown in both children and adults. An altered drug metabolism may contribute significantly to therapeutic failure or toxicity. The aim of this trial is to investigate the in vivo activity of CYP3A4, CYP2E1 and CYP1A2 substrates in obese versus non-obese children. METHODS: The CYTONOX trial is an open-label explorative pharmacokinetic trial. We intend to include 50 obese and 50 non-obese children. The primary end points are: in vivo clearance of CYP3A4, CYP2E1 and CYP1A2 substrates, which will be defined by using well-tested probes; midazolam, chlorzoxazone and caffeine. Each of the probes will be administered as a single dose. Subsequently, blood and urine samples will be collected at pre-specified times. CONCLUSION: The aim of the CYTONOX trial is to investigate the in vivo activity of CYP3A4, CYP2E1 and CYP1A2 in obese and non-obese children. The results are expected to be used in the future as a basis for drug dosing recommendations in obese children. FUNDING: The study was funded by the Danish Regions' "Medicinpuljen". The funder had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. TRIAL REGISTRATION: EudraCT: 2014-004554-34.
There is considerable variability in the elimination clearance of the opioid analgesic alfentanil. It has been shown previously that alfentanil clearance is independent of the polymorphic debrisoquine hydroxylase (P-450 2D6), and it is therefore of interest to identify the human cytochrome P-450 enzymes involved in noralfentanil formation, the primary reaction involved in the oxidative N-dealkylation at the piperidine nitrogen. Purified human P-450 3A4 showed appreciable catalytic activity, and yeast recombinant P-450 3A4 also showed alfentanil oxidation activity. When microsomes prepared from different human liver samples were compared, noralfentanil formation activity was well correlated (r = 0.95,P less than 0.005) with nifedipine oxidation (a P-450 3A4 marker) but not with markers of other P-450s, including phenacetin O-deethylation (P-450 1A2), chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation (P-450 2E1), and (S)-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation (a P-450 2C enzyme). Using antibodies that recognize specific human P-450 enzymes (immunoinhibition techniques), it was possible to demonstrate that anti-P-450 3A4 nearly completely inhibited alfentanil oxidation activity in the human liver microsomes, but no other antibodies showed a measurable inhibitory effect. Selective chemical inhibitors of P-450 3A4, gestodene and troleandomycin, inhibited as much as 90% of the microsomal noralfentanil formation activity, but other chemical inhibitors did not show a detectable inhibitory effect. 7,8-Benzoflavone inhibited as much as 90% of the alfentanil oxidation activity of the microsomal or reconstituted P-450 3A4 system. This work indicates that P-450 3A4 contributes significantly to human liver microsomal alfentanil oxidation, whereas P-450 2D6 does not contribute.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Lots of factors can influence CYP2E1 activities, e.g. thyroid status, different types of anaemia (fanconi anaemia and sideroblastic anaemia), etc. Alcohol is a known inducer of CYP2E1, therefore a justifiable duration of abstinence is required before the subjects are enrolled into a study for normalization of CYP2E1 activity. In this letter we address these confounding factors and their role in CYP2E1 activity.
Dissolution testing plays many important roles throughout the pharmaceutical industry, from the research and development of drug products to the control and evaluation of drug quality. However, it is a challenging task to perform both high-efficient separation and high-temporal detection to achieve accurate dissolution profile of each active ingredient dissolved from a drug tablet. In our study, we report a novel non-manual-operation method for performing the automatic dissolution testing of drug tablets, by combining a program-controlled sequential analysis and high-speed capillary electrophoresis for efficient separation of active ingredients. The feasibility of the method for dissolution testing of real drug tablets as well as the performance of the proposed system has been demonstrated. The accuracy of drug dissolution testing is ensured by the excellent repeatability of the sequential analysis, as well as the similarity of the evaluation of dissolution testing. Our study show that the proposed method is capable to achieve simultaneous dissolution testing of multiple ingredients, and the matrix interferences can be avoided. Therefore it is of potential valuable applications in various fields of pharmaceutical research and drug regulation.
A series of flavonoids isolated from Scutellariae radix were evaluated for their effects on cytochrome P-450 (CYP) activities in human liver microsomes. All flavonoids did not substantially inhibit pentoxyresorufin O-deethylation (CYP2B 1), mephenytoin 4-hydroxylation (CYP2C19), dextromethorphan O-demethylation (CYP2D6), and chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation (CYP2E1) activities (IC50: >50 microM). Baicalein and 2',5,6',7-tetrahydroxyflavone inhibited hepatic testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (CYP3A4) activity with a IC50 of 17.4 and 7.8 microM, respectively. Oroxylin A inhibited diclofenac 4-hydroxylation (CYP2C9) activity with a IC50 of 6.7 microM. In contrast, all flavonoids tested inhibited hepatic caffeine N'-demethylation (CYP1A2) with IC50 values ranging from 0.7 to 51.3 microM. Kinetic analysis revealed that the mechanism of inhibition varied according to the flavonoids. These results suggest that flavonoids tested are inhibitors of hepatic CYP1A2 and that the extracts of Scutellariae radix, widely used as a hepatoprotective agent, may protect the liver through the prevention of CYPIA2-induced metabolic activation of protoxicants.
BACKGROUND: Temozolomide (TMZ), an oral alkylator of the imidazotetrazine family, is used to treat glioma. Whether this drug has any ionic effects in glioma cells remains largely unclear. METHODS: With the aid of patch-clamp technology, we investigated the effects of TMZ on the ionic currents in U373 glioma cells. The mRNA expression of KCNN4 (KCa3.1) in U373 glioma cells and TMZ's effect on K+ currents in these KCNN4 siRNA-transfected U373 cells were investigated. RESULTS: In whole-cell recordings, TMZ decreased the amplitude of voltage-dependent K+ currents (IK) in U373 cells. TMZ-induced IK inhibition was reversed by ionomycin or 1-ethyl-2-benzimidazolinone (1-EBIO). In cell-attached configuration, TMZ concentration-dependently reduced the activity of intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (IKCa) channels with an IC50 value of 9.2 microM. Chlorzoxazone or 1-EBIO counteracted the TMZ-induced inhibition of IKCa channels. Although TMZ was unable to modify single-channel conductance, its inhibition of IKCa channels was weakly voltage-dependent and accompanied by a significant prolongation in the slow component of mean closed time. However, neitherlarge-conductance Ca2+-activated (BKCa) nor inwardly rectifying K+ (Kir) channels were affected by TMZ. In current-clamp mode, TMZ depolarized the cell membrane and 1-EBIO reversed TMZ-induced depolarization. TMZ had no effect on IK in KCNN4 siRNA-transfected U373 cells. CONCLUSION: In addition to the DNA damage it does, its inhibitory effect on IKCa channels accompanied by membrane depolarization could be an important mechanism underlying TMZ-induced antineoplastic actions.
The effects of buprenorphine, a powerful mixed agonist/antagonist analgesic, on several cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoform specific reactions in human liver microsomes were investigated to predict drug interaction of buprenorphine in vivo from in vitro data. The following eight CYP-catalytic reactions were used in this study: CYPlA1/2-mediated 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation, CYP2A6-mediated coumarin 7-hydroxylation, CYP2B6-mediated 7-benzyloxyresorufin O-debenzylation, CYP2C8/9-mediated tolbutamide methylhydroxylation, CYP2C19-mediated S-mephenytoin 4-hydroxylation, CYP2D6-mediated bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation, CYP2E1-mediated chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation, and CYP3A4-mediated testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation. Buprenorphine strongly inhibited the CYP3A4- and CYP2D6-catalyzed reactions with Ki values of 14.7 microM and 21.4 microM, respectively. The analgesic also weakly inhibited specific reactions catalyzed by CYP1A1/2 (Ki=132 microM), CYP2B6 (Ki=133 microM), CYP2C19 (Ki=146 microM), CYP2C8/9 (IC50>300 microM), and CYP2E1 (IC50>300 microM), but not CYP2A6 mediated pathway. In consideration of the Ki values obtained in this study and the therapeutic concentration of buprenorphine in human plasma, buprenorphine would not be predicted to cause clinically significant interactions with other CYP-metabolized drugs.
The effects of irsogladine (CAS 84504-69-8) on P450-isoform specific activities in human hepatic microsomes were examined. Irsogladine had little effects on coumarin hydroxylation (CYP2A6), 7-benzyloxyresorufin O-debenzylation (CYP2B6), S-mephenytoin hydroxylation (CYP2C19), bufuralol hydroxylation (CYP2D6), chlorzoxazone hydroxylation (CYP2E1) and nifedipine oxidation (CYP3A4) at concentrations ranging from 10 to 50 pmol/L. However, it inhibited 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation (CYP1A2) and tolbutamide hydroxylation (CYP2C9) with the Ki values of 276 and 156 micromol/L, respectively. This suggests that it is a weak inhibitor of these isoforms. Because the plasma concentrations of irsogladine in humans are much lower than these Ki values, it is unlikely that irsogladine causes drug interactions with other drugs.
Pharmacological treatment of cerebellar ataxias and cerebellar nystagmus still remains difficult. The efficacy of most of the agents recommended in the past for symptomatic or even causative therapy could not be proven in larger state-of-the art clinical trials. Exceptions are (a) 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) for episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2): one observational and one randomized controlled trial showed a significant effect on the number of attacks of ataxia and quality of life; (b) aminopyridines in cerebellar downbeat nystagmus (DBN): two randomized controlled trials and several observational studies demonstrate a significant improvement of the intensity of DBN, visual acuity, and postural imbalance. In both diseases the sustained-release form is evidently also efficient; (c) 4-AP in cerebellar gait ataxia: evidence comes from two observational studies. (d) chlorzoxazone in DBN which, however, was so far demonstrated in only one observational study; (e) the modified amino acid acetyl-DL-leucine: evidently effective in cerebellar ataxias, shown in three observational studies, one on patients with Niemann-Pick type C; its mode of action has to be evaluated in animal models and on a cellular/electrophysiological level. There are ongoing randomized placebo-controlled trials on EA2 with 4-AP versus acetazolamide (EAT-2-TREAT), cerebellar gait ataxia with 4-AP (FACEG), and a multinational trial on cerebellar ataxia with acetyl-DL-leucine (ALCAT).
The effects of nilvadipine, a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, on cytochrome P450 (CYP) activities in human hepatic microsomes were investigated. Nilvadipine competitively inhibited CYP1A2-mediated 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase, CYP2A6-mediated coumarin 7-hydroxylase, CYP2C8/9-mediated tolbutamide methylhydroxylase, CYP2C19-mediated S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase, and CYP3A4-mediated nifedipine oxidase activities, and the inhibition constant (Ki) values were 13.0, 35.8, 5.02, 24.5 and 44.3 microM, respectively. On the other hand, no inhibition of CYP2B6-mediated 7-benzyloxyresorufin O-debenzylation, CYP2D6-mediated bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation, or CYP2E1-mediated chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation by nilvadipine at 40 microM concentration was observed. The free fractions of nilvadipine in the incubation mixture estimated by ultracentrifugation were 18.9-27.4%. These results suggest that nilvadipine would not cause clinically significant interactions with other drugs, which are metabolized by CYPs, via the inhibition of metabolism.
The effects of etodolac (CAS 41340-25-4) on P450 isoform-specific activities in human hepatic microsomes were examined. Etodolac had little effect on 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation (CYP1A2), coumarin hydroxylation (CYP2A6), 7-benzyloxyresorufin O-debenzylation (CYP2B6), S-mephenytoin hydroxylation (CYP2C19), bufuralol hydroxylation (CYP2D6), chlorzoxazone hydroxylation (CYP2E1) and nifedipine oxidation (CYP3A4) at concentrations ranging from 10 to 50 micromol/L. Etodolac inhibited tolbutamide hydroxylation (CYP2C9) with the Ki value of 64 micromol/L, suggesting that it is a weak inhibitor of CYP2C9. The in vivo drug interaction was predicted from the in vitro data using the [I]/([I] + Ki) value. Because the value was calculated to be almost 1, it is not likely that etodolac causes the drug interactions with the CYP2C9 substrates.
Progressive neuronal death is the key pathogenic event leading to clinical symptoms in neurodegenerative disorders (NDDs). Neuroprotective treatments are virtually unavailable, partly because of the marked internal heterogeneity of the mechanisms underlying pathology. Targeted neuroprotection would require deep mechanistic knowledge across the entire aetiological spectrum of each NDD and the development of tailored treatments. Although ideal, this strategy appears challenging, as it would require a degree of characterization of both the disease and the patient that is currently unavailable. The alternate strategy is to search for commonalities across molecularly distinct NDD forms and exploit these for the development of drugs with broad-spectrum efficacy. In this view, mounting evidence points to ionic mechanisms (IMs) as targets with potential therapeutic efficacy across distinct NDD subtypes. The scope of this review is to present clinical and preclinical evidence supporting the link between disruption of IMs and neuronal death in specific NDDs and to critically revise past and ongoing attempts of harnessing IMs for the development of neuroprotective treatments.
An overview of the current pharmacotherapy of central vestibular syndromes and the most common forms of central nystagmus as well as cerebellar disorders is given. 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) is recommended for the treatment of downbeat nystagmus, a frequent form of acquired persisting fixation nystagmus, and upbeat nystagmus. Animal studies showed that this non-selective blocker of voltage-gated potassium channels increases Purkinje cell excitability and normalizes the irregular firing rate, so that the inhibitory influence of the cerebellar cortex on vestibular and deep cerebellar nuclei is restored. The efficacy of 4-AP in episodic ataxia type 2, which is most often caused by mutations of the PQ-calcium channel, was demonstrated in a randomized controlled trial. It was also shown in an animal model (the tottering mouse) of episodic ataxia type 2. In a case series, chlorzoxazone, a non-selective activator of small-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels, was shown to reduce the DBN. The efficacy of acetyl-DL-leucine as a potential new symptomatic treatment for cerebellar diseases has been demonstrated in three case series. The ongoing randomized controlled trials on episodic ataxia type 2 (sustained-release form of 4-aminopyridine vs. acetazolamide vs. placebo; EAT2TREAT), vestibular migraine with metoprolol (PROVEMIG-trial), cerebellar gait disorders (sustained-release form of 4-aminopyridine vs. placebo; FACEG) and cerebellar ataxia (acetyl-DL-leucine vs. placebo; ALCAT) will provide new insights into the pharmacotherapy of cerebellar and central vestibular disorders.
BACKGROUND: We studied the interaction of oxaliplatin derivatives involving cytotoxic adenine-based cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, with human liver microsomal cytochrome P450. METHODS AND RESULTS: The activities of 9 human liver microsomal CYP forms (CYPs 1A2, 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation; 2A6, coumarin 7-hydroxylation; 2B6, 7-ethoxy-4-(trifluoromethyl) coumarin O-deethylation; 2C8, luciferin-6  methyl ether demethylation; 2C9, diclofenac 4 -hydroxylation, 6 -deoxyluciferin hydroxylation; 2C19, (S)-mephenytoin 4 -hydroxylation; 2D6, bufuralol 1 -hydroxylation, 2E1, chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation; 3A4, testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation, luciferin-6  benzyl ether debenzylation) were tested using HPLC, fluorescence and luminescence product detection. At 100 microM platinum(II) oxalato complex concentration, CYP inhibition was in general 25%-50%, except for the CYP3A4 form which showed roughly twice the inhibition (72%-95%). At low complex concentration (10 microM), the difference in inhibition of CYP3A4 and other forms was even more pronounced. Dixon and Lineweaver-Burk plots indicated a partially noncompetitive mechanism of CYP3A4 inhibition. CONCLUSIONS: The tested complexes significantly inhibit human liver microsomal CYP3A4 activity even at clinically relevant concentrations. This could be a serious drawback for the use of these compounds in clinical practice.
