Ranitidine is an H2-receptor antagonist that was released recently for use in the treatment of acute duodenal ulcer disease, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, and systemic mastocytosis with gastric hypersecretion. The pharmacokinetics, efficacy, adverse effects, and clinical utility of ranitidine are presented. The drug is similar in therapeutic effect to its predecessor, cimetidine, yet has certain advantages over cimetidine in clinical applications.
Three patients with dyspeptic symptoms who were being treated with the H2-receptor blocking drug, cimetidine, were later found to have gastric carcinoma. It was not possible to determine whether the association was fortuitous, whether the drug had masked the neoplastic change, or whether it was involved in some other way. Repeated clinical and endoscopic evaluation is essential in patients on this treatment for any length of time.
Although cimetidine is more effective than a placebo for the prophylaxis of stress-induced ulcers, it has no advantage over titrated antacid dosing. Several comparative studies even suggest that combining cimetidine with antacid is no more effective than use of full-dose antacid. Therefore, we recommend prophylactic use of cimetidine only when very large dosages of antacid are required, in order to minimize acid-base disturbances.
Cimetidine and ranitidine are specific and potent H2-receptor antagonists widely used in the effective therapy of peptic ulcer disease. The drugs also possess other pharmacological properties unrelated to H2-receptor antagonism. More recently large experimental doses of cimetidine or ranitidine were found to have anticholinesterase, ganglion blocking and neuromuscular blocking activities. Actions of the drugs at such cholinergic sites may account for some of their clinically documented adverse effects. The toxicological implications of these findings including the potential for drug interactions to occur, especially during some anesthetic procedures, are discussed.
The mechanism of hepatotoxicity caused by paracetamol (acetaminophen) overdose and the treatment of patients is reviewed. Paracetamol is widely used over-the-counter drug with analgesic and antipyretic properties. Although it is considered to be safe at therapeutic doses, the incidence of hepatotoxicity caused by overdose or inadvertent application has been increasing lately. N-acetyl-p-benzoquinonimine, one of the metabolites formed from paracetamol is responsible for the hepatotoxicity. Until now there is no complete therapeutic strategy for the effective treatment of hepatotoxicity caused by paracetamol. Gut decontamination, N-acetylcysteine antidote administration and enhancement of elimination is used for the management of paracetamol overdose. Those with severe hepatotoxicity and neurological symptoms can benefit from removal of necrotic liver and undergo transplantation.
Cimetidine is a rare cause of drug-induced fever. In a patient without evidence of hypersensitivity (the lymphocytes did not react to the drug in vitro) fever was the sole manifestation of an adverse reaction to cimetidine that was confirmed by challenge with the drug.
Our review of published material, manufacturer's files, and submissions to the United States Food and Drug Administration indicates that cimetidine is safe for short term use (up to 8 weeks). This judgment is based on a total experience with over 3000 patients. Clinically insignificant elevations of serum creatinine occur in a high percentage of patients, persisting until the end of therapy, then disappearing. Gynecomastia occurred in some patients on long term therapy.
In vitro studies and animal experiments as well as clinical observations in humans concerning cardiovascular effects of H2-receptor antagonists have been published shortly after the development. Thus, clinical studies were performed to investigate these effects. The following review summarizes the results from in vitro studies up to the clinical investigations performed.
The aetiopathogenesis of gastric ulceration suggests that though gastric acid plays an essential role, damage to the gastric mucosal barrier may be of more importance. Gastric ulceration is a complex disease and certain factors such as the size and site of the ulceration may influence healing. If these are not carefully standardised assessment of various therapeutic agents may produce conflicting results. The factor which has perhaps most influenced the approach to therapy of gastric ulcers is the difficulty in differentiating benign from malignant ulceration. The first accepted form of treatment for gastric ulceration was carbenoxolone sodium and though a high incidence of side effects were reported with its use, it enabled treatment on an outpatient basis. More recently the histamine H2-receptor antagonists have been shown to be equally effective and minimal reported adverse effects have made them the treatment of choice. Newer drugs are available but are yet to be fully evaluated. At present maintenance therapy is not advisable in patients with gastric ulceration unless the risk of relapse in these patients outweighs the danger of delaying diagnosis of malignancy. Where maintenance therapy is used patients should be closely monitored clinically and endoscopically.
Trithiozine is a new product which in animal studies proved to have a marked anti-secretory and anti-ulcer effect, along with a very low acute and chronic toxicity and no ganglioplegic, anticholinergic and anti-H2 activity. Clinical trials with trithiozine have been performed in some European countries. The results of these trials, most of which were conducted on a double-blind basis, and including already several hundreds of patients, have shown that oral trithiozine: exerts a very significant action on both basal and stimulated gastric acid secretion, without a rebound hypersecretion; promotes, in most patients, a complete endoscopic healing of peptic ulcer, in addition to an early symptomatic relief; has a mild sedative action; does not affect the pancreatic secretion; is well tolerated even for long-term (up to 10 months) treatments.
In a controlled, randomized, double-blind trial, the value of cimetidine as prophylaxis against acid aspiration pneumonitis was studied. Compared to placebo, cimetidine reduced the volume as well as the acidity of the gastric contents significantly. The patients at risk of developing severe pneumonitis after aspiration (pH less than 2.5 and volume greater than 20 ml) were reduced from 55% in the placebo group to 0 in the group having received cimetidine 400 mg the night before and a further 400 mg on the morning of surgery. Premedication with cimetidine may be useful if rapid intubation cannot be anticipated.
The effect of cimetidine in the daily dose of 1200 mg on the healing rate of chronic gastric ulcer was assessed in a randomized double-blind trial in 48 patients. Cimetidine was found to accelerate the healing of chronic gastric ulcers in the ambulant patients, but it conferred no additional benefit on the patients in hospital. No significant side effects were observed.
In a prospective randomized study of 39 consecutive cesarean sections, 20 patients received cimetidine 400 mg intramuscularly as a pre-anesthetic, an 19 control patients were given NaCl. No perinatal effects on the infants were observed by cardiotocography before delivery, and K, Na, pH, PCO2, HCO-3 and glucose values in capillary blood were nearly identical in the two groups 2 hours after birth, the difference being non-significant (p greater than 0.05). No respiratory effects or arrhythmias were observed. In another study comprising 8 elective cesarean sections in patients with uncomplicated pregnancies, cimetidine was found to cross the placenta at a maternal/cord blood ratio of 3:1. The drug could not be detected in any of the infants 2 hours after delivery.
Experience obtained during post-marketing surveillance of the safety of cimetidine emphasizes the difficulties in interpretation posed by the high background frequency of disease of all types in drug takers. The multiple sources of confounding factors, and their high prevalence, make it impossible to detect adverse events which mimic ordinary disease, particularly when a consistent relationship between adverse event and drug exposure is not observed. The inclusion of controls emphasizes the difficulties but does not ease interpretation.
A 41-year-old man with rheumatoid arthritis developed severe acute hepatitis 3 days after starting cimetidine for duodenal ulcer. Other causes were ruled out and he recovered after cimetidine was discontinued. Mild transient elevations of hepatic enzymes have been reported in 3.6% of patients taking cimetidine. However, only 12 cases of severe acute hepatitis associated with cimetidine, mostly secondary to idiosyncrasy, have been reported in the English literature. This rare but serious complication of cimetidine should be kept in mind.
1. The N-hydroxylation of dapsone is thought to be responsible for the methaemoglobinaemia and haemolysis associated with this drug. We wished to investigate the effect of concurrent administration of cimetidine (400 mg three times per day) on the disposition of a single dose (100 mg) of dapsone in seven healthy volunteers in order to inhibit selectively N-hydroxylation. 2. The AUC of dapsone (31.0 +/- 7.2 micrograms ml-1 h) was significantly increased (P less than 0.001) in the presence of cimetidine (43.3 +/- 8.8 micrograms ml-1 h). 3. Peak methaemoglobin levels observed after dapsone administration (2.5 +/- 0.6%) were significantly (P less than 0.05) reduced in the presence of cimetidine (0.98 +/- 0.35%). 4. The percentage of the dose excreted in urine as the glucuronide of dapsone hydroxylamine was significantly (P less than 0.05) reduced in the presence of cimetidine (34.2 +/- 9.3 vs 23.1 +/- 4.2%). 5. Concurrent cimetidine therapy might reduce some of the haematological side-effects of dapsone.
Ten white women with moderate to severe androgenetic alopecia were treated with cimetidine 300 mg by mouth five times a day. Duration of therapy ranged from 1.5-9 months, with a median of 5 months. Seven patients (70%) showed good to excellent regrowth of hair. No major side effects were noted. The patients were followed up for 5 months. Cimetidine presumably has the ability to block androgen action. Cimetidine is not a first-line drug for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia in women and should be used only in selected cases.
Our purpose was to determine if oral cimetidine, a histamine-receptor antagonist, might be of benefit in the treatment of extensive molluscum contagiosum in children. We present 13 pediatric patients in whom conventional treatment modalities for molluscum contagiosum were unsuccessful or difficult to apply. They were treated with a two-month course of oral cimetidine 40 mg/kg/day. All but three children who completed treatment experienced clearance of all lesions. These children had no new lesions but had persistence of several lesions. One child did not take the drug and did not clear. No adverse effects were observed. We conclude that oral cimetidine may be of benefit in the management of widespread or facial molluscum contagiosum in immunocompetent children.
A blind, parallel, prospective, clinical study was conducted to investigate the effect of ascorbic acid on human serum hydrocortisone concentrations which were decreased by the administration of cimetidine. The study population included 16 male adults scheduled for major abdominal vascular surgery. The study was conducted in surgical patients under anaesthesia, in which steroidogenesis was inhibited by cimetidine. The results showed a reduction in serum hydrocortisone concentrations in patients receiving a placebo. In patients receiving ascorbic acid, there was a significant increase in serum hydrocortisone concentration. This reflects the normal serum hydrocortisone profile for this operation and anaesthetic technique. Cimetidine can bind to cytochrome P-450 covering the active haem group, the cytochrome proves to be of vital importance for hydroxylation reactions, involved in human steroidogenesis. Serum hydrocortisone concentrations will decrease when cytochrome P-450 becomes blocked. Intravenous administration of ascorbic acid was supposed to cause relief for this decrease. The reasons are undetermined yet. This investigation proved that ascorbic acid can prevent cimetidine-induced decrease of human serum hydrocortisone concentrations.
There have been recent findings of gastric cancer in patients treated with cimetidine but too soon after treatment for that drug to have had a pathogenetic role. Ranitidine has been shown to induce slight changes in the gastric mucosa. In 117 patients with gastric ulcer followed-up in some cases for 24 months, five cases of cancer were detected, one after more than a year of follow-up. The numbers were too small to allow any conclusion to be drawn regarding relationships with medication. No significant differences in incidence of gastric epithelial dysplasia between control patients and patients treated with cimetidine or ranitidine were found. No dysplastic lesions were seen during a brief follow-up of 19 duodenal ulcer patients and a few gastric ulcer patients treated with pirenzepine but the data is too limited to allow conclusions to be drawn.
