Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is an endocrine disorder resulting from the hyperfunction of one or more parathyroid glands, with hypersecretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH). It can be managed by parathyroidectomy (PTX) or non-surgically. Medical therapy with pharmacological agents is an alternative for those patients with asymptomatic PHPT who meet guidelines for surgery but are unable or unwilling to undergo PTX. In this review, we focus upon these non-surgical aspects of PHPT management. We emphasize the most studied and widely used pharmacological alternatives: bisphosphonates, denosumab, cinacalcet and hormone therapy, in addition to combined therapy. We also address the relevant aspects of perioperative management.
BACKGROUND: Calcimimetics are widely used in hemodialysis patients and influence serum calcium levels. Although the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes guidelines argued that low calcium levels induced by calcimimetics may be harmless, large observational studies investigating the association between hypocalcemia and mortality are scarce. We investigated the association between serum calcium levels and cardiovascular mortality in calcimimetics users using the nationwide Japanese registry for dialysis patients. METHODS: In this 9-year prospective cohort study, the baseline data were collected at the end of 2009. We enrolled patients on maintenance hemodialysis or hemodiafiltration. We employed three models (baseline, time-dependent and time-averaged) to conduct Cox proportional hazard regression analyses. RESULTS: Cinacalcet was prescribed to 12.7% (N = 22 853) at baseline. The median observation period was 98 (interquartile range 40-108) months and 108 (interquartile range 59-108) months in the whole cohort (N = 180 136) and in cinacalcet users, respectively. Three-quarters of survivors at the end of 2019 had continued calcimimetic therapy for 10 years, corresponding to a mean annual dropout rate of 2.9%. Hypocalcemia was not associated with cardiovascular mortality in the baseline or time-averaged model. In the time-dependent model, however, the lowest calcium decile (corrected calcium <8.4 mg/dL) was significantly associated with higher cardiovascular mortality than the reference (corrected calcium 8.7-8.9 mg/dL) in both cinacalcet users and all patients [hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) 1.32 (1.00, 1.75) and 1.15 (1.05, 1.26), respectively]. Hypocalcemia was especially associated with sudden death and death due to hemorrhagic stroke, heart failure and ischemic heart disease. Higher rate of fatal and non-fatal cardiovascular events was observed in hypocalcemic patients regardless of cinacalcet usage. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that transient hypocalcemia was associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular death independent of cinacalcet usage. We should pay attention to hypocalcemia transiently induced by cinacalcet.
CONTEXT: Parathyroidectomy (PTx) and cinacalcet are both effective treatments for secondary hyperparathyroidism in hemodialysis patients, but limited data exist comparing the long-term outcomes of these interventions. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to compare the risk of mortality among hemodialysis patients who underwent PTx and those who started treatment with cinacalcet. METHODS: In this prospective cohort study, comprising patients from the Japanese Society for Dialysis Therapy Renal Data Registry, patients who had intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels >/= 300 pg/mL in late 2007 and underwent PTx or started treatment with cinacalcet in 2008 to 2009 were matched by propensity score at 1:3. PTx and cinacalcet were compared for all-cause mortality within 6 years. RESULTS: Among eligible patients, 894 patients who underwent PTx were matched with 2682 patients who started treatment with cinacalcet. The median baseline intact PTH levels were 588 pg/mL and 566 pg/mL in the PTx and cinacalcet groups, respectively. PTx resulted in greater reductions in intact PTH, calcium, and phosphorus levels compared with cinacalcet. During the 6-year follow-up period, 201 patients (22.5%) in the PTx group and 736 patients (27.4%) in the cinacalcet group died. PTx was associated with a lower risk of mortality compared with cinacalcet (hazard ratio, 0.78 [95% CI, 0.67-0.91]; P = 0.002). This association was more pronounced in patients with intact PTH levels >/= 500 pg/mL and in patients with serum calcium levels >/= 10.0 mg/dL (both P for interaction < 0.001). CONCLUSION: PTx compared with cinacalcet is associated with a lower risk of mortality, particularly among patients with severe secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Positive allosteric modulator (PAM) drugs enhance the activation of the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) and suppress parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion. Unfortunately, these hyperparathyroidism-treating drugs can induce hypocalcemia and arrhythmias. Seeking improved modulators, we docked libraries of 2.7 million and 1.2 billion molecules against the CaSR structure. The billion-molecule docking found PAMs with a 2.7-fold higher hit rate than the million-molecule library, with hits up to 37-fold more potent. Structure-based optimization led to nanomolar leads. In ex vivo organ assays, one of these PAMs was 100-fold more potent than the standard of care, cinacalcet, and reduced serum PTH levels in mice without the hypocalcemia typical of CaSR drugs. As determined from cryo-electron microscopy structures, the PAMs identified here promote CaSR conformations that more closely resemble the activated state than those induced by the established drugs.
Sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism is a common endocrinopathy, particularly afflicting postmenopausal women and both African American men and women. Although classic signs and symptoms of the disease are well appreciated and described, because of the ease and availability and low threshold for screening, the disorder often is diagnosed in patients who are minimally symptomatic or asymptomatic. Surgery conducted by experienced endocrine surgeons has a high cure rate, particularly if guided by concordant imaging. In patients who cannot safely undergo surgery or who fail to be cured, medical therapy with the oral calcimimetic cinacalcet is a validated option for controlling serum calcium levels.
IMPORTANCE: Secondary hyperparathyroidism contributes to extraskeletal calcification and is associated with all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. Control is suboptimal in the majority of patients receiving hemodialysis. An intravenously (IV) administered calcimimetic could improve adherence and reduce adverse gastrointestinal effects. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relative efficacy and safety of the IV calcimimetic etelcalcetide and the oral calcimimetic cinacalcet. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A randomized, double-blind, double-dummy active clinical trial was conducted comparing IV etelcalcetide vs oral placebo and oral cinacalcet vs IV placebo in 683 patients receiving hemodialysis with serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentrations higher than 500 pg/mL on active therapy at 164 sites in the United States, Canada, Europe, Russia, and New Zealand. Patients were enrolled from August 2013 to May 2014, with end of follow-up in January 2015. INTERVENTIONS: Etelcalcetide intravenously and oral placebo (n = 340) or oral cinacalcet and IV placebo (n = 343) for 26 weeks. The IV study drug was administered 3 times weekly with hemodialysis; the oral study drug was administered daily. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary efficacy end point was noninferiority of etelcalcetide at achieving more than a 30% reduction from baseline in mean predialysis PTH concentrations during weeks 20-27 (noninferiority margin, 12.0%). Secondary end points included superiority in achieving biochemical end points (>50% and >30% reduction in PTH) and self-reported nausea or vomiting. RESULTS: The mean (SD) age of the trial participants was 54.7 (14.1) years and 56.2% were men. Etelcalcetide was noninferior to cinacalcet on the primary end point. The estimated difference in proportions of patients achieving reduction in PTH concentrations of more than 30% between the 198 of 343 patients (57.7%) randomized to receive cinacalcet and the 232 of 340 patients (68.2%) randomized to receive etelcalcetide was -10.5% (95% CI, -17.5% to -3.5%, P for noninferiority, <.001; P for superiority, .004). One hundred seventy-eight patients (52.4%) randomized to etelcalcetide achieved more than 50% reduction in PTH concentrations compared with 138 patients (40.2%) randomized to cinacalcet (P = .001; difference in proportions, 12.2%; 95% CI, 4.7% to 19.5%). The most common adverse effect was decreased blood calcium (68.9% vs 59.8%). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients receiving hemodialysis with moderate to severe secondary hyperparathyroidism, the use of etelcalcetide was not inferior to cinacalcet in reducing serum PTH concentrations over 26 weeks; it also met superiority criteria. Further studies are needed to assess clinical outcomes as well as longer-term efficacy and safety. TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT1896232.
The calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) is a family C G-protein-coupled receptor(1) (GPCR) that has a central role in regulating systemic calcium homeostasis(2,3). Here we use cryo-electron microscopy and functional assays to investigate the activation of human CaSR embedded in lipid nanodiscs and its coupling to functional G(i) versus G(q) proteins in the presence and absence of the calcimimetic drug cinacalcet. High-resolution structures show that both G(i) and G(q) drive additional conformational changes in the activated CaSR dimer to stabilize a more extensive asymmetric interface of the seven-transmembrane domain (7TM) that involves key protein-lipid interactions. Selective G(i) and G(q) coupling by the receptor is achieved through substantial rearrangements of intracellular loop 2 and the C terminus, which contribute differentially towards the binding of the two G-protein subtypes, resulting in distinct CaSR-G-protein interfaces. The structures also reveal that natural polyamines target multiple sites on CaSR to enhance receptor activation by zipping negatively charged regions between two protomers. Furthermore, we find that the amino acid L-tryptophan, a well-known ligand of CaSR extracellular domains, occupies the 7TM bundle of the G-protein-coupled protomer at the same location as cinacalcet and other allosteric modulators. Together, these results provide a framework for G-protein activation and selectivity by CaSR, as well as its allosteric modulation by endogenous and exogenous ligands.
Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is a common endocrinological process, characterized by chronic elevation of serum concentrations of calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH). Many years ago, the most frequent forms of clinical presentation were symptomatic renal or skeletal disease with moderate or severe hypercalcemia; however, currently, most patients have few symptoms and mild hypercalcemia. A new form of presentation called normocalcemic PHPT has also been described but clinical consequences are not well established. The biochemical profile of PHPT is characterized by hypercalcemia and high or inappropriately normal PTH concentrations. Parathyroidectomy is the only definitive cure. Medical treatment with the calcimimetic cinacalcet has been shown to normalize calcemia in a high percentage of cases.
RATIONALE & OBJECTIVE: Parathyroidectomy and calcimimetics have been used to reduce fracture risk in patients with kidney failure and advanced secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT), but direct comparisons of these treatment approaches have not been implemented. This pilot study compared their effects on bone mineral density (BMD) in this patient population. STUDY DESIGN: A prospective pilot open-label randomized trial. SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: 65 patients receiving maintenance peritoneal dialysis with advanced SHPT recruited from 2 university-affiliated hospitals in Hong Kong. INTERVENTIONS: Total parathyroidectomy with forearm autografting versus oral cinacalcet treatment for 12 months. OUTCOME: Prespecified secondary end points including changes in BMD z and T scores of femoral neck, lumbar spine, and distal radius 12 months after treatment initiation and also categorized as osteopenia or osteoporosis according to the World Health Organization. RESULTS: Both total parathyroidectomy and cinacalcet significantly improved BMD of the lumbar spine and femoral neck over 12 months, but the total parathyroidectomy group had a greater increase than the cinacalcet-treated group (P<0.001). The proportion of study participants classified as having osteopenia/osteoporosis by femoral neck T-score fell from 78.2% to 51.7% in the total parathyroidectomy group (P<0.001) and from 65.7% to 52.0% in cinacalcet-treated group after 12 months (P=0.7). The proportion of participants with a T-score at the lumbar spine classified as osteopenia/osteoporosis fell from 53.1% to 31.0% in the total parathyroidectomy group (P=0.01) and from 59.4% to 53.8% with cinacalcet (P=0.3). No significant change was observed in BMD T or z score of the distal radius over 12 months with either intervention. LIMITATIONS: Bone histology was not assessed, and the study duration was 12 months. CONCLUSIONS: A large proportion of peritoneal dialysis patients with advanced SHPT had low bone densities and osteopenia/osteoporosis. Total parathyroidectomy increased the BMD of the lumbar spine and femoral neck and reduced osteopenia/osteoporosis more than oral cinacalcet. FUNDING: Grants from academic (The University of Hong Kong Research) and not-for-profit (Hong Kong Society of Nephrology) entities. REGISTRATION: Registered at Clinicaltrials.gov with study number NCT01447368. PLAIN-LANGUAGE SUMMARY: It is not known whether oral cinacalcet and surgical parathyroidectomy differ in their effects on bone parameters in patients with advanced secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT) receiving peritoneal dialysis. This pilot randomized trial evaluated the effect of medical versus surgical therapy on bone mineral densities (BMD) as prespecified secondary study end points. The findings showed that a large proportion of peritoneal dialysis patients with advanced SHPT had low bone densities and osteopenia/osteoporosis. Parathyroidectomy increased the BMD of the lumbar spine and femoral neck more than cinacalcet over 12 months. Parathyroidectomy reduced the proportion of patients with osteopenia/osteoporosis at the lumbar spine and femoral neck more than cinacalcet after 12 months. Neither intervention led to an increase in the BMD of the distal radius over 12 months.
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the options available for patients with primary hyperparathyrodism (PHPT) not undergoing parathyroidectomy (PTx). Adequate hydration should be recommended in all patients. Calcium intake should not be restricted and vitamin D deficiency should be corrected aiming at a serum concentration of 25OHD of >20 ng/mL or even higher (>30 ng/mL according to some opinion leaders). Pharmacologic therapy is not an alternative to PTx and could be considered in patients who meet the surgical criteria but unwilling to undergo PTx, as well as in patients with an increased risk of surgery or failed surgery. Targeted therapy includes antiresorptive drugs for skeletal protection and cinacalcet for lowering serum calcium. Combined therapy can be an option when appropriate. Pregnant women should be treated conservatively (hydration) and surgery, if needed, performed in the second trimester of pregnancy. Severe hypercalcemia is a life-threatening condition and requires immediate intensive treatment.
Hypophosphataemic rickets is a rare, genetic disorder resulting in defect bone mineralisation and rickets. The current medical treatment consists of phosphate supplementation and alfacalcidol, but side effects such as secondary hyperparat-hyroidism and nephrocalcinosis are common. This treatment regimen often fails to prevent bone deformity and reduced final height. The rarity and complexity of these diseases call for centralised specialist care and international collaboration. Future medical treatment may be improved by addition of new promising experimental treatments.
The discovery of the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) and the development of calcimimetics have provided new insights into calcium homeostasis and new therapeutic opportunities for parathyroid-related disorders. However, the CaSR is also implicated in various other cellular processes, and the translational applications of calcimimetics may not be exclusively calcium-centric. Koleganova et al. describe a novel role for calcimimetics as vasculotropes, which provides the impetus for further studies to characterize their effects on vascular biology.
Calciphylaxis, also known as calcific uremic arteriolopathy, is a cutaneous ischemic small vessel vasculopathy seen in 1 to 4% of patients with chronic kidney disease on hemodialysis. It is associated with extreme pain and a 60 to 80% mortality rate in the setting of few and frequently ineffective therapeutic options, although this may be changing based on reports of success with newer therapies.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) secreted from parathyroid cells is a key regulator of circulating levels of calcium ion, which is maintained within a narrow physiological range mainly by the action of a cell surface Ca2+-sensing receptor (CaSR) residing on parathyroid cells. The CaSR belongs to the family C of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), all members of which have a large extra cellular domain called Venus flytrap, akin to bacterial nutrient sensor. Promiscuity of the CaSR is reflected in its binding to several physiologically relevant di- or polyvalent cations that could elicit cellular signaling, yet the ligand specificity remains poor. This problem has been circumvented by the discovery of calcimimetics, the positive allosteric modulators of the CaSR that activate the CaSR on parathyroid cells, immediately suppressing PTH secretion. Out of several small molecules that act as calcimimetics, cinacalcet is the most extensively studied. The discovery of the CaSR and these specific agonists provides important insights into the discovery of new drugs that will be discussed in this review from the perspective of their structure-activity relationship. The calcimimetic compound cinacalcet has obtained regulatory approval for the treatment of hyperparathyroidism and is the first positive allosteric modulator of any GPCR to reach the market. It has other important uses in dialysis patients with end-stage renal disease, in whom it decreases Ca X P product. Pharmaceutically converse to calcimimetics are calcilytic compounds, which antagonize parathyroid CaSR and stimulate PTH secretion. Antagonism of the CaSR has the potential to yield an anabolic therapy for osteoporosis that awaits clinical validation.
Oral cinacalcet hydrochloride (HCl) [Sensipar, Mimpara] is the first in a new class of therapeutic agents, the calcimimetics, and has a novel mechanism of action. It directly modulates the principal regulator of parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion, namely the calcium-sensing receptor (CaR) on the chief cells in the parathyroid gland. Cinacalcet HCl reduces circulating PTH levels by increasing the sensitivity of the CaR to extracellular calcium. In three pivotal phase III, 26-week, randomised, double-blind, multicentre trials in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients (n = 1136) on dialysis with uncontrolled secondary hyperparathyroidism (HPT), a significantly higher proportion of oral cinacalcet HCl 30-180 mg/day than placebo recipients achieved a reduction in intact PTH levels to < or =250 pg/mL. Cinacalcet HCl treatment also simultaneously lowered serum calcium and phosphorus, and calcium-phosphorous product levels. Notably, cinacalcet HCl proved effective in a broad range of CKD patients on dialysis with uncontrolled secondary HPT, regardless of disease severity, duration of dialysis treatment, dialysis modality, race, age, gender, or concurrent phosphate binder or vitamin D sterol use. Cinacalcet HCl (60-360 mg/day) also reduced elevated serum calcium levels by > or =1 mg/dL in 15 of 21 (71%) patients with parathyroid carcinoma in an open-label, multicentre, dose-titration trial. Cinacalcet HCl was generally well tolerated in clinical trials. Most treatment-emergent adverse events were mild to moderate in severity.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Calciphylaxis is a disorder of cutaneous microvascular calcification and thrombosis leading to chronic, excruciatingly painful, progressive wounds with a high risk of sepsis and death. The diagnosis and treatment of calciphylaxis presents significant challenges. A poorly understood disease, the management of calciphylaxis has mostly been restricted to wound management and a few novel therapies. Data from patient registries and new studies on causal pathways is stimulating the development of pathogenesis-based medical therapies. RECENT FINDINGS: Much needed clinical trials are now underway to examine the safety and efficacy of sodium thiosulfate and other therapeutics for the indication of calciphylaxis. There is emerging data suggesting a potential role of therapeutic anticoagulation in these patients. There has also been a renewed emphasis on patient-oriented outcomes, such as improvement of pain scores and quality-of-life indices. SUMMARY: This review highlights ongoing clinical trials studying therapeutic options in calciphylaxis and emphasizes the causal pathways that led to the development of such therapies.
PURPOSES OF REVIEW: With chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression, secondary hyperparathyroidism (sHPT) and mineral and bone metabolism disease (MBD) almost inevitably develop and result in renal osteodystrophy and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Together with active vitamin D, calcimimetics are the main therapy for sHPT in CKD. This review provides an overview of the therapeutic effects of oral cinacalcet and intravenous etelcalcetide on CKD-MBD and vascular disease, with a focus on pediatric dialysis patients. RECENT FINDINGS: Randomized controlled trials in adults and children demonstrate efficient lowering of parathyroid hormone (PTH) by the calcimimetics together with a reduction in serum calcium and phosphate when combined with low-dose active vitamin D, while therapy with active vitamin D analogs alone increases serum calcium and phosphate. Cinacalcet and etelcalcetide both improve bone formation and correct adynamic bone, i.e., have a direct bone anabolic effect. They decrease serum calciprotein particles, which are involved in endothelial dysfunction, atherogenesis, and vascular calcification. Clinical trials in adults suggest a modest slowing of the progression of cardiovascular calcification with cinacalcet. Calcimimetic agents represent a major pharmacological tool for improved control of CKD-MBD, by efficiently counteracting sHPT and allowing for better control of calcium/phosphate and bone homeostasis. Albeit definite evidence is lacking, the beneficial effects of calcimimetics on CVD are promising. Routine use of cinacalcet has been suggested in children.
INTRODUCTION: Calcific uraemic arteriolopathy (CUA), also called calciphylaxis, is a rare but potentially fatal vascular disorder that almost exclusively affects patients with chronic renal failure. The objective of this study was to analyse various risk factors for developing CUA and its subsequent clinical course according to the treatment received. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective study that included patients diagnosed with CUA from December 1999 to December 2015. Various risk factors, clinical course and treatment options were analysed. RESULTS: A total of 28 patients (53.6% females) with a mean age of 67.2+/-11.8 (38-88) years were included. At the time of diagnosis, 53.6% were on haemodialysis, 25% were kidney transplant patients and 21.4% had normal renal function. The use of steroids (100%, P=.001) was the main risk factor in renal transplant patients. Skin lesions resolved in 60.7% (especially in those receiving multitargeted therapy). Patient survival at 12 months was 29% in transplant patients, 57% in haemodialysis patients and 100% in normal renal function patients (log-rank 6.88, P=.032). Chronic renal failure (P=.03) and hypoalbuminaemia (P=.02) were the main risk factor for CUA mortality. CONCLUSIONS: Although the incidence of CUA remains low, CUA mortality is very high, Special attention to its occurrence in kidney transplant patients and <<non-renal>> CUA forms is required. Oral anticoagulants and steroids appear to be the main risk factors, CUA is a challenge; a registry of patients and determining standard therapy are required.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism is associated with an increased risk of skeletal fractures and mortality in dialysis patients. Classical treatments such as active vitamin D derivatives and surgical parathyroidectomy are efficient but have some limitations. Second generation calcimimetics allow to control serum PTH levels without increasing serum calcium phosphorus product. This article reviews the physiological bases of PTH regulation, the mode of action of calcimimetics and the results of preclinical and clinical studies evaluating the effect of calcimimetics on different biochemical, clinical and histological parameters.
BACKGROUND: A 47-year-old man with a 6-year history of chronic dialysis for end-stage renal disease of unknown etiology presented for renal transplantation. While on dialysis, he had developed secondary hyperparathyroidism, which persisted after transplantation despite treatment with cinacalcet. INVESTIGATIONS: Physical examination, serum and urine analysis, ultrasound of the renal transplant, renal biopsy, bone scintigraphy. DIAGNOSIS: Severe persistent hyperparathyroidism associated with mild hypercalcemia following renal transplantation. Initiation of a calcimimetic followed by fulminant graft failure. Extensive tubular calcinosis. MANAGEMENT: Renal transplantation (with immunosuppressant medications: basiliximab, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, prednisolone), cinacalcet (halted on day 26 after transplantation), angiotensinconverting-enzyme inhibitor, angiotensin-receptor blocker, hydrochlorothiazide, emergency dialysis, subtotal parathyroidectomy.
