Ciprofloxacin is one of a new generation of fluorinated quinolones structurally related to nalidixic acid. The primary mechanism of action of ciprofloxacin is inhibition of bacterial DNA gyrase. It is a broad spectrum antibacterial drug to which most Gram-negative bacteria are highly susceptible in vitro and many Gram-positive bacteria are susceptible or moderately susceptible. Unlike most broad spectrum antibacterial drugs, ciprofloxacin is effective after oral or intravenous administration. Ciprofloxacin has been most extensively studied following oral administration. It attains concentrations in most tissues and body fluids which are at least equivalent to the minimum inhibitory concentration designated as the breakpoint for bacterial susceptibility in vitro. The results of clinical trials with orally and intravenously administered ciprofloxacin have confirmed the potential for its use in a wide range of infections, which was suggested by its in vitro antibacterial and pharmacokinetic profiles. It has proven an effective treatment for many types of systemic infections as well as for both acute and chronic infections of the urinary tract. Ciprofloxacin generally appeared to be at least as effective as alternative orally administered antibacterial drugs in the indications in which they were compared, and in some indications, to parenterally administered antibacterial therapy. However, further studies are needed to fully clarify the comparative efficacy of ciprofloxacin and standard antibacterial therapies. Bacterial resistance to ciprofloxacin develops infrequently, both in vitro and clinically, except in the setting of pseudomonal respiratory tract infections in cystic fibrosis patients. The drug is also well tolerated. Thus, as an orally active, broad spectrum and potent antibacterial drug, ciprofloxacin offers a valuable alternative to broad spectrum parenterally administered antibacterial drugs for use in a wide range of clinical infections, including difficult infections due to multiresistant pathogens.
Available information about the safety of intravenous (i.v.) administration of ciprofloxacin is reviewed. No increased incidence of systemic toxicity is apparent over the oral route. CNS side effects occur, but at a low rate and they are mild. Caution is indicated in patients with tendency for seizures. Laboratory changes are minimal, mainly mild elevations of liver enzymes. No increased risk of crystalluria has been seen. Local side effects in the form of erythema and burning are relatively common in some volunteer studies and are also seen in clinical studies, infusion phlebitis also occurs. It is recommended that i.v. ciprofloxacin is administered in slow infusion through a large or preferably central vein.
Ciprofloxacin is a new quinolone derivative which is particularly well adapted for the treatment of bacterial urinary tract infection. Virtually all uropathogens are susceptible, and the development of resistance is uncommon. Its pharmacokinetic characteristics reveal that effective concentrations of the drug are easily achieved with twice a day oral therapy in the blood, urine, kidneys, and prostate--even in advanced renal failure. The drug is well tolerated, even with prolonged courses of therapy. It will be particularly useful in the treatment of antibiotic-resistant, complicated, and/or prostatic infection.
A 65-year-old man with recently diagnosed urinary tract infection treated with ciprofloxacin (Cipro) presented to our institution with recurrent seizure-like activity. His rhythm revealed torsade de pointes, which required defibrillation. Subsequent electrocardiogram revealed severely prolonged QT interval, which near-completely resolved 7 days later off Cipro. This case highlights a rare but potentially fatal side effect of quinolone antibiotics, especially in combination with other QT-prolonging medications. Review of the literature with regard to prevalence, mechanism, and assessment and treatment of this potentially fatal incidence is provided.
This article reviews the characteristics of the main fluoroquinolones used in dentistry (ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin and moxifloxacin), including pharmacokinetic/ pharmacodynamic parameters, susceptibility profiles of oral bacteria and clinical trials on their efficacy in dental practice. It seems that some of these antibiotics might represent a safe alternative in patients with allergy, intolerance, or lack of response to beta-lactams.
Fluoroquinolones present various pharmacokinetic properties. That's the way we carried out a bibliographic summary about the pharmacokinetics of pefloxacin, ofloxacin and ciprofloxacin in patients hit by chronic renal failure, under haemodialysis or under continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. Then, we will describe how to adapt drug dose according to the degree of renal insufficiency and the used molecule.
This article reports an update to the protocol of the IMASOY trial, which was prospectively registered on clinicaltrials.gov (NCT04110340) in October 2019.
Fluoroquinolones have been associated with tendinopathies. The authors present three cases of Achilles tendinopathy in which the patients' symptoms were preceded by treatment for unrelated bacterial infections with ciprofloxacin. Although the exact mechanism of the relationship is not understood, those who engage in sports or exercise should be advised of the risk of quinolone-induced tendinopathy.
The Drug rash with hypereosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome, or hypersensitivity syndrome, is a severe drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome. It has been exceptionally described with ciprofloxacin. We report a 47-year-old-woman who developed DRESS syndrome, 2 days after taking ciprofloxacin for a urinary infection. She had a generalized maculopapular rash, severe rhabdomyolysis, liver involvement, renal failure and hypereosinophilia. Clinical symptoms had completely resolved after ciprofloxacin withdrawal. Renal failure has decrease after short corticosteroid treatment.
Pseudomonas aeruginosaisa commonly known as nosocomial infection agent but rarely previously healthy people are infected by P. aeruginosa. Here we report Community Acquired Pneumonia (CAP) in a 27 year old male athlete. 15 published P. aeruginosa CAP case reports were reviewed. 53.3% of patients were female and 46.67% were male. The mean age was 44 years old (SD: +/-13.54). In 8 reports it is mentioned that the patient was a smoker. Fatality rate was 46.6% and death rate was not significantly different between selected antibiotic regimen, sex and smoking in patient's outcome. Chest strike can be a risk factor for P. aeruginosa CAP in athlete people. Our reported patient treated by ciprofloxacin 500 mg per day and healed without any Secondary complication. Fast, timely diagnosis and treatment is critical in Community Acquired P. aeruginosa pneumonia outcome.
Ciprofloxacin is a useful, orally available, non-toxic broad-spectrum antibiotic. Despite its novel mode of action, resistance is arising and we feel the drug should be reserved for specific indications where it can be of enormous value.
The administration of antibiotics by the inhaled route offers an appealing and logical approach to treating infectious respiratory conditions. Studies in the cystic fibrosis (CF) population have established the efficacy of this therapeutic concept and inhaled antibiotic therapy is now one of the pillars of management in CF. There are now a number of new inhaled antibiotic formulations that have shown impressive preliminary evidence for efficacy in CF and are commencing phase III efficacy studies. Translation of this paradigm into the non-CF bronchiectasis population has proven difficult thus far, apparently due to problems with tolerability of inhaled formulations. Inhaled versions of ciprofloxacin have shown good tolerability and microbiological efficacy in preliminary studies, suggesting that effective inhaled antibiotics are finally on the horizon for this previously neglected patient population. The increased use of long-term inhaled antibiotics for a wider range of non-CF indications presents risks to the broader community of greater antimicrobial resistance development that must be carefully weighed against any demonstrated benefits.
We report the case of a 38-year-old patient with a rupture of the right Achilles tendon after physical exercise. A few days before he had been treated with ciprofloxacine 500mg bid for chlamydial urethritis. We discuss know risk factors for Achilles tendon ruptures and the possible contribution of ciprofloxacin and fluorquinolones in this case.
Background: Infections with Aeromonas spp. are a recognized complication of leech therapy for circulatory complications in replanted digits. Ciprofloxacin is commonly used empirically for Aeromonas coverage in such cases. Evolving resistance patterns of Aeromonas should be considered in designing an antibiotic strategy. Methods: Three consecutive patients with complicated replantations had site cultures yielding Aeromonas isolates resistant to ciprofloxacin. These cultures were analyzed to identify effective antibiotic agents. Results: Each Aeromonas isolate, and each additional site organism, was sensitive to cefepime. Conclusion: Our routine antibiotic coverage for leech application has been changed to cefepime. Aeromonas sensitivities and resistances should be monitored to adapt to future changes in appropriate antibiotics.
Ciprofloxacin (CP) is a fluoroquinolone that is highly active against diverse microorganisms. At concentrations less than 1 microg/ml it is active against a diverse types of bacteria, including Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Bacillius subtilius, Escherichia coli and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In addition, it has shown to be effective against other diseases such as malaria, cancer and AIDS. The extended antimicrobial activity, lack of plasmid-mediated resistance, large volume of distribution and minimal adverse effects of CP are therapeutically advantageous. In the pursuit of increasing their effectiveness against these diseases and prevent unwanted resistance, researchers have begun to synthesize a class of organic, inorganic and organometallic derivatives, which have displayed interesting activities. This review describes the development and recent advances on the evaluation of CP and its derivatives as a new class of drugs with potential for clinical development.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is considered as the most redoubtable pathogenic agent at cystic fibrosis patients. Its eradication is a priority to avoid the passage to chronic infection, the real turning point of the disease. For this, a wide therapeutic panel of intravenous antibiotics exists, and for some years, the research teams concentrate more and more on the inhaled way. The synthesis of the literature data presented herein focuses on both already experienced molecules (colistin and tobramycin), and on new therapeutics. This review aims at loosening advantages and inconveniences of each of these therapeutic options, while bringing to light the necessity of follow-up studies in order to prove the therapeutic interests of molecules in development.
Drug-induced bullous pemphigoid (DIBP) has been reported to be an autoimmune bullous disease induced or precipitated by several drugs, immunopathologically similar to classic bullous pemphigoid. Several medications may not only cause DIBP, including diuretics, antiarrythmics-antihypertensives, and recently antitumor necrosis factor agents, other drugs as chloroquine, but also rarely by antibiotics as amoxicillin and penicillin. The authors present the third case of DIBP induced by quinolones and the second case of localized DIBP triggered by oral ciprofloxacin. A DIBP can be suspected in old patients when they add or change some drugs in their normal medication regimen.
Fluoroquinolones are widely used antibiotics; however, numerous side effects have been reported in published studies, including a spectrum of tendinopathies, affecting numerous anatomic sites. Several risk factors have been identified, including advanced age (>60 years), corticosteroid use, renal failure or dialysis, female sex, and nonobesity. We present the case of an elderly male with minimal change disease treated with glucocorticoids and acute kidney injury, who sustained spontaneous nontraumatic bilateral Achilles tendon tears 4 days after initiating ciprofloxacin.
OBJECTIVE: To report a case of ciprofloxacin-induced psychosis and to discuss occurrence rates, risk factors, possible etiologies, preventive measures, and treatment courses for this adverse reaction. DATA SOURCES: Case reports and review articles identified by MEDLINE. DATA EXTRACTION: Data from pertinent published sources were reviewed and abstracted. DATA SYNTHESIS: A 49-year-old man developed symptoms of severe psychosis concomitant with ciprofloxacin (250 mg bid) treatment. Central nervous system effects secondary to ciprofloxacin treatment are uncommon and usually consist only of minor dizziness or mild headache, although rare occurrences of seizures and hallucinations have been reported. The mechanism by which ciprofloxacin causes these adverse effects is not fully understood. It has been suggested that quinolones may produce an epileptogenic effect by inhibiting the binding of gamma-aminobutyric acid to its receptor sites in the brain. There is yet no explanation for the occurrence of hallucinations or psychosis. CONCLUSIONS: Caution should be exercised when using ciprofloxacin in the treatment of patients with personality abnormalities or symptoms of psychosis.
The influence of pH, inoculum size, human urine and prostatic extract on the MICs of ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim for Escherichia coli was investigated. There was no influence by the bacterial inoculum size within wide ranges on either drug. An increase in pH had a variable influence on the MICs of trimethoprim for E. coli but lowered those of ciprofloxacin considerably. Human prostatic extract increased the trimethoprim MIC for E. coli but lowered those of ciprofloxacin as compared to Mueller Hinton broth. Human urine increased the MICs of both drugs for E. coli.
