Escitalopram is the (S)-enantiomer of the racemic selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressant citalopram. Clinical studies have shown that escitalopram is effective and well tolerated in the treatment of depression and anxiety disorders. Following oral administration, escitalopram is rapidly absorbed and reaches maximum plasma concentrations in approximately 3-4 hours after either single- or multiple-dose administration. The absorption of escitalopram is not affected by food. The elimination half-life of escitalopram is about 27-33 hours and is consistent with once-daily administration. Steady-state concentrations are achieved within 7-10 days of administration. Escitalopram has low protein binding (56%) and is not likely to cause interactions with highly protein-bound drugs. It is widely distributed throughout tissues, with an apparent volume of distribution during the terminal phase after oral administration (V(z)/F) of about 1100L. Unmetabolised escitalopram is the major compound in plasma. S-demethylcitalopram (S-DCT), the principal metabolite, is present at approximately one-third the level of escitalopram; however, S-DCT is a weak inhibitor of serotonin reuptake and does not contribute appreciably to the therapeutic activity of escitalopram. The didemethyl metabolite of escitalopram (S-DDCT) is typically present at or below quantifiable concentrations. Escitalopram and S-DCT exhibit linear and dose-proportional pharmacokinetics following single or multiple doses in the 10-30 mg/day dose range. Adolescents, elderly individuals and patients with hepatic impairment do not have clinically relevant differences in pharmacokinetics compared with healthy young adults, implying that adjustment of the dosage is not necessary in these patient groups. Escitalopram is metabolised by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoenzymes CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4. However, ritonavir, a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4, does not affect the pharmacokinetics of escitalopram. Coadministration of escitalopram 20mg following steady-state administration of cimetidine or omeprazole led to a 72% and 51% increase, respectively, in escitalopram exposure compared with administration alone. These changes were not considered clinically relevant. In vitro studies have shown that escitalopram has negligible inhibitory effects on CYP isoenzymes and P-glycoprotein, suggesting that escitalopram is unlikely to cause clinically significant drug-drug interactions. The favourable pharmacokinetic profile of escitalopram suggests clinical utility in a broad range of patients.
BACKGROUND: Antidepressants are among the most commonly prescribed medications, but evidence on comparative weight change for specific first-line treatments is limited. OBJECTIVE: To compare weight change across common first-line antidepressant treatments by emulating a target trial. DESIGN: Observational cohort study over 24 months. SETTING: Electronic health record (EHR) data from 2010 to 2019 across 8 U.S. health systems. PARTICIPANTS: 183 118 patients. MEASUREMENTS: Prescription data determined initiation of treatment with sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, paroxetine, bupropion, duloxetine, or venlafaxine. The investigators estimated the population-level effects of initiating each treatment, relative to sertraline, on mean weight change (primary) and the probability of gaining at least 5% of baseline weight (secondary) 6 months after initiation. Inverse probability weighting of repeated outcome marginal structural models was used to account for baseline confounding and informative outcome measurement. In secondary analyses, the effects of initiating and adhering to each treatment protocol were estimated. RESULTS: Compared with that for sertraline, estimated 6-month weight gain was higher for escitalopram (difference, 0.41 kg [95% CI, 0.31 to 0.52 kg]), paroxetine (difference, 0.37 kg [CI, 0.20 to 0.54 kg]), duloxetine (difference, 0.34 kg [CI, 0.22 to 0.44 kg]), venlafaxine (difference, 0.17 kg [CI, 0.03 to 0.31 kg]), and citalopram (difference, 0.12 kg [CI, 0.02 to 0.23 kg]); similar for fluoxetine (difference, -0.07 kg [CI, -0.19 to 0.04 kg]); and lower for bupropion (difference, -0.22 kg [CI, -0.33 to -0.12 kg]). Escitalopram, paroxetine, and duloxetine were associated with 10% to 15% higher risk for gaining at least 5% of baseline weight, whereas bupropion was associated with 15% reduced risk. When the effects of initiation and adherence were estimated, associations were stronger but had wider CIs. Six-month adherence ranged from 28% (duloxetine) to 41% (bupropion). LIMITATION: No data on medication dispensing, low medication adherence, incomplete data on adherence, and incomplete data on weight measures across time points. CONCLUSION: Small differences in mean weight change were found between 8 first-line antidepressants, with bupropion consistently showing the least weight gain, although adherence to medications over follow-up was low. Clinicians could consider potential weight gain when initiating antidepressant treatment. PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: National Institutes of Health.
It is known that newer antidepressants, such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), provide advantages in tolerability over antidepressants such as the tricyclics. However, even within the SSRI class, differences in efficacy or tolerability exist between the individual drugs. Among the three most widely prescribed SSRIs are paroxetine, sertraline, and escitalopram. Escitalopram is commonly referred to as an SSRI, but also has well-documented allosteric properties, and thus can be further classed as an allosteric serotonin reuptake inhibitor. All three antidepressants are efficacious compared with placebo, but there is evidence that escitalopram is more effective than a range of other antidepressants. There are no direct data to regard either paroxetine or sertraline as a superior antidepressant. Escitalopram is superior compared with paroxetine, which has a less favorable tolerability profile. Paroxetine is associated with cholinergic muscarinic antagonism and potent inhibition of CYP2D6, and sertraline has moderate drug interaction issues in comparison with escitalopram. Overall, as an allosteric serotonin reuptake inhibitor that is somewhat different from classical SSRIs, escitalopram is the first choice judged by combined efficacy and tolerability, and nonclinical data have offered possible mechanisms through which escitalopram could be more efficacious, based on its interaction with orthosteric and allosteric binding sites at the serotonin transporter.
BACKGROUND: There is growing evidence for the therapeutic effects of the psychedelic drug psilocybin for major depression. However, due to the lack of safety data on combining psilocybin with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and concerns that there may be a negative interaction on efficacy, participants enrolling in psychedelic trials are usually required to discontinue SNRI/SNRIs prior to enrolling. AIMS: Using data from a recent clinical trial examining the comparative efficacy the psychedelic drug psilocybin (P) combined with approximately 20 h of psychological support to a 6-week (daily) course of the SSRI escitalopram plus matched psychological support for major depressive disorder, we explored the effects of discontinuing SSRI/SNRIs prior to study enrolment on study outcomes. METHODS: Exploratory post hoc analyses using linear mixed effects model were performed to investigate the discontinuation effect on various validated depression symptom severity scales and well-being. The impact of SSRI/SNRIs discontinuation on the acute psychedelic experience was also explored. RESULTS/OUTCOMES: In the psilocybin group, there was a reduced treatment effect on all outcome measures for SSRI/SNRIs discontinuers compared with unmedicated patients at trial entry. However, no effects of discontinuation on measures of the acute psychedelic experience were found. CONCLUSION: Discontinuation of SSRI/SNRIs before psilocybin might diminish response to treatment; however, as we did not test SSRI/SNRI continuation in our trial, we cannot infer such causation. Moreover, the exploratory nature of the analyses makes them hypothesis generating, and not confirmatory. A controlled trial of SSRI/SNRI discontinuation versus continuation prior to psilocybin is urgently required.
The authors present an overview of the most often discussed questions concerning citalopram, i.e. its proven effect on the QT interval and related dose reductions. They discuss citalopram's antiplatelet effect including the most recent data and draw attention to serotonin syndrome as its incidence is still underestimated. They go on to discuss hyponatremia pointing out that this condition may develop even in those taking low doses of citalopram. Finally, the authors provide a brief overview of the latest findings on osteoporosis and the serotonergic mechanism inducing it in individuals treated with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
Citalopram is a selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor that has demonstrated antidepressant efficacy in numerous controlled clinical trials. Additional studies have shown that the drug benefits patients with other illnesses that are related in some way to serotonergic dysfunction, including anxiety, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, premenstrual dysphoria, alcohol dependence and the behavioural disturbances of dementia. This paper reviews the full spectrum of citalopram's clinical efficacy, as well as its safety and tolerability, in a range of patients.
BACKGROUND: Escitalopram is selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and one of the most commonly prescribed newer antidepressants (ADs) worldwide. We aimed to explore the efficacy, acceptability and tolerability of escitalopram in comparison with other ADs in the acute-phase treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD). METHODS: Medline/PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, CINAHL, and Clinical Trials.gov were searched from inception to July 10, 2023. Trial databases of drug-approving agencies were hand-searched for published, unpublished and ongoing controlled trials. All randomized controlled trials comparing escitalopram against any other antidepressant for patients with MDD. Responders and remitters to treatment were calculated on an intention-to-treat basis. For dichotomous data, risk ratios (RRs) were calculated with 95% confidence intervals (CI). Continuous data were analyzed using standardized mean differences (with 95% CI) using the random effects model. RESULTS: A total of 30 studies were included in this meta‑analysis, among which sixteen trials compared escitalopram with another SSRI and 14 compared escitalopram with a newer AD. Escitalopram was shown to be significantly more effective than citalopram in achieving acute response (RR 0.67, 95% CI 0.50-0.87). Escitalopram was also more effective than citalopram in terms of remission (RR 0.53, 95% CI 0.30-0.93). CONCLUSIONS: Escitalopram was superior to other ADs for the acute phase treatment of MDD in terms of efficacy, acceptability and tolerability. However, no significant difference was found between escitalopram and other ADs in early response or follow-up response to treatment of MDD.
The efficacy of escitalopram in treating social anxiety disorder is significantly influenced by expectations shaped through communication, contributing to about half the improvement. Overt SSRI treatment with accurate information about its effectiveness doubled the clinical outcome compared to covert treatment with misinformation about the therapeutic effect. Clinical improvements are not solely due to serotonin reuptake inhibition, as indicated by similar serotonin transporter occupancy in both treatment types, without correlation to anxiety reduction. There was, however, notable correlation between clinical improvement and reduced dopamine transporter availability in the overt SSRI group, possibly due to increased dopamine turnover. This was also observed in a study on combined CBT and  SSRI treatment. Conversely, clinical improvement after CBT combined with placebo showed an inverse correlation with dopamine transporters and did not inhibit serotonin transporters.
The psychedelic psilocybin is being investigated for the treatment of depression and anxiety. Unclear is whether antidepressant treatments interact with psilocybin. The present study used a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design with two experimental test sessions to investigate the response to psilocybin (25 mg) in healthy subjects after pretreatment with escitalopram or placebo. The treatment order was random and counterbalanced. Pretreatment consisted of 10 mg escitalopram daily for 7 days, followed by 20 mg daily for 7 days, including the day of psilocybin administration, or 14 days of placebo pretreatment before psilocybin administration. Psilocybin treatments were separated by at least 16 days. The outcome measures included self-rating scales that evaluated subjective effects, autonomic effects, adverse effects, plasma brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels, electrocardiogram QTc time, whole-blood HTR2A and SCL6A4 gene expression, and pharmacokinetics. Escitalopram pretreatment had no relevant effect on positive mood effects of psilocybin but significantly reduced bad drug effects, anxiety, adverse cardiovascular effects, and other adverse effects of psilocybin compared with placebo pretreatment. Escitalopram did not alter the pharmacokinetics of psilocin. The half-life of psychoactive free (unconjugated) psilocin was 1.8 hours (range 1.1-2.2 hours), consistent with the short duration of action of psilocybin. Escitalopram did not alter HTR2A or SCL6A4 gene expression before psilocybin administration, QTc intervals, or circulating BDNF levels before or after psilocybin administration. Further studies are needed with a longer antidepressant pretreatment time and patients with psychiatric disorders to further define interactions between antidepressants and psilocybin.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are widely used for depression based on the monoamine deficiency hypothesis. However, the clinical use of these agents is controversial, in part because of their variable clinical efficacy and in part because of their delayed onset of action. Because of the complexities involved in replicating human disease and clinical dosing in animal models, the scientific community has not reached a consensus on the reasons for these phenomena. In this work, we create a theoretical hippocampal model incorporating escitalopram's pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics (competitive and non-competitive inhibition, and serotonin transporter (SERT) internalization), inflammation, and receptor dynamics. With this model, we simulate chronic oral escitalopram in mice showing that days to weeks are needed for serotonin levels to reach steady-state. We show escitalopram's chemical efficacy is diminished under inflammation. Our model thus offers mechanisms for how chronic escitalopram affects brain serotonin, emphasizing the importance of optimized dose and time for future antidepressant discoveries.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a chronic, distressing illness that is associated with a specific and unique response to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Escitalopram was granted marketing authorization for the treatment of OCD from the European authorities in 2007 based on results from two Phase-III clinical trials in patients with moderate-to-severe OCD. One, a relapse prevention study, demonstrated substantial efficacy of escitalopram 10-20 mg/day in both acute and maintenance treatment, and the other demonstrated superior efficacy and favorable tolerability of escitalopram compared with placebo during 24-week, double-blind treatment. These data, and other studies reviewed here, suggest that escitalopram is an important additional tool for the treatment of OCD.
Escitalopram, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) was recently approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of major depression. This chapter reviews preclinical and clinical studies with escitalopram, focusing on its therapeutic profile of action and tolerability. Escitalopram is the S-enantiomer of the racemic SSRI citalopram. It has been proposed that the S-enantiomer of citalopram is the isomer that holds antidepressant efficacy, and that the R-enantiomer is clinically inactive; preclinical and clinical data support this. Based on in vitro radioligand binding data, escitalopram is the most selective SSRI available. Hypotheses that escitalopram has a more rapid onset of action or fewer adverse effects than citalopram have not yet been fully documented in published studies, although its profile is at least comparable to citalopram. Escitalopram is more effective than placebo in the treatment of major depression and as effective as other SSRIs, including citalopram. Comparable to other SSRIs, it is well tolerated, safe in overdose and has a low incidence of adverse effects or drug interactions.
BACKGROUND: Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) represent a diverse class of medications widely prescribed for depression and anxiety. Despite their common use, there is an absence of large-scale, real-world evidence capturing the heterogeneity in their effects on individuals. This study addresses this gap by utilizing naturalistic search data to explore the varied impact of six different SSRIs on user behavior. METHODS: The study sample included  approximately 508 thousand Bing users with searches for one of six SSRIs (citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline) from April-December 2022, comprising 510 million queries. Cox proportional hazard models were employed to examine 30 topics (e.g., shopping, tourism, health) and 195 health symptoms (e.g., anxiety, weight gain, impotence), using each SSRI as a reference. We assessed the relative hazard ratios between drugs and, where feasible, ranked the SSRIs based on their observed effects. We used Cox proportional hazard models in order to account for both the likelihood of users searching for a particular topic or symptom and the associated time to that search. The temporal aspect aided in distinguishing between potential symptoms of the disorder, short-term medication side effects, and later appearing side effects. RESULTS: Differences were found in search behaviors associated with each SSRI. E.g., fluvoxamine was associated with a significantly higher likelihood of searching weight gain compared to all other SSRIs (HRs 1.85-2.93). Searches following citalopram were associated with significantly higher rates of later impotence queries compared to all other SSRIs (HRs 5.11-7.76), except fluvoxamine. Fluvoxamine was associated with a significantly higher rate of health related searches than all other SSRIs (HRs 2.11-2.36). CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals new insights into the varying SSRI impacts, suggesting distinct symptom profiles. This novel use of large-scale, naturalistic search data contributes to pharmacovigilance efforts, enhancing our understanding of intra-class variation among SSRIs, potentially uncovering previously unidentified drug effects.
Short-term intake of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) modulates threat-related amygdala responses in healthy individuals. However, how SSRI intake over a clinically relevant time period modulates threat-related amygdala responses is less clear. In a semi-randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 64 healthy individuals (SSRI n = 32, placebo n = 32), we examined the effect of 3-5 weeks of SSRI escitalopram (20 mg daily) on brain response to angry, fearful and neutral faces using BOLD fMRI. Data was analysed using a whole-brain region-wise approach extracting standardised effects (i.e., Cohen's D). The study was conducted at the Copenhagen University Hospital. A priori, we hypothesised that SSRI would attenuate amygdala responses to angry and fearful faces but not to neutral ones. Whether SSRI modulates correlations between amygdala responses to emotional faces and negative mood states was also explored. Compared to placebo, 3-5 weeks of SSRI intake did not significantly affect the amygdala response to angry, fearful, or neutral faces (|Cohen's D|< 0.2, P(FWER) = 1). Whole-brain, region-wise analyses revealed significant differences in frontal (|Cohen's D|< 0.6, P(FWER) < .01) and occipital regions (|Cohen's D|< 0.5, P(FWER) < .01). SSRI did not modulate correlations between amygdala responses to emotional faces and negative mood states. Our findings indicate that a 3-5 week SSRI intake impacts cortical responses to emotional stimuli, an effect possibly involved in SSRI's therapeutic efficacy.Trial registration Clinical Trials NCT04239339.
Recurrent isolated sleep paralysis can be very disturbing and provoke anxiety. The majority of patients can be treated conservatively with cognitive and behavioural therapies. However, some patients may benefit from a pharmacologic intervention. With only scant available evidence, there are currently no standardized pharmacologic treatment recommendations for recurrent isolated sleep paralysis. We report the first two cases of escitalopram used to successfully treat recurrent isolated sleep paralysis. Escitalopram, the most selective of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, generally improves subjective sleep quality, making it an appealing treatment option.
Escitalopram is a new antidepressant drug, available for clinical use in many countries. This review describes the properties of escitalopram, summarizes the results of randomized controlled trials, and suggests that escitalopram has advantages over citalopram in the treatment of depression.
AIM: To review laboratory findings on the effects of anti-depressant agents that interact with the serotonergic system on signs of ethanol withdrawal syndrome in rats. METHOD: Adult Wistar rats received a modified liquid diet to produce ethanol dependence. Signs of ethanol withdrawal, locomotor hyperactivity, stereotyped behaviour, tremor, wet dog shakes, agitation, and audiogenic seizures, were evaluated for the first 6 h of ethanol withdrawal. The effects of the anti-depressants fluoxetine, venlafaxine, escitalopram, tianeptine, and extract of Hypericum perforatum (St. John's wort) (HPE) were examined. RESULTS: Some beneficial effects of fluoxetine, tianeptine, HPE, escitalopram and venlafaxine on ethanol withdrawal signs were observed, ranked as follows: fluoxetine = tianeptine > HPE > escitalopram > venlafaxine. CONCLUSIONS: Tianeptine and fluoxetine seem to be potent pharmacologically active agents on ethanol withdrawal syndrome in rats. Thus, these anti-depressants may be useful in treatment of ethanol withdrawal syndrome in patients with alcoholism. In addition to serotonergic effects, interactions with nitrergic, glutamatergic, and adenosinergic systems may also provide a significant contribution to the beneficial effects of these drugs on ethanol withdrawal syndrome.
BACKGROUND: To investigate the association between pre-trial expectancy, suggestibility, and response to treatment in a trial of escitalopram and investigational drug, COMP360, psilocybin, in the treatment of major depressive disorder (ClinicalTrials.gov registration: NCT03429075). METHODS: We used data (n = 55) from our recent double-blind, parallel-group, randomized head-to-head comparison trial of escitalopram and investigational drug, COMP360, psilocybin. Mixed linear models were used to investigate the association between pre-treatment efficacy-related expectations, as well as baseline trait suggestibility and absorption, and therapeutic response to both escitalopram and COMP360 psilocybin. RESULTS: Patients had significantly higher expectancy for psilocybin relative to escitalopram; however, expectancy for escitalopram was associated with improved therapeutic outcomes to escitalopram, expectancy for psilocybin was not predictive of response to psilocybin. Separately, we found that pre-treatment trait suggestibility was associated with therapeutic response in the psilocybin arm, but not in the escitalopram arm. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our results suggest that psychedelic therapy may be less vulnerable to expectancy biases than previously suspected. The relationship between baseline trait suggestibility and response to psilocybin therapy implies that highly suggestible individuals may be primed for response to this treatment.
INTRODUCTION: Typical antipsychotics are known to produce extrapyramidal side effects such as drug induced parkinsonism, acute dystonia, akathisia, tardive dyskinesias and rabbit syndrome. Rabbit syndrome is characterized by vertical rhythmic motion of the mouth and lips, resembling chewing movements of a rabbit. REASON FOR THE REPORT: Rabbit syndrome seen in patients on antidopaminergic therapies is characterized by vertical rhythmic movements of perioral region, has a late onset, and characteristically spares the tongue. The main aim of the report is to highlight atypical manifestation of antipsychotic associated Rabbit syndrome in the presence of a serotonergic antidepressant. An elderly patient presented with atypical rabbit syndrome with relatively acute onset, horizontal movements of jaw and marked tongue involvement after haloperidol-escitalopram initiation. OUTCOME: The patient improved with discontinuation of antipsychotic. The tongue involvement was believed to be secondary to escitalopram use.
