A variety of medications representing several major drug classes improve cataplexy in patients with narcolepsy. These include aminergic reuptake inhibitors such as venlafaxine and clomipramine as well as sodium oxybate. This review is intended to familiarize readers with the safety and efficacy of these medications, thus enabling clinicians to optimize their management of cataplexy.
There is currently available evidence that suggests that drugs combining 2 synergistic mechanisms of action (e.g., enhancement of both noradrenergic and serotonergic neurotransmission) may yield superior therapeutic efficacy compared with a single therapeutic mechanism of highly selective agents such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). The differences in antidepressant efficacy favoring dual-acting drugs may exist in particular for 3 difficult-to-treat groups of patients: those with endogenous depression, those with severe depression, or hospitalized depressed patients. Mirtazapine differs from other new dual-acting antidepressants by not being a reuptake inhibitor. Its antidepressant activity may be related to a direct enhancement of noradrenergic neurotransmission by blockade of alpha2-autoreceptors. The rapid increase in serotonin (5-HT) synaptic levels by blockade of alpha2-heteroreceptors indirectly enhances 5-HT1A-mediated neurotransmission since 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 are blocked by mirtazapine. The antidepressant efficacy of mirtazapine was established in several placebo-controlled trials. Currently available evidence suggests that mirtazapine is effective in all levels of severity of depressive illness, as well as is in a broad range of symptoms associated with depression.
There is still limited knowledge about alterations of blood concentrations of psychotropic drugs during pregnancy, the transfer of psychotropic drugs into breastmilk and the effects on exposed children. We investigated changes in concentrations of psychopharmacological medication during pregnancy and lactation in serum and breastmilk at different time points in a naturalistic sample of 60 mothers and observed the development of the exposed children in the first 12 months. We found a decrease in serum concentrations from the first to the second trimester of amitriptyline, duloxetine, escitalopram, quetiapine and sertraline. Citalopram stayed rather stable during pregnancy, sertraline levels interestingly increased again from the second to the third trimester. High concentration-by-dose ratios in breastmilk were found for venlafaxine as well as lamotrigine, low for quetiapine and clomipramine. Similarly, clomipramine and quetiapine showed low milk/serum-penetration ratios. Regarding the birth outcome measures in children, we found no significant differences between in utero exposed compared to nonexposed newborns. There were no significant differences in the development in the first 12 months. Psychotropic medication in the peripartum needs a balancing of risks and benefits and a continuous therapeutic drug monitoring can be a guidance for clinicians to monitor drug alteration patterns, which are likely to occur due to physiological pregnancy-associated changes in pharmacokinetics. Accordingly, therapeutic drug monitoring can optimize a medication in pregnancy and lactation with the lowest effective dose.
Behavioral therapy and drugs have significantly improved obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) symptoms. A variety of behavioral therapy methods have been employed, but exposure and prevention of response, particularly, have reduced ritualistic actions of many OCD patients. Many psychoactive drugs have been tried; the tricyclic antidepressant drugs (clomipramine or Anafranel), especially in research outside the United States, have alleviated OCD symptoms as well as depression. Compulsive rituals have responded more often than obsessive actions to both behavioral and psychopharmacological therapy. Recent research has suggested that psychophysiological as well as traditional psychogenic factors may contribute to the etiology, course, and alleviation of OCD.
Severe neutropenia is an unusual complication of antidepressant therapy. We report a case of agranulocytosis due to clomipramine, and discuss principles of management.
Premature ejaculation (PE) is recognized to be the most common male sexual disorder. PE provides difficulties for professionals who treat this condition because there is neither a universally accepted definition nor a medication approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Despite these shortcomings, physicians continue to diagnose their patients with PE according to major guidelines and treat them with either behavioral therapies or off-label medications. This review focuses on current and emerging treatment options and medications for PE. Advantages and limitations of each treatment option are discussed in the light of current published peer-reviewed literature.
The mainstay of the pharmacologic treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a 10- to 12-week trial of a potent serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI) at an adequate dose. Double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have established the anti-obsessive-compulsive (OC) efficacy of five different SRIs. One of the most thoroughly studied of these SRIs is fluvoxamine, the focus of this article. Fluvoxamine's pharmacologic and pharmacokinetic properties, its efficacy, and guidelines for its clinical use in OCD and related disorders are briefly reviewed. Potential drug-drug interactions are discussed and placed in clinical perspective. The management of common SRI-induced side effects is also addressed. Recent comparative studies suggest that fluvoxamine may be equivalent in efficacy to clomipramine, yet better tolerated. Fluvoxamine shows promise in the treatment of several so-called OC-spectrum disorders, but additional controlled trials are needed.
Clomipramine is a tricyclic antidepressant that was the first effective agent in the treatment of OCD. Its capacity to block serotonin reuptake appears to be essential to reducing the primary symptoms of OCD. Like other tricyclic agents, CMI has an array of possible side effects including gastrointestinal, autonomic, hepatic, and cardiac problems that need to be considered in the clinical management of children and adolescents treated with CMI. Evaluation of clinical response begins with the identification of target symptoms and monitoring the change in these target symptoms over time. This effort can be aided by the use of clinical rating instruments such as the Children's Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scales and, to a limited degree, drug plasma levels. Although many OCD patients manifest a positive response to CMI, some patients do not. This variation suggests that other neurochemical systems may be implicated in OCD.
This article reviews the literature concerning obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and its treatment with drugs. We survey the differential diagnosis of OCD and the problems involved in evaluating its severity in a research setting. Pharmacological treatment of OCD has usually involved antidepressants, especially clomipramine, with equivocal but nevertheless encouraging success. Anxiolytic and neuroleptics have also been tried, but the results are inconsistent. We discuss the implications of these findings for treatment of patients with OCD and for future research.
Within the past decade the field of psychiatry has rediscovered the neuropsychiatric syndrome of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Although excellently described over 150 years ago, for many years OCD was thought to be rare, untreatable, and to arise from hidden psychodynamic conflicts. All of these earlier ideas now appear to be wrong. Occurring in approximately 2% of adults, OCD consists of recurrent intrusive thoughts (obsessions) or senseless repetitive actions (compulsions). Although the aetiology of OCD remains unclear, recent neuro-imaging studies implicate the basal ganglia and frontal cortex as crucial structures in the pathogenesis of OCD. Genetic studies demonstrate a clear genetic component to OCD and an interesting link with chronic motor tics and the Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome. Although a true cure for the disorder remains elusive, most OCD symptoms respond well to treatment with 5HT reuptake inhibitors. The phenomenology and aetiology of OCD will be reviewed, with particular emphasis placed on the proper pharmacological treatment of this sometimes crippling disorder.
Trichotillomania (TTM) is an obsessive-compulsive disorder in which affected individuals recurrently pull-out hair from any region of the body, causing hair loss or alopecia. The management of TTM is a therapeutic challenge for dermatologists and consists of a combination of pharmacological and non-pharmacological alternatives. Cognitive-behavioral therapy has successfully been used to treat TTM. However, not all patients are willing to follow this treatment strategy. Unconventional support tools are proposed, such as electronic devices, Internet therapies and microneedling. N-acetylcysteine and memantine are considered suitable first-line therapies thanks to their favorable safety and efficacy profile, low risk of adverse effects, and significant benefits. The use of other drugs, including fluoxetine, clomipramine, olanzapine, and naltrexone has limited evidence of variable efficacy. The present review illustrates the current treatment modalities for the management of TTM.
Combined treatment with tricyclic antidepressants and MAO inhibitors has been an area of some controversy. The efficacy of the combination approach is not established; the only controlled trail showed trimipramine alone to be superior to an MAOI alone and to the combination of trimipramine with an MAOI in treating depressed outpatients not selected for a history of treatment refractoriness. The safety of the combination varies according to the specific drugs used; tranylcypromine and clomipramine are not recommended, and recent pharmacologic studies suggest that specific serotonin reuptake inhibitors are dangerous in combination with MAOIs. Further controlled clinical studies are clearly needed before combined therapy can be recommended for routine clinical use.
OBJECTIVE: Aquagenic pruritus is the development of severe, prickling-like skin discomfort without observable skin lesions that is evoked by contact with water at any temperature. METHOD: This is a case report of a man presenting with aquagenic pruritus after starting clomipramine treatment for anxiety and depression. RESULTS: The patient's aquagenic pruritus resolved after discontinuing the clomipramine but reemerged when treatment was restarted. CONCLUSIONS: A greater awareness and knowledge about aquagenic pruritus among physicians could help improve the clinical recognition and management of this clinical entity.
A new antodepressant drug, clomipramine hydrochloride, closely related to imipramine hydrochloride, was used to treat four patients suffering from cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic hallucinations. Attacks of cataplexy were associated with rapid-eye-movement (REM) electroencephalographic patterns. Cloripramine, in doses of 25 to 75 mg/day, completely stopped all attacks of cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic hallucinations within 48 hours of initial therapy. The patients have been free of symptoms for periods of 10 to 21 months. Side effects included impotence in the male patients, but no hematologic, cardiovascular, hepatic, or renal toxic effects were observed. Available evidence suggests that such drugs inhibit those brain stem systems that control the toxic components of REM sleep.
The authors present a patient with Gilles de la Tourette syndrome who developed abdominal distension and bloating due to air swallowing. We suggest that this air swallowing may have been due to a tic.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) traditionally has been considered a rare, treatment refractory disorder of psychological origin. However, OCD appears to be much more common than was previously believed. Moreover, in recent years controlled studies demonstrated that clomipramine is more effective than placebo and than other tricyclics for reducing obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Although it has been suggested that clomipramine was effective in treating obsessive-compulsive symptoms by an antidepressant mechanism, the majority of the controlled studies found that its antiobsessional effects occurred whether the patient was depressed or not. The apparent specificity of clomipramine, and, to some extent, newer serotonin selective antidepressants, suggests a serotonergic role in the psychobiology of OCD.
Twenty-three outpatients with primary obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) were started in a 12-week double-blind clinical trial of clomipramine (CLI) (n = 11) and imipramine (IMI) (n = 12). There was no placebo and no crossover. After 6 weeks of treatment, data on 19 subjects (9 CLI, 10 IMI) were available. After week 12, the sample was reduced to 16 patients (8 CLI, 8 IMI). At both time points, OCD symptoms showed modest reductions (in comparison with the pretreatment baseline) in both CLI and IMI groups. Both drugs showed a major antidepressant effect. Analyses accounting for the differences in the baseline levels indicated a somewhat superior effect of CLI over IMI on OCD as well as depression. The effect of CLI and IMI on OCD was independent of the initial severity of depression. There were no clear differences in the safety of the treatments.
Melasma is a hyperpigmented dermatological condition common in females. Drugs such as steroids, cosmetics, and photosensitizing agents are known to cause melasma. We report here a case of an adult male with obsessive-compulsive disorder, receiving clomipramine, who developed melasma.
The fortuitous detection of SIADH is described in a patient receiving clomipramine therapy.
Clomipramine hydrochloride, a chlorinated analog of imipramine, is a widely used antidepressant recently approved for use in the U.S. for the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a potentially incapacitating affliction. Its primary pharmacologic action is blockade of the reuptake of the neurotransmitter serotonin. Its metabolite, desmethylclomipramine, is a potent norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. Significant first-pass metabolism reduces oral bioavailability to less than 62 percent. The drug is widely distributed throughout the body (volume of distribution 9-25 L/kg) and is 90-98 percent protein-bound. Clomipramine follows first-order elimination pharmacokinetics, with a plasma half-life of 20-24 hours. Recent double-blind controlled clinical trials have demonstrated the drug's effectiveness in the treatment of OCD. Response is most often associated with doses greater than 75 mg/d, with 250 mg the maximum recommended daily dose. Relapse upon withdrawal is frequently reported. The adverse effect profile of clomipramine is similar to other tricyclic antidepressants, with anticholinergic, cardiovascular, sexual, and central nervous system effects the most prominent.
