The incidence of clonidine overdose is increasing, yet there is a paucity of new information regarding treatment options for clonidine toxicity. Reported treatment approaches vary widely, demonstrating the lack of science on which current treatment is based. Available research needs to be reassessed. Neurotransmitters, receptors, endogenous opioids, and baseline sympathetic tone determine the clinical response to clonidine as well as the potential response to drug therapy following clonidine overdose. This article reviews aspects of clonidine toxicity that need to be further investigated. Multicenter research trials will be required to evaluate new treatment options.
Alpha-adrenergic receptors play an important role in the regulation of blood pressure (BP). There are 2 principal types of alpha receptors, alpha 1 and alpha 2, and both participate in circulatory control. Alpha 1 receptors are the classic postsynaptic alpha receptors and are found on vascular smooth muscle. They determine both arteriolar resistance and venous capacitance, and thus BP. Alpha 2 receptors are found both in the brain and in the periphery. In the brain stem, they modulate sympathetic outflow. Their function in the periphery is not yet fully understood, but they may contribute both to control of sympathetic tone and to local and regional blood flow. Drugs that enhance central alpha 2 activity, such as clonidine, guanfacine and the active metabolite of methyldopa, can significantly lower BP and are effective in the long-term control of hypertension, either alone or in combination with other drugs. While central alpha agonists, as a class, share a common pharmacologic mode of action, side effects, e.g., sedation and drowsiness, occur to different degrees with different drugs, and the individual agents also vary in terms of their propensity for causing withdrawal hypertension. The use of low-dose regimens or of newer drugs, such as guanfacine, with its longer half-life and duration of action, may reduce the likelihood of adverse reactions associated with this class of drugs.
The centrally acting agents are one of several differing classes of drugs now available for antihypertensive therapy. The availability of newer pharmacologic classes, including the beta-blockers, alpha-blockers. ACE inhibitors and calcium channel blockers, has resulted in a relative decline in the use of the centrally acting drugs. A major reason for this change in emphasis has been the perception by clinicians that the centrally acting agents, although effective, tend to produce symptomatic side effects that are difficult or unacceptable for patients. Some recent innovations in administering the centrally acting drugs appear to have addressed this problem. The pharmacokinetic characteristics of agents such as the transdermally administered clonidine or oral guanfacine appear to provide them with sustained efficacy without concomitant adverse effects. A further attribute of these drugs is their ability to decrease blood pressure without producing sodium retention. A growing awareness of the importance of treatment-induced metabolic effects has further served to reawaken interest in these agents. Specifically, they do not appear to produce alterations in glucose metabolism, and possibly may even have some slight beneficial effects on the blood lipid profile. Their ability to cause regression of left ventricular muscle hypertrophy, and possibly to enhance diastolic function, may add a further dimension of cardiovascular protection beyond their antihypertensive efficacy.
Clonidine hydrochloride (Catapres), a potent antihypertensive agent, has been in clinical use since 1974 in the United States. Clonidine, an alpha-adrenergic receptor agonist, stimulates central alpha receptors in the depressor site of the vasomotor center of the medulla oblongata and hypothalamus, which diminishes efferent sympathetic tone to the heart, kidneys, and peripheral vasculature with a concomitant increase in vagal activity. Hemodynamic and renal effects include reduction in supine and erect blood pressure, heart rate, total peripheral resistance, plasma renin activity, and urinary aldosterone and catecholamine excretion, with little effect on resting cardiac output, response to exercise, and preservation of renal function. Clonidine alone produces a significant reduction in mean arterial pressure in all degrees of hypertension during acute and chronic administration, with little or no tendency toward tolerance or postural hypotension. Its antihypertensive potency is enhanced with the concomitant use of a diuretic or vasodilator, and it may be used in place of a beta blocker with equal efficacy in the diuretic plus vasodilator combination. Serious adverse effects are uncommon, with more than 93% of patients tolerating the drug well. Sedation and dry mouth, the most common adverse effects, are usually related to dose and duration and are minimized by gradually increasing the dose and by taking the major portion of the twice-daily schedule at bedtime. Clonidine may be safely given to patients with congestive heart failure, ischemic heart disease, obstructive lung disease, chronic renal insufficiency, and diabetes mellitus. Clonidine is one of the most versatile and effective agents presently available for the treatment of hypertension.
Provision of adequate sedation is a fundamental part of caring for critically ill patients. Propofol, dexmedetomidine, and benzodiazepines are the most commonly administered sedative medications for adult patients in the intensive care unit (ICU). These agents are limited by adverse effects, need for a monitored environment for safe administration, and lack of universal effectiveness. Increased interest has recently been expressed about repurposing older pharmacologic agents for patient comfort in the ICU. Valproate, enteral clonidine, and phenobarbital are three agents with increasing evidence supporting their use. Potential benefits associated with their utilization are cost minimization and safe administration after transition out of the ICU. This literature review describes the historical context, pharmacologic characteristics, supportive data, and practical considerations associated with the administration of these agents for comfort in critically ill adult patients.
Clonidine is a nonnarcotic analgesic historically used as a nasal decongestant and more recently established as an antihypertensive agent in adults. Because of its sedative properties with few adverse effects, clonidine has also been reported to be an effective pharmacologic agent for the treatment of neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS). The use of oral clonidine as a primary or secondary agent in the treatment of NAS has been found to reduce hospitalization and duration of treatment in this population.
Clonidine hydrochloride, apraclonidine hydrochloride, and brimonidine tartrate constitute the three topical alpha agonists that are used in the treatment of elevated intraocular pressure. All the alpha agonists have prejunctional (alpha 2) as well as postjunctional (alpha 1) effects. Within the past year, questions have arisen about their local and systemic effects, and their effects upon the optic nerve. We will, therefore, attempt to clarify these points, to provide a greater understanding of the role of alpha agonists in glaucoma therapy.
Clonidine therapy was discontinued abruptly in seven patients. Blood pressure was recorded every hour or two hours throughout the study. Clonidine therapy was reinstituted 48 hours after its discontinuation in all except two patients, in whom it was reinstituted at 36 hours. During the withdrawal phase, blood pressure tended to return rapidly to nontreatment levels, but there was no "overshoot" in blood pressure. Apprehension, insomnia, palpitations, and sweating were experienced by two patients. These symptoms were relieved promptly by reinstituting clonidine therapy. In this prospective study, no blood pressure overshoot was noted with abrupt discontinuation of clonidine.
Alinidine--N-allyl-clonidine--reduces heart rate without blocking beta adrenoreceptors. It may be used in patients with angina without inducing the adverse effects of beta-adrenergic blockers. We therefore evaluated alinidine efficacy in patients with angiographically proven coronary artery disease and stable angina during a 10-wk placebo-controlled randomized double-blind trial. Alinidine (40 mg three times a day) reduced the number of anginal attacks and the average number of nitroglycerine capsules consumed. The double product was slightly lowered during rest but more pronounced during exercise. This effect was mainly due to decreased heart rate. The ischemic S-T segment depression was diminished. Exercise tolerance was clearly improved in six, slightly improved in two, and unchanged in four subjects.
The spectrum of antispasticity therapies is fairly broad. Familiarity with the various therapies will enable a nurse involved in the care of neurological patients to deliver the effective treatment and minimize adverse events. Referral to specialty care centers may be appropriate for selected patients who require more complex interventions for spasticity control.
Stimulation of alpha 2-adrenergic receptors on enterocytes promotes fluid and electrolyte absorption and inhibits anion secretion. Loss of adrenergic innervation may play a role in impaired intestinal fluid and electrolyte absorption in diabetic patients with autonomic neuropathy. Clonidine, an alpha 2-adrenergic agonist, was used to treat three patients with "idiopathic" diabetic diarrhea after other treatments had failed: The volume of diarrhea declined significantly (p less than 0.01). Diarrhea recurred when the drug was withdrawn, but the patient's condition improved again when clonidine treatment was reintroduced. Hypotension did not occur as a side effect presumably because of the autonomic neuropathy of these patients.
PURPOSE: This study describes our long-term experience with apraclonidine 0.5% in the treatment of chronic glaucoma in clinical practice. METHODS: A retrospective review was performed of all consecutive patients treated with apraclonidine 0.5%, specifically studying the magnitude of IOP reduction, incidence of allergic reaction, frequency of ineffectiveness, and its additivity to other anti-glaucoma medications. Patients previously treated with this agent or in whom multiple simultaneous medication changes were made were excluded. RESULTS: A total of 174 patients were included in this study and followed up to 24 months. For 38 patients (21%), the drug was found to be ineffective at some point during the study. A similar number of patients developed an allergic reaction to the medication. Intraocular pressure lowering ranged from 19 to 26% overall, and 22.5 to 29% in those responding to apraclonidine 0.5%. CONCLUSION: In this study, apraclonidine 0.5% was shown to be effective in reducing intraocular pressure, both for short-term situations and for longer periods of treatment, up to 24 months.
We report a case of delirium accompanied by extrapyramidal symptoms and autonomic dysfunction in a 59-year-old man following abrupt cessation of baclofen and tizanidine. An extensive search for the etiology was undertaken, but it was only after a careful history was taken that suspicion for baclofen and tizanidine withdrawal was raised. The delirium and motor disturbances resolved within 24 h of reintroduction of baclofen. Withdrawal from muscle relaxants requires a high index of suspicion but should be considered in patients who manifest signs and symptoms of withdrawal from the medications, particularly visual hallucinations, rigidity and autonomic dysfunction.
Intrathecal clonidine is a powerful antispastic drug. Its mechanism of action is more selective than baclofen. The acute effects are reviewed. An assessment of side effects of clonidine during chronic infusion is needed.
The need for sedation and analgesia and treatment of iatrogenic drug withdrawal is common in critically ill children. First-line therapy typically includes opioid agonists. However, clonidine, a central alpha(2) agonist, has been suggested as a treatment option for sedation and analgesia and iatrogenic drug withdrawal. Therefore, we conducted a literature search to identify articles evaluating the use of enteral (PO) and transdermal clonidine in critically ill infants and children for sedation and analgesia and treatment of iatrogenic drug withdrawal. The literature search was limited to English-language articles in Medline (1946-May 2016), Embase (1988-May 2016), and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970-May 2016). Reference citations from relevant articles were also reviewed. Ten case reports and studies, representing a total of 114 children receiving clonidine, were included. Fifty patients (43.9%) received clonidine for sedation and analgesia while mechanically ventilated, and 33 (29.0%) received clonidine for treatment or prevention of drug withdrawal. The remaining 31 patients (27.1%) were included in a pharmacokinetic study that did not evaluate clinical outcomes. Seventy-nine patients (69.3%) received PO clonidine, with a dosage range of 2-15 microg/kg/day divided every 6-8 hours. Thirty-five patients (30.7%) received transdermal clonidine, with a dosage range of 2.3-20 microg/kg/day. Whole, cut, and occluded transdermal patches were used in the reports. Patients receiving cut patches had more variable and significantly higher serum clonidine concentrations than those receiving whole patches. Only three studies reported that the PO clonidine dose was tapered at the end of therapy; however, no report specifically described the process. The two most common adverse events reported with PO and transdermal clonidine were bradycardia and hypotension. PO and transdermal clonidine have a potential role for sedation and analgesia and drug withdrawal in critically ill infants and children. The use of cut transdermal patches should be avoided. Future prospective studies are needed to further define clonidine's role as adjunct therapy or monotherapy.
Clonidine is an alpha-adrenergic agent that is used in the treatment of hypertension. Bradycardia has been described as a common effect of clonidine poisoning, but has rarely been described as a side effect at commonly prescribed dosages. Bradyarrhythmias, as a side effect, may have several manifestations and may be symptomatic or asymptomatic. This report proposes mechanisms for clonidine-induced bradycardia, describes persons at risk for this effect, and outlines treatments and preventive measures.
Previous studies have reported a therapeutic window of 0.8 to 2.0 ng/ml within which clonidine exerts its antihypertensive effect. This study was designed to investigate whether there was any loss of blood pressure control when plasma clonidine concentrations exceeded this window owing to its accumulation in renal insufficiency. The results indicate that clonidine concentrations of up to 30 ng/ml in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) can be associated with a maintenance of blood pressure control. It remains to be learned whether this phenomenon of high concentrations and control of blood pressure in our ESRD patient population may be related to altered (decreased) peripheral alpha-receptor sensitivity and inability to develop vasoconstriction. There is precedence for autonomic imbalance and altered tissue sensitivity in ESRD.
PURPOSE: To determine the efficacy of transdermal clonidine for alleviating tamoxifen-induced hot flashes in women with a history of breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, crossover design was used in this prospective study. Women with a history of breast cancer who were receiving tamoxifen and suffering from hot flashes were potentially eligible for this protocol study. RESULTS: Clonidine did reduce hot-flash frequency to a degree that was statistically impressive (P < .0001), but clinically moderate (20% reduction from baseline). It also decreased hot-flash severity (P = .02, 10% reduction from baseline). Clonidine was related to increased mouth dryness (P < .001), constipation (P < .02), itchiness under the patch (P < .01), and drowsiness (P < .05). CONCLUSION: Better means are needed to alleviate hot flashes among patients in whom estrogen therapy is contraindicated.
We performed a prospective, double-masked, placebo-controlled, six-period, cross-over study in which normal subjects were randomly assigned to treatment and compared three different formulations of apraclonidine hydrochloride (the present commercially available formulation, and formulations with hydroxypropylmethylcellulose or lysolecithin). We also evaluated the efficacy of a 16-microliters and 30-microliters drop size. The magnitude and duration of decrease in intraocular pressure was comparable for all formulations. Most subjects tolerated all formulations well with only a few reporting any side effects. The best-tolerated formulation was 0.5% apraclonidine hydrochloride delivered with a 16-microliters drop size. Dry mouth developed frequently with the commercially available 1% apraclonidine solution. Blurred vision complicated the use of the formulation containing hydroxypropylmethylcellulose. Both dry mouth (P less than .05) and blurred vision (P = .004) were statistically significant side effects.
A double-blind crossover trial compared tizanidine with baclofen in 36 patients with spasticity. Tizanidine appeared to reduce lower limb spasticity more effectively and to have fewer side effects, but no statistically significant differences emerged when the two drugs were compared. An additional open study of tizanidine confirmed the beneficial action in a selected minority of patients with spasticity. This drug may have an important role in the management of spasticity, but further studies are required.
