Burning mouth syndrome (BMS) is a chronic disease characterized by burning of the oral mucosa associated with a sensation of dry mouth and/or taste alterations. BMS occurs more frequently among postmenopausal women. The pathophysiology of the disease is still unknown, and evidence is conflicting; although some studies suggest a central origin, others point to a peripheral neuropathic origin. The efficacy of some medications in the treatment of BMS suggests that the dopaminergic system may be involved.
The focal involuntary muscular contractions of spinal myoclonus have been associated with neoplastic, infectious, traumatic, and degenerative lesions of the spinal cord. Four patients are described here. In two, the myoclonus is associated with severe cervical spondylitis. One patient had herpes zoster. In the fourth, a segment of thoracic spinal cord is narrow and probably atrophic. Both tetrabenazine and clonazepam were therapeutically effective.
An interaction between phenytoin (PHT) and clonazepam (CZP) occurred in an epileptic patient, who had been treated with PHT with partial seizure control. The addition of CZP brought about a significant decrease of PHT plasma levels (from 24.8 to 16 micrograms/ml) in spite of increases in the PHT dose. Gradual reduction of CZP, without modifying the PHT dosage, caused significant increases in PHT plasma levels to 42.4 micrograms/ml with signs of intoxication. A review of the literature shows contradictions: some authors state that there is no interaction between the drugs; other authors state either an increase or decrease in PHT plasma levels. These paradoxical results could be explained by the bidirectional effect of these drugs in hepatic enzyme metabolism. The importance of monitoring plasma levels of antiepileptic drugs is emphasized when several medications are required in the treatment of epilepsy.
Status epilepticus (SE) is an acute, life-threatening medical condition that requires immediate, effective therapy. Therefore, the acute care of prolonged seizures and SE is a constant challenge for healthcare professionals, in both the pre-hospital and the in-hospital settings. Benzodiazepines (BZDs) are the first-line treatment for SE worldwide due to their efficacy, tolerability, and rapid onset of action. Although all BZDs act as allosteric modulators at the inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)(A) receptor, the individual agents have different efficacy profiles and pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties, some of which differ significantly. The conventional BZDs clonazepam, diazepam, lorazepam and midazolam differ mainly in their durations of action and available routes of administration. In addition to the common intravenous, intramuscular and rectal administrations that have long been established in the acute treatment of SE, other administration routes for BZDs-such as intranasal administration-have been developed in recent years, with some preparations already commercially available. Most recently, the intrapulmonary administration of BZDs via an inhaler has been investigated. This narrative review provides an overview of the current knowledge on the efficacy and tolerability of different BZDs, with a focus on different routes of administration and therapeutic specificities for different patient groups, and offers an outlook on potential future drug developments for the treatment of prolonged seizures and SE.
High-potency benzodiazepines, such as clonazepam, are frequently used in the treatment of panic disorder (PD) because of their rapid onset of action and good tolerability. However, there is concern about their potential to cause withdrawal symptoms. We aimed to develop a protocol for safely tapering off clonazepam in patients with PD who had been receiving treatment for at least 3 years. A specific scale for judging withdrawal was also developed, the Composite Benzodiazepine Discontinuation Symptom Scale. We selected 73 patients with PD who had been asymptomatic for at least 1 year and who wished to discontinue the medication. The trial consisted of a 4-month period of tapering and an 8-month follow-up period. The dosage of clonazepam was decreased by 0.5 mg per 2-week period until 1 mg per day was reached, followed by a decrease of 0.25 mg per week. The mean dosage at the start of tapering was 2.7 +/- 1.2 mg/d. In total, 51 (68.9%) of the patients were free of the medication after the 4 months of tapering according to the protocol, and 19 (26.0%) of the patients needed another 3 months to be free of medication. Clonazepam discontinuation symptoms were mostly mild and included mainly: anxiety, shaking/trembling/tremor, nausea/vomiting, insomnia/nightmares, excessive sweating, tachycardia/palpitations, headache, weakness, and muscle aches. The improvement in PD and general well-being was maintained during both the taper and follow-up phases. Clonazepam can be successfully discontinued without any major withdrawal symptoms if the dose is reduced gradually. We recommend reducing the dosage of clonazepam after intermediate-term use by 0.25 mg/wk.
Management of trigeminal neuralgia, a severe facial pain, remains difficult. All patients are initially treated with drugs. Since the seventeenth century more than 40 different preparations have been used; some of these, although effective, had toxic side effects. The most useful drugs at present are carbamazepine, phenytoin, baclofen, and clonazepam. A new drug, oxcarbazepine, is showing therapeutic promise. The most common reason for therapeutic failure with antineuralgic drugs is inadequate dosage. We review here the pharmacokinetics, side effects, possible drug interactions, plasma and serum therapeutic concentrations, and the available formulations of each drug. On the basis of these considerations and clinical reports describing the use of these drugs, we make dosage recommendations to enable the practitioner to individualize therapeutic regimens.
In the last decade, a proliferation of research has emerged concerning the use of somatic treatments with anticonvulsant properties, e.g., carbamazepine, valproate, clonazepam, oxcarbazepine, and electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), for patients with bipolar disorder. A sufficient number of controlled studies have been conducted to allow critical review of the evidence supporting the efficacy of these treatments for acute bipolar manic and depressive episodes, as well as for the prevention of subsequent episodes. Further research is needed to establish the prophylactic efficacy of anticonvulsants as maintenance therapies and, perhaps most importantly, to provide clinical and biological predictors of response.
PURPOSE: To report a case of retinopathy associated with the longterm intake of the antiepileptic drug clonazepam. METHODS: Case report. RESULTS: A 36-year-old woman, with a history of long-term use of the antiepileptic drug clonazepam developed subtle visual disturbances. Funduscopy revealed areas of mild depigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium throughout the posterior pole bilaterally corresponding to transmission hyperfluorescence on fluorescein angiography. There was no history of any inherited retinal degenerative disease and no other known agent responsible for retinal toxicity had been used. CONCLUSIONS: The longstanding intake of the antiepileptic drug clonazepam may be associated with the development of toxic retinopathy.
Two cases are reported who developed myoclonus as the only manifestation of a post-infectious syndrome without evidence of encephalitis or the opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome. Case 1 had generalised myoclonus following an influenza-like illness, while case 2 had right upper limb segmental myoclonus following uncomplicated chicken pox. Neither had any localising neurological signs or abnormality on investigation. Both recovered completely within six months of the onset. Similar cases are reviewed from the literature and it is suggested that such cases be called "isolated" post-infectious myoclonus.
Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are still the main treatment for epilepsy. The first drugs such as the bromides, phenobarbital (PB), and related barbituates were all found to be anticonvulsant by chance. They also all carried to some extent the disadvantages of slowing thinking and motor behavior. Bromides are now seldom used and (PB) is only used when other drugs fail, although it is an important drug in the third world because of its low cost. Carbamazepine (CBZ), valproate (VPA), and phenytoin (PHT) are the current first-line AEDs. All of these drugs vary in the extent of their effect on mood. These drugs have also all been used in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. CBZ has been used mainly as a mood normalizer and has had some success in treating hypermanic episodes. VPA has been used successfully in the treatment of cyclical psychoses, whereas PHT, although it had a vogue in the 1940s for the treatment of psychosis, is little used as a psychological treatment now.
A short classification and brief clinical description of epileptic seizures are presented. The pharmacokinetic principles underlying modern drug treatment of epileptic seizures are discussed and the drug(s) of choice for different seizure types are listed according to their clinical efficacy. The current view of using single-drug therapy rather than polypharmacy, whenever possible, is emphasized.
In this work, ultrasound-assisted electromembrane extraction (UA-EME) coupled with capillary electrophoresis (CE) and diode array detection (DAD) was developed for the determination of clonazepam from plasma samples. A comparative study was carried out between conventional EME and UA-EME methods to investigate the influence of the ultrasound waves on the extraction efficiency. The central composite design was used for the optimization of the variables affecting these methods to achieve the best extraction efficiency. Under optimal extraction conditions, the UA-EME provided better extraction recovery in a shorter time (58% in 13 min) than the EME method (42% in 30 min). Ultrasound reduces the extraction time and increased recovery by reducing the thickness of the barrier layer. In addition, this method provided a higher pre-concentration factor (203) and a lower limit of detection (3 ng mL(-1)) with good repeatability (RSDs were less than 10.11%).
There are presently three main treatments for restless leg syndrome-periodic leg movements in sleep (RLS-PLMS). The benzodiazepines (especially clonazepam) are considered by most clinicians to be the treatment of choice in mild cases, especially in young subjects. In our experience, however, L-dopa and bromocriptine are more effective treatments, although no controlled studies have ever been conducted to compare their therapeutic benefits and the side effects of benzodiazepines and dopaminergic drugs. The use of opioids should be restricted to patients who have severe symptoms and who fail to respond to benzodiazepines or L-dopa. Propoxyphene was found less effective than L-dopa in decreasing PLMS, but some patients resistant to L-dopa may exhibit a masked therapeutic response to opioids. However, there is currently no method to predict the response to any treatment modality.
Clonazepam is a high-potency benzodiazepine labeled for use as an anticonvulsant. Increasingly, clonazepam has been used in the treatment of a variety of psychiatric disorders. The authors discuss its potential clinical applications, including (1) use as an adjunct to neuroleptics for treating psychosis, (2) management of specific psychotropic side effects, (3) alternative treatment for certain pain syndromes, and (4) a primary treatment for severe agitation, atypical psychosis, and anxiety disorders. Apparent treatment-emergent side effects including depression, disinhibition, and sexual dysfunction are also discussed.
INTRODUCTION: Burning mouth syndrome mainly affects women, particularly after the menopause, when its prevalence may be 18% to 33%. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of treatments for burning mouth syndrome? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to November 2009 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 15 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: anaesthetics (local), antidepressants, benzodiazepines (topical clonazepam), benzydamine hydrochloride, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), dietary supplements, and hormone replacement therapy (HRT) in postmenopausal women.
While widely accepted as a first-line treatment for rapid eye movement sleep (REM) behaviour disorder, clonazepam (CNZP) has side effects that limit its applicability. Pramipexole is a possible alternative, but limited literature on its effectiveness exists. This review aims to summarize the available data on the use of pramipexole in REM sleep behaviour disorder. A systematic search of major databases was conducted to look for published and on-going trials. This search yielded a total of five articles, all of which are observational in nature. Factors associated with effectiveness include low doses (less than 1.5mg/day) and idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder/absence of neurodegenerative disease. Overall, the evidence is inconclusive. This is due to the lack of randomised controlled trials and the challenges in interpreting polysomgraphy findings in rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder. Suggestions are given on how future trials evaluating pramipexole treatment in rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder could overcome current methodological issues in extant literature.
INTRODUCTION: Burning mouth syndrome mainly affects women, particularly after the menopause, when its prevalence may be 18-33%. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of treatments for burning mouth syndrome? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to February 2007 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 12 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: anaesthetics (local), antidepressants, benzodiazepines (topical clonazepam), benzydamine hydrochloride, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), dietary supplements, and hormone replacement therapy (HRT) in postmenopausal women.
Post-hypoxic myoclonus (PHM) is a rare neurological complication having two different variants depending on acute or chronic onset after cardiopulmonary resuscitation following cardiac arrest: myoclonic status epilepticus (MSE) and Lance-Adams syndrome (LAS) respectively. Clinical and simultaneous electro-encephalographic (EEG) and electromyographic (EMG) tracing can distinguish between the two. Anecdotal treatment with benzodiazepines and anaesthetics (in the case of MSE) have been tried. Although limited evidence is available, valproic acid, clonazepam and levetiracetam, either in combination with other drugs or alone, have shown to control epilepsy associated with LAS effectively. Deep brain stimulation is a novel and promising advance in LAS treatment.
Two patients with opium dependence developed delirium during abstinence. The delirium resolved completely within 48-58 hours of appropriate treatment. Caution needs to be exercised during opioid detoxification in timely detecting and treating potentially life-threatening condition like delirium.
Adolescence is a critical developmental period in which major metabolic changes occur. The majority of adolescents with epilepsy can be fully controlled with medications and can lead productive lives. A knowledge of basic principles of pharmacotherapy with AEDs will enable the physician to treat effectively most adolescents with epilepsy.
