The newer antifungal agents, clotrimazole, miconazole and haloprogin are considered for their efficacy and acceptability, and are compared with other topical agents used for the treatment of dermatophyte infections of the skin.
Cutaneous candidiasis is a common skin disease, and several treatments have been investigated within the last fifty years. Yet, systematic reviews are lacking, and evidence-based topical and systemic treatment strategies remain unclear. Thus, the aim of this review was to summarize efficacy and adverse effects of topical and oral therapies for cutaneous candidiasis in all age groups. Two individual researchers searched PubMed and EMBASE for 'cutaneous candidiasis' and 'cutaneous candidiasis treatment', 'intertrigo', 'diaper dermatitis' and 'cheilitis'. Searches were limited to 'English language', 'clinical trials' and 'human subjects', and prospective clinical trials published in abstracts or articles were included. In total, 149 studies were identified, of which 44 were eligible, comprising 41 studies of 19 topical therapies and four studies of three systemic therapies for cutaneous candidiasis. Topical therapies were investigated in infants, children, adolescents, adults and elderly, while studies of systemic therapies were limited to adolescents and adults. Clotrimazole, nystatin and miconazole were the most studied topical drugs and demonstrated similar efficacy with complete cure rates of 73%-100%. Single-drug therapy was as effective as combinations of antifungal, antibacterial and topical corticosteroid. Four studies investigated systemic therapy, and oral fluconazole demonstrated similar efficacy to oral ketoconazole and topical clotrimazole. Limitations to this review were mainly that heterogeneity of studies hindered meta-analyses. In conclusions, clotrimazole, nystatin and miconazole were the most studied topical drugs and demonstrated equal good efficacy and mild adverse effects similar to combinations of antifungal, antibacterial and topical corticosteroids. Oral fluconazole was as effective as topical clotrimazole and is the only commercially available evidence-based option for systemic treatment of cutaneous candidiasis.
BACKGROUND: Candidiasis is one of the most common opportunistic oral infections that presents different acute and chronic clinical presentations with diverse diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. The present study carries out a bibliographic review on the therapeutic tools available against oral candidiasis and their usefulness in each clinical situation. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Recent studies on treatment of oral candidiasis were retrieved from PubMed and Cochrane Library. RESULTS: Nystatin and miconazole are the most commonly used topical antifungal drugs. Both antifungal drugs are very effective but need a long time of use to eradicate the infection. The pharmacological presentations of miconazole are more comfortable for patients but this drug may interact with other drugs and this fact should be assessed before use. Other topical alternatives for oral candidiasis, such as amphotericin B or clotrimazole, are not available in many countries. Oral fluconazole is effective in treating oral candidiasis that does not respond to topical treatment. Other systemic treatment alternatives, oral or intravenous, less used are itraconazole, voriconazole or posaconazole. Available novelties include echinocandins (anidulafungin, caspofungin) and isavuconazole. Echinocandins can only be used intravenously. Isavuconazole is available for oral and intravenous use. Other hopeful alternatives are new drugs, such as ibrexafungerp, or the use of antibodies, cytokines and antimicrobial peptides. CONCLUSIONS: Nystatin, miconazole, and fluconazole are very effective for treating oral candidiasis. There are systemic alternatives for treating recalcitrant infections, such as the new triazoles, echinocandins, or lipidic presentations of amphotericin B.
TRPM3 is an ion channel that is highly expressed in nociceptive neurons and plays a key role in pain perception. In the presence of the endogenous TRPM3 ligand, pregnenolone sulfate (PS), the antifungal compound clotrimazole (Clt) augments Ca(2+) signaling and opens a non-canonical pore, permeable to Na(+), which aggravates TRPM3-induced pain. To date, little is known about structural features that govern the Clt modulatory effect of TRPM3. Here, we synthesized and evaluated several Clt analogues in order to gain insights into their structure-activity relationship. Our results reveal a tight SAR with the three phenyl rings on the trityl moiety being essential for the activity, as well as the presence of fluorine or chlorine substituents on the trityl group. Imidazole as a heterocycle is also necessary for activity. Interestingly, we identified a pentafluoro-trityl analogue (29a) that is able to act as a TRPM3 agonist in the absence of PS. The compounds we report in this work will be useful tools for the further study of TRPM3 modulation and its effect on pain perception.
White piedra, a fungal infection caused by Trichosporon cutaneum, has been reported in Europe, South America, and the Orient. A few cases have also been reported in the United States, all of them acquired as well in this country. A patient whose condition was diagnosed in California apparently contracted white piedra while visiting Panama, demonstrating that tropical diseases may occasionally be found at great distances from their point of origin. Therapy with topical clotrimazole and removal of infected hairs by shaving failed to produce a clinical or culturally confirmed cure in this patient.
INTRODUCTION: Around 15% to 25% of people are likely to have athlete's foot at any one time. The infection can spread to other parts of the body and to other people. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of topical treatments for athlete's foot? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to July 2008 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 14 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: improved foot hygiene, including socks and hosiery; topical allylamines (naftifine and terbinafine); topical azoles (bifonazole, clotrimazole, econazole nitrate, miconazole nitrate, sulconazole nitrate, and tioconazole); and topical ciclopirox olamine.
A comparative clinical study was carried out that included 50 cases of otomycosis in immunocompetent patients and 50 cases of otomycosis in immunocompromised patients. Clinical presentation, predisposing factors, mycologic profile, and treatment outcomes were compared. Aspergillus spp were the most commonly isolated fungi in the immunocompetent group, and Candida albicans in the immunocompromised group. Bilateral involvement was more common in the immunocompromised group. All the patients were treated with topical clotrimazole ear drops. Four patients in the immunocompromised group did not respond to treatment with clotrimazole but were treated successfully with fluconazole ear drops. Three patients had a small tympanic membrane perforation due to otomycosis.
The objective of the present work was to analyse the available pharmaceutical products used for treatment of otitis media. The rational application of these medications makes it possible to eliminate rapidly a variety of etiological factors, reduce the severity of inflammation, and improve the quality of life of the patients. One of the approaches to the achievement of these goals for the patients with otitis externa and otitis media consists of the use of combined preparations containing antibacterial, antimycotic, anti-inflammatory and analgetic components. Candibiotic is a four-components drug composed of chloramphenicol, clotrimazol, beclomethasone and lidocaine. The advantages of Candibiotic include high therapeutic efficacy due to its ethiotropic and pathogenetic activity and safety as its components do not have ototoxicity in the case of local application).
Forty-seven patients with active rheumatoid arthritis took part in an 8-week controlled study in which clotrimazole was compared with a standard nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent, ketoprofen. Although clotrimazole was shown to be effective in the treatment of the disease and superior to ketoprofen in certain measurements, if was also responsible for a high incidence of adverse effects. Improvement with clotrimazole took place more slowly but was more sustained than with ketoprofen. A significant rise in plasma cortisol and a fall in white cell count was observed in the clotrimazole treated patients.
Sudden death in military recruits with sickle cell trait appears to be related to hyperthermia and its consequences and can probably be prevented by use of sensible precautions and heightened awareness of the risk. Sickle cell disease can be treated by decreasing the proportion of sickle cells through transfusion; indications and pathophysiology of such transfusions are beginning to become clear. Sickle cell disease can be prevented if erythrocytes can be prevented from sickling. Dilution of hemoglobin S within erythrocytes, by stimulating fetal hemoglobin production, increasing cell water, or inducing iron deficiency, can achieve that goal in some patients, but risks and benefits of such treatment are still incompletely understood.
Various agents are available for the treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis. Imidazole agents (clotrimazole, miconazole, butoconazole, and terconazole) are preferred because of their greater efficacy, shorter treatment regimens, and ease of administration. Although the various imidazole compounds are equally efficacious, different treatment schedules are recommended depending on clinical situations. Additionally, different formulations are available that provide clinicians and patients with the opportunity to select the most appropriate agent.
As both humans and fungi are eukaryotic organisms, antifungal agents affect their cellular metabolism. Thus, a relatively few antifungals with minimal toxicity and side-effects are available compared with a plethora of antibacterials. These agents currently prescribed in dentistry belong to two major groups, the polyenes (nystatin and amphotericin B) and the azoles (imidazoles and triazoles). A newly recognized phenomenon known as the post-antifungal effect implies that antifungals, even at sub-therapeutic concentrations, may suppress the virulent attributes of yeasts, especially intra-orally where topical drug levels fluctuate dramatically during dosing intervals.
A total of 202 evaluable cancer patients were randomly assigned to receive or not receive oral clotrimazole as antifungal prophylaxis during hospitalization. Oropharyngeal candidiasis occurred in 1% of the former patients and 27% of the latter patients (P less than .00001). Candida sp were cultured from the initial throat specimens of 53 control patients and 55 patients who received prophylaxis. Oropharyngeal candidiasis subsequently developed in 2% of the former patients and 38% of the latter patients (P = less than .00001). Oral clotrimazole is an effective agent for prophylaxis of oropharyngeal candidiasis in susceptible cancer patients.
According to data on the imidazole antimycotics at present on the market, none of these products satisfactorily fills the gaps which exist in the treatment for mycoses of internal organs, although they have brought considerable progress in the topical treatment of mycoses. On the basis of their very broad spectrum and high intensity of activity under suitable test conditions, and the comparatively tolerable amount of side effects in man, the present imidazole antimycotics are considered to be an encouraging start for future development of derivatives which will lead to products with considerably better pharmacokinetic, and therefore better therapeutic, properties.
Tinea pedis is the commonest fungal infection in developed countries. Topical therapy is an accepted and successful method for the management of this condition. This has usually involved the application of an antifungal twice or 3 times a day for 3-4 weeks to achieve a cure rate of > or = 80%. Terbinafine, a new antifungal, has been shown in a number of studies to give equally good results when applied once or twice daily for 1-2 weeks. In one study, a cure rate of 78% was achieved in patients with tinea pedis after a single application of 1% terbinafine cream, demonstrating the high potency of this antifungal. Topical terbinafine has also been compared to clotrimazole for the treatment of tinea pedis. Terbinafine 1% cream applied twice daily for 1 week was significantly superior to a 4-week course of clotrimazole 1% cream for treating this common mycosis. Overall, the high efficacy of topical terbinafine in treating tinea pedis following such-short-duration therapy is undoubtedly due to its fungicidal mode of action.
One of the pathogenetic mechanisms responsible for sickling of erythrocytes in patients with sickle cell disease is the decreased hydration status of the cells. In this brief review, we discuss the pathophysiologic background and explore some new treatment options to prevent vaso-occlusive crises or other problems in this patient population.
We report two cases in which dermatophytic infection developed almost entirely within a radiation field mimicking an acute radiation effect. Radiotherapists and dermatologists should be aware of this possibility and be able to differentiate it from radiation dermatitis. Topical antifungal agents are the recommended treatment after diagnosis is established.
The accepted modern practice is to treat each sexually transmitted disease with the shortest possible course of treatment consistent with success. In candidal vulvovaginitis, six days is the minimum period that has so far been found to be successful, but we report here a further reduction to three days. Patients were given two clotrimazole pessaries nightly for three consecutive nights; the overall success rate was 89-4% one month after treatment. This compares favourably with the 93% cure rate reported with the six-day course of clotrimazole. With both the long and short courses, patients having their first attack of genital candidosis responded better than those with a history of previous infection. Short courses of clotrimazole treatment are particularly valuable in dealing with uncooperative women who stop treatment at the earliest possible moment. Clinical and laboratory diagnostic pitfalls and their possible influence upon the therapeutic outcome are also discussed.
Pregnancy creates a climate favorable to the growth of Candida albicans, and this yeast often is difficult to eradicate in pregnant women. Miconazole nitrate administered intravaginally has been found to achieve comparable therapeutic and mycological cure rates in both pregnant and nonpregnant women. A number of clinical studies, using rigid definitions of cure, have demonstrated that miconazole nitrate is significantly better than nystatin, clotrimazole, and butoconazole, a new imidazole derivative, in treating vaginal candidiasis during gestation.
