INTRODUCTION: Statin-induced myopathy is an important cause of statin intolerance and the most common cause of statin discontinuation. Observational studies estimate that 10 - 15% of statin users develop statin-related muscle side effects ranging from mild myalgia to more severe muscle symptoms with significant CPK elevations. AREAS COVERED: This article reviews the epidemiology, clinical features, risk factors and mechanisms of statin-induced myopathy and provides an evidence-based algorithm for managing patients with statin myopathy. EXPERT OPINION: There are multiple risk factors for statin-induced myopathy that are both patient-related (age, genetics, co-morbidities) and drug-related (statin metabolism via the CYP system, drug-drug interactions and statin drug transport). Management options for statin-intolerant patients include statin switching, especially to low-dose, non-daily doses of long-acting statins, such as rosuvastatin and atorvastatin, and other non-statin lipid-lowering agents, such as ezetimibe and colesevelam, and possibly red yeast rice. In conclusion, statin-induced myopathy is a significant clinical problem that contributes considerably to statin therapy discontinuation. However, there exist multiple and effective management options for statin intolerant patients.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: A variety of medication classes are available for diabetes; however, treatment options become limited due to adverse effect profiles and cost. Current diabetes guidelines include agents not originally developed for diabetes treatment, bromocriptine and colesevelam. COMMENT: Other non-diabetes medications demonstrating haemoglobin A1c lowering, including agents for weight loss, depression, anaemia and coronary artery disease, are described in this review article. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: More research looking into the impact of non-diabetes medications on blood glucose may offer additional diabetes treatment strategies.
PURPOSE: Levothyroxine (LT4) is a drug with a narrow therapeutic index, applied in small amounts (micrograms), which makes interactions in the absorption phase clinically significant. The main aim of this article was to review and present the latest information on factors that affect the gastrointestinal absorption of this drug. METHODS: Relevant data were collected by using the MEDLINE, PubMed, EMBASE, Web of Science, Science Direct, and Scopus databases with the key words levothyroxine and absorption. Searches were not limited to specific publication types, study designs, dates, or languages. The reports were highly variable in the amount of information provided regarding study design and methods. Because of the heterogeneity of studies, no statistical analysis was performed. FINDINGS: Many gastrointestinal disorders, such as celiac disease, atrophic gastritis, lactose intolerance, and Helicobacter pylori infection, may impede the absorption of levothyroxine. During treatment of these disorders, it is necessary to monitor serum thyroid-stimulating hormone and free T4 values to reduce the risk of developing iatrogenic hyperthyroidism. Soybeans and coffee have the greatest impact on the reduction of absorption, whereas vitamin C has the ability to increase it. Conversely, the effect of dietary fiber on the absorption of LT4 is not yet fully understood; further research is needed on this topic. A decrease in the absorption of LT4 is established and clinically significant when administered concomitantly with cholestyramine, colesevelam, lanthanum, calcium carbonate, calcium citrate, calcium acetate, iron sulfate, ciprofloxacin, aluminum hydroxide, sevelamer, or proton pump inhibitors. This effect should be taken into consideration when prescribing these drugs concomitantly with LT4. The effects of Giardia lamblia infection and the influence of orlistat, polystyrene sulfonate, raloxifene, and simethicone on absorption of LT4 have been poorly documented. For bariatric surgery, sucralfate and H(2)-antagonist interactions are not well founded or contradictory evidence is available regarding their existence; additional research should be conducted. IMPLICATIONS: The majority of the interactions are clinically significant. They are based on the LT4 adsorption on interfering substances in the digestive tract, as well as a consequently reduced amount of the drug available for absorption. These interactions can be avoided by separating the administration of LT4 and the interfering substance.
Bile acids (BA) are actively reabsorbed in the terminal ileum by the apical Na(+)-dependent bile salt transporter. This review addresses the epidemiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment of BA diarrhea (BAD). BAD is typically caused by ileal resection or disease; 25-33% of patients with chronic functional diarrhea or irritable bowel syndrome-diarrhea (IBS-D) have BAD, possibly from deficiency in the ileal hormone, FGF-19, which normally provides feedback inhibition of BA synthesis. Diagnosis of BAD is typically based on reduced BA retention of radiolabeled BA ((75)SeHCAT), increased BA synthesis (serum C4) or increased fecal BA loss. In clinical practice, diagnosis is often based on response to BA sequestrants (e.g., cholestyramine or colesevelam). Diagnostic tests for BA malabsorption (BAM) need to be used more extensively in clinical practice. In the future, farnesoid X receptor agonists that stimulate ileal production of FGF-19 may be alternative treatments of BAD.
Colesevelam is a bile acid sequestrant, approved for the management of both dyslipidaemia and type 2 diabetes. This review discusses the potential for the use of colesevelam in the management of type 2 diabetes. Expert opinion suggests possible indications where colesevelam may add value as a glucose lowering agent. It also highlights the limitations of the drug, and precautions that must be observed while using it.
Treatment with statins represents an essential component both of primary and secondary cardiovascular prevention strategies. However, a proportion of patients cannot reach low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) targets with the highest tolerable dose of a potent statin or is intolerant to statins. Several treatment options are available for these patients. Colesevelam is a relatively new bile acid sequestrant that decreases serum LDL-C levels. Moreover, colesevelam improves glycemic control and seems to be well-tolerated, at least in short-term studies. Therefore, colesevelam seems to be a useful tool for the management of high-risk patients who cannot achieve LDL-C targets with monotherapy with a potent statin.
Cholestyramine is a bile acid sequestrant, like colestipol and colesevelam. These molecules are positively charged non-digestible resins that bind to bile acids in the intestine to form an insoluble complex, which is excreted in the feces. They are used mainly for the treatment of primary hypercholesterolemia and hypercholesterolemia associated with mild hypertriglyceridemia, in patients not responding to dietary treatment as well as a second line-treatment for pruritus associated with cholestatic disease, in patients with incomplete biliary obstruction. Several data indicate that modulation of bile acid homeostasis has a good clinical effect in managing diabetes mellitus and the diarrhea from bile acid malabsorption. In this review, we present the "in label" use and indication for these compounds, revisiting the other clinical applications that may benefit from the use of bile acid sequestrants in the near future.
Pruritus is a symptom arising from a plethora of dermatological, neurological, and systemic conditions. The pathophysiological mechanisms involved in the transmission of acute and chronic pruritus are of high complexity and not yet fully understood. Recent research has enhanced the understanding of these mechanisms, enabling the development of novel drugs. Specifically, new therapies for inflammatory dermatoses, uremic pruritus, cholestatic pruritus, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, and prurigo nodularis are being tested in ongoing randomized clinical trials. Compounds in development include neurokinin 1 receptor antagonists, anti-interleukin-31 receptor A antibodies, nerve growth factor inhibitors, transient receptor potential cation channel V1 antagonists, as well as kappa-opioid agonists, ileal bile acid transporter inhibitors, and bile acid sequestrants. Effective treatment options for the various forms of chronic pruritus are still insufficient. Basic research studying additional pathophysiological mechanisms involved in pruritus transmission is urgently needed, as well as clinical trials testing new compounds in patients with chronic pruritus. Moreover, clinical trials including specific patients groups, such as pregnant women or children, are of the utmost importance since only few treatment options are currently approved for these patients. The aim of this chapter is to provide an overview of the drugs under development, highlighting the pathophysiological mechanisms they target.
Colesevelam, a bile acid sequestrant used in the treatment of patients with hypercholesterolemia, is a lipid-lowering polymer that has high affinity for bile acids. In animals colesevelam was not systemically absorbed after oral administration and was rapidly eliminated via the gastrointestinal tract. Colesevelam did not alter the serum concentrations or pharmacokinetic properties of drugs from several different classes in healthy volunteers. Colesevelam administered orally in patients with primary hypercholesterolemia significantly reduced serum levels of low density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol and total cholesterol. This lipid-lowering activity was sustained during short (6 weeks) and longer term (24 weeks) treatment. Combination therapy with colesevelam plus hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (lovastatin, simvastatin or atorvastatin) was associated with additive reductions in serum levels of LDL-cholesterol and total cholesterol, relative to either agent alone. Colesevelam treatment was well tolerated and lacked severe gastrointestinal adverse events typical of other bile acid sequestrants (bloating, flatulence, heartburn and nausea). The most frequently reported adverse events were constipation and dyspepsia. In humans colesevelam did not induce clinically significant changes in serum levels of vitamins, coagulation parameters or liver enzymes.
Although a change in life-style is often the method of first choice for lipid lowering, lipid-lowering drugs, in general, help to control elevated levels of different forms of lipids in patients with hyperlipidemia. While one group of drugs, statins, lowers cholesterol, the other group, fibrates, is known to take care of fatty acids and triglycerides. In addition, other drugs, such as ezetimibe, colesevelam, torcetrapib, avasimibe, implitapide, and niacin are also being considered to manage hyperlipidemia. As lipids are very critical for cardiovascular diseases, these drugs reduce fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular abnormalities in the general population. However, a number of recent studies indicate that apart from their lipid-lowering activities, statins and fibrates exhibit multiple functions to modulate intracellular signaling pathways, inhibit inflammation, suppress the production of reactive oxygen species, and modulate T cell activity. Therefore, nowadays, these drugs are being considered as possible therapeutics for several forms of human disorders including cancer, autoimmunity, inflammation, and neurodegeneration. Here I discuss these applications in the light of newly discovered modes of action of these drugs.
Simultaneous control of blood glucose and other risk factors such as hypertension and dyslipidaemia is essential for reducing the risk of complications associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). As relatively few patients with T2DM have their risk factors managed to within the limits recommended by the American Diabetes Association, American College of Endocrinology or National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III guidelines, treatment that can simultaneously control more than one risk factor is of therapeutic benefit. Clinical studies have shown that bile acid sequestrants have glucose-lowering effects in addition to their low-density lipoprotein cholesterol-lowering effects in patients with T2DM. The bile acid sequestrant colesevelam hydrochloride is approved as an adjunct to antidiabetes therapy for improving glycaemic control in adults with T2DM. This review examines data from three phase III clinical trials that evaluated the glucose- and lipid-lowering effects of colesevelam when added to the existing antidiabetes treatment regimen of patients with T2DM.
Sevelamer is a calcium-free and metal-free phosphate-binding oral drug used in the management of hyperphosphataemia in chronic kidney disease. Preclinical and clinical trials have shown glucose and lipid-lowering effects of sevelamer, thereby giving rise to a potential role of the drug in the treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes. These 'novel' effects are most probably derived from the bile acid-binding properties of sevelamer. The proposed potential is supported by the approval of the bile acid sequestrant colesevelam in the United States for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and hypercholesterolaemia. This article offers a brief review on the effects of sevelamer and a perspective on the potential mechanisms behind the glucose-lowering effect of the drug.
The use of statins for cardiovascular disease prevention is clearly supported by clinical evidence. However, in January 2014 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration released an advice on statin risk reporting that "statin benefit is indisputable, but they need to be taken with care and knowledge of their side effects". Among them the by far most common complication is myopathy, ranging from common but clinically benign myalgia to rare but life-threatening rhabdomyolysis. This class side effect appears to be dose dependent, with more lipophilic statin (i.e., simvastatin) carrying a higher overall risk. Hence, to minimize statin-associated myopathy, clinicians should take into consideration a series of factors that potentially increase this risk (i.e., drug-drug interactions, female gender, advanced age, diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism and vitamin D deficiency). Whenever it is appropriate to stop statin treatment, the recommendations are to stay off statin until resolution of symptoms or normalization of creatine kinase values. Afterwards, clinicians have several options to treat dyslipidemia, including the use of a lower dose of the same statin, intermittent non-daily dosing of statin, initiation of a different statin, alone or in combination with nonstatin lipid-lowering agents, and substitution with red yeast rice.
Statins have proved to be potent drugs for reducing low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels. However, because the response to current statin therapy regimens is not always sufficient to reach defined goal levels, additional drugs to lower LDL-C are needed. New drugs may soon be available to lower LDL-C levels by mechanisms that differ from those of the statins. Among these new agents are a bile acid binding resin, inhibitors of bile acid transport, inhibitors of cholesterol transport, inhibitors of cholesterol esterification, and triglyceride-lowering agents.
Introduction: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a major global health challenge associated with increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Intervention strategies managing multiple risk factors (hyperglycemia, hypertension and dyslipidemia) in patients with T2D can reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease by ~50%. Areas covered: Herein, the authors provide an update on the development and clinical potential of colesevelam as a glucose-lowering drug in T2D. Furthermore, they outline the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and the clinical efficacy and safety data from the studies carried out to obtain market authorization for colesevelam. Expert opinion: Four phase III clinical trials provide evidence that colesevelam, as a monotherapy and add-on to various background glucose-lowering treatments, confers placebo-corrected reductions in HbA1c of ~5 mmol/mol. In addition, colesevelam reduces low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and total cholesterol. Some antidiabetic agents seem superior to colesevelam in terms of clinical efficiency (HbA1c lowering), tolerability/convenience, and price. Nonetheless, colesevelam offers a clinically relevant combination of HbA1c- and LDL-lowering that in selected patients could be relevant as add-on treatment to other glucose-lowering drugs and a statin. Potential patients include those with renal impairment, and patients that are close to reaching their lipid and glycemic treatment goals but need further LDL and HbA1c reductions.
The pharmacology, pharmacodynamics, clinical efficacy, drug interactions, adverse effects, and dosage and administration of colesevelam hydrochloride are reviewed. Colesevelam hydrochloride is a nonabsorbed lipid-lowering agent approved for use alone or in combination with hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors for the reduction of low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in patients with primary hypercholesterolemia. Colesevelam forms nonabsorbable complexes with bile acids in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, resulting in changes in plasma lipid levels, including total, LDL, and high-density-lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides. Colesevelam has been reported to be four to six times as potent as traditional bile acid sequestrants (BASs), perhaps because of its greater binding affinity for glycocholic acid. Unlike cholestyramine and colestipol, colesevelam appears to reduce LDL cholesterol in a dose-dependent manner. In clinical trials, colesevelam demonstrated efficacy either alone or in combination with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors in the treatment of primary hypercholesterolemia. Combination therapy appeared to be more effective than monotherapy. Although infection, headache, and GI adverse effects have been reported for colesevelam, the rates do not differ significantly from those occurring with placebo. The constipation that typically hinders compliance with traditional BASs is minimal. In one study, the rate of compliance with colesevelam was 93%. There is little evidence of clinically significant interactions involving colesevelam. The maintenance dosage is three 625-mg tablets twice daily or six tablets once daily, taken with meals. Colesevelam provides an effective alternative to cholestyramine and colestipol while offering the potential for fewer adverse effects and better compliance. Studies are needed to directly compare colesevelam with traditional BASs.
This systematic review analyses the efficacy, tolerability and safety of combinations of different medicines used to treat dyslipidemias in clinical practice. A PubMed search up to January 2009, was conducted to identify relevant studies. Criteria used to identify studies included (1) English language, (2) published studies with original data or meta-analyses in peer-reviewed journals. Although statin treatment is a mainstay of dyslipidemia management today, complementary effects of other lipid-lowering and/or HDL-cholesterol-raising therapies might substantially increase the clinical benefits not only in the small minority of patients with severe dyslipidemias but in others as well. These therapies include combinations with bile acid sequestrants (cholestyramine, colestipol, colesevelam), ezetimibe, niacin, plant sterols, fibrates (fenofibrate, bezafibrate, gemfibrozil), and prescription omega-3 fatty acids. Therapeutic approaches which incorporate the use of multiple drugs combinations for dyslipidemia treatment should be more widely adopted since combination therapy might offer a means to increase the number of patients able to meet their lipoprotein goals according to the guidelines. However, it has to be stated that for most of these combination therapies data on cardiovascular outcomes are still lacking.
OBJECTIVE: We present the available data on the effects of combined therapy of fenofibrate with drugs affecting lipid metabolism other than statins. METHODS: We consider studies evaluating the effects of combined therapy of fenofibrate with bile acid sequestrants (BAS), ezetimibe, niacin, n-3 fatty acids, plant sterols, orlistat, rimonabant, metformin and glitazones. RESULTS: Combination of BAS (especially colesevelam) with fenofibrate had additional effects on metabolic parameters in patients with mixed hyperlipidemia. Combination of ezetimibe with fenofibrate may be a useful approach to improve the overall lipid profile of patients with mixed hyperlipidemia. There is a further reduction in triglyceride levels when n-3 fatty acids are administered with fenofibrate in patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia. Combined fenofibrate and orlistat treatment further improves metabolic parameters in overweight/obese patients with metabolic syndrome. The fenofibrate/thiazolidinedione combination is an alternative for diabetic patients intolerant to statins, though differences exist between pioglitazone and rosiglitazone. CONCLUSIONS: For patients who cannot tolerate statins there are useful combinations of fenofibrate with other drugs affecting lipid metabolism. These combinations improve several metabolic parameters, but more trials should be carried out to reach more robust conclusions about their effects on cardiovascular events.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with a specific pattern of plasma lipid and lipoprotein abnormalities. Lipid goals are often not attained with statins alone, and combination lipid-lowering strategies may need to be considered in an attempt to further reduce the residual cardiovascular risk. Combination therapy utilizes various classes of lipid-lowering medications with different mechanisms of action and different effects on lipid levels. Clinical trial data support the efficacy of combining statins with fibrates, niacin, ezetimibe (cholesterol absorption inhibitor) and colesevelam (bile acid sequestrant) with the caveat that there are insufficient clinical trial data to show a further robust benefit on cardiovascular outcomes. Of the different combination therapy options to potentiate low-density lipoprotein cholesterol lowering in combination with a statin, colesevelam provides additional beneficial effects by further reducing hemoglobin A1c levels in Type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The treatment of lipid disorders begins with lifestyle therapy to improve nutrition, physical activity, weight, and other factors that affect lipids. Secondary causes of lipid disorders should be addressed, and pharmacologic therapy initiated based on a patient's risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD). Patients at extreme ASCVD risk should be treated with high-intensity statin therapy to achieve a goal low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) of <55 mg/dL, and those at very high ASCVD risk should be treated to achieve LDL-C <70 mg/dL. Treatment for moderate and high ASCVD risk patients may begin with a moderate-intensity statin to achieve an LDL-C <100 mg/dL, while the LDL-C goal is <130 mg/dL for those at low risk. In all cases, treatment should be intensified, including the addition of other LDL-C-lowering agents (i.e., proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitors, ezetimibe, colesevelam, or bempedoic acid) as needed to achieve treatment goals. When targeting triglyceride levels, the desirable goal is <150 mg/dL. Statin therapy should be combined with a fibrate, prescription-grade omega-3 fatty acid, and/or niacin to reduce triglycerides in all patients with triglycerides >/=500 mg/dL, and icosapent ethyl should be added to a statin in any patient with established ASCVD or diabetes with >/=2 ASCVD risk factors and triglycerides between 135 and 499 mg/dL to prevent ASCVD events. Management of additional risk factors such as elevated lipoprotein(a) and statin intolerance is also described.
