Cyclophosphamide remains one of the most successful and widely utilized antineoplastic drugs. Moreover, it is also a potent immunosuppressive agent and the most commonly used drug in blood and marrow transplantation (BMT). It was initially synthesized to selectively target cancer cells, although the hypothesized mechanism of tumor specificity (activation by cancer cell phosphamidases) transpired to be irrelevant to its activity. Nevertheless, cyclophosphamide's unique metabolism and inactivation by aldehyde dehydrogenase is responsible for its distinct cytotoxic properties. Differential cellular expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase has an effect on the anticancer therapeutic index and immunosuppressive properties of cyclophosphamide. This Review highlights the chemistry, pharmacology, clinical toxic effects and current clinical applications of cyclophosphamide in cancer and autoimmune disorders. We also discuss the development of high-dose cyclophosphamide for BMT and the treatment of autoimmune diseases.
We evaluated renal function in 107 patients with active lupus nephritis who participated in long-term randomized therapeutic trials (median follow-up, seven years). For patients taking oral prednisone alone, the probability of renal failure began to increase substantially after five years of observation. Renal function was better preserved in patients who received various cytotoxic-drug therapies, but the difference was statistically significant only for intravenous cyclophosphamide plus low-dose prednisone as compared with high-dose prednisone alone (P = 0.027). The advantage of treatment with intravenous cyclophosphamide over oral prednisone alone was particularly apparent in the high-risk subgroup of patients who had chronic histologic changes on renal biopsy at study entry. Patients treated with intravenous cyclophosphamide have not experienced hemorrhagic cystitis, cancer, or a disproportionate number of major infections. We conclude that, as compared with high-dose oral prednisone alone, treatment of lupus glomerulonephritis with intravenous cyclophosphamide reduces the risk of end-stage renal failure with few serious complications.
Cyclophosphamide is an alkylating agent belonging to the group of oxazaphosporines. As cyclophosphamide is in clinical use for more than 40 years, there is a lot of experience using this drug for the treatment of cancer and as an immunosuppressive agent for the treatment of autoimmune and immune-mediated diseases. Besides antimitotic and antireplicative effects, cyclophosphamide has immunosuppressive as well as immunomodulatory properties. Cyclophosphamide shows selectivity for T cells and is therefore now frequently used in tumour vaccination protocols and to control post-transplant allo-reactivity in haplo-identical unmanipulated bone marrow after transplantation. The schedule of administration is of special importance for the immunological effect: while cyclophosphamide can be used in high-dose therapy for the complete eradication of haematopoietic cells, lower doses of cyclophosphamide are relatively selective for T cells. Of special interest is the fact that a single administration of low-dose cyclophosphamide is able to selectively suppress regulatory T cells (Tregs). This effect can be used to counteract immunosuppression in cancer. However, cyclophosphamide can also increase the number of myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Combination of cyclophosphamide with other immunomodulatory agents could be a promising approach to treat different forms of advanced cancer.
This review examines and details the pharmacokinetics of ifosfamide (a congener of cyclophosphamide) when administered by a number of commonly used chemotherapeutic regimes. The influence of route of administration, schedule of administration and dose on the pharmacokinetics of ifosfamide and its metabolites are discussed. Oral fractionated ifosfamide therapy, which causes an excessively high incidence of neurotoxicity, is similar to intravenous fractionated therapy in that it exhibits a time dependent increase in ifosfamide metabolic clearance. Five g/m2 ifosfamide given intravenously as a short (half hour) or long (24 hr) infusion does not exhibit dose dependent (zero-order) pharmacokinetics. In patients who develop ifosfamide/mesna associated CNS toxicity the pharmacokinetics of parent ifosfamide are not aberrant. This implies that ifosfamide metabolites are more likely to be responsible for the neurotoxicity rather than the parent drug. The development of simple and more specific analytical methodology, will allow further studies of the pharmacokinetics of the active ifosfamide metabolite(s). This may lead to further optimisation of the therapeutic index of ifosfamide treatment.
A 12-year-old boy with aplastic anemia developed severe but reversible cardiac failure after treatment with 200 mg/kg cyclophosphamide (4 x 50 mg/kg on four consecutive days) given as preparation for bone marrow grafting. This and previously reported cases demonstrate the possibility of cardiotoxicity after high doses of the drug.
An understanding of the basics of the anatomy of the bladder mucosa is essential to better understand the pathophysiology of chemo-and radiotherapy-induced cystitis. Following an overview of bladder anatomy and the definitions and causes of bladder injury, the mechanisms of cyclophosphamide (CP)-induced bladder injury are discussed as a specific example.
The records of 53 patients treated with Adriamycin, 17 of whom developed congestive heart failure and 36 of whom received a similar total dose of Adriamycin without developing congestive heart failure, were analyzed for factors associated with Adriamycin cardiomyopathy. The risk of cardiomyopathy was significantly greater in patients who developed a larger than or equal to 30% decrease in limb-lead QRS voltage. Concurrent cyclophosphamide and mediastinal radiotherapy lowered the cumulative Adriamycin dose necessary for the development of cardiac toxicity. Uncontrolled hypertension also appears to be a risk factor in potentiating the development of Adriamycin cardiomyopathy at lower doses. Congestive heart failure was more likely to be fatal if it developed shortly after the last dose of Adriamycin. These findings can be utilized to increase the safety of Adriamycin therapy in the future.
High-dose cyclophosphamide (high-CY) is a potent immunosuppressive regimen that is increasingly used to mitigate both autoimmune and alloimmune conditions. Differential expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase between hematopoietic stem cells and lymphocytes accounts for the differential sensitivity of these cells to high-CY and explains why this regimen is immunosuppressive but not myeloablative. This article describes the clinical translation of high-CY for the treatment of autoimmune and alloimmune conditions.
It remains unclear whether metronomic chemotherapy is superior to conventional chemotherapy when combined with immune checkpoint blockade. Here we performed a phase 2 clinical trial of metronomic chemotherapy combined with PD-1 blockade to compare the efficacy of combined conventional chemotherapy and PD-1 blockade using Bayesian adaptive randomization and efficacy monitoring. Eligible patients had metastatic HER2-negative breast cancer and had not received more than one prior line of standard chemotherapy. Patients (total n = 97) were randomized to receive (1) metronomic vinorelbine (NVB) monotherapy (n = 11), (2) NVB plus anti-PD-1 toripalimab (n = 7), (3) anti-angiogenic bevacizumab, NVB and toripalimab (n = 27), (4) conventional cisplatin, NVB and toripalimab (n = 26), or (5) metronomic cyclophosphamide, capecitabine, NVB and toripalimab (the VEX cohort) (n = 26). The primary endpoint was disease control rate (DCR). Secondary objectives included progression-free survival (PFS) and safety. The study met the primary endpoint. The VEX (69.7%) and cisplatin (73.7%) cohorts had the highest DCR. The median PFS of patients in the VEX cohort was the longest, reaching 6.6 months, followed by the bevacizumab (4.0 months) and cisplatin (3.5 months) cohorts. In general, the five regimens were well tolerated, with nausea and neutropenia being the most common adverse events. An exploratory mass cytometry analysis indicated that metronomic VEX chemotherapy reprograms the systemic immune response. Together, the clinical and translational data of this study indicate that metronomic VEX chemotherapy combined with PD-1 blockade can be a treatment option in patients with breast cancer. ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04389073 .
Regulatory T cells (Treg) have become an important player in regulating anticancer immune responses. In fact, published studies describe a correlation between tumor-infiltrating Tregs and poor prognosis. Once called "suppressor T cells," these T cells evaded isolation because of a lack of known markers that distinguished them from other T cells. However, the biology of these T cells is currently a major focus of immunologic research. Markers have since been discovered that identify these T cells and provide insights into how these T cells are regulated. Despite these advances, much needs to be learned about the subsets of Tregs and their specific roles in regulating immune responses. In addition, specific agents that target Tregs are currently unavailable. Cyclophosphamide has emerged as a clinically feasible agent that can suppress Tregs and allow more effective induction of antitumor immune responses. This review focuses on the use of cyclophosphamide in targeting Tregs to augment cancer vaccine approaches. However, these principles can also be applied to other immunotherapy strategies.
Cancer immunotherapy has proven to be a potent treatment modality. Although often successful in generating antitumor immune responses, cancer immunotherapy is frequently hindered by tumor immune-escape mechanisms. Among immunosuppressive strategies within the tumor microenvironment, suppressive immune regulatory cells play a key role in promoting tumor progression through inhibiting the effector arm of the immune response. Targeting these suppressive cells can greatly enhance antitumor immune therapies, hence augmenting a highly effective therapeutic antitumor response. Several approaches are being tested to enhance the effector arm of the immune system while simultaneously inhibiting the suppressor arm. Some of these approaches are none other than traditional drugs repurposed as immune modulators. Cyclophosphamide, an old-school chemotherapeutic agent used across a wide range of malignancies, was found to be a potent immune modulator that targets suppressive regulatory immune cells within the tumor microenvironment while enhancing effector cells. Preclinical and clinical findings have confirmed the ability of low doses of cyclophosphamide to selectively deplete regulatory T cells while enhancing effector and memory cytotoxic T cells within the tumor microenvironment. These immune effects translate to suppressed tumor growth and enhanced survival, evidence of antitumor therapeutic efficacy. This article discusses the reincarnation of cyclophosphamide as an immune modulator that augments novel immunotherapeutic approaches. Cancer Immunol Res; 4(5); 377-82. (c)2016 AACR.
Chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is a major cause of late death and morbidity following allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT), but its pathogenesis remains unclear. Recently, haplo-identical HCT with post-transplant cyclophosphamide (Haplo-HCT with PTCY) was found to achieve a low incidence rate of acute GVHD and chronic GVHD. However, while the pathogenesis of acute GVHD following Haplo-HCT with PTCY has been well investigated, that of chronic GVHD remains to be elucidated, especially in HLA-matched HCT with PTCY. Based on its safety profile, PTCY is currently applied for the human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-matched HCT setting. Here, we investigated the mechanisms of chronic GVHD following HLA-matched HCT with PTCY using a well-defined mouse chronic GVHD model. PTCY attenuated clinical and pathological chronic GVHD by suppressing effector T-cells and preserving regulatory T-cells compared with a control group. Additionally, we demonstrated that cyclosporine A (CsA) did not show any additional positive effects on attenuation of GVHD in PTCY-treated recipients. These results suggest that monotherapy with PTCY without CsA could be a promising strategy for the prevention of chronic GVHD following HLA-matched HCT.
Treatment strategies for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV) are evolving. Cyclophosphamide (CYC) plus corticosteroids (CSs) is the mainstay of therapy for generalized, multisystemic AAV. Historically, the combination of CYC plus CS was used for a minimum of 12 months, but concern about late toxicities associated with CYC has led to novel treatment approaches. Currently, short-course (3 to 6 months) induction treatment with CYC plus CS, followed by maintenance therapy with less toxic agents (eg, methotrexate, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil) is recommended. Further, methotrexate combined with CS may be adequate for limited, non-life-threatening AAV. Recent studies suggest that rituximab may be useful for induction therapy or for CYC-refractory AAV. This article reviews the key agents used to treat AAV, with a focus on pharmacology, toxicities, and monitoring.
Cyclocreatine, an analog of creatine, is an efficient substrate for creatine kinase, but its phosphorylated form is a poor phosphate donor in comparison with creatine phosphate. Cyclocreatine was not very cytotoxic upon 24 h of exposure of human SW2 small-cell lung cancer cells to concentrations of up to 5 mM. However, combinations of cyclocreatine (0.5 mM, 24 h) with each of four antitumor alkylating agents, cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II), melphalan, 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide, and carmustine, resulted in additive to greater-than-additive cytotoxicity toward exponentially growing SW2 cells. The greatest levels of synergy were seen at higher concentrations of 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide and carmustine as determined by isobologram analysis. In vivo cyclocreatine (0.5 or 1 g/kg) was more effective if given i.v. rather than i.p. The longest tumor-growth delays, up to 10 days, were produced by extended regimens of cyclocreatine. Cyclocreatine was an effective addition to therapy with standard anticancer agents including cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II), cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin, or 5-fluorouracil. No additional toxicity was observed when 10 days of cyclocreatine treatment was given with full standard-dose regimens of each drug. The resultant increases in tumor-growth delay were 1.7- to 2.4-fold as compared with those obtained for each of the drugs alone. These results indicate that cyclocreatine may be an effective single agent and an effective addition to combination chemotherapy regimens.
Cyclophosphamide, a drug that has not previously had an important role in whole-organ transplantation, was given as a primary immunosuppressant to one liver and eleven kidney recipients, in combination with prednisone and horse antilymphocyte globulin. One of the patients died despite good renal-graft function. Two kidneys from a common cadaveric donor failed. The other nine patients have excellent function of their homografts after 2-3 months. Cyclophosphamide was substituted for azathioprine in one hepatic and five renal recipients who were suspected of having liver toxicity from azathioprine 3 months to almost 8 years post-transplantation. Graft function was maintained after this change, and the evidence of liver injury subsided.
In a prospective study, 18 evaluable patients with recurrent osteosarcoma were treated with ifosfamide, 1.8 g/m2 daily for 5 consecutive days. Courses were repeated every 4 weeks. Additional mesna (2-mercaptoethane sulfonate) was given to prevent urotoxicity. All patients had measurable lung deposits and all but one had been pretreated with various cytotoxic agents. Six patients (33%) showed therapeutic response, two complete and four partial, with a median duration of 5.5 months (range, 3-47+). Toxicity included myelosuppression, alopecia, nausea, and vomiting. No severe urotoxicity or central nervous system toxicity was observed. Thus, high-dose ifosfamide in combination with mesna seems to be a safe and effective agent for the chemotherapy of osteosarcoma.
Fifty patients with pemphigus (45 pemphigus vulgaris, 5 pemphigus foliaceus) were treated with dexamethasone-cyclophosphamide pulse therapy. The pulse consisted of 136 mg dexamethasone dissolved in 5% dextrose given in a drip over a period of 1-2 hours on 3 consecutive days. In addition, 500 mg cyclophosphamide was added in the drip on the first day. Such pulses were given at monthly intervals. In between the pulses patients were given 50 mg cyclophosphamide orally each day. The results were encouraging, the chief advantage being freedom from side effects of corticosteroid therapy. The lesions healed in 3-4 days and the patients were able to resume their work within one week. Further scope of such therapy in pemphigus is discussed.
Dosage recommendations for cyclophosphamide therapy are examined in the light of an accumulated experience that this agent provides a useful palliation in 25% to 35% of patients with advanced breast cancer. It is concluded that an attempt to press dosage to the extreme limits of marrow tolerance does not significantly increase the likelihood of obtaining palliation, while posing a danger to the patient's life.It is also concluded that continuous low dosage schedules appear to achieve a similar incidence of tumour palliation to that from intermittent high dosage of cyclophosphamide. The latter schedule has the disadvantage of a considerably higher incidence of side effects, such as loss of scalp hair, nausea, cystitis and haemopoietic damage. Intensive dosage may however be more efficacious in the occasional case involving urgent management of a localized rapidly growing tumour. Consideration is given to other factors which may affect the degree and duration of palliation by cyclophosphamide, and to measures claimed to decrease the degree of toxicity.
Eflapegrastim (Rolontis) is a long-acting granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) produced by conjugating a human G-CSF analogue and a human immunoglobulin G4 Fc fragment, linked via a polyethylene glycol linker. Weight-based doses of 45 to 270 mug/kg eflapegrastim (12.3-73.6 mug/kg as G-CSF) were evaluated in a phase 2 study in patients. Based on these results, a fixed dose of 13.2 mg eflapegrastim (3.6 mg G-CSF) was compared with pegfilgrastim (6 mg G-CSF) in 2 phase 3 studies and in a pharmacokinetic single-arm multicenter study. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) data from these 3 studies were evaluated in patients with early-stage breast cancer who were treated with docetaxel and cyclophosphamide (n = 669). Serum concentrations of eflapegrastim were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Eflapegrastim systemic exposures were higher in cycle 1 than in cycle 3, likely attributable to the higher ANC in cycle 3, increasing neutrophil-mediated clearance. Eflapegrastim elicited a greater effect on ANC than pegfilgrastim in patients at  approximately 60% of the G-CSF dose. Body weight had no clinically significant effect on response, justifying administration of a fixed dose of eflapegrastim. The results from 2 phase 3 studies demonstrate that eflapegrastim at a fixed dose of 13.2 mg (3.6 mg G-CSF) administered once per chemotherapy cycle is effective in prophylactic treatment of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia.
Cyclophosphamide (CP) is an alkylating antineoplastic agent with known toxicity to the male reproductive system. Areas covered: This review summarizes the known mechanisms by which CP exerts its toxic effects on the male reproductive system and the methods utilized to prevent such effects so that it could be further investigated and applied in clinical use. Keywords including ['Cyclophosphamide' AND 'male reproductive' OR' sperm toxicity' OR 'spermatotoxicity' OR 'infertility] were searched through Google Scholar, PubMed and Scopus databases based on PRISMA guidelines. After removing duplicates and irrelevant data, 76 papers were reviewed concerning the outcomes of treatment of male mice, rats, and humans with CP and the effects of co-administration of various natural and synthetic compounds on male reproductive system. Expert opinion: CP exerts its effect mainly by inducing oxidative stress and changing gene expression in spermatocytes variably during different stages of development. These effects could be either restored or prevented by the administration of compounds with antioxidant properties and those which target the biochemical alterations induced by CP.
