OBJECTIVE: The original European League Against Rheumatism recommendations for managing fibromyalgia assessed evidence up to 2005. The paucity of studies meant that most recommendations were 'expert opinion'. METHODS: A multidisciplinary group from 12 countries assessed evidence with a focus on systematic reviews and meta-analyses concerned with pharmacological/non-pharmacological management for fibromyalgia. A review, in May 2015, identified eligible publications and key outcomes assessed were pain, fatigue, sleep and daily functioning. The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation system was used for making recommendations. RESULTS: 2979 titles were identified: from these 275 full papers were selected for review and 107 reviews (and/or meta-analyses) evaluated as eligible. Based on meta-analyses, the only 'strong for' therapy-based recommendation in the guidelines was exercise. Based on expert opinion, a graduated approach, the following four main stages are suggested underpinned by shared decision-making with patients. Initial management should involve patient education and focus on non-pharmacological therapies. In case of non-response, further therapies (all of which were evaluated as 'weak for' based on meta-analyses) should be tailored to the specific needs of the individual and may involve psychological therapies (for mood disorders and unhelpful coping strategies), pharmacotherapy (for severe pain or sleep disturbance) and/or a multimodal rehabilitation programme (for severe disability). CONCLUSIONS: These recommendations are underpinned by high-quality reviews and meta-analyses. The size of effect for most treatments is relatively modest. We propose research priorities clarifying who will benefit from specific interventions, their effect in combination and organisation of healthcare systems to optimise outcome.
Skeletal muscle relaxants are widely used in treating musculoskeletal conditions. However, evidence of their effectiveness consists mainly of studies with poor methodologic design. In addition, these drugs have not been proven to be superior to acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for low back pain. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses support using skeletal muscle relaxants for short-term relief of acute low back pain when nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or acetaminophen are not effective or tolerated. Comparison studies have not shown one skeletal muscle relaxant to be superior to another. Cyclobenzaprine is the most heavily studied and has been shown to be effective for various musculoskeletal conditions. The sedative properties of tizanidine and cyclobenzaprine may benefit patients with insomnia caused by severe muscle spasms. Methocarbamol and metaxalone are less sedating, although effectiveness evidence is limited. Adverse effects, particularly dizziness and drowsiness, are consistently reported with all skeletal muscle relaxants. The potential adverse effects should be communicated clearly to the patient. Because of limited comparable effectiveness data, choice of agent should be based on side-effect profile, patient preference, abuse potential, and possible drug interactions.
Health care providers prescribe skeletal muscle relaxants for a variety of indications. However, the comparative efficacy of these drugs is not well known. Skeletal muscle relaxants consist of both antispasticity and antispasmodic agents, a distinction prescribers often overlook. The antispasticity agents-baclofen, tizanidine, dantrolene, and diazepam-aid in improving muscle hypertonicity and involuntary jerks. Antispasmodic agents, such as cyclobenzaprine, are primarily used to treat musculoskeletal conditions. Much of the evidence from clinical trials regarding skeletal muscle relaxants is limited because of poor methodologic design, insensitive assessment methods, and small numbers of patients. Although trial results seem to support the use of these agents for their respective indications, efficacy data from comparator trials did not particularly favor one skeletal muscle relaxant over another. Therefore, the choice of a skeletal muscle relaxant should be based on its adverse-effect profile, tolerability, and cost.
Tinnitus is a phantom auditory sensation that reduces quality of life for millions of people worldwide, and for which there is no medical cure. Most cases of tinnitus are associated with hearing loss caused by ageing or noise exposure. Exposure to loud recreational sound is common among the young, and this group are at increasing risk of developing tinnitus. Head or neck injuries can also trigger the development of tinnitus, as altered somatosensory input can affect auditory pathways and lead to tinnitus or modulate its intensity. Emotional and attentional state could be involved in the development and maintenance of tinnitus via top-down mechanisms. Thus, military personnel in combat are particularly at risk owing to combined risk factors (hearing loss, somatosensory system disturbances and emotional stress). Animal model studies have identified tinnitus-associated neural changes that commence at the cochlear nucleus and extend to the auditory cortex and other brain regions. Maladaptive neural plasticity seems to underlie these changes: it results in increased spontaneous firing rates and synchrony among neurons in central auditory structures, possibly generating the phantom percept. This Review highlights the links between animal and human studies, and discusses several therapeutic approaches that have been developed to target the neuroplastic changes underlying tinnitus.
Skeletal muscle relaxants are a heterogeneous group of medications used to treat two different types of underlying conditions: spasticity from upper motor neuron syndromes and muscular pain or spasms from peripheral musculoskeletal conditions. Although widely used for these indications, there appear to be gaps in our understanding of the comparative efficacy and safety of different skeletal muscle relaxants. This systematic review summarizes and assesses the evidence for the comparative efficacy and safety of skeletal muscle relaxants for spasticity and musculoskeletal conditions. Randomized trials (for comparative efficacy and adverse events) and observational studies (for adverse events only) that included oral medications classified as skeletal muscle relaxants by the FDA were sought using electronic databases, reference lists, and pharmaceutical company submissions. Searches were performed through January 2003. The validity of each included study was assessed using a data abstraction form and predefined criteria. An overall grade was allocated for the body of evidence for each key question. A total of 101 randomized trials were included in this review. No randomized trial was rated good quality, and there was little evidence of rigorous adverse event assessment in included trials or observational studies. There is fair evidence that baclofen, tizanidine, and dantrolene are effective compared to placebo in patients with spasticity (primarily multiple sclerosis). There is fair evidence that baclofen and tizanidine are roughly equivalent for efficacy in patients with spasticity, but insufficient evidence to determine the efficacy of dantrolene compared to baclofen or tizanidine. There is fair evidence that although the overall rate of adverse effects between tizanidine and baclofen is similar, tizanidine is associated with more dry mouth and baclofen with more weakness. There is fair evidence that cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, and tizanidine are effective compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions (primarily acute back or neck pain). Cyclobenzaprine has been evaluated in the most clinical trials and has consistently been found to be effective. There is very limited or inconsistent data regarding the effectiveness of metaxalone, methocarbamol, chlorzoxazone, baclofen, or dantrolene compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions. There is insufficient evidence to determine the relative efficacy or safety of cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, tizanidine, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and chlorzoxazone. Dantrolene, and to a lesser degree chlorzoxazone, have been associated with rare serious hepatotoxicity.
INTRODUCTION: Approaching patients with fibromyalgia (FM) is challenging due to the limited availability of scientifically proven effective therapies. OBJECTIVE: Review the treatments in use for FM and present new knowledge that could benefit these patients. Non-pharmacological interventions are recommended as the first line of treatment: aerobic exercise, cognitive behavioral therapy and patient education, all aimed at improving pain and other symptoms. Additional approaches have been studied, such as, digital health interventions, combined treatments, noninvasive neuromodulation, and others. Concerning pharmacological therapy, the mechanism of action of the medications currently used is to promote pain modulation. Medications approved by Food and Drug Administration are duloxetine, milnacipran and pregabalin. Amitriptyline, cyclobenzaprine, gabapentin and naltrexone are considered for off-label use. Cannabinoids, vitamin D supplementation are still controversial and further research is needed. CONCLUSION: The combination of therapies, whether old, recent or reformulated, are the most effective strategy for managing symptoms in patients with fibromyalgia. KEY WORDS: fibromyalgia, treatment, nonpharmacological interventions, pharmacological treatment.
As the population ages, spine-related pain is increasingly common in older adults. While medications play an important role in pain management, their use has limitations in geriatric patients due to reduced liver and renal function, comorbid medical problems, and polypharmacy. This review will assess the evidence basis for medications used for spine-related pain in older adults, with a focus on drug metabolism and adverse drug reactions. A PubMed/OVID search crossing common spine, neck, and back pain terms with key words for older adults and geriatrics was combined with common drug classes and common drug names and limited to clinical trials and age over 65 years. The results were then reviewed with identification of commonly used drugs and drug categories: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, corticosteroids, gabapentin and pregabalin, antispastic and antispasmodic muscle relaxants, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tramadol, and opioids. Collectively, 138 double-blind, placebo-controlled trials were the focus of the review. The review found a variable contribution of high-quality studies examining the efficacy of medications for spine pain primarily in the geriatric population. There was strong evidence for NSAID use with adjustments for gastrointestinal and renal risk factors. Gabapentin and pregabalin had mixed evidence for neuropathic pain. SNRIs had good evidence for neuropathic pain and a more favorable safety profile than TCAs. Tramadol had some evidence in older patients, but more so in persons aged < 65 years. Rational therapeutic choices based on geriatric spine pain diagnosis are helpful, such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen for arthritic and myofascial-based pain, gabapentinoids or duloxetine for neuropathic and radicular pain, antispastic agents for myofascial-based pain, and combination therapy for mixed etiologies. Tramadol can be well tolerated in older patients, but has risks of cognitive and classic opioid side effects. Otherwise, opioids are typically avoided in the treatment of spine-related pain in older adults due to their morbidity and mortality risk and are reserved for refractory severe pain. Whenever possible, beneficial geriatric spine pain pharmacotherapy should employ the lowest therapeutic doses with consideration of polypharmacy, potentially decreased renal and hepatic metabolism, and co-morbid medical disorders.
IMPORTANCE: Stricter opioid prescribing guidelines have increased prescriptions of skeletal muscle relaxants (SMRs) for chronic pain, but the efficacy of long-term use of SMRs for chronic pain is unknown. OBJECTIVE: To systematically review the effectiveness or efficacy of long-term use of SMRs for chronic pain. EVIDENCE REVIEW: Two reviewers systematically searched Ovid MEDLINE, Embase (Ovid), Web of Science, CINAHL, and Cochrane through December 4, 2023. They included articles published in English, Spanish, or Italian. Only randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and cohort studies with comparator groups evaluating at least 1-month duration of SMRs for chronic pain were included. The reviewers dually reviewed data abstraction, risk-of-bias, and quality. They characterized studies by chronic pain syndrome: low back pain, fibromyalgia, headaches, painful cramps or spasticity, and other syndromes. FINDINGS: A total of 30 RCTs with 1314 participants and 14 cohort studies with 1168 participants assessed SMRs for chronic pain. Studies were primarily short-term (4-6 weeks). Nine unique SMRs were represented by the studies identified. Eleven studies (25%) examined baclofen, 8 (18%) examined tizanidine, and 7 (16%) examined cyclobenzaprine. Evidence for effectiveness was strongest for SMRs used for trigeminal neuralgia, neck pain, and painful cramps; evidence suggested SMRs for fibromyalgia, low back pain, and other syndromes were not more beneficial than placebo. The most common adverse effects were sedation and dry mouth. RCTs had a low to moderate risk of bias, and the quality of cohort studies was fair to good. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this systematic review of long-term use of SMRs for chronic pain, findings suggest that their long-term use may benefit patients with painful spasms or cramps and neck pain; their long-term use for low back pain, fibromyalgia, and headaches did not appear to be beneficial. Clinicians should be vigilant for adverse effects and consider deprescribing if pain-related goals are not met.
Many patients with rheumatologic conditions receive care from physicians other than rheumatologists. Here we note key findings from 6 studies in rheumatology published in 2023 that offer valuable insights for internal medicine specialists and subspecialists outside of rheumatology. The first study investigated the effect of low-dose glucocorticoids on patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) over 2 years and challenged existing perceptions about the risks of glucocorticoids in this setting. The second study focused on the updated guideline for preventing and treating glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis. With the chronic and widespread use of glucocorticoids, the American College of Rheumatology emphasized the importance of assessing fracture risk and initiating pharmacologic therapy when appropriate. The third study explored the potential use of methotrexate in treating inflammatory hand osteoarthritis, suggesting a novel approach to managing this challenging and common condition. The results of the fourth article we highlight suggest that sarilumab has promise as an adjunct treatment of polymyalgia rheumatica relapse during glucocorticoid dosage tapering. The fifth study evaluated sublingual cyclobenzaprine for fibromyalgia treatment, noting both potential benefits and risks. Finally, the sixth article is a systematic review and meta-analysis that assessed the therapeutic equivalence of biosimilars and reference biologics in the treatment of patients with RA. Knowledge of this recent literature will be useful to clinicians regardless of specialty who care for patients with these commonly encountered conditions.
Analgesic medications compounded for topical use are gaining popularity for the management of chronic pain. The advantages of topical pain medications include reduction of systemic adverse effects, improved patient acceptance, few drug interactions, ease of dose determination, avoidance of first-pass metabolism, and direct access to the target site. Compounded topical medications typically use a mixture of 3 or more single medications to achieve multiple complementary effects at lower doses of each individual medication. Herein, we review the mechanisms, adverse effects, and evidence for some of the most commonly used medications in topical compounds for pain management. Because more topical medications are used for chronic pain, dermatologists can expect an increase in irritant and allergic contact dermatitis related to these medications.
The clinical findings in three patients who ingested 260-900 mg cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril) consisted of delayed onset and long duration of anticholinergic symptomatology. In two of these patients, symptoms responded to treatment with physostigmine. The third patient recovered without specific therapy. Despite its structural similarity to amitriptyline, cyclobenzaprine overdosage did not result in coma, seizures, or cardiac toxicity. The pharmacological properties of cyclobenzaprine may account for the observed toxicity.
The muscle-relaxing 5-HT(2) receptor antagonist cyclobenzaprine is structurally closely related to amitriptyline. It is widely used to treat patients presenting with back pain and fibromyalgia. Very rarely cyclobenzaprine toxicity can result in extrapyramidal symptoms, but occurrence of torticollis has not been reported so far. We report on a patient presenting with torticollis and myoclonic movements after treatment with cyclobenzaprine, who was successfully treated with intravenous biperiden. This case might be additional evidence for the necessity of appropriate dosage in case of liver impairment. Secondly there are possibly consequences as regards the therapy of motor side effects.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of TNX-102 SL, a once-nightly sublingual formulation of cyclobenzaprine, in reducing pain in patients with fibromyalgia (FM). METHODS: RELIEF was a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Overall, 503 patients received TNX-102 SL 2.8 mg for 2 weeks, followed by 5.6 mg for 12 weeks (248 patients), or matching placebo (255 patients). The primary end point was change from baseline at week 14 in the weekly average of daily pain scores. Secondary end points included Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC) scores, Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire Revised (FIQR) scores, Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Sleep Disturbance and Fatigue scores, and daily sleep quality. Safety was assessed by adverse event (AE) reporting. RESULTS: Reduction in daily pain from baseline at week 14 was significantly greater with TNX-102 SL (least squares [LS] mean change -1.9 [95% confidence interval (95% CI) -2.1, -1.7]) versus placebo (LS mean change -1.5 [95% CI -1.7, -1.3]; P = 0.01). TNX-102 SL was not associated with significant improvement in PGIC at week 14 but was associated with improvements in FIQR scores, PROMIS scores, and daily sleep quality. Overall, 59.7% of patients receiving TNX-102 SL and 46.3% receiving placebo reported treatment-emergent AEs; the most common were oral hypoesthesia (17.3% with TNX-102 SL versus 0.4% with placebo), oral paresthesia (5.6% versus 0.4%, respectively), and product taste abnormal (4.4% versus 0.4%, respectively). CONCLUSION: In this phase III, randomized, controlled trial of patients with FM, treatment with TNX-102 SL was associated with significant reductions in daily pain and was safe and well tolerated.
Cyclobenzaprine hydrochloride became available for the treatment of acute skeletal muscle spasm ten years ago. The initial clinical trials conducted during the premarketing evaluation of this drug showed that it was significantly superior to placebo in relieving the signs and symptoms of acute skeletal muscle spasm. In addition, cyclobenzaprine was found to have a more rapid onset of action than diazepam. Data obtained both in controlled clinical investigations and in a postmarketing surveillance program indicated that cyclobenzaprine treatment was associated with few serious adverse experiences. Cyclobenzaprine represents a cost-effective approach to the management of acute muscle spasm, primarily because of the rapid symptomatic relief that it provides.
The therapeutic role of medications in fibromyalgia is reviewed. The tricyclics, amitriptyline and cyclobenzaprine, have been the most extensively evaluated, and in controlled studies have proven to be more effective than placebo or NSAIDs. Their mode of action is not known, but their effect may relate to a number of potential mechanisms. However, neither the tricyclics nor any other medication has provided long-term, clinically meaningful improvement in the majority of patients.
This is a case presentation of acute delirium in a previously healthy man. It was originally discussed during Morbidity and Mortality Conference at The George Washington, Georgetown Residency Program in Emergency Medicine, December 1989.
Adding cyclobenzaprine or oxycodone/acetaminophen to naproxen for the treatment of acute low back pain does nothing more than increase adverse effects.
Thirty-eight out of 212 patients (18%) with fibromyalgia met the criteria for the definition of female urethral syndrome (FUS). None of the patients from the control group met these criteria. The treatment for FUS was the same as that for fibromyalgia: cyclobenzaprine or diazepam and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs with a partial response in both pathologies. We should consider FUS in the evaluation of every patient with fibromyalgia.
We retrospectively analyzed 56 consecutive cases involving acute skeletal muscle relaxant exposure that were reported to the Poison Control Center over a 1-year period. The age range was 9 mo to 56 years (mean 18.9 +/- 13.1) with the site of exposure being the primary residence in 54 cases (96.4%). The reasons for inquiry to the Poison Center were reported to be intentional suicide in 26 cases (46.4%), accidental in 21 cases (37.5%), with intentional misuses in 5 cases (8.9%). No deaths were reported. Eighteen cases (32.1%) were reported with co-ingestants (average number of substances taken was 2.7 +/- 0.8). Of these cases 3 patients (16.7%) had major effects with life-threatening symptoms with 6 (33.3%) patients having no symptoms. Of the remaining 38 cases, 17 (44.7%) wer cyclobenzaprine, 6 (15.8%) were methocarbamol, 5 (13.2%) were carisoprodol, 5 (13.2%) were chlorzoxazone, 3 (7.89%) were Baclofen and the remainder were either life-threatening symptoms (2.6%), while 29 (74.3%) had no or minor effects with symptoms that subsided. We conclude that morbidity and mortality are low in pure skeletal muscle relaxant ingestion, however it may be increased in multiple ingestions.
