Histologic studies suggest that polymorphonuclear leukocytes (polys) may initiate, enable, and/or enhance the development of psoriasis. A man with long-standing psoriasis developed acute myelogenous leukemia. His psoriasis disappeared after treatment with daunorubicin and cytosine arabinoside. Smears of his peripheral blood showed essentially zero polys from day 10 to day 22 after start of chemotherapy. His psoriasis began to reappear on day 14, became prominent by day 16, and persisted. Polys may not be requisite for the development and maintenance of psoriasis.
Cytarabine is effective in the treatment of leukemias and CNS disease when given SQ, IM, IV, or intrathecally. Research is continuing to investigate high-dose therapy with cytarabine.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common cause of leukemia-related mortality. The combination of cytarabine and anthracycline has been the gold standard of treatment over the past 40 years, but the distribution of the drugs in the body leads to severe adverse effects. Poor prognosis of older patients with AML is the consequence not only of comorbidities, but also of chemoresistance resulting from frequent secondary AML. Numerous strategies using nanotechnologies are in development to improve drug targeting, pharmacokinetics, administration route, chemoresistance, and adverse effects generally observed. Among the four new drugs approved for AML by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2017, Vyxeos((R)) is a novel liposomal formulation of historical AML drugs. Here, we review current AML treatments and discuss how the development of new formulations will change the therapeutic armamentarium.
High dose cytarabine (HDARAC) therapy is used increasingly to treat hematologic malignancies. Recent data indicate that HDARAC at doses of 2-3 g/M2 every 12 hr x 10-12 doses is of comparable or greater efficacy in remission induction as standard doses of cytarabine in acute myelogenous leukemia. HDARAC can also produce remissions in individuals resistant to conventional doses. HDARAC-containing regimens are reported to result in substantially higher long-term, disease-free survival than previous approaches to post-remission therapy, but this has not yet been confirmed in controlled trials. HDARAC is also active in acute lymphocytic leukemia. Because intravenous HDARAC achieves high levels in the spinal fluid, it is useful to treat central nervous system leukemia and may provide adequate CNS prophylaxis in acute lymphocytic leukemia. HDARAC is reported to be active in advanced non-Hodgkin lymphomas and chronic myelogenous leukemia in acute phase; optimal use in these settings is under study. HDARAC has also been combined with other drugs. Randomized trials are needed to determine whether these combinations are more effective than HDARAC alone. Apart from potent myelosuppression, the dose-limiting toxicity of HDARAC is cerebellar damage. This occurs with increased frequency in patients greater than 50 years old. HDARAC is active in hematologic malignancies and may further improve therapeutic results if combined with other drugs.
PURPOSE: To explore the efficacy and safety of venetoclax-based combination therapy for older patients with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (AML). METHODS: We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials comparing venetoclax plus hypomethylating agents (HMAs) or low-dose cytarabine (LDAC) with mono-HMAs or LDAC. The random or fixed effects model was applied to the studies based on heterogeneity. Dichotomous data were summarized using the risk ratio (RR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). Continuous variable data were reported as weighted mean differences (WMDs). RESULTS: Nine studies, including a total of 1232 patients, were included in this meta-analysis. Thec complete remission (CR)/complete remission with incomplete hematological recovery (CRi) rate of the venetoclax (Ven) + azacytidine (Aza) group was significantly greater than that of the Aza monotherapy group (RR: 2.42; 95% CI: 1.85-3.15; P < 0.001). Similarly, the CR/CRi rate of the Ven + LDAC group was also significantly greater than that of the LDAC monotherapy group (RR: 2.57; 95% CI: 1.58-4.17; P = 0.00). The same results were observed for OS among these groups. However, the incidence of febrile neutropenia was greater in the Ven + Aza group than in the Ven + Decitabine (Dec) or monotherapy Aza group (RR: 0.69; 95% CI: 0.53-0.90; P = 0.006 and RR: 2.19; 95% CI: 1.58-3.03; P < 0.001, respectively). In addition, the Ven + LDAC group had significantly greater rates of constipation, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting than the LDAC monotherapy group, with RRs and CIs of 0.61 (95% CI 0.44-0.83, P = 0.002), 1.81 (95% CI 1.22-2.67, P = 0.003), 1.39 (95% CI 1.06-1.82, P = 0.016), and 1.80 (95% CI 1.19-2.72, P = 0.005), respectively. CONCLUSION: Venetoclax combined with azacitidine, decitabine, or LDAC significantly improved the CR/CRi and OS of patients with previously untreated AML. However, venetoclax plus azacitidine or LDAC was more likely to lead to increased febrile neutropenia and gastrointestinal toxicity.
BACKGROUND: Liposomal formulation of anthracyclines provide better systemic and organ-specific tolerance, with potential for less local tissue damage during extravasation. Several small series have reported that most liposomal anthracycline extravasations are consistent with irritant injury without tissue necrosis. There have been no reports published regarding the clinical effects of extravasation of liposomal cytarabine-daunorubicin (CPX-351). CASE REPORT: The patient received CPX-351 for relapsed acute myelogenous leukemia via a left chest wall port-a-catheter. The catheter became dislodged. Once symptoms developed, the infusion was discontinued, with observations demonstrating an 8-cm region of edema, warmth, no erythema, and no drainage. Limited supportive management was performed. Physical examination the following day demonstrated no evidence of necrosis, and erythema resolved completely without additional intervention. CONCLUSION: CPX-351 extravasation behaving as an irritant is consistent with the reports of other liposomal anthracyclines.
High-dose cytarabine applied during remission induction or as consolidation after attainment of a complete remission has become an established element in the treatment of adults with acute myeloid leukemia. Recent evidence has challenged the need for these exceptionally high-dose levels of cytarabine. In this review, we present a reappraisal of the usefulness of high-dose cytarabine for acute myeloid leukemia treatment.
Lin et al. report the long-term follow-up of a phase II trial involving 95 adult patients with Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH), investigating the combination of methotrexate and cytarabine (MA). After a median follow-up of 6.5 years, the study showed high response rates, with 90% overall response; 55% of patients free from an event such as disease progression, poor response or death; and 93% of patients were alive, though nearly half experienced febrile neutropenia. This prospective study helps fill gaps in understanding adult LCH treatment, indicating that fixed-duration chemotherapy can yield durable responses despite its associated risks. It emphasizes the importance of personalized treatment decisions, considering both fixed-duration chemotherapy and continuous targeted agents based on patient and disease-specific factors. Commentary on: Lin et al. Long term follow-up of methotrexate and cytarabine in adult patients with Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Br J Haematol 2025; 206:576-584.
PURPOSE: Effective treatment options are limited for patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) who cannot tolerate intensive chemotherapy. An international phase Ib/II study evaluated the safety and preliminary efficacy of venetoclax, a selective B-cell leukemia/lymphoma-2 inhibitor, together with low-dose cytarabine (LDAC) in older adults with AML. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Adults 60 years or older with previously untreated AML ineligible for intensive chemotherapy were enrolled. Prior treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome, including hypomethylating agents (HMA), was permitted. Eighty-two patients were treated at the recommended phase II dose: venetoclax 600 mg per day orally in 28-day cycles, with LDAC (20 mg/m(2) per day) administered subcutaneously on days 1 to 10. Key end points were tolerability, safety, response rates, duration of response (DOR), and overall survival (OS). RESULTS: Median age was 74 years (range, 63 to 90 years), 49% had secondary AML, 29% had prior HMA treatment, and 32% had poor-risk cytogenetic features. Common grade 3 or greater adverse events were febrile neutropenia (42%), thrombocytopenia (38%), and WBC count decreased (34%). Early (30-day) mortality was 6%. Fifty-four percent achieved complete remission (CR)/CR with incomplete blood count recovery (median time to first response, 1.4 months). The median OS was 10.1 months (95% CI, 5.7 to 14.2), and median DOR was 8.1 months (95% CI, 5.3 to 14.9 months). Among patients without prior HMA exposure, CR/CR with incomplete blood count recovery was achieved in 62%, median DOR was 14.8 months (95% CI, 5.5 months to not reached), and median OS was 13.5 months (95% CI, 7.0 to 18.4 months). CONCLUSION: Venetoclax plus LDAC has a manageable safety profile, producing rapid and durable remissions in older adults with AML ineligible for intensive chemotherapy. High remission rate and low early mortality combined with rapid and durable remission make venetoclax and LDAC an attractive and novel treatment for older adults not suitable for intensive chemotherapy.
Rhabdomyolysis is an unusual complication of chemotherapy that can lead to substantial morbidity through such complications as renal failure, infections, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. The syndrome has been described after treatment with cyclophosphamide, 5-azacytidine, interleukin-2, and interferon and after bone marrow transplantation. We report a patient with acute myeloid leukemia who developed fulminant rhabdomyolysis after treatment with a cytarabine-containing regimen. The syndrome was complicated by acute renal failure requiring hemodyalisis, respiratory insufficiency, and pancreatitis. We suggest that the muscle damage might be related to the known ability of cytarabine to trigger the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria, which could lead to uncoupling of the oxidative phosphorylation with subsequent depletion of ATP reserves at the skeletal muscle and rhabdomyolysis.
BACKGROUND: The therapeutic effectiveness of chemotherapy is often limited by the inability to sustain cytotoxic concentrations at the tumor site. Cytarabine liposome injection (DepoCyt), a sterile, injectable suspension of the antimetabolite cytarabine, encapsulated into multivesicular, lipid-based particles, has been developed to improve the treatment of neoplastic meningitis (NM) through sustained release of cytarabine. OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and safety of intrathecal DepoCyt for the treatment of NM secondary to lymphoma or solid tumors. RESULTS: In preclinical and clinical studies, DepoCyt markedly extended the duration of tumor exposure to cytotoxic concentrations of cytarabine compared with administration of unbound cytarabine. Data from recent clinical studies demonstrate that DepoCyt improves complete response rates among patients with NM secondary to lymphoma. Trends in time to neurologic progression and median survival also favored DepoCyt over unbound cytarabine in these studies. Data have also been presented that suggest that patients with NM secondary to solid tumors benefit more from DepoCyt than from conventional treatment approaches. Chemical arachnoiditis (i.e., headache, fever, nausea, vomiting) was common in patients receiving DepoCyt, however, symptoms were manageable with oral dexamethasone. CONCLUSIONS: Encapsulation of cytarabine into liposomes for sustained release prolongs tumor exposure to cytotoxic concentrations of cytarabine, which may improve therapeutic efficacy in patients with NM secondary to lymphoma or solid tumors.
Cardiac complications of high-dose cytosine arabinoside (HiDAC), although rare, predominantly include pericarditis, pericardial effusion and cardiomyopathy (with concurrent use of cyclophosphamide). Clinically significant arrhythmias associated with HiDAC, although reported in the literature, are rare. The following case report has for the first time used the Naranjo Scale to document a high-probability association (definite adverse drug reaction) of cytarabine with symptomatic sinus bradycardia.
CPX-351 is a liposomal formulation of cytarabine:daunorubicin designed to deliver synergistic drug ratios to leukemia cells. In this phase 2 study, newly diagnosed older acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients were randomized 2:1 to first-line CPX-351 or 7+3 treatment. The goal was to determine efficacy and identify patient subgroups that may benefit from CPX-351 treatment. Response rate (complete remission + incomplete remission) was the primary end point, with event-free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS) as secondary end points. The 126 patients entered were balanced for disease and patient-specific risk factors. Overall, CPX-351 produced higher response rates (66.7% vs 51.2%, P = .07), meeting predefined criteria for success (P < .1). Differences in EFS and OS were not statistically significant. A planned analysis of the secondary AML subgroup demonstrated an improved response rate (57.6% vs 31.6%, P = .06), and prolongation of EFS (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.59, P = .08) and OS (HR = 0.46, P = .01). Recovery from cytopenias was slower after CPX-351 (median days to absolute neutrophil count >/=1000: 36 vs 32; platelets >100 000: 37 vs 28) with more grade 3-4 infections but without increase in infection-related deaths (3.5% vs 7.3%) or 60-day mortality (4.7% vs 14.6%), indicating acceptable safety. These results suggest a clinical benefit with CPX-351, particularly among patients with secondary AML, and provide the rationale for a phase 3 trial currently underway in newly diagnosed secondary AML patients. This study is registered at Clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00788892.
Although the mechanism of action responsible for the effects of low-dose ara-C remains unclear, certain insights are available concerning the interaction of this agent with DNA. Ara-C incorporates into DNA, and the extent of (ara-C)DNA formation correlates significantly with loss of clonogenic survival. The inhibition of DNA replication by ara-C also results in DNA fragmentation and terminal differentiation of leukemic cells. Other studies have demonstrated that inhibition of DNA replication by ara-C results in an aberrant form of DNA synthesis with certain segments of DNA being replicated more than once within a single cell cycle. The additional copies of certain segments of DNA could lead to the accumulation of DNA fragments and alterations in gene expression. It is of interest that other inhibitors of S-phase DNA replication such as aphidicolin and hydroxyurea can also induce similar phenotypic changes in HL-60 and K562 leukemia cells. Although the in vitro data support the concept that ara-C is capable of inducing leukemic cell differentiation, there is no evidence to suggest that this agent induces differentiation of human leukemic cells in vivo. Drug levels achieved by administration of low-dose ara-C (42-64 nmol/L) result in the incorporation of ara-C into bone marrow mononuclear preparations from patients with preleukemia syndromes. This concentration of ara-C (5 X 10(-8) mol/L) slows DNA replication of human leukemic cells in vitro. Thus, the clinical use of low doses of ara-C that achieve plasma concentrations of 10(-8) to 10(-7) mol/L could theoretically induce maturational effects by partially inhibiting DNA synthesis. At the present time we have no available data to support this contention. On the basis of chromosomal analyses, low-dose ara-C apparently maintains sufficient drug levels to suppress more "malignant" clones, but even "clonal" selection may represent elimination of leukemic cells by either cytotoxicity or induction of terminal differentiation. Further studies will be necessary to define the mechanism of action of low-dose ara-C in preleukemia.
Until the late 1980s, chemotherapy with anthracyclines and cytarabine (AraC) was the only treatment approach for acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), as for other types of acute myeloid leukemia. Many studies have shown that treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), followed by anthracycline-AraC chemotherapy, significantly decreases the incidence of relapse and improves survival in newly diagnosed APL, compared with this chemotherapy alone. This approach was associated with consistent morbidity and mortality during consolidation and maintenance treatment, however, mainly resulting from myelosuppression induced by anthracycline-AraC courses. Several groups have reported high rates of complete remission and low rates of relapse with ATRA and chemotherapy using anthracyclines alone, suggesting that AraC could be avoided in the chemotherapy of APL, reducing toxicity. These results were not confirmed in other studies, however, raising the issue of the role of AraC in treatment of patients with newly diagnosed APL.
BACKGROUND: About 65 percent of previously untreated adults with primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) enter complete remission when treated with cytarabine and an anthracycline. However, such responses are rarely durable when conventional postremission therapy is administered. Uncontrolled trials have suggested that intensive postremission therapy may prolong these complete remissions. METHODS: We treated 1088 adults with newly diagnosed AML with three days of daunorubicin and seven days of cytarabine and randomly assigned patients who had a complete remission to receive four courses of cytarabine at one of three doses: 100 mg per square meter of body-surface area per day for five days by continuous infusion, 400 mg per square meter per day for five days by continuous infusion, or 3 g per square meter in a 3-hour infusion every 12 hours (twice daily) on days 1, 3, and 5. All patients then received four courses of monthly maintenance treatment. RESULTS: Of the 693 patients who had a complete remission, 596 were randomly assigned to receive postremission cytarabine. After a median follow-up of 52 months, the disease-free survival rates in the three treatment groups were significantly different (P = 0.003). Relative to the 100-mg group, the hazard ratios were 0.67 for the 3-g group (95 percent confidence interval, 0.53 to 0.86) and 0.75 for the 400-mg group (95 percent confidence interval, 0.60 to 0.94). The probability of remaining in continuous complete remission after four years for patients 60 years of age or younger was 24 percent in the 100-mg group, 29 percent in the 400-mg group, and 44 percent in the 3-g group (P = 0.002). In contrast, for patients older than 60, the probability of remaining disease-free after four years was 16 percent or less in each of the three postremission cytarabine groups. CONCLUSIONS: These data support the concept of a dose-response effect for cytarabine in patients with AML who are 60 years of age or younger. The results with the high-dose schedule in this age group are comparable to those reported in similar patients who have undergone allogeneic bone marrow transplantation during a first remission.
Cytosine arabinoside (cytarabine or Ara-C) has been one of the cornerstones of treatment of acute myeloid leukemia since its approval in 1969. Standard induction therapy worldwide for all patients deemed fit for treatment (excluding those with acute promyelocytic leukemia) remains unchanged for over 40 years and consists of Ara-C administered by continuous infusion in combination with a topoisomerase II inhibitor (e.g., daunorubicin, idarubicin and mitoxantrone). Despite decades of clinical investigation, the optimum dose of both agents still remains unclear. Although higher doses of Ara-C have been shown to improve response rates, the elderly poorly tolerate these regimens. Resistance mechanisms also develop or may be present at diagnosis resulting in poor outcomes. Elacytarabine (CP-4055), an elaidic acid ester of Ara-C, has been developed using lipid vector technology in an attempt to overcome these limitations. Clinical data are encouraging, with evidence suggesting that this novel agent is circumventing resistance mechanisms but retaining the potent antileukemic efficacy of Ara-C.
OBJECTIVES: NS-87/CPX-351 is a dual-drug liposomal encapsulation of cytarabine and daunorubicin. NS-87/CPX-351 exerts antileukemic action by maintaining a synergistic molar ratio of cytarabine to daunorubicin of 5:1 within the liposome while in circulation. Patients with high-risk acute myeloid leukemia (AML), which includes therapy-related AML and AML with myelodysplasia-related changes (AML-MRC), have poorer outcomes than those with other AML. METHODOLOGY: This open-label phase 1/2 (P1/2) study was conducted in 47 Japanese patients aged 60-75 years with newly diagnosed high-risk AML to evaluate the pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of NS-87/CPX-351. RESULTS: In the 6 patients enrolled in the P1 portion, no dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) were reported, and 100 units/m(2) during the induction cycle was found to be acceptable. Cytarabine and daunorubicin had a long half-life in the terminal phase (32.8 and 28.7 h, respectively). In the 35 patients enrolled in the P2 portion, composite complete remission (CRc; defined as complete remission [CR] or CR with incomplete hematologic recovery [CRi]) was achieved in 60.0% (90% CI: 44.7-74.0) of the patients. Adverse events due to NS-87/CPX-351 were well tolerated. OUTCOMES: NS-87/CPX-351 can be considered as a frontline treatment option for Japanese patients with high-risk AML.
The bone marrow of hematological patients was studied as were effects of cytozar at different dilutions on the bone marrow cells. The analysis of the secured results showed the magnetic field to be a powerful biologically active factor capable of changing clonogenic properties, proliferative and differentiative potential of hemopoietic cells precursors. A long exposure brings about a decline in the colony-forming activity of bone-marrow cells, that is to say, with prolongation of time of the exposition the magnetic field becomes an unfavourable factor for the leukotic cell culture development. Similar results were obtained with cytozar in the culture while studying the colony-forming capability of bone-marrow cells. Hence it appears that action of magnetic field under long exposition to it, combined exposure to magnetic fields, are, in some cases, comparable to effects of cytozar. It is possible that concurrent prescription of cytozar together with magnetization of blood in patients with hemoblastoses should permit enhancing the efficacy of treatment. Employment of weak magnetic fields is a satisfactory and worth-while therapeutic attempt to be made in a multimodality treatment of patients with hemoblastoses.
