Dapsone (4,4'-diaminodiphenylsulfone, DDS) was synthesized a century ago and continues to be a powerful therapeutic tool in many skin diseases. We have tried to retrieve and present the available knowledge and relevant information on this old but still very useful drug with the hope of encouraging and guiding practicing dermatologists to adapt it for various indications. Our objective is to familiarize the clinician with how this agent works, in what disease states it is effective, how to administer it, what adverse effects may occur, and how to monitor the patient receiving this drug.
An understanding of the clinical significance of dapsone-drug interactions is essential for optimal use of this agent. This review aims to provide clinicians with an overview of this topic.
Dapsone is used in the treatment of autoimmune bullous diseases (AIBD), a group of disorders resulting from autoimmunity directed against basement membrane and/or intercellular adhesion molecules on cutaneous and mucosal surfaces. This review summarizes the limited published data evaluating dapsone as a therapy for AIBD.
Dapsone is an extensively Used drug for the treatment of leprosy as well as'some other clinical problems worldwide: Its use has been predicted to increase further, especially in non leprosy conditions. Treatment with Dapsone is sometimes known'to be associated with side-effects, which include gastrointestinal intolerance, haemolysis, methaemoglobinaemia, agranulocytosis, psychosis, peripheral neuritis and varied dermatological conditions, varying from simple rash to severe life threatening epidermolytic reactions and Dapsone hypersensitivity syndrome (DHS). DHS is a rare delayed hypersensitivity reaction involving multiple organs. the condition is associated with high morbidity and is potentially fatal. In this article, the focus is on etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management of DHS. Awareness of the varied presentation/s of the condition, early recognition, withdrawal of the drug and proper management helps in rapid reduction in morbidity and preventing fatalities associated with it.
Superficial granulomatous pyoderma, recently described as a variant of pyoderma gangrenosum, would be better termed pathergic granulomatous cutaneous ulceration as the seven previously described cases, as well as our own two cases, have significant dermal involvement histologically and heal with scarring. In contrast to pyoderma gangrenosum, lesions of superficial granulomatous pyoderma respond to less toxic anti-inflammatory agents.
Pemphigus is a group of autoimmune intraepidermal bullous diseases; being pemphigus foliaceus (PF) and pemphigus vulgaris (PV) the most common subtypes. Pustular variants are scarcely reported for both PV and PF. The purpose of this manuscript was to describe the clinical, microscopic and immunologic findings of an atypical case of PF presenting with pustules, including a review of the literature. PF is described as blisters and because this entity is rare, it is not known for the general medical community that they are other clinical features that can be seen as this one we present here with pustules.
The prompt recognition of the clinical features of dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) is important, but securing a definitive diagnosis requires further work-up. Recent advances in understanding of the immunologic basis for DH have led to the development and wider availability of serologic testing, which is rapidly becoming an essential part of the diagnosis and management of DH. Part II of this series will detail the diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up for patients with DH, and will particularly focus on recent advances in the field.
Dapsone and sulfapyridine are structurally related compounds with anti-microbial and anti-inflammatory effects. Dapsone remains the most important drug for leprosy and is useful in the prophylaxis of Pneumocystis pneumonia in patients with HIV disease. The medical treatment of choice for dermatitis herpetiformis is dapsone; and sulfapyridine also can be used for those patients who are intolerant of dapsone. Other neutrophilic disorders also may respond to these drugs. Toxic side effects of both dapsone and sulfapyridine are mediated through the hydroxylamine metabolite. These include hemolysis, methemoglobinemia, and agranulocytosis. Careful monitoring for possible adverse reactions includes frequently performing complete blood counts and regular blood chemistry profile determinations.
Systemic non-biologic agents have long been in clinical use in medicine--often with considerable efficacy, albeit with some adverse effects--as with all medications. With the advent of biologic agents, all of which currently are restricted to systemic use, there is a growing need to ensure which agents have the better therapeutic ratio. The non-biologic agents (NBAs) include a range of agents, most importantly the corticosteroids (steroids). Previous articles by us in this series have discussed systemic use of corticosteroids and purine synthesis inhibitors; the other immunomodulating agents (calcineurin inhibitors, thalidomide, dapsone, colchicine and cyclophosphamide) are reviewed in this final article.
Dapsone is an efficient anti-inflammatory and antimycobacterial agent. It is one of the main constituents of multidrug therapy (MDT). It acts by interference with folate metabolism. Dapsone-induced photosensitivity is a rare, non-dose-related adverse effect of the sulfone and can occur in patients with inflammatory skin disorders treated with dapsone. So far, only 12 cases seem to have been reported in the literature. We report a case of dapsone-induced photosensitivity in an Indian patient with leprosy.
BACKGROUND: Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) is a common opportunistic infection among people living with HIV (PWH), particularly among new and untreated cases. Several regimens are available for the prophylaxis of PCP, including trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), dapsone-based regimens (DBRs), aerosolized pentamidine (AP), and atovaquone. OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of PCP prophylaxis regimens in PWH by network meta-analysis. METHODS: DATA SOURCES: Embase, MEDLINE, and CENTRAL from inception to June 21, 2023. STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Comparative randomized controlled trials (RCTs). PARTICIPANTS: PWH. INTERVENTIONS: Regimens for PCP prophylaxis either compared head-to-head or versus no treatment/placebo. ASSESSMENT OF RISK OF BIAS: Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for RCTs 2. METHODS OF DATA SYNTHESIS: Title or abstract and full-text screening and data extraction were performed in duplicate by two independent reviewers. Data on PCP incidence, all-cause mortality, and discontinuation due to toxicity were pooled and ranked by network meta-analysis. Subgroup analyses of primary versus secondary prophylaxis, by year, and by dosage were performed. RESULTS: A total of 26 RCTs, comprising 55 treatment arms involving 7516 PWH were included. For the prevention of PCP, TMP-SMX was ranked the most favourable agent and was superior to DBRs (risk ratio [RR] = 0.54; 95% CI, 0.36-0.83) and AP (RR = 0.53; 95% CI, 0.36-0.77). TMP-SMX was also the only agent with a mortality benefit compared with no treatment/placebo (RR = 0.79; 95% CI, 0.64-0.98). However, TMP-SMX was also ranked as the most toxic agent with a greater risk of discontinuation than DBRs (RR = 1.25; 95% CI, 1.01-1.54) and AP (7.20; 95% CI, 5.37-9.66). No significant differences in PCP prevention or mortality were detected among the other regimens. The findings remained consistent within subgroups. CONCLUSIONS: TMP-SMX is the most effective agent for PCP prophylaxis in PWH and the only agent to confer a mortality benefit; consequently, it should continue to be recommended as the first-line agent. Further studies are necessary to determine the optimal dosing of TMP-SMX to maximize efficacy and minimize toxicity.
A young man with dermatitis herpetiformis developed fatigue and neurologic complaints 4 years after he began oral dapsone therapy. Neurologic examination and nerve conduction studies confirmed the presence of a combined motor and sensory peripheral neuropathy. The symptomatic improvement reported by the patient was supported by improvement in the nerve conduction studies after cessation of dapsone therapy. Substitution of sulfapyridine did not adversely affect the resolution of his neuropathy.
Relapsing polychondritis (RP) is an inflammatory condition that has been widely accepted as autoimmune in nature and can occur in patients with immune system dysregulation. Although RP has been well documented in patients with other autoimmune conditions, such as vasculitis, its presence in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection has been infrequently described. We describe a case of RP in an HIV-positive patient without other identifiable autoimmune disease.
Dapsone-induced agranulocytosis is a rare adverse effect. There are various reports of agranulocytosis in patients treated with dapsone for malaria prophylaxis and other dermatological diseases. However, this adverse reaction in leprosy is not often encountered. We describe agranulocytosis in a young patient who was taking dapsone (100 mg) for borderline-tuberculoid leprosy in a rural environment.
For 60 years, dapsone has been used as a both antibacterial and anti-inflammatory agent. Dapsone (4,4'-diaminodiphenylsulfone, DDS) continues to be used successfully to treat a wide range of dermatologic disorders, notably those characterized by abnormal neutrophil and eosinophil polynuclear accumulation. A considerable number of other inflammatory as well as bullous dermatoses, of which dermatitis herpetiformis is the best known, have been shown to respond in varying degrees to dapsone, although the indication for the molecule has not been demonstrated in of them all. This article reviews current knowledge on the pharmacokinetics, mechanism of action and side effects of dapsone in dermatology. Despite the lack of controlled studies, the aim of this study is to specify and classify the pathological states in which disulone could be indicated.
OBJECTIVE: To report a case of methemoglobinemia in a patient receiving dapsone for prophylaxis of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP). CASE SUMMARY: A 69-year-old white woman was hospitalized to rule out sepsis. Two years prior to this admission, the patient received an orthotopic liver transplant after which she required hemodialysis three times weekly. Because of intolerance to trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole and aerosolized pentamidine, she was prescribed dapsone therapy on hospital day 13, that was continued for 11 days. On hospital day 45 the patient received a cadaveric kidney transplant, and dialysis treatments were scheduled only as needed. One week after the transplant, dapsone therapy was resumed. Nine days into this course of dapsone, the patient developed dyspnea and oxygen desaturation of unknown etiology. The patient was evaluated for and diagnosed with methemoglobinemia. She received two doses of intravenous methylene blue and one dose of oral activated charcoal due to fluctuating methemoglobin concentrations. DISCUSSION: The elimination of dapsone is not completely understood. Several case reports of dapsone-induced methemoglobinemia are present in the literature. Most have occurred in patients who have accidentally or deliberately overdosed. Cases of methemoglobinemia in patients receiving therapeutic doses of dapsone are discussed. CONCLUSIONS: The growing numbers of immunosuppressed patients due to transplantation of HIV may result in increased dapsone use for the prevention of PCP. Clinicians should be aware of the adverse effects associated with dapsone therapy, and patients with dyspnea and hypoxemia of unclear etiology should be evaluated for methemoglobinemia.
Dapsone, initially synthesized for textile dyeing, gained recognition in the 1930s for its antibacterial properties, leading to its utilization in dermatology for leprosy and dermatitis herpetiformis. Despite US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for these conditions, dapsone's off-label uses have expanded, making it a valuable option in various dermatologic conditions. This review seeks to highlight the common uses of dapsone in its FDA indications and off-label indications. Diseases in which dapsone is considered first-line therapy or adjunctive therapy are reviewed, with highlights from the resources included. An overview of dapsone's pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, indications, dosages, and safety profile are also reviewed. Dapsone's versatility and safety profile make it a cost-effective treatment option in dermatology, particularly for patients with limited access to specialized medications. Ongoing clinical trials are also described exploring dapsone's efficacy in novel dermatologic uses. Dapsone has been a valuable adjunctive therapy across various dermatologic conditions for years and evidence for its use continues to expand.
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is characterized by premature platelet destruction in the reticuloendothelial system due to the presence of autoantibodies against the platelet membrane proteins. Patients who are resistant to the traditional treatment options that include the administration of steroids, IV immunoglobulin, and antirhesus D immunoglobulin and the performance of a splenectomy are diagnosed to have refractory chronic ITP. Management options in these patients are not well defined. Long-term steroids, rituximab, danazol, azathioprine, and cyclophosphamide have variable efficacy and at the same time carry significant side effects. We present the case of a patient treated effectively with dapsone, a drug that is much safer than other drugs and which can be used before resorting to splenectomy; we also include a review of the literature establishing its role in the management of ITP.
Although dapsone and sulfapyridine have been used for years in dermatology, there has not always been a clear understanding of how these agents work. Recent investigation, however, has shed new light on thes agents which now allows a more rational approach to their use. This review is an attempt to familiarize the clinician with how these agents work, in what disease states they are effective, how to administer them, what adverse effects may occur, and how to monitor the patient to detect these adverse effects.
BACKGROUND: First-line medications for acne vulgaris include retinoids and antibiotics. Dapsone is a topical drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of acne. However, due to its side effects, the clinical application of dapsone has not been promoted, and the value of the medication is still unclear. The aim of this study is to determine the efficacy and safety of dapsone gel in patients with acne. METHODS: Systematic searches were performed using the following databases on January 4, 2020: PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), China Biomedical Literature Service System (SinoMed), China Science and Technology Journal Database (CQVIP), and Wanfang Data Knowledge Service Platform. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials was then conducted to analyze the efficacy and adverse events of dapsone gel treatment compared with excipient and other drug therapies. RevMan 5.3 software was used to calculate the odds ratio (OR), and the confidence interval (CI) was 95%. RESULTS: Data of 11,424 participants across 7 trials which met the inclusion criteria were analyzed. Meta-analysis showed that dapsone gel alone or dapsone gel combined with isotretinoin was superior to excipient alone or oral isotretinoin alone in the treatment of acne (OR =1.51, 95% CI: 1.38-1.66, P<0.0001 random effects model, I2=0%). This indicates that dapsone gel is effective for the treatment of acne. We also found that dapsone gel is a more effective treatment for females (OR =1.80, 95% CI: 1.46-2.23). There was no significant difference in the incidence of adverse events between the dapsone group and the control group (OR =0.94, 95% CI: 0.82-1.14, P=0.24 random effects model; I2=29%). The common local adverse reactions in the dapsone group, such as dryness, heat, and eczema, were not statistically significant compared with those in the control group, and the side effects were transient. DISCUSSION: Dapsone gel is effective in treating acne, and there is no significant difference in adverse events compared with other drugs.
