Darunavir is a nonpeptidic protease inhibitor recently approved for the treatment of antiretroviral therapy-experienced patients. It has potent in vitro activity against viral isolates that are resistant to currently licensed protease inhibitors. In randomized clinical trials with optimized background regimens, it has shown virologic and immunologic responses superior to comparator-based regimens.
Tibotec (formerly Tibotec-Virco) is developing TMC-114 as a potential treatment for HIV-1 infection. In February 2001, TMC-126 was revealed as the series prototype, from which TMC-114 was developed. Because of its improved antiviral and superior pharmacokinetic properties, TMC-114 was selected for clinical development. Phase II trials of TMC-114 are underway.
OBJECTIVES: Given the high need and the absence of specific antivirals for treatment of COVID-19 (the disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus-2 [SARS-CoV-2]), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) protease inhibitors are being considered as therapeutic alternatives. METHODS: Prezcobix/Rezolsta is a fixed-dose combination of 800 mg of the HIV protease inhibitor darunavir (DRV) and 150 mg cobicistat, a CYP3A4 inhibitor, which is indicated in combination with other antiretroviral agents for the treatment of HIV infection. There are currently no definitive data on the safety and efficacy of DRV/cobicistat for the treatment of COVID-19. The in vitro antiviral activity of darunavir against a clinical isolate from a patient infected with SARS-CoV-2 was assessed. RESULTS: DRV showed no antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 at clinically relevant concentrations (EC(50) > 100 muM). Remdesivir, used as a positive control, demonstrated potent antiviral activity (EC(50) = 0.38 muM). CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the data do not support the use of DRV for the treatment of COVID-19.
We report the first published case of a drug induced liver injury (DILI) presumed secondary to a drug-drug interaction between ritonavir and levonorgestrel progestogen-only emergency contraception (POEC). Our patient is a 25-year-old female living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), taking antiretroviral therapy (ART) containing tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine and darunavir/ritonavir. She was found to have elevated transaminases at a routine clinic appointment consistent with hepatocellular DILI. Further investigation found the most likely cause of this was a drug-drug interaction (DDI) between the ritonavir component of her ART and recent use of levonorgestrel POEC 3 days earlier. Evidence suggests that ritonavir increases levonorgestrel exposure, yet our patient received double the usual dose as per dispensing guidance at the time. We review the pharmacokinetics of ritonavir-levonorgestrel DDIs and highlight the need for consistent guidelines on this topic.
: The risk of drug-drug interactions (DDIs) is elevated in aging people living with HIV (PLWH) because of highly prevalent age-related comorbidities leading to more comedications. To investigate the impact of aging on DDI magnitudes between comedications (amlodipine, atorvastatin, rosuvastatin) and boosted darunavir, we conducted a clinical trial in aging PLWH aged at least 55 years. DDI magnitudes were comparable with those reported in young individuals supporting that the clinical management of DDIs in aging PLWH can be similar.
We report here the synthesis and biological evaluation of darunavir derived HIV-1 protease inhibitors and their functional effect on enzyme inhibition and antiviral activity in MT-2 cell lines. The P2' 4-amino functionality was modified to make a number of amide derivatives to interact with residues in the S2' subsite of the HIV-1 protease active site. Several compounds exhibited picomolar enzyme inhibitory and low nanomolar antiviral activity. The X-ray crystal structure of the chloroacetate derivative bound to HIV-1 protease was determined. Interestingly, the active chloroacetate group converted to the acetate functionality during X-ray exposure. The structure revealed that the P2' carboxamide functionality makes enhanced hydrogen bonding interactions with the backbone atoms in the S2'-subsite.
Darunavir: (3R,3aS,6aR)-hexahydrofuro[2,3-b]furan-3-yl [(2S,3R)-4-[(4-aminophenyl)sulfonyl] (isobutyl)amino-3-hydroxy-1-phenyl-2-butanyl]carbamate is a synthetic non-peptide protease inhibitor. On June 2006, it was first approved by the Food and Drug administration (FDA) for treatment of resistant type-1 of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). In July 2016, the FDA expanded the approval for use of darunavir in pregnant women with HIV infection. Darunavir prevents the replication of HIV virus by inhibiting the catalytic activity of the HIV-1 protease enzyme, and selectively inhibits the cleavage of HIV encoded Gag-Pol polyproteins in virus-infected cells, which prevents the formation of mature infectious virus particles. Darunavir is unique among currently available protease inhibitors because it maintains antiretroviral activity against a variety of multidrug-resistant HIV strains. This article discusses, by a critical extensive review of the literature, the description of darunavir in terms of its names, formulae, elemental composition, appearance, and use in the treatment of HIV-infected patients. The article also discusses the methods for preparation of darunavir, its physical-chemical properties, analytical methods for its determination, pharmacological properties, and dosing information.
AIMS: Patients receiving darunavir are advised to take it concomitantly with food. The objectives of the present cross-sectional study were to evaluate the actual concomitant food intake of patients visiting an HIV outpatient clinic. METHODS: Sixty participants treated with darunavir/ritonavir once daily were subjected to a food recall questionnaire concerning their last concomitant food intake with darunavir. Darunavir trough concentrations were calculated. RESULTS: The median food intake was 507 (0-2707) kcal; protein intake, 20 (0-221)g; carbohydrate intake, 62 (0-267)g; fat intake: 14 (0-143)g; and dietary fibre: 4 (0-30)g. Twenty-five patients (42%) ingested their drug with between-meal snacks. No relationship was found between food intake and trough concentrations. CONCLUSIONS: Clear advice on the optimal caloric intake is needed, to avoid high caloric intake in patients who already have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease due to their HIV infection.
Regimens containing darunavir are one of the first one with two drugs that demonstrated good efficacy as a simplification strategy. We wanted to describe the characteristics of patients followed in our center on a dual therapy regimen containing darunavir evaluating the metabolic aspects during follow-ups. We collected data from 208 patients switching to lamivudine plus darunavir with either ritonavir or cobicistat between 2010 and 2019. In all patients we found an increase in low-density lipoprotein (LDL), with no rising in creatinine, total cholesterol, or triglycerides. Twenty-five patients reached 120 weeks of follow-up. In these patients, no significant metabolic changes were described without concomitant treatment with drugs for dyslipidemia. These regimens seem to be more tolerable in metabolic profile compared with the data concerning three-drug therapies, leading only to a slight increase in LDL. The main reason for discontinuation was for a single-tablet therapy. None of the patients started treatment for dyslipidemia.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review the evidence linking use of HIV protease inhibitors with excess risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in HIV+ populations. RECENT FINDINGS: For the two contemporary most frequently used protease inhibitors, darunavir and atazanavir [both pharmacologically boosted with ritonavir (/r)], darunavir/r has been shown to be associated with increased CVD risk. The effect is cumulative with longer exposure increasing risk and an effect size comparable to what has been observed for previously developed protease inhibitors. Biological mechanisms may be overlapping and include perturbed lipid metabolism and accumulation of cholesterol derivatives within macrophages. Conversely, atazanavir/r has not been shown to be associated with CVD, possibly because of its ability to increase cardioprotective bilirubin levels. SUMMARY: Evidence linking protease inhibitors to CVD is based on observational studies only, whereas plausible biological explanations are well established and derived from randomized trials and controlled experiments. Given the possible association with clinical disease, a conservative approach to apply the data in daily practise is proposed which is focused on individualization of care based on underlying risk of CVD.
In this randomized controlled study, individuals taking dolutegravir+darunavir/ritonavir had greater increases in systolic and diastolic blood pressure than those taking 2 nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors+darunavir/ritonavir at week-48. The difference remained significant after controlling for confounding factors, including weight gain.
Atazanavir and darunavir total concentrations (drug bound to plasma proteins plus unbound drug) progressively decrease during pregnancy. This pharmacokinetic variation leads physicians to recommend increasing doses. Conversely, the unbound concentration (Cu), i.e. the pharmacologically active form of the drug, remains unchanged. The explanation of this desynchronization lies in the fact that the clearance of the unbound form, corresponding to the intrinsic metabolic capacity of the hepatocytes, is the only factor driving Cu, and is constant during pregnancy. The attention of HIV physicians should be attracted to this aspect of pharmacokinetics, which is often incompletely understood and could lead to inadequate dose adjustment, which could then cause overexposure of the foetus for many months, with unknown consequences.
In a multicentre, open-label, clinical trial, 43 patients virologically suppressed while receiving a standard triple antiretroviral therapy were randomized (1:1:1) to switch to monotherapy with darunavir/ritonavir (DRV/r-MT arm), monotherapy with lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/r-MT arm) or to continue on the ongoing regimen (cART arm). The proportion (95% CI) of patients with virological success (Snapshot analysis) at week 48 was 73% (48%-90%) in the DRV/r-MT arm, 69% (42%-88%) in the LPV/r-MT arm and 87% (61%-98%) in the cART arm. Virological failure was detected in only one patient receiving LPV/r-MT. The LPV/r-MT arm showed a modest worsening in lipid profile.
At present, there is no definitive antiviral treatment for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). We describe our early experience with remdesivir in four critically ill COVID-19 patients. Patients received a 200 mg loading dose, followed by 100 mg daily intravenously for up to 10 days. All patients had been previously treated with other antivirals before remdesivir initiation. One patient experienced a torsade de pointes requiring cardiac resuscitation and one died due to multiple organ failure. Three patients showed biochemical signs of liver injury. Lymphocyte count increased in all patients soon after remdesivir initiation. Nasal swab SARS-CoV-2 RNA became negative in three of four patients after 3 days of therapy. We observed an in vivo virological effect of remdesivir in four critically ill, COVID-19 patients, coupled with a significant burden of adverse events. Although limited by the low number of subjects studied, our preliminary experience may be relevant for clinicians treating COVID-19.
INTRODUCTION: When darunavir (DRV) 800 mg is boosted with 150 mg cobicistat (DRV(cobi) ), DRV trough concentration (C(trough) ) is about 30% lower as compared to 100 mg ritonavir (DRV(rtv) ). DRV(cobi) shows similar virological efficacy as DRV(rtv) when combined with two nucleos(t)ide analogue reverse-transcriptase inhibitors, but it is unknown whether a lower DRV C(trough) would undermine the effectiveness of DRV(cobi) when given as monotherapy (mtDRV(cobi) ). METHODS: Prospective observational study on virologically suppressed HIV-infected subjects who switched to mtDRV(cobi) . Virological failure was defined as two consecutive HIV-RNA >200 copies/mL. Efficacy was evaluated by intention-to-treat (ITT) and on-treatment (OT) analyses, and compared with data from a previous cohort of subjects on mtDRV(rtv) conducted at our centre. Plasma DRV C(trough) was measured using LC-MS/MS. RESULTS: A total of 234 subjects were enrolled. At week 96, the efficacy rates were 67.8% (CI(95) , 61.8 to 73.7) by ITT and 86.9% (CI(95) , 78.0 to 87.7) by OT analyses. The corresponding rates in our historical DRV(rtv) controls were 67.6% (CI(95) , 60.0 to 75.2) and 83.6% (CI(95) : 77.2 to 90.0). A total of 135 DRV determinations were performed in 83 subjects throughout the follow-up period, with a median plasma DRV C(trough) of 1305 ng/mL (range, 150 to 5895) compared with 1710 ng/mL (range, 200 to 3838) in subjects on monotherapy with DRV(rtv) (p = 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: DRV C(trough) was lower in HIV-infected subjects receiving DRV(cobi) than with DRV(rtv) . However, this did not appear to influence the efficacy of DRV(cobi) , when administered as monotherapy.
During formylation of 2-quinolones by DMF/Et(3)N mixture, the unexpected 3,3'-methylenebis(4-hydroxyquinolin-2(1H)-ones) were formed. The discussed mechanism was proved as due to the formation of 4-formyl-2-quinolone as intermediate. Reaction of the latter compound with the parent quinolone under the same reaction condition gave also the same product. The structure of the obtained products was elucidated via NMR, IR and mass spectra. X-ray structure analysis proved the anti-form of the obtained compounds, which were stabilized by the formation hydrogen bond. Molecular docking calculations showed that most of the synthesized compounds possessed good binding affinity to the SARS-CoV-2 main protease (M(pro)) in comparable to Darunavir.
We report a case of darunavir-induced cholestatic hepatitis in a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patient in the third year of his combined antiretroviral therapy. During the patient's monthly follow-up with regard to his HIV infection, elevated transaminase levels were detected. The patient was subsequently hospitalised at the AIDS and gastroenterology departments. All tested viral hepatitis markers were negative. A diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis was also ruled out. The liver biopsy revealed cholestatic hepatitis. Darunavir withdrawal resulted in a progressive decrease in liver enzyme levels. We highlight the importance of recognising late development of liver injury secondary to the use of darunavir, and the importance of monitoring liver function in patients undergoing prolonged treatment involving darunavir.
Multidrug resistance continues to be a barrier to the effectiveness of highly active antiretroviral therapy in the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) infection. Darunavir (DRV) is a highly potent protease inhibitor (PI) that is oftentimes effective when drug resistance has emerged against first-generation inhibitors. Resistance to darunavir does evolve and requires 10-20 amino acid substitutions. The conformational landscapes of six highly characterized HIV-1 protease (PR) constructs that harbor up to 19 DRV-associated mutations were characterized by distance measurements with pulsed electron double resonance (PELDOR) paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, namely double electron-electron resonance (DEER). The results show that the accumulated substitutions alter the conformational landscape compared to PI-naive protease where the semi-open conformation is destabilized as the dominant population with open-like states becoming prevalent in many cases. A linear correlation is found between values of the DRV inhibition parameter K(i) and the open-like to closed-state population ratio determined from DEER. The nearly 50% decrease in occupancy of the semi-open conformation is associated with reduced enzymatic activity, characterized previously in the literature.
Darunavir (DRV) was the last approved protease inhibitor (PI) and has been extensively used for the treatment of HIV in both naive and experienced subjects due to its high genetic barrier and efficacy. The introduction in clinical practice of integrase strand transfer inhibitors limited its role in the management of naive subjects and in antiretroviral treatment simplification strategies. However, recent data from trials that have investigated the new DRV/cobicistat/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide (D/C/F/TAF) combination showed an excellent efficacy and tolerability of this coformulation both in naive patients and in those with viral suppression, making D/C/F/TAF a new option for the treatment of HIV infection. Areas covered: The authors present and discuss the efficacy and safety data of DRV when used in antiretroviral-naive, multiexperienced subjects and in the setting of treatment deintensification in subjects with viral suppression. Moreover, the authors evaluate the recent data from two different Phase III trials on D/C/F/TAF both in treatment-naive and virologically suppressed subjects. Expert opinion: Although novel antiretroviral drugs may become available over time, DRV continues to represent a valuable option for multiexperienced subjects and has a role in simplification regimens. In addition, the convenience of D/C/F/TAF coformulation may be useful for the future management of HIV-infected subjects.
