Monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B) inhibitors are commonly used for the symptomatic treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). MAO-B inhibitor monotherapy has been shown to be effective and safe for the treatment of early-stage PD, while MAO-B inhibitors as adjuvant drugs have been widely applied for the treatment of the advanced stages of the illness. MAO-B inhibitors can effectively improve patients' motor and non-motor symptoms, reduce "OFF" time, and may potentially prevent/delay disease progression. In this review, we discuss the effects of MAO-B inhibitors on motor and non-motor symptoms in PD patients, their mechanism of action, and the future development of MAO-B inhibitor therapy.
Selegiline HCl, 10 mg per day has been reported to improve attention and episodic memory in Parkinson's disease and early Alzheimer's disease. Selegiline also improves motor reaction times in Parkinson's and subjective feelings of increased vitality, euphoria and energy. At doses of between 10 and 40 mg a day it has also been shown to improve depression particularly when psychomotor retardation is prominent and anxiety minimal.
Four aspects about monoamine oxidase (MAO; E.C. 1.4.3.4) are of obvious interest in relation to Parkinson's disease and its treatment with the irreversible and selective MAO-B inhibitor L-deprenyl and are discussed in this review: 1) To what extent the two forms of MAO are of importance for the deamination of dopamine and to what degree MAO localised inside and outside of dopaminergic nerve terminals contributes 2) The kinetics of the MAO-protein, i.e. the rate of recovery of MAO after irreversible inhibition. 3) To what extent MAO may be changed as a consequence of the pathophysiological processes. 4) To what extent MAO may be involved as a force in the pathophysiological processes.
Although theoretical reasons exist for believing that selegiline slows the progression of Parkinson's disease, this has not been shown in clinical trials. Selegiline improves the symptoms of Parkinson's disease, allowing the introduction of levodopa to be delayed in de-novo patients and, later, for levodopa to be used at a lower dose. It does not lessen the long-term problems of dyskinesia and fluctuations associated with levodopa therapy. The report of an increased mortality associated with selegiline therapy awaits further evaluation. Of the dopamine agonists, pergolide appears to be more potent than bromocriptine; cabergoline looks promising. The catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors, tolcapone and entacopone, prolong the duration of action of levodopa and also show promise. The main objective in the drug treatment of Parkinson's disease remains the optimization of the dose and frequency of levodopa administration.
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors were the first antidepressants introduced, but their use has dwindled because of their reported side effects, their food and drug interactions, and the introduction of other classes of agents. However, interest in MAO inhibitors is reviving. Here, we discuss their use, risks, and benefits in clinical medicine.
Despite advances in the treatment of PD, there remain significant unmet therapeutic needs. This is particularly true at the later stages of the disease when dopaminergic therapy is complicated by motor fluctuations and dyskinesias. Inhibition of dopamine metabolism is a valuable adjunct to exogenous dopaminergic replacement. Inhibitors of MAO-B have been used to treat early and advanced PD for a number of years. Although controversy remains, existing evidence still raises the possibility that MAO-B inhibition may confer a protective effect in PD, delaying the progression of the underlying pathology. More recently, clinically useful inhibitors of COMT have become available. These medications largely act peripherally to increase the pool of available dopamine precursor and prolong the duration of effect of L-dopa. They are indicated primarily for control of motor fluctuations.
Controlling motor complications becomes increasingly difficult with disease progression. The "wearing-off" phenomenon is the most-common motor fluctuation. Wearing-off can be treated by dietary manipulation, shortening the dosing interval, substituting sustained-release levodopa, adding amantadine, or monoamine oxidase type B inhibitors, and other options, including catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors and the approved dopamine agonists addressed in another chapter. The rotigotine constant-delivery system is being developed to treat wearing-off symptoms. Istradefylline (KW-6002), an adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonist, has been studied for wearing-off and the results will be discussed. The on-off fluctuations can be treated with liquid levodopa and the rescue therapy of injectable apomorphine. Patients may also suffer from dyskinesias. Dyskinesias can be treated with small doses of liquefied levodopa-carbidopa, amantadine, and clozapine, an atypical neuroleptic.
This invited narrative review emphasizes the role of MAO-B inhibition in the drug portfolio for dopamine substitution in patients with Parkinson's disease. Neuronal and glial MAO-B inhibition contributes to more stable levels of dopamine and other biogenic amines in the synaptic cleft. Accordingly, symptomatic effects of MAO-B inhibition for a limited amelioration of impaired motor behaviour and wearing-off phenomena in patients with Parkinson's disease are well proven, even when MAO-B inhibitors are only applied together with dopamine agonists. Delay of disease progression by MAO-B inhibition is under debate despite positive experimental findings. This discussion does not consider, that levodopa, respectively, dopamine agonists, are substrates, respectively, inhibitors of the ABCB1 (P-gp, MDR1, and CD243) transporter system. It supports toxin efflux over the blood-brain barrier. ABCB1 transporters have a limited capacity. MAO-B inhibitors do not weaken it. Treatment with MAO-B inhibitors is advantageous as it enables sparing of dopamine agonist and levodopa dosing.
Two (11)C-labelled PET tracers, (R)-N-[(11)C]methyl-N-(3,3-dideuteropropargyl)-1-phenylpropan-2-amine ([(11)C]L-deprenyl-D2, [(11)C]DED) and (S)-N-[(11)C]methyl-N-propargyl-1-phenylpropan-2-amine ([(11)C]D-deprenyl, [(11)C]DDE) were synthesised. One step N-alkylation with [(11)C]MeI or [(11)C]MeOTf was performed using the automated platform TRACERlab(R) FX-C Pro. The labelled products were obtained with (37+/-15)% (n=10) (end of synthesis, decay corrected from [(11)C]MeI) radiochemical yields from [(11)C]MeI after 38+/-3min synthesis time. In all cases, radiochemical purity was over 99% when [(11)C]MeOTf was used. This synthesis using a commercial platform makes these tracers more accessible for clinical research purposes.
The 2001 expert consensus guidelines for treating major depressive disorder (MDD) in geriatric patients recommended antidepressant treatment in combination with psychotherapy. Recent evidence continues to support the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors as first-line agents in the elderly, and although the transdermal monoamine oxidase inhibitor selegilene has shown promise in adult patients, it has not been studied in geriatric depression. Augmentation therapy with atypical antipsychotics or other agents may provide benefits for agitated, psychotic, or resistant MDD in the elderly. The few treatment studies that have been conducted in the geriatric population since the publication of the guidelines have had mixed results and high placebo response rates. More large controlled trials are needed.
Increasing knowledge of the role of brain iron in health and disease has prompted consideration of therapeutic strategies aimed at attenuating the effects of iron and its untoward oxidative consequences. The success of this approach is critically dependent on a better understanding of the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. The controlled trial "Deprenyl and Tocopherol Antioxidative Therapy of Parkinsonism" (DATATOP) represents a clinical strategy to detect neuroprotective effects of antioxidative interventions. Validation of reliable biological markers of nigral degeneration is central to development of therapies that exert genuine neuroprotective effects in slowing the progression and preventing the onset of Parkinson's disease.
Selegiline, the R-optical enantiomer of deprenyl (phenyl-isopropyl-methyl-propargylamine), was almost exclusively used MAO-B inhibitor during the past decades to treat Parkinson's disease. Oral treatment prolongs the need of levodopa administration. Selegiline is rapidly metabolized by the microsomal enzymes to amphetamine, methamphetamine, and desmethyl-deprenyl. In addition, the flavin-containing monooxigenase is synthesizing deprenyl-N-oxide. Selegiline in rather low concentrations (10(-)(9)-10(-)(1)(3) M), does not influence MAO-B, but it has an antiapoptotic activity in tissue culture. The neuroprotective effect of selegiline has a biphasic character. In higher concentrations than 10(-)(7) M increases the rate of apoptosis (proapoptotic activity). The metabolites are also taking part in the complex pharmacological activity of selegiline. The simultaneous presence of the pro- and antiapoptotic effects of selegiline and its metabolites frequently hindered its clinical usage. During the past years rasagiline has been introduced to replace selegiline in clinical application. MAO-B inhibitors beside their effect on the enzyme MAO-B could hold different spectrum of pharmacological activities. Selegiline is administered orally and it possesses an intensive "first pass" metabolism. To circumvent the "first pass" metabolism, parenteral administration of the drug might lead to different distribution and pharmacological activity of selegiline.
The selective serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) have internationally become the accepted 'benchmark' class of antidepressants. It has become clear, however, that there are a number of clinically significant interactions between SSRIs and other medications. The most frequently described interactions are pharmacokinetic, which are far more prevalent than pharmacodynamic interactions. This article details those medications that may interact significantly with the SSRIs, and provides clinical guidelines for minimising the likelihood of such complications. The most common pharmacokinetic interactions are caused by an inhibitory effect of the SSRIs on the hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) metabolic system. The SSRIs differ in their potency in inhibiting a number of important CYP isoenzymes (CYP1A2, CYP2C9/10, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A3/4). The major outcome of concern in relation to pharmacodynamic interactions is the development of the 'serotonin syndrome'. While combination of the SSRIs with the irreversible monoamine oxidase inhibitors is the most recognised cause of this syndrome, concurrent administration with moclobemide, tryptophan or selegiline (deprenyl) may also lead to a similar outcome.
In about 2/3 of the cases studied (152 patients), the combination of deprenyl and the substitution-therapy has a favourable effect as it tends to normalize motor activity. Although the administering of deprenyl renders neither L-Dopa nor the decarboxylase inhibitor superfluous, their side effects can be slightly reduced as their dose is reduced. Therefore it is advised to give all patients a trial with this drug.
We investigated the antidepressant efficacy of l-deprenyl (selegiline), a selective monoamine oxidase B inhibitor (MAOI), in a six-week open trial of 17 patients with atypical depression. Such patients have previously been shown to benefit from nonselective MAOIs such as phenelzine sulfate. Ten patients (59%) responded to l-deprenyl, but nine required dosages above the 10 to 20 mg/day used in previous investigations. l-Deprenyl was superior to six weeks of placebo administered to diagnostically similar patients in a separate double-blind study. In contrast with previous findings with pheneizine, responders to l-deprenyl differed from nonresponders by having lower baseline anxiety ratings. Even at high dosages, there appeared to be fewer side effects with l-deprenyl than with nonselective MAOIs.
The enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO) plays an important role in the inactivation of both dietary amines and also of neurotransmitter amines. A study of the properties of irreversible inhibitors of this enzyme suggests that the enzyme exists in two broad types--MAO-A and MAO-B. Although irreversible inhibitors of MAO were once widely used as antidepressant agents, they fell from favour because of adverse reactions after the ingestion of amine-containing foodstuffs ("the cheese reaction"). However, these inhibitors (phenelzine and tranylcypromine) are probably best for the treatment of atypical depression providing the patient is aware of dietary reactions. A new series of reversible, MAO-A selective inhibitors are being developed which do not exhibit serious dietary interactions. These reversible inhibitors show promise as rapidly acting antidepressant agents. An atypical irreversible MAO-B selective inhibitor, selegiline (deprenyl) does not exhibit an adverse reaction on the ingestion of amine-containing foods. This drug has been used as an adjuvant in the treatment of Parkinson's disease since it allows the dose of L-dopa to be reduced by approximately 25%. More important, selegiline may slow the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons that is characteristic of Parkinson's disease.
Often, reports of anti-ageing research using animal models are overly optimistic and incomplete. Without having the details of the study (issues inherent with the animal models, the condition of the animal colony, the replicability of the findings, for example), even the educated public can find it difficult to interpret the reports accurately. This chapter provides background information about ageing research and animal models in general and arms readers with guidelines they can use to assist them when analyzing reports of ageing research using those models. The article also uses the guidelines to briefly evaluate three anti-ageing treatment candidates: one in the very early stages of testing (resveratrol), one that has been proven unfounded as an anti-ageing intervention by testing [dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)] and one that has undergone testing successfully (l-deprenyl).
Seligiline, a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, has been previously approved by the US FDA for adjunctive treatment of Parkinson's disease. At present, it has been found to be effective in a transdermal system when administered daily in the treatment of major depressive disorder. The minimum dosage of 6 mg/24 h was effective in two trials; this dosage did not require any dietary precautions. Higher doses of 9 mg/24 h and 12 mg/24 h may also not require restrictions, however, current data is insufficient. Furthermore, a randomized 52-week prevention study found significant benefits for continuance of this treatment. There are several types of safety data available. First, there have been no reports of hypertensive crisis in any patient receiving selegiline via this transdermal system at any of the three doses. Tyramine challenge studies have found a comfortable cushion of safety at selegiline doses of 6 mg/24 h. Other side effects include a slightly higher rate of orthostatic hypotension, insomnia and, most frequently, application site reactions. There are no significant effects on weight or sexual side effects. In terms of drug interactions, carbamazepine was found to significantly increase seligiline levels (however, carbamazepine should be contraindicated). Direct sympathomimetics may be safe, but indirect ones are thought to put the patient at risk. Finally, due to risk of serotonin syndrome, other medications contraindicated include: selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors, serotonin-noradrenaline re-uptake inhibitors and multiple analgesics - in particular meperidine. To prevent toxic drug interactions at initiation of seligiline transdermal system therapy, all mediactions that are at risk should be completely stopped a minimum of 4-5 times their respective half-lifes for full elimination. This is generally a time period of 1 week. Upon stopping treatment with selegiline, 2 weeks should pass prior to beginning any medication at risk for drug interactions.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors inhibit dopamine metabolism and are therefore effective in treating Parkinson's disease, a condition associated with progressive striatal dopamine deficiency secondary to degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. Selegiline is currently the most widely used monoamine oxidase-B inhibitor for Parkinson's disease, but has a low and variable bioavailability, and is metabolized to L-methamphetamine and L-amphetamine that carry a risk for potential neurotoxicity. There are two new approaches that circumvent these potential disadvantages. First, selegiline orally disintegrating tablets provide a novel delivery form of selegiline, avoiding first pass metabolism by rapid absorption through the oral mucosa, thus leading to significantly lower plasma concentrations of L-metamphetamine and L-amphetamine. Selegiline orally disintegrating tablets prove to be clinically effective and safe in patients with moderately advanced Parkinson's disease. Second, rasagiline is a new monoamine oxidase inhibitor, without known neurotoxic metabolites. In large clinical trials, rasagiline proves effective as monotherapy in early Parkinson's disease, as well as adjunctive therapy to levodopa in advanced disease. Clinical data suggest, in addition, a disease-modifying effect of rasagiline that may correlate with neuroprotective activity of monoamine oxidase-B inhibitors in animal models of Parkinson's disease.
Levodopa is the most effective drug available for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). As a precursor of dopamine, levodopa causes an increase in brain dopamine, which is depleted in PD. However, long-term levodopa therapy is associated with complications such as dyskinesias, motor fluctuations, and mental status changes. The treatment of these side effects is a major challenge for the clinician.
