Potent inhaled anaesthetics are halogenated hydrocarbons with a large global warming effect. The use of fluorinated hydrocarbons (most are not anaesthetics) are being restricted but volatile anaesthetics have been exempted from legislation, until now: the EU has formulated a proposal to ban or at least severely restrict the use of desflurane starting January 2026. This narrative review addresses the implications of a politics-driven decision - without prior consultation with major stakeholders, such as the European Society of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care (ESAIC) - on daily anaesthesia practice and reviews the potential scientific arguments that would support stopping the routine use of desflurane in anaesthetic practice. Of note, banning or severely restricting the use of one anaesthetic agent should not distract the user from sensible interventions like reducing fresh gas flows and developing technology to capture and recycle or destroy the wasted potent inhaled anaesthetics that we will continue to use. We call to join efforts to minimise our professional environmental footprint.
The halogenated inhalational anaesthetics halothane, enflurane, isoflurane and desflurane can produce metabolic hepatocellular injury in humans to a variable extent. During metabolism of these anaesthetics, tissue acetylation occurs due to the formation of reactive intermediates. Proteins modified by acetylation may constitute neo-antigens with a potential for triggering an antibody-mediated immune response. The likelihood of suffering post-operative immune hepatitis depends on the amount of the anaesthetic metabolized and is thereby considerably less with enflurane, isoflurane or desflurane compared with halothane. Plasma inorganic fluoride concentrations are regularly increased after sevoflurane. Elevated inorganic fluoride concentrations have been associated with nephrotoxicity following methoxyflurane anaesthesia but not after sevoflurane. Another source of concern is the products of degradation from reactions with carbon dioxide absorbents. Most important is compound A, which has been shown to exhibit nephrotoxicity in rodents. However, no significant changes in renal function parameters have been reported in surgical patients.
Despite technological advances in surgery and anesthesia during the last few decades, the incidence of postoperative cognitive dysfunction remains a relatively common complication in surgical patients. After surgery, elderly patients in particular often exhibit a transient reversible state of cerebral cognitive alterations. Anesthetics administered as part of a surgical procedure may alter the patient's behavioral state by influencing brain activity. This concise report will address the scientific evidence on the relationship between postoperative cognitive dysfunctions and the most common inhalational agents currently used in anesthesia (volatile anesthetics: isoflurane, desflurane and sevoflurane, gaseous nitrous oxide). The available literature does not allow definitive conclusions to be drawn on the possible differences between anesthetics in relation to the subsequent occurrence of cognitive dysfunction. However, such information is crucial to improve anesthesia performance and patient safety, as well as outcomes.
Development targets in anaesthetic pharmacology have evolved from minimizing harm caused by unwanted effects through an era in which rapid onset and offset of drug effect were prioritised. Today's anaesthetists have access to a library of effective drugs whose characteristics offer controllable hypnosis, analgesia and paralysis with manageable off-target effects. The availability of these agents at generic prices inhibits commercial interest and this is reflected in the limited number of current anaesthetic drug development projects. Recently, questions around neonatal neurotoxicity, delirium and postoperative cognitive dysfunction have stimulated research to characterise these phenomena and explain them in mechanistic terms. Emergent basic science from these enquiries together with exploration of possible effects of anaesthetic drug choice on patient outcomes from cancer surgery may yield new targets for drug discovery.
There have been remarkable efforts to characterize the key responsible pathophysiologic mechanisms, as well as to ameliorate the organ preservation and ischemia reperfusion injury with the ultimate goal of expanding the donor pool and further improvement of the outcomes of liver transplantation. Attempts to translate the experimental results from bench to bedside have yielded no valid protective concepts in the field of clinical liver transplantation yet. Nonetheless, there has been a considerable amount of ongoing clinical research to develop clinically relevant graft protective strategies. Areas covered: This review focuses on the most recent evidence based findings and ongoing clinical trials that might lead to emerging graft protective strategies in the field of clinical liver transplantation. New evidence-based findings in the donor preconditioning, organ preservation, and perioperative pharmacologic graft protection strategies in the recipient are reviewed. Expert commentary: Few strategies have been shown to exert some graft protective effects against ischemia reperfusion injury in recent clinical trials in liver transplantation. Among others, 'dynamic graft preservation' techniques have been emerging as more promising graft optimization strategies.
This study estimated the climate footprint of halogenated inhalation anesthetics in Sweden and estimated effects of a decreased use of these compounds. We collected data on sales of desflurane, sevoflurane and isoflurane in Sweden during 2017 and calculated the mass of CO2 equivalents (CO2e) using Global Warming Potential data over 100 years for the compounds. Inhalation anesthetics contributed by 5000 tons of CO2e which corresponds to 0.005 percent of the Swedish climate footprint. By replacing desflurane with sevoflurane the footprint can be reduced by 73 percent. By replacing sevoflurane with intravenous propofol the climate effect can be reduced further by at least 2 orders of magnitude.
BACKGROUND: The effect of intraoperative anesthetic regimen on pulmonary outcome after minimally invasive esophagectomy for esophageal cancer is yet undetermined. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of volatile anesthesia (sevoflurane or desflurane) compared with propofol-based intravenous anesthesia on pulmonary complications after minimally invasive esophagectomy. METHODS: Patients scheduled for minimally invasive esophagectomy were randomly assigned to 1 of 3 general anesthetic regimens (sevoflurane, desflurane, or propofol). The primary outcome was the incidence of pulmonary complications within the 7 days postoperatively, which was a collapsed composite end point, including respiratory infection, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, atelectasis, respiratory failure, bronchospasm, pulmonary embolism, and aspiration pneumonitis. The severity of pulmonary complications, surgery-related complications, and other secondary outcomes were also assessed. RESULTS: Of 647 patients assessed for eligibility, 558 were randomized, and 553 were analyzed. A total of 185 patients were assigned to the sevoflurane group, 185 in the desflurane, and 183 in the propofol group. Patients receiving a volatile anesthetic (sevoflurane or desflurane) had a significantly lower incidence (36.5% vs 47.5%; odds ratio, 0.63; 95% confidence interval, 0.44-0.91; P = .013) and lower severity grade of pulmonary complications ( P = .035) compared to the patients receiving propofol. There were no statistically significant differences in other secondary outcomes between the 2 groups. CONCLUSIONS: In patients undergoing minimally invasive esophagectomy, the use of volatile anesthesia (sevoflurane or desflurane) resulted in the reduced risk and severity of pulmonary complications within the first 7 postoperative days as compared to propofol-based intravenous anesthesia.
BACKGROUND: Remimazolam is an ultrashort-acting benzodiazepine that is increasingly used for its efficacy in anesthesia induction and maintenance. However, limited research has explored its impact on intraoperative hypothermia compared to that of traditional inhalation anesthetics. This study aimed to compare the incidence of hypothermia during endoscopic nasal surgery when using remimazolam for maintenance anesthesia versus using inhalation anesthetics. METHODS: This prospective study included 70 patients who underwent endoscopic nasal surgery under general anesthesia. The patients were randomly assigned to one of two groups: the inhalation anesthetic (IA) group (n=35), in which desflurane and nitrous oxide were administered, and the remimazolam (R) group (n=35), in which remimazolam and remifentanil were administered for anesthesia maintenance. The primary outcome was the incidence of intraoperative hypothermia, defined as an esophageal temperature below 36  degrees C during anesthesia. RESULTS: The incidence of intraoperative hypothermia was significantly higher in the R group than in the IA group (P = 0.014). Furthermore, the temperature at the end of the surgery was significantly lower in the R group than in the IA group (P = 0.006). Additionally, the use of warming devices after surgery was more frequent in the R group than in the IA group (P = 0.047). CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the use of remimazolam for maintenance anesthesia during endoscopic nasal surgery increases the risk of intraoperative hypothermia compared to the use of inhalation anesthetics. This highlights the importance of temperature monitoring in patients receiving remimazolam to minimize the adverse outcomes associated with hypothermia during surgery.
AIMS: To compare the clinical profile of target-controlled infusion (TCI) of remifentanil (REM) + propofol (PRO) with fentanyl (FEN) bolus infusion with desflurane (DES) inhalation in direct laryngoscopic surgery. METHODS: Sixty patients who were scheduled to undergo laryngoscopic surgery were randomly assigned to two groups (n = 30, respectively). One group of patients received a TCI of REM + PRO anesthetic treatment, while the patients in the other group received a bolus infusion of FEN and DES inhalation treatment. The hemodynamics, recovery profiles and unexpected events that occurred in both groups were recorded. RESULTS: The hemodynamics of the patients in the TCI group was more stable during tracheal intubation, direct laryngoscope insertion and extubation. The mean arterial pressure was also significantly lower in the TCI group compared with the FEN/DES group. The TCI group also showed faster recovery profiles (e.g. a shorter time needed for response to verbal commands, autonomous breathing, tracheal extubation and orientation recovery). The FEN/DES group had lower Stewart recovery scores during the first 15 min determined at the postanesthesia care unit. However, there were no significant differences regarding the occurrence of unexpected events and postoperative complications between the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: TCI of REM + PRO anesthesia appears to be a reasonable alternative to FEN bolus infusion combined with DES inhalation during direct laryngoscopic surgery.
In patients undergoing craniotomy, general anesthesia should be addressed to warrant good hypnosis, immobility, and analgesia, to ensure systemic and cerebral physiological status and provide the best possible surgical field. Regarding craniotomies, it is unclear if there are substantial differences in providing general anesthesia using total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) or balanced anesthesia (BA) accomplished using the third generation halogenates. New evidence highlighted that the last generation of halogenated agents has possible advantages compared with intravenous drugs: rapid induction, minimal absorption and metabolization, reproducible pharmacokinetic, faster recovery, cardioprotective effect, and opioid spare analgesia. This review aims to report evidence related to the use of the latest halogenated agents in patients undergoing craniotomy and to present available clinical evidence on their effects: cerebral and systemic hemodynamic, neurophysiological monitoring, and timing and quality of recovery after anesthesia.
Global postoperative amnesia (profound anterograde and retrograde amnesia) is rare and usually attributed to transient global amnesia-a poorly understood condition with no broadly accepted mechanism. We report an incident of probable transient global amnesia in a patient after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram under general anesthesia, which was successfully treated with flumazenil. On the basis of the results of flumazenil administration in this and a previous case report, we would recommend a trial dose of 0.2 mg for cases of global postoperative amnesia, repeated if the first dose seems effective.
Coronary heart disease is an affliction that is common and has an adverse effect on patients' quality of life and survival while also raising the risk of intraoperative anesthesia. Mitochondria are the organelles most closely associated with the pathogenesis, development, and prognosis of coronary heart disease. Ion abnormalities, an acidic environment, the production of reactive oxygen species, and other changes during abnormal myocardial metabolism cause the opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pores, which disrupts electron transport, impairs mitochondrial function, and even causes cell death. Differences in reliability and cost-effectiveness between desflurane and other volatile anesthetics are minor, but desflurane has shown better myocardial protective benefits in the surgical management of patients with coronary artery disease. The results of myocardial protection by desflurane are briefly summarized in this review, and biological functions of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, mitochondrial electron transport chain, reactive oxygen species, adenosine triphosphate-dependent potassium channels, G protein-coupled receptors, and protein kinase C are discussed in relation to the protective mechanism of desflurane. This article also discusses the effects of desflurane on patient hemodynamics, myocardial function, and postoperative parameters during coronary artery bypass grafting. Although there are limited and insufficient clinical investigations, they do highlight the possible advantages of desflurane and offer additional suggestions for patients.
The volatile anaesthetics sevoflurane and desflurane feature new and promising properties. Their low blood and tissue solubility enables rapid onset of and emergence from anaesthesia, thus enhancing patient safety and comfort. This article is designed as an up-to-date review of the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of modern volatile anaesthetics. The first part focuses on pharmacokinetic issues such as substance properties, uptake and elimination. The second part covers the effects of inhaled anaesthetics on organ systems, with emphasis on the central nervous system, the cardiovascular system, the respiratory tract, liver and kidneys.
The rate of uptake of sevoflurane during clinical anaesthesia (1.3 MAC) was measured by computer-controlled injection of liquid anaesthetic into a closed breathing system. The cumulative uptake of sevoflurane was 4.8 ml, 7.4 ml, 9.5 ml and 11.5 ml at 30, 60, 90 and 120 min, respectively. The ratio of inspired to end-expired sevoflurane was greater than similar measurements we have made for desflurane in the past, but the absolute rate of sevoflurane uptake was less than the rate of uptake of desflurane in these cases. The rate of uptake was equivalent to 059e-0.32t + 0.039e-0.036t + 0.105e-0.0034t ml.min-1 liquid sevoflurane. Plasma urea and creatinine measured on the first postoperative day were not significantly different from pre-operative values.
The Ohmeda Tec 6 was designed as an agent-specific vaporizer for desflurane. Its exterior framework offers some unique features. Aside from its unique filling port, broad calibration range, and additional light-emitting diodes (LEDs), its large size literally sets it apart from all other models. As distinctive as the exterior appears, its interior design is even more unconventional; that is, it is not a variable-bypass, flow-over system. There are no mixing chambers, baffles, or temperature-sensing bellows; a differential pressure transducer system takes their place. Many modifications were made primarily to accommodate the remarkably high vapor pressure of desflurane. This is especially true in regard to the sump heating unit. Although there are many options to accommodate a high vapor pressure, a heating unit serves the purpose best. A brief review of vaporization and fundamental thermodynamics will demonstrate why this is so.
Hepatic inflow occlusion during the liver surgery may result in a transient ischemia period followed by reperfusion, and may initiate liver injury and lead to postoperative liver dysfunction. Especially in cirrhotic patients, the tolerance time of ischemia is much shorter and the outcome would be worse. Recently, clinical trials had proved that volatile anesthetics rather than propofol can protect myocardial cells from ischemia reperfusion (IR) injury in cardiac surgery. Meanwhile, animal studies had revealed that volatile anesthetics could induce some endogenous protective molecules in the liver such as hypoxia induced factor-1 (HIF-1), heme oxygenase (HO) enzyme system and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), which make the volatile anesthetics posing the extraordinary anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory, anti-apoptotic, and vasodilatory characteristics. However, there is still lack of trials to compare the postoperative outcomes such as liver function in cirrhotic patients undergoing liver surgery with inflow occlusion between volatile anesthetics and propofol anesthesia. Hence we hypothesize that with its anti-IR injury characteristics, volatile anesthetics might be the more appropriate choice in cirrhotic patients undergoing liver surgery with occlusion.
We report a case of acute intraoperative tympanic membrane (TM) rupture in a patient anesthetized with desflurane without N2O. The patient was undergoing endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) to treat ascending cholangitis. TM rupture is known to occur with N2O but has not been reported in the literature with the use of inhaled volatile anesthetics without N2O. We suspect that several factors contributed to this complication, including prone positioning, a remote history of ear trauma, and the selection of desflurane as the maintenance anesthetic as opposed to a vapor with a higher blood-gas partition coefficient.
Emergence delirium is a common problem in children recovering from general anaesthesia. We performed a study comparing emergence characteristics in 100 patients who were randomly allocated to receive either 0.3 mug.kg(-1) dexmedetomidine, 1 mg.kg(-1) propofol or saline 0.9% and undergoing infra-umbilical surgery. The Pediatric Anesthesia Emergence Delirium scale was used to grade emergence delirium. Emergence delirium occurred in 9.4% of children in the dexmedetomidine group compared with 13.9% in the propofol group and 40.6% in the control group (p = 0.004). In the dexmedetomidine group, sedation occurred in 62.5% of children at 10 min after transfer to the recovery area, compared with 44.4% in the propofol group and 12.5% in the control group (p = 0.010). We conclude that dexmedetomidine significantly reduced the incidence of emergence delirium but this was at the expense of a greater incidence of sedation in the recovery period.
The cardiovascular and respiratory effects of desflurane are reviewed. In experimental animals, desflurane has been shown to produce hemodynamic effects comparable to those produced by isoflurane. Desflurane increases heart rate and decreases both mean arterial pressure and systemic vascular resistance while maintaining cardiac output. In some but not all studies, desflurane has appeared to maintain arterial pressure and systemic vascular resistance to a somewhat greater degree than equianesthetic concentrations of isoflurane. Otherwise, desflurane and isoflurane produce strikingly similar effects on systemic, coronary, renal, hepatic, and cerebral circulation. In addition, desflurane and isoflurane have nearly identical actions on a variety of indices of left ventricular systolic and diastolic function. Although desflurane may cause coronary vasodilation in dogs, no evidence of "coronary steal" has been observed in a canine model of multivessel coronary artery disease. In humans, desflurane produces alterations in systemic hemodynamics that have many similarities to those produced in animals. No differences between the cardiovascular actions of desflurane and isoflurane have been identified in volunteers during spontaneous or controlled ventilation with and without nitrous oxide. Desflurane and isoflurane also produce similar hemodynamic effects during induction and maintenance of anesthesia in a wide variety of clinical settings. To date, no direct evidence of desflurane-related myocardial ischemia or increased cardiovascular morbidity has been observed in patients with coronary artery disease. Desflurane depresses ventilation in animals and humans. Dose-related decreases in tidal volume and increases in respiratory rate, arterial carbon dioxide tension, dead space/tidal ventilation ratio, and intrapulmonary shunt fraction have all been observed in volunteers. These effects are similar to those produced by other currently used volatile anesthetics, including isoflurane. Desflurane, like isoflurane, also appears to be a mild respiratory irritant. Thus, the cardiorespiratory effects of the new volatile anesthetic, desflurane, are remarkably similar to those produced by isoflurane.
Desflurane use is associated with carbon monoxide production and sympathetic activation. These side effects can be eliminated taking into account certain recommendations such as closing fresh gas flow at the end of anaesthesia, regular replacement of carbon dioxide absorbents and the use of new absorbents for carbon monoxide production and opioid administration with slow increases of inspiration concentrations during desflurane initiation for sympathetic activation.
