Central diabetes insipidus (CDI) is the end result of a number of conditions that affect the hypothalamic-neurohypophyseal system. The known causes include germinoma/craniopharyngioma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH), local inflammatory, autoimmune or vascular diseases, trauma resulting from surgery or an accident, sarcoidosis, metastases and midline cerebral and cranial malformations. In rare cases, the underlying cause can be genetic defects in vasopressin synthesis that are inherited as autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or X-linked recessive traits. The diagnosis of the underlying condition is challenging and raises several concerns for patients and parents as it requires long-term follow-up. Proper etiological diagnosis can be achieved via a series of steps that start with clinical observations and then progress to more sophisticated tools. Specifically, MRI identification of pituitary hyperintensity in the posterior part of the sella, now considered a clear marker of neurohypophyseal functional integrity, together with the careful analysis of pituitary stalk shape and size, have provided the most striking findings contributing to the diagnosis and understanding of some forms of 'idiopathic' CDI. MRI STIR (short-inversion-time inversion recovery sequencing) is a promising technology for the early identification of LCH-dependent CDI.
Hypertonic saline has been used for the treatment of hyponatremia for nearly a century. There is now general consensus that hypertonic saline should be used in patients with hyponatremia associated with moderate or severe symptoms to prevent neurological complications. However, much less agreement exists among experts regarding other aspects of its use. Should hypertonic saline be administered as a bolus injection or continuous infusion? What is the appropriate dose? Is a central venous line necessary? Should desmopressin be used concomitantly and for how long? This article considers these important questions, briefly explores the historical origins of hypertonic saline use for hyponatremia, and reviews recent evidence behind its indications, dosing, administration modality and route, combined use with desmopressin to prevent rapid correction of serum sodium, and other considerations such as the need and degree for fluid restriction. The authors conclude by offering some practical recommendations for the use of hypertonic saline.
Hypothermia has been demonstrated to induce pancytopenia in animals, but whether this association exists in humans is unknown. The authors report the case of an 8-year-old girl in whom hypothermia (temperature 33 degrees C-35 degrees C) is the cause of pancytopenia. The patient developed thermoregulatory dysfunction subsequent to surgical resection of a craniopharyngioma. Her recurrent cytopenias could not be explained by any etiology except chronic hypothermia. The pancytopenia improved upon rewarming the patient to a temperature of 36 degrees C. This association between hypothermia and pancytopenia has rarely been reported in humans and may be underdiagnosed especially in cases of transient or milder presentations. The authors recommend careful hematologic monitoring of patients with thermoregulatory dysfunction.
Since the pressor and antidiuretic properties of the native hormone were characterized, chemists have been working to synthesize vasopressin analogues selective for particular biologic activities. Desmopressin has had the longest clinical track record. Subsequently, three more analogues have been formulated and have found specific clinical application. Their actions and uses are reviewed.
Desmopressin (dDAVP) is the best characterized analogue of vasopressin, the endocrine regulator of water balance endowed with potent vasoconstrictive effects. Despite the use of dDAVP in clinical practice, ranging from the treatment of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus to bleeding disorders, much remains to be understood about the impact of the drug on endothelial phenotype. The aim of this study was, thus, to evaluate the effects of desmopressin on the viability and function of human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HLMVECs). The results obtained demonstrate that the vasopressor had no cytotoxic effect on the endothelium; similarly, no sign of endothelial activation was induced by dDAVP, indicated by the lack of effect on the expression of inflammatory cytokines and adhesion molecules. Conversely, the drug significantly stimulated the production of nitric oxide (NO) and the expression of the inducible isoform of nitric oxide synthase, NOS2/iNOS. Since the intracellular level of cAMP also increased, we can hypothesize that NO release is consequent to the activation of the vasopressin receptor 2 (V2R)/guanylate cyclase (Gs)/cAMP axis. Given the multifaceted role of NOS2-deriving NO for many physio-pathological conditions, the meanings of these findings in HLMVECs appears intriguing and deserves to be further addressed.
The management of central diabetes insipidus has been greatly simplified by the introduction of desmopressin (DDAVP). Its ease of administration, safety and tolerability make DDAVP the first line agent for outpatient treatment of central diabetes insipidus. The major complication of DDAVP therapy is water intoxication and hyponatremia. The risk of hyponatremia can be reduced by careful dose titration when initiating therapy and by close monitoring of serum osmolality when DDAVP is used with other medications affecting water balance. Herein we review the adverse effects of DDAVP and its predecessor, vasopressin, as well as discuss important clinical considerations when using these agents to treat central diabetes insipidus.
Desmopressin (dDAVP), a synthetic analog of the neurohypophyseal nonapeptide arginine vasopressin, has enhanced antidiuretic potency, markedly diminished pressor activity, and a prolonged half-life and duration of action compared to the natural hormone. Desmopressin is the treatment of choice for central diabetes insipidus and can be administered either intranasally or parenterally. A newly approved indication is treatment of mild classical hemophilia and von Willebrand's disease, in which deficient concentrations of factor VIII and von Willebrand's factor are transiently increased to levels that allow minor surgery.
Vasopressin is a vital homeostatic protein which regulates fluid balance via its antidiuretic effects and vascular tone via its vasoconstrictive effects. Endogenous vasopressin deficiency has been implicated in several disease states resulting in vasodilatory shock. In particular, vasopressin levels are low in patients following cardiac surgery and in those with ventricular dysrhythmias. Several recent studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of exogenous vasopressin in providing haemodynamic support in patients with postcardiopulmonary bypass vasodilatory shock and refractory ventricular fibrillation. This manuscript reviews the pathophysiological and clinical basis for vasopressin replacement in patients with cardiovascular collapse.
Activity-based recovery training (ABRT) reverses spinal cord injury (SCI) induced polyuria and alterations of biomarkers involved with fluid balance, including expression levels of kidney vasopressin 2 receptors. However, void volumes do not return to pre-injury baseline levels, indicating a combinatorial approach may be necessary. In the current study, acute effects of a pharmacological intervention versus placebo were examined in male rats that had received 70 daily ABRT sessions. The treatment, desmopressin (DDAVP - synthetic analogue of arginine vasopressin), an antidiuretic therapy used for the management of bedwetting in children and central diabetes insipidus, has previously shown some promise in a few limited cohorts of SCI individuals having nocturnal polyuria. A total of 70 sessions of ABRT over a 10-week timeframe again reduced the overproduction of urine, but not completely to pre-SCI baseline levels. DDAVP treatment maintained but did not further reduce the level of urine output in the ABRT group without continuous exercise, demonstrating either intervention/treatment alone is effective, despite no additive effect. Although intake did not change from pre-injury levels despite polyuria, DDAVP treatment also reduced drink volume. Further studies are needed as the mechanisms underlying changes in fluid and solute balance are likely multi-factorial involving a complex interaction between the neural (both central and peripheral) control of systems mediating thirst, urinary output, and cardiovascular regulation.
More than 700 children aged between 5 and 15 years were treated at the University of Vienna Department of Urology during the last 10 years. The therapeutic approach was based on a complex diagnostic scheme to define the individual problem of each enuretic child. Generally speaking the enuresis problem turned out to be a symptom of delayed maturation of fine motor control [1] or sleep and hormone secretion rhythm during day and night hours. In a high percentage of enuretic children, no major physical problem or disease could be found, but the possibility of a physical problem, especially a neurourological problem, should not be ignored. Nonneurogenic discoordinated voiding in children can be treated by cognitive flow-triggered feedback training [2, 3] while overproduction of urine during sleep is reduced by antidiuretic hormone therapy with desmopressin (DDAVP; 1-deamino-8-D-arginine-vasopressin), a synthetic analogue of antidiuretic hormone.
Use of desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) for patients having cardiac surgery is controversial. We did a double-blind, randomized study of 83 patients having cardiac operations at Georgetown University Hospital. The effect of DDAVP on bleeding as compared to placebo was evaluated by blood loss, replacement volume, and laboratory tests. There were no significant differences in baseline and intraoperative data between the DDAVP (n = 40) and placebo (n = 43) groups. Total drainage for the first 24 postoperative hours was 1,214 mL (+/- 78) for the DDAVP group and 1,386 mL (+/- 116) for the placebo group (not significant). There were no significant differences in replacement therapy. In this study, administration of DDAVP did not decrease bleeding.
Desmopressin is an analog of vasopressin that exerts a substantial haemostatic effect by inducing the release of von Willebrand factor from its storage sites in endothelial cells. It has proved useful in treating or preventing bleeding episodes in patients with von Willebrand disease, haemophilia A and platelet function defects. Its efficacy in achieving a satisfactory level of haemostasis has reduced the use of blood products to treat bleeding episodes. Clinicians need to become familiar with the use of this drug that has become a home medication for many patients with inherited bleeding disorders.
Arginine vasopressin preparations have been used in the treatment of diabetes insipidus for many years. Compared with older antidiuretic agents, the synthetic analog desmopressin is more potent, longer acting and easier to use. It is available for intravenous, subcutaneous and intranasal administration. Desmopressin may be useful in the treatment of hemostatic disorders such as von Willebrand's disease and hemophilia A. It has also been used for nocturnal enuresis. The vasopressor effects of arginine vasopressin preparations have been exploited for use as a temporizing measure in controlling acute gastrointestinal bleeding. Side effects such as hyponatremia and water intoxication are uncommon when these drugs are used with proper precautions.
Desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, DDAVP) has been used in children with von Willebrand disease (VWD) and Hemophilia A for almost 35 years. This treatment has substantially lowered the number of children exposed to human plasma derived products, with a good safety profile, and at very low cost. The response to DDAVP has been shown to be associated with age, baseline factor level, and genetic mutations. A DDAVP challenge test is recommended. DDAVP has also been used to prevent and treat bleeding episodes in children with platelet function defects and other disorders associated with bleeding tendency.
Bed-wetting is a common and disturbing problem for children and their families. Underlying causes are rarely found and should be suspected from the history rather than from investigations. Children older than 7 years can usually be cured if they are motivated enough to use an alarm conditioning device. Intranasal desmopressin acetate, the current drug of choice, will produce only temporary relief.
Desmopressin (DDAVP) is a well tolerated and convenient haemostatic agent that can be used in a number of clinical conditions with bleeding diathesis. It has several effects on the haemostatic system, causing endogenous release of coagulation factor VIII, von Willebrand factor and tissue-type plasminogen activator, among others. In this review we present a growing body of evidence showing that DDAVP treatment may impair spread of cancer cells and contribute to encapsulation of tumour tissue. Our data in preclinical animal models suggest a potential application of DDAVP in the perioperative management of aggressive solid tumours. Novel vasopressin analogues with improved antitumor effects are currently in development.
INTRODUCTION: One of the most serious complications associated with antiplatelet agents is antiplatelet-associated intracranial hemorrhage (AA-ICH). Desmopressin is a synthetic antidiuretic hormone (ADH) analog. It has been linked to improving patient outcomes in antiplatelet-induced intracranial hemorrhage. The secondary outcomes included the incidence of thrombotic complications and neurological outcomes. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted on three databases (PubMed, Cochrane, and ClinicalTrials.gov) to find eligible literature that compares desmopressin (DDAVP) versus controls in patients with AA-ICH. The Mantel-Haenszel statistic was used to determine an overall effect estimate for each outcome by calculating the risk ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Heterogeneity was measured using the I(2) test. The risk of bias in studies was calculated using the New Castle Ottowa Scale. RESULTS: Five studies were included in the analysis with a total of 598 patients. DDAVP was associated with a nonsignificant decrease in the risk of hematoma expansion (RR = .8, 95% CI,.51-1.24; p = .31, I(2) = 44%). It was also associated with a non-significant decrease in the risk of thrombotic events (RR,.83; 95% CI,.25-2.76; p = .76, I(2) = 30%). However, patients in the DDAVP group demonstrated a significant increase in the risk of poor neurological outcomes (RR, 1.31; 95% CI, 1.07-1.61; p = .01, I(2) = 0%). The risk of bias assessment showed a moderate to low level of risk. CONCLUSION: DDAVP was associated with a nonsignificant decrease in hematoma expansion and thrombotic events. However, it was also associated with a significantly poor neurological outcome in the patients. Thus, until more robust clinical trials are conducted, the use of DDAVP should be considered on a case-to-case basis.
PURPOSE: This review aims to provide prescribing clinicians a deeper appreciation of desmopressin's clinical indications and formulation types, to better balance efficacy and safety through proper formulation selection. BACKGROUND: Since its discovery 50 years ago, desmopressin's antidiuretic properties have been used for central diabetes insipidus, primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis and adult nocturnal polyuria, while its coagulant effects are useful for mild hemophilia A and von Willebrand Disease. During this time, newer formulations of desmopressin have also been introduced to the market raising questions on interchangeability, dose conversion and safety. The wide array of clinical indications and variable pharmacokinetic properties of different desmopressin preparations raises the possibility of medication error, especially the risk of hyponatraemia. METHODOLOGY: A narrative review to explore clinically relevant aspects of desmopressin therapy, synthesising information obtained from searches of published literature. RESULTS: We identified that the risk factors for developing hyponatremia include extremes of age, existing comorbidity, drug interaction, intranasal formulations and intercurrent illness. We describe the dose equivalence between all formulations to facilitate conversion. We highlight that in view of inter-subject variability, close monitoring is recommended when switching preparations. We found that paediatric data remains limited, leading to recent proposals for age- and weight-based dosing regimens. CONCLUSION: The risk of hyponatremia, albeit small, can be reduced by adhering to the indication-specific doses and taking steps to govern the safe prescription of the drug. Further paediatric clinical trials are awaited to expand the evidence base of childhood desmopressin therapy.
There is inconsistency in the amount of oral desmopressin that children with central diabetes insipidus require. We investigated whether clinical characteristics influenced desmopressin dose requirements in 100 children with central diabetes insipidus. Extremely large doses were associated with acquired etiology (P = .04), greater body mass index z score, intact thirst, and additional pituitary hormone deficiencies (P < .001).
Nonketotic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar coma is an uncommon, but significant, complication of type II diabetes mellitus with a high overall mortality rate. Treatment of this entity is controversial but mandates aggressive fluid resuscitation and strict control of serum glucose levels. In the patient described, nonketotic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar coma complicated by diabetes insipidus was successfully treated with desmopressin acetate. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first reported case of nonketotic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar coma associated with partial central diabetes insipidus.
