Benzodiazepines ameliorate or prevent the symptoms and complications of moderate to severe alcohol withdrawal, which can include autonomic hyperactivity, agitation, combativeness, hallucinations, seizures, delirium, and death. The benzodiazepines most commonly used for this purpose are lorazepam, chlordiazepoxide, oxazepam, and diazepam. It is widely asserted that no member of this group is superior to the others for treatment of alcohol withdrawal. However, of these, diazepam has the shortest time to peak effect, which facilitates both rapid control of symptoms and accurate titration to avoid over-sedation. Furthermore, diazepam and its active metabolite, desmethyldiazepam, have the longest elimination half-lives, so their levels decrease in a gradual, self-tapering manner, resulting in a smoother withdrawal, i.e., a lower incidence and severity of both breakthrough symptoms and rebound phenomena, including a possibly decreased seizure risk. Importantly, the fear of increased risk of over-sedation with diazepam compared with other benzodiazepines is based on a misunderstanding of its pharmacokinetics and is unfounded. Similarly, the notion that diazepam should be avoided in patients with liver disease and elderly patients to avoid prolonged over-sedation is based on no more than conjecture. In fact, there is clinical evidence that diazepam is safe for the treatment of alcohol withdrawal in these patients when administered using a simple symptom-based approach. There is one instance in which diazepam should not be used: when intramuscular administration is the only option, the lipophilicity of diazepam can result in slow absorption-either lorazepam or, when rapid control of symptoms is required, midazolam should be used. The comparative pharmacokinetics of the benzodiazepines used in the treatment of alcohol withdrawal together with a comprehensive review of the literature on their use strongly suggest that diazepam should be the preferred benzodiazepine for the treatment of patients experiencing moderate to severe alcohol withdrawal under most circumstances.
Diazepam (Valium) is among the most successful drugs from the onset of the psychopharmacological revolution that began during the 1950s. Efficacious in treating a wide-spectrum of CNS disorders, including anxiety and epilepsy, it set the standard for pharmacotherapy in terms of potency, onset of action, and safety. In this Review, the legacy of diazepam to chemical neuroscience will be considered along with its synthesis, pharmacology, drug metabolism, adverse events and dependence, clinical use, and regulatory issues.
Eleven healthy subjects received single oral doses of placebo, 2 mg diazepam, 5 mg diazepam, and 10 mg diazepam in a randomized four-way crossover study. Plasma diazepam levels, the Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST), and fraction of total electroencephalographic (EEG) amplitude falling in the sigma plus beta (13 to 31 Hz) frequency range were determined during the 12 hours after drug administration. Peak plasma diazepam concentration and area under the 12-hour curve were proportional to dose; time of peak was independent of dose. Baseline percentage of EEG amplitude falling in the 13 to 31 Hz range averaged 15.7% and did not differ among the four trials. The percentage of EEG amplitude falling in the 13 to 31 Hz range did not change over baseline with placebo or 2 mg diazepam but was increased 1/4 to 2 1/2 hours after 5 mg diazepam, (maximum, +7.3%) and 3/4 to 12 hours after 10 mg diazepam (maximum, +15.2%). The increase in the percentage of EEG amplitude falling in the 13 to 31 Hz range was highly correlated with plasma diazepam concentration. DSST scores for placebo and 2 mg diazepam were nearly identical. DSST decrements with 5 and 10 mg diazepam paralleled and were correlated with the changes in the percentage of EEG amplitude falling in the 13 to 31 Hz range and with plasma diazepam levels. Thus the EEG analysis provides objective quantitation of benzodiazepine central nervous system effects, in turn reflecting plasma levels and other clinical measures.
Antianxiety medications such as benzodiazepines (BZDs) are frequently and appropriately used to ameliorate the anxiety symptoms of depression, dysthymic disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, eating disorder, and many personality disorders. Pregnancy may be accompanied by anxiety necessitating therapeutic intervention by anxiolytic drugs like BZD. Keeping in view the potential risks of teratogenicity and direct neonatal toxicity, BZDs with established safety records should be used, while avoiding exposure in the first trimester, especially with multidrug regimens, and prescribing the lowest dose for the shortest duration. This literature review highlights information from various sources regarding safety data of exposure of pregnant and lactating mothers to long-acting BZDs, especially diazepam.
Reports of the withdrawal syndrome following discontinuation of diazepam and drug dependence fears have contributed to diazepam's displacement as the most popular anxiolytic agent. Reports of the withdrawal syndrome, the factors involved in withdrawal, and the remedies proposed for diazepam withdrawal symptoms are reviewed.
This article defines and then delineates pre-eclampsia and eclampsia, reviewing the clinical features, neurologic manifestations, and underlying causes. There is a review of the pathophysiology including hypertension, coagulopathy, and cerebral pathology including newer findings involving immune system abnormalities. The diagnosis including laboratory studies, imaging, and electroencephalography.
The relation of breast cancer to diazepam use was evaluated in a case-control study of 1236 women with breast cancer and 728 control subjects with other malignancies. Compared to women who never used diazepam, the relative risk for women who used the drug at least 4 days per week for at least 6 months was estimated to be 0.9, with 95% confidence limits of 0.5 and 1.6. There was no apparent association for recent use, or for use in the distant past, although confidence intervals were fairly wide in these categories. The results were not explained by various potential confounding factors, including the major risk factors for breast cancer. The findings suggest that regular diazepam use does not increase the risk of breast cancer relative to other cancers.
Lidocaine Hydrochloride is an amide ester, which is widely used local anesthetic agent that is well tolerated but what is less known is the occurrence of systemic toxicity which manifests in the central nervous and cardiovascular systems. We report here 3 cases of Lidocaine associated Seizures.
Benzodiazepines are commonly prescribed for the therapy of disorders such as anxiety and sleep disturbance, but develop dependence in many patients. In this review we discuss the impact of different brain areas that modulate the reward system in the development of tolerance and dependence to benzodiazepine and the associative processes underlying those fenomena.
These therapeutic approaches to the premedication of children, in our opinion, offer a more rational, probably safer, and at least equally efficacious treatment regimen as the DPT/lytic cocktail. It is understood that controlled, double-blind comparative clinical trials in children are needed of these or other potential premedicant regimens for specific pediatric procedures (e.g., cardiac catheterization, CT scans, bone marrow aspiration, gastrointestinal endoscopy, pleural taps, etc.) to establish the premedication treatment(s) with the greatest benefit-to-risk ratio. Until these data are available, we must maintain prudence in the selection (design) of premedicant regimens and carefully monitor all children receiving these "cocktails."
A thorough understanding of the pharmacologic properties of lipid-soluble drugs is essential when using these agents to treat status epilepticus. In addition to physiologic factors, such as blood pressure and cerebral blood flow, pharmacokinetic principles, including half-life, distribution, elimination, and volume of distribution (with special regard to an agent's lipid-solubility rating), should be applied. These factors, in toto, will influence the choice of drug, its loading dose, and its therapeutic dose.
Etizolam is a thienodiazepine anxiolytic which is said to have lower dependence potential than other benzodiazepines. We report a case of etizolam dependence in a young male with social anxiety disorder and moderate depression. This case report highlights the fact that the same caution be exercised while prescribing etizolam with respect to its potential to cause dependence as with any other benzodiazepine.
Intrarectally (i.r.) administered diazepam (DZP) solution at doses of 20 and 30 mg in the treatment of serial seizures was studied in 39 adult patients with refractory partial epilepsy. Patients were randomly distributed into two groups (20 mg, n = 21; 30 mg, n = 18). Plasma levels of DZP were assessed over 24 h following i.r. injection. The efficacy of i.r. DZP in the treatment of serial seizures in adults was confirmed; onset of effect was noted approximately 10 min after the injection, and the effective dose was 0.50 mg/kg. Tolerance and acceptability were good. Intrarectal injection of DZP can be performed even by unskilled personnel and may be recommended in patients with serial seizures in the hope of preventing development of status epilepticus.
Having gained knowledge of the advantages of inhalational and intravenous sedation many dental practitioners use these techniques to supplement local anaesthesia for dental procedures. Inhalational sedation is commonly carried out with nitrous oxide and oxygen while isoflurane in oxygen has also been tried out. Intravenous sedation is commonly carried out with midazolam or diazepam given as a single titrated dose to an end point which does not result in anaesthesia. When sedation with benzodiazepines is carried out, the specific antagonist, flumazenil should always be available for use in emergencies such as accidental oversedation, iatrogenic overdose or paradoxical reactions. Patient controlled sedation with midazolam, the modern technique of intravenous sedation, is comparable to anaesthetist controlled sedation and patients may be administered increments of one milligram at one minute intervals. Computer controlled sedation has been carried out with propofol. Mortality following sedation is low in the United Kingdom, partly due to the strict guidelines of the General Dental Council in the United Kingdom.
Eighty-seven per cent of surgical patients receiving undiluted diazepam experienced pain on injection while 6-16%, depending on the dose, manifested evidence of clinical thrombophlebitis. This was improved when diazepam, 10 mg, was diluted to 20-40 ml with intravenous solution. In contrast, lorazepam appeared to have minimal irritative or injurious effects on veins whether undiluted or diluted. In view of these results and clinical studies reporting a higher patient acceptance of lorazepam than diazepam, lorazepam may be a superior drug for use in anaesthesia.
Several new agents have recently become available for the long-term treatment of epilepsy. Until now, there has been little change for the acute management of seizures. Three new agents may alter our present practice. Fosphenytoin has recently been approved as a substitute for parenteral phenytoin. It provides similar efficacy without the risk for infusion site injury while allowing greater flexibility in intravenous solutions. Intravenous valproate adds flexibility for patients on valproate, allowing patients to be rapidly loaded. In addition, it will prevent patients from having to change seizure medications when intervening medical illness or surgery do not allow medications by mouth. Viscous diazepam solution for rectal administration will allow for safe and effective treatment for seizures at home and will potentially decrease emergency department services and hospitalization.
24 students, after intake of diazepam or placebo, performed a psychomotor test of finger tapping as a prospective time-estimation task. The task was less overestimated by those who were under the influence of the drug than by the 12 subjects to whom the placebo was given.
Four pharmacologic differences among the benzodiazepines, which are the drugs of choice to conduct alcohol withdrawal, guide selection of the appropriate one: chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, oxazepam, or chlorazepate. Bases for selection include: (1) availability of other than oral dosage forms; (2) differences in additive effect with alcohol in producing central nervous system depression; (3) differences in anticonvulsant effect; and (4) differences in duration of effect in the body (ie, half-life). Decreasing dosage schedules are preferred to a steady dosage. Illustrative dosage schedules for using chlordiazepoxide and diazepam to conduct alcohol withdrawal are given.
The only clinically detectable cardiovascular changes after intravenous diazepam administration are a moderate fall in systolic blood pressure and a rise in pulse rate. But it will produce significant cardiovascular changes, principally the lowering of total peripheral resistance and stroke volume. The drug has a long history of safety but is not totally innocuous. It is suggested that if diazepam is used in combination with methohexital, consideration should be given to the additive effects on total peripheral resistance.
Patients suffering from substance use disorder, including for instance benzodiazepines, may have comorbidity with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Centrally acting stimulants play an important role in the treatment of ADHD. Before such treatment can be initiated, withdrawal of benzodiazepines may be necessary. Urine testing is the preferred method for monitoring adherence in benzodiazepine withdrawal, but there is a lack of studies reporting detection time. Here, we report a case of a 30-year-old woman with substance use disorder and ADHD who had detectable metabolites of diazepam 79 days after withdrawal. To our knowledge, no cases with detection time equivalent to this have previously been published. This case report serves as an example that clinicians may need to consider interindividual pharmacokinetic characteristics when interpreting the results of urine drug tests, and that a positive urine test may still be consistent with abstinence from a certain drug. In the current case, a high body mass index and a genetic polymorphism gave a reasonable explanation for the prolonged detection of diazepam metabolites.
