Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) is a common condition that affects as many as 70% of pregnant women. Although no consensus definition is available for hyperemesis gravidarum (HG), it is typically viewed as the severe form of NVP and has been reported to occur in 0.3-10.8% of pregnant women. HG can be associated with poor maternal, fetal and child outcomes. The majority of women with NVP can be managed with dietary and lifestyle changes, but more than one-third of patients experience clinically relevant symptoms that may require fluid and vitamin supplementation and/or antiemetic therapy such as, for example, combined doxylamine/pyridoxine, which is not teratogenic and may be effective in treating NVP. Ondansetron is commonly used to treat HG, but studies are urgently needed to determine whether it is safer and more effective than using first-line antiemetics. Thiamine (vitamin B1) should be introduced following protocols to prevent refeeding syndrome and Wernicke encephalopathy. Recent advances in the genetic study of NVP and HG suggest a placental component to the aetiology by implicating common variants in genes encoding placental proteins (namely GDF15 and IGFBP7) and hormone receptors (namely GFRAL and PGR). New studies on aetiology, diagnosis, management and treatment are under way. In the next decade, progress in these areas may improve maternal quality of life and limit the adverse outcomes associated with HG.
CONTEXT: Infantile colic is self-limiting condition but it can be a cause of anxiety for parents and challenge for doctors. The challenge for the doctors lies in correct identification of the condition and appropriate management. The objective of this review article is to summarize the pathophysiology, treatment options and outcome in infantile colic so that clinicians can have a fair idea about the condition, recent updates and future prospects. EVIDENCE: A search of the Cochrane Library, PubMed, and Google Scholar was made using the key words "Infant colic", Infantile colic", "excessive crying in infants". All the materials were analyzed and summarized. RESULTS: At present, infantile colic is an area of clinical research both in terms of etiology and treatment. Various etiological theories have been proposed but none of them are strong enough to completely describe the condition. Various treatment agents are being tried for colic like counseling and behavioral modification, dietary modification, lactase and probiotic supplementation, pain relieving agents, and chiropathy. Proper counseling of the parents is the first line of management at present. Simethicone has no role in decreasing the symptoms of colic and Dicyclomine is not recommended in children younger than six months. No specific recommendations have been made on the use of pain relieving agents and manipulative therapies in colic. At present strong evidence is lacking regarding the use of probiotics, lactase supplementation and dietary modification. CONCLUSIONS: Counseling of parents about the benign nature of the condition is considered first line for now until an effective treatment is established. Other treatment options are prescribed on a case-based manner, and based on the parental perception of the condition.
Infantile colic is a common problem, but it is still a cause of great stress and anxiety to the parents of a colicky baby. Dipak Kanabar believes that failure of lactose digestion has an important part to play in colic and in this bulletin he reviews the causes of infantile colic and the available management options.
BACKGROUND: Infantile colic is typically defined as full-force crying for at least three hours per day, on at least three days per week, for at least three weeks. This condition appears to be more frequent in the first six weeks of life (prevalence range of 17% to 25%), depending on the specific location reported and definitions used, and it usually resolves by three months of age. The aetiopathogenesis of infantile colic is unclear but most likely multifactorial. A number of psychological, behavioural and biological components (food hypersensitivity, allergy or both; gut microflora and dysmotility) are thought to contribute to its manifestation. The role of diet as a component in infantile colic remains controversial. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of dietary modifications for reducing colic in infants less than four months of age. SEARCH METHODS: In July 2018 we searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase , 17 other databases and 2 trials registers. We also searched Google, checked and handsearched references and contacted study authors. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-RCTs evaluating the effects of dietary modifications, alone or in combination, for colicky infants younger than four months of age versus another intervention or placebo. We used specific definitions for colic, age of onset and the methods for performing the intervention. We defined 'modified diet' as any diet altered to include or exclude certain components. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. Our primary outcome was duration of crying, and secondary outcomes were response to intervention, frequency of crying episodes, parental/family quality of life, infant sleep duration, parental satisfaction and adverse effects. MAIN RESULTS: We included 15 RCTs involving 1121 infants (balanced numbers of boys and girls) aged 2 to 16 weeks. All studies were small and at high risk of bias across multiple design factors (e.g. selection, attrition). The studies covered a wide range of dietary interventions, and there was limited scope for meta-analysis. Using the GRADE approach, we assessed the quality of the evidence as very low.Low-allergen maternal diet versus a diet containing known potential allergens: one study (90 infants) found that 35/47 (74%) of infants responded to a low-allergen maternal diet, compared with 16/43 (37%) of infants on a diet containing known potential allergens.Low-allergen diet or soy milk formula versus dicyclomine hydrochloride: one study (120 infants) found that 10/15 (66.6%) breastfed babies responded to dicyclomine hydrochloride, compared with 24/45 (53.3%) formula-fed babies. There was little difference in response between breastfed babies whose mother changed their diet (10/16; 62.5%) and babies who received soy milk formula (29/44; 65.9%).Hydrolysed formula versus standard formula: two studies (64 infants) found no difference in duration of crying, reported as a dichotomous outcome: risk ratio 2.03, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.81 to 5.10; very low-quality evidence. The author of one study confirmed there were no adverse effects. One study (43 infants) reported a greater reduction in crying time postintervention with hydrolysed formula (104 min/d, 95% CI 55 to 155) than with standard formula (3 min/d, 95% CI -63 to 67).Hydrolysed formula versus another hydrolysed formula: one study (22 infants) found that two types of hydrolysed formula were equally effective in resolving symptoms for babies who commenced with standard formula (Alimentum reduced crying to 2.21 h/d (standard deviation (SD) 0.40) and Nutramigen to 2.93 h/d (SD 0.70)).Hydrolysed formula or dairy- and soy-free maternal diet versus addition of parental education or counselling: one study (21 infants) found that crying time decreased to 2.03 h/d (SD 1.03) in the hydrolysed or dairy- and soy-free group compared with 1.08 h/d (SD 0.7) in the parent education or counselling group, nine days into the intervention.Partially hydrolysed, lower lactose, whey-based formulae containing oligosaccharide versus standard formula with simethicone: one study (267 infants) found that both groups experienced a decrease in colic episodes (secondary outcome) after seven days (partially hydrolysed formula: from 5.99 episodes (SD 1.84) to 2.47 episodes (SD 1.94); standard formula: from 5.41 episodes (SD 1.88) to 3.72 episodes (SD 1.98)). After two weeks the difference between the two groups was significant (partially hydrolysed: 1.76 episodes (SD 1.60); standard formula: 3.32 episodes (SD 2.06)). The study author confirmed there were no adverse effects.Lactase enzyme supplementation versus placebo: three studies (138 infants) assessed this comparison, but none reported data amenable to analysis for any outcome. There were no adverse effects in any of the studies.Extract of Foeniculum vulgare, Matricariae recutita, and Melissa officinalis versus placebo: one study (93 infants) found that average daily crying time was lower for infants given the extract (76.9 min/d (SD 23.5), than infants given placebo (169.9 min/d (SD 23.1), at the end of the one-week study. There were no adverse effects.Soy protein-based formula versus standard cows' milk protein-based formula: one study (19 infants) reported a mean crying time of 12.7 h/week (SD 16.4) in the soy formula group versus 17.3 h/week (SD 6.9) in the standard cows' milk group, and that 5/10 (50%) responded in the soy formula group versus 0/9 (0%) in the standard cows' milk group.Soy protein formula with polysaccharide versus standard soy protein formula: one study (27 infants) assessed this comparison but did not provide disaggregated data for the number of responders in each group after treatment.No study reported on our secondary outcomes of parental or family quality of life, infant sleep duration per 24 h, or parental satisfaction. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Currently, evidence of the effectiveness of dietary modifications for the treatment of infantile colic is sparse and at significant risk of bias. The few available studies had small sample sizes, and most had serious limitations. There were insufficient studies, thus limiting the use of meta-analysis. Benefits reported for hydrolysed formulas were inconsistent.Based on available evidence, we are unable to recommend any intervention. Future studies of single interventions, using clinically significant outcome measures, and appropriate design and power are needed.
Infantile colic is a benign process in which an infant has paroxysms of inconsolable crying for more than three hours per day, more than three days per week, for longer than three weeks. It affects approximately 10% to 40% of infants worldwide and peaks at around six weeks of age, with symptoms resolving by three to six months of age. The incidence is equal between sexes, and there is no correlation with type of feeding (breast vs. bottle), gestational age, or socioeconomic status. The cause of infantile colic is not known; proposed causes include alterations in fecal microflora, intolerance to cow's milk protein or lactose, gastrointestinal immaturity or inflammation, increased serotonin secretion, poor feeding technique, and maternal smoking or nicotine replacement therapy. Colic is a diagnosis of exclusion after a detailed history and physical examination have ruled out concerning causes. Parental support and reassurance are key components of the management of colic. Simethicone and proton pump inhibitors are ineffective for the treatment of colic, and dicyclomine is contraindicated. Treatment options for breastfed infants include the probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri (strain DSM 17938) and reducing maternal dietary allergen intake. Switching to a hydrolyzed formula is an option for formula-fed infants. Evidence does not support chiropractic or osteopathic manipulation, infant massage, swaddling, acupuncture, or herbal supplements.
Infantile colic is a self-limiting disorder of excessive infant crying or fussiness that peaks at 6 weeks of age and typically improves by 3 months of age. The etiology of infantile colic has yet to be definitively elucidated, but there is increasing research to support its relationship to migraine. The aims of this review are to present recent research investigating the connection between infantile colic and migraine. The importance of identifying this connection is useful in reducing invasive and potentially harmful investigations and to identify age appropriate pharmacologic interventions that would be safe in this population.
In a case-control study spanning five years' experience at Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound, we could demonstrate no plausible association between the use of spermicides, oral contraceptives, Bendectin, or antibiotics prior to conception and the occurrence of 73 nontraumatic stillbirths.
Chronic abdominal pain is a common gastrointestinal (GI) symptom that characterizes many functional GI disorders/disorders of gut-brain interaction, including irritable bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia, and centrally mediated abdominal pain syndrome. The symptoms of abdominal pain in these highly prevalent disorders are often treated with antispasmodic agents. Antispasmodic treatment includes a broad range of therapeutic classes with different mechanisms of action, including anticholinergic/antimuscarinic agents (inhibition of GI smooth muscle contraction), calcium channel inhibitors (inhibition of calcium transport into GI smooth muscle), and direct smooth muscle relaxants (inhibition of sodium and calcium transport). The aim of this review article was to examine the efficacy and safety of antispasmodics available in North America (e.g., alverine, dicyclomine, hyoscine, hyoscyamine, mebeverine, otilonium, pinaverium, and trimebutine) for the treatment of chronic abdominal pain in patients with common disorders of gut-brain interaction. For the agents examined, comparisons of studies are limited by inconsistencies in treatment dosing and duration, patient profiles, and diagnostic criteria employed. Furthermore, variability in study end points limits comparisons. Risk of selection, performance, detection, attrition, and reporting bias also differed among studies, and in many cases, risks were considered "unclear." The antispasmodics evaluated in this review, which differ in geographic availability, were found to vary dramatically in efficacy and safety. Given these caveats, each agent should be considered on an individual basis, rather than prescribed based on information across the broad class of agents.
Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) affects up to 80 percent of pregnant women. This condition is usually self-limiting, but the symptoms can be distressing and interfere with work, social activities and sleep. Symptoms can often be managed by diet and lifestyle changes, but these interventions may not be successful for everyone. In April 2013, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved doxylamine succinate 10 mg/pyridoxine hydrochloride 10 mg (Diclegis) as the first medication to specifically treat NVP in more than 30 years. This article reviews the indications, dosage and nursing interventions associated with using doxylamine succinate/pyridoxine to treat NVP.
Drug teratogenicity has been demonstrated experimentally for more than 30 years. After the discovery of the thalidomide-induced embryopathies, the fetal dangers of maternal drug ingestion were overemphasized. Accumulation of additional information during the past 15 years has led to a more balanced viewpoint concerning drug teratogenicity. A complex set of circumstances must prevail for a specific teratogenic effect to result. Not only the drug or environmental pollutant in question but also its dose, timing, and frequency of administration as well as the genetic and individual susceptibility of the embryo are important factors. Herein we review the currently available information on drug and environmental effects on the fetus and neonate.
Hyperemesis gravidarum is a common pathology encountered by the obstetrician in 0.1-2% of all pregnancies. The purpose of our review, along with other literature, is to report general outline of the syndrome, with etiology, complications and some guidelines about conventional and newer therapy.
Infantile colic, defined as excessive crying in an otherwise healthy baby, is a distressing phenomenon, but there is little evidence to support the many treatments offered. Several small studies report some benefit from use of a hypoallergenic (protein hydrolysate) formula, maternal diet adjustment (focusing on a low-allergen diet), and reduced stimulation of the infant. While dicyclomine has been shown to be effective for colic, there are significant concerns about its safety, and the manufacturer has contraindicated its use in this population. An herbal tea containing chamomile, vervain, licorice, fennel, and balm-mint was also effective in a small RCT, but the volume necessary for treatment limits its usefulness (strength of recommendation: B, inconsistent or limited-quality patient-oriented evidence). The one proven treatment is time, as this behavior tends to dissipate by 6 months of age.
Until recently epidemiological evidence was not regarded as helpful in determining cause and effect. It generated associations that then had to be explained in terms of bio-mechanisms and applied to individual patients. A series of legal cases surrounding possible birth defects triggered by doxylamine (Bendectin) and connective tissue disorders linked to breast implants made it clear that in some instances epidemiological evidence might have a more important role, but the pendulum swung too far so that epidemiological evidence has in recent decades been given an unwarranted primacy, partly perhaps because it suits the interests of certain stakeholders. Older and more recent epidemiological studies on doxylamine and other antihistamines are reviewed to bring out the ambiguities and pitfalls of an undue reliance on epidemiological studies.
Doxylamine-pyridoxine is the first-line agent for the treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) according to Canadian guidelines, and this combination is commonly prescribed to pregnant women. There is limited evidence that doxylamine-pyridoxine is more effective than pyridoxine alone. There is stronger support for the safety of pyridoxine monotherapy than for the combination of doxylamine-pyridoxine during pregnancy, and some conflicting evidence links doxylamine-pyridoxine use to pyloric stenosis and childhood malignancies. The role of doxylamine-pyridoxine as the first-line pharmacological treatment for NVP in Canada should be reconsidered.
Docetaxel is the most commonly used chemotherapy for advanced prostate cancer (PC), including castration-resistant disease (CRPC), but the eventual development of docetaxel resistance constitutes a major clinical challenge. Here, we demonstrate activation of the cholinergic muscarinic M1 receptor (CHRM1) in CRPC cells upon acquiring resistance to docetaxel, which is manifested in tumor tissues from PC patients post- vs. pre-docetaxel. Genetic and pharmacological inactivation of CHRM1 restores the efficacy of docetaxel in resistant cells. Mechanistically, CHRM1, via its first and third extracellular loops, interacts with the SEMA domain of cMET and forms a heteroreceptor complex with cMET, stimulating a downstream mitogen-activated protein polykinase program to confer docetaxel resistance. Dicyclomine, a clinically available CHRM1-selective antagonist, reverts resistance and restricts the growth of multiple docetaxel-resistant CRPC cell lines and patient-derived xenografts. Our study reveals a CHRM1-dictated mechanism for docetaxel resistance and identifies a CHRM1-targeted combinatorial strategy for overcoming docetaxel resistance in PC.
The drug combination Debendox has been very widely used for the treatment of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. Recently its manufacturer ceased world-wide production owing to the increasing costs of litigation associated with claims of teratogenicity. Teratogenicity claims were widespread in the media but the overwhelming scientific evidence was that Debendox was not teratogenic. In the interests of preventing other drugs (and drug companies) being subjected to similarly unfounded claims, the literature relating to the effects of Debendox on the fetus has been reviewed and evaluated against well known epidemiological principles of establishing causality. This evaluation consistently demonstrates that Debendox is not in fact teratogenic. It is recommended that appropriate professional bodies be more aware of the criteria by which causation is established and be prepared publicly to state their considered views of the effects of particular drugs in pregnancy.
To better evaluate the non-medical use of anticholinergic substances in Brazil, a review of the local literature was performed. Synthetic compounds such as triexyphenidyl (Artane), benactizine (Asmosterona), dicyclomine (Bentyl) as well as Datura sp. tea were reported as being used by first and second grade students and by street children of several Brazilian cities. In several cases the percentage of youngsters indulging in such use was higher than the percentage found for cocaine, barbiturates, cough syrups and amphetamine-related drugs. Several cases of patients seeking treatment for dependence or for acute psychotic symptoms were also described.
A central tension in pediatric research ethics arises from our desire to protect children from harm while also allowing progress toward discoveries that could improve child health. A prime example of this tension is research on a controversial yet increasingly common practice: the use of cannabis by women to treat nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Studies of cannabis use in pregnancy face a combination of ethical hurdles because of the inclusion of pregnant women and involvement of a schedule I controlled substance. Given the growing need for research on the safety and efficacy of cannabis for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy, we reflect on the multiple historical contexts that have contributed to the challenge of studying cannabis use during pregnancy and make a case for the ethical rationale for such research.
A double-blind comparison was undertaken between Debendox with 10mg of extra pyridoxine and placebo with 10mg of pyridoxine, in 56 women suffering from nausea and/or vomiting during the first 10 weeks of pregnancy. The results of treatment were assessed on the patient's own dialy records of:the time of nausea, the frequency of nausea, and the severity of nausea, retching and vomiting. There were statistically significant differences in favour of Debendox with extra pyridoxine in respect of the days of nausea all day (P les than 0-02), the severity of nausea (P less than 0-05) and the severity of retching (P less than 0.05).
The relationship between Bendectin exposure during the first trimester of pregnancy and the occurrence of congenital malformations was prospectively studied in 31,564 newborns registered in the Northern California Kaiser Permanente Birth Defects Study. The odds ratio for any major malformation and Bendectin use was 1.0 (95% confidence interval 0.8-1.4). There were 58 categories of congenital malformations; three of them were statistically associated with Bendectin exposure (microcephaly--odds ratio = 5.3, 95% confidence interval = 1.8-15.6; congenital cataract--odds ratio = 5.3, 95% confidence interval = 1.2-24.3; lung malformations (ICD-8 codes 484.4-484.8)--odds ratio = 4.6, 95% confidence interval = 1.9-10.9). This is exactly the number of associations that would be expected by chance. An independent study (the Collaborative Perinatal Project) was used to determine whether vomiting during pregnancy in the absence of Bendectin use was associated with these three malformations. Two of the three (microcephaly and cataract) had strong positive associations with vomiting in the absence of Bendectin use. We conclude that there is no increase in the overall rate of major malformations after exposure to Bendectin and that the three associations found between Bendectin and individual malformations are unlikely to be causal.
