During the 19th century, for the first time, the linkage between inflammation and cancer was established. Inflammatory microenvironment is an essential component of the tumor microenvironment. Chronic inflammation due to persistent infection due to the microbes, viruses, helminths or constant exposure to non-infectious factors like smoke, silica or asbestos eventually might result in carcinogenesis. In tumor microenvironment, various inflammatory cells such as T lymphocytes (occasionally B cells), dendritic cells, macrophages, monocytes, neutrophils and natural killer (NK) cells are present. As a mediator of immune surveillance and host defense TRAIL cytokines are produced which upon binding with death receptors (DRs) initiate a cascade of apoptotic pathways. Anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin, celecoxib, diclofenac, diflunisal and ibuprofen etc. are being used against cancer, indicating the interplay between both the mechanisms. A deeper understanding of common pathways implicated between both the inflammation and cancer may pave the way to fight against both of these deleterious ailments.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is the largest non-genetic, non-aging related risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD). We report here that TBI induces tau acetylation (ac-tau) at sites acetylated also in human AD brain. This is mediated by S-nitrosylated-GAPDH, which simultaneously inactivates Sirtuin1 deacetylase and activates p300/CBP acetyltransferase, increasing neuronal ac-tau. Subsequent tau mislocalization causes neurodegeneration and neurobehavioral impairment, and ac-tau accumulates in the blood. Blocking GAPDH S-nitrosylation, inhibiting p300/CBP, or stimulating Sirtuin1 all protect mice from neurodegeneration, neurobehavioral impairment, and blood and brain accumulation of ac-tau after TBI. Ac-tau is thus a therapeutic target and potential blood biomarker of TBI that may represent pathologic convergence between TBI and AD. Increased ac-tau in human AD brain is further augmented in AD patients with history of TBI, and patients receiving the p300/CBP inhibitors salsalate or diflunisal exhibit decreased incidence of AD and clinically diagnosed TBI.
Cardiac amyloidosis (CA) is an infiltrative and restrictive cardiomyopathy that leads to heart failure, reduced quality of life, and death. The disease has two main subtypes, transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis (ATTR-CA) and immunoglobulin light chain cardiac amyloidosis (AL-CA), characterized by the nature of the infiltrating protein. ATTR-CA is further subdivided into wild-type (ATTRwt-CA) and variant (ATTRv-CA) based on the presence or absence of a mutation in the transthyretin gene. CA is significantly underdiagnosed and increasingly recognized as a cause of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Advances in diagnosis that employ nuclear scintigraphy to diagnose ATTR-CA without a biopsy and the emergence of effective treatments, including transthyretin stabilizers and silencers, have changed the landscape of this field and render early and accurate diagnosis critical. This review summarizes the epidemiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, prognosis, and management of CA with an emphasis on the significance of recent developments and suggested future directions.
Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTRv) is a severe, adult-onset autosomal dominant inherited systemic disease predominantly affecting the peripheral and autonomic nervous system, heart, kidney and the eyes. ATTRv is caused by mutations of the transthyretin (TTR) gene, leading to extracellular deposition of amyloid fibrils in multiple organs including the peripheral nervous system. Typically, the neuropathy associated with ATTRv is characterised by a rapidly progressive and disabling sensorimotor axonal neuropathy with early small-fibre involvement. Carpal tunnel syndrome and cardiac dysfunction frequently coexist as part of the ATTRv phenotype. Although awareness of ATTRv polyneuropathy among neurologists has increased, the rate of misdiagnosis remains high, resulting in significant diagnostic delays and accrued disability. A timely and definitive diagnosis is important, given the emergence of effective therapies which have revolutionised the management of transthyretin amyloidosis. TTR protein stabilisers diflunisal and tafamidis can delay the progression of the disease, if treated early in the course. Additionally, TTR gene silencing medications, patisiran and inotersen, have resulted in up to 80% reduction in TTR production, leading to stabilisation or slight improvement of peripheral neuropathy and cardiac dysfunction, as well as improvement in quality of life and functional outcomes. The considerable therapeutic advances have raised additional challenges, including optimisation of diagnostic techniques and management approaches in ATTRv neuropathy. This review highlights the key advances in the diagnostic techniques, current and emerging management strategies, and biomarker development for disease progression in ATTRv.
Transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis is a life-threatening, gain-of-toxic-function disease characterised by extracellular deposition of amyloid fibrils composed of transthyretin (TTR). TTR protein destabilised by TTR gene mutation is prone to dissociate from its native tetramer to monomer, and to then misfold and aggregate into amyloid fibrils, resulting in autosomal dominant hereditary amyloidosis, including familial amyloid polyneuropathy, familial amyloid cardiomyopathy and familial leptomeningeal amyloidosis. Analogous misfolding of wild-type TTR results in senile systemic amyloidosis, now termed wild-type ATTR amyloidosis, characterised by acquired amyloid disease in the elderly. With the availability of genetic, biochemical and immunohistochemical diagnostic tests, patients with ATTR amyloidosis have been found in many nations; however, misdiagnosis is still common and considerable time is required before correct diagnosis in many cases. The current standard first-line treatment for hereditary ATTR amyloidosis is liver transplantation, which allows suppression of the main source of variant TTR. However, large numbers of patients are not suitable transplant candidates. Recently, the clinical effects of TTR tetramer stabilisers, diflunisal and tafamidis, were demonstrated in randomised clinical trials, and tafamidis has been approved for treatment of hereditary ATTR amyloidosis in European countries and in Japan. Moreover, antisense oligonucleotides and small interfering RNAs for suppression of variant and wild-type TTR synthesis are promising therapeutic approaches to ameliorate ATTR amyloidosis and are currently in phase III clinical trials. These newly developed therapies are expected to be effective for not only hereditary ATTR amyloidosis but also wild-type ATTR amyloidosis.
Transthyretin familial amyloid polyneuropathy (TTR-FAP) classically presents as a length dependent small fiber polyneuropathy in endemic countries like Portugal. In nonendemic countries, it may mimic a variety of chronic polyneuropathies, with several phenotypes: ataxic, upper limb onset neuropathy, or motor. In these cases, there is usually a late onset and no positive family history. TTR gene sequencing appears the most pertinent first-line test for diagnosis. Cardiac involvement of various severities is common in FAP. Liver transplantation remains the standard antiamyloid therapy with better results in Val30Met TTR-FAP of early onset. Antiamyloid medication has been developed. (1) TTR stabilizers: Tafamidis was the first drug approved in Europe in stage 1 (walking unaided) TTR-FAP to slow progression of the disease; diflunisal has been assessed in a phase 3 clinical trial; (2) TTR gene silencing is a new strategy to inhibit production of both mutant and nonmutant TTR with antisense oligonucleotides or SiRNA (2 ongoing phase 3 clinical trials).
Transthyretin (TTR) is associated with several human amyloid diseases. Various kinetic stabilizers have been developed to inhibit the dissociation of TTR tetramer and the formation of amyloid fibrils. Most of them are bisaryl derivatives, natural flavonoids, crown ethers and carborans. In this review article, we focus on TTR tetramer stabilizers, genetic therapeutic approaches and fibril remodelers. The binding modes of typical bisaryl derivatives, natural flavonoids, crown ethers and carborans are discussed. Based on knowledge of the binding of thyroxine to TTR tetramer, many stabilizers have been screened to dock into the thyroxine binding sites, leading to TTR tetramer stabilization. Particularly, those stabilizers with unique binding profiles have shown great potential in developing the therapeutic management of TTR amyloidogenesis.
BACKGROUND: Chronic back pain is an important health problem. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are widely used to treat people with low back pain, especially people with acute back pain. Short term NSAID use is also recommended for pain relief in people with chronic back pain. Two types of NSAIDs are available and used to treat back pain: non-selective NSAIDs and selective COX-2 NSAIDs. In 2008, a Cochrane review identified a small but significant effect from NSAIDs compared to placebo in people with chronic back pain. This is an update of the Cochrane review published in 2008 and focuses on people with chronic low back pain. OBJECTIVES: To determine if NSAIDs are more efficacious than various comparison treatments for non-specific chronic low back pain and if so, which type of NSAID is most efficacious. SEARCH METHODS: We searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, EMBASE, PubMed and two clinical trials registry databases up to 24 June 2015 for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) published in English, German or Dutch. We also screened references cited in relevant reviews. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs (double-blind and single-blind) of NSAIDs used to treat people with chronic low back pain. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently screened trials for inclusion in this Cochrane review according to the inclusion criteria. One review author extracted the data, and a second review author checked the data. Two review authors independently evaluated the risk of bias of all included trials. If data were clinically homogeneous, we performed a meta-analysis and assessed the quality of evidence using the GRADE approach. MAIN RESULTS: We included 13 trials in this Cochrane review. Ten studies were at 'low' risk of bias. Six studies compared NSAIDs with placebo, and included 1354 participants in total. There is low quality evidence that NSAIDs are more effective than placebo, with a mean difference in pain intensity score from baseline of -3.30 (95% CI -5.33 to -1.27) on a 0 to 100 visual analogue scale (VAS) with a median follow-up of 56 days (interquartile range (IQR) 13 to 91 days). Four studies measured disability using the Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire. There is low quality evidence that NSAIDs are more effective than placebo on disability, with a mean difference from baseline of -0.85 (95% CI -1.30 to -0.40) on a scale from 0 to 24 with a median follow-up of 84 days (IQR 42 to 105 days). All six placebo controlled studies also reported adverse events, and suggested that adverse events are not statistically significant more frequent in participants using NSAIDs compared to placebo (RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.92 to 1.17). Due to the relatively small sample size and relatively short follow-up in most included trials, it is likely that the proportion of patients experiencing an adverse event is underestimated.Two studies compared different types of non-selective NSAIDs, namely ibuprofen versus diclofenac and piroxicam versus indomethacin. The trials did not find any differences between these NSAID types, but both trials had small sample sizes. One trial reported no differences in pain intensity between treatment groups that used selective or non-selective NSAIDs. One other trial compared diflunisal with paracetamol and showed no difference in improvement from baseline on pain intensity score. One trial showed a better global improvement in favour of celecoxib versus tramadol.One included trial compared NSAIDs with 'home-based exercise'. Disability improved more in participants who did exercises versus participants receiving NSAIDs, but pain scores were similar. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Six of the 13 included RCTs showed that NSAIDs are more effective than placebo regarding pain intensity. NSAIDs are slightly more effective than placebo regarding disability. However, the magnitude of the effects is small, and the level of evidence was low. When we only included RCTs at low risk of bias, differences in effect between NSAIDs and placebo were reduced. We identified no difference in efficacy between different NSAID types, including selective versus non-selective NSAIDs. Due to inclusion of RCTs only, the relatively small sample sizes and relatively short follow-up in most included trials, we cannot make firm statements about the occurrence of adverse events or whether NSAIDs are safe for long-term use.
BACKGROUND: The risk of upper gastrointestinal (GI) complications associated with the use of NSAIDs is a serious public health concern. The risk varies between individual NSAIDs; however, there is little information on the risk associated with some NSAIDs and on the impact of risk factors. These data are necessary to evaluate the benefit-risk of individual NSAIDs for clinical and health policy decision making. Within the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme, the Safety Of non-Steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) [SOS] project aims to develop decision models for regulatory and clinical use of individual NSAIDs according to their GI and cardiovascular safety. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies to provide summary relative risks (RR) of upper GI complications (UGIC) associated with the use of individual NSAIDs, including selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors. METHODS: We used the MEDLINE database to identify cohort and case-control studies published between 1 January 1980 and 31 May 2011, providing adjusted effect estimates for UGIC comparing individual NSAIDs with non-use of NSAIDs. We estimated pooled RR and 95% CIs of UGIC for individual NSAIDs overall and by dose using fixed- and random-effects methods. Subgroup analyses were conducted to evaluate methodological and clinical heterogeneity between studies. RESULTS: A total of 2984 articles were identified and 59 were selected for data abstraction. After review of the abstracted information, 28 studies met the meta-analysis inclusion criteria. Pooled RR ranged from 1.43 (95% CI 0.65, 3.15) for aceclofenac to 18.45 (95% CI 10.99, 30.97) for azapropazone. RR was less than 2 for aceclofenac, celecoxib (RR 1.45; 95% CI 1.17, 1.81) and ibuprofen (RR 1.84; 95% CI 1.54, 2.20); 2 to less than 4 for rofecoxib (RR 2.32; 95% CI 1.89, 2.86), sulindac (RR 2.89; 95% CI 1.90, 4.42), diclofenac (RR 3.34; 95% CI 2.79, 3.99), meloxicam (RR 3.47; 95% CI 2.19, 5.50), nimesulide (RR 3.83; 95% CI 3.20, 4.60) and ketoprofen (RR 3.92; 95% CI 2.70, 5.69); 4-5 for tenoxicam (RR 4.10; 95% CI 2.16, 7.79), naproxen (RR 4.10; 95% CI 3.22, 5.23), indometacin (RR 4.14; 95% CI 2.91, 5.90) and diflunisal (RR 4.37; 95% CI 1.07, 17.81); and greater than 5 for piroxicam (RR 7.43; 95% CI 5.19, 10.63), ketorolac (RR 11.50; 95% CI 5.56, 23.78) and azapropazone. RRs for the use of high daily doses of NSAIDs versus non-use were 2-3 times higher than those associated with low daily doses. CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed variability in the risk of UGIC among individual NSAIDs as used in clinical practice. Factors influencing findings across studies (e.g. definition and validation of UGIC, exposure assessment, analysis of new vs prevalent users) and the scarce data on the effect of dose and duration of use of NSAIDs and on concurrent use of other medications need to be addressed in future studies, including SOS.
Triazoles are heterocyclic compounds which have a five-membered ring of two carbon atoms and three nitrogen atoms. These structures have been interest in the development of novel compounds with anticonvulsant, antidepressant, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antinociceptive, antibacterial, antimycobacterial, antifungal, antiviral, anticancer, anti-parasitic, anti-urease and other activities. Therefore, many researchers have synthesized these compounds as target structures and evaluated their biological activities. This review contains various pharmacological activities of 1,2,4-triazole-3-thiones in one place and it is also the milestone for the new research towards this moiety.
BACKGROUND: This is an updated version of the original Cochrane overview published in Issue 9, 2011. That overview considered both efficacy and adverse events, but adverse events are now dealt with in a separate overview.Thirty-nine Cochrane reviews of randomised trials have examined the analgesic efficacy of individual drug interventions in acute postoperative pain. This overview brings together the results of those individual reviews and assesses the reliability of available data. OBJECTIVES: To summarise the efficacy of pharmaceutical interventions for acute pain in adults with at least moderate pain following surgery who have been given a single dose of oral analgesic. METHODS: We identified systematic reviews in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews in The Cochrane Library through a simple search strategy. All reviews were overseen by a single review group, had a standard title, and had as their primary outcome the number of participants with at least 50% pain relief over four to six hours compared with placebo. For individual reviews, we extracted the number needed to treat for an additional beneficial outcome (NNT) for this outcome for each drug/dose combination, and also the percentage of participants achieving at least 50% maximum pain relief, the mean of mean or median time to remedication, and the percentage of participants remedicating by six, eight, 12, or 24 hours. Where there was adequate information for pairs of drug and dose (at least 200 participants, in at least two studies), we defined the addition of four comparisons of typical size (400 participants in total) with zero effect as making the result potentially subject to publication bias and therefore unreliable. MAIN RESULTS: The overview included 39 separate Cochrane Reviews with 41 analyses of single dose oral analgesics tested in acute postoperative pain models, with results from about 50,000 participants in approximately 460 individual studies. The individual reviews included only high-quality trials of standardised design, methods, and efficacy outcome reporting. No statistical comparison was undertaken.Reliable results (high quality information) were obtained for 53 pairs of drug and dose in painful postsurgical conditions; these included various fixed dose combinations, and fast acting formulations of some analgesics. NNTs varied from about 1.5 to 20 for at least 50% maximum pain relief over four to six hours compared with placebo. The proportion of participants achieving this level of benefit varied from about 30% to over 70%, and the time to remedication varied from two hours (placebo) to over 20 hours. Good (low) NNTs were obtained with ibuprofen 200 mg plus paracetamol (acetaminophen) 500 mg (NNT compared with placebo 1.6; 95% confidence interval 1.5 to 1.8), ibuprofen fast acting 200 mg (2.1; 1.9 to 2.3); ibuprofen 200 mg plus caffeine 100 mg (2.1; 1.9 to 3.1), diclofenac potassium 50 mg (2.1; 1.9 to 2.5), and etoricoxib 120 mg (1.8; 1.7 to 2.0). For comparison, ibuprofen acid 400 mg had an NNT of 2.5 (2.4 to 2.6). Not all participants had good pain relief and, for many pairs of drug and dose, 50% or more did not achieve at least 50% maximum pain relief over four to six hours.Long duration of action (eight hours or greater) was found for etoricoxib 120 mg, diflunisal 500 mg, paracetamol 650 mg plus oxycodone 10 mg, naproxen 500/550 mg, celecoxib 400 mg, and ibuprofen 400 mg plus paracetamol 1000 mg.There was no evidence of analgesic effect for aceclofenac 150 mg, aspirin 500 mg, and oxycodone 5 mg (low quality evidence). No trial data were available in reviews of acemetacin, meloxicam, nabumetone, nefopam, sulindac, tenoxicam, and tiaprofenic acid. Inadequate amounts of data were available for nine drugs and doses, and data potentially susceptible to publication bias for 13 drugs and doses (very low quality evidence). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is a wealth of reliable evidence on the analgesic efficacy of single dose oral analgesics. Fast acting formulations and fixed dose combinations of analgesics can produce good and often long-lasting analgesia at relatively low doses. There is also important information on drugs for which there are no data, inadequate data, or where results are unreliable due to susceptibility to publication bias. This should inform choices by professionals and consumers.
Transthyretin (TTR) is a tetrameric protein found in human serum and associated with amyloid diseases. Because the tetramer dissociation and misfolding of the monomer precede amyloid fibril formation, development of a small molecule that binds to TTR and stabilizes the TTR tetramer is an efficient strategy for the treatment of amyloidosis. Here, we report our discovery of the anti-TTR amyloidogenesis activities of crown ethers. X-ray crystallographic analysis, binding assay, and chemical cross-linking assay showed that 4'-carboxybenzo-18C6 (4) stabilized the TTR tetramer by binding to the allosteric sites on the molecular surface of the TTR tetramer. In addition, 4 synergistically increased the stabilization activity of diflunisal, one of the most potent TTR amyloidogenesis inhibitors. These experimental evidences establish that 4 is a valuable template compound as an allosteric inhibitor of TTR amyloidogenesis.
Pain is the predominant reason for seeking treatment in patients with osteoarthritis. Management is multifactorial, involving psychological, physical, pharmaceutical, and sometimes surgical measures. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents play a valuable role in the overall treatment program. A review of 28 clinical trials involving ibuprofen for osteoarthritis shows sometimes conflicting results in efficacy, often because of inadequacies in study design or dosage. In fact, 17 of these 28 studies employed doses of less than 1,600 mg/day. Nonetheless, several trends are clear. Ibuprofen at a dose of over 1,200 mg daily was superior to placebo and at doses of 1,200 to 1,800 mg/day was as effective or more effective than 3,200 to 3,600 mg/day of aspirin or 4,500 mg/day of aspirin plus acetaminophen. In trials with a wide variety of other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, ibuprofen was often as effective as the comparison agent. Tolerability was consistently excellent with ibuprofen, and adverse reactions were few.
Hereditary transthyretin (TTR)-related amyloidosis is caused by mutations in the TTR gene. The mutations destabilize the tetramer and/or monomer of TTR, and thus the stabilization of TTR is a key strategy for the treatment of TTR-related amyloidosis. In this review, we summarized the natural products and synthetic compounds that have been shown to inhibit the amyloidogenesis of TTR. The stabilizers and/or the amyloid fibril disrupters isolated from natural sources may become lead compounds for the treatment of TTR-related amyloidosis.
The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, adverse effects, and dosage of diclofenac sodium are reviewed. Diclofenac, the first nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent (NSAID) to be approved that is a phenylacetic acid derivative, competes with arachidonic acid for binding to cyclo-oxygenase, resulting in decreased formation of prostaglandins. The drug has both analgesic and antipyretic activities. Diclofenac is efficiently absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract; peak plasma concentrations occur 1.5 to 2.0 hours after ingestion in fasting subjects. Even though diclofenac has a relatively short elimination half-life in plasma (1.5 hours), it persists in synovial fluid. The drug is metabolized in the liver and is eliminated by urinary and biliary excretion. In clinical trials, diclofenac was as effective as aspirin, diflunisal, indomethacin, sulindac, ibuprofen, ketoprofen, and naproxen in improving function and reducing pain in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. For treatment of osteoarthritis, diclofenac was equivalent in efficacy to aspirin, diflunisal, indomethacin, sulindac, ibuprofen, ketoprofen, naproxen, flurbiprofen, mefenamic acid, and piroxicam. Diclofenac was as effective as indomethacin or sulindac in treating ankylosing spondylitis. The most frequent adverse effects reported for diclofenac were gastrointestinal, but these effects were fewer and less serious than occurred with aspirin or indomethacin; in addition, diclofenac caused fewer central nervous system reactions than indomethacin. Diclofenac is administered in divided doses with meals. The recommended total daily dosage is 100 to 150 mg (osteoarthritis and ankylosing spondylitis) or 150 to 200 mg (rheumatoid arthritis). Diclofenac is effective, but no more so than other NSAIDs. It is structurally distinct and offers another choice in the treatment of rheumatological conditions.
A series of diflunisal 4-thiazolidinones were synthesized. Some selected compounds were determined at one dose towards the full panel of 60 human cancer cell lines by National Cancer Institute. 2',4'-Difluoro-4-hydroxy-N-[4-oxo-2-(thiophen-2-yl)-1,3-thiazolidin-3-yl]biphenyl- 3-carboxamide (4a) demonstrated the most marked effect on K-562 cancer cell line with 58.59 % growth inhibition at 10 muM. Compound 4a was evaluated in vitro using the MTT colorimetric method against human leukemia cell line K-562 and mouse embryonic fibroblasts cell line NIH- 3T3 at different doses for cell viability and growth inhibition. Compound 4a exhibited anticancer activity with IC50 value of 5.2 muM against K-562 cells and did not display cytotoxicity towards NIH-3T3 cells compared with diflunisal. In addition, this compound could be an interesting prototype as an antiproliferative agent.
INTRODUCTION: Sickle cell disease causes chronic haemolytic anaemia, dactylitis, and painful acute crises. It also increases the risk of stroke, organ damage, bacterial infections, and complications of blood transfusion. In sub-Saharan Africa, up to a third of adults are carriers of the defective sickle cell gene, and 1% to 2% of babies are born with the disease. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical questions: what are the effects of pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical interventions to prevent sickle cell crisis and other acute complications in people with sickle cell disease? What are the effects of pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical interventions to treat pain in people with sickle cell crisis? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to March 2010 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 38 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: acupuncture, antibiotic prophylaxis in children <5 years of age, antibiotic prophylaxis in children >5 years of age, aspirin, avoidance of cold environment, blood transfusion, codeine, corticosteroid (with narcotic analgesics), diflunisal, hydration, hydroxyurea, ibuprofen, ketorolac, limiting physical exercise, malaria chemoprophylaxis, morphine (controlled-release oral after initial intravenous bolus, repeated intravenous doses), oxygen, paracetamol, patient-controlled analgesia, pneumococcal vaccines, and rehydration.
Transthyretin-cardiac amyloidoses (ATTR-CA) are an underdiagnosed but increasingly recognized cause of heart failure. Extracellular deposition of fibrillary proteins into tissues due to a variety of inherited transthyretin mutations in ATTRm or due to advanced age in ATTRwt eventually leads to organ failure. In the heart, amyloid deposition causes diastolic dysfunction, restrictive cardiomyopathy with progressive loss of systolic function, arrhythmias, and heart failure. While traditional treatments have consisted of conventional heart failure management and supportive care for systemic symptoms, numerous disease-modifying therapies have emerged over the past decade. From organ transplantation to transthyretin stabilizers (diflunisal, tafamidis, AG-1), TTR silencers (ALN-ATTR02, ISIS-TTR(Rx)), and degraders of amyloid fibrils (doxycycline/TUDCA), the potential for effective transthyretin amyloid therapy is greater now than ever before. In light of these multiple agents under investigation in human clinical trials, clinicians should be familiar with the systemic cardiac amyloidoses, their differing pathophysiology, natural histories, and unique treatment strategies.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cardiomyopathies due to genetic mutations are a heterogeneous group of disorders that comprise diseases of contractility, myocardial relaxation, and arrhythmias. Our goal here is to discuss a limited list of genetically inherited cardiomyopathies and the specific therapeutic strategies used to treat them. RECENT FINDINGS: Research into the molecular pathophysiology of the development of these cardiomyopathies is leading to the development of novel treatment approaches. Therapies targeting these specific mutations with gene therapy vectors are on the horizon, while other therapies which indirectly affect the physiologic derangements of the mutations are currently being studied and used clinically. Many of these therapies are older medications being given new roles such as mexiletine for Brugada syndrome and diflunisal for transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy. A newer targeted therapy, the inhibitor of myosin ATPase MYK-461, has been shown to suppress the development of ventricular hypertrophy, fibrosis, and myocyte disarray and is being studied as a potential therapy in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. While this field is too large to be completely contained in a single review, we present a large cross section of recent developments in the field of therapeutics for inherited cardiomyopathies. New therapies are on the horizon, and their development will likely result in improved outcomes for patients inflicted by these conditions.
Biomedicine represents one of the main study areas for dendrimers, which have proven to be valuable both in diagnostics and therapy, due to their capacity for improving solubility, absorption, bioavailability and targeted distribution. Molecular cytotoxicity constitutes a limiting characteristic, especially for cationic and higher-generation dendrimers. Antineoplastic research of dendrimers has been widely developed, and several types of poly(amidoamine) and poly(propylene imine) dendrimer complexes with doxorubicin, paclitaxel, imatinib, sunitinib, cisplatin, melphalan and methotrexate have shown an improvement in comparison with the drug molecule alone. The anti-inflammatory therapy focused on dendrimer complexes of ibuprofen, indomethacin, piroxicam, ketoprofen and diflunisal. In the context of the development of antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains, dendrimer complexes of fluoroquinolones, macrolides, beta-lactamines and aminoglycosides have shown promising effects. Regarding antiviral therapy, studies have been performed to develop dendrimer conjugates with tenofovir, maraviroc, zidovudine, oseltamivir and acyclovir, among others. Furthermore, cardiovascular therapy has strongly addressed dendrimers. Employed in imaging diagnostics, dendrimers reduce the dosage required to obtain images, thus improving the efficiency of radioisotopes. Dendrimers are macromolecular structures with multiple advantages that can suffer modifications depending on the chemical nature of the drug that has to be transported. The results obtained so far encourage the pursuit of new studies.
