The fixed-dose combination of extended-release dipyridamole/aspirin (Aggrenox/Asasantin Retard) combines 2 antiplatelet agents with different mechanisms of action. The combination reduced thrombus formation in human and animal models. Coadministration of extended-release dipyridamole and aspirin in healthy volunteers had no significant effects on the plasma concentrations of either agent. Twice-daily oral extended-release dipyridamole/aspirin (400/50 mg/day) was twice as effective as either agent alone in the secondary prevention of stroke in a large clinical trial involving patients with prior stroke or transient ischaemic attack. The rate of the combined end-point of stroke and death tended to be lower with the combination than with other treatments. The incidence of death was not significantly reduced by any treatment. Most adverse events with extended-release dipyridamole/aspirin were mild and similar to those with either agent alone. Bleeding was more common with the combination than with extended-release dipyridamole alone, as was headache when compared with aspirin alone. Limited pharmacoeconomic analyses suggest that treatment with extended-release dipyridamole/aspirin was cost saving and was cost effective compared with aspirin monotherapy for the secondary prevention of stroke.
Pharmacological therapy able to improve the cognitive performances of patients with chronic vascular pathologies currently remains unavailable. Many studies of chronic cerebral hypotension in rodents have revealed alterations in reference memory and learning. Dipyridamole was introduced into clinical medicine in the early 1960s as a coronary vasodilator. It is a potent inhibitor of platelet activation and reduces formation of thrombi in vivo. In addition, it is an antithrombotic agent used for secondary stroke prevention in combination with aspirin. Recent evidence indicates that dipyridamole has anti-inflammatory properties. Bilateral common carotid artery occlusion (2VO) in the rat is recognized as a valid model of chronic cerebral hypotension, also defined as the "vascular cognitive impairment rat model." Here, we report that dipyridamole reverses the impairment of spatial working memory 90 days after 2VO. This protective effect might be in relation to dipyridamole's anti-inflammatory properties.
Data are reviewed describing hypoxemia, a newly identified feature in thalassemia. Evidence indicates platelet aggregation in the pulmonary circulation as being a key factor leading to hypoxemia and cor-pulmonale with right heart failure.
Antiplatelet agents are the medications of choice for preventing non-cardioembolic strokes. The diverse pathways involved in platelet function suggest the possibility of synergistic effects by combining various agents. In heart disease and in the setting of coronary artery stents, antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel and aspirin has established benefits. Although it is tempting to extrapolate the benefits of this combination for stroke prevention, recent clinical trials have not borne this out. Unacceptable bleeding risks without additional efficacy weigh against the routine use of clopidogrel with aspirin for stroke prophylaxis. The combination of aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole has demonstrated superiority over aspirin in two large secondary stroke prevention trials.
Much new information has been gleaned about the morphology, biochemistry and function of platelets. The pathophysiology of atherosclerosis and thromboembolic disorders appears to be related to abnormal platelet function. Endothelial damage, thromboxane A2, Thrombin, adenosine diphospate and epinephrine may each promote platelet aggregation, whereas prostacyclin impairs aggregation. Aspirin, sulfinpyrazone and dipyridamole have been used as antiplatelet agents, and specific indications are being developed to guide their selection.
Dipyridamole was first introduced as an antianginal, coronary vasodilator agent. It was soon found that this drug could not prevent effort ischaemia; on the contrary, given intravenously, it could frequently induce ischaemia in the presence of coronary artery stenosis. This property was exploited for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease. The dipyridamole-induced ischaemia was detected by different techniques: ST-segment depression, thallium 201 scintigraphy and echocardiography. This review article describes the mechanisms underlying dipyridamole-induced ischaemia and discusses the value of this pharmacologic stress test for the detection of coronary artery disease.
A 23-year-old woman developed ischemic stroke (IS) 8 to 12 hours after ingestion of sumatriptan (ST) and then developed mucosal bleeding secondary to acute thrombocytopenia likely due to dipyridamole (DP) on the 10th day poststroke. Sumatriptan-associated IS and DP-induced thrombocytopenia are rare events in themselves and their sequential occurrence in the same patient is quite exceptional. We compare our case to other similar cases in the literature.
The high rates of mortality and long-term disability associated with ischemic stroke, coupled with its prevalence, necessitate good, long-term preventive strategies. Risk-factor management is effective for individuals with preclinical and clinical cerebrovascular disease. Patients suffering from a transient ischemic attack or stroke are particularly vulnerable to subsequent stroke. Most of these individuals are candidates for antiplatelet treatment to prevent a recurrence. Available antiplatelet therapies include aspirin, ticlopidine, and clopidogrel. The combination of low-dose aspirin plus extended-release dipyridamole has been shown to offer safe, effective antiplatelet therapy for appropriate patients. In the second European Stroke Prevention Study, the combination was found to be significantly more effective than either drug alone, at the cost of relatively few treatment-related adverse effects. This combination is currently recommended as one of the first-line treatments for stroke prevention after first transient ischemic attack or stroke.
Recent trials of antiplatelet therapy for stroke prevention indicate that the combination of clopidogrel (75 mg/d) plus low-dose aspirin (75-162 mg/d) was not more effective than low-dose aspirin alone in the long-term prevention of major vascular events among patients at high risk of atherothrombotic events, nor was it more effective than oral anticoagulation in patients with atrial fibrillation. Furthermore, oral anticoagulation (International Normalized Ratio of 2.0-3.0) was not more effective than aspirin alone among patients with recent cerebral ischemia of presumed arterial origin. However, the addition of extended-release dipyridamole to aspirin was more effective than aspirin alone among patients with recent cerebral ischemia of presumed arterial origin. A large trial comparing clopidogrel with the combination of aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole in more than 20,000 patients with recent (< 120 days) atherothrombotic ischemic stroke is expected to report in 2008.
Dipyridamole stress is the forerunner and prototype of pharmacological stress echo tests in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease. The safety of this test has been conclusively demonstrated as a result of extensive experience in large-scale multicenter projects. The diagnostic accuracy of dipyridamole stress echo is comparable to dobutamine and largely a function of the employed dose. Higher dosages (up to 0.84 mg/kg) are being required to achieve good sensitivity. The prognostic value has been shown to be independent and additive to clinical, exercise echocardiogram, and angiographic data. The test positive response should be titrated on the basis of severity, extent, and timing of induced dyssynergy with low positivity being associated to more anatomically and functionally severe forms of disease. Multicenter, randomized, prospective, international studies on cost-effectiveness directly comparing a noninvasive strategy centered on stress echo versus an invasive strategy centered on coronary angiography are currently ongoing.
Antiplatelet drugs protect against myocardial infarction, stroke, cardiovascular death and other serious vascular events in patients with a history of previous vascular events or known risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Aspirin reduces the risk of serious vascular events in patients at high risk of such an event by about a quarter and is recommended as the first-line antiplatelet drug. Clopidogrel reduces the risk of serious vascular events among high-risk patients by about 10% compared with aspirin. It is as safe as aspirin, but much more expensive. It is an appropriate alternative to aspirin for long-term secondary prevention in patients who cannot tolerate aspirin, have experienced a recurrent vascular event while taking aspirin, or are at very high risk of a vascular event (>/= 20% per year). Addition of clopidogrel to aspirin reduces the risk of serious vascular events among patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes by 20%, and patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention by 30%, compared with aspirin alone. Addition of a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonist to aspirin reduces the risk of vascular events among patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes by 10% and among patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention by 30%, compared with aspirin alone; it appears to provide incremental benefit in patients also treated with clopidogrel. Addition of dipyridamole to aspirin seems to be more effective than aspirin alone for preventing recurrent stroke, but its overall effect in preventing serious vascular events in patients with ischaemic stroke and transient ischaemic attack has not been determined.
Evidence is needed to guide therapeutic decisions on patients who had ischaemic cerebral events. The recently published European/Australasian Stroke Prevention in Reversible Ischaemia Trial (ESPRIT), an open-label randomised controlled study, compared long-term treatment of patients randomised to aspirin 30-325 mg daily with (n = 1363) or without (n = 1376) dipyridamole 200 mg twice daily. The study found the combination to be superior to aspirin alone (13% vs. 16% events in a composite endpoint of vascular death, non-fatal stroke, non-fatal myocardial infarction, or major bleeding; hazard ratio 0.8; 95% confidence interval 0.66-0.98). In the interpretation of the results, criticism has been raised related to the study design (open-label, change during the study), the study conduct (half of the aspirin patients underdosed, 33% drop-out rate in the combination group, missing information on potential confounders such as protective concomitant medication), and the outcomes (lack of differences in the efficacy outcomes between the intent-to-treat and the on-treatment populations, lack of differences in minor bleedings between treatment groups, borderline statistical significance of primary study endpoint). Further studies are needed to determine the place of aspirin/dipyridamole combinations in the secondary prevention of stroke.
INTRODUCTION: Reduced exercise capacity is of clinical importance. Sometimes no corresponding cardiovascular disease can be found to explain this condition. We hypothesized that coronary microvascular dysfunction may have an effect on exercise capacity in patients without apparent cardiovascular disease. METHODS: Fifty patients (33 female, mean age 46.8 +/- 12.4 years) without coronary artery or other cardiac disease were enrolled. Coronary microvascular function was evaluated by measurement of coronary flow reserve (CFR) during transthoracic pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography with pharmacological stress. CFR was calculated as the ratio of hyperemic to baseline peak diastolic velocities after dipyridamole infusion. Exercise capacity was determined by treadmill exercise testing. Exercise time, metabolic equivalent (MET), and Duke treadmill score (DTS) were recorded and compared with the CFR data. RESULTS: CFR was correlated with exercise time (r=0.376, p=0.007), MET (r=0.435, p=0.002) and DTS (r=0.458, p=0.001). Exercise time, MET, and DTS were lower in patients with impaired CFR (<2) than in those with normal CFR (2) (5.3 +/- 1.8 min vs. 8.6 +/- 2.7 min, p<0.001; 7.3 +/- 3.1 vs. 11.4 +/- 2.8, p=0.002; -1.75 (-5.9, 5.0) vs. 7.5 (5.2, 9.41), p<0.001; respectively). CFR was lower in patients with MET7 as compared to patients with MET>7 (2.0 +/- 0.5 vs. 2.6 +/- 0.6, p=0.015). CONCLUSIONS: CFR is associated with exercise capacity. Thus coronary microvascular dysfunction may be a reason for reduced exercise capacity in patients who have no apparent cardiovascular disease.
A trial of antiplatelet therapy (slow-release aspirin and dipyridamole) in mesangial IgA glomerulonephritis was conducted. Vitamin B was given to the control group. Altogether, 38 patients were observed for a mean of 33.2 months. Antiplatelet therapy did not favorably modify the course of mesangial IgA glomerulonephritis. The rate of progression of the disease, measured by the slope of reciprocals of serum creatinine v time plots, correlated significantly with the severity of tissue damage as assessed by an arbitrary morphologic score from renal biopsy specimens.
This study investigates a comprehensive model of bone regeneration capacity of dypiridamole-loaded 3D-printed bioceramic (DIPY-3DPBC) scaffolds composed of 100% beta-tricalcium phosphate (beta -TCP) in an immature rabbit model through the time of facial maturity. The efficacy of this construct was compared to autologous bone graft, the clinical standard of care in pediatric craniofacial reconstruction, with attention paid to volume of regenerated bone by 3D reconstruction, histologic and mechanical properties of regenerated bone, and long-term safety regarding potential craniofacial growth restriction. Additionally, long-term degradation of scaffold constructs was evaluated. At 24 weeks in vivo, DIPY-3DPBC scaffolds demonstrated volumetrically significant osteogenic regeneration of calvarial and alveolar defects comparable to autogenous bone graft with favorable biodegradation of the bioactive ceramic component in vivo. Characterization of regenerated bone reveals osteogenesis of organized, vascularized bone with histologic and mechanical characteristics comparable to native bone. Radiographic and histologic analyses were consistent with patent craniofacial sutures. Lastly, through application of 3D morphometric facial surface analysis, our results support that DIPY-3DPBC scaffolds do not cause premature closure of sutures and preserve normal craniofacial growth. Based on this novel evaluation model, this DIPY-3DPBC scaffold strategy is a promising candidate as a safe, efficacious pediatric bone tissue engineering strategy.
Evidence is mounting that three drugs that inhibit platelet function--aspirin, dipyridamole, and sulfinpyrazine--have an antithrombotic effect in humans. Particularly in men, aspirin is beneficial in controlling transient ischemic attacks and stroke, and there is evidence that it may be effective in preventing thrombotic and embolic complication of hip surgery. It abolishes symptoms in peripheral ischemia associated with thrombocytosis and spontaneous platelet aggregation and may prove effective in coronary artery disease. When combined with oral anticoagulants, aspirin is more effective than oral anticoagulants alone in preventing systemic embolism in patients with prosthetic heart valves. Dipyridamole in combination with oral anticoagulants reduces the incidence of systemic embolism after prosthetic heart valve replacement. Sulfinpyrazone reduces the incidence of sudden death in the first year after myocardial infarction, decreases the incidence of arteriovenous shunt thrombosis in patients undergoing chronic hemodialysis, and when combined with anticoagulants, may be effective in reducing the frequency of episodes in recurrent venous thrombosis.
The case history of a patient treated with dipyridamole who developed severe epistaxis, accompanied by alteration of the platelet aggregation tests, is presented. The bleeding did not respond to local therapy and stopped only after discontinuation of the drug and normalization of the platelet aggregation. Hemorrhage, especially in elderly patients, should be considered as a possible complication of dipyridamole administration.
A 24-year old woman after using birth control pills for two months began to suffer from frequent migraine-like attacks, which turned eventually into typical transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs). A significant increase in spontaneous platelet aggregation was found, and combined treatment with dipridamole and aspirin was started. After two months of treatment spontaneous platelet aggregation rate fell to normal limits and TIAs disappeared. A causal relationship between increased platelet aggregability and TIAs is supposed.
Extended-release dipyridamole plus low-dose aspirin (ERDP/ASA) prolongs primary unassisted graft patency of newly created hemodialysis arteriovenous grafts, but the individual contributions of each component are unknown. Here, we analyzed whether use of aspirin at baseline associated with primary unassisted graft patency among participants in a randomized trial that compared ERDP/ASA and placebo in newly created grafts. We used Cox proportional hazards regression, adjusting for prespecified baseline comorbidities and covariates. Of all participants, 43% reported use of aspirin at baseline; of these, 82% remained on nonstudy aspirin (i.e., excluding ERDP/ASA) at 1 year. After 1 year of follow-up, the incidence of primary unassisted patency among participants using aspirin at baseline was 30% (95% CI: 24 to 35%) and among those not using aspirin was 23% (95% CI: 18 to 27%). Use of aspirin at baseline associated with a dose-dependent prolongation of primary unassisted graft patency that approached statistical significance (adjusted HR, 0.83; 95% CI: 0.68 to 1.01; P=0.06). Use of aspirin at baseline did not associate with prolongation of cumulative graft patency or participant survival. In conclusion, use of aspirin associates with a trend toward longer primary unassisted patency of newly placed hemodialysis grafts similar to that observed for ERDP/ASA.
Dipyridamole was introduced on the market as coronary vasodilator drug more than half a century ago and is still used as antithrombotic and vasodilator. Among cellular targets, it inhibits phosphodiesterases and raises extracellular levels of adenosine through inhibition of adenosine reuptake by red blood cells. As a consequence, endocellular levels of cyclic nucleotides are upregulated. The rise of cGMP in vascular smooth muscle cells and of cAMP in platelets provide the mechanism of vasodilation and antithrombosis, which are further potentiated by the release of PGI2 consequent on the increase in endothelial cell cAMP. These effects support the use of dipyridamole in cardiovascular diseases in which the drug is approved for the secondary prevention of cerebrovascular events. On the other hand, dipyridamole has been shown to possess a potent, little perceived, antioxidant activity of potential use in the several fields where pathophysiological pathways are dependent on oxidative stress, including those occurring in atherosclerosis, thrombosis, CNS-related diseases, and cancer.
