Metastases account for most cancer-related deaths, yet the mechanisms underlying metastatic spread remain poorly understood. Recent evidence demonstrates that senescent cells, while initially restricting tumorigenesis, can induce tumor progression. Here, we identify the metalloproteinase inhibitor TIMP1 as a molecular switch that determines the effects of senescence in prostate cancer. Senescence driven either by PTEN deficiency or chemotherapy limits the progression of prostate cancer in mice. TIMP1 deletion allows senescence to promote metastasis, and elimination of senescent cells with a senolytic BCL-2 inhibitor impairs metastasis. Mechanistically, TIMP1 loss reprograms the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) of senescent tumor cells through activation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Loss of PTEN and TIMP1 in prostate cancer is frequent and correlates with resistance to docetaxel and worst clinical outcomes in patients treated in an adjuvant setting. Altogether, these findings provide insights into the dual roles of tumor-associated senescence and can potentially impact the treatment of prostate cancer.
Purpose Docetaxel added to androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) significantly increases the longevity of some patients with metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. Herein, we present the outcomes of the CHAARTED (Chemohormonal Therapy Versus Androgen Ablation Randomized Trial for Extensive Disease in Prostate Cancer) trial with more mature follow-up and focus on tumor volume. Patients and Methods In this phase III study, 790 patients with metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer were equally randomly assigned to receive either ADT in combination with docetaxel 75 mg/m(2) for up to six cycles or ADT alone. The primary end point of the study was overall survival (OS). Additional analyses of the prospectively defined low- and high-volume disease subgroups were performed. High-volume disease was defined as presence of visceral metastases and/or >/= four bone metastases with at least one outside of the vertebral column and pelvis. Results At a median follow-up of 53.7 months, the median OS was 57.6 months for the chemohormonal therapy arm versus 47.2 months for ADT alone (hazard ratio [HR], 0.72; 95% CI, 0.59 to 0.89; P = .0018). For patients with high-volume disease (n = 513), the median OS was 51.2 months with chemohormonal therapy versus 34.4 months with ADT alone (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.50 to 0.79; P < .001). For those with low-volume disease (n = 277), no OS benefit was observed (HR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.70 to 1.55; P = .86). Conclusion The clinical benefit from chemohormonal therapy in prolonging OS was confirmed for patients with high-volume disease; however, for patients with low-volume disease, no OS benefit was discerned.
IMPORTANCE: Metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer is currently an incurable disease. Despite a high response rate to androgen-deprivation therapy, most cases progress to castration-resistant disease, the terminal phase. This review provides a summary of the most recent evidence for current and emerging management strategies, including treatment intensification with combinations of therapies. It also provides recommendations on applying the evidence in clinical practice to encourage appropriate treatment to improve survival outcomes among patients with metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. OBSERVATIONS: Androgen-deprivation therapy is the backbone of treatment for metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer; however, it is insufficient alone to provide sustained disease control and long-term survival. Addition of an androgen receptor pathway inhibitor and/or docetaxel significantly improves survival, as demonstrated by several international phase 3 randomized clinical trials. Triplet therapy composed of androgen-deprivation therapy plus an androgen receptor pathway inhibitor plus docetaxel has been shown to improve overall survival over androgen-deprivation therapy plus docetaxel. In the ARASENS trial (darolutamide), the hazard ratios (HRs) were 0.68 (95% CI, 0.57-0.80) in the overall population; 0.71 (95% CI, 0.59-0.85) and 0.61 (95% CI, 0.35-1.05) in patients with de novo and recurrent disease, respectively; 0.69 (95% CI, 0.57-0.82) and 0.72 (95% CI, 0.41-1.13) in patients with high-volume and low-volume disease, respectively; and 0.71 (95% CI, 0.58-0.86) and 0.62 (95% CI, 0.42-0.90) in patients with high-risk and low-risk disease, respectively. In the PEACE-1 trial (abiraterone acetate + prednisone), the HRs were 0.75 (95% CI, 0.59-0.95; all de novo) in the overall population and 0.72 (95% CI, 0.55-0.95) and immature in the high-volume and low-volume subgroups, respectively. In the ENZAMET trial (enzalutamide), the HRs were 0.82 (95% CI, 0.63-1.06) in the overall population; 0.73 (95% CI, 0.55-0.99) and 1.10 (95% CI, 0.65-1.86) in the de novo and recurrent subgroups, respectively; and 0.87 (95% CI, 0.66-1.17) and 0.61 (95% CI, 0.33-1.10) in the high-volume and low-volume subgroups. Combination regimens are generally well tolerated, with adverse effects dependent on the profiles of the component drugs. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The findings of this review show compelling evidence from phase 3 randomized clinical trials in favor of initiating triplet combination therapy for patients with metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer for the best overall survival. Patients who are eligible for chemotherapy should be offered androgen-deprivation therapy plus an androgen receptor pathway inhibitor plus docetaxel, particularly patients with high-volume, high-risk, or de novo metastatic disease.
BACKGROUND: There are few effective treatment options for patients with recurrent or metastatic head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma. Pembrolizumab showed antitumour activity and manageable toxicity in early-phase trials. We aimed to compare the efficacy and safety of pembrolizumab versus standard-of-care therapy for the treatment of head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma. METHODS: We did a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study at 97 medical centres in 20 countries. Patients with head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma that progressed during or after platinum-containing treatment for recurrent or metastatic disease (or both), or whose disease recurred or progressed within 3-6 months of previous multimodal therapy containing platinum for locally advanced disease, were randomly assigned (1:1) in blocks of four per stratum with an interactive voice-response and integrated web-response system to receive pembrolizumab 200 mg every 3 weeks intravenously or investigator's choice of standard doses of methotrexate, docetaxel, or cetuximab intravenously (standard-of-care group). The primary endpoint was overall survival in the intention-to-treat population. Safety was analysed in the as-treated population. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02252042, and is no longer enrolling patients. FINDINGS: Between Dec 24, 2014, and May 13, 2016, 247 patients were randomly allocated to pembrolizumab and 248 were randomly allocated to standard of care. As of May 15, 2017, 181 (73%) of 247 patients in the pembrolizumab group and 207 (83%) of 248 patients in the standard-of-care group had died. Median overall survival in the intention-to-treat population was 8.4 months (95% CI 6.4-9.4) with pembrolizumab and 6.9 months (5.9-8.0) with standard of care (hazard ratio 0.80, 0.65-0.98; nominal p=0.0161). Fewer patients treated with pembrolizumab than with standard of care had grade 3 or worse treatment-related adverse events (33 [13%] of 246 vs 85 [36%] of 234). The most common treatment-related adverse event was hypothyroidism with pembrolizumab (in 33 [13%] patients) and fatigue with standard of care (in 43 [18%]). Treatment-related death occurred in four patients treated with pembrolizumab (unspecified cause, large intestine perforation, malignant neoplasm progression, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome) and two patients treated with standard of care (malignant neoplasm progression and pneumonia). INTERPRETATION: The clinically meaningful prolongation of overall survival and favourable safety profile of pembrolizumab in patients with recurrent or metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma support the further evaluation of pembrolizumab as a monotherapy and as part of combination therapy in earlier stages of disease. FUNDING: Merck Sharp & Dohme, a subsidiary of Merck & Co.
INTRODUCTION: The phase 3 RATIONALE-303 trial (NCT03358875) investigated the efficacy and safety of tislelizumab versus docetaxel in pretreated patients with advanced NSCLC. Here, we report the efficacy and safety results and describe the exploratory biomarker analyses. METHODS: A total of 805 patients aged more than or equal to 18 years with locally advanced or metastatic squamous or nonsquamous NSCLC were randomized 2:1 to intravenous tislelizumab 200 mg or docetaxel 75 mg/m(2) every 3 weeks. Co-primary end points were overall survival (OS) in the intent-to-treat (ITT) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) tumor cell expression greater than or equal to 25% populations. The exploratory biomarker analyses included PD-L1 expression, tumor mutation burden, and gene expression profile. RESULTS: At the prespecified interim analysis (August 10, 2020), the co-primary end point of OS in the ITT population was met, with a statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in OS with tislelizumab versus docetaxel (median 17.2 versus 11.9 mo, respectively; hazard ratio [HR] = 0.64, p < 0.0001). At the final analysis (July 15, 2021), the other co-primary end point of OS in the PD-L1 tumor cell greater than or equal to 25% population was further met (median 19.3 versus 11.5 mo, respectively; HR = 0.53, p < 0.0001), and OS continued to improve in the ITT population (median 16.9 versus 11.9 mo, respectively, HR = 0.66). Exploratory biomarker analyses revealed the potential association of NOTCH1-4 mutations with improved tislelizumab efficacy for both OS and progression-free survival, whereas tissue tumor mutation burden correlated with progression-free survival benefit, but not OS benefit. No new safety signals were identified. CONCLUSIONS: Tislelizumab was found to have a significantly improved and long-term clinical benefit in OS versus docetaxel in pretreated patients with advanced NSCLC, regardless of PD-L1 expression.
For metastatic prostate cancer, androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is the key strategy to control the disease. However, after 18-24 months of treatment, most patients will progress from metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (mHSPC) to metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) even with ADT. Once patients enter into mCRPC, they face with significant declines in quality of life and a dramatically reduced survival period. Thus, doublet therapy, which combines ADT with new hormone therapy (NHT) or ADT with docetaxel chemotherapy, substitutes ADT alone and has become the "gold standard" for the treatment of mHSPC. In recent years, triplet therapy, which combines ADT with NHT and docetaxel chemotherapy, has also achieved impressive effects in mHSPC. This article provides a comprehensive review of the recent applications of the triplet therapy in the field of mHSPC.
Standard treatment for locally advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (LAHNSCC) consists mainly of concurrent chemoradiation (CCR) but induction chemotherapy (IC) by docetaxel-cisplatin-fluorouracil (TPF), followed by CCR, is a strong option. Comparative trials suggest that IC and CCR are equivalent, and some trials suggest superiority of IC, whereas none shows inferiority. IC might have less interest in oropharyngeal cancer (more often linked to HPV infection). When functional laryngeal preservation is the patient's priority, essays strongly suggest that IC is the best treatment. There is little data about a less toxic regimen of IC, but several schemes are promising and need to be developed. An early selection of responders to IC by metabolic imaging must be considered. Intensification attempts with cetuximab were too toxic and unsafe, but trials with immunotherapy are ongoing to enhance TPF efficacy. After IC, CCR either with cetuximab or cisplatin seems to be equally effective.
BACKGROUND: PTEN loss and aberrations in PI3K/AKT signaling kinases associate with poorer response to abiraterone acetate (AA) in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). In this study, we assessed antitumor activity of the AKT inhibitor capivasertib combined with enzalutamide in mCRPC with prior progression on AA and docetaxel. METHODS: This double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized phase 2 trial, recruited men >/= 18 years with progressing mCRPC and performance status 0-2 from 15 UK centers. Randomized participants (1:1) received enzalutamide (160 mg orally, once daily) with capivasertib (400 mg)/ placebo orally, twice daily on an intermittent (4 days on, 3 days off) schedule. Primary endpoint was composite response rate (RR): RECIST 1.1 objective response, >/= 50 % PSA decrease from baseline, or circulating tumor cell count conversion (from >/= 5 at baseline to < 5 cells/7.5 mL). Subgroup analyses by PTEN(IHC) status were pre-planned. RESULTS: Overall, 100 participants were randomized (50:50); 95 were evaluable for primary endpoint (47:48); median follow-up was 43 months. RR were 9/47 (19.1 %) enzalutamide/capivasertib and 9/48 (18.8 %) enzalutamide/placebo (absolute difference 0.4 % 90 %CI -12.8 to 13.6, p = 0.58), with similar results in the PTEN(IHC) loss subgroup. Irrespective of treatment, OS was significantly worse for PTEN(IHC) loss (10.1 months [95 %CI: 4.6-13.9] vs 14.8 months [95 %CI: 10.8-18]; p = 0.02). Most common treatment-emergent grade >/= 3 adverse events for the combination were diarrhea (13 % vs 2 %) and fatigue (10 % vs 6 %). CONCLUSIONS: Combined capivasertib/enzalutamide was well tolerated but didn't significantly improve outcomes from abiraterone pre-treated mCRPC.
In this review, we describe the advances in oral drug delivery approaches for taxanes for successful therapeutic outcome. Taxanes (paclitaxel and docetaxel) have unwanted pharmacokinetic profiles when they are given in their current dosage forms. Taxanes have low bioavailability, are extensively metabolized by CYP3A, and have a high affinity for P-glycoprotein. Regardless of dosage schedule, the overall docetaxel or paclitaxel dose that a patient can tolerate at a given interval remains similar. Currently, there are no commercially available oral taxane nanoformulations, and there are still several challenges to overcome. Nano-based formulations may offer the best solutions to problems involving the safety and effectiveness of taxane delivery. Thus, further research is necessary before such taxane nanoformulations can be manufactured for clinical use.
PURPOSE: In recent years, the treatment options for metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (mHSPC) have expanded significantly. In addition to androgen deprivation therapy, the systemic treatments now include docetaxel, abiraterone, enzalutamide, and apalutamide. Radiation to the primary is also an option for select low-volume patients. METHODS: We conducted a review of the pivotal trials that have changed the practice of mHSPC. RESULTS: We describe an overview of the trials that investigated docetaxel (CHAARTED and STAMPEDE-Docetaxel), abiraterone (LATTITUDE and STAMPEDE-Abiraterone), enzalutamide (ARCHES, ENZAMET), apalutamide (TITAN), and radiation to the primary (STAMPEDE-Radiation). DISCUSSION: The treatment of mHSPC is a complex topic, and treatment choice should be individualized. Patient preferences, cost, volume of disease, and side effect profiles are important in determining which option is the best for an individual patient.
BACKGROUND: This systematic review and network meta-analysis aimed to assess the comparative effectiveness and safety profiles of current combination therapies based on androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) for the heterogeneous population of individuals with metastatic castration-sensitive prostate cancer (mCSPC). METHODS: We retrieved pertinent literature from PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, ClinicalTrials.gov, and international conference databases. The study was registered in the Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (CRD42023453853) for transparency. RESULTS: Our analysis included 20 RCTs involving 14,995 patients, evaluating 15 ADT-based combinations, including systemic therapies, radiotherapy and surgery. In the overall population, the darolutamide triplet (DARO + docetaxel + ADT) demonstrated comparable overall survival (OS) benefits to prostatectomy/radical local therapy (RLT) plus ADT (hazard ratio [HR], 0.82; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.43-1.57). Additionally, the enzalutamide (ENZ) triplet (ENZ + DOC + ADT) appeared to confer the best progression-free survival (HR, 0.34; 95% CI: 0.27-0.43). Subgroup analysis based on metastatic burden indicated that RLT plus ADT had the best OS performance in patients with low burden, while the DARO triplet was associated with the best OS in patients with high burden. Regarding adverse events (AEs), the addition of certain androgen receptor pathway inhibitor (ARPI) agents to ADT led to an increased incidence of severe AEs, while the addition of DOC to the ARPI doublet did not appear to elevate the exposure-adjusted incidence rates. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that combined treatments result in better survival outcomes than does ADT alone. In the current landscape of systemic therapy, the significance of local therapy should not be underestimated, and therapeutic decisions should be tailored with meticulous consideration of clinical heterogeneity among patients.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Leading trials CHAARTED, STAMPEDE, GETUG-AFU15 and LATITUDE established docetaxel and abiraterone acetate addition to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) as a treatment guideline for patients with metastatic castration-sensitive prostate cancer. RECENT FINDINGS: Two recent combinations, enzalutamide with ADT and apalutamide with ADT were tested in metastatic castration-sensitive prostate cancer in three randomized controlled trials. Both combinations provided survival gain, expanding our options of treatment. Moreover, additional evidence behind radiotherapy for the primary tumor in metastatic prostate cancer is emerging. SUMMARY: In this updated article, we review the data of these trials and highlight the distinctions between these therapies, in order to better personalize the care for patients with metastatic prostate cancer.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Until 2015, androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) alone was the standard-of-care for metastatic hormone-naive prostate cancer (mHNPC). In the last decade, important landmark therapeutic advances occurred in the management of these patients permitting improvement of their survival. RECENT FINDINGS: At least two prospective randomized trials proved upfront docetaxel (DOC) + ADT benefit consequently providing strong evidence for guidelines modifications. Second, similar benefit results were demonstrated when using upfront abiraterone acetate + ADT in mHNPC. SUMMARY: Both DOC-based chemotherapy and abiraterone acetate provide survival improvement when added to ADT in mHNPC. In the current article, we review the evidence behind this progress and discuss ongoing clinical controversies.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Abiraterone acetate (AA) is an androgen receptor axis inhibitor, indicated together with prednisone, for metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Withdrawal syndrome for classical antiandrogen treatments is well known, but not so known for AA. Abiraterone withdrawal syndrome (AWS) could be related to simultaneous prednisone discontinuation or to an androgenic effect of AA metabolites. CASE DESCRIPTION: A case is described of a patient with long-term AWS without prednisone discontinuation. The clinical and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) response allowed an 8-month delay in docetaxel treatment. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Prednisone did not play a role in AWS in this case. The long-term response allowed a delay in future treatment.
PURPOSE: The randomized, open-label, global phase III TROPION-Lung01 study compared the efficacy and safety of datopotamab deruxtecan (Dato-DXd) versus docetaxel in patients with pretreated advanced/metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). METHODS: Patients received Dato-DXd 6 mg/kg or docetaxel 75 mg/m(2) once every 3 weeks. Dual primary end points were progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Objective response rate, duration of response, and safety were secondary end points. RESULTS: In total, 299 and 305 patients were randomly assigned to receive Dato-DXd or docetaxel, respectively. The median PFS was 4.4 months (95% CI, 4.2 to 5.6) with Dato-DXd and 3.7 months (95% CI, 2.9 to 4.2) with docetaxel (hazard ratio [HR], 0.75 [95% CI, 0.62 to 0.91]; P = .004). The median OS was 12.9 months (95% CI, 11.0 to 13.9) and 11.8 months (95% CI, 10.1 to 12.8), respectively (HR, 0.94 [95% CI, 0.78 to 1.14]; P = .530). In the prespecified nonsquamous histology subgroup, the median PFS was 5.5 versus 3.6 months (HR, 0.63 [95% CI, 0.51 to 0.79]) and the median OS was 14.6 versus 12.3 months (HR, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.68 to 1.05]). In the squamous histology subgroup, the median PFS was 2.8 versus 3.9 months (HR, 1.41 [95% CI, 0.95 to 2.08]) and the median OS was 7.6 versus 9.4 months (HR, 1.32 [95% CI, 0.91 to 1.92]). Grade >/=3 treatment-related adverse events occurred in 25.6% and 42.1% of patients, and any-grade adjudicated drug-related interstitial lung disease/pneumonitis occurred in 8.8% and 4.1% of patients, in the Dato-DXd and docetaxel groups, respectively. CONCLUSION: Dato-DXd significantly improved PFS versus docetaxel in patients with advanced/metastatic NSCLC, driven by patients with nonsquamous histology. OS showed a numerical benefit but did not reach statistical significance. No unexpected safety signals were observed.
One of the most neglected aspects of chemotherapy are changes, and possible consequences of these changes, that occur in normal somatic cells. In this review, we summarize effects of selected drugs used to treat ovarian cancer (platin derivatives-cisplatin and carboplatin; and taxanes-paclitaxel and docetaxel) on cellular metabolism, acquisition of reactive stroma features, cellular senescence, inflammatory reactions, apoptosis, autophagy, mitophagy, oxidative stress, DNA damage, and angiogenesis in various types of normal cells, including fibroblasts, epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and neurons. The activity of these drugs against the normal cells is presented from a broader perspective of their desirable anti-tumoral effects.
While temozolomide (TMZ) has been a cornerstone in the treatment of newly diagnosed glioblastoma (GBM), a significant challenge has been the emergence of resistance to TMZ, which compromises its clinical benefits. Additionally, the nonspecificity of TMZ can lead to detrimental side effects. Although TMZ is capable of penetrating the blood-brain barrier (BBB), our research addresses the need for targeted therapy to circumvent resistance mechanisms and reduce off-target effects. This study introduces the use of PEGylated mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSN) with octyl group modifications (C8-MSN) as a nanocarrier system for the delivery of docetaxel (DTX), providing a novel approach for treating TMZ-resistant GBM. Our findings reveal that C8-MSN is biocompatible in vitro, and DTX@C8-MSN shows no hemolytic activity at therapeutic concentrations, maintaining efficacy against GBM cells. Crucially, in vivo imaging demonstrates preferential accumulation of C8-MSN within the tumor region, suggesting enhanced permeability across the blood-brain tumor barrier (BBTB). When administered to orthotopic glioma mouse models, DTX@C8-MSN notably prolongs survival by over 50%, significantly reduces tumor volume, and decreases side effects compared to free DTX, indicating a targeted and effective approach to treatment. The apoptotic pathways activated by DTX@C8-MSN, evidenced by the increased levels of cleaved caspase-3 and PARP, point to a potent therapeutic mechanism. Collectively, the results advocate DTX@C8-MSN as a promising candidate for targeted therapy in TMZ-resistant GBM, optimizing drug delivery and bioavailability to overcome current therapeutic limitations.
Challenges for glioma treatment with nanomedicines include physio-anatomical barriers (the blood-brain barrier and blood-brain tumor barrier), low drug loading capacity, and limited circulation time. Here, a red blood cell membrane-coated docetaxel drug nanocrystal (pV-RBCm-NC(DTX)), modified with pHA-VAP (pV) for all-stage targeting of glioma, was designed. The NC(DTX) core exhibited a high drug loading capacity but low in vivo stability, and the RBCm coating significantly enhanced the stability and prolonged in vivo circulation. Moreover, the Y-shaped targeting ligand pV was modified by a mild avidin-biotin interaction, which endowed RBCm-NC(DTX) with superior barrier-crossing ability and therapeutic efficacy. The integration of nanocrystal technology, cell membrane coating, and the avidin-biotin insertion method into this active targeting biomimetic formulation represents a promising drug delivery strategy for glioma.
BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that perioperative FOLFOX (5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin) might be used as an alternative to standard FLOT (docetaxel, 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin) in patients with locally advanced oesogastric adenocarcinomas (OGA), particularly those with frailties. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed the charts of 61 consecutives patients treated with FOLFOX for resectable OGA to estimate overall survival, recurrence-free survival, and safety. RESULTS: The median follow-up was 69.7 (range=3.6-97.9) months. Few patients experienced grade 3 adverse events during the preoperative (n=6; 10%) and postoperative (n=6; 16%) phases. One patient experienced a fatal grade 5 adverse events (cardiogenic shock). Median overall survival was 51.7 months [95% confidence interval (CI)=31.6-93.2 months] and the 5-year survival rate was 44.4% (95% CI=30.3%-57.5%). CONCLUSION: Regarding its comparable efficacy and its favourable toxicity profile, perioperative FOLFOX is a reasonable alternative to FLOT for frail patients with resectable OGA.
To date, cancer therapies largely consist of five pillars: surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. Still, researchers are trying to innovate the current cancer therapies to pursue an ideal one without side effects. For developing such a therapy, we designed a chemically well-defined route to a PEG- and docetaxel (DTX)-conjugated inorganic polymer, polyphosphazene, named "polytaxel (PTX)" with a prolonged blood circulation time and tumor localization. Here, we conducted the proof-of-concept study of the ideal therapy in orthotopic and xenograft pancreatic cancer models. We found that the average tumor inhibition rates of PTX were similar to those of DTX without any DTX toxicity-related side effects, such as neutropenia and weight loss. In conclusion, PTX met the requirements of an ideal anticancer drug with high anticancer efficacy and 100% survival rate. PTX is expected to replace any existing anticancer therapies in clinical practice.
