Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common cause of adult-onset dementia is characterized by a progressive decline of cognitive functions accompanied by behavioral manifestations. The main class of drugs currently used for the treatment of AD are acetylcholinesterase/cholinesterase inhibitors (ChE-Is). The first ChE-I licensed for symptomatic treatment of AD was tacrine. The ChE-Is currently available in the market are donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine as tacrine is no longer in use, due to its hepatotoxicity. According to mechanism of action the ChE-Is are classified as short-acting or reversible agents such as tacrine, donepezil, and galantamine, as intermediate-acting or pseudo-irreversible agent such as rivastigmine. Overall, the efficacy of the three ChE-Is available in the market is similar and the benefit of administration of these compounds is mild and may not be clinically significant. Due to gastrointestinal side effects of these drugs, medicinal chemistry and pharmaceutical delivery studies have investigated solutions to improve the pharmacological activity of these compounds. In spite of the limited activity of ChE-Is, waiting for more effective approaches, these drugs still represent a pharmacotherapeutic resource for the treatment of AD. Other approaches in which ChE-Is were investigated is in their use in combination with other classes of drugs such as cholinergic precursors, N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists and antioxidant agents. After many years from the introduction in therapy of ChE-Is, the combination with other classes of drugs may represent the chance for a renewed interest of ChE-Is in the treatment of adult-onset dementia disorders.
The recently published results of the 18-month randomized controlled trial of lecanemab, reporting the efficacy of the drug in slowing the progression of early Alzheimer disease, quickly led to approval by the FDA and widespread acceptance of lecanemab treatment. However, there are a number of matters that deserve further consideration. The success of blinding was not assessed, even as infusion reactions and the cerebral pathology underlying amyloid-related imaging abnormalities could have signaled to many participants that they were on drug, potentially exerting a potent placebo effect. The value of the outcome to participants is not defined in the absolute terms necessary for clinical decision-making, and the difference attributable to lecanemab was between 18% and 46% of estimates of the minimal clinically important difference on the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes. The attenuation of change on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive 14 achieved by lecanemab at 18 months was 50% of that achieved by donepezil at 6 months. Lecanemab treatment imposes a high treatment burden. The fact that the burden commences at the initiation of lecanemab treatment, whereas the benefit accrues years later requires us to take into account value discounting over time, which would significantly reduce the benefit/burden ratio. Finally, treatment with monoclonal antibodies to cerebral amyloid has consistently been associated with progressive cerebral atrophy. At the least, these issues should be raised in treatment discussions with patients. They also suggest a need to very seriously reconsider how we evaluate clinical trial results preparatory to translating them into clinical practice. Some suggestions are provided.
Lecanemab, a novel amyloid-sequestering agent, recently received accelerated Food and Drug Administration approval for the treatment of mild dementia due to Alzheimer disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Approval was based on a large phase 3 trial, Clarity, which demonstrated reductions in amyloid plaque burden and cognitive decline with lecanemab. Three major concerns should give us pause before adopting this medication: Its beneficial effects are small, its harms are substantial, and its potential costs are unprecedented. Although lecanemab has a clear and statistically significant effect on cognition, its effect size is small and may not be clinically significant. The magnitude of lecanemab's cognitive effect is smaller than independent estimates of the minimally important clinical difference, implying that the effect may be imperceptible to a majority of patients and caregivers. Lecanemab's cognitive effects were numerically smaller than the effect of cholinesterase inhibitors and may be much smaller. The main argument in lecanemab's favor is that it may lead to greater cognitive benefit over time. Although plausible, there is a lack of evidence to support this conclusion. Lecanemab's harms are substantial. In Clarity, it caused symptomatic brain edema in 11% and symptomatic intracranial bleeding in 0.5% of participants. These estimates likely significantly underestimate these risks in general practice for 3 reasons: (1) Lecanemab likely interacts with other medications that increase bleeding, an effect minimized in Clarity. (2) The Clarity population is much younger than the real-world population with mild AD dementia and MCI (age 71 years vs 85 years) and bleeding risk increases with age. (3) Bleeding rates in trials are typically much lower than in clinical practice. Lecanemab's costs are unprecedented. Its proposed price of $26,500 is based on cost-effectiveness analyses with tenuous assumptions. However, even if cost-effective, it is likely to result in higher expenditures than any other medication. If its entire target population were treated, the aggregate medication expenditures would be $120 billion US dollars per year-more than is currently spent on all medications in Medicare Part D. Before adopting lecanemab, we need to know that lecanemab is not less effective, vastly more harmful, and 100x more costly than donepezil.
Donepezil, an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (AChEI), has been widely used to treat Alzheimer's disease (AD) in China. However, there are few studies focusing on the efficacy and safety of donepezil in Chinese patients. In this review, we discuss 1) the efficacy of donepezil and its comparison with other AChEIs or memantine, 2) the therapeutic responses to donepezil and its influencing factors, and 3) the safety and tolerability of donepezil in Chinese patients with different stages of AD and amnestic mild cognitive impairment, and further compare the similarities and differences of the results between Chinese studies and previous Western studies that predominantly enrolled Caucasian subjects. We include Chinese clinical trials and other well-designed studies investigating donepezil or using donepezil as a positive control, in which the efficacy and/or safety of donepezil have been analyzed. Based on these studies, donepezil has been shown to be effective and safe in Chinese AD patients and may impact AD biomarkers, such as hippocampal atrophy, Abeta, and tau. In addition, the therapeutic response to donepezil may be influenced by apolipoprotein E or cytochrome P450 2D6 polymorphism.
BACKGROUND: Evidence summaries for efficacy and safety of frequently employed treatments of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are sparse. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to perform an updated umbrella review to identify an efficacious and safe treatment for AD patients. METHODS: We conducted a search for meta-analyses and systematic reviews on the Embase, PubMed, The Cochrane Library, and Web of Science to address this knowledge gap. We examined the cognitive functions, behavioral symptoms, global clinical assessment, and Activities of Daily Living as efficacy endpoints, and the incidence of adverse events as safety profiles. RESULTS: Sixteen eligible papers including 149 studies were included in the umbrella review. The results showed that AChE inhibitors (donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine, Huperzine A), Ginkgo biloba, and cerebrolysin appear to be beneficial for cognitive, global performances, and activities of daily living in patients with AD. Furthermore, anti-Abeta agents are unlikely to have an important effect on slowing cognitive or functional impairment in mild to moderate AD. CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated that AChE inhibitors, Ginkgo biloba, and cerebrolysin are the optimum cognitive and activities of daily living medication for patients with AD.
Prevalence of dementia continues to increase with limited pharmacotherapy options available. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors remain a mainstay of treatment. The US FDA has approved three oral medications within this class- donepezil, galantamine, and rivastigmine. In 2022, the US Food and Drug Administration approved a novel patch formulation for donepezil that could be beneficial for patients with dysphagia as well as potentially decreasing the side effect burden. The purpose of this analysis is to review the efficacy, safety, tolerability, and clinical considerations related to this novel formulation.
BACKGROUND: Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) are common in individuals with Alzheimer disease (AD). Donepezil and memantine are both widely used for the treatment of moderate AD. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of donepezil and memantine in relieving BPSD in individuals with moderate AD. METHOD: We conducted a prospective, randomized, 6-month clinical trial involving 85 individuals with moderate AD divided into two groups: group 1 (n = 42) was treated with donepezil; group 2 (n = 43) was treated with memantine. We used the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) to assess the prevalence and severity of BPSD at baseline and after 6 months of treatment with donepezil or memantine. RESULTS: The two groups' baseline characteristics, including age, sex, mean length of education, and disease duration, were comparable, as were their baseline Mini-Mental State Examination scores. The NPI Total score improved from baseline to month 6 in both groups (P < 0.0001). Analyses of the NPI subdomains revealed that both donepezil treatment and memantine treatment produced statistically significant improvement in all of the NPI domains except euphoria and apathy, for which no improvement was observed after memantine treatment. Both treatments were well tolerated, with mostly mild and transient adverse effects. CONCLUSION: Specific drugs for AD, including donepezil and memantine, may be effective in treating BPSD in individuals with moderate AD, with a favorable safety profile.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the comparative efficacy and safety of cognitive enhancers by patient characteristics for managing Alzheimer's dementia (AD). DESIGN: Systematic review and individual patient data (IPD) network meta-analysis (NMA) based on our previously published systematic review and aggregate data NMA. DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Methodology Register, CINAHL, AgeLine and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials up to March 2016. PARTICIPANTS: 80 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) including 21 138 adults with AD, and 12 RCTs with IPD including 6906 patients. INTERVENTIONS: Cognitive enhancers (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine and memantine) alone or in any combination against other cognitive enhancers or placebo. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: We requested IPD from authors, sponsors and data sharing platforms. When IPD were not available, we used aggregate data. We appraised study quality with the Cochrane risk-of-bias. We conducted a two-stage random-effects IPD-NMA, and assessed their findings using CINeMA (Confidence in Network Meta-Analysis). PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: We included trials assessing cognition with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and adverse events. RESULTS: Our IPD-NMA compared nine treatments (including placebo). Donepezil (mean difference (MD)=1.41, 95% CI: 0.51 to 2.32) and donepezil +memantine (MD=2.57, 95% CI: 0.07 to 5.07) improved MMSE score (56 RCTs, 11 619 participants; CINeMA score: moderate) compared with placebo. According to P-score, oral rivastigmine (OR=1.26, 95% CI: 0.82 to 1.94, P-score=16%) and donepezil (OR=1.08, 95% CI: 0.87 to 1.35, P-score=30%) had the least favourable safety profile, but none of the estimated treatment effects were sufficiently precise when compared with placebo (45 RCTs, 15 649 patients; CINeMA score: moderate to high). For moderate-to-severe impairment, donepezil, memantine and their combination performed best, but for mild-to-moderate impairment donepezil and transdermal rivastigmine ranked best. Adjusting for MMSE baseline differences, oral rivastigmine and galantamine improved MMSE score, whereas when adjusting for comorbidities only oral rivastigmine was effective. CONCLUSIONS: The choice among the different cognitive enhancers may depend on patient's characteristics. The MDs of all cognitive enhancer regimens except for single-agent oral rivastigmine, galantamine and memantine, against placebo were clinically important for cognition (MD larger than 1.40 MMSE points), but results were quite imprecise. However, two-thirds of the published RCTs were associated with high risk of bias for incomplete outcome data, and IPD were only available for 15% of the included RCTs. PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42015023507.
BACKGROUND: The role of currently available drugs for Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been controversial, with some national formularies restricting their use, and health economists questioning whether the small clinical effects are economically worthwhile. OBJECTIVE: To estimate the efficacy and safety of donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine, and memantine for the treatment of AD. METHODS: Double-blind, placebo-controlled, with random assignment to a cholinesterase inhibitor or memantine trials were included into the pooled studies. RESULTS: Cognitive effects were significant for all drugs, ranging from a -1.29 points mean difference (95% CI -2.30 to -0.28) in the 20 mg daily memantine trials to -3.20 points (95% CI -3.28 to -3.12) in the 32 mg daily galantamine group. Only memantine had no effect on the Clinicians' Global Impression of Change scale. No behavioral benefits were observed, except for -2.72 (95% CI -4.92 to -0.52) in the 10 mg daily donepezil group and -1.72 (95% CI -3.12 to -0.33) for 24 mg daily galantamine trial. Only 5 mg daily donepezil had no effect on the function outcome. Compared with placebo, more dropouts and adverse events occurred with the cholinesterase inhibitors, but not with memantine. CONCLUSIONS: Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine are able to stabilize or slow decline in cognition, function, behavior, and global change.
Acetylcholinesterase (AchE), hydrolase enzyme, regulates the hydrolysis of acetylcholine neurotransmitter in the neurons. AchE is found majorly in the central nervous system at the site of cholinergic neurotransmission. It is involved in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's diseasecausing dementia, cognitive impairment, behavioral and psychological symptoms. Recent findings involved the inhibition of AchE that could aid in the treatment of Alzheimer's. Many drugs of different classes are being analyzed in the clinical trials and examined for their potency. Drugs that are used in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease are donepezil, galantamine, tacrine, rivastigmine showing major adverse effects. To overcome this, researchers work on novel drugs to elicit inhibition. This review comprises many hybrids and non-hybrid forms of heteroaromatic and nonheteroaromatic compounds that were designed and evaluated for AchE inhibition by Ellman's method of assay. These novel compounds may assist future perspectives in the discovery of novel moieties against Alzheimer's disease by the inhibition of AchE.
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease are the most prevalent neurodegenerative diseases and the leading causes of dementia worldwide. The etiology of these multifactorial pathologies is not completely known. The available therapeutic approaches can cause temporary relief of symptoms but cannot slow down their progression or cure them. Life-changing therapeutic solutions are urgently needed, as the number of people suffering from these pathologies has been increasing quickly over the last few decades. Several targets are being studied, and innovative approaches are being pursued to find new therapeutic options. This overview is focused on the most recent information regarding the paradigm of using multitarget compounds to treat both Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.
BACKGROUND: Vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) describes a broad spectrum of cognitive impairments caused by cerebrovascular disease, ranging from mild cognitive impairment to dementia. There are currently no pharmacological treatments recommended for improving either cognition or function in people with VCI. Three cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, galantamine, and rivastigmine) are licenced for the treatment of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease. They are thought to work by compensating for reduced cholinergic neurotransmission, which is also a feature of VCI. Through pairwise comparisons with placebo and a network meta-analysis, we sought to determine whether these medications are effective in VCI and whether there are differences between them with regard to efficacy or adverse events. OBJECTIVES: (1) To assess the efficacy and safety of cholinesterase inhibitors in the treatment of adults with vascular dementia and other VCI. (2) To compare the effects of different cholinesterase inhibitors on cognition and adverse events, using network meta-analysis. SEARCH METHODS: We searched ALOIS, the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group's register, MEDLINE (OvidSP), Embase (OvidSP), PsycINFO (OvidSP), CINAHL (EBSCOhost), Web of Science Core Collection (ISI Web of Science), LILACS (BIREME), ClinicalTrials.gov, and the World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform on 19 August 2020. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials in which donepezil, galantamine, or rivastigmine was compared with placebo or in which the drugs were compared with each other in adults with vascular dementia or other VCI (excluding cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL)). We included all drug doses and routes of administration. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently identified eligible trials, extracted data, assessed risk of bias, and applied the GRADE approach to assess the certainty of the evidence. The primary outcomes were cognition, clinical global impression, function (performance of activities of daily living), and adverse events. Secondary outcomes were serious adverse events, incidence of development of new dementia, behavioural disturbance, carer burden, institutionalisation, quality of life and death. For the pairwise analyses, we pooled outcome data at similar time points using random-effects methods. We also performed a network meta-analysis using Bayesian methods. MAIN RESULTS: We included eight trials (4373 participants) in the review. Three trials studied donepezil 5 mg or 10 mg daily (n= 2193); three trials studied rivastigmine at a maximum daily dose of 3 to 12 mg (n= 800); and two trials studied galantamine at a maximum daily dose of 16 to 24 mg (n= 1380). The trials included participants with possible or probable vascular dementia or cognitive impairment following stroke. Mean ages were between 72.2 and 73.9 years. All of the trials were at low or unclear risk of bias in all domains, and the evidence ranged from very low to high level of certainty. For cognition, the results showed that donepezil 5 mg improves cognition slightly, although the size of the effect is unlikely to be clinically important (mean difference (MD) -0.92 Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog) points (range 0 to 70), 95% confidence interval (CI) -1.44 to -0.40; high-certainty evidence). Donepezil 10 mg (MD -2.21 ADAS-Cog points, 95% CI -3.07 to -1.35; moderate-certainty evidence) and galantamine 16 to 24 mg (MD -2.01 ADAS-Cog point, 95%CI -3.18 to -0.85; moderate-certainty evidence) probably also improve cognition, although the larger effect estimates still may not be clinically important. With low certainty, there may be little to no effect of rivastigmine 3 to 12 mg daily on cognition (MD 0.03 ADAS-Cog points, 95% CI -3.04 to 3.10; low-certainty evidence). Adverse events reported in the studies included nausea and/or vomiting, diarrhoea, dizziness, headache, and hypertension. The results showed that there was probably little to no difference between donepezil 5 mg and placebo in the number of adverse events (odds ratio (OR) 1.22, 95% CI 0.94 to 1.58; moderate-certainty evidence), but there were slightly more adverse events with donepezil 10 mg than with placebo (OR 1.95, 95% CI 1.20 to 3.15; high-certainty evidence). The effect of rivastigmine 3 to 12 mg on adverse events was very uncertain (OR 3.21, 95% CI 0.36 to 28.88; very low-certainty evidence). Galantamine 16 to 24 mg is probably associated with a slight excess of adverse events over placebo (OR 1.57, 95% CI 1.02 to 2.43; moderate-certainty evidence). In the network meta-analysis (NMA), we included cognition to represent benefit, and adverse events to represent harm. All drugs ranked above placebo for cognition and below placebo for adverse events. We found donepezil 10 mg to rank first in terms of benefit, but third in terms of harms, when considering the network estimates and quality of evidence. Galantamine was ranked second in terms of both benefit and harm. Rivastigmine had the lowest ranking of the cholinesterase inhibitors in both benefit and harm NMA estimates, but this may reflect possibly inadequate doses received by some trial participants and small trial sample sizes. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found moderate- to high-certainty evidence that donepezil 5 mg, donepezil 10 mg, and galantamine have a slight beneficial effect on cognition in people with VCI, although the size of the change is unlikely to be clinically important. Donepezil 10 mg and galantamine 16 to 24 mg are probably associated with more adverse events than placebo. The evidence for rivastigmine was less certain. The data suggest that donepezil 10 mg has the greatest effect on cognition, but at the cost of adverse effects. The effect is modest, but in the absence of any other treatments, people living with VCI may still wish to consider the use of these agents. Further research into rivastigmine is needed, including the use of transdermal patches.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder. Dementia severity was assessed mainly through cognitive function, psychobehavioral symptoms, and daily living ability. Currently, there are not many drugs that can be selected to treat mild to moderate AD, and the value of drugs remains controversial. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to quantitatively evaluate the efficacy and safety of cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs), memantine, and sodium oligomannate (GV-971) in the treatment of patients with AD. Additionally, molecular docking analysis will be used to investigate the binding affinities of donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine, and memantine with key receptor proteins associated with AD, including beta-amyloid (Abeta), microtubule-associated protein (MAP), apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4), and Mitofusin-2 (MFN2), to further validate the results of the meta-analysis. METHODS: We obtained clinical trials characterized by randomization, placebo control, and double-blinded methodologies concerning ChEIs, memantine, and GV-971. Statistical analysis was performed using Review Manager Version 5.4 software. Molecular docking was also conducted to evaluate the results. RESULTS: All drugs improved the cognitive function, with the effect value ranging from -1.23 (95% CI -2.17 to -0.30) for 20 mg memantine to -3.29 (95% CI -4.14 to -2.45) for 32 mg galantamine. Although 32 mg galanthamine and GV-971 did not improve the clinicians' Global Impression of Change scale, other drugs showed significant results compared with placebo. On NPI, only 10 mg of donepezil and 24 mg of galantamine had improvement effects. On ADCS/ADL, only 20 mg memantine and 900 mg GV-971 had no significant difference from the placebo. Donepezil 5 mg and GV-971 900 mg did not increase the drug withdrawal rates due to various reasons or adverse reactions when compared to the placebo. Donepezil demonstrated superior binding to the protein and exhibited greater efficacy compared to other drugs. CONCLUSION: ChEIs, memantine, and GV-971 all can slow the progression of AD but have different effects on respective assessments. Donepezil and GV-971 were relatively well tolerated.
The endogenous neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) is known to affect the excitatory/inhibitory (E/I) balance of primate visual cortex, enhancing feedforward thalamocortical gain while suppressing corticocortical synapses. Recent advances in the study of the human visual system suggest that ACh is a likely component underlying interocular interactions. However, our understanding of its precise role in binocular processes is currently lacking. Here we use binocular rivalry as a probe of interocular dynamics to determine ACh's effects, via the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (AChEI) donepezil, on the binocular visual system. A total of 23 subjects (13 male) completed two crossover experimental sessions where binocular rivalry measurements were obtained before and after taking either donepezil (5 mg) or a placebo (lactose) pill. We report that enhanced cholinergic potentiation attenuates perceptual suppression during binocular rivalry, reducing the overall rate of interocular competition while enhancing the visibility of superimposition mixed percepts. Considering recent evidence that perceptual suppression during binocular rivalry is causally modulated by the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA, our results suggest that cholinergic activity counteracts the effect of GABA with regards to interocular dynamics and may modulate the inhibitory drive within the visual cortex.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Our research demonstrates that the cholinergic system is implicated in modulating binocular interactions in the human visual cortex. Potentiating the transmission of acetylcholine (ACh) via the cholinergic drug donepezil reduces the extent to which the eyes compete for perceptual dominance when presented two separate, incongruent images.
Donepezil is the most widely prescribed of the cholinesterase inhibitors that has been licensed for the treatment of mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. Evidence from a number of clinical trials suggests that it improves cognitive performance and stabilizes the functional abilities in people with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. Donepezil increases the amount of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine in the brain, the deficit of which is thought to play a major role in the clinical presentation of Alzheimer's disease. Studies show good safety and long-term tolerability. In addition, donepezil's pharmacokinetic properties make it convenient to prescribe. There are a number of newer drug therapies in various stages of pharmacological development, but donepezil should continue to play a major role in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease for the next few years.
According to the Alzheimer Association Report (2017), Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the 6th primary cause of death in the USA, which affects nearly 5.5 million people. In the year 2017 itself, the cost of AD treatment in the USA has been reported to rise to $259 billion. This statistic shows the severity of the disease in the USA which is very much similar across the globe. On the other hand, the treatment remains limited to a few conventional oral medications (approved by FDA). These are mainly acting superficially from mild to the moderate AD. The therapeutic efficacy of the drug is not only affected by its reduced concentration in the brain owing to the existence of blood-brain-barrier (BBB) but also due to its low brain permeability. In this context, the intranasal (IN) route of drug administration has emerged as an alternative route over the systemic (oral and parenteral) drug delivery to the brain. The delivery of the drug via an IN route offers various advantages over systemic drug delivery system, as it directly delivers the drug into the brain via olfactory route. Presence of drug in the olfactory bulb, in turn, increases the drug bioavailability in the brain and reduces the drug degradation as well as wastage of the drug through; systemic clearance. However, there is also some limitation associated with IN like poor drug permeation through the nasal mucosa and mucociliary clearance. The delivery system various through novel strategies (nano drug carrier system, colloidal carriers, mucoadhesive devices, controlled delivery system, pro-drug, etc.) are adapted to overcome the above-stated limitations. Although, after all, such successful research claims, very few of the nose-to-brain drug delivery of anti-AD drugs have gained market approval due to lack of sufficient clinical evidence. Onzetra Xsail(R) is one such marketed preparations approved for IN delivery used for the treatment of a brain disorder; migraine. In the field of patents also, no work is found which could present sufficient experimental findings to support its clinical safety profile. It also underlines the fact that majority of work related to the nose-to-brain delivery of anti-AD drugs is limited only up to preclinical studies. In this review article, we have discussed the latest works on various novel formulations loaded with various anti-Alzheimer agents. These agents include galantamine, deferoxamine, tacrine, tarenflurbil, rivastigmine, risperidone, curcumin, quercetin, piperine, insulin, etc. and various peptides towards the development of a promising IN drug delivery system for the treatment of AD. Through this review article, we want to drag the attention of the researchers working in this field towards the challenges and hurdles of practical applicability IN delivery of anti-AD drugs. Moreover, the attention towards the clinical studies will ease the approval process for the administration of anti-Alzheimer drugs via IN route.
The role of the cholinergic system with respect to cognitive deficits characteristic of Alzheimer's disease (AD) has led to a number of studies focusing on the development of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors as a drug for treating this disease. The earliest known AChE inhibitors, namely, physostigmine and tacrine, performed poorly in clinical trials (e.g., poor oral activity, brain penetration, and hepatotoxic liability). Studies were then focused on finding a new type of acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that would overcome the disadvantages of these two compounds. Donepezil hydrochloride inaugurates a new class of AChE inhibitors with longer and more selective action and with manageable adverse effects.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) involves a complex pathophysiology with multiple interconnected subpathologies, including protein aggregation, impaired neurotransmission, oxidative stress, and microglia-mediated neuroinflammation. Current treatments, which generally target a single subpathology, have failed to modify the disease's progression, providing only temporary symptom relief. Multi-target drugs (MTDs) address several subpathologies, including impaired aggregation of pathological proteins. In this review, we cover hybrid molecules published between 2014 and 2024. We offer an overview of the strategies employed in drug design and approaches that have led to notable improvements and reduced hepatotoxicity. Our aim is to offer insights into the potential development of new Alzheimer's disease drugs. This overview highlights the potential of multi-target drugs featuring heterocycles with N-benzylpiperidine fragments and natural compounds in improving Alzheimer's disease treatment.
The discovery of acetylcholine and acetylcholinesterase provided the first insight into the intricacies of chemical signal transduction and neuronal communication. Further elucidation of the underlying mechanisms led to an attendant leveraging of this knowledge via the synthesis of new therapeutics designed to control aberrant biochemical processes. The central role of the cholinergic system within human memory and learning, as well as its implication in Alzheimer's disease, has made it a point of focus within the neuropharmacology and medicinal chemistry communities. This review is focused on donepezil and covers the background, synthetic routes, structure-activity relationships, binding interactions with acetylcholinesterase, pharmacokinetics and metabolism, efficacy, adverse effects, and historical importance of this leading therapeutic in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease and true Classic in Chemical Neuroscience.
Donepezil (DNP) is a selective cholinesterase inhibitor widely used for the therapy of Alzheimer's disease. Instances of liver injury correlated with DNP treatment have been reported, yet the underlying hepatotoxic mechanism remains to be elucidated. This study aimed to explore the contribution of metabolic activation to the hepatotoxicity of DNP. The structure of 6-O-desmethyl DNP (M1), the oxidative metabolite of DNP, was characterized by chemical synthesis, LC-MS/MS, and nuclear magnetic resonance. A reactive quinone methide resulting from the metabolism of DNP was captured by glutathione (GSH) fortified in liver microsomal incubations after exposure to DNP, and the resulting GSH conjugate (M2) was detected in the bile of rats receiving DNP. Recombinant human P450 enzyme incubation studies demonstrated that CYP3A4 was the principal enzyme responsible for the production of M1 and M2. The generation of M2 declined in rat primary hepatocytes pretreated with ketoconazole, an inhibitor of CYP3A4, which also decreased the vulnerability of rat primary hepatocytes to DNP-caused cytotoxicity. These findings suggest that the quinone methide metabolite may contribute to the cytotoxicity and hepatotoxicity caused by the DNP.
