There is emerging evidence that alpha1-blockers can be safely used in the treatment of hypertension. These drugs can be used in almost all hypertensive patients for blood pressure control. However, there are several special indications. Benign prostatic hyperplasia is a compelling indication of alpha1-blockers, because of the dual treatment effect on both high blood pressure and lower urinary tract symptoms. Many patients with resistant hypertension would require alpha1-blockers as add-on therapy. Primary aldosteronism screen is a rapidly increasing clinical demand in the management of hypertension, where alpha1-blockers are useful for blood pressure control in the preparation for the measurement of plasma aldosterone and renin. Nonetheless, alpha1-blockers have to be used under several considerations. Among the currently available agents, only long-acting alpha1-blockers, such as doxazosin gastrointestinal therapeutic system 4-8 mg daily and terazosin 2-4 mg daily, should be chosen. Orthostatic hypotension is a concern with the use of alpha1-blockers especially in the elderly, and requires careful initial bedtime dosing and avoiding overdosing. Fluid retention is potentially also a concern, which may be overcome by combining an alpha1-blocker with a diuretic.
CONTEXT: Pretreatment with alpha-adrenergic receptor blockers is recommended to prevent hemodynamic instability during resection of a pheochromocytoma or sympathetic paraganglioma (PPGL). OBJECTIVE: To determine which type of alpha-adrenergic receptor blocker provides the best efficacy. DESIGN: Randomized controlled open-label trial (PRESCRIPT; ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01379898). SETTING: Multicenter study including 9 centers in The Netherlands. PATIENTS: 134 patients with nonmetastatic PPGL. INTERVENTION: Phenoxybenzamine or doxazosin starting 2 to 3 weeks before surgery using a blood pressure targeted titration schedule. Intraoperative hemodynamic management was standardized. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary efficacy endpoint was the cumulative intraoperative time outside the blood pressure target range (ie, SBP >160 mmHg or MAP <60 mmHg) expressed as a percentage of total surgical procedure time. Secondary efficacy endpoint was the value on a hemodynamic instability score. RESULTS: Median cumulative time outside blood pressure targets was 11.1% (interquartile range [IQR]: 4.3-20.6] in the phenoxybenzamine group compared to 12.2% (5.3-20.2)] in the doxazosin group (P = .75, r = 0.03). The hemodynamic instability score was 38.0 (28.8-58.0) and 50.0 (35.3-63.8) in the phenoxybenzamine and doxazosin group, respectively (P = .02, r = 0.20). The 30-day cardiovascular complication rate was 8.8% and 6.9% in the phenoxybenzamine and doxazosin group, respectively (P = .68). There was no mortality after 30 days. CONCLUSIONS: The duration of blood pressure outside the target range during resection of a PPGL was not different after preoperative treatment with either phenoxybenzamine or doxazosin. Phenoxybenzamine was more effective in preventing intraoperative hemodynamic instability, but it could not be established whether this was associated with a better clinical outcome.
Purpose: Tamsulosin is formulated as sustained release beads within a capsule to prevent rapid absorption and associated hypotension. The package insert advises the capsule is swallowed whole; not crushed, chewed, or opened. To our knowledge, there are no current data on opening capsules for adults with enteral tube feeds. Given the unidentified safety and efficacy of administration via enteral tubes, alternative alpha blockers with less selectivity for alpha(1A) are often used. Methods: A single center retrospective chart review was conducted at two hospital sites. Adult patients that received at least one dose of tamsulosin or doxazosin while an enteral feeding tube was placed were included. Safety outcomes evaluated were the number of documented tube obstructions and incidence of medication associated hypotension. Results: 169 patients were included. Ten enteral feeding tube obstructions were reported, 4 of 110 (3.64%) in the tamsulosin arm and 6 of 59 (10.17%) in the doxazosin arm (RR .36, 95% CI .11 to 1.22, P = .099). At least 1 episode of medication associated hypotension occurred in 22 of 98 (22.45%) in the tamsulosin arm and 20 of 49 (40.82%) in the doxazosin arm (RR .55, 95% CI .33 to .91, P = .019). Conclusion: There was no statistically significant difference in the number of tube obstructions between patients receiving tamsulosin or doxazosin via enteral tube feeds. Patients receiving doxazosin were at increased risk of experiencing medication related hypotension. Tamsulosin capsules may be opened and administered via enteral feeding tubes if administered with content integrity intact.
PURPOSE: To investigate the effect of doxazosin on autophagy and the activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) in vivo and in vitro and determine the underlying mechanism. METHODS: In vivo, a mouse liver fibrosis model was induced by the intraperitoneal injection of carbon tetrachloride (CCl(4)). Doxazosin was administered at doses of 2.5, 5 and 10 mg/(kg*day) by gavage. After 20 weeks, blood and liver tissues were collected for serological and histological analysis, respectively. Blood analysis, hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining, Masson's trichrome staining, immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence staining were used to measure the extent of liver fibrosis in model and control mice. In vitro, the human HSC cell line LX-2 was cultured and treated with different doses of doxazosin for the indicated times. The effects of doxazosin on LX-2 cell proliferation and migration were examined by Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) and Transwell assays, respectively. The number of autophagosomes in LX-2 cells was observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Infection with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-LC3B adenovirus, GFP-red fluorescent protein (RFP)-LC3B adenovirus and mCherry-EGFP-LC3 adeno-associated virus was performed to examine changes in autophagic flux in vitro and in vivo. Cell apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry in vitro and by TUNEL assays both in vitro and in vivo. Immunoblotting was performed to evaluate the expression levels of proteins related to fibrosis, autophagy, apoptosis, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). RESULTS: Doxazosin inhibited HSC proliferation and migration. HSC activation was attenuated by doxazosin in a concentration-dependent manner in vivo and in vitro. Doxazosin also blocked autophagic flux and induced apoptosis in HSCs. In addition, the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway was activated by doxazosin and regulated fibrosis, autophagy and apoptosis in HSCs. CONCLUSION: The study confirmed that doxazosin could inhibit autophagy by activating the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and attenuate liver fibrosis.
BACKGROUND: Benign prostatic hyperplasia is commonly treated with alpha-adrenergic-receptor antagonists (alpha-blockers) or 5alpha-reductase inhibitors. The long-term effect of these drugs, singly or combined, on the risk of clinical progression is unknown. METHODS: We conducted a long-term, double-blind trial (mean follow-up, 4.5 years) involving 3047 men to compare the effects of placebo, doxazosin, finasteride, and combination therapy on measures of the clinical progression of benign prostatic hyperplasia. RESULTS: The risk of overall clinical progression--defined as an increase above base line of at least 4 points in the American Urological Association symptom score, acute urinary retention, urinary incontinence, renal insufficiency, or recurrent urinary tract infection--was significantly reduced by doxazosin (39 percent risk reduction, P<0.001) and finasteride (34 percent risk reduction, P=0.002), as compared with placebo. The reduction in risk associated with combination therapy (66 percent for the comparison with placebo, P<0.001) was significantly greater than that associated with doxazosin (P<0.001) or finasteride (P<0.001) alone. The risks of acute urinary retention and the need for invasive therapy were significantly reduced by combination therapy (P<0.001) and finasteride (P<0.001) but not by doxazosin. Doxazosin (P<0.001), finasteride (P=0.001), and combination therapy (P<0.001) each resulted in significant improvement in symptom scores, with combination therapy being superior to both doxazosin (P=0.006) and finasteride (P<0.001) alone. CONCLUSIONS: Long-term combination therapy with doxazosin and finasteride was safe and reduced the risk of overall clinical progression of benign prostatic hyperplasia significantly more than did treatment with either drug alone. Combination therapy and finasteride alone reduced the long-term risk of acute urinary retention and the need for invasive therapy.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia is an increasingly prevalent condition affecting > 50% of men > 65 years of age. Although it is a condition that is unlikely to be life threatening, it can significantly affect quality of life with distressing lower urinary tract symptoms. Increasingly, medical therapy is being used as first-line treatment for men with moderate-to-severe lower urinary tract symptoms. Two main pharmacological classes of drugs are used: 5alpha-reductase inhibitors and alpha-1 selective blockers. Both these classes of drugs have shown good tolerability and clinical efficacy. This article examines the potential benefit of the use of combination therapy. In particular, what is the evidence for using doxazosin and finasteride therapy together?
The importance of reporting correlations among side effects is examined using studies of BPH drugs as examples. The special relation of placebo effects in studying side-effects of drugs, as opposed to their efficacies, is introduced, and the need for special new controls is presented.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) may decrease patient quality of life and often leads to acute urinary retention and surgical intervention. While effective treatments are available, many BPH patients do not respond or develop resistance to treatment. To understand molecular determinants of clinical symptom persistence after initiating BPH treatment, we investigated gene expression profiles before and after treatments in the prostate transitional zone of 108 participants in the Medical Therapy of Prostatic Symptoms (MTOPS) Trial. Unsupervised clustering revealed molecular subgroups characterized by expression changes in a large set of genes associated with resistance to finasteride, a 5alpha-reductase inhibitor. Pathway analyses within this gene cluster found finasteride administration induced changes in fatty acid metabolism, amino acid metabolism, immune response, steroid hormone metabolism, and kinase activity within the transitional zone. We found that patients without this transcriptional response were highly likely to develop clinical progression, which is expected in 13.2% of finasteride-treated patients. Importantly, a patient's transcriptional response to finasteride was associated with their pre-treatment kinase expression. Further, we identified novel expression signatures of finasteride resistance among the transcriptionally responded patients. These patients showed different gene expression profiles at baseline and increased prostate transitional zone volume compared to the patients who responded to the treatment. Our work suggests molecular mechanisms of clinical resistance to finasteride treatment that could be potentially helpful for personalized BPH treatment as well as new drug development to increase patient drug response.
PURPOSE: Preoperative medical management is critical to prevent intraoperative cardiovascular complications in patients with pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGLs). Initial treatment involves alpha-adrenergic receptor blockers. However, while the routine use of metyrosine alongside these blockers is not strongly recommended due to a lack of evidence supporting its efficacy and associated safety concerns, there are previous studies on combination therapy with phenoxybenzamine and metyrosine. There are few reports on combination therapy with the selective alpha1-adrenergic receptor blocker doxazosin. Therefore, we investigated this combination treatment, which theoretically can affect perioperative outcomes in patients with PPGLs. To our knowledge, this is the first such study. METHODS: This retrospective single-center observational study involved 51 patients who underwent surgical resection of PPGLs at Kobe University Hospital between 2014 and 2022. All patients received doxazosin at maximum doses. Fourteen patients received concomitant metyrosine, while 37 received doxazosin alone. Their perioperative outcomes were compared. RESULTS: No severe event, such as acute coronary syndrome, was observed in either group. Intraoperatively, the doxazosin + metyrosine group exhibited a lower median minimum systolic blood pressure (56 [54-60] vs. 68 [59-74] mmHg, P = 0.03) and required lower median remifentanil (P = 0.04) and diltiazem (P = 0.02) doses than the doxazosin-alone group. CONCLUSION: The combination of metyrosine and doxazosin as a preoperative treatment for PPGLs affects intraoperative circulatory hemodynamics, such as a reduced occurrence of blood pressure elevation during surgery. Further research is necessary to identify patients who will benefit most from this combination treatment.
The efficiency of drug therapy should be evaluated by not only its directed action on specific organ or target parameter, but also its effects on general regulatory and adaptive status.
Alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists have been shown to provide effective relief from symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) with attendant improvements in quality of life. Although the alpha1A-adrenoceptor subtype predominates over other subtypes of alpha1 adrenoceptors in the prostate gland, there is no evidence that a subselective alpha-adrenoceptor antagonist provides a clinical advantage over a selective alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonist in the treatment of patients with BPH. The pharmacokinetic profiles of alpha1A-adrenoceptor antagonists and their documented penetration of the blood-brain barrier (CNS adverse effects) preclude a clinical benefit of subselective alpha-adrenoceptor blockers over selective alpha1 blockers.
PURPOSE: To describe the otorhinolaryngological adverse effects of the main drugs used in urological practice. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A review of the scientific literature was performed using a combination of specific descriptors (side effect, adverse effect, scopolamine, sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil, oxybutynin, tolterodine, spironolactone, furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide, doxazosin, alfuzosin, terazosin, prazosin, tamsulosin, desmopressin) contained in publications until April 2020. Manuscripts written in English, Portuguese, and Spanish were manually selected from the title and abstract. The main drugs used in Urology were divided into five groups to describe their possible adverse effects: alpha-blockers, anticholinergics, diuretics, hormones, and phosphodiesterase inhibitors. RESULTS: The main drugs used in Urology may cause several otorhinolaryngological adverse effects. Dizziness was most common, but dry mouth, rhinitis, nasal congestion, epistaxis, hearing loss, tinnitus, and rhinorrhea were also reported and varies among drug classes. CONCLUSIONS: Most of the drugs used in urological practice have otorhinolaryngological adverse effects. Dizziness was most common, but dry mouth, rhinitis, nasal congestion, epistaxis, hearing loss, tinnitus, and rhinorrhea were also reported. Therefore, doctors must be aware of these adverse effects to improve adherence to the treatment and to minimize damage to the health of patients.
Antihypertensive monotherapy provides adequate blood pressure control in less than 50% of patients with hypertension (BP > 140/90 mmHg), especially those with stage 2-3 disease. This article reviews clinical studies that demonstrate that add-on therapy with an alpha1-blocker (doxazosin, terazosin or prazosin) is an effective and well-tolerated regimen for improving blood pressure control in patients with inadequately controlled hypertension. Furthermore, alpha1-blockers have therapeutic benefits that go beyond blood pressure management. They have a small but positive effect on the serum lipid profile and they have favourable or benign effects on conditions that frequently coexist with hypertension, such as type 2 diabetes mellitus and benign prostatic hyperplasia.
BACKGROUND: Alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists (alpha1-blockers) are first-line drugs for the treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms associated with benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH). Doxazosin gastrointestinal therapeutic system (GITS) and tamsulosin belong to the 2 most frequently prescribed alpha1-blockers. This systematic review and meta-analysis was performed to compare the efficacy and tolerability of these 2 alpha1-blockers. METHODS: A systematic review of published randomized controlled trials in English or Chinese language was performed using the PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, CNKI, Wanfang, and Vip databases. After data extraction and quality assessment, the meta-analysis was performed to compare clinical parameters (International Prostate Symptom Score [IPSS] total [IPSS-T], storage [IPSS-S], voiding [IPSS-V], maximum urine flow [Qmax], and postvoid residual) and adverse events (AEs) that changed after first drug intake. RESULTS: After the screening, 8 eligible randomized controlled trials with 1316 patients were identified. Doxazosin-GITS showed a significantly higher efficacy compared with tamsulosin (IPSS-T P < .001, IPSS-S P < .001, and IPSS-V P < .001). There were no significant differences between the 2 drugs for changes in Qmax (P = .477) or postvoid residual (P = .739). The overall AEs were significantly lower in the doxazosin-GITS group (risk ratio: 0.77; 95% CI: 0.54-1.08; P = .036). However, dizziness (P = .387), headache (P = .745), asthenia (P = .693), postural hypotension (P = .114), and retrograde ejaculation (P = .187) were similar between the 2 groups. CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis indicates that doxazosin-GITS has significantly higher efficacy and lower AEs than tamsulosin in patients with lower urinary tract symptoms/benign prostate hyperplasia.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is very common in older men, causing symptoms that can markedly impair quality of life. Surgical treatment, typically transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP), is highly effective but can be costly and is associated with the risk for significant morbidity. Medical treatments for BPH are targeted toward reducing bladder outlet obstruction either by androgen blockade to reduce prostatic volume or alpha-adrenergic blockade to relax the smooth muscle tone of the prostate. In recent years, understanding of the sympathetic innervation of the prostate has improved. This has been paralleled by the development of alpha-adrenergic blocking agents, from nonselective alpha-antagonists, to selective alpha1-antagonists, to the more selective alpha1A-antagonists. It is anticipated that more specific agents will optimize the therapeutic effectiveness of alpha-adrenergic blockade in the prostate while reducing the side effects associated with alpha-adrenergic blockade in other areas of the body, such as the vascular system. This article reviews the evolution of alpha-blockade therapy in management of BPH, focusing on tamsulosin, an agent targeted toward the alpha1A-adrenoceptor that predominates in the prostate. Clinical trials in Europe and the United States have provided evidence that tamsulosin is effective at doses of 0.4 and 0.8 mg/day. At both doses, tamsulosin is associated with significant improvements in the American Urological Association symptom score and the mean and peak urinary flow rates as compared with placebo. This once-daily alpha1A-adrenergic antagonist is well-tolerated, with a minimal potential for the side effects associated with alphas-blocker therapy.
Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) suggestive of benign prostatic obstruction are common in aging men. Nearly 25% of men >40 years of age have LUTS. Medical therapy with alpha-blockade is the most common method of medical therapy for benign prostatic obstruction. Multiple methods of minimally invasive surgical therapies have been introduced in the last decade. These methods include balloon dilatation, temporary and permanent urethral stents, various laser techniques, microwave thermotherapy, transurethral needle ablation, electrovaporization, and high-intensity focused ultrasound. alpha-Receptor blockers to reduce the sympathetic tone of the prostate are considered as first-line therapy to relieve the symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Selective alpha(1)-receptor blockers relax prostatic smooth muscle, relieve bladder outlet obstruction, and enhance urine flow with fewer side effects. In addition, it was determined that treating patients with alpha-blockers increases prostatic apoptosis. Pharmacokinetic activity, mode of action, clinical efficacy, and side effects of the selective alpha(1)-receptor blockers terazosin, doxazosin, and prazosin are reviewed.
Objective: The aim of this study was to determine the efficacy of doxazosin, an alpha(1)-adrenergic antagonist, for the treatment of co-occurring posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and alcohol use disorder (AUD). Methods: This 12-week, double-blind, randomized controlled trial of doxazosin (16 mg/d) was conducted between June 2016 and December 2019 at the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center in Charleston, South Carolina. Participants were military veterans (N = 141) who met DSM-5 criteria for current PTSD and AUD and were randomly assigned to receive doxazosin (n = 70) or placebo (n = 71). Primary outcome measures were the Clinician Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS-5), the PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5), and the Timeline Follow-Back (TLFB). Results: Findings from the intent-to-treat analyses revealed that participants in both groups demonstrated statistically significant reductions in CAPS-5 and PCL-5 scores (P < .0001), but, contrary to hypotheses, no significant differences were observed between groups. Percent drinking days and percent heavy drinking days also decreased significantly during treatment, but there were no differences between groups (P < .0001). Abstinence during treatment was significantly higher in the doxazosin versus the placebo group (22% vs 7%, P = .017); however, participants in the doxazosin group consumed a greater number of drinks on drinking days (6.15 vs 4.56, P = .0096). A total of 74.5% of the sample completed the treatment phase, and there were no group differences in retention or adverse events. Conclusions: Doxazosin was safe and tolerable but was not more effective than placebo in reducing PTSD or AUD severity in this dually diagnosed sample. Clinical considerations such as heterogeneity of PTSD and AUD presentation and potential moderators are discussed in the context of future research directions. Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02500602.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize selective alpha 1-adrenergic blockers as antihypertensive agents, particularly doxazosin. CHARACTERISTICS OF ALPHA-BLOCKERS: These agents lower elevated blood pressure by reducing peripheral arterial resistance without increasing the heart rate or reducing cardiac output. They also reduce left ventricular hypertrophy; improve an atherogenic lipid profile; reduce the risk of thrombotic complications; reduce the formation of fatty streaks, the precursor of advanced athersclerosis; have no adverse metabolic effects in diabetic hypertensives; have a comparable side-effect profile to that of other antihypertensive drugs; and are cost-effective. CONCLUSIONS: In addition to reducing high blood pressure, the alpha-blockers reduce a number of other cardiovascular risk factors. In attempts to solve the hypertension-coronary dilemma, these additional effects may prove to be of crucial importance.
The prevalence of both benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and hypertension increases with advancing age. These conditions coexist in almost 25% of men aged 60 years and older. The use of transurethral prostatectomy, a common surgical therapy for BPH, alleviates symptoms but results in erectile dysfunction (ED) in up to 35% of patients. Pharmacological intervention for BPH, including androgen-suppressing agents, has resulted in an increased incidence of sexual adverse experiences compared with the incidence observed in patients receiving placebo. Patients with hypertension also frequently experience problems with sexual function; in addition, antihypertensive medications used to treat this disease may increase problems with sexual function. ED is an age-related phenomenon, with estimated prevalence rates of 39% among men 40 years old and 67% among those 70 years old. Doxazosin, an alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonist indicated for the treatment of patients with BPH and/or hypertension, is not associated with the occurrence of ED compared with other antihypertensive treatments.
Myasthenia gravis is a neuroimmunological disorder leading to skeletal muscle weakness. Common symptoms of the disease, such as anxiety, depression, and insomnia, can cause significant distress in patients. Unfortunately, selecting an appropriate medication for treatment of psychiatric comorbidities can prove to be challenging for providers given the unique pharmacologic constraints that myasthenia gravis presents. The authors present the following clinical vignette and accompanying discussion in an attempt to highlight the special considerations that must be taken into account when treating anxiety and insomnia in patients with myasthenia gravis, as well as to provide an overview of available medication options through the lens of existing constraints.
