BACKGROUND: Droperidol is a butyrophenone, with antiemetic, sedative, anxiolytic, and analgesic properties. Although droperidol was once widely used in both emergency and perioperative settings, use of the medication declined rapidly after a 2001 U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) boxed warning called the medication's safety into question. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this clinical review was to provide evidence-based answers to questions about droperidol's safety and to examine its efficacy in its various clinical indications. DISCUSSION: Droperidol is an effective sedative, anxiolytic, analgesic, and antiemetic medication. As a sedative, when compared with haloperidol, droperidol has faster onset, as well as greater efficacy, in patients experiencing acute psychosis, with no increase in adverse events. As an antiemetic, droperidol has been found to have equal or greater efficacy in reducing nausea and vomiting than ondansetron and metoclopramide, with similar adverse effects and the added effect of reducing the need for rescue analgesia in these patients. As an analgesic, droperidol is effective for migraines and has opioid-sparing effects when used to treat abdominal pain. Droperidol is a particularly useful adjunct in patients who are opioid-tolerant, whose pain is often difficulty to manage adequately. CONCLUSIONS: Droperidol seems to be effective and safe, despite the boxed warning issued by the FDA. Droperidol is a powerful antiemetic, sedative, anxiolytic, antimigraine, and adjuvant to opioid analgesia and does not require routine screening with electrocardiography when used in low doses in otherwise healthy patients before administration in the emergency department.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: We aim to determine the most efficacious of 3 common medication regimens for the sedation of acutely agitated emergency department (ED) patients. METHODS: We undertook a randomized, controlled, double-blind, triple-dummy, clinical trial in 2 metropolitan EDs between October 2014 and August 2015. Patients aged 18 to 65 years and requiring intravenous medication sedation for acute agitation were enrolled and randomized to an intravenous bolus of midazolam 5 mg-droperidol 5 mg, droperidol 10 mg, or olanzapine 10 mg. Two additional doses were administered, if required: midazolam 5 mg, droperidol 5 mg, or olanzapine 5 mg. The primary outcome was the proportion of patients adequately sedated at 10 minutes. RESULTS: Three hundred forty-nine patients were randomized to the 3 groups. Baseline characteristics were similar across the groups. Ten minutes after the first dose, significantly more patients in the midazolam-droperidol group were adequately sedated compared with the droperidol and olanzapine groups: differences in proportions 25.0% (95% confidence interval [CI] 12.0% to 38.1%) and 25.4% (95% CI 12.7% to 38.3%), respectively. For times to sedation, the differences in medians between the midazolam-droperidol group and the droperidol and olanzapine groups were 6 (95% CI 3 to 8) and 6 (95% CI 3 to 7) minutes, respectively. Patients in the midazolam-droperidol group required fewer additional doses or alternative drugs to achieve adequate sedation. The 3 groups' adverse event rates and lengths of stay did not differ. CONCLUSION: Midazolam-droperidol combination therapy is superior, in the doses studied, to either droperidol or olanzapine monotherapy for intravenous sedation of the acutely agitated ED patient.
This is one of a series of statements discussing the utilization of GI endoscopy in common clinical situations. The Standards of Practice Committee of the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy prepared this text. In preparing this guideline, a MEDLINE literature search was performed, and additional references were obtained from the bibliographies of the identified articles and from recommendations of expert consultants. When little or no data exist from well-designed prospective trials, emphasis is given to results from large series and reports from recognized experts. Guidelines for appropriate utilization of endoscopy are based on a critical review of the available data and expert consensus. Further controlled clinical studies are needed to clarify aspects of this statement, and revision may be necessary as new data appear. Clinical consideration may justify a course of action at variance to these recommendations.
This article discusses research in the areas of morbidity and mortality, epidemiologic risk factors, phenomenology, pathophysiology, and treatment of delirium. Delirium assessment instruments are reviewed. The neuropathophysiologic understanding of delirium is discussed in the context of important CNS neural circuitry. Pharmacologic treatments of delirium in adults and children are outlined, with particular emphasis on intravenous use of butyrophenone neuroleptics.
In Switzerland, approximately 32,000 patients are hospitalized annually due to adverse drug reactions (ADRs), representing 2.3% of all hospitalizations. During the perioperative period, the administration of a variety of drugs from different classes over a relatively short period of time increases the risk of ADR. Here, we describe the case of a 32-year-old woman who was administered droperidol to treat nausea in the recovery room after a myomectomy and who subsequently became comatose. Correctable metabolic, respiratory, and cerebrovascular disorders were ruled out. Six hours after the event, she was extubated without residual effects. We discuss potential ADR for droperidol.
The cardiovascular responses to anaesthesia, laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation were studied in 20 healthy adult patients. The mean arterial pressure increase following intubation was 1.60 mmHg (SEM +/- 3.52 mmHg) in patients to whom droperidol 150 microgram/kg was given intravenously before anaesthesia compared with a rise of 26.50 mmHg (SEM +/- 4.35 mmHg) in a control group of patients.
Twenty-one patients with vertigo related to inner ear disease were treated with droperidol as their sole form of therapy. I report the results and discuss droperidol therapy in detail with regard to its pharmacology, dosage techniques, and the necessary precautions.
PURPOSE: After a long period of low utilization, droperidol has become easier to obtain in the US market. This comprehensive review discusses the safety, indications, clinical efficacy, and dosing of droperidol for use in the emergency department (ED) setting. SUMMARY: In 2001 the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandated a boxed warning in the labeling of droperidol after reports of QT interval prolongation associated with droperidol use. Since that time, it has been difficult to access droperidol in the United States; as a result, many practicing clinicians lack experience in its clinical use. Multiple studies have been conducted to assess the clinical efficacy and safety of droperidol use in ED patients. Results consistently show the safety of droperidol and its clinical efficacy when used as an analgesic, antiemetic, and sedative. Now that droperidol is more widely available for use in the US market, pharmacists and prescribers need to reliably translate safety and efficacy data compiled since 2001 to help ensure appropriate and effective use of the medication. CONCLUSION: Droperidol is an effective and safe option for the treatment of acute agitation, migraine, nausea, and pain for patients in the ED setting. Healthcare professionals can adopt droperidol for use in clinical practice, and they should become familiar with how to dose and monitor droperidol for safe and effective use.
In December 2001, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) added a "black box" warning to the labeling for droperidol stating that all doses, even those typically used for postoperative nausea and vomiting, were potentially associated with malignant ventricular dysrhythmias, including torsade de pointes. The 19 cases in which droperidol doses less than 10 mg were allegedly associated with such dysrhythmias are reviewed in detail. Confounding issues present in a majority of the cases make it difficult to incriminate droperidol as the likely cause of the reported adverse events.
One hundred and twenty-eight children aged three to ten years, were studied to determine the effect of premedication on amnesia for the preanesthetic period. Four comparable groups were used: A control group, no premedication; oral trimeprazine tartrate 2 mg/kg, methadone 0.1 mg/kg plus droperidol 0.15 mg/kg (T.M.D.); oral midazolam 0.45 mg/kg; intramuscular midazolam 0.15 mg/kg. Amnesia was tested for four pictorial facts, and for induction of anesthesia. For pictorial facts, both routes of midazolam administration gave a sixty percent incidence of amnesia compared with sixteen percent in the control group (p less than 0.001). The T.M.D. premedication provided a forty-three percent incidence, also better than the control group (p less than 0.05). Induction was remembered by fifty percent of the midazolam children compared with sixty-six percent of the T.M.D. group (p greater than 0.05) and eight-one percent of the control group (p less than 0.05). The potential advantages of amnesia in pediatric premedication are discussed.
In a double-blind clinical study, 27 acutely agitated patients were treated with an intramuscular injection of 5 mg of droperidol or 5 mg of haloperidol from identical appearing vials. At 30 minutes following treatment, 81% of the patients treated with haloperidol but only 36% treated with droperidol required a second injection (p less than .05). Thus, droperidol, a safe butyrophenone neuroleptic, appears to be a drug of choice for rapid and reliable control of acute agitation.
This report describes neuroleptic malignant syndrome in a previously healthy 6-year-old child. Droperidol and metoclopramide had been given, and hyponatraemia may have been a precipitating factor. Treatment with dantrolene sodium combined with a forced alkaline diuresis resulted in a full recovery.
Angioedema, also known as angioneurotic edema or Quincke's disease, is a well-demarcated, localized edema involving the subcutaneous tissues that may cause upper-airway obstruction. We report the case of a previously healthy 19-year-old man with no known drug allergies in whom angioedema with significant tongue swelling and protrusion developed within 10 minutes of the administration of a single IV dose of droperidol.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is a rare complication of antipsychotic medications. This paper describes the case of a trauma patient who received haloperidol and droperidol for severe agitation, developed neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and was treated successfully with dantrolene sodium, and also provides a review of the literature.
Because psychostimulant intoxication can lead to serious health risks for the patient, it is often necessary to ensure that the patient receives both adequate medical surveillance and rapid tranquillisation.<br/> AIM: To find out whether there is scientific evidence that psychopharmacological intervention helps patients with psychostimulant intoxication to manage aggression and agitation.<br/> METHOD: We searched the literature systematically.<br/> RESULTS: Our study showed that intravenous droperidol worked faster and was more effective than intravenous lorazepam in inducing sedation in patients intoxicated with psychostimulants. In other studies the number of patients intoxicated with psychostimulants was too small or the patient population was not described in sufficient detail for any meaningful conclusions to be drawn.<br/> CONCLUSION: So far, research has been so limited that it has not yet provided convincing evidence about the best medication to use in the treatment of aggressive patients intoxicated with psychostimulants.
The dopamine antagonists, particularly droperidol, are effective at treating N&V. Because dopamine plays many roles in the body, especially in the brain, a degree of alteration in mental status should be expected, especially with higher doses. Other less frequent side effects include QT prolongation. When given for non- chemotherapy-induced N&V treatment QT prolongation is rare. Higher doses warrant clinical awareness and ability to identify and treat prolonged QT and its sequelae. Invited authors for a following column will discuss QT prolongation and implications.
During a period of one year, 119 patients with chronic pain received injections of opioids via a catheter inserted in the lumbar epidural space. Twenty-three patients (19%) showed evidence of tolerance and were given droperidol 1.25-5.0 mg epidurally. In 20 patients in this study, there was a significant reduction in the number of epidural opioid injections. Six patients complained of excessive sedation, which disappeared when the dose of droperidol was reduced, although this did not affect the analgesia. One patient given an accidental overdose of droperidol developed reversible Parkinsonism. It is concluded that epidural administration of the dopamine antagonist droperidol may be beneficial as supplementary medication to epidural opioids when tolerance develops.
Postoperative nausea with emesis is an undesirable side effect of general anesthesia in patients who have undergone ophthalmic surgery. The antiemetic effect of intravenous droperidol (Inapsine) was measured in a double-blind, controlled study of 78 patients undergoing general (enflurane [Ethrane]) anesthesia for a variety of ophthalmic procedures. There was a significant difference in the incidence of postoperative nausea and/or emesis in the droperidol-treated group, 13 of 78 (16%) as compared with the control population (37 of 87 [42%]). No complications of droperidol administration were observed. Droperidol may be an effective antiemetic drug if used prophylactically in patients who receive general anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery.
BACKGROUND: Chemical restraint (CR) is emergency drug management for acute behavioural disturbances in people with mental illness, provided with the aim of rapid calming and de-escalating potentially dangerous situations. AIMS: To describe a systematic review of Randomised Controlled Trials (RCTs) reporting on short-term safety and effectiveness of drugs used for CR, administered to non-consenting adults with mental health conditions, who require emergency management of acute behavioural disturbances. A meta-analysis was conducted of those RCTs with comparable interventions, outcome measures and measurement timeframes. METHOD: Academic databases were searched for RCTs published between 1 January 1996 and 20th April 2020. Relevant RCTs were critically appraised using the 13-item JBI checklist. All RCTs were described, and step-wise filters were applied to identify studies suitable for meta-analysis. For these, forest and funnel plots were constructed, and Q and I(2) statistics guided interpretation of pooled findings, tested using MedCalc Version 19.1. RESULTS: Of 23 relevant RCTs, 18 (78.2% total) had excellent methodological quality scores (at least 90%). Eight RCTs were potentially relevant for meta-analysis (six of excellent quality), reporting 20 drug arms in total. Adverse events for 6-36% patients were reported in all 20 drug arms. Four drug arms from two homogenous studies of N = 697 people were meta-analysed. These RCTs tested two antipsychotic drugs (droperidol, olanzapine) delivered intravenously in either 5 mgs or 10 mg doses, with outcomes of time to calm, percentage calm within five or 10 min, and adverse events. There were no significant differences between drug arms for either measure of calm. However, 5 mg olanzapine incurred significantly lower risk of adverse events than 10 mg olanzapine (OR 0.4 (95%CI 0.2-0.8)), although no dose differences were found for droperidol. CONCLUSION: 5 mg intravenous olanzapine is recommended for quick, safe emergency management of people with acute behavioural disturbances associated with mental illness.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of droperidol for the relief of acute migraine headaches. DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE search (1946 to August 2014) was performed using the following keywords and associated medical subject headings: droperidol, inapsine, headache, migraine, and migraine disorder. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: The search was conducted to identify randomized controlled trials comparing droperidol with placebo or an active control in adult patients with acute migraine headaches that were published in English. Primary end points included acute headache improvement after the intervention. Safety end points included the frequency of extrapyramidal symptoms, somnolence, and cardiac adverse effects. DATA SYNTHESIS: In all, 5 manuscripts are included in this review. Patients presenting to the emergency department with acute headache desire rapid pain relief, which was the primary objective in each of the evaluated studies. Droperidol was better than placebo and at least as effective as comparator drugs such as prochlorperazine, meperidine, or olanzapine using droperidol doses of 2.5 to 5 mg, given either intramuscularly (IM) or intravenously (IV). The most commonly reported adverse effects were extrapyramidal symptoms and sedation. Cardiac adverse effects were not reported in any of the studies; however, only 2 articles described using cardiac monitoring. CONCLUSIONS: Parenteral droperidol is an effective option for the treatment of acute migraine. The minimum effective dose is 2.5 mg given IM or IV. Clinicians must be aware of the risk for adverse events, select appropriate patients, perform EKG monitoring for patients at risk of QTc prolongation, and institute treatment if necessary.
