There are many options for acute migraine attack treatment, but none is ideal for all patients. This study aims to review current medical office-based acute migraine therapy in adults and provides readers with an organized approach to this important facet of migraine treatment. A general literature review includes a review of several recent published guidelines. Acetaminophen, 4 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (ibuprofen, acetylsalicylic acid [ASA], naproxen sodium, and diclofenac potassium), and 7 triptans (almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan, and zolmitriptan) have good evidence for efficacy and form the core of acute migraine treatment. NSAID-triptan combinations, dihydroergotamine, non-opioid combination analgesics (acetaminophen, ASA, and caffeine), and several anti-emetics (metoclopramide, domperidone, and prochlorperazine) are additional evidence-based options. Opioid containing combination analgesics may be helpful in specific patients, but should not be used routinely. Clinical features to be considered when choosing an acute migraine medication include usual headache intensity, usual rapidity of pain intensity increase, nausea, vomiting, degree of disability, patient response to previously used medications, history of headache recurrence with previous attacks, and the presence of contraindications to specific acute medications. Available acute medications can be organized into 4 treatment strategies, including a strategy for attacks of mild to moderate severity (strategy one: acetaminophen and/or NSAIDs), a triptan strategy for patients with severe attacks and for attacks not responding to strategy one, a refractory attack strategy, and a strategy for patients with contraindications to vasoconstricting drugs. Acute treatment of migraine attacks during pregnancy, lactation, and for patients with chronic migraine is also discussed. In chronic migraine, it is particularly important that medication overuse is eliminated or avoided. Migraine treatment is complex, and treatment must be individualized and tailored to the patient's clinical features. Clinicians should make full use of available medications and formulations in an organized approach.
BACKGROUND: Although triptans are widely used in the acute management of migraine, there is uncertainty around the comparative efficacy of triptans among each other and vs non-triptan migraine treatments. We conducted systematic reviews and network meta-analyses to compare the relative efficacy of triptans (alone or in combination with other drugs) for acute treatment of migraines compared with other triptan agents, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), acetylsalicylic acid (ASA), acetaminophen, ergots, opioids, or anti-emetics. METHODS: The Cochrane Library, MEDLINE, and EMBASE were searched for randomized controlled trials that compared triptans (alone or in combination with other drugs) with placebo-controlled or active migraine treatments. Study selection, data extraction, and quality assessment were completed independently by multiple reviewers. Outcome data were combined and analyzed using a Bayesian network meta-analysis. For each outcome, odds ratios, relative risks, and absolute probability of response were calculated. RESULTS: A total of 133 randomized controlled trials met the inclusion criteria. Standard dose triptans relieved headaches within 2 hours in 42 to 76% of patients, and 2-hour sustained freedom from pain was achieved for 18 to 50% of patients. Standard dose triptans provided sustained headache relief at 24 hours in 29 to 50% of patients, and sustained freedom from pain in 18 to 33% of patients. Use of rescue medications ranged from 20 to 34%. For 2-hour headache relief, standard dose triptan achieved better outcomes (42 to 76% response) than ergots (38%); equal or better outcomes than NSAIDs, ASA, and acetaminophen (46 to 52%); and equal or slightly worse outcomes than combination therapy (62 to 80%). Among individual triptans, sumatriptan subcutaneous injection, rizatriptan ODT, zolmitriptan ODT, and eletriptan tablets were associated with the most favorable outcomes. INTERPRETATION/CONCLUSIONS: Triptans are effective for migraine relief. Standard dose triptans are associated with better outcomes than ergots, and most triptans are associated with equal or better outcomes compared with NSAIDs, ASA, and acetaminophen. Use of triptans in combination with ASA or acetaminophen, or using alternative modes of administration such as injectables, may be associated with slightly better outcomes than standard dose triptan tablets.
The triptans are a class of tryptamine-based drugs indicated for in the treatment of migraine headaches. The triptans act as serotonin (5-hydroxytriptamine) (5-HT) agonists by binding to various serotonin receptors, causing vasoconstriction and neuronal inhibition to alleviate migraines. There are 7 types of triptans currently available on the U.S. market: almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan and zolmitriptan. The objective of this study was to examine the use and effects of triptans in pregnancy. Although three of the triptans have pregnancy registries maintained by the manufacturer, triptan use in pregnancy has not been extensively studied. Information on the use of sumatriptan during pregnancy is relatively more abundant, because it has been on the market longer than the other triptans and may also have a higher percentage of the market share. There are no data to suggest teratogenicity for any of the triptans, although preterm birth rates appear to be elevated.
The study aims to provide an updated assessment of the evidence for individual pharmacological therapies for acute migraine treatment. Pharmacological therapy is frequently required for acutely treating migraine attacks. The American Academy of Neurology Guidelines published in 2000 summarized the available evidence relating to the efficacy of acute migraine medications. This review, conducted by the members of the Guidelines Section of the American Headache Society, is an updated assessment of evidence for the migraine acute medications. A standardized literature search was performed to identify articles related to acute migraine treatment that were published between 1998 and 2013. The American Academy of Neurology Guidelines Development procedures were followed. Two authors reviewed each abstract resulting from the search and determined whether the full manuscript qualified for review. Two reviewers studied each qualifying full manuscript for its level of evidence. Level A evidence requires at least 2 Class I studies, and Level B evidence requires 1 Class I or 2 Class II studies. The specific medications - triptans (almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan [oral, nasal spray, injectable, transcutaneous patch], zolmitriptan [oral and nasal spray]) and dihydroergotamine (nasal spray, inhaler) are effective (Level A). Ergotamine and other forms of dihydroergotamine are probably effective (Level B). Effective nonspecific medications include acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin, diclofenac, ibuprofen, and naproxen), opioids (butorphanol nasal spray), sumatriptan/naproxen, and the combination of acetaminophen/aspirin/caffeine (Level A). Ketoprofen, intravenous and intramuscular ketorolac, flurbiprofen, intravenous magnesium (in migraine with aura), and the combination of isometheptene compounds, codeine/acetaminophen and tramadol/acetaminophen are probably effective (Level B). The antiemetics prochlorperazine, droperidol, chlorpromazine, and metoclopramide are probably effective (Level B). There is inadequate evidence for butalbital and butalbital combinations, phenazone, intravenous tramadol, methadone, butorphanol or meperidine injections, intranasal lidocaine, and corticosteroids, including dexamethasone (Level C). Octreotide is probably not effective (Level B). There is inadequate evidence to refute the efficacy of ketorolac nasal spray, intravenous acetaminophen, chlorpromazine injection, and intravenous granisetron (Level C). There are many acute migraine treatments for which evidence supports efficacy. Clinicians must consider medication efficacy, potential side effects, and potential medication-related adverse events when prescribing acute medications for migraine. Although opioids, such as butorphanol, codeine/acetaminophen, and tramadol/acetaminophen, are probably effective, they are not recommended for regular use.
OBJECTIVE: To compare all licensed drug interventions as oral monotherapy for the acute treatment of migraine episodes in adults. DESIGN: Systematic review and network meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES: Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Medline, Embase, ClinicalTrials.gov, EU Clinical Trials Register, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, as well as websites of regulatory agencies and pharmaceutical companies without language restrictions until 24 June 2023. METHODS: Screening, data extraction, coding, and risk of bias assessment were performed independently and in duplicate. Random effects network meta-analyses were conducted for the primary analyses. The primary outcomes were the proportion of participants who were pain-free at two hours post-dose and the proportion of participants with sustained pain freedom from two to 24 hours post-dose, both without the use of rescue drugs. Certainty of the evidence was graded using the confidence in network meta-analysis (CINeMA) online tool. Vitruvian plots were used to summarise findings. An international panel of clinicians and people with lived experience of migraine co-designed the study and interpreted the findings. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR SELECTING STUDIES: Double blind randomised trials of adults (>/=18 years) with a diagnosis of migraine according to the International Classification of Headache Disorders. RESULTS: 137 randomised controlled trials comprising 89 445 participants allocated to one of 17 active interventions or placebo were included. All active interventions showed superior efficacy compared with placebo for pain freedom at two hours (odds ratios from 1.73 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.27 to 2.34) for naratriptan to 5.19 (4.25 to 6.33) for eletriptan), and most of them also for sustained pain freedom to 24 hours (odds ratios from 1.71 (1.07 to 2.74) for celecoxib to 7.58 (2.58 to 22.27) for ibuprofen). In head-to-head comparisons between active interventions, eletriptan was the most effective drug for pain freedom at two hours (odds ratios from 1.46 (1.18 to 1.81) to 3.01 (2.13 to 4.25)), followed by rizatriptan (1.59 (1.18 to 2.17) to 2.44 (1.75 to 3.45)), sumatriptan (1.35 (1.03 to 1.75) to 2.04 (1.49 to 2.86)), and zolmitriptan (1.47 (1.04 to 2.08) to 1.96 (1.39 to 2.86)). For sustained pain freedom, the most efficacious interventions were eletriptan and ibuprofen (odds ratios from 1.41 (1.02 to 1.93) to 4.82 (1.31 to 17.67)). Confidence in accordance with CINeMA ranged from high to very low. Sensitivity analyses on Food and Drug Administration licensed doses only, high versus low doses, risk of bias, and moderate to severe headache at baseline confirmed the main findings for both primary and secondary outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, eletriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan, and zolmitriptan had the best profiles and they were more efficacious than the recently marketed drugs lasmiditan, rimegepant, and ubrogepant. Although cost effectiveness analyses are warranted and careful consideration should be given to patients with a high risk cardiovascular profile, the most effective triptans should be considered as preferred acute treatment for migraine and included in the WHO List of Essential Medicines to promote global accessibility and uniform standards of care. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: Open Science Framework https://osf.io/kq3ys/.
Migraine is a multifactorial chronic central nervous system disorder, characterized by recurrent disabling attacks of moderate-to-severe headache. Symptomatic acute treatment of migraine should provide rapid and effective relief of the headache pain. The introduction of the 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonists (triptans) expanded the armamentarium for acute migraine pain treatment. Eletriptan is a second-generation triptan with favorable bioavailability and half-life, a high affinity for 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors and selectivity for cranial arteries. Eletriptan (40 and 80 mg) has been shown to be effective as early as 30 min after administration and well tolerated when compared to placebo. In comparative clinical trials, eletriptan 40 and 80 mg were superior or equivalent to other triptans and have shown a very high safety and tolerability profile across the studies performed. Eletriptan showed the most favorable cost-effectiveness profile when compared with other agents in its class.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Many acute treatment options exist for migraine. However, large-scale, head-to-head comparisons of treatment effectiveness from real-world patient experience reports are lacking. METHODS: This is a retrospective analysis of 10,842,795 migraine attack records extracted from an e-diary smartphone application between June 30, 2014, and July 2, 2020. We analyzed 25 acute medications among 7 classes-acetaminophen, nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), triptans, combination analgesics, ergots, antiemetics, and opioids. Gepants and ditan were not included in this analysis. Different doses and formulations of each medication, according to the generic names, were combined in this analysis. We used a 2-level nested logistic regression model to analyze the odds ratio (OR) of treatment effectiveness of each medication by adjusting concurrent medications and the covariance within the same user. Subgroup analyses were conducted for users in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada. RESULTS: Our final analysis included 4,777,524 medication-outcome pairs from 3,119,517 migraine attacks among 278,006 users. Triptans (mean OR 4.8), ergots (mean OR 3.02), and antiemetics (mean OR 2.67) were the top 3 classes of medications with the highest effectiveness, followed by opioids (mean OR 2.49), NSAIDs (other than ibuprofen, mean OR 1.94), combination analgesics (acetaminophen/acetylsalicylic acid/caffeine) (OR 1.69, 95% CI 1.67-1.71), others (OR 1.49, 95% CI 1.47-1.50), and acetaminophen (OR 0.83, 95% CI 0.83-0.84), using ibuprofen as the reference. Individual medications with the highest ORs were eletriptan (OR 6.1, 95% CI 6.0-6.3), zolmitriptan (OR 5.7, 95% CI 5.6-5.8), and sumatriptan (OR 5.2, 95% CI 5.2-5.3). The ORs of acetaminophen, NSAIDS, combination analgesics, and opioids were mostly around or less than 1, suggesting similar or lower reported effectiveness compared with ibuprofen. The ORs for 24 medications, except that of acetylsalicylic acid, achieved statistical significance with p < 0.0001, and our nested logistic regression model achieved an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.849. Country-specific subgroup analyses revealed similar ORs of each medication and AUC (United States 0.849, United Kingdom 0.864, and Canada 0.842), demonstrating the robustness of our analysis. DISCUSSION: Using a big data approach, we analyzed patient-generated real-time records of 10 million migraine attacks and conducted simultaneous head-to-head comparisons of 25 acute migraine medications. Our findings that triptans, ergots, and antiemetics are the most effective classes of medications align with the guideline recommendations and offer generalizable insights to complement clinical practice. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class IV evidence that for patients with migraine, selected acute medications (e.g., triptans, ergots, antiemetics) are associated with higher odds of user-rated positive response than ibuprofen.
Gateways to Clinical Trials is a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables has been retrieved from the Clinical Studies Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: Abetimus sodium, Ad5-FGF4, adeno-Interferon gamma, AE-941, AERx, alemtuzumab, alicaforsen sodium, almotriptan, alpharadin, anakinra, anatumomab mafenatox, ANG-453, anti-CTLA-4 Mab, AP-12009, aprepitant, aripiprazole, arsenic trioxide, astemizole, atlizumab, atomoxetine hydrochloride; Bevacizumab, BG-9928, BMS-188667, botulinum toxin type B, BufferGel; Caffeine, CDP-870, cetuximab, cilomilast, ciluprevir, clofarabine, continuous erythropoiesis receptor activator, CP-461; Darbepoetin alfa, deferasirox, desloratadine, desoxyepothilone B, diflomotecan, dolasetron, drotrecogin alfa (activated), duloxetine hydrochloride; ED-71, efalizumab, efaproxiral sodium, EKB-569, eletriptan, EMD-72000, enfuvirtide, erlotinib hydrochloride, escitalopram oxalate, etoricoxib; Fampridine, ferumoxytol, fondaparinux sodium; Gadofosveset sodium, gastrazole, gefitinib, gemtuzumab ozogamicin, gepirone hydrochloride glutamine; hLM609, HSPPC-96, human insulin; IDD-1, imatinib mesylate, indisulam, inhaled insulin, ixabepilone; Keratinocyte growth factor; Lapatinib, laquinimod, LDP-02, LE-SN38, levetiracetam, levosimendan, licofelone, liposomal doxorubicin, liposomal NDDP, lopinavir, lumiracoxib, LY-156735; Morphine hydrochloride, morphine-6-glucuronide, motexafin gadolinium, MS-27-275, MVA-5T4, MVA-Muc1-IL-2; Nemifitide ditriflutate, neridronic acid nitronaproxen, NSC-683864, NSC-703940, NVP-LAF-237; Oblimersen sodium, ocinaplon, oncomyc-NG, OPC-28326, ortataxel, ospemifene; Palonosetron hydrochloride, PEG-filgrastim peginterferon alfa-2(a), peginterferon alfa-2b, pegsunercept, pemetrexed disodium, pregabalin, prilocaine, pyridoxamine; RDP-58, recombinant glucagon-like peptide-1 (7-36) amide, recombinant human ApoA-I milano/phospholipid complex; SB-715992, soblidotin, sodium dichloroacetate, St. John's Wort extract; TAS-102, terfenadine, TG-1024, TG-5001, 4'-Thio-ara-C, tipranavir, topixantrone hydrochloride, trabectedin, transdermal selegiline, trimethoprim, troxacitabine, TT-232; Vatalanib succinate, vinflunine; Ximelagatran; Ziprasidone hydrochloride, Zoledronic acid monohydrate.
The potential advantages of eletriptan lie firstly in its lipophilicity reflected as an increased rate of absorption and Tmax compared to sumatriptan. This is manifested in a modest advantage over sumatriptan in terms of speed of onset, 2 h headache response and 2 h pain free. However, eletriptan has not yet been shown to have an advantage over the other triptans for lack of head-to head comparisons. It does not appear to have an advantage over sumatriptan for headache recurrence. The second advantage is the partial agonist activity at the 5-HT(1B) receptor, reducing the potential for cardiovascular side-effects compared to the other triptans. Although no serious cardiovascular events have yet been recognized, eletriptan should still be used with extreme caution for patients with cardiovascular risk factors.
Migraine is a paroxysmal disorder characterized by attacks of headache, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, and malaise. This review summarizes new treatment options for therapy of the acute attack. Mild or moderate migraine attacks are treated with antiemetics followed by analgesics such as aspirin, paracetamol, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or antiemetics combined with ergotamine or dihydroergotamine. Sumatriptan, a specific serotonin (5-HT)1B/D agonist is used when attacks do not respond to ergotamine, or when intolerable side effects occur. The new migraine drugs zolmitriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, and eletriptan differ slightly in their pharmacological profiles, which translates into minor differences in efficacy, headache recurrence, and side effects. New drugs in migraine prophylaxis include cyclandelate, valproic acid and magnesium.
We report the case of a 53-year-old male patient with a medical history significant for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, migraines with visual aura and non-obstructive coronary artery disease, who sustained a non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction a few hours after taking eletriptan as abortive therapy for migraine headaches. We believe this case implies a causal association between eletriptan and myocardial infarction, considering the timing of both drug intake and symptom onset. To the best of our knowledge this is the first reported myocardial infarction attributable to eletriptan overdose in a patient without obstructive coronary artery disease.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article provides a systematic, evidence-based approach to acute medication choices for the patient with migraine. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent clinical trials, meta-analyses, and practice guidelines have confirmed that four nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) with randomized controlled trial evidence for efficacy in migraine (ibuprofen, naproxen sodium, diclofenac potassium, and acetylsalicylic acid) and seven triptans (sumatriptan, rizatriptan, eletriptan, zolmitriptan, almotriptan, frovatriptan, and naratriptan) are appropriate medications for acute migraine treatment. Dihydroergotamine (DHE) is also suitable for selected patients. SUMMARY: NSAIDs and triptans are the mainstays of acute migraine therapy, and antiemetic drugs can be added as necessary. Opioids and combination analgesics containing opioids should not be used routinely. Patient-specific clinical features should help guide the selection of an acute medication for an individual patient. Acute medications can be organized into four treatment strategies for use in various clinical settings. The acetaminophen-NSAID strategy is suitable for patients with attacks of mild to moderate severity. The triptan strategy is suitable for patients with severe attacks and for those with attacks of moderate severity who do not respond well to NSAIDs. The refractory migraine strategies may be useful for patients who do not respond well to the NSAIDs or triptans alone and include using triptans and NSAIDs simultaneously in combination, DHE, and rescue medications (eg, dopamine antagonists, combination analgesics, and corticosteroids) when the patient's usual medications fail. Strategies for patients with contraindications to vasoconstricting drugs include use of NSAIDs, combination analgesics, and dopamine antagonists.Acetaminophen is the safest acute migraine drug during pregnancy, and acetaminophen with codeine is also an option. Sumatriptan may be an option during pregnancy for selected patients and is compatible with breast-feeding.
Recent studies of the pathophysiology of migraine provide evidence that the headache phase is associated with multiple physiologic actions. These actions include the release of vasoactive neuropeptides by the trigeminovascular system, vasodilation of intracranial extracerebral vessels, and increased nociceptive neurotransmission within the central trigeminocervical complex. The 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonists, collectively known as triptans, are a major advance in the treatment of migraine. The beneficial effects of the triptans in patients with migraine are related to their multiple mechanisms of action at sites implicated in the pathophysiology of migraine. These mechanisms are mediated by 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors and include vasoconstriction of painfully dilated cerebral blood vessels, inhibition of the release of vasoactive neuropeptides by trigeminal nerves, and inhibition of nociceptive neurotransmission. The high affinity of the triptans for 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors and their favorable pharmacologic properties contribute to the beneficial effects of these drugs, including rapid onset of action, effective relief of headache and associated symptoms, and low incidence of adverse effects.
Although the migraine clinical trials literature is enormous, we identified only nine published double-blind studies which compare an oral triptan with a non-triptan acute treatment. Of the nine comparative trials that met inclusion criteria for this review, six compared sumatriptan with other drugs, zolmitriptan was studied in two trials and eletriptan in one trial. In seven of the nine studies reviewed herein, differences between active treatments on the primary endpoints were not dramatic. Experience in clinical practice suggests that, for many patients, oral triptans are superior to non-specific acute treatments, creating a discrepancy between clinical trials results and clinical practice experience. Four possible explanations for the disparities between clinical trials and clinical practice are likely: (i) statistically significant differences may not have emerged because the studies lack adequate statistical power; (ii) patients treated with triptans in clinical practice may be relatively more responsive to triptans and relatively less responsive to other agents than those who participate in clinical trials (patient selection); (iii) headache response at 2 h, as measured in clinical trials, may not fully capture the benefits of triptans relative to other therapies, as assessed in clinical practice; (iv) waiting until pain is moderate or severe, as required in clinical trials, may disadvantage triptans relative to comparators.
Eletriptan (Relpax, Pfizer) is one of a group of anti-migraine medications commonly referred to as 'triptans'. It is a potent serotonin agonist at the 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor and is indicated for the acute treatment of migraine headaches. Eletriptan is administered orally. It is rapidly absorbed and has a bioavailability of 50% compared to 14% for sumatriptan. The relatively high lipophilicity of eletriptan compared to sumatriptan may explain its faster oral absorption and shorter time to onset of action. Results from comparative studies between oral eletriptan and sumatriptan indicate that eletriptan 80 mg was superior to sumatriptan 100 mg in onset of action, headache response rate, pain free response rate and relief of associated migraine symptoms at the 1 or 2 h time intervals. Although there was a modest increase in adverse events with eletriptan 80 mg than with sumatriptan 100 mg, eletriptan received a high patient acceptability rating (84%).
Migraine is a highly prevalent, chronic and disabling illness in which the gap between practice guideline recommendations and actual clinical practice remains wide. Eletriptan, similar to other triptans, is a potent 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonist with a high selectivity for cranial versus coronary artery constriction and favorable pharmacokinetic profile. An extensive program of double-blind, placebo-controlled, head-to-head comparator trials has demonstrated the superior efficacy of eletriptan compared with the combination of ergotamine and caffeine, and selected oral triptans for the acute treatment of migraine. Eletriptans tolerability profile makes it a good choice as a first-line treatment of migraine. An early treatment study suggests that treatment of mild headache is associated with unusually high sustained pain-free rates and a tolerability profile that is equivalent to placebo.
In randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of oral drug treatment of migraine attacks, efficacy is evaluated after 2 hours. The effect of oral naratriptan 2.5 mg with a maximum blood concentration (T(max) ) at 2 hours increases from 2 to 4 hours in RCTs. To check whether such a delayed effect is also present for other oral antimigraine drugs, we hand-searched the literature for publications on RCTs reporting efficacy. Two triptans, 3 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), a triptan combined with an NSAID and a calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonist were evaluated for their therapeutic gain with determination of time to maximum effect (E(max) ). E(max) was compared with known T(max) from pharmacokinetic studies to estimate the delay to pain-free. The delay in therapeutic gain varied from 1-2 hours for zolmitriptan 5 mg to 7 hours for naproxen 500 mg. An increase in effect from 2 to 4 hours was observed after eletriptan 40 mg, frovatriptan 2.5 mg and lasmiditan 200 mg, and after rizatriptan 10 mg (T(max)  = 1 h) from 1 to 2 hours. This strongly indicates a general delay of effect in oral antimigraine drugs. A review of 5 possible effects of triptans on the trigemino-vascular system did not yield a simple explanation for the delay. In addition, E(max) for triptans probably depends partly on the rise in plasma levels and not only on its maximum. The most likely explanation for the delay in effect is that a complex antimigraine system with more than 1 site of action is involved.
BACKGROUND: A beneficial prophylactic effect from eletriptan 40 mg given to a single patient with cluster headache was observed. OBJECTIVE: To further evaluate the efficacy of eletriptan in the short-term prophylaxis of cluster headache. METHODS: We treated 18 patients; mean age, 40.5 years (standard deviation [SD], 9.9). The number of cluster headache attacks was recorded during a baseline period of 6 days, and during 6 days of treatment with eletriptan 40 mg twice daily. The primary outcome measure was the reduction in the number of attacks during the treatment period. RESULTS: In the 16 patients who completed the study (2 patients were lost to follow-up), the mean total number of attacks decreased from 10.9 (SD, 5.6) during baseline to 6.3 (SD, 3.7) during treatment with eletriptan (P=.01) The reduction in the number of attacks exceeded 50% in 6 patients. CONCLUSION: This small open-label study suggests that eletriptan 40 mg twice daily may be useful for the short-term prophylaxis of cluster headache.
Eletriptan is a selective, high affinity serotonin 5-HT(1B/1D)-receptor agonist which is rapidly absorbed and has a long half-life in plasma. Eletriptan has been shown to be effective and well tolerated in randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled acute migraine trials and long-term open-label trials. Eletriptan maintains a consistency of response across three attacks and patients continue to respond to eletriptan for at least up to 1 year. Eletriptan has been compared with sumatriptan, zolmitriptan, naratriptan and ergotamine/caffeine in placebo-controlled, randomised, head-to-head trials, and has shown better efficacy with similar adverse events. In a large triptan meta-analysis, including 53 trials and > 24,000 patients, eletriptan 80 mg showed better efficacy, similar consistency but lower tolerability compared with sumatriptan 100 mg. Eletriptan has also shown efficacy in difficult-to-treat patients who were dissatisfied with their previous treatment with sumatriptan, rizatriptan, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or Excedrin.
