INTRODUCTION: International guidelines support the use of low molecular weight heparins for the treatment of thromboembolism and thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy. However, evidence of the benefit and harm associated with specific low molecular weight heparins such as enoxaparin is dated. No current systematic review and meta-analysis describing the safety and efficacy of enoxaparin for thromboembolism and thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy exists. METHODS: PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane databases were searched on August 17, 2018 for clinical trials or observational studies in pregnant women receiving enoxaparin; patients with a prosthetic heart valve were excluded. Risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using a random effects model, and heterogeneity was measured using the I(2) statistic. RESULTS: Of the 485 records identified in the search, 24 studies published clinical trials, and observational studies were found dating back to 2000. Only one observational cohort and one randomized control trial focused on the use of enoxaparin for thromboprophylaxis and therefore efficacy was not assessed; the other studies included women with recurrent pregnancy loss (15 studies), history of placental vascular complications (five studies), and recurrent in vitro fertilization failure (two studies) and were therefore analyzed in terms of safety only. Bleeding events were non-significantly more often reported for enoxaparin compared to untreated controls (RR 1.35 [0.88-2.07]) but less often reported for enoxaparin versus aspirin (RR 0.93 [0.62-1.39]); thromboembolic events, thrombocytopenia, and teratogenicity were rarely reported events; in patients with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss, encouragingly the rates of pregnancy loss were significantly lower for enoxaparin compared to untreated controls (RR 0.58 [0.34-0.96]) and enoxaparin + aspirin versus aspirin alone (RR 0.42 [0.32-0.56]) as well as observably lower for enoxaparin versus aspirin alone (RR 0.39 [0.15-1.01]), though significant heterogeneity was observed (I(2) > 60). CONCLUSION: Literature on the efficacy and safety of enoxaparin for thromboembolism and thromboprophylaxis remains scanty, and therefore efficacy was not assessed; in terms of safety, when including other indications for enoxaparin in pregnancy, we found that enoxaparin was associated with significantly lower complications than aspirin. Given differences in study design and study heterogeneity, pregnancy loss results should be interpreted with caution. Moreover, reports of thromboembolic events, thrombocytopenia, and congenital malformations were rare. FUNDING: Sanofi.
BACKGROUND: The role of factor XI in the pathogenesis of postoperative venous thromboembolism is uncertain. Abelacimab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to factor XI and locks it in the zymogen (inactive precursor) conformation. METHODS: In this open-label, parallel-group trial, we randomly assigned 412 patients who were undergoing total knee arthroplasty to receive one of three regimens of abelacimab (30 mg, 75 mg, or 150 mg) administered postoperatively in a single intravenous dose or to receive 40 mg of enoxaparin administered subcutaneously once daily. The primary efficacy outcome was venous thromboembolism, detected by mandatory venography of the leg involved in the operation or objective confirmation of symptomatic events. The principal safety outcome was a composite of major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding up to 30 days after surgery. RESULTS: Venous thromboembolism occurred in 13 of 102 patients (13%) in the 30-mg abelacimab group, 5 of 99 patients (5%) in the 75-mg abelacimab group, and 4 of 98 patients (4%) in the 150-mg abelacimab group, as compared with 22 of 101 patients (22%) in the enoxaparin group. The 30-mg abelacimab regimen was noninferior to enoxaparin, and the 75-mg and 150-mg abelacimab regimens were superior to enoxaparin (P<0.001). Bleeding occurred in 2%, 2%, and none of the patients in the 30-mg, 75-mg, and 150-mg abelacimab groups, respectively, and in none of the patients in the enoxaparin group. CONCLUSIONS: This trial showed that factor XI is important for the development of postoperative venous thromboembolism. Factor XI inhibition with a single intravenous dose of abelacimab after total knee arthroplasty was effective for the prevention of venous thromboembolism and was associated with a low risk of bleeding. (Funded by Anthos Therapeutics; ANT-005 TKA EudraCT number, 2019-003756-37.).
Enoxaparin is a low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) that differs substantially from unfractionated heparin (UFH) in its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties. Some of the pharmacodynamic features of enoxaparin that distinguish it from UFH are a higher ratio of anti-Xa to anti-IIa activity, more consistent release of tissue factor pathway inhibitor, weaker interactions with platelets and less inhibition of bone formation. Enoxaparin has a higher and more consistent bioavailability after subcutaneous administration than UFH, a longer plasma half-life and is less strongly bound to plasma proteins. These properties mean that enoxaparin provides a more reliable anticoagulant effect without the need for laboratory monitoring, and also offers the convenience of once-daily administration. Clinical studies have confirmed that these pharmacological advantages translate into improved outcomes. There are important pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic differences between enoxaparin, other LMWHs and UFH, and therefore these molecules cannot be regarded as interchangeable.
BACKGROUND: Factor XIa inhibitors for the prevention and treatment of venous and arterial thromboembolism may be more effective and result in less bleeding than conventional anticoagulants. Additional data are needed regarding the efficacy and safety of milvexian, an oral factor XIa inhibitor. METHODS: In this parallel-group, phase 2 trial, we randomly assigned 1242 patients undergoing knee arthroplasty to receive one of seven postoperative regimens of milvexian (25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, or 200 mg twice daily or 25 mg, 50 mg, or 200 mg once daily) or enoxaparin (40 mg once daily). The primary efficacy outcome was venous thromboembolism (which was a composite of asymptomatic deep-vein thrombosis, confirmed symptomatic venous thromboembolism, or death from any cause). The principal safety outcome was bleeding. RESULTS: Among the patients receiving milvexian twice daily, venous thromboembolism developed in 27 of 129 (21%) taking 25 mg, in 14 of 124 (11%) taking 50 mg, in 12 of 134 (9%) taking 100 mg, and in 10 of 131 (8%) taking 200 mg. Among those receiving milvexian once daily, venous thromboembolism developed in 7 of 28 (25%) taking 25 mg, in 30 of 127 (24%) taking 50 mg, and in 8 of 123 (7%) taking 200 mg, as compared with 54 of 252 patients (21%) taking enoxaparin. The dose-response relationship with twice-daily milvexian was significant (one-sided P<0.001), and the 12% incidence of venous thromboembolism with twice-daily milvexian was significantly lower than the prespecified benchmark of 30% (one-sided P<0.001). Bleeding of any severity occurred in 38 of 923 patients (4%) taking milvexian and in 12 of 296 patients (4%) taking enoxaparin; major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding occurred in 1% and 2%, respectively; and serious adverse events were reported in 2% and 4%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Postoperative factor XIa inhibition with oral milvexian in patients undergoing knee arthroplasty was effective for the prevention of venous thromboembolism and was associated with a low risk of bleeding. (Funded by Bristol Myers Squibb and Janssen Research and Development; AXIOMATIC-TKR ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03891524.).
Enoxaparin is a hydrophilic drug with obesity having little effect on its apparent volume of distribution, therefore patients with obesity receiving standard 1 mg/kg dosing may be at a higher risk of supratherapeutic dosing. Conversely, dose reducing patients with obesity could place already at risk patients at higher risk of a thrombotic event. Data and recommendations are variable for the most appropriate weight-based dose of therapeutic enoxaparin in obese patients, particularly those a weight > 100 kg or a body mass index (BMI) >/= 40 kg/m(2). The purpose of this systematic review was to globally evaluate these data to surmise optimal dosing recommendations for patients with obesity. A systematic review of English language studies was conducted and identified articles via Pubmed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) searches. Studies were included if they reported therapeutic enoxaparin use in adult patients with a BMI >/= 40 kg/m(2) or body weight > 100 kg and the percentage of patients achieving a therapeutic anti-Xa based on a weight-based dose or the weight-based dose required to produce a therapeutic anti-Xa level. Therapeutic attainment of anti-Xa levels were assessed across enoxaparin weight-based dosing categories including a very low dose group: < 0.75 mg/kg, low dose group: 0.75-0.85 mg/kg, and standard dose group: >/= 0.95 mg/kg. Rates of bleeding and thrombosis were also evaluated. A total of eight studies were included. For anti-Xa level assessment, 682 patients were included. A total of 62% of anti-Xa levels were therapeutic in the very low dose group, 66% in the low dose group, and 42% in the standard dose group. Overall rates of total bleeding and thrombosis were assessed in 798 patients. A total of 29 bleedings (3.6%) occurred, and 27 reported a relationship to dose. Most bleedings, 85.2% (n = 23/27), occurred with doses in the standard dose group (>/= 0.95 mg/kg). Thrombosis occurred in 5 patients (0.6%). Utilization of a reduced weight-based dosing strategy for therapeutic enoxaparin in obese patients may increase the percentage of patients with a therapeutic anti-Xa level.
Population analyses are performed on new and existing drugs. They play an important role in quantifying the time course of drug effects and provide a means of understanding the impact of variability between individuals on dosing requirements. For some drugs there have been several population analyses reported in the literature. It is important to understand how repeated population analyses can value add and what authors and readers can consider when reviewing such analyses. The purpose of this review is to explore what is learnt from repeated population analyses and provide an understanding of how the value-added nature of these analyses can be considered.
For the oral and maxillofacial surgeon, many patients will be on heparin products during surgery. So far, there is no standardized approach to treating anticoagulated patients during oral and maxillofacial surgical procedures. When a patient is on heparin therapy, heparin may be stopped 4 to 6 hours before surgery and resumed once hemostasis is achieved, usually within 24 hours. If low-molecular-weight heparin is administered, the treatment is generally stopped at least 12 hours before surgery and then resumed in a similar fashion. Local measures are generally enough to provide adequate hemostasis.
This review deals with the problem of delayed thrombosis and thereby the potential need of prolonged prophylaxis. The risk of late thrombosis and pulmonary embolism is discussed from pathogenetic factors and data on frequencies of thromboembolic complications in the literature. The problems concerning long term or prolonged prophylaxis are indicated and studies on prolonged prophylaxis-our own included-are analyzed. There is an urgent need to define which risk factors motivate prolonging thromboprophylaxis for more than the standard 7-14 days.
Despite widespread diffusion of pharmacological prophylaxis, deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is still a common cause of morbidity after major orthopedic surgery (total hip replacement--THR--and total knee replacement--TKR). At present, clear evidence has been provided that pharmacological primary prophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is associated with a significant decrease in the incidence of venous thromboembolism. The main limitation of LMWH prophylaxis however is the need for parenteral administration with a not negligible drop-out of treatment. Newer oral anticoagulants (NAOs) dabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixiban and edoxaban may be valid alternatives in elective surgery. Several studies have demonstrated the efficacy and safety of NAOs after THR and TKR. The research for new compounds and their antidote is under continuous development Aim of this paper was to review the indications and clinical results of DVT prophylaxis with NAO in patients undergoing major orthopaedic surgery.
Hemotympanum is defined as the presence of blood in the middle ear cavity. It is commonly associated with skull fractures. Spontaneous hemotympanum secondary to anticoagulant therapy is extremely rare. Herein, we report the first case of a 51-year-old woman with right spontaneous hemotympanum related to the use of enoxaparin. Complete resolution of signs and symptoms was accomplished by conservative management. Close follow-up is important to assure resolution and reduce long-term sequelae. The use of anticoagulants should be considered in the differential diagnosis of hemotympanum. This is also a good case for clinicians to be mindful about hemorrhagic complications of anticoagulant treatment.
BACKGROUND: Although practice guidelines recommend outpatient care for selected, haemodynamically stable patients with pulmonary embolism, most treatment is presently inpatient based. We aimed to assess non-inferiority of outpatient care compared with inpatient care. METHODS: We undertook an open-label, randomised non-inferiority trial at 19 emergency departments in Switzerland, France, Belgium, and the USA. We randomly assigned patients with acute, symptomatic pulmonary embolism and a low risk of death (pulmonary embolism severity index risk classes I or II) with a computer-generated randomisation sequence (blocks of 2-4) in a 1:1 ratio to initial outpatient (ie, discharged from hospital </=24 h after randomisation) or inpatient treatment with subcutaneous enoxaparin (>/=5 days) followed by oral anticoagulation (>/=90 days). The primary outcome was symptomatic, recurrent venous thromboembolism within 90 days; safety outcomes included major bleeding within 14 or 90 days and mortality within 90 days. We used a non-inferiority margin of 4% for a difference between inpatient and outpatient groups. We included all enrolled patients in the primary analysis, excluding those lost to follow-up. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00425542. FINDINGS: Between February, 2007, and June, 2010, we enrolled 344 eligible patients. In the primary analysis, one (0.6%) of 171 outpatients developed recurrent venous thromboembolism within 90 days compared with none of 168 inpatients (95% upper confidence limit [UCL] 2.7%; p=0.011). Only one (0.6%) patient in each treatment group died within 90 days (95% UCL 2.1%; p=0.005), and two (1.2%) of 171 outpatients and no inpatients had major bleeding within 14 days (95% UCL 3.6%; p=0.031). By 90 days, three (1.8%) outpatients but no inpatients had developed major bleeding (95% UCL 4.5%; p=0.086). Mean length of stay was 0.5 days (SD 1.0) for outpatients and 3.9 days (SD 3.1) for inpatients. INTERPRETATION: In selected low-risk patients with pulmonary embolism, outpatient care can safely and effectively be used in place of inpatient care. FUNDING: Swiss National Science Foundation, Programme Hospitalier de Recherche Clinique, and the US National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Sanofi-Aventis provided free drug supply in the participating European centres.
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a common, severe and preventable disease. The severity of this entity ranges from isolated symptoms of deep vein thrombosis with favorable resolution to severe pulmonary embolism, with a high mortality rate. Several observational studies have reported the risk factors associated with VTE, such as prior surgery or trauma. However, non-traumatic or surgical immobility has also been demonstrated to be an important risk factor for VTE, even after short periods of time, and particularly for VTE associated with certain diseases.
Age-related alterations in renal function, protein binding, and increased bleeding risk must be considered prior to administering anticoagulants to the increasing elderly population. Clinical use of unfractionated heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin, and fondaparinux are reviewed with respect to their role in prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism, as well as for treatment of acute coronary syndrome. In addition, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, a potentially life-threatening adverse effect, is discussed with respect to both diagnosis and management.
Notably, enoxaparin has not been described to cause acute localized exanthematous pustulosis (ALEP). Herein, we present a case of a woman with a cutaneous drug reaction consistent with ALEP that occurred after enoxaparin. This case highlights enoxaprin as a novel causative agent for this type of drug reaction.
LMWH has been compared with unfractionated heparin in the treatment of venous thrombosis. The results of a pooled analysis studies of hospitalized patients showed a significant reduction of thrombus size, p < 0.001 and in the incidence of recurrent venous thromboembolism, p < 0.001 and of major bleeding p < 0.005 in patients treated with LMWH. The pooled mortality rate at long term follow-up was also found to be lower in LMWH group. Two large randomized trials have been completed in which LMWH was administered subcutaneously on an outpatient basis and compared with the standard approach of unfractionated heparin administered by continuous intravenous infusion in hospital. In both studies the efficacy, safety and mortality in the LMWH and heparin groups were similar.
Anti-coagulants are one of the most important categories in healthcare therapeutics. For healthcare professionals dealing in cases of in-vivo blood clotting problems. Heparin and low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs) would be the first choice of drugs. This review represents an overview of the LMWHs, their importance over heparin and enlightens the advancements. In addition to these, different methods used for preparation and purification are discuss in terms of production and synthesis. Worldwide availability in pre-filled syringe, market, manufacturers and suppliers drug interactions, adverse drug reactions, in-vitro study, freezing/thawing process and structural differences of LMWHs are also focused upon in this review.
Enoxaparin has become the treatment of choice for various thromboembolic diseases. In most patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD), prophylactic dosage of enoxaparin does not appear to be associated with an increased bleeding risk and can be used without the need for monitoring and adjustment of regimens. Empirical dose adjustment and biological monitoring seem to be necessary along with therapeutic doses. Anti-factor Xa poorly predicts the degree of anticoagulation in ESRD patients given enoxaparin.
Brazil is among the first countries approving the commercialization and clinical use of biosimilar enoxaparins. Our research group has performed quality control assessments of these drugs over the last decade. Areas covered: We have not found noticeable differences between Brazilian biosimilar enoxaparins and the original product regarding their physicochemical properties, disaccharide composition, anticoagulant activity, bioavailability and safety. Expert commentary: In spite of clinical and pharmacological advantages of enoxaparin, subcutaneous formulations of unfractionated heparin are employed by the Brazilian public health system for prevention and treatment of thromboembolism. The underuse of both original and biosimilar enoxaparins in Brazil directly correlates with their high cost.
Venous thromboembolism is a relatively frequently occurring complication in critically ill patients admitted to the ICU despite prophylactic treatment with subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin. Several studies show that critically ill patients have significantly lower plasma anti-factor-Xa activity levels compared to control patients after administration of subcutaneous heparin. Robinson and colleagues show in this issue of Critical Care dose-dependent but relatively low levels of anti-factor Xa activity at increasing doses of enoxaparin. Anti-factor Xa levels thought to be required for adequate thromboprophylaxis are observed only at doses of enoxaparin that are one and a half times higher than the conventional dose (40 mg).
PURPOSE: Venous thromboembolism (VTE), including deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism, is a common cause of morbidity and mortality after radical cystectomy. The purpose of our study was to evaluate the utility of extended outpatient chemoprophylaxis against VTE after radical cystectomy-with a focus on any reduction in the incidence of VTE, including DVT and pulmonary embolism. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Beginning in April 2013, we prospectively instituted a policy of extending inpatient VTE prophylaxis with subcutaneous heparin/enoxaparin for 30 days postoperatively. For this study, we reviewed the electronic medical records of all patients who underwent radical cystectomy at our institution from January 2012 through December 2015. The experimental group (n = 79) received extended outpatient chemoprophylaxis against VTE; the control group (n = 51) received no chemoprophylaxis after discharge. The primary outcome was the 90-day incidence of VTE. The secondary outcomes included the overall complication rate, the hemorrhagic complication rate, as well as the rate of readmission within 30 days of hospital discharge. RESULTS: The experimental group experienced a significantly lower rate of DVT (5.06%), assessed as of 90 days postoperatively, than the control group (17.6%): a relative risk reduction of 71.3% (P = 0.021). We found no significant differences in secondary outcomes between the 2 groups, including the overall complication rate (54.4% vs. 68.6%), the hemorrhagic complication rate (3.7% vs. 2.0%), and the readmission rate (21.5% vs. 29.4%). CONCLUSION: Extended outpatient chemoprophylaxis significantly reduced the incidence of VTE.
