Gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib are three widely used epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs) for treating advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with proven efficacy. We undertook a systematic review and meta-analysis to synthesize existing studies with direct comparisons of EGFR TKIs in NSCLC in terms of both efficacy and safety. Eight randomized trials and 82 cohort studies with a total of 17,621 patients were included for analysis. Gefitinib and erlotinib demonstrated comparable effects on progression-free survival (hazard ratio [HR], 1.00; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.95 to 1.04), overall survival (HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.93 to 1.06), overall response rate (risk ratio [RR], 1.05; 95% CI, 1.00 to 1.11), and disease control rate (RR, 0.98; 95% CI, 0.96 to 1.01), which did not vary considerably with EGFR mutation status, ethnicity, line of treatment, and baseline brain metastasis status. Gefitinib was associated with more grade 3/4 liver dysfunction, but tended to cause lower rates of dose reduction, treatment discontinuation, total grade 3/4 adverse events (RR, 0.78; 95% CI 0.65 to 0.94), and a number of specific adverse events such as rash and diarrhea. No solid evidence was found that afatinib had greater efficacy than gefitinib or erlotinib in first-line treatment of EGFR-mutant NSCLC. However, afatinib was more effective than erlotinib as second-line treatment of patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma. The grade 3/4 adverse events rate of afatinib was comparable to that of erlotinib but higher than that of gefitinib.
Oncogenic proteins cooperate to promote tumor development and progression by sustaining cell proliferation, survival and invasiveness. Constitutive epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and nuclear factor kappab (NF-kappaB) activities are seen in multiple solid tumors and combine to provide oncogenic signals to cancer cells. Understanding how these oncogenic pathways are connected is crucial, given their role in intrinsic or acquired resistance to targeted anticancer therapies. We review molecular mechanisms by which both EGFR- and NF-kappaB-dependent pathways establish positive loops to increase their oncogenic potential. We also describe how NF-kappaB promotes resistance to EGFR inhibitors.
A series of erlotinib analogues that have structural modification at 6,7-alkoxyl positions is efficiently synthesized. The in vitro anti-tumor activity of synthesized compounds is studied in two non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines (A549 and H1975). Among the synthesized compounds, the iodo compound 6 (ETN-6) exhibits higher anti-cancer activity compared to erlotinib. An efficient method is developed for the conjugation of erlotinib analogue-4, alcohol compound, with protein, bovine serum albumin (BSA), via succinic acid linker. The in vitro anti-tumor activity of the protein attached erlotinib analogue, 8 (ETN-4-Suc-BSA), showed stronger inhibitory activity in both A549 and H1975 NSCLC cell lines.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs), encompassing at least 18 members, are promising targets for anticancer drug discovery and development. To date, five histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACis) have been approved for cancer treatment, and numerous others are undergoing clinical trials. It has been well validated that an agent that can simultaneously and effectively inhibit two or more targets may offer greater therapeutic benefits over single-acting agents in preventing resistance to treatment and in potentiating synergistic effects. A prime example of a bifunctional agent is the hybrid HDAC inhibitor. In this perspective, the authors review the majority of reported kinase/HDAC hybrid inhibitors.
Dual inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathways may delay therapeutic resistance in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). This phase 3 study investigated the efficacy and safety of an erlotinib plus bevacizumab regimen in untreated patients with advanced NSCLC. In total, 311 patients received bevacizumab plus erlotinib (n = 157) or erlotinib only (n = 154). Progression-free survival (PFS) was 17.9 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 15.2-19.9) for bevacizumab plus erlotinib and 11.2 months (95% CI, 9.7-13.8) for erlotinib only (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.55; 95% CI, 0.41-0.73; p < 0.001). A brain metastases subgroup treated with bevacizumab plus erlotinib also showed improved PFS (HR = 0.48; 95% CI, 0.27-0.84; p = 0.008). Grade >/=3 treatment-related adverse events occurred in 86 (54.8%) and 40 (26.1%) patients, respectively. Bevacizumab plus erlotinib significantly improved PFS in patients with untreated metastatic EGFR-mutated NSCLC, including those with brain metastases at baseline.
A 73-year-old man has been suffering from a pulmonary adenocarcinoma for three years. He has been treated with the EGF-inhibitor erlotinib for the past 18 months. While taking this medication he developed a progressive papulopustular rash on his face and trunk which later spread to his thighs. Topical treatment with methylprednisolone and nadifloxacin, as well as short courses of systemic doxycycline and ciprofloxacin, led to marked improvement and control of his skin condition.
BACKGROUND: The shift from cytotoxic to targeted chemotherapy led to improved treatment outcomes in oncology. Nevertheless, many cancer patients cannot be cured from their disease because of the development of drug resistance and side effects. PURPOSE: There is an ongoing quest for novel compounds, which raised not only the interest in natural products but also in novel combination therapy regimens. STUDY DESIGN: In this review, we report on the inhibition epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) by targeted small molecules and their combination with natural products from medicinal plants. RESULTS: The combination of erlotinib with artesunate leads to synergistic inhibition of cell growth in isobologram analyses. Artesunate is an approved anti-malaria drug, which is also active against cancer as shown in vitro, in vivo and in preliminary clinical phase I/II trials. CONCLUSION: The combination of natural products (e.g. the sesquiterpenoid artesunate) and synthetic compounds (e.g. the small molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib) may lead to improved clinical success rates in oncology.
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are the standard treatment for epidermal growth factor receptor mutant (EGFRm) advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Combining TKIs with an angiogenesis inhibitor has shown promise in pre-clinical studies. A systematic search of clinical trials found that combining erlotinib (a first-generation TKI) with bevacizumab or ramucirumab (angiogenesis inhibitors) improved progression-free survival (PFS) in EGFRm advanced NSCLC patients compared to TKI alone. However, no significant benefit in overall survival (OS) was observed in trials. Similar efficacy was seen in patients with specific EGFR mutations. Third generation TKIs were used as second-line therapy for patients with the T790M mutation. The combination treatment was associated with a higher incidence of severe adverse events. Overall, combining erlotinib or another TKI with an angiogenesis inhibitor is a safe and effective alternative for first-line treatment in EGFRm advanced NSCLC, particularly in countries without access to osimertinib and for patients with the EGFR L858R mutation.
Erlotinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is used for treating patients with cancer exhibiting EGFR overexpression or mutation. However, the response rate of erlotinib is low among patients with gastric cancer (GC). The findings of this study illustrated that the overexpression of bromodomain PHD finger transcription factor (BPTF) is partially responsible for erlotinib resistance in GC, and the combination of the BPTF inhibitor AU-1 with erlotinib synergistically inhibited tumor growth both in vivo and in vitro. AU-1 inhibited the epigenetic function of BPTF and decreased the transcriptional activity of c-MYC on PLCG1 by attenuating chromosome accessibility of the PLCG1 promoter region, thus decreasing the expression of p-PLCG1 and p-Erk and eventually improving the sensitivity of GC cells to erlotinib. In patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models, AU-1 monotherapy exhibited remarkable tumor-inhibiting activity and is synergistic anti-tumor effects when combined with erlotinib. Altogether, the findings illustrate that BPTF affects the responsiveness of GC to erlotinib by epigenetically regulating the c-MYC/PLCG1/pErk axis, and the combination of BPTF inhibitors and erlotinib is a viable therapeutic approach for GC.
The common dysregulation of the mTOR signaling pathway in tumor cells makes it a key target in oncotherapy. To better understand the effects of mTOR inhibitors, we analyzed 32 published clinical trials on solid tumors other than renal cell cancer, neuroendocrine tumors and metastatic breast cancer, for mTOR inhibitors are already approved by the US FDA to treat the three cancers. A lack of therapeutic effects was observed when mTOR inhibitors were used as a single agent. When combined with other agents, mTOR inhibitors still lacked sufficient clinical activity or just had minimal activity. More studies are required to better understand the clinically effects of mTOR inhibitors and the development of novel mTOR inhibitors is absolutely necessary.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are key drugs for patients with EGFR mutation-positive non-small cell lung cancer, and osimertinib is the standard treatment. Although drug-induced interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a remarkable adverse event of EGFR-TKIs, evidence regarding the continuation and re-challenge of EGFR-TKIs after drug-induced severe ILD is lacking. This is the first report of successful switching to ramucirumab plus erlotinib after osimertinib-induced severe ILD in an 81-year-old woman with stage IV lung adenocarcinoma harboring the EGFR L858R mutation in exon 21. These findings suggest that ramucirumab plus erlotinib may be a viable treatment option for osimertinib-induced severe ILD.
PURPOSE: NRG/RTOG 0848 was designed to determine whether adjuvant radiation with fluoropyrimidine sensitization improved survival following gemcitabine-based adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with resected pancreatic head adenocarcinoma. In step 1 of this protocol, patients were randomized to adjuvant gemcitabine versus the combination of gemcitabine and erlotinib. This manuscript reports the final analysis of these step 1 data. METHODS: Eligibility-within 10 weeks of curative intent pancreaticoduodenectomy with postoperative CA19-9<180. Gemcitabine arm-6 cycles of gemcitabine. Gemcitabine+erlotinib arm-gemcitabine and erlotinib 100 mg/d. Two hundred deaths provided 90% power (1-sided alpha=0.15) to detect the hypothesized OS signal (hazard ratio=0.72) in favor of the arm 2. RESULTS: From November 17, 2009 to February 28, 2014, 163 patients were randomized and evaluable for arm 1 and 159 for arm 2. Median age was 63 (39 to 86) years. CA19-9 </=90 in 93%. Arm 1: 32 patients (20%) grade 4 and 2 (1%) grade 5 adverse events; arm 2, 27 (17%) grade 4 and 3 (2%) grade 5. GI adverse events, arm 1: 22% grade >/=3 and arm 2: 28%, (P=0.22). The median follow-up (surviving patients) was 42.5 months (min-max: <1 to 75). With 203 deaths, the median and 3-year OS (95% confidence interval) are 29.9 months (21.7, 33.4) and 39% (30, 45) for arm 1 and 28.1 months (20.7, 30.9) and 39% (31, 47) for arm 2 (log-rank P=0.62). Hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) comparing OS of arm 2 to arm 1 is 1.04 (0.79, 1.38). CONCLUSIONS: The addition of adjuvant erlotinib to gemcitabine did not provide a signal for increased OS in this trial.
Erlotinib-loaded carboxymethyl temarind gum-g-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-montmorillonite based semi-IPN nanocomposites were synthesized and characterized for their in vitro performances for lung cancer therapy. The placebo matrices exhibited outstanding biodegradability and pH-dependent swelling profiles. The molar mass (M  c) between the crosslinks of these composites was declined with temperature. The solid state characterization confirmed the semi-IPN architecture of these scaffolds. The corresponding drug-loaded formulations displayed excellent drug-trapping capacity (DEE, 86-97 %) with acceptable zeta potential (-16 to -13 mV) and diameter (967-646 nm). These formulations conferred sustained drug elution profiles (Q(8h), 77-99 %) with an initial burst release. The drug release profile of the optimized formulation (F-3) was best fitted in the first order kinetic model with Fickian diffusion driven mechanism. The mucin adsorption to F-3 followed Langmuir isotherms. The results of MTT assay, AO/EB staining and confocal analyses revealed that the ERL-loaded formulation suppressed A549 cell proliferation and induced apoptosis more effectively than pristine drug.
Small-molecule EGFR inhibitors have distinctly improved the overall survival especially in EGFR-mutated lung cancer. However, their use is often limited by severe adverse effects and rapid resistance development. To overcome these limitations, a hypoxia-activatable Co(III)-based prodrug (KP2334) was recently synthesized releasing the new EGFR inhibitor KP2187 in a highly tumor-specific manner only in hypoxic areas of the tumor. However, the chemical modifications in KP2187 necessary for cobalt chelation could potentially interfere with its EGFR-binding ability. Consequently, in this study, the biological activity and EGFR inhibition potential of KP2187 was compared to clinically approved EGFR inhibitors. In general, the activity as well as EGFR binding (shown in docking studies) was very similar to erlotinib and gefitinib (while other EGFR-inhibitory drugs behaved different) indicating no interference of the chelating moiety with the EGFR binding. Moreover, KP2187 significantly inhibited cancer cell proliferation as well as EGFR pathway activation in vitro and in vivo. Finally, KP2187 proved to be highly synergistic with VEGFR inhibitors such as sunitinib. This indicates that KP2187-releasing hypoxia-activated prodrug systems are promising candidates to overcome the clinically observed enhanced toxicity of EGFR-VEGFR inhibitor combination therapies.
Current technologies to measure drug-target interactions require complex processing and invasive tissue biopsies, limiting their clinical utility for cancer treatment monitoring. Here we develop an analytical platform that leverages circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) for activity-based assessment of tumour-specific drug-target interactions in patient blood samples. The technology, termed extracellular vesicle monitoring of small-molecule chemical occupancy and protein expression (ExoSCOPE), utilizes bio-orthogonal probe amplification and spatial patterning of molecular reactions within matched plasmonic nanoring resonators to achieve in situ analysis of EV drug dynamics. It measures changes in drug occupancy and protein composition in molecular subpopulations of EVs. When used to monitor various targeted therapies, the ExoSCOPE revealed EV signatures that closely reflected cellular treatment efficacy. We further applied the technology for clinical cancer diagnostics and treatment monitoring. Using a small volume of blood, the ExoSCOPE accurately classified disease status and rapidly distinguished between targeted treatment outcomes, within 24 h after treatment initiation.
Due to cell mutation and self-adaptation, the application of clinical drugs with early epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeted inhibitors is severely limited. To overcome this limitation, herein, the synthesis and in-depth biological evaluation of an erlotinib-platinum(II) complex as an EGFR-targeted anticancer agent is reported. The metal complex is able to self-assemble inside an aqueous solution and readily form nanostructures with strong photophysical properties. While being poorly toxic toward healthy cells and upon treatment in the dark, the compound was able to induce a cytotoxic effect in the very low micromolar range upon irradiation against EGFR overexpressing (drug resistant) human lung cancer cells as well as multicellular tumor spheroids. Mechanistic insights revealed that the compound was able to selectively degrade the EGFR using the lysosomal degradation pathway upon generation of singlet oxygen at the EGFR. We are confident that this work will open new avenues for the treatment of EGFR-overexpressing tumors.
Lung carcinosarcoma is acknowledged as a rare form of lung cancer. Due to its rarity, the inability to conduct large-scale clinical trials and interventions is currently carried out based on empirical evidence. In this study, we report the case of a 73-year-old female patient diagnosed with postoperative recurrence of lung carcinosarcoma. The resected tumor was diagnosed as lung carcinosarcoma, and genetic testing revealed the presence of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) exon21 L858R. Approximately 2 years postoperatively, the tumor recurred and the patient was treated with erlotinib plus ramucirumab, which were effective in controlling metastatic disease. Erlotinib plus ramucirumab is therefore a treatment option for EGFR mutation-positive lung carcinosarcoma.
Although the cardiotoxicity of anti-cancer drugs is an important issue, the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. To develop a sensitive assay system for cardiotoxicity, we examined effects of anti-cancer drugs on contractile functions of human iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes by using non-invasive motion field imaging analysis with extended drug exposure time. We succeeded in continuously measuring stable contractile function. The continued exposure revealed that the difference in cardiotoxicity between cardiotoxic doxorubicin and less toxic erlotinib was more evident after 8 days of treatment than with 3 days of treatment, suggesting that continued exposure improved the predictive power for cardiotoxicity of anti-cancer drugs.
OBJECTIVE: Effective targeted therapies for patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) present an unmet clinical need. There is evidence that TNBCs often have increased expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and of osteopontin (OPN). OPN-mediated signaling can activate EGFR-dependent signaling pathways. Here, we assessed OPN as a potential predictive biomarker for response to anti-EGFR therapy in TNBC. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Using two different TNBC cell lines, MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231, we investigated the impact of stable expression of OPN on efficacy of the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib in vitro. RESULTS: We observed that breast cancer cells engineered to overexpress OPN are more sensitive to growth inhibition by erlotinib than control cells. The level of response was related to the level of OPN expression, possibly due to increased phosphorylation status of EGFR Tyr1068. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that OPN expression levels are related to sensitivity of TNBC cells to growth inhibition by erlotinib. OPN thus is a promising predictive biomarker for anti-EGFR therapy in breast cancer.
INTRODUCTION: Erlotinib is an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor that is approved by the FDA to treat non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Several membrane receptors, including EGFR, interact with amyloid beta (Abeta), raising the possibility that erlotinib could have therapeutic effects on Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the effects of erlotinib on Abeta/tau-related pathology and cognitive function in mouse models of AD and its mechanisms of action have not been examined in detail. METHODS: To investigate the effects of erlotinib on cognitive function and AD pathology, 3 to 6-month-old PS19 mice and 3 to 3.5-month-old 5xFAD mice and WT mice were injected with vehicle (5% DMSO + 10% PEG + 20% Tween80 + 65% D.W.) or erlotinib (20 mg/kg, i.p.) daily for 14 or 21 days. Then, behavioral tests, Golgi staining, immunofluorescence staining, western blotting ELISA, and real-time PCR were conducted. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: We found that erlotinib significantly enhanced short-term spatial memory and dendritic spine formation in 6-month-old P301S tau transgenic (PS19) mice. Importantly, erlotinib administration reduced tau phosphorylation at Ser202/Thr205 (AT8) and Thr231 (AT180) and further aggregation of tau into paired helical fragments (PHFs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in 3-month-old and/or 6-month-old PS19 mice by suppressing the expression of the tau kinase DYRK1A. Moreover, erlotinib treatment decreased astrogliosis in 6-month-old PS19 mice and reduced proinflammatory responses in primary astrocytes (PACs) from PS19 mice. In 3- to 3.5-month-old 5xFAD mice, erlotinib treatment improved short-term spatial memory and hippocampal dendritic spine number and diminished Abeta plaque deposition and tau hyperphosphorylation. Furthermore, erlotinib-treated 5xFAD mice exhibited significant downregulation of astrocyte activation, and treating PACs from 5xFAD mice with erlotinib markedly reduced cxcl10 (reactive astrocyte marker) and gbp2 (A1 astrocyte marker) mRNA levels and proinflammatory cytokine mRNA and protein levels. Taken together, our results suggest that erlotinib regulates tau/Abeta-induced AD pathology, cognitive function, and Abeta/tau-evoked astrogliosis and therefore could be a potent therapeutic drug for ameliorating AD symptoms.
