The subcutaneous route is a widely used route of administration in routine clinical practice, particularly in elderly patients, when the intravenous route cannot be used. This review of the literature highlights the lack of randomized studies and the lack of pharmacokinetic data on the use of this route of administration. Three antibiotics administered subcutaneously can be used for severe infections, with acceptable pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data, when the intravenous administration is not possible: ceftriaxone, ertapenem, and teicoplanin.
The carbapenems are beta-lactam antimicrobial agents with an exceptionally broad spectrum of activity. Older carbapenems, such as imipenem, were often susceptible to degradation by the enzyme dehydropeptidase-1 (DHP-1) located in renal tubules and required co-administration with a DHP-1 inhibitor such as cilastatin. Later additions to the class such as meropenem, ertapenem and doripenem demonstrated increased stability to DHP-1 and are administered without a DHP-1 inhibitor. Like all beta-lactam antimicrobial agents, carbapenems act by inhibiting bacterial cell wall synthesis by binding to and inactivating penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs). Carbapenems are stable to most beta-lactamases including AmpC beta-lactamases and extended-spectrum beta-lactamases. Resistance to carbapenems develops when bacteria acquire or develop structural changes within their PBPs, when they acquire metallo-beta-lactamases that are capable of rapidly degrading carbapenems, or when changes in membrane permeability arise as a result of loss of specific outer membrane porins. Carbapenems (imipenem, meropenem, doripenem) possess broad-spectrum in vitro activity, which includes activity against many Gram-positive, Gram-negative and anaerobic bacteria; carbapenems lack activity against Enterococcus faecium, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. Compared with imipenem, meropenem and doripenem, the spectrum of activity of ertapenem is more limited primarily because it lacks activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterococcus spp. Imipenem, meropenem and doripenem have in vivo half lives of approximately 1 hour, while ertapenem has a half-life of approximately 4 hours making it suitable for once-daily administration. As with other beta-lactam antimicrobial agents, the most important pharmacodynamic parameter predicting in vivo efficacy is the time that the plasma drug concentration is maintained above the minimum inhibitory concentration (T>MIC). Imipenem/cilastatin and meropenem have been studied in comparative clinical trials establishing their efficacy in the treatment of a variety of infections including complicated intra-abdominal infections, skin and skin structure infections, community-acquired pneumonia, nosocomial pneumonia, complicated urinary tract infections, meningitis (meropenem only) and febrile neutropenia. The current role for imipenem/cilastatin and meropenem in therapy remains for use in moderate to severe nosocomial and polymicrobial infections. The unique antimicrobial spectrum and pharmacokinetic properties of ertapenem make it more suited to treatment of community-acquired infections and outpatient intravenous antimicrobial therapy than for the treatment of nosocomial infections. Doripenem is a promising new carbapenem with similar properties to those of meropenem, although it appears to have more potent in vitro activity against P. aeruginosa than meropenem. Clinical trials are required to establish the efficacy and safety of doripenem in moderate to severe infections, including nosocomial infections.
BACKGROUND: Subcutaneous (SC) administration of antibiotics represents an attractive alternative to the intravenous (IV) route. METHODS: We performed a systematic electronic search of PubMed and the Cochrane Library for all articles published prior to April 2022, using the key terms and MeSH terms 'subcutaneous', 'antibiotic' and the international non-proprietary name of antibiotics. RESULTS: A total of 30 studies were selected including data on the efficacy and tolerability of antibiotics, and seven studies that were conducted in healthy subjects, for relevant information regarding the safety and tolerability of antibiotics. Comparative studies have shown that efficacy is similar for the SC and IV routes for ceftriaxone, teicoplanin and ertapenem. The SC use of other antibiotics such as ampicillin, ceftazidime, cefepime, piperacillin/tazobactam, metronidazole and fosfomycin has also been described. These results have largely been corroborated by pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analyses, especially for time-dependent antibiotics. Complications of SC treatment are rarely severe, with no reports of bacteraemia or other invasive infection related to this route of administration. Therapeutic drug monitoring has been proposed to adapt the dose and avoid toxicity. DISCUSSION: The rationale for using SC administration of ceftriaxone, ertapenem and teicoplanin is strong in patients with non-severe infections. It is already commonly practised in some countries, particularly in France. Other antibiotics could be administered subcutaneously, but further studies are needed to validate their use in clinical practice. Further research is needed to safely generalize and optimize this route of administration whenever possible. This would reduce the risk of catheter-related infections and their complications, together with the length of hospital stay.
BACKGROUND: De-escalation from broad-spectrum to narrow-spectrum antibiotics is considered an important measure to reduce the selective pressure of antibiotics, but a scarcity of adequate evidence is a barrier to its implementation. We aimed to determine whether de-escalation from an antipseudomonal beta-lactam to a narrower-spectrum drug was non-inferior to continuing the antipseudomonal drug in patients with Enterobacterales bacteraemia. METHODS: An open-label, pragmatic, randomised trial was performed in 21 Spanish hospitals. Patients with bacteraemia caused by Enterobacterales susceptible to one of the de-escalation options and treated empirically with an antipseudomonal beta-lactam were eligible. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1; stratified by urinary source) to de-escalate to ampicillin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (urinary tract infections only), cefuroxime, cefotaxime or ceftriaxone, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, ciprofloxacin, or ertapenem in that order according to susceptibility (de-escalation group), or to continue with the empiric antipseudomonal beta-lactam (control group). Oral switching was allowed in both groups. The primary outcome was clinical cure 3-5 days after end of treatment in the modified intention-to-treat (mITT) population, formed of patients who received at least one dose of study drug. Safety was assessed in all participants. Non-inferiority was declared when the lower bound of the 95% CI of the absolute difference in cure rate was above the -10% non-inferiority margin. This trial is registered with EudraCT (2015-004219-19) and ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02795949) and is complete. FINDINGS: 2030 patients were screened between Oct 5, 2016, and Jan 23, 2020, of whom 171 were randomly assigned to the de-escalation group and 173 to the control group. 164 (50%) patients in the de-escalation group and 167 (50%) in the control group were included in the mITT population. 148 (90%) patients in the de-escalation group and 148 (89%) in the control group had clinical cure (risk difference 1.6 percentage points, 95% CI -5.0 to 8.2). The number of adverse events reported was 219 in the de-escalation group and 175 in the control group, of these, 53 (24%) in the de-escalation group and 56 (32%) in the control group were considered severe. Seven (5%) of 164 patients in the de-escalation group and nine (6%) of 167 patients in the control group died during the 60-day follow-up. There were no treatment-related deaths. INTERPRETATION: De-escalation from an antipseudomonal beta-lactam in Enterobacterales bacteraemia following a predefined rule was non-inferior to continuing the empiric antipseudomonal drug. These results support de-escalation in this setting. FUNDING: Plan Nacional de I+D+i 2013-2016 and Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Subdireccion General de Redes y Centros de Investigacion Cooperativa, Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovacion y Universidades, Spanish Network for Research in Infectious Diseases; Spanish Clinical Research and Clinical Trials Platform, co-financed by the EU; European Development Regional Fund "A way to achieve Europe", Operative Program Intelligence Growth 2014-2020.
The carbapenems are a group of broad-spectrum beta-lactam antibiotic agents of which there are three parenteral preparations currently available in South Africa, namely imimpenem/cilastatin, meropenem and ertapenem. Owing to the fact that imipenem/cilastatin and meropenem have a broad spectrum of activity that includes Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter species, they are ideal antibiotics for treatment of severe nosocomial infections. In contrast, ertapenem has limited in vitro activity against the latter non-fermentative gram-negative bacteria and is therefore more suitable for the treatment of certain severe community-acquired infections. This statement arises out of concerns about the general abuse of antibiotics such as the carbapenems, with the primary intention of highlighting the appropriate use of these agents.
Carbapenems are antibiotics of the cephalosporin family with a good penetrance into the central nervous system. Neurotoxicity is a rare adverse effect, most often associated with imipenem (0.4-10 %) and unusual with ertapenem. It usually presents as seizures, although encephalopathy or hallucinations may develop. However, a recent large study (n = 544) found neurotoxicity associated to the use of ertapenem with an incidence of 4.6 %. There were associated factors such as advanced age or renal dysfunction (ertapenem has a renal metabolism level of 80 %).
An 83-year-old man was admitted for right lower lobe pneumonia which did not improve after a 5-day outpatient treatment with amoxicillin/clavulinate and clarithromycin. An empiric treatment with levofloxacin was started with a significant improvement after 24 h of this treatment. On the third day of hospitalization, delirium developed, while the patient was afebrile and with normal blood oxygenation. Treatment with levofloxacin was stopped, and a complete resolution of the patient's delirium was observed 2 days later. To the best of our knowledge, this is the third case of levofloxacin-induced delirium described in the medical literature.
The aim of this study was to determine whether ertapenem, being highly protein bound, is less effective than other carbapenems in the presence of hypoalbuminemia. In a prospective cohort study, we included adults with clinically and microbiologically documented infections caused by carbapenem-susceptible Enterobacteriaceae who were hospitalized in a tertiary medical center from March 2010 to September 2012. We tested whether hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin <2.5 g/dL) had a larger effect on 30-day mortality in subjects treated with ertapenem compared to those treated with meropenem or imipenem (I/M). Logistic regression analysis was used to identify independent risk factors for death including the carbapenem drug and the interaction between albumin and the carbapenem. Of 279 individual subjects included, 173 were treated with ertapenem and 106 with I/M. The odds ratio (OR) for 30-day mortality with hypoalbuminemia was 4.6 (95% confidence interval (CI) 2.1-10.1) among subjects with ertapenem versus 1.2 (95% CI 0.5-2.70) with I/M (p = 0.02 for difference between groups). In the regression model, the interaction between carbapenem type and albumin levels was significant (p = 0.03); for ertapenem lower albumin levels were associated with increased 30-day mortality (OR 2.45, 95% CI 1.19-5.05), while for I/M the change was not significant (OR 0.67, 95% CI 0.31-1.41). The model suggests that the risk of death for ertapenem-treated subjects quintupled when albumin was 2 g/dL compared to 4 g/dL. Hypoalbuminemia was associated with mortality significantly more among subjects treated with ertapenem compared to subjects treated with I/M. The effectiveness of current dosing schemes of ertapenem in subjects with significant hypoalbuminemia should be revisited.
OBJECTIVES: A consensus exists among clinicians that imipenem/cilastatin is the most epileptogenic carbapenem, despite inconsistencies in the literature. METHODS: We conducted a meta-analysis of all randomized controlled trials comparing carbapenems with each other or with non-carbapenem antibiotics to assess the risk of seizures for imipenem, meropenem, ertapenem and doripenem. RESULTS: In the risk difference (RD) analysis, there were increased patients with seizure (2 per 1000 persons, 95% CI 0.001, 0.004) among recipients of carbapenems versus non-carbapenem antibiotics. This difference was largely attributed to imipenem as its use was associated with an additional 4 patients per 1000 with seizure (95% CI 0.002, 0.007) compared with non-carbapenem antibiotics, whereas none of the other carbapenems was associated with increased seizure. Similarly, in the pooled OR analysis, carbapenems were associated with a significant increase in the risk of seizures relative to non-carbapenem comparator antibiotics (OR 1.87, 95% CI 1.35, 2.59). The ORs for risk of seizures from imipenem, meropenem, ertapenem and doripenem compared with other antibiotics were 3.50 (95% CI 2.23, 5.49), 1.04 (95% CI 0.61, 1.77), 1.32 (95% CI 0.22, 7.74) and 0.44 (95% CI 0.13, 1.53), respectively. In studies directly comparing imipenem and meropenem, there was no difference in epileptogenicity in either RD or pooled OR analyses. CONCLUSIONS: The absolute risk of seizures with carbapenems was low, albeit higher than with non-carbapenem antibiotics. Although imipenem was more epileptogenic than non-carbapenem antibiotics, there was no statistically significant difference in the imipenem versus meropenem head-to-head comparison.
IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: Given their broad-spectrum and safety, carbapenems are a widely used class of antibiotics, especially in the treatment of hospital-acquired infections including infections due to multidrug-resistant organisms. Ertapenem is a unique member of this class, with a narrower spectrum that lacks reliable activity against Pseudomonas and Enterococcus. Given its spectrum and half-life of 4 h it is better suited to use in community-acquired infections and it is particularly well positioned for use in the outpatient setting. AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: Chemistry, mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics, safety and indications for use will be covered in this review. Similar to other beta-lactams, the carbapenems inhibit cell wall synthesis by binding to and inhibiting penicillin-binding proteins. Their resistance to beta-lactamases including AmpC and extended-spectrum beta-lactamases enhances their usefulness. Similar to other beta-lactams, ertapenem exhibits time-dependent killing. Given this profile, ertapenem has been found to be useful in intra-abdominal infections, acute pelvic infections, complicated skin and skin structure infections, community-acquired pneumonia and complicated urinary tract infections. WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: This review will enable the reader to understand differences between the different carbapenems, especially with regard to ertapenem. Once an understanding is gained with regard to pharmacology and microbiology, the reader will be positioned to understand better those circumstances in which use of ertapenem should be considered. TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Substantial differences between the carbapenems exist. Ertapenem has unique characteristics that may make it useful in specific clinical circumstances that are detailed in this review.
BACKGROUND: Sulopenem is a thiopenem antibiotic being developed for the treatment of multidrug-resistant infections. The availability of both intravenous (IV) and oral formulations will facilitate earlier hospital discharge. METHODS: Hospitalized adults with pyuria, bacteriuria, and signs and symptoms of complicated urinary tract infection (cUTI) were randomized to 5 days of IV sulopenem followed by oral sulopenem etzadroxil/probenecid or 5 days of IV ertapenem followed by oral ciprofloxacin or amoxicillin-clavulanate, depending on uropathogen susceptibility. The primary end point was overall combined clinical and microbiologic response at the test-of-cure visit (day 21). RESULTS: Of 1392 treated patients, 444 and 440 treated with sulopenem and ertapenem, respectively, had a positive baseline urine culture and were eligible for the primary ef fi cacy analyses. Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing organisms were identified in 26.6% of patients and fluoroquinolone-nonsusceptible pathogens in 38.6%. For the primary end point, noninferiority of sulopenem to the comparator regimen was not demonstrated, 67.8% vs 73.9% (difference, -6.1%; 95% confidence interval, -12.0 to -.1%). The difference was driven by a lower rate of asymptomatic bacteriuria in the subgroup of ertapenem-treated patients who stepped down to ciprofloxacin. No substantial difference in overall response was observed at any other time point. Both IV and oral formulations of sulopenem were well-tolerated and compared favorably to the comparator. CONCLUSIONS: Sulopenem followed by oral sulopenem-etzadroxil/probenecid was not noninferior to ertapenem followed by oral step-down therapy for the treatment of cUTIs, driven by a lower rate of asymptomatic bacteriuria in those who received ciprofloxacin. Both formulations of sulopenem were well-tolerated. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT03357614.
beta-Lactam antibiotics share a common structure and mechanism of action, although they differ in their spectrum of antimicrobial activity and utility in treating different infections. The current classes include the penicillins, the penicillinase-resistant penicillins, the extended- spectrum penicillins, the cephalosporins, the carbapenems, and the monobactams. This article discusses some of the newest beta-lactams available for use in the United States: ertapenem, cefditoren, and cefepime. A new formulation of amoxicillin-clavulanate, which contains higher doses of amoxicillin, is also discussed.
IMPORTANCE: Eravacycline is a novel, fully synthetic fluorocycline antibiotic of the tetracycline class with in vitro activity against clinically important gram-negative, gram-positive aerobic, and facultative bacteria including most of those resistant to cephalosporins, fluoroquinolones, beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitors, multidrug resistant strains and carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, and most anaerobic pathogens. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of eravacycline compared with ertapenem in adult hospitalized patients with complicated intra-abdominal infections (cIAIs). DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a phase III, randomized, double-blind, multicenter study that evaluated the efficacy and safety of eravacycline in comparison with ertapenem in patients with cIAI requiring surgical or percutaneous intervention. The test-of-cure evaluation was conducted 25 to 31 days after the first dose of the study drug and the follow-up visit was conducted 38 to 50 days after the first dose of the study drug. All patients recruited into this study were hospitalized. Five hundred forty-one patients were recruited for this study; 270 patients were randomized to receive eravacycline, and 271 patients were randomized to receive ertapenem. Patients had to meet all of the following criteria: hospitalized for cIAI requiring intervention; 18 years or older; evidence of systemic inflammatory response; pain caused by cIAI; able to provide informed consent; and diagnosis of cIAI with sonogram or radiographic imaging or visual confirmation. Analyses were done in intent-to-treat and evaluable populations. INTERVENTIONS: Patients received eravacycline, 1.0 mg/kg every 12 hours, or ertapenem, 1.0 g every 24 hours, for a minimum of four 24-hour dosing cycles. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Clinical outcome assessments were made at the end of treatment, test of cure, and follow-up visits and were classified as clinical cure, clinical failure, or indeterminate/missing. RESULTS: In total, 541 patients were randomly assigned to treatment: 270 in the eravacycline group and 271 in the ertapenem group. The mean ages were 54.9 years and 55.4 years for the eravacycline and ertapenem groups, respectively. Most patients were white (263 of 270 patients [97.4%] in the eravacycline group and 260 of 271 patients [95.9%] in the ertapenem group). For the microbiological intent-to-treat population, the rates of clinical cure at the test-of-cure visit were 86.8% in the eravacycline group and 87.6% in the ertapenem group. The difference in clinical cure rates between the groups was -0.80% (95% CI, -7.1% to 5.5%), meeting the prespecified noninferiority margin and allowing for statistical noninferiority of eravacycline to ertapenem to be declared for this study. Both study drugs were well tolerated. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Overall, eravacycline demonstrated noninferiority to ertapenem for the treatment of patients with cIAI. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01844856.
BACKGROUND: The preferred carbapenem for treatment of infections caused by extended spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacterales (ESBL-E) in critically ill patients is debated. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the difference in clinical failure between ertapenem and meropenem for treatment of ESBL-E bacteremia in critically ill patients. Of concern is ertapenem use in hypoalbuminemia given the potential for higher drug clearance. METHODS: This retrospective, matched cohort study compared critically ill patients treated with ertapenem or meropenem for ESBL-E bacteremia between October 2016 and August 2022. Patients were matched on age, sex, lowest albumin, and in a 1:2 ratio of ertapenem to meropenem. The primary outcome, clinical failure, was a composite of 30-day mortality, antibiotic escalation, and microbiological failure. Secondary outcomes included all-cause readmission and development of superinfection. RESULTS: Of 54 patients, 18 received ertapenem and 36 meropenem. Most had a urinary infection source (55.6% vs 41.7%, P = 0.393). There was no difference in clinical failure (50.0% vs 38.9%, P = 0.436). Ertapenem patients had antibiotic escalation more often (33.3% vs 2.8%, P = 0.002). There was no difference in 30-day mortality (11.1% vs 27.8%, P = 0.298), microbiological failure (27.8% vs 11.1%, P = 0.142), all-cause readmission (22.2% vs 13.9%, P = 0.461), or development of superinfection (11.1% vs 13.9%, P = 1.000). CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: There was no difference in clinical failure in a small, retrospective cohort of critically ill patients receiving ertapenem or meropenem for ESBL-E bacteremia. Ertapenem may be appropriate in some critically ill and hypoalbuminemic patients, though additional data are needed.
Neurotoxicity is an unusual side effect of carbapenems, and it has been reported most commonly presenting as seizures, encephalopathy and hallucinations. Ertapenem neurotoxicity most classically presents as seizures in patients with end-stage renal disease (estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) <30 mL/min/1.73 m(2)). We present a patient with a baseline eGFR of 30-59 mL/min/1.73 m(2) with acute kidney injury who developed non-seizure neurotoxicity after ertapenem exposure. This patient is a middle-aged Caucasian man who received intravenous ertapenem for treatment of empyema. Although the empyema improved, he developed delirium beginning on day 7 of ertapenem. The delirium progressed to constant agitation and visual hallucinations requiring transfer to the intensive care unit with eventual intubation for airway protection. No improvement in mental status was observed with cessation of other medications. Ertapenem was discontinued and within 24 hours, he was extubated, and his mental status returned to baseline. He was discharged from the hospital the following day. The timely resolution after ertapenem discontinuation makes ertapenem-induced encephalopathy the most likely explanation for this patient's course.
IMPORTANCE: Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a debilitating follicular skin disorder in which bacterial colonization is typical. Oral antibiotic efficacy can be unreliable; however, selective intravenous antibiotics, specifically ertapenem, may provide favorable clinical outcomes. OBJECTIVE: To explore optimal course duration, efficacy, and patient satisfaction associated with intravenous ertapenem for HS. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This retrospective review of the medical records of 98 patients with HS between 2018 and 2022 measured and evaluated patient outcomes before and after treatment with intravenous ertapenem. Participants were followed up in a telephone survey assessing patient perspectives and satisfaction. All of those included in this study received medical care from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine's Montefiore HS Center. EXPOSURES: Patients were treated with 1 g of ertapenem that was self-administered at home through a peripheral intravenous central catheter using an elastomeric pump for 12 to 16 weeks. Antiandrogens and immunomodulatory biologic therapies initiated prior to ertapenem were maintained throughout the treatment course. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcomes, encompassing clinical severity (evaluated through the HS Physician Global Assessment score [a 6-point scale ranging from clear to very severe] and a numerical rating scale for pain [an 11-point scale in which a score of 0 indicates no pain and a score of 10 indicates the worst possible pain]) and markers of inflammation (such as leukocytes, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and interleukin-6), were measured at baseline, the midcourse of intravenous ertapenem treatment, at the end of the course, and posttherapy. Bacterial abundance was also examined at these 4 points, and patient satisfaction was assessed during follow-up. RESULTS: A total of 98 patients (mean [SD] age, 35.8 [13.0] years; 61 [62.2%] female) with HS were treated with intravenous ertapenem. The self-reported racial distribution included 3 individuals identifying as Asian (3.1%), 59 as Black/African American (60.2%), 13 as White (13.3%), and 23 as either other or unknown (23.5%). Additionally, 24 participants (24.5%) reported Spanish/Hispanic/Latino ethnicity. The mean (SD) treatment duration spanned 13.1 (4.0) weeks, with posttherapy follow-up occurring after 7.8 (3.6) weeks. From baseline to posttherapy follow-up, significant reductions were found in the mean (SD) HS Physician Global Assessment scores (3.9 [1.0] vs 2.7 [1.2]; P < .001) and the numerical rating scale for pain (4.2 [3.3] vs 1.8 [2.7]; P < .001), C-reactive protein (5.4 [11.4] vs 2.4 [2.0] mg/dL; P < .001), interleukin-6 (25.2 [21.1] vs 13.7 [13.9]; P < .001), and leukocytes (11.34 [3.9] vs 10.0 [3.4]; P < .001). At follow-up, 76 patients (78.0%) participated in the telephone survey, where 63 (80.3%) reported medium to high satisfaction; further, 69 (90.8%) would recommend ertapenem to other patients. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this retrospective review of medical records and telephone survey, treating HS with intravenous ertapenem, administered for a mean of 13 weeks, was associated with improvement in clinical and inflammatory markers, as well as heightened patient satisfaction. Nonetheless, this approach should be monitored for the emergence of antimicrobial resistance given a longer than standard treatment course.
BACKGROUND: Due to limited therapeutic options, the spread of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) have become a major public health concern. We conducted a prospective, randomized, open-label comparison of the therapeutic efficacy of piperacillin-tazobactam (PTZ), cefepime, and ertapenem in febrile nosocomial urinary tract infection with ESBL-producing Escherichia coli (ESBL-EC). METHODS: This study was conducted at three university hospitals between January 2013 and August 2015. Hospitalized adult patients presenting with fever were screened for healthcare-associated urinary tract infection (HA-UTI). When ESBL-EC was solely detected and susceptible to a randomized antibiotic in vitro, the case was included in the final analysis. Participants were treated for 10-14 days with PTZ, cefepime, or ertapenem. RESULTS: A total of 66 participants were evenly assigned to the PTZ and ertapenem treatment groups. After the recruitment of six participants, assignment to the cefepime treatment group was stopped because of an unexpectedly high treatment failure rate. The baseline characteristics of these participants did not differ from participants in other treatment groups. The clinical and microbiological response to PTZ treatment was estimated to be 94% and was similar to the response to ertapenem treatment. The efficacy of cefepime was 33.3%. In the cefepime group, age, Charlson comorbidity index, genotype, and minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) did not significantly affect the success of treatment. Similarly, genotype seemed to be irrelevant with respect to clinical outcome in the PTZ group. Expired cases tended to involve septic shock with a high Charlson comorbidity index and high MIC. CONCLUSION: Results from this study suggest that PTZ is effective in the treatment of urinary tract infection caused by ESBL-EC when the in vitro test indicates susceptibility. In addition, cefepime should not be used as an alternative treatment for urinary tract infection caused by ESBL-EC. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The trial was registered with the Clinical Research Information Service of Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (KCT0001895).
Clinical experience suggests higher occurrence of carbapenem-associated seizures in the elderly than what is reported in the available literature (range between 0.2% and 0.7%). An audit of 1345 patients with age 60 years or older, who received imipenem, ertapenem or meropenem during their acute hospitalisation found 32 (2.4%) subjects developed seizures. Subjects with more than one central nervous system disorders were 11.6 times more likely to develop seizures (odds ratio 11.61, P < 0.001) and subjects with prior history of seizures is associated with four times greater risks (odds ratio 4.02, P = 0.005). Physicians should exercise caution when prescribing carbapenems in elderly, especially those with known epilepsy and a high number of intracranial pathologies.
Ertapenem is a parenteral carbapenem licensed for use in adults and children more than 3 months of age. It is active against many Gram-positive and negative bacteria, including several anaerobic organisms but has a narrower spectrum of antimicrobial activity, compared with older carbapenems. It is highly stable against nearly all beta-lactamases, including AmpC and extended spectrum beta lactamases. Ertapenem can be given intramuscularly or intravenously and its favourable pharmacokinetic profile allows once daily dosing. Ertapenem has been proven to be clinically and bacteriologically efficacious in randomised controlled trials for the treatment of community acquired infections including complicated intra-abdominal infections, complicated skin and skin-structure infections, acute pelvic infections, complicated urinary tract infections, community-acquired pneumonia and for the prophylaxis of surgical-site infection following elective colorectal surgery. Ertapenem is suited for mild to moderately ill patients with community-acquired infections and for outpatient intravenous antibacterial therapy.
Among the many different structurally distinct classes of beta-lactams, the carbapenem class is regarded as that which is most potent and which has the widest spectrum of antimicrobial activity. Rapidly bactericidal, and demonstrating time-dependent killing, carbapenemes have a spectrum of antimicrobial activity that includes Gram-positive and Gram-negative aerobic and anaerobic pathogens. Their in-vitro activity includes extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing pathogens and carbapenems are currently considered to be the treatment of choice for serious infections due to ESBL-producing organisms. However, isolates acquiring resistance under treatment have been reported. Imipenem, meropenem and ertapenem are licensed in the European Community and panipenem and biapenem are also available in Japan and South Korea. Other carbapenemes are under development.
