Established antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) decrease membrane excitability by interacting with neurotransmitter receptors or ion channels. AEDs developed before 1980 appear to act on sodium channels, gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors, or calcium channels. Benzodiazepines and barbiturates enhance GABAA receptor-mediated inhibition. Phenytoin (PHT), carbamazepine (CBZ), and possibly valproate (VPA) decrease high-frequency repetitive firing of action potentials by enhancing sodium-channel inactivation. Ethosuximide (ESM) and VPA reduce a low threshold (T-type) calcium-channel current. The mechanisms of action of the new AEDs are not fully established. Gabapentin (GBP) binds to a high-affinity site on neuronal membranes in a restricted regional distribution of the central nervous system. This binding site may be related to a possible active transport process of GBP into neurons; however, this has not been proven, and the mechanism of action of GBP remains uncertain. Lamotrigine (LTG) decreases sustained high-frequency repetitive firing of voltage-dependent sodium action potentials that may result in a preferential decreased release of presynaptic glutamate. The mechanism of action of oxcarbazepine (OCBZ) is not known; however, its similarity in structure and clinical efficacy to CBZ suggests that its mechanism of action may involve inhibition of sustained high-frequency repetitive firing of voltage-dependent sodium action potentials. Vigabatrin (VGB) irreversibly inhibits GABA transaminase, the enzyme that degrades GABA, thereby producing greater available pools of presynaptic GABA for release in central synapses. Increased activity of GABA at postsynaptic receptors may underline the clinical efficacy of VGB.
Acute, symptomatic seizures or epilepsy may complicate the course of hepatic disease. Choosing the most appropriate antiepileptic drug in this setting represents a difficult challenge, as most medications are metabolized by the liver. This article focuses on the acute and chronic treatment of seizures in patients with advanced liver disease and reviews the hepatotoxic potential of specific antiepileptic drugs. Newer antiepileptic drugs without, or with minimal, hepatic metabolism, such as levetiracetam, lacosamide, topiramate, gabapentin, and pregabalin should be used as first-line therapy. Medications undergoing extensive hepatic metabolism, such as valproic acid, phenytoin, and felbamate should be used as drugs of last resort. In special circumstances, as in patients affected by acute intermittent porphyria, exposure to most antiepileptic drugs could precipitate attacks. In this clinical scenario, bromides, levetiracetam, gabapentin, and vigabatrin constitute safe choices. For the treatment of status epilepticus, levetiracetam and lacosamide, available in intravenous preparations, are good second-line therapies after benzodiazepines fail to control seizures. Hepatotoxicity is also a rare and unexpected side effect of some antiepileptic drugs. Drugs such as valproic acid, phenytoin, and felbamate, have a well-recognized association with liver toxicity. Other antiepileptic drugs, including phenobarbital, benzodiazepines, ethosuximide, and the newer generations of antiepileptic drugs, have only rarely been linked to hepatotoxicity. Thus physicians should be mindful of the pharmacokinetic profile and the hepatotoxic potential of the different antiepileptic drugs available to treat patients affected by liver disease.
Seizures are common and are treated in all branches of medicine. Approximately 10% of the population will have one or more seizures during their lifetime. Seizures are symptoms that occur in acute illness, ie, provoked seizures, or in epilepsy, ie, unprovoked seizures. Epilepsy is any disorder in which spontaneous recurrence of unprovoked seizures is the main symptom. It is a common chronic neurologic disorder and affects 1% to 3% of the population. Classification of seizure type is important because it enables identification of the region of the brain where the seizure originated and guides initial diagnostic testing. Classification of epilepsy syndrome, rather than only type of seizure, is more important. Epilepsy syndromes are defined by many factors, including type of seizures, age at onset of seizures, family history of seizures, and findings at physical examination, electroencephalography (EEG), and neurologic imaging studies. Identifying the epilepsy syndrome provides insight into natural history, prognosis, diagnostic testing, and therapy of the disorder and facilitates communication between health care professionals. Understanding seizure type provides useful information even when the epilepsy syndrome cannot be classified. Many sudden events are easily confused with seizures, in particular, pseudoseizures, syncope, migraine, cerebrovascular disease, movement disorders, and sleep disorders. In most cases a detailed history and physical examination concentrated on the details of the event, and results of routine EEG and magnetic resonance imaging can aid in determination of which events are seizures. Video EEG monitoring is occasionally necessary to capture events to enable definitive determination of whether they are seizures and to further characterize them. Provoked seizures are treated with relief of the provoking factor. Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are not indicated. However, AEDs may be required to treat unprovoked seizures of new onset in patients at high risk for seizure recurrence or when a second seizure can have devastating psychosocial effects. High risk for recurrence is present when there is a history of brain insult, an EEG demonstrates epileptiform abnormalities, and magnetic resonance images demonstrate a structural lesion. AED therapy is the standard treatment for epilepsy, ie, two or more seizures. Selection of the appropriate AED depends on type of seizure and epilepsy present, and individual drug characteristics, including pharmacokinetics, side effects, dosing interval, and cost. All available AEDs except ethosuximide are effective as adjunctive therapy, and most are effective as initial monotherapy for partial seizures. Generalized seizures preferentially respond to valproate, lamotrigine, and topiramate, among other drugs. If trials of more than two AEDs do not control seizures, additional AEDs are unlikely to be effective, and the patient should be referred to an epilepsy center, where other treatment options, in particular, epilepsy surgery, can be offered. Epilepsy surgery renders 60% to 70% of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy free of disabling seizures.
Childhood absence epilepsy (CAE) is a common pediatric epilepsy syndrome with distinct seizure semiology, electroencephalography (EEG) features, and treatment. A diagnosis of CAE can be obtained during an office visit with a careful history, physical exam including prolonged hyperventilation, and a routine EEG. The treatment of choice for CAE with absence seizures only is ethosuximide. Valproic acid and lamotrigine are also effective treatments for many patients, but when compared to ethosuximide, valproic acid has more adverse effects and lamotrigine is less effective. Attention to predictors of response to treatment, including clinical, electrographic, and genetic factors, is increasing. Refractory CAE occurs in fewer than half of patients, and treatment strategies are available, though efficacy data are lacking. Careful assessment and treatment of psychosocial comorbidities is essential in caring for patients with CAE.
The developmental and epileptic encephalopathies encompass a group of rare syndromes characterised by severe drug-resistant epilepsy with onset in childhood and significant neurodevelopmental comorbidities. The latter include intellectual disability, developmental delay, behavioural problems including attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder, psychiatric problems including anxiety and depression, speech impairment and sleep problems. Classical examples of developmental and epileptic encephalopathies include Dravet syndrome, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and tuberous sclerosis complex. The mainstay of treatment is with multiple anti-seizure medications (ASMs); however, the ASMs themselves can be associated with psychobehavioural adverse events, and effects (negative or positive) on cognition and sleep. We have performed a targeted literature review of ASMs commonly used in the treatment of developmental and epileptic encephalopathies to discuss the latest evidence on their effects on behaviour, mood, cognition, sedation and sleep. The ASMs include valproate (VPA), clobazam, topiramate (TPM), cannabidiol (CBD), fenfluramine (FFA), levetiracetam (LEV), brivaracetam (BRV), zonisamide (ZNS), perampanel (PER), ethosuximide, stiripentol, lamotrigine (LTG), rufinamide, vigabatrin, lacosamide (LCM) and everolimus. Bromide, felbamate and other sodium channel ASMs are discussed briefly. Overall, the current evidence suggest that LEV, PER and to a lesser extent BRV are associated with psychobehavioural adverse events including aggressiveness and irritability; TPM and to a lesser extent ZNS are associated with language impairment and cognitive dulling/memory problems. Patients with a history of behavioural and psychiatric comorbidities may be more at risk of developing psychobehavioural adverse events. Topiramate and ZNS may be associated with negative effects in some aspects of cognition; CBD, FFA, LEV, BRV and LTG may have some positive effects, while the remaining ASMs do not appear to have a detrimental effect. All the ASMs are associated with sedation to a certain extent, which is pronounced during uptitration. Cannabidiol, PER and pregabalin may be associated with improvements in sleep, LTG is associated with insomnia, while VPA, TPM, LEV, ZNS and LCM do not appear to have detrimental effects. There was variability in the extent of evidence for each ASM: for many first-generation and some second-generation ASMs, there is scant documented evidence; however, their extensive use suggests favourable tolerability and safety (e.g. VPA); second-generation and some third-generation ASMs tend to have the most robust evidence documented over several years of use (TPM, LEV, PER, ZNS, BRV), while evidence is still being generated for newer ASMs such as CBD and FFA. Finally, we discuss how a variety of factors can affect mood, behaviour and cognition, and untangling the associations between the effects of the underlying syndrome and those of the ASMs can be challenging. In particular, there is enormous heterogeneity in cognitive, behavioural and developmental impairments that is complex and can change naturally over time; there is a lack of standardised instruments for evaluating these outcomes in developmental and epileptic encephalopathies, with a reliance on subjective evaluations by proxy (caregivers); and treatment regimes are complex involving multiple ASMs as well as other drugs.
Pyknoleptic petit mal is a childhood epilepsy syndrome characterized by frequent absence seizures and a specific EEG pattern. The EEG trait is dominantly inherited. It represents the paradigm of primary generalized epilepsy with cortico-reticular participation. The clinical features include disturbances of awareness and/or responsiveness and frequently associated events such as mild clonic components, postural changes and automatisms. Treatment is usually successful in eliminating seizures and the prognosis is favorable for terminal remission though generalized tonic-clonic seizures may ensue.
The use of antiepileptic drugs in patients with renal or hepatic disease is common in clinical practice. Since the liver and kidney are the main organs involved in the elimination of most drugs, their dysfunction can have important effects on the disposition of antiepileptic drugs. Renal or hepatic disease can prolong the elimination of the parent drug or an active metabolite leading to accumulation and clinical toxicity. It can also affect the protein binding, distribution, and metabolism of a drug. The protein binding of anionic acidic drugs, such as phenytoin and valproate, can be reduced significantly by renal failure, causing difficulties in the interpretation of total serum concentrations commonly used in clinical practice. Dialysis can further modify the pharmacokinetic parameters or result in significant removal of the antiepileptic drugs. Antiepileptic drugs that are eliminated unchanged by the kidneys or undergo minimal metabolism include gabapentin, pregabalin, vigabatrin, and topiramate when used as monotherapy. Drugs eliminated predominantly by biotransformation include phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine, tiagabine, and rufinamide. Drugs eliminated by a combination of renal excretion and biotransformation include levetiracetam, lacosamide, zonisamide, primidone, phenobarbital, ezogabine/retigabine, oxcarbazepine, eslicarbazepine, ethosuximide, and felbamate. Drugs in the latter group can be used cautiously in patients with either renal or liver failure. Antiepileptic drugs that are at high risk of being extracted by hemodialysis include ethosuximide, gabapentin, lacosamide, levetiracetam, pregabalin and topiramate. The use of antiepileptic drugs in the presence of hepatic or renal disease is complex and requires great familiarity with the pharmacokinetics of these agents. Closer follow-up of the patients and more frequent monitoring of serum concentrations are required to optimize clinical outcomes.
Despite the recent entry into the market-place of a range of new pharmacological treatments for epilepsy, most patients still receive the standard antiepileptic drugs. This review considers the clinical place and practical use of these agents. Detailed consideration is given to carbamazepine, phenytoin, sodium valproate, phenobarbital and ethosuximide, with lesser emphasis on primidone, clobazam and clonazepam. Individualization of therapy, polypharmacy, refractory epilepsy, therapeutic drug monitoring, pregnancy, withdrawing treatment, epilepsy prophylaxis and referral to an epilepsy centre are also discussed. The paper concludes with a statement of 12 basic rules in prescribing established antiepileptic drugs.
Despite introduction of new antiepileptic drugs the established drugs phenytoin, carbamazepine and valproate still provide the treatment of choice in most forms of epilepsy, being efficacious in approximately two-thirds of all newly referred patients. In 20-60% of patients resistant to treatment with the older drugs, a 50% reduction of seizure frequency can be achieved by adding ethosuximide, clobazam, vigabatrine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, felbamate, tiagabine or topiramate to the classic treatment. The majority of the new drugs are free of the problematic enzyme induction of the older compounds, making monotherapy as well as combination therapy much easier. To what extent the new antiepileptic drugs are going to be used for the treatment of patients with epilepsy will depend on the analysis of cost and benefits. This will be based on efficacy, side effects, interactions and teratogenicity of these new compounds.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of antiseizure medications (ASMs), both as monotherapies and adjunctive therapies, for idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGEs) and related entities. METHODS: Two reviewers independently searched PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Library for relevant randomized controlled trials from December 2022 to February 2023. Studies on the efficacy and safety of ASM monotherapies or adjunctive therapies for IGEs and related entities-including juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, childhood absence epilepsy (CAE), juvenile absence epilepsy, or generalized tonic-clonic seizures alone (GTCA)-were included. Efficacy outcomes were the proportions of patients remaining seizure free for 1, 3, 6, and 12 months; safety outcomes were the proportions of any treatment-emergent adverse event (TEAE) and TEAEs leading to discontinuation. Network meta-analyses were performed in a random-effects model to obtain odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. Rankings of ASMs were based on the surface under the cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA). This study is registered with PROSPERO (No. CRD42022372358). RESULTS: Twenty-eight randomized controlled trials containing 4282 patients were included. As monotherapies, all ASMs were more effective than placebo, and valproate and ethosuximide were significantly better than lamotrigine. According to the SUCRA for efficacy, ethosuximide ranked first for CAE, whereas valproate ranked first for other types of IGEs. As adjunctive therapies, topiramate ranked best for GTCA as well as overall for IGEs, while levetiracetam ranked best for myoclonic seizures. For safety, perampanel ranked best (measured by any TEAE). CONCLUSIONS: All of the studied ASMs were more effective than placebo. Valproate monotherapy ranked best overall for IGEs, whereas ethosuximide ranked best for CAE. Adjunctive topiramate and levetiracetam were most effective for GTCA and myoclonic seizures, respectively. Furthermore, perampanel had the best tolerability.
Antiepileptic drugs are known to result in visual disturbances. A number of antiepileptic drugs have recently been reported to result in various abnormalities of vision, particularly deficiencies in visual fields and color vision. Moreover, there has been a marked improvement in the diagnosis and understanding of the pathophysiology of visual disturbance. This review collects evidence for visual adverse effects induced by the older antiepileptic drugs (barbiturates, benzodiazepine, carbamazepine, valproic acid, ethosuximide, and phenytoin) and the newer ones (vigabatrin, topiramate, tiagabine, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, gabapentin, felbamate, and oxcarbazepine).
As a sizeable population is affected by epilepsy, so its effective management is a matter of concern. Newer anti-epileptic drugs are now in use, aimed at controls of seizure with fewer side-effects over and above the conventional anti-epileptic drugs. The anti-epileptic drugs can be divided in two groups--conventional anti-epileptic drugs and newer anti-epileptic drugs. The drugs which fall in the first group are--phenytoin, phenobaibitone, valproic acid, carbamazepine, ethosuximide and clonazepam. The second group of drugs are--lamotrigine, clobazam, oxcarbazepine, topiramate and gabapentin. The pharmacology of the drugs are described in a nutshell in this article.
Despite the availability of newer agents, a number of antiepileptic drugs have continued to be employed reasonably widely, many years after their introduction to human therapeutics. These drugs comprise phenobarbitone and some of its congeners, phenytoin, ethosuximide, carbamazepine, valproate, and certain benzodiazepines. Details of their pharmacological profiles are outlined in the following account.
Valproic acid undergoes drug-drug interactions with most of the commonly used anticonvulsants. Since it possesses a wide range of indications, concomitant use with other anticonvulsants, and hence interactions, are not infrequent. Many of these interactions are reciprocal and may have important therapeutic consequences. Valproate acts as a protein binding displacer and/or metabolic inhibitor with respect to a number of other anticonvulsants (phenobarbitone, primidone, phenytoin). Inhibition of metabolism would, in most instances, result in a decrease of the dose requirements of the affected drugs. Valproate is a low clearance drug primarily eliminated by metabolism. Its metabolism is highly inducible by some of the major anticonvulsants (e.g. carbamazepine, phenytoin). Valproate is also highly protein bound in plasma and thus is displaced by salicylates and free fatty acids. However, displacement alone, unlike induced metabolism, should not affect the drug's dose-response relationship.
We carried out a systematic review of published information on transfer of antiseizure medications (ASMs) into breastmilk, ASM serum concentrations in breastfed infants, and the wellbeing of infants breastfed by mothers on ASM treatment. Information was extracted from 85 relevant articles. No data on ASM levels in breastmilk or in breastfed infants was identified for cannabidiol, cenobamate, clobazam, eslicarbazepine-acetate, everolimus, felbamate, fenfluramine, retigabine, rufinamide, stiripentol, tiagabine, and vigabatrin. For ASMs, with available information on levels in breastfed infants, very low concentrations (in the order of 10% or less of maternal serum concentrations) were reported for carbamazepine, gabapentin, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, valproate, and clonazepam. Slightly higher levels (up to approximately 30% of maternal serum concentrations) have been observed with lamotrigine and topiramate, and in single case reports for brivaracetam, lacosamide, and perampanel. High infant levels (30% up to 100% of maternal serum concentrations) have been reported with ethosuximide, phenobarbital and zonisamide. Adverse infant effects during breastfeeding by mothers on ASMs appear to be rare regardless of the type of ASM, but systematic study is limited. Prospective long-term follow-up studies of developmental outcomes among children who have been breastfed by mothers taking ASMs are sparse and have mainly involved children whose mothers were taking carbamazepine, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, phenytoin or valproate as monotherapy while breastfeeding. Although these studies have not indicated poorer outcome among breastfed children compared with those who were not breastfed, further data on long-term outcomes are needed to draw firm conclusions. It is concluded that breastfeeding should in general be encouraged in women taking ASMs, given the well-established benefits of breastfeeding with regard to both short- and long-term infant health in the general population. Counselling needs to be individualized including information on the current knowledge regarding the woman's specific ASM treatment.
The metabolism of the antiepileptic drug ethosuximide (3-ethyl-3-methylpyrollidine-2,5-dione) (I) in animals and humans is reviewed. Chiral aspects of the metabolism of ethosuximide are discussed. Clarification of the precise nature of the hydroxymetabolites of ethosuximide is presented.
BACKGROUND: Pregnant women with epilepsy frequently experience seizures related to pregnancy complications and are often prescribed anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) to manage their symptoms. However, less is known about the comparative safety of AED exposure in utero. We aimed to compare the risk of congenital malformations (CMs) and prenatal outcomes of AEDs in infants/children who were exposed to AEDs in utero through a systematic review and Bayesian random-effects network meta-analysis. METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane CENTRAL were searched from inception to December 15, 2015. Two reviewers independently screened titles/abstracts and full-text papers for experimental and observational studies comparing mono- or poly-therapy AEDs versus control (no AED exposure) or other AEDs, then abstracted data and appraised the risk of bias. The primary outcome was incidence of major CMs, overall and by specific type (cardiac malformations, hypospadias, cleft lip and/or palate, club foot, inguinal hernia, and undescended testes). RESULTS: After screening 5305 titles and abstracts, 642 potentially relevant full-text articles, and 17 studies from scanning reference lists, 96 studies were eligible (n = 58,461 patients). Across all major CMs, many AEDs were associated with higher risk compared to control. For major CMs, ethosuximide (OR, 3.04; 95% CrI, 1.23-7.07), valproate (OR, 2.93; 95% CrI, 2.36-3.69), topiramate (OR, 1.90; 95% CrI, 1.17-2.97), phenobarbital (OR, 1.83; 95% CrI, 1.35-2.47), phenytoin (OR, 1.67; 95% CrI, 1.30-2.17), carbamazepine (OR, 1.37; 95% CrI, 1.10-1.71), and 11 polytherapies were significantly more harmful than control, but lamotrigine (OR, 0.96; 95% CrI, 0.72-1.25) and levetiracetam (OR, 0.72; 95% CrI, 0.43-1.16) were not. CONCLUSION: The newer generation AEDs, lamotrigine and levetiracetam, were not associated with significant increased risks of CMs compared to control, and were significantly less likely to be associated with children experiencing cardiac malformations than control. However, this does not mean that these agents are not harmful to infants/children exposed in utero. Counselling is advised concerning teratogenic risks when the prescription is written for a woman of childbearing age and before women continue with these agents when considering pregnancy, such as switching from polytherapy to monotherapy with evidence of lower risk and avoiding AEDs, such as valproate, that are consistently associated with CMs. These decisions must be balanced against the need for seizure control. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42014008925.
High prevalence of chronic pain in elderly results in active search of new approaches for the effective and safe management of this category of patients. Antiepileptic drugs may provide analgesic affect in different types of chronic pain (mainly, in neuropathic pain). Variety of antiepileptics used as analgesics have variable efficacy and safety profile in elderly. <<Old>> antiepileptics (phenobarbital, clonazepam, ethosuximide, carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproate, etc.) and <<new>> (gabapentin, pregabalin, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, topiramate, zonisamide, tiagabine) are considered in this review with insights on pharmacokinetic features of these drugs in elderly, profile of side effects, parameters of analgesic efficacy.
Ethosuximide is the drug of first choice in absence seizures. Idiosyncratic side effects are rare. Valproate is effective against absence, generalized tonic-colonic, and partial seizures. It is the drug of choice in photosensitive seizures. Valproate is, on the whole, free from unpleasant side effects, but fatal hepatotoxicity and hyperamnionemia have been reported very rarely.
Childhood absence epilepsy (CAE) is a common pediatric epilepsy syndrome accounting for 10% of all pediatric epilepsies. The aim of this review is to provide an updated overview of this epilepsy syndrome to pediatricians. Most of the patients can be initially managed in private practice or in general pediatric settings. Absence seizures are the only seizure type observed at the time of diagnosis in these patients. An electroencephalogram recording and a clinical evaluation lead to the diagnosis. The underlying mechanisms are not yet fully understood. CAE is considered a self-limited epilepsy syndrome since most of the patients will become seizure free. Only a few patients (5-10%) have resistant CAE. However, CAE, as well as any pediatric epilepsy syndrome, should not be considered a "benign" epilepsy. Attention deficit is observed in about one third of the patients. There is also an increased risk of academic difficulties related to specific cognitive disorders. Therefore, the early detection of children at risk of developing neuropsychological problems can be helpful for preventing school underachievement and poor psychosocial outcome. Recently, several studies including a large randomized controlled trial indicated that ethosuximide should be considered as a first-line treatment and valproate as a second-line treatment. Cognitive side effects should be an important factor in the selection of the antiepileptic drug and should be specifically assessed during the follow-up. This review concludes by discussing the criteria that might lead to referring the patient to a specialist.
