Therapeutic Reviews aim to provide essential independent information for health professionals about drugs used in palliative and hospice care. Additional content is available on www.palliativedrugs.com. The series editors welcome feedback on the articles (hq@palliativedrugs.com).
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: A concise review of recent findings in brain tumor-related epilepsy (BTRE), with focus on the effect of antitumor treatment on seizure control and the management of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). RECENT FINDINGS: Isocitrate dehydrogenase mutation and its active metabolite d -2-hydroxyglutarate seem important contributing factors to epileptogenesis in BTRE. A beneficial effect of antitumor treatment (i.e. surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy) on seizure control has mainly been demonstrated in low-grade glioma. AED prophylaxis in seizure-naive BTRE patients is not recommended, but AED treatment should be initiated after a first seizure has occurred. Comparative efficacy randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are currently lacking, but second-generation AED levetiracetam seems the preferred choice in BTRE. Levetiracetam lacks significant drug-drug interactions, has shown favorable efficacy compared to valproic acid in BTRE, generally causes no hematological or neurocognitive functioning adverse effects, but caution should be exercised with regard to psychiatric adverse effects. Potential add-on AEDs in case of uncontrolled seizures include lacosamide, perampanel, and valproic acid. Ultimately, in the end-of-life phase when oral intake of medication is hampered, benzodiazepines via nonoral administration routes are potential alternatives. SUMMARY: Management of seizures in BTRE is complex and with currently available evidence levetiracetam seems the preferred choice. Comparative efficacy RCTs in BTRE are warranted.
BACKGROUND: The choice of drugs for patients with status epilepticus that is refractory to treatment with benzodiazepines has not been thoroughly studied. METHODS: In a randomized, blinded, adaptive trial, we compared the efficacy and safety of three intravenous anticonvulsive agents - levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, and valproate - in children and adults with convulsive status epilepticus that was unresponsive to treatment with benzodiazepines. The primary outcome was absence of clinically evident seizures and improvement in the level of consciousness by 60 minutes after the start of drug infusion, without additional anticonvulsant medication. The posterior probabilities that each drug was the most or least effective were calculated. Safety outcomes included life-threatening hypotension or cardiac arrhythmia, endotracheal intubation, seizure recurrence, and death. RESULTS: A total of 384 patients were enrolled and randomly assigned to receive levetiracetam (145 patients), fosphenytoin (118), or valproate (121). Reenrollment of patients with a second episode of status epilepticus accounted for 16 additional instances of randomization. In accordance with a prespecified stopping rule for futility of finding one drug to be superior or inferior, a planned interim analysis led to the trial being stopped. Of the enrolled patients, 10% were determined to have had psychogenic seizures. The primary outcome of cessation of status epilepticus and improvement in the level of consciousness at 60 minutes occurred in 68 patients assigned to levetiracetam (47%; 95% credible interval, 39 to 55), 53 patients assigned to fosphenytoin (45%; 95% credible interval, 36 to 54), and 56 patients assigned to valproate (46%; 95% credible interval, 38 to 55). The posterior probability that each drug was the most effective was 0.41, 0.24, and 0.35, respectively. Numerically more episodes of hypotension and intubation occurred in the fosphenytoin group and more deaths occurred in the levetiracetam group than in the other groups, but these differences were not significant. CONCLUSIONS: In the context of benzodiazepine-refractory convulsive status epilepticus, the anticonvulsant drugs levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, and valproate each led to seizure cessation and improved alertness by 60 minutes in approximately half the patients, and the three drugs were associated with similar incidences of adverse events. (Funded by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke; ESETT ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01960075.).
OBJECTIVE: Among people with epilepsy, levetiracetam (LEV) can cause neuropsychiatric adverse events (NPAEs) that impact negatively on quality of life. It has been suggested that pyridoxine can ameliorate LEV-related NPAEs. We conducted a systematic review of studies on the use of pyridoxine supplementation to relieve NPAEs associated with LEV therapy. METHODS: The review was conducted according to Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Medline, EMBASE, Scholar, Cochrane-CENTRAL (2000-2019), and EThOS platform were searched for studies on the use of pyridoxine in patients with LEV-related NPAEs. Proportions of patients reported to benefit from pyridoxine supplementation were tabulated, and a random-effect model meta-analysis was conducted. RESULTS: Eleven retrospective studies/case reports and one randomized prospective study, mostly including pediatric populations, were identified. Retrospective studies, which were rated as low quality due to failure to control for bias, reported an overall improvement of NPAEs after pyridoxine supplementation in 72.5% (108/149) of patients. The proportion of patients showing improvement in a pooled analysis of the four largest retrospective studies (n = 134) was 72.1% (95% confidence interval (CI) 47.1-88.3), although there was high heterogeneity across studies (I(2) = 82%, p(heterogeneity) < 0.01). In the only prospective trial, patients randomized to pyridoxine supplementation were more likely to show relief from NPAEs than patients not receiving supplementation (p < 0.01), but outcomes might have been affected by assessment bias. CONCLUSION: This systematic review suggests that pyridoxine might be of benefit in relieving LEV-related NPAEs. However, the quality of the evidence is poor, and better-designed prospective studies that include quantitative as well as qualitative data are needed to define the role of pyridoxine in the management of LEV-related NPAEs.
It is challenging to balance the fetal risks associated with the use of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) against maternal and fetal risks of seizure worsening, and therefore it is very important to define and distinguish the possible risks entailed by different AEDs. This paper aims to undertake a comprehensive review regarding the possible risks of four classical (phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and valproate) and two newer (lamotrigine and levetiracetam) AEDs during pregnancy. The review focuses on major and organ-specific malformations, dose-dependent risks, mono vs polytherapy, and clinical pharmacokinetics. A discussion regarding the safety of AED use during breastfeeding is also provided.
More than a third of patients with epilepsy cannot achieve freedom from seizures despite taking multiple medications. This article compares brivaracetam to levetiracetam, and provides guidelines for the safe and effective use of brivaracetam.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: There are no US Food and Drug Administration-approved therapies for neonatal seizures. Phenobarbital and phenytoin frequently fail to control seizures. There are concerns about the safety of seizure medications in the developing brain. Levetiracetam has proven efficacy and an excellent safety profile in older patients; therefore, there is great interest in its use in neonates. However, randomized studies have not been performed. Our objectives were to study the efficacy and safety of levetiracetam compared with phenobarbital as a first-line treatment of neonatal seizures. METHODS: The study was a multicenter, randomized, blinded, controlled, phase IIb trial investigating the efficacy and safety of levetiracetam compared with phenobarbital as a first-line treatment for neonatal seizures of any cause. The primary outcome measure was complete seizure freedom for 24 hours, assessed by independent review of the EEGs by 2 neurophysiologists. RESULTS: Eighty percent of patients (24 of 30) randomly assigned to phenobarbital remained seizure free for 24 hours, compared with 28% of patients (15 of 53) randomly assigned to levetiracetam (P < .001; relative risk 0.35 [95% confidence interval: 0.22-0.56]; modified intention-to-treat population). A 7.5% improvement in efficacy was achieved with a dose escalation of levetiracetam from 40 to 60 mg/kg. More adverse effects were seen in subjects randomly assigned to phenobarbital (not statistically significant). CONCLUSIONS: In this phase IIb study, phenobarbital was more effective than levetiracetam for the treatment of neonatal seizures. Higher rates of adverse effects were seen with phenobarbital treatment. Higher-dose studies of levetiracetam are warranted, and definitive studies with long-term outcome measures are needed.
INTRODUCTION: This review aims to identify the optimal therapeutic dosage of anti-epileptic drugs in terms of efficacy and safety in patients with multiple comorbidities. AREAS COVERED: We have analyzed changes in terms of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of Brivaracetam, Carbamazepine, Lacosamide, Lamotrigine, Levetiracetam, Topiramate, Valproate, and Zonisamide in liver disease, chronic kidney disease, and in patients admitted to intensive care unit. Our literature search covers the past 5 years. We used PubMed, Google Scholar, and EMBASE database's to support our article. EXPERT OPINION: To ensure that the patient with seizure receives the best treatment in relation to their comorbidities, careful clinical-laboratory monitoring is necessary to maximize effectiveness while maintaining safety, especially in the case of polytherapy.
Although levetiracetam is the antiepileptic of choice in patients after hepatic transplantation and patients with hepatic dysfunction, we report a patient in whom levetiracetam was the most probable cause of hepatic dysfunction. Treatment of this hepatic dysfunction is to have a high degree of suspicion and withdraw the drug at the earliest to prevent morbidity and rarely mortality. Though rare, this is an important unwanted side effect of this highly useful medication.
Status epilepticus (SE) is a frequent neurological emergency associated with high morbidity and mortality. According to the new ILAE 2015 definition, SE results either from the failure of the mechanisms responsible for seizure termination or initiation, leading to abnormally prolonged seizures. The definition has different time points for convulsive, focal and absence SE. Time is brain. There are changes in synaptic receptors leading to a more proconvulsant state and increased risk of brain lesion and sequelae with long duration. Management of SE must include three pillars: stop seizures, stabilize patients to avoid secondary lesions and treat underlying causes. Convulsive SE is defined after 5 minutes and is a major emergency. Benzodiazepines are the initial treatment, and should be given fast and an adequate dose. Phenytoin/fosphenytoin, levetiracetam and valproic acid are evidence choices for second line treatment. If SE persists, anesthetic drugs are probably the best option for third line treatment, despite lack of evidence. Midazolam is usually the best initial choice and barbiturates should be considered for refractory cases. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus has a similar initial approach, with benzodiazepines and second line intravenous (IV) agents, but after that, aggressiveness should be balanced considering risk of lesion due to seizures and medical complications caused by aggressive treatment. Usually, the best approach is the use of sequential IV antiepileptic drugs (oral/tube are options if IV options are not available). EEG monitoring is crucial for diagnosis of nonconvulsive SE, after initial control of convulsive SE and treatment control. Institutional protocols are advised to improve care.
Recent literature indicates, that rolandic epilepsy/epilepsy of childhood with centrotemporal spikes may not be as benign as previously assumed. This study investigates the existing evidence, which describes the treatment effects on seizure frequency as well as improvement of cognition in children with rolandic epilepsy. We conclude, that treatment with anti-epileptic drugs could be justified, if treatment reduces seizures, prevents the evolution to atypical forms, or diminishes the negative cognitive consequences associated with the disease. Levetiracetam and sulthiame are the recommended treatments according to the existing evidence, which is still insufficient. A larger randomized controlled trial is warranted.
Epilepsy is the most common symptom in patients with brain tumors. The shared genetic, molecular, and cellular mechanisms between tumorigenesis and epileptogenesis represent 'two sides of the same coin'. These include augmented neuronal excitatory transmission, impaired inhibitory transmission, genetic mutations in the BRAF, IDH, and PIK3CA genes, inflammation, hemodynamic impairments, and astrocyte dysfunction, which are still largely unknown. Low-grade developmental brain tumors are those most commonly associated with epilepsy. Given this strict relationship, drugs able to target both seizures and tumors would be of extreme clinical usefulness. In this regard, anti-seizure medications (ASMs) are optimal candidates as they have well-characterized effects and safety profiles, do not increase the risk of developing cancer, and already offer well-defined seizure control. The most important ASMs showing preclinical and clinical efficacy are brivaracetam, lacosamide, perampanel, and especially valproic acid and levetiracetam. However, the data quality is low or limited to preclinical studies, and results are sometimes conflicting. Future trials with a prospective, randomized, and controlled design accounting for different prognostic factors will help clarify the role of these ASMs and the clinical setting in which they might be used. In conclusion, brain tumor-related epilepsies are clear examples of how close, multidisciplinary collaborations among investigators with different expertise are warranted for pursuing scientific knowledge and, more importantly, for the well-being of patients needing targeted and effective therapies.
BACKGROUND: Levetiracetam is commonly used for seizure prophylaxis in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), traumatic brain injury (TBI), supratentorial neurosurgery, and spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). However, its efficacy, optimal dosing, and the adverse events associated with levetiracetam prophylaxis remain unclear. METHODS: A systematic search of PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane central register of controlled trials (CENTRAL) database was conducted from January 1, 2000, to October 30, 2020, including articles addressing treatment with levetiracetam for seizure prophylaxis after SAH, ICH, TBI, and supratentorial neurosurgery. Non-English, pediatric (aged < 18 years), preclinical, reviews, case reports, and articles that included patients with a preexisting seizure condition or epilepsy were excluded. The coprimary meta-analyses examined first seizure events in (1) levetiracetam versus no antiseizure medication and (2) levetiracetam versus other antiseizure medications in all ICH, TBI, SAH, and supratentorial neurosurgery populations. Secondary meta-analyses evaluated the same comparator groups in individual disease populations. Risk of bias in non-randomised studies - of interventions (ROBINS-I) and risk-of-bias tool for randomized trials (RoB-2) tools were used to assess risk of bias. RESULTS: A total of 30 studies (n = 6 randomized trials, n = 9 prospective studies, and n = 15 retrospective studies), including 7609 patients (n = 4737 with TBI, n = 701 with SAH, n = 261 with ICH, and n = 1910 with neurosurgical diseases) were included in analyses. Twenty-seven of 30 (90%) studies demonstrated moderate to severe risk of bias, and 11 of 30 (37%) studies used low-dosage levetiracetam (250-500 mg twice daily). In the primary meta-analyses, there were no differences in seizure events for levetiracetam prophylaxis (n = 906) versus no antiseizure medication (n = 2728; odds ratio [OR] 0.79, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.53-1.16, P = 0.23, fixed-effect, I(2) = 26%, P = 0.23 for heterogeneity) or levetiracetam (n = 1950) versus other antiseizure prophylaxis (n = 2289; OR 0.84, 95% CI 0.55-1.28, P = 0.41, random-effects, I(2) = 49%, P = 0.005 for heterogeneity). Only patients with supratentorial neurosurgical diseases benefited from levetiracetam compared with other antiseizure medications (median 0.70 seizure events per-patient-year with levetiracetam versus 2.20 seizure events per-patient-year for other antiseizure medications, OR 0.34, 95% CI 0.20-0.58, P < 0.001, fixed-effects, I(2) = 39%, P = 0.13 for heterogeneity). There were no significant differences in meta-analyses of patients with ICH, SAH, or TBI. Adverse events of any severity were reported in a median of 8% of patients given levetiracetam compared with 21% of patients in comparator groups. CONCLUSIONS: Based on the current moderately to seriously biased heterogeneous data, which frequently used low and possibly subtherapeutic doses of levetiracetam, our meta-analyses did not demonstrate significant reductions in seizure incidence and neither supports nor refutes the use of levetiracetam prophylaxis in TBI, SAH, or ICH. Levetiracetam may be preferred post supratentorial neurosurgery. More high-quality randomized trials of prophylactic levetiracetam are warranted.
OBJECTIVE: Operational delays have the potential to lead to suboptimal time to seizure control during status epilepticus. Levetiracetam (LEV) is an urgent control antiepileptic medication that offers relative lack of adverse effects and ease of monitoring. There are limited data published demonstrating safety and tolerability of undiluted rapid intravenous (IV) push of LEV in doses of 1000 mg or less. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the safety of IV push administration of LEV doses up to 4500 mg. METHODS: This is a retrospective, observational, cohort analysis of adult patients who received at least one dose of undiluted IV push LEV from October 15, 2019 to August 31, 2020 at a large academic medical center in Phoenix, Arizona. Outcomes of interest include safety and tolerability of rapid administration of undiluted LEV. RESULTS: There were 953 unique patients included during the study period. LEV was a new medication for witnessed or suspected seizure in 51.9% of patients, and 40.7% of patients had a documented history of epilepsy or seizure disorder. There were 8561 undiluted IV push LEV doses administered, 3674 (42.9%) of which were greater than 1000 mg. LEV was administered most often through a peripheral IV (79.1%). There were 12 patients with documented adverse drug events during the study period, with four potentially directly related to IV push LEV administration. These events were limited to local injection site reactions and included redness, burning, and loss of a peripheral IV line. SIGNIFICANCE: Rapid IV administration of undiluted LEV is both safe and tolerable in doses of up to 4500 mg, allowing for rapid drug administration, which is paramount during neurologic emergencies.
PURPOSE: Multiple interventions have been studied for benzodiazepine-resistant status epilepticus (SE) in children and adults. This review aimed to summarize the available evidence and provide estimates of comparative effectiveness and ranking of treatment effects. METHODS: All randomized controlled trials studying patients (>1 month of age) with benzodiazepine-resistant SE were included. Outcomes including seizure cessation within 60 min, seizure freedom for 24 h, death, respiratory depression warranting intubation and cardiovascular instability were studied. Conventional and network meta-analyses (NMA) were done. RESULTS: Seventeen studies were included (16 in NMA). Phenobarbital and high-dose levetiracetam were significantly superior to phenytoin with respect to seizure cessation within 60 min. Network ranking demonstrated that phenobarbital had the highest probability of being the best among the studied interventions followed by high-dose levetiracetam and high-dose valproate. Network meta-analysis was limited by predominant indirect evidence and high heterogeneity.On pairwise comparisons, phenobarbital was found to be associated with a higher risk of need for intubation and cardiovascular instability. Levetiracetam had a better safety profile than fosphenytoin. CONCLUSIONS: Based on low quality evidence, phenobarbital appears to be the most effective agent for seizure cessation within 60 min of administration in patients with benzodiazepine resistant status epilepticus. High-dose levetiracetam, high-dose valproate and fosphenytoin are probably equally effective. Choice of medication may be guided by effectiveness, safety concerns, availability, cost and systemic co-morbidities.
PURPOSE: To understand the currently available post-marketing real-world evidence of the incidences of and discontinuations due to the BAEs of irritability, anger, and aggression in people with epilepsy (PWE) treated with the anti-seizure medications (ASMs) brivaracetam (BRV), levetiracetam (LEV), perampanel (PER), and topiramate (TPM), as well as behavioral adverse events (BAEs) in PWE switching from LEV to BRV. METHODS: A systematic review of published literature using the Cochrane Library, PubMed/MEDLINE, and Embase was performed to identify retrospective and prospective observational studies reporting the incidence of irritability, anger, or aggression with BRV, LEV, PER, or TPM in PWE. The incidences of these BAEs and the rates of discontinuation due to each were categorized by ASM, and where possible, weighted means were calculated but not statistically assessed. Behavioral and psychiatric adverse events in PWE switching from LEV to BRV were summarized descriptively. RESULTS: A total of 1500 records were identified in the searches. Of these, 44 published articles reporting 42 studies met the study criteria and were included in the data synthesis, 7 studies were identified in the clinical trial database, and 5 studies included PWE switching from LEV to BRV. Studies included a variety of methods, study populations, and definitions of BAEs. While a wide range of results was reported across studies, weighted mean incidences were 5.6% for BRV, 9.9% for LEV, 12.3% for PER, and 3.1% for TPM for irritability; 3.3%* for BRV, 2.5% for LEV, 2.0% for PER, and 0.2%* for TPM for anger; and 2.5% for BRV, 2.6% for LEV, 4.4% for PER, and 0.5%* for TPM for aggression. Weighted mean discontinuation rates were 0.8%* for BRV, 3.4% for LEV, 3.0% for PER, and 2.2% for TPM for irritability and 0.8%* for BRV, 2.4% for LEV, 9.2% for PER, and 1.2%* for TPM for aggression. There were no discontinuations for anger. Switching from LEV to BRV led to improvement in BAEs in 33.3% to 83.0% of patients (weighted mean, 66.6%). *Denotes only 1 study. CONCLUSIONS: This systematic review characterizes the incidences of irritability, anger, and aggression with BRV, LEV, PER, and TPM, and it provides robust real-world evidence demonstrating that switching from LEV to BRV may improve BAEs. While additional data remain valuable due to differences in methodology (which make comparisons difficult), these results improve understanding of the real-world incidences of discontinuations due to these BAEs in clinical practice and can aid in discussions and treatment decision-making with PWE.
BACKGROUND: Benzodiazepine-refractory, or established, status epilepticus is thought to be of similar pathophysiology in children and adults, but differences in underlying aetiology and pharmacodynamics might differentially affect response to therapy. In the Established Status Epilepticus Treatment Trial (ESETT) we compared the efficacy and safety of levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, and valproate in established status epilepticus, and here we describe our results after extending enrolment in children to compare outcomes in three age groups. METHODS: In this multicentre, double-blind, response-adaptive, randomised controlled trial, we recruited patients from 58 hospital emergency departments across the USA. Patients were eligible for inclusion if they were aged 2 years or older, had been treated for a generalised convulsive seizure of longer than 5 min duration with adequate doses of benzodiazepines, and continued to have persistent or recurrent convulsions in the emergency department for at least 5 min and no more than 30 min after the last dose of benzodiazepine. Patients were randomly assigned in a response-adaptive manner, using Bayesian methods and stratified by age group (<18 years, 18-65 years, and >65 years), to levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, or valproate. All patients, investigators, study staff, and pharmacists were masked to treatment allocation. The primary outcome was absence of clinically apparent seizures with improved consciousness and without additional antiseizure medication at 1 h from start of drug infusion. The primary safety outcome was life-threatening hypotension or cardiac arrhythmia. The efficacy and safety outcomes were analysed by intention to treat. This study is registered in ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01960075. FINDINGS: Between Nov 3, 2015, and Dec 29, 2018, we enrolled 478 patients and 462 unique patients were included: 225 children (aged <18 years), 186 adults (18-65 years), and 51 older adults (>65 years). 175 (38%) patients were randomly assigned to levetiracetam, 142 (31%) to fosphenyltoin, and 145 (31%) were to valproate. Baseline characteristics were balanced across treatments within age groups. The primary efficacy outcome was met in those treated with levetiracetam for 52% (95% credible interval 41-62) of children, 44% (33-55) of adults, and 37% (19-59) of older adults; with fosphenytoin in 49% (38-61) of children, 46% (34-59) of adults, and 35% (17-59) of older adults; and with valproate in 52% (41-63) of children, 46% (34-58) of adults, and 47% (25-70) of older adults. No differences were detected in efficacy or primary safety outcome by drug within each age group. With the exception of endotracheal intubation in children, secondary safety outcomes did not significantly differ by drug within each age group. INTERPRETATION: Children, adults, and older adults with established status epilepticus respond similarly to levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, and valproate, with treatment success in approximately half of patients. Any of the three drugs can be considered as a potential first-choice, second-line drug for benzodiazepine-refractory status epilepticus. FUNDING: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health.
The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, adverse effects, and dosage and administration of levetiracetam are reviewed. Levetiracetam is an adjunctive treatment for partial-onset epileptic seizures. This drug inhibits seizure activity via a mechanism that does not involve excitatory or inhibitory neuronal pathways. Oral bioavailability is about 100%, and food does not alter absorption. Levetiracetam is minimally plasma protein bound (10%). Peak time to absorption after oral administration is one hour, and steady state is achieved in two days with twice-daily administration. Three clinical studies have demonstrated levetiracetam's ability to reduce seizure frequency in patients with partial-onset epilepsy. The most commonly reported adverse effects in clinical trials were somnolence, dizziness, infection, and asthenia. The potential for interactions with medications that are hepatically metabolized is minimal. The starting dosage is 500 mg twice a day; the maximum dosage is 3000 mg/day within four weeks. Levetiracetam is effective as an adjunctive treatment of partial-onset epilepsy with or without secondary generalization.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of antiseizure medications (ASMs), both as monotherapies and adjunctive therapies, for idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGEs) and related entities. METHODS: Two reviewers independently searched PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Library for relevant randomized controlled trials from December 2022 to February 2023. Studies on the efficacy and safety of ASM monotherapies or adjunctive therapies for IGEs and related entities-including juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, childhood absence epilepsy (CAE), juvenile absence epilepsy, or generalized tonic-clonic seizures alone (GTCA)-were included. Efficacy outcomes were the proportions of patients remaining seizure free for 1, 3, 6, and 12 months; safety outcomes were the proportions of any treatment-emergent adverse event (TEAE) and TEAEs leading to discontinuation. Network meta-analyses were performed in a random-effects model to obtain odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. Rankings of ASMs were based on the surface under the cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA). This study is registered with PROSPERO (No. CRD42022372358). RESULTS: Twenty-eight randomized controlled trials containing 4282 patients were included. As monotherapies, all ASMs were more effective than placebo, and valproate and ethosuximide were significantly better than lamotrigine. According to the SUCRA for efficacy, ethosuximide ranked first for CAE, whereas valproate ranked first for other types of IGEs. As adjunctive therapies, topiramate ranked best for GTCA as well as overall for IGEs, while levetiracetam ranked best for myoclonic seizures. For safety, perampanel ranked best (measured by any TEAE). CONCLUSIONS: All of the studied ASMs were more effective than placebo. Valproate monotherapy ranked best overall for IGEs, whereas ethosuximide ranked best for CAE. Adjunctive topiramate and levetiracetam were most effective for GTCA and myoclonic seizures, respectively. Furthermore, perampanel had the best tolerability.
IMPORTANCE: Network hyperexcitability may contribute to cognitive dysfunction in patients with Alzheimer disease (AD). OBJECTIVE: To determine the ability of the antiseizure drug levetiracetam to improve cognition in persons with AD. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The Levetiracetam for Alzheimer's Disease-Associated Network Hyperexcitability (LEV-AD) study was a phase 2a randomized double-blinded placebo-controlled crossover clinical trial of 34 adults with AD that was conducted at the University of California, San Francisco, and the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, between October 16, 2014, and July 21, 2020. Participants were adults 80 years and younger who had a Mini-Mental State Examination score of 18 points or higher and/or a Clinical Dementia Rating score of less than 2 points. Screening included overnight video electroencephalography and a 1-hour resting magnetoencephalography examination. INTERVENTIONS: Group A received placebo twice daily for 4 weeks followed by a 4-week washout period, then oral levetiracetam, 125 mg, twice daily for 4 weeks. Group B received treatment using the reverse sequence. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was the ability of levetiracetam treatment to improve executive function (measured by the National Institutes of Health Executive Abilities: Measures and Instruments for Neurobehavioral Evaluation and Research [NIH-EXAMINER] composite score). Secondary outcomes were cognition (measured by the Stroop Color and Word Test [Stroop] interference naming subscale and the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale) and disability. Exploratory outcomes included performance on a virtual route learning test and scores on cognitive and functional tests among participants with epileptiform activity. RESULTS: Of 54 adults assessed for eligibility, 11 did not meet study criteria, and 9 declined to participate. A total of 34 adults (21 women [61.8%]; mean [SD] age, 62.3 [7.7] years) with AD were enrolled and randomized (17 participants to group A and 17 participants to group B). Thirteen participants (38.2%) were categorized as having epileptiform activity. In total, 28 participants (82.4%) completed the study, 10 of whom (35.7%) had epileptiform activity. Overall, treatment with levetiracetam did not change NIH-EXAMINER composite scores (mean difference vs placebo, 0.07 points; 95% CI, -0.18 to 0.32 points; P = .55) or secondary measures. However, among participants with epileptiform activity, levetiracetam treatment improved performance on the Stroop interference naming subscale (net improvement vs placebo, 7.4 points; 95% CI, 0.2-14.7 points; P = .046) and the virtual route learning test (t = 2.36; Cohen f2 = 0.11; P = .02). There were no treatment discontinuations because of adverse events. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial, levetiracetam was well tolerated and, although it did not improve the primary outcome, in prespecified analysis, levetiracetam improved performance on spatial memory and executive function tasks in patients with AD and epileptiform activity. These exploratory findings warrant further assessment of antiseizure approaches in AD. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02002819.
