A narrative review of papers published from January 2011 to December 2021, after a literature search in selected databases using the terms "pharmacokinetics", "ibuprofen", "diclofenac", "acemetacin", "naproxen", "etodolac" and "etoricoxib" was performed. From 828 articles identified, only eight met the inclusion criteria. Selective COX-2 inhibitors are associated with higher cardiovascular risk, while non-selective COX inhibitors are associated with higher gastrointestinal risk. NSAIDs with lower renal excretion with phase 2 metabolism are less likely to induce adverse effects and drug-drug interactions. Patients with frequent NSAID use needs, such as elderly patients and patients with cardiovascular disease or impaired renal function, will benefit from lower renal excretion (e.g. acemethacin, diclofenac, and etodolac) (level of evidence 3). Polymedicated patients, elderly patients, and patients with chronic alcohol abuse will be at a lower risk for adverse effects with NSAIDs that undergo phase 2 liver biotransformation, namely, acemethacin and diclofenac (level of evidence 3). Young patients, patients dealing with acute pain, or with active and/or chronic symptomatic gastritis, selective COX-2 inhibitors (celecoxib or etoricoxib) may be a better option (level of evidence 2). Knowing the individual characteristics of the patients, combined with knowledge on basic pharmacology, offers greater safety and better adherence to therapy. PERSPECTIVE: Although there are several NSAIDs options to treat pain, physicians usually take special care to its prescription regarding cardiovascular and gastrointestinal side effects, despite the age of the patient. In this paper, based on the best evidence, the authors present a review of the safest NSAIDs to use in the elderly.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are a group of heterogeneous compounds extensively used in both human and veterinary medicine for their antipyretic, anti-inflammation, and analgesic properties. NSAIDs consist of a wide range of pharmacologically active agents with different chemical structures, with similar therapeutic and adverse effects. The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center received 22,206 NSAID incidents in dogs and cats (3% of total cases; dogs [15,823] and cats [1244]) during 2005 to 2010. This is roughly equivalent to 4% NSAID incidents reported in humans. The most common NSAID involved was ibuprofen, followed by aspirin, naproxen, deracoxib, meloxicam, diclofenac, piroxicam, indomethacin, nabumetone, and etodolac. This article provides a brief overview of classification, mechanism of action, pharmacologic and toxicologic properties, and treatment information involving frequently encountered human and veterinary NSAIDs in dogs and cats.
Acute rheumatic fever is a delayed inflammatory disease that follows streptococcal infection of the throat. Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis is a sterile arthritis associated with antecedent streptococcal infection in patients not fulfilling the Jones criteria for acute rheumatic fever. Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis has been reported to have lower-extremity predominance and, therefore, should be included in the differential diagnosis of patients with lower-extremity arthritis. A review of the literature, distinguishing poststreptococcal reactive arthritis from acute rheumatic fever, and treatment options are discussed here. A case report is also presented.
Postsurgical dental pain is mainly driven by inflammation, particularly through the generation of prostaglandins via the cyclooxygenase system. Thus, it is no surprise that numerous randomized placebo-controlled trials studying acute pain following the surgical extraction of impacted third molars have demonstrated the remarkable efficacy of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen, naproxen sodium, etodolac, diclofenac, and ketorolac in this prototypic condition of acute inflammatory pain. Combining an optimal dose of an NSAID with an appropriate dose of acetaminophen appears to further enhance analgesic efficacy and potentially reduce the need for opioids. In addition to being on average inferior to NSAIDs as analgesics in postsurgical dental pain, opioids produce a higher incidence of side effects in dental outpatients, including dizziness, drowsiness, psychomotor impairment, nausea/vomiting, and constipation. Unused opioids are also subject to misuse and diversion, and they may cause addiction. Despite these risks, some dental surgical outpatients may benefit from a 1- or 2-d course of opioids added to their NSAID regimen. NSAID use may carry significant risks in certain patient populations, in which a short course of an acetaminophen/opioid combination may provide a more favorable benefit versus risk ratio than an NSAID regimen.
BACKGROUND: Radioresistance is found to be the main therapeutic restriction in colorectal radiation therapy. The aim of this study was to investigate the synergistic effect of Etodolac (ET) and ionizing radiation on human colorectal cancer cells. METHODS: Pretreated HT-29 cells with ET were exposed to ionizing radiation. The radiosensitizing effect of ET was evaluated using MTT, flow cytometry, and clonogenic assay. The amount of nitrite oxide (NO) in irradiated cells was also measured with the Griess reagent. RESULTS: The present study found that pretreatment of HT-29 cells with ET decreases their survival and colony formation. Higher concentrations of ET cause total apoptosis and an increase in NO levels in irradiated cells. CONCLUSION: Applying ET in a concentration-dependent manner had an incremental effect on the amount of apoptosis and cell death induced by radiation.
An extensive literature search on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-induced gastropathy in rheumatic conditions has been carried out. A reduced incidence of gastropathy has been observed among newly developed NSAIDs such as etodolac and the non-acidic nabumetone. An alternative prophylactic therapy to avoid NSAID-induced gastroduodenal mucosal damage which has been successfully tested in several trials is co-medication with the prostaglandin analogue misoprostol. The cytoprotective agent sucralfate also appears to be effective. Recent observations of Campylobacter pylori infections in NSAID-induced gastropathy introduces the question as to whether simultaneous antibacterial medication should be routinely administered during NSAID therapy. At present the invasive technique of endoscopy is used to ascertain gastroduodenal mucosal damage. However, a new technique which merely requires blood sampling is being investigated. This involves measurement of serum levels of the precursor molecules for the gastric enzyme pepsin, pepsinogen I and II. In future this assay could constitute a non-invasive method for detecting gastroduodenal mucosal damage.
Triazoles are heterocyclic compounds which have a five-membered ring of two carbon atoms and three nitrogen atoms. These structures have been interest in the development of novel compounds with anticonvulsant, antidepressant, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antinociceptive, antibacterial, antimycobacterial, antifungal, antiviral, anticancer, anti-parasitic, anti-urease and other activities. Therefore, many researchers have synthesized these compounds as target structures and evaluated their biological activities. This review contains various pharmacological activities of 1,2,4-triazole-3-thiones in one place and it is also the milestone for the new research towards this moiety.
Etodolac has previously been reported to have an excellent safety profile. Results of recent clinical trials and of a clinical practice study were compared with the previously reported safety data for etodolac. The total incidence of patient complaints and of laboratory abnormalities continues to be low, with no apparent increase in side effects with increasing patient age. In the clinical practice study, 60% of study events occurred early in therapy (before 10 weeks). These data support an excellent safety profile for etodolac.
Stereoselective binding of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can be studied using various techniques. Thus the results obtained by different investigators may be poorly consistent and even contradictory. NSAIDs are bound stereoselectively to serum albumin to different degrees depending on the drug investigated (ibuprofen, indoprofen, carprofen, etodolac, ketoprofen and flurbiprofen). For other drugs, both enantiomers are bound to a similar extent (pirprofen, fenoprofen). This stereoselectivity could vary with experimental conditions, in particular with protein concentration (ketoprofen, etodolac), leading to individual differences. Finally, the stereoselectivity of protein binding and of pharmacokinetics can be compared: differences in binding between enantiomers can explain their differences in pharmacokinetics, once metabolic properties such as inversion have been taken into account.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) relieve pain, inflammation, and fever by inhibiting cyclooxygenases (COXs). Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs selective for COX-2 were developed to inhibit the major enzymatic source of the prostaglandins that mediate pain and inflammation while sparing COX-1-derived prostaglandins that contribute dominantly to gastric cytoprotection. Indeed, such purpose-designed COX-2 inhibitors reduced the incidence of serious gastrointestinal adverse effects when compared with traditional NSAIDs; however, they confer a small but absolute cardiovascular hazard. The hazard might also extend to traditional NSAIDs, which are relatively selective for COX-2, such as diclofenac, meloxicam, and etodolac. The occurrence of complications and the therapeutic responses to individual NSAIDs may vary substantially from patient to patient. Exploitation of detectable variability in the biochemical response to NSAIDs may offer an approach to the personalization of the management of risk and benefit.
Severe gastro-intestinal complications are a major cause of NSAID-induced deaths in cases of rheumatoid arthritis. We measured COX selectivity by using an intact cell assay system, and found that NS-398 is a highly COX-2-selective inhibitor. Meloxicam, etodolac and diclofenac also showed high COX-2 selectivity. Zaltoprofen, loxoprofen-SRS (active metabolite of loxoprofen), 6-MNA (active metabolite of nabumetone) and ibuprofen showed intermediate COX-2 selectivity. The lowest COX-2 selectivities, which means the highest COX-1 selectivities, were observed in indomethacin, aspirin, and oxaprozin. There appears to be a good relationship between our data and some clinical data of severe gastro-intestinal toxicity. The more a given NSAID is selective for COX-2, the safer it is for clinical use. In conclusion, to anticipate the safety of NSAIDs, we find that an intact cell assay system, using human cells for measurement of COX selectivity, may be more useful than using direct enzyme assay systems.
We reviewed the literature on 7 investigational nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): fenbufen, flurbiprofen, tiaprofenic acid, diclofenac, fenclofenac, etodolac and proquazone. These drugs all appear to be at least as effective as currently marketed NSAIDs. Toxicity reported with these newer agents is similar to that seen with other drugs in this class, with gastrointestinal complaints being most commonly reported. The frequency of gastritis and the extent of gastrointestinal microbleeding are less than what occur with aspirin therapy. Fenclofenac may affect thyroid function tests, an effect not noted with other NSAIDs. Proquazone and fenclofenac may have some effect on immunologic function similar to those of slow-acting antirheumatic drugs. These drugs decrease immunoglobulins, rheumatoid factor and C-reactive protein. The place for these drugs in the management of rheumatic diseases has yet to be defined. They may prove to be more beneficial than currently marketed drugs for some patients.
A huge number of nitrogen-containing heterocyclic compounds are ubiquitous in natural products, pharmaceuticals, and bioactive molecules. Among these, the pyranoindole represents an important structural motif, as it constitutes the central subunit in both the biologically active natural products and therapeutic agents. Talathermophilins, notoamides, norgeamides, carneamides, and versicamides are examples of naturally occurring pyranoindoles, while the well-known etodolac and pemedolac are a tetrahydropyrano[ 3,4-b]indole deriving from synthetic procedures. Besides the well-known antiinflammatory and fibrinolytic activity, molecules comprising the pyranoindole framework have been demonstrated to exhibit various biological activities, such as antiulcer, antidepressant, analgesic, and antiproliferative. Herein, we report the most common natural and synthetic products bearing a pyranoindole nucleus, their syntheses, and biological activities.
Etodolac is a chiral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that is marked as the racemate. Currently, the drug is available in several countries for the treatment of arthritis and the alleviation of pain. Etodolac possesses several unique disposition features mainly due to its stereoselective pharmacokinetics. In plasma, the concentrations of the 'inactive' R-enantiomer are about 10-fold higher than those of the active S-enantiomer, an observation that is novel among the chiral NSAIDs. In common with other NSAIDs, the drug is highly plasma protein bound, and undergoes virtually complete biotransformation to oxidised metabolites and acyl-glucuronides. Etodolac is well absorbed, with maximal plasma concentrations attained within 1 to 2 hours in healthy volunteers. The area under the plasma concentration-time curve of racemic etodolac increases linearly with doses used clinically. The elimination half-life of etodolac is between 6 and 8 hours in plasma, and is similar for both enantiomers. The volume of distribution (Vd) of racemic etodolac is higher than that of most other NSAIDs mainly because of the extensive distribution of the S-enantiomer. The very large Vd of the S-enantiomer, compared with its antipode is, at least in part, due to its less extensive plasma protein binding. In addition to the unchanged drug, substantial concentrations of the acyl-glucuronides of etodolac are found in both plasma and the synovial fluid of patients with arthritis. A limited amount of conjugated etodolac is found in the bile of patients following cholecystectomy. Hepatic cirrhosis has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of racemic etodolac, although the effect of hepatic dysfunction on the pharmacokinetics of the individual enantiomers has yet to be determined. In elderly non-arthritic individuals with excellent kidney function, aging does not affect the pharmacokinetics of etodolac. The pharmacokinetics of the drug in patients with renal failure have not been published, and may be important because the acyl-glucuronides are renally cleared.
Articular cartilage has a complex structure and metabolism which allow for a proper movement within joints. Nevertheless, several systemically administered pharmacological agents have been proved to improve the anabolic response in the case of cartilage lesions. Alendronate, glucosamine, chondroitin sulfate, hyaluronic acid, collagen hydrolysate, vitamin C, vitamin D, aspirin and strontium ranelate have shown positive results in clinical trials. On the other hand, calcitonin, risedronate, doxycycline, and celecoxib did not slow the progression of cartilage lesions in clinical trials. Other systemic drugs or supplements such as teriparatide, leptin, zoledronic acid, bevacizumab, atorvastatin, omega-3 fatty acid, naringin, MSM, selenium, zinc, magnesium, resveratrol, donepezil, naproxen, etodolac, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), lithium chloride, and rebamipide showed positive results in in vitro and animal studies but clinical trials are needed to confirm the positive impact on cartilage repair. A number of molecules, not currently available on the market, have also shown promising results in cartilage healing, such as licofelone, sclerostin, cyclopamine, cyclodextrin polysulfate, AG-041R, osteoprotegerin, rhMK, beta-cryptoxanthine, NF-kappab essential modulator binding domain (NBD), TGF-beta-neutralizing antibody, osteogenic protein-1 (BMP-7), fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), and RhBMP-2. Currently available systemic drugs that impair cartilage healing are represented by corticosteroids, vitamin A, and fluoroquinolones.
The molecular identification of a second isoform of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) led to a major investment by several pharmaceutical companies in the development of selective inhibitors. The central tenets of the rationale for developing selective COX-2 inhibitors are that prostaglandins that contribute to inflammation are derived from COX-2, whereas prostaglandins that are involved in normal physiological processes are derived from the constitutively expressed isoform COX-1. There is now considerable evidence that COX-2 is actually expressed constitutively in many tissues and performs important physiological functions. Thus, suppression of COX-2 with selective inhibitors should not be expected to be without some adverse consequences. Moreover, there is strong evidence that COX-1 contributes to inflammation and pain, so selective inhibition of COX-2 will not necessarily produce the same degree of efficacy that is seen with mixed inhibitors of COX-1 and COX-2.
Arachidonic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid liberated from phospholipids of cell membranes. NSAIDs are known as targets of cyclooxygenase enzyme (COX-1, COX-2 and COX-3) in arachidonic acid metabolism. This mechanism of COX-2 in carcinogenesis causes cancer. In addition, COX-2 plays a role in the early stages of hepatocarcinogenesis. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is cause of liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The aim of our study was to improve effective agents against HCV. A novel series of new etodolac 1,2,4-triazoles derivatives (4a-h) have been synthesized and investigated for their activity against HCV NS5B polymerase. Compound 4a was found to be the most active with IC(50) value of 14.8 microM. In accordance with these results, compound 4a was screened for anti-cancer activity on liver cancer cell lines (Huh7, Mahlavu, HepG2, FOCUS). Compound 4a showed anti-cancer activity against Huh7 human hepatoma cell line with IC(50) value of 4.29 microM. Therefore, compound 4a could be considered as a new anti-cancer and anti-HCV lead compound.
The thymus is a vital organ for functional immune systems, and is the site of T cell development, which plays a central role in cellular immune defenses. Unlike other major organs, the thymus is highly dynamic in size and structure. It shrinks immediately upon bacterial infection, aging, pregnancy, mental stress, nutritional deficiency, and more. The reduction in size and function of the thymus during such biological events is called thymic involution or thymic atrophy; thymic involution is a particularly important issue because dysfunctional T cell immunity increases the risks of tumorigenesis and infectious diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying thymic involution remain obscure. Our recent study indicated that blood vessels are remodeled during thymic involution that occurs upon aging, estradiol-treatment, or nutritional deficiency. We also found that prostanoid synthesis is induced during thymic involution. Treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), aspirin or etodolac, at least partially inhibited thymic involution-induced remodeling of the blood vessels, suggesting that prostanoids are involved in blood vessel remodeling. Our results revealed the potential role of blood vessel remodeling during thymic involution, which can lead to biological stress-induced immunosenescence.
OBJECTIVE: Remdesivir is a nucleotide analogue prodrug that inhibits viral RNA polymerases. It has been recognized recently as a promising antiviral drug against a wide array of RNA viruses (including SARS/MERS-CoV5). We aimed at determining which drugs used in dentistry interact with Remdesivir in order to avoid adverse reactions that may worsen the condition of patients with COVID-19. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature review was conducted to identify potential drug interactions between remdesivir (used in the treatment of COVID-19) and drugs prescribed in dentistry. The search was made in the databases PubMed and MEDLINE and official websites using key terms remdesivir, drug interactions and dentistry for articles published up to 31st July 2020. RESULTS: According to the articles reviewed, a total of 279 drugs interact with Remdesivir. Two major interactions have been reported, 277 moderate drug interactions, and one with alcohol/food. The drug interactions involving drugs prescribed in dentistry are all moderate drug interactions and are (according to drug group): (1) antibiotics: azithromycin, clavulanate, doxycycline, erythromycin, levofloxacin; (2) antifungals: clotrimazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole; (3) non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NAIDS): celecoxib diclofenac, etodolac, flurbiprofen, ibuprofen, ketoprofen, ketorolac, mefenamic acid, naproxen, piroxicam. CONCLUSIONS: It is clinically necessary for oral health professionals to be aware of possible drug interactions that may occur between remdesivir and drugs commonly prescribed in dentistry in order to prevent adverse reactions that may even endanger the life of a patient with COVID-19.
