Significant advances in atherosclerotic cardiovascular (ASCVD) risk stratification and treatment have occurred over the past 10 years. While the lipid panel continues to be the basis of risk estimation, imaging for coronary artery calcium is now widely used in estimating risk at the individual level. Statins remain first-line agents for ASCVD risk reduction but in high-risk patients, ezetimibe, proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin-9 inhibitors, and bempedoic acid can be added to further reduce individual cardiovascular risk based on results of cardiovascular outcomes trials. Results of randomized control trials do not support use of medications targeted at triglyceride lowering for ASCVD risk reduction, but icosapent ethyl can be considered.
In 2015, more than 530 000 people were prescribed statins in Norway. Adverse effects from the musculoskeletal system as well as less specific side effects are frequently reported. The extent of these contrasts with observations made in randomised controlled studies which report the prevalence of such adverse effects as being in line with placebo. Breaks from drug treatment, low doses, switching medication and use of other lipid-lowering drugs are the most relevant approaches to dealing with adverse effects.
Rosuvastatin/ezetimibe combines two lipid-lowering agents: rosuvastatin, an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor (i.e. statin) with particularly strong inhibitory effects on hepatic cholesterol synthesis, and ezetimibe, which inhibits the intestinal absorption of cholesterol. A fixed-dose combination (FDC) of rosuvastatin/ezetimibe is indicated as an adjunctive therapy to diet for the management of primary hypercholesterolemia in adults in numerous countries worldwide. In well-designed clinical trials evaluating the therapeutic efficacy of rosuvastatin/ezetimibe administered as either separate agents or as an FDC, rosuvastatin/ezetimibe was significantly more effective than rosuvastatin monotherapy (including at double the dose of rosuvastatin) or simvastatin/ezetimibe in reducing low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and total cholesterol in adults with hypercholesterolemia. Furthermore, rosuvastatin/ezetimibe enabled significantly higher proportions of patients to achieve recommended LDL-C levels than rosuvastatin monotherapy or simvastatin/ezetimibe. Rosuvastatin/ezetimibe did not significantly differ from rosuvastatin monotherapy with respect to incidences of treatment-related or serious adverse events in these short-term trials and displayed a similar safety profile to simvastatin/ezetimibe. While additional cardiovascular outcomes data and head-to-head comparisons with atorvastatin/ezetimibe would be of interest, rosuvastatin/ezetimibe is a potent and generally well-tolerated drug combination that extends the range of options available for the pharmacological management of primary hypercholesterolemia in adults.
BACKGROUND: Drug combinations rather than increasing doses of one drug can achieve greater efficacy and lower risks. Thus, as an alternative to high-intensity statin monotherapy, moderate-intensity statin with ezetimibe combination therapy can lower LDL cholesterol concentrations effectively while reducing adverse effects. However, evidence from randomised trials to compare long-term clinical outcomes is needed. METHODS: In this randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial, patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) at 26 clinical centres in South Korea were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive either moderate-intensity statin with ezetimibe combination therapy (rosuvastatin 10 mg with ezetimibe 10 mg) or high-intensity statin monotherapy (rosuvastatin 20 mg). The primary endpoint was the 3-year composite of cardiovascular death, major cardiovascular events, or non-fatal stroke, in the intention-to-treat population with a non-inferiority margin of 2.0%. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03044665 and is complete. FINDINGS: Between Feb 14, 2017, and Dec 18, 2018, 3780 patients were enrolled: 1894 patients to the combination therapy group and 1886 to the high-intensity statin monotherapy group. The primary endpoint occurred in 172 patients (9.1%) in the combination therapy group and 186 patients (9.9%) in the high-intensity statin monotherapy group (absolute difference -0.78%; 90% CI -2.39 to 0.83). LDL cholesterol concentrations of less than 70 mg/dL at 1, 2, and 3 years were observed in 73%, 75%, and 72% of patients in the combination therapy group, and 55%, 60%, and 58% of patients in the high-intensity statin monotherapy group (all p<0.0001). Discontinuation or dose reduction of the study drug by intolerance was observed in 88 patients (4.8%) and 150 patients (8.2%), respectively (p<0.0001). INTERPRETATION: Among patients with ASCVD, moderate-intensity statin with ezetimibe combination therapy was non-inferior to high-intensity statin monotherapy for the 3-year composite outcomes with a higher proportion of patients with LDL cholesterol concentrations of less than 70 mg/dL and lower intolerance-related drug discontinuation or dose reduction. FUNDING: Hanmi Pharmaceutical.
Patients who take statins frequently experience adverse events, typically muscle symptoms. Some of these patients develop statin intolerance and discontinue the statin treatment. The treatment of a statin intolerant patient can be difficult. Treatment possibilities include a low dose regimen of statin, possibly in combination with another lipid-lowering agent, most commonly ezetimibe.
Despite treatment with statins, patients with elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and triglycerides remain at increased risk for adverse cardiovascular events. Consequently, novel pharmaceutical drugs have been developed to control and modify the composition of blood lipids to ultimately prevent fatal cardiovascular events in patients with dyslipidaemia. This article reviews established and emerging lipid-lowering drugs regarding their mechanism of action, development stage, ongoing clinical trials, side effects, effect on blood lipids and reduction in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. We conducted a keyword search to identify studies on established and emerging lipid modifying drugs. Results were summarized in a narrative overview. Established pharmaceutical treatment options include the Niemann-Pick-C1 like-1 protein (NPC1L1) inhibitor ezetimibe, the protein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors alirocumab and evolocumab, fibrates as peroxisome proliferator receptor alpha (PPAR-alpha) activators, and the omega-3 fatty acid icosapent ethyl. Statins are recommended as the first-line therapy for primary and secondary cardiovascular prevention in patients with hypercholesterinaemia and hypertriglyceridemia. For secondary prevention in hypercholesterinaemia, second-line options such as statin add-on or statin-intolerant treatments are ezetimibe, alirocumab and evolocumab. For secondary prevention in hypertriglyceridemia, second-line options such as statin add-on or statin-intolerant treatments are icosapent ethyl and fenofibrate. Robust data for these add-on therapeutics in primary cardiovascular prevention remains scarce. Recent biotechnological advances have led to the development of innovative small molecules (bempedoic acid, lomitapide, pemafibrate, docosapentaenoic and eicosapentaenoic acid), antibodies (evinacumab), antisense oligonucleotides (mipomersen, volanesorsen, pelcarsen, olezarsen), small interfering RNA (inclisiran, olpasiran), and gene therapies for patients with dyslipidemia. These molecules specifically target new cellular pathways, such as the adenosine triphosphate-citrate lyase (bempedoic acid), PCSK9 (inclisiran), angiopoietin-like 3 (ANGPTL3: evinacumab), microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP: lomitapide), apolipoprotein B-100 (ApoB-100: mipomersen), apolipoprotein C-III (ApoC-III: volanesorsen, olezarsen), and lipoprotein (a) (Lp(a): pelcarsen, olpasiran). The authors are hopeful that the development of new treatment modalities alongside new therapeutic targets will further reduce patients' risk of adverse cardiovascular events. Apart from statins, data on new drugs' use in primary cardiovascular prevention remain scarce. For their swift adoption into clinical routine, these treatments must demonstrate safety and efficacy as well as cost-effectiveness in randomized cardiovascular outcome trials.
The objective of this study was to review available health economic evaluations of PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9) inhibitors. These drugs reduce low-density lipid cholesterol levels and cardiovascular risk, but their cost effectiveness has been questioned. We searched Medline and Embase for economic evaluations in any language at any time. Studies were included if they analysed any PCSK9 inhibitor compared with either statin alone or in combination with ezetimibe or any other therapy considered standard prior to the introduction of PCSK9 inhibitors. We found ten full health economic evaluations of PCSK9 inhibitors, two from Europe and eight from the United States (US). Six of the eight from the US were from two different consortia that analysed PCSK9 inhibitors at different stages through the development of evidence. All studies generally reported incremental cost-effectiveness ratios above suggested thresholds for cost effectiveness, except one study from Spain. The results of this review indicate that PCSK9 inhibitors in general are not cost effective at the current prices, but lower prices may change the results.
BACKGROUND: Lipoprotein(a) is a presumed risk factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Olpasiran is a small interfering RNA that reduces lipoprotein(a) synthesis in the liver. METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-finding trial involving patients with established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and a lipoprotein(a) concentration of more than 150 nmol per liter. Patients were randomly assigned to receive one of four doses of olpasiran (10 mg every 12 weeks, 75 mg every 12 weeks, 225 mg every 12 weeks, or 225 mg every 24 weeks) or matching placebo, administered subcutaneously. The primary end point was the percent change in the lipoprotein(a) concentration from baseline to week 36 (reported as the placebo-adjusted mean percent change). Safety was also assessed. RESULTS: Among the 281 enrolled patients, the median concentration of lipoprotein(a) at baseline was 260.3 nmol per liter, and the median concentration of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol was 67.5 mg per deciliter. At baseline, 88% of the patients were taking statin therapy, 52% were taking ezetimibe, and 23% were taking a proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitor. At 36 weeks, the lipoprotein(a) concentration had increased by a mean of 3.6% in the placebo group, whereas olpasiran therapy had significantly and substantially reduced the lipoprotein(a) concentration in a dose-dependent manner, resulting in placebo-adjusted mean percent changes of -70.5% with the 10-mg dose, -97.4% with the 75-mg dose, -101.1% with the 225-mg dose administered every 12 weeks, and -100.5% with the 225-mg dose administered every 24 weeks (P&lt;0.001 for all comparisons with baseline). The overall incidence of adverse events was similar across the trial groups. The most common olpasiran-related adverse events were injection-site reactions, primarily pain. CONCLUSIONS: Olpasiran therapy significantly reduced lipoprotein(a) concentrations in patients with established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Longer and larger trials will be necessary to determine the effect of olpasiran therapy on cardiovascular disease. (Funded by Amgen; OCEAN[a]-DOSE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04270760.).
OBJECTIVE: Network meta-analysis was used to derive estimates of the relative efficacy of inclisiran, evolocumab, alirocumab, bempedoic acid, and ezetimibe in patients with hypercholesterolemia and/or at increased cardiovascular risk due to elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol taking maximum tolerated dose statins. METHODS: Clinical trials published through February 2021 comparing percent change from baseline in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol were identified via a systematic review. Bayesian network meta-analyses were performed for patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and/or high cardiovascular risk on maximally tolerated statins in the base case, which included 23 trials. RESULTS: Results from the base-case analyses demonstrated that inclisiran, evolocumab, and alirocumab provide superior efficacy over placebo, bempedoic acid, and ezetimibe in terms of reduction in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Inclisiran was also comparable to alirocumab (mean difference: 0.78% [95% CrI: -8.35, 9.88]) and evolocumab (8.16%, [95% CrI: -1.82, 18.49]). Findings of a scenario which also included trials conducted in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia were consistent with the base case. There was evidence of statistical heterogeneity across the included trials, roughly equivalent to variation of 5-10% change in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, suggesting that any differences between treatments that were greater than 5-10% are generalizable. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides insight regarding the comparative efficacy of drugs for which no head-to-head trials exist and suggests that inclisiran, alirocumab, and evolocumab are expected to provide similar clinically meaningful improvements in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in patients with hypercholesterolemia on maximally tolerated statins who are at increased cardiovascular risk.
Atherosclerotic heart disease is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in the USA. Low density lipoprotein (LDL) has been the target for many hypolipidemic agents to modify atherosclerotic risk. Bempedoic acid is a novel hypolipidemic drug that inhibits the enzymatic activity of ATP citrate lyase in the cholesterol synthesis pathway. CLEAR Harmony, CLEAR Wisdom, CLEAR Tranquillity and CLEAR Serenity have shown safety and efficacy associated with long term administration of this drug. Studies have shown effectiveness in reducing LDL-C in both statin intolerant patients and in patients on maximally tolerated doses of statin. The fixed drug combination of bempedoic acid and ezetimibe in a recent phase III showed significant reduction in LDL compared with placebo, which might be a promising future for LDL reduction among statin intolerant patients. Bempedoic acid also reduced inflammatory markers like hs-CRP. Given these results, bempedoic acid alone and in combination with ezetimibe received the USA FDA approval for adults with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia or established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. We present a comprehensive review exploring the underlying mechanism, pre-clinical studies, and clinical trials of bempedoic acid and discuss the potential future role of the drug in treating hyperlipidaemia.
Cardiovascular disease is one of the leading causes of death around the world with various efforts being made to reduce risk in patients through preventive measures. One major method for prevention has been managing cholesterol, particularly low-density lipoprotein to decrease atherosclerotic plaque burden, potentially decreasing future cardiac complications. Statins have been the gold standard therapy for hypercholesterolemia treatment due to their ease of dosing, limited drug interactions, and favorable safety profile. Unfortunately, statin therapy alone is not always effective enough to adequately control a patient's elevated lipid levels and combination therapy may be warranted. Ezetimibe is commonly added to regimens to help augment cholesterol lowering by inhibiting the absorption of cholesterol. The recent approval of a combination tablet of high-intensity rosuvastatin and ezetimibe has introduced a potentially more beneficial option for cholesterol management in addition to the only available combination of moderate intensity simvastatin and ezetimibe. We aimed to identify potential beneficial effects of ezetimibe by comparing its use in combination with high-intensity rosuvastatin compared to a statin therapy alone or in combination with moderate intensity simvastatin through a literature review. The current evidence indicated that combination therapy outperformed statin monotherapy in reduction of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and patients were more likely to achieve their target low-density lipoprotein cholesterol goal level. This suggests rosuvastatin/ezetimibe combination holds a potential place in therapy for patients requiring a more aggressive reduction in cholesterol to help prevent atherosclerotic disease.
Since the publication of the JUPITER trial, attention has been focused on the adverse glycemic effects of statin therapy. Although the modest increase in the risk of new diabetes mellitus is outweighed by the reduction in cardiovascular events for statins, emerging biochemical and genetic links between lipid metabolism and glycemic control raise the prospect of a broader diabetogenic effect of lipid-lowering therapies. For the novel and powerful PCSK9-inhibitor class available evidence does not support a major glycaemic effect with the results of large scale trials awaited although preliminary genetic data does suggest a link. In contrast, there is clear evidence of a diabetogenic effect for the now outdated but well-studied niacin. For ezetimibe and fibrates, evidence is scarce but currently broadly unconcerning. For now, the glycemic effects of lipid-lowering therapies should have a limited influence on clinical decision-making. Further study in this topical area is needed.
INTRODUCTION: Many patients with primary hypercholesterolemia do not achieve their plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) goals with statin alone under a recommended dose of statin (e.g., 10 mg rosuvastatin) in China. The objective of this phase III study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a new single-pill combination (SPC) of rosuvastatin 10 mg/ezetimibe 10 mg (R10/E10) in this population. METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, active-controlled study in patients with primary hypercholesterolemia inadequately controlled with statin alone. The participants were randomized 1:1 to receive SPC R10/E10 or R10. The primary objective was to demonstrate the superiority of SPC R10/E10 vs. R10 in reducing the LDL-C levels after 8 weeks. RESULTS: This trial randomized 305 participants to SPC R10/E10 (n = 153) and R10 (n = 152). The superiority of SPC R10/E10 over R10 was demonstrated with the least square (LS) mean difference of percent change in LDL-C from baseline to week 8: - 13.85% (95% confidence interval [CI] - 20.15% to - 7.56%, P < 0.0001). The proportion of participants who achieved the LDL-C target (< 2.6 mmol/l) at week 8 was larger with SPC R10/E10 (n = 80, 54.1%) than with R10 (n = 42, 29.2%) (Odds ratio = 2.80, 95% CI 1.70 to 4.61, P < 0.0001). No unexpected safety findings were reported. CONCLUSION: The results suggest that SPC R10/E10 improve LDL-C reduction and goal achievement in Chinese patients with primary hypercholesterolemia not adequately controlled on statin therapy, without new safety findings. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT04669041).
Dyslipidemia, specifically elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels, causes atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) and increases the risk of myocardial infarction and stroke. Statins, a class of drugs that exert their effects by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase, a key enzyme in the synthesis of cholesterol, have been the mainstay of therapy for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and lipids reduction. Statins are associated with side effects, most commonly myopathy and myalgias, despite their proven efficacy. This review explores non-statin lipid-lowering therapies and examines recent advances and emerging research. Over the previous decades, several lipid-lowering therapies, both as monotherapy and adjuncts to statin therapy and lipid-targeting gene therapy, have emerged, thus redefining how we treat dyslipidemia. These drugs include Bile acids sequestrants, Fibrates, Nicotinic acid, Ezetimibe, Bempedoic acid, Volanesoren, Evinacumab, and the PCSK 9 Inhibitors Evolocumab and Alirocumab. Emerging gene-based therapy includes Small interfering RNAs, Antisense oligonucleotides, Adeno-associated virus vectors, CRISPR/Cas9 based therapeutics, and Non-coding RNA therapy. Of all these therapies, Bempedoic acid works most like statins by working through a similar pathway to decrease cholesterol levels. However, it is not associated with myopathy. Overall, although statins continue to be the gold standard, non-statin therapies are set to play an increasingly important role in managing dyslipidemia.
AIMS: The aim of this study was to evaluate the low-density lipoprotein cholesterol lowering efficacy and safety of a bempedoic acid 180 mg and ezetimibe 10 mg fixed-dose combination in patients with hypercholesterolemia and a high risk of cardiovascular disease receiving maximally tolerated statin therapy. METHODS: This phase 3, double-blind clinical trial enrolled adult patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease due to atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, or multiple cardiovascular disease risk factors. Patients were randomly assigned (2:2:2:1) to treatment with the fixed-dose combination, bempedoic acid 180 mg, ezetimibe 10 mg or placebo added to stable background statin therapy for 12 weeks. The primary efficacy endpoint was the percentage change from baseline to week 12 in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. RESULTS: Among the 301 patients included in the primary analysis, the mean baseline low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level was 3.87 mmol/L (149.8 mg/dL). At week 12, the fixed-dose combination lowered low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (-36.2%) significantly more than placebo (1.8% (placebo-corrected difference -38.0%); P < 0.001), ezetimibe alone (-23.2%; P < 0.001) or bempedoic acid alone (-17.2%; P < 0.001). The fixed-dose combination lowered low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels similarly across subgroups, including patients receiving high-intensity, other-intensity or no statin therapy. Improvements with the fixed-dose combination were also observed in secondary efficacy endpoints, including high-sensitivity C-reactive protein. In this trial, fixed-dose combination treatment had a generally similar safety profile compared with bempedoic acid, ezetimibe or placebo. CONCLUSION: The bempedoic acid and ezetimibe fixed-dose combination significantly lowered low-density lipoprotein cholesterol versus placebo or other oral monotherapies and had a favourable safety profile when added to maximally tolerated statin therapy in patients with hypercholesterolemia and high cardiovascular disease risk. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03337308.
BACKGROUND: The RACING (randomized comparison of efficacy and safety of lipid-lowering with statin monotherapy versus statin/ezetimibe combination for high-risk cardiovascular diseases) trial examined the effects of combination therapy with moderate-intensity statin and ezetimibe in patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease compared with high-intensity statin monotherapy. OBJECTIVES: This observational study was conducted to evaluate the impact of 2 treatment strategies used in the RACING trial in clinical practice. METHODS: After stabilized inverse probability of treatment weighting, a total of 72,050 patients who were prescribed rosuvastatin after drug-eluting stent implantation were identified from a nationwide cohort database: 10,794 patients with rosuvastatin 10 mg plus ezetimibe 10 mg (combination lipid-lowering therapy) and 61,256 patients with rosuvastatin 20 mg monotherapy. The primary endpoint was the 3-year composite event of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, coronary artery revascularization, hospitalization for heart failure treatment, or nonfatal stroke in accordance with the RACING trial. RESULTS: Combination lipid-lowering therapy was associated with a lower occurrence of the primary endpoint (11.6% vs 15.2% for those with high-intensity statin monotherapy; HR: 0.75; 95% CI: 0.70-0.79; P < 0.001). Compared with high-intensity statin monotherapy, combination lipid-lowering therapy was associated with fewer discontinuations of statin (6.5% vs 7.6%; HR: 0.85; 95% CI: 0.78-0.94: P < 0.001) and a lower occurrence of new-onset diabetes requiring medication (7.7% vs 9.6%; HR: 0.80; 95% CI: 0.72-0.88; P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In clinical practice, combination lipid-lowering therapy with ezetimibe and moderate-intensity statin was associated with favorable clinical outcomes and drug compliance in patients treated with drug-eluting stent implantation. (CONNECT DES Registry; NCT04715594).
The relative risk reduction of cardiovascular events is proportional to the absolute reduction in LDL-C levels, the primary target of therapy, no matter the way of reduction. During the last decades, the therapeutic regimens for reducing the LDL-C levels have been immerged and improved, with favorable effects on the atherosclerotic process and clinical benefits of various cardiovascular outcomes. From a practical view of point, this review is focusing only on the current available lipid lowering agents: statins, ezetimibe, anti PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies, the small interfering RNA (siRNA) agent, Inclisiran, and Bempedoic acid. The recent changes in lipid lowering regimens, including the early combination of lipid lowering agents and "Low LDL-C" levels <30 mg/dL for high/very high cardiovascular risk patients will also be discussed.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To describe lipid abnormalities in diabetes, when they occur and the evidence base for lipid management with established and new drugs to prevent diabetes complications. We also discuss how to manage statin intolerance. RECENT FINDINGS: Statins remain first-line therapy in patients with diabetes, though newer therapies to reduce LDL-C have emerged, including ezetimibe as an add-on therapy to statins, and injectable PCSK9 inhibitors, both of which are safe and effective in diabetes. Emerging evidence suggests a need to consider lipid-lowering therapies more often in younger patients with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Statins remain the cornerstone of lipid management in diabetes but other options are increasing. There is also now evidence for better managing apparent statin intolerance. Notably, younger patients lose the most life years from their diabetes, an observation that future guidelines need to consider.
Statin therapy has a very important role in decreasing cardiovascular risk, and treatment non-compliance may therefore be a concern in high cardiovascular risk patients. Myotoxicity is a frequent side effect of statin therapy and one of the main causes of statin discontinuation, which limits effective treatment of patients at risk of or with cardiovascular disease. Because of the high proportion of patients on statin treatment and the frequency of statin-related myotoxicity, this is a subject of concern in clinical practice. However, statin-related myotoxicity is probably underestimated because there is not a gold standard definition, and its diagnosis is challenging. Moreover, information about pathophysiology and optimal therapeutic options is scarce. Therefore, this paper reviews the knowledge about the definition, pathophysiology and predisposing conditions, diagnosis and management of statin-related myotoxicity, and provides a practical scheme for its management in clinical practice.
Cholesterol is an important component of cell membrane. However, elevated level of serum cholesterol is a key risk factor for heart disease. Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 (NPC1L1) is the crucial target involving in cholesterol cellar uptake. Ezetimibe is the first, and only, NPC1L1 inhibitor approved for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia through decreasing cholesterol absorption for nearly two decades. That means that the development of NPC1L1 inhibitors encounters much challenge, as well as offers exciting therapeutic opportunities. Substantial efforts have been undertaken to develop NPC1L1 inhibitors. The present review describes the mechanism of cholesterol transport by NPC1L1, highlights the development of NPC1L1 inhibitors, and discusses the current challenges.
