Herpes zoster, or shingles, is caused by reactivation of varicella zoster virus, which causes chickenpox. There are an estimated 1 million cases in the Unites States annually, with an individual lifetime risk of 30%. Patients with conditions that decrease cell-mediated immunity are 20 to 100 times more likely to develop herpes zoster. Patients may present with malaise, headache, low-grade fever, and abnormal skin sensations for two to three days before the classic maculopapular rash appears. The rash is usually unilateral, confined to a single dermatome, and typically progresses to clear vesicles that become cloudy and crust over in seven to 10 days. Herpes zoster can be treated with acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir, ideally within 72 hours of the development of the rash. Postherpetic neuralgia is the most common complication, occurring in about one in five patients. It is defined as pain in a dermatomal distribution sustained for at least 90 days after acute herpes zoster. Treatment is focused on symptom control and includes topical lidocaine or capsaicin and oral gabapentin, pregabalin, or tricyclic antidepressants. The varicella zoster virus vaccine decreases the incidence of herpes zoster and is approved for adults 50 years and older. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends this vaccine for adults 60 years and older, except for certain immunosuppressed patients.
BACKGROUND: Herpes labialis is characterized by recurrent vesicular eruptions primarily on the lips and perioral skin. The condition is contagious, can cause significant discomfort/pain, and can have an adverse effect on the quality of life. OBJECTIVE: To update the evaluation and treatment of herpes labialis. METHODS: A PubMed search was completed in Clinical Queries using the key term "herpes labialis". Patents were searched using the key term "herpes labialis" from www.freepatentsonline.com. RESULTS: The diagnosis of herpes labialis is mainly clinical based on classic grouped lesions (papules, vesicles, ulcers) on the lip. Antiviral therapy shortens the duration of pain and discomfort, hastens healing, and reduces viral shedding. Thus, episodic treatment is warranted, especially if the patient desires treatment for cosmetic purposes or for relief of pain. Such treatment needs to be initiated promptly, ideally in the prodromal stage and no later than 48 hours from the onset of lesions to achieve optimal results. Chronic suppressive therapy with oral antiviral agents should be considered for patients with severe or frequent (six or more episodes per year) recurrences. Recent patents related to the management of herpes labialis are also discussed. CONCLUSION: For episodic treatment, oral antiviral agents, such as acyclovir (Zovirax), valacyclovir (Valtrex) and famciclovir (Famvir), are superior to topical antiviral therapy. Valacyclovir and famciclovir have greater oral bioavailability and are better absorbed than acyclovir, require less frequent dosing, but are more expensive and are not approved for children. Topical antiviral agents such as 5% acyclovir cream/ointment (Zovirax) +/- hydrocortisone (Xerese), 1% penciclovir (Denavir) cream, and 50 mg Buccal Adhesive Tablet (ABT-50 mg) can also be used for episodic treatment of herpes labialis. These topical agents are not effective in the prevention of recurrent herpes labialis. For chronic daily suppressive therapy, oral antivirals are the treatment of choice.
The objective of this article is to provide evidence-based recommendations for the management of patients with herpes zoster (HZ) that take into account clinical efficacy, adverse effects, impact on quality of life, and costs of treatment. Systematic literature reviews, published randomized clinical trials, existing guidelines, and the authors' clinical and research experience relevant to the management of patients with HZ were reviewed at a consensus meeting. The results of controlled trials and the clinical experience of the authors support the use of acyclovir, brivudin (where available), famciclovir, and valacyclovir as first-line antiviral therapy for the treatment of patients with HZ. Specific recommendations for the use of these medications are provided. In addition, suggestions are made for treatments that, when used in combination with antiviral therapy, may further reduce pain and other complications of HZ.
This review article focuses on the anti-herpesvirus agents effective against herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus and cytomegalovirus, which have either been licensed for clinical use (idoxuridine, trifluridine, brivudin, acyclovir, valaciclovir, valganciclovir, famciclovir and foscarnet) or are under clinical development (CMX001 [the hexadecyloxypropyl prodrug of cidofovir], the helicase-primase inhibitor BAY 57-1293 [now referred to as AIC316], FV-100 [the valine ester of Cf 1743] and the terminase inhibitor letermovir [AIC246]).
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV), a common and ubiquitous human-restricted pathogen, causes a primary infection (varicella or chickenpox) followed by establishment of latency in sensory ganglia. The virus can reactivate, causing herpes zoster (HZ, shingles) and leading to significant morbidity but rarely mortality, although in immunocompromised hosts, VZV can cause severe disseminated and occasionally fatal disease. We discuss VZV diseases and the decrease in their incidence due to the introduction of live-attenuated vaccines to prevent varicella or HZ. We also focus on acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir (FDA approved drugs to treat VZV infections), brivudine (used in some European countries) and amenamevir (a helicase-primase inhibitor, approved in Japan) that augur the beginning of a new era of anti-VZV therapy. Valnivudine hydrochloride (FV-100) and valomaciclovir stearate (in advanced stage of development) and several new molecules potentially good as anti-VZV candidates described during the last year are examined. We reflect on the role of antiviral agents in the treatment of VZV-associated diseases, as a large percentage of the at-risk population is not immunized, and on the limitations of currently FDA-approved anti-VZV drugs. Their low efficacy in controlling HZ pain and post-herpetic neuralgia development, and the need of multiple dosing regimens requiring daily dose adaptation for patients with renal failure urges the development of novel anti-VZV drugs.
More than 25 years after the licensure of aciclovir and then penciclovir, followed by their respective prodrugs valaciclovir and famciclovir, cases of clinically relevant resistance to these drugs in immunocompetent individuals remain very rare. The aim of this review is to focus on the mechanism of action of these anti HSV drugs and then briefly compare this favourable outcome with that of CMV, HIV, HBV and influenza. A central theme is that resistance is an epiphenomenon of failure to suppress virus replication, so that improved potency and selectivity should be prioritised when developing new drugs rather than activity against resistant strains per se.
Over the past 15 years, acyclovir has become established as standard therapy for the management of herpes simplex virus infections, but there are areas where improvements might be made. Acyclovir has a relatively low oral bioavailability. As a result, valaciclovir, the L-valine ester of acyclovir, is being developed. This new drug produces enhanced plasma levels of acyclovir following oral dosing, which will not only allow more convenient dosing for the treatment of herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster virus (VZV) infections, but also mean that valaciclovir has the potential for superior clinical efficacy over acyclovir. This may broaden the potential utility of the drug to include human cytomegalovirus prophylaxis. Other new drugs in the antiherpes area include penciclovir and its pro-drug famciclovir, which have antiviral characteristics similar to acyclovir but no clinical benefit over and above that seen with acyclovir has been demonstrated. The synthesis of new specific antiherpes compounds has led to the discovery of a novel nucleoside analogue, 882C87, which has significantly greater activity against VZV than acyclovir. The compound also has a longer plasma half-life than acyclovir which may permit less frequent dosing.
Valaciclovir and famciclovir, two new prodrugs (for aciclovir and penciclovir, respectively) have similar pharmacokinetics in many regards. Both have good but incomplete bioavailability, with the conversion to the active forms taking place in the liver, but by different cytosolic enzymes. Absorption and conversion are consistent in relevant patient groups, including those with liver disease. The pharmacokinetics of both active molecules are also similar in being mainly renally eliminated, a significant component of which is tubular secretion, and elimination half-lives from plasma of approximately 2.2 to 2.5 hours. Dosage adjustment is required in the presence of renal impairment. No clinically important drug interactions have been identified with either drug. The choice between the two agents is likely to depend on clinical factors such as tolerability, safety, efficacy, compliance and possibly cost, rather than on their pharmacokinetics.
In the past decade, significant progress has been achieved in the battle against hepatitis B virus. In addition to the immunomodulating agents such as interferon-alpha and thymosin, many novel antiviral agents have been discovered, among which nucleoside analogues are the mainstay. New-generation compounds such as 3TC and famciclovir have shown promise in the treatment of patients chronically infected by this virus, and are on the line for approval. However, viral rebound after cessation of therapy still remains a major problem. Additionally, the reports on the drug resistance to these antiviral agents suggest that combination therapy will be the eventual strategy (Bartholomew et al., 1997; Tipples et al., 1996). Therefore, developments of safe and effective antiviral agents which do not cross-resist with currently available antiviral drugs are still much needed.
INTRODUCTION: Chickenpox is extremely contagious. Over 90% of unvaccinated people become infected, but infection occurs at different ages in different parts of the world - over 80% of people have been infected by the age of 10 years in the US, the UK, and Japan, and by the age of 20 to 30 years in India, South East Asia, and the West Indies. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical questions: What are the effects of interventions to prevent chickenpox in healthy adults and children? What are the effects of interventions to prevent chickenpox in children exposed prenatally? What are the effects of interventions to prevent chickenpox in immunocompromised adults and children? What are the effects of treatments for chickenpox in healthy adults and children? What are the effects of treatments for chickenpox in immunocompromised adults and children? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to June 2010 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 11 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: aciclovir, famciclovir, live attenuated vaccine, valaciclovir, and varicella zoster immunoglobulin.
OBJECTIVE: To review the evidence regarding treatment of herpes zoster (HZ) in the short-term, focusing on the prevention of postherpetic neuralgia (PHN). QUALITY OF EVIDENCE: The evidence relating to treatment of HZ is derived mainly from randomized controlled trials (level I evidence). MAIN MESSAGE: Antiviral drugs might have some effect on the severity of acute pain and on the duration of skin lesions. Corticosteroids also alleviate acute pain. Oral antiviral medication reduces the risk of eye complications in patients with ophthalmic HZ. There is no convincing evidence that antiviral medication reduces the risk of PHN. Some studies, however, have shown that famciclovir and valacyclovir shorten the duration of PHN. The effectiveness of amitriptyline or cutaneous and percutaneous interventions in preventing PHN has not been proven. CONCLUSION: Oral antiviral drugs should be prescribed to elderly HZ patients with high risk of PHN. Moreover, these drugs should be prescribed to all patients at the first signs of ophthalmic HZ, irrespective of age or severity of symptoms.
The development of the antiherpetic therapeutical system was remarkable in the last decade. Nucleoside analogs (5-iodine-2-deoxiuridine, citodine-arabinotide, adenine-arabinotide), as well as specific inhibitors of viruses (Zovirax or Acyclovir) are active medicines for both local and wide-spread forms of the herpes virus infection.
Therapy for infectious diseases resulting from alpha-herpesvirus infections has been dramatically improved by the development of acyclovir (ACV). ACV is highly specific against herpes simplex virus type 1(HSV-1), herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) as ACV is specifically phosphorylated by the thymidine kinases (TKs) of these viruses. These viral TKs are important enzymes for viral replication in vivo; therefore, the growth of TK-deficient mutants is impaired. ACV-resistant viruses are rarely isolated from immunocompetent patients but are frequently obtained from immunocompromised patients. Recently, other anti alpha-herpesvirus drugs, such as valacyclovir and famciclovir, have become available for use in Japan, but the need to develop new antiherpetic compounds with different mechanisms of action remains.
Recurrent benign lymphocytic meningitis is a recurring, typically innocuous, painful form of aseptic meningitis. This syndrome is associated with transient neurological symptoms in one-half of afflicted patients. The causative agent is usually herpes simplex virus type 2, which can be confirmed by detection of viral DNA in the cerebrospinal fluid using polymerase chain reaction. Clinical disease resolves spontaneously; however, acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir have been administered to some patients for both episodic therapy and suppression of recurrences. This therapy is thought to be beneficial, although there is no controlled trial data to support efficacy and safety.
Acute retinal necrosis (ARN), also known as Kirisawa-type uveitis, is an uncommon condition caused by infection of the retina by one of the herpes family of viruses, most typically varicella zoster virus or herpes simplex virus and less commonly cytomegalovirus. Clinical diagnosis can be challenging and is often aided by PCR-based analysis of ocular fluids. Treatment typically involves extended use of one or more antiviral agents. Long term retinal detachment risk is high. We review the literature on ARN and present an approach to the diagnosis and management of this serious condition.
The episodic and daily suppressive treatment of genital herpes is safe and effective with the currently available antiviral agents: acyclovir, valacyclovir and famciclovir. Clinical strategies for the comprehensive management of genital herpes simplex virus infections are recommended. Data from recent clinical trials demonstrating the efficacy of shorter duration of therapy for recurrences and the use of antivirals for the prevention of transmission are reviewed in this article. The factors influencing the choice of therapy, such as cost, ease of dosing and acyclovir resistance are also discussed.
The discovery of acyclovir and penciclovir has led to the development of a successful systemic therapy for treating herpes simplex virus infection and varicella-zoster virus infection, and the orally available prodrugs, valacyclovir and famciclovir, have improved antiviral treatment compliance. Acyclovir and penciclovir are phosphorylated by viral thymidine kinase and are incorporated into the DNA chain by viral DNA polymerase, resulting in chain termination. Helicase-primase plays an initial step in DNA synthesis to separate the double strand into two single strands (replication fork) and is a new target of antiviral therapy. The helicase-primase inhibitors (HPIs) pritelivir and amenamevir have novel mechanisms of action, drug resistance properties, pharmacokinetic characteristics, and clinical efficacy for treating genital herpes. The clinical study of amenamevir in herpes zoster has been completed, and amenamevir has been submitted for approval for treating herpes zoster in Japan. The clinical use of HPIs will be the beginning of a new era of anti-herpes therapy.
Antiviral treatment of herpesvirus infections is rapidly changing since the advent of new drugs with improved oral availability. The efficacy of valaciclovir, the prodrug of aciclovir, and famciclovir, the prodrug of penciclovir, in the treatment of herpes genitalis and acute herpes zoster has been well documented in large clinical trials. Both drugs are effective on zoster-associated pain. Brivudin and sorivudine which are the most active compounds against varicella-zoster virus (VZV) in cell culture have also been successful in the treatment of herpes zoster. Aciclovir is still the standard therapy of severe herpes simplex virus (HSV) and varicella virus infections. In patients treated with aciclovir, the mortality of herpes encephalitis has been reduced to about 25%. The development of resistance against aciclovir and the other nucleoside analogues has not been a problem to date in the treatment of immunocompetent individuals. However, in immunocompromised patients, aciclovir-resistant HSV strains often emerge. In such cases, intravenous foscarnet is the current treatment of choice.
Current therapy against herpes simplex viruses (HSV) relies on the use of a few nucleoside antivirals such as acyclovir, famciclovir and valacyclovir. However, the current drugs are ineffective against latent and drug-resistant HSV infections. A series of amidinourea compounds, designed as analogues of the antiviral drug moroxydine, has been synthesized and evaluated as potential non-nucleoside anti-HSV agents. Three compounds showed micromolar activity against HSV-1 and low cytotoxicity, turning to be promising candidates for future optimization. Preliminary mode of action studies revealed that the new compounds act in an early stage of the HSV replication cycle, just after the viral attachment and the entry phase of the infection.
Brivudin is an oral thymidine analogue indicated for the early treatment of acute herpes zoster in immunocompetent adults. It has high, selective activity against varicella zoster virus (VZV), inhibiting VZV replication, possibly through competitive inhibition of viral DNA polymerase, or by acting as an alternative substrate to deoxythymidine triphosphate, causing viral DNA strand breakage. In a large, 7-day, phase III trial in immunocompetent patients with herpes zoster, once-daily brivudin 125mg was significantly more effective than oral acyclovir 800mg five times daily in reducing the mean time from start of treatment to last vesicular eruption, and was as effective as acyclovir at healing lesions and alleviating acute zoster-related pain. The likelihood of developing post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN) in immunocompetent patients aged > or =50 years was significantly lower with brivudin than with acyclovir. Brivudin was as effective as oral famciclovir 250mg three times daily in terms of the prevalence of PHN, the time to last vesicular eruption and lesion healing in another large, 7-day, phase III study in immunocompetent patients with herpes zoster. Oral brivudin is generally well tolerated, with a similar tolerability profile to those of oral acyclovir or famciclovir. Nausea was the most commonly reported adverse event.
