Urticaria pigmentosa is a rare dermatologic syndrome in humans, cats, and dogs. This report documents a case of canine urticaria pigmentosa-like disease with unusual features and no C-kit mutation.
H(2) receptor antagonists are commonly employed to manage gastro-esophageal reflux and peptic ulcer diseases with a very low incidence of side effects. Herein, we report an extremely rare incidence of famotidine-induced acute confusion in a patient with end-stage renal failure. We also discuss the pharmacokinetic properties of famotidine and its interplay with compromised renal function to result in neuropsychiatric manifestations, highlighting the importance of dosage ad ustment in individuals with renal insufficiency.
SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for COVID-19, binds to the ACE2 receptors. ACE2 is thought to counterbalance ACE in the renin-angiotensin system. While presently it is advised that patients should continue to use ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers, questions still remain as to whether adverse effects are potentiated by the virus. Here, we report a case of a 57-year-old man, unknowingly with COVID-19, who presented to the emergency department with tongue swelling, shortness of breath and difficulty in speaking following 4 months taking benazepril, an ACE inhibitor. Finally, we also describe possible pathways that exist for SARS-CoV-2 to interact with the mechanism behind angioedema.
Pain affects the quality of life for millions of individuals and is a major reason for healthcare utilization. As populations age, medical personnel will need to manage more and more patients suffering from pain associated with degenerative and inflammatory musculoskeletal disorders. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are an effective treatment for both acute and chronic musculoskeletal pain; however, their use is associated with potentially significant gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity. Guidelines suggest various strategies to prevent problems in those at risk for NSAID-associated GI complications. In this article, we review the data supporting one such strategy - the use of histamine type-2 receptor antagonists (H2RAs) - for the prevention of GI adverse events in NSAID users. Older studies suggest that high-dose H2RAs are effective in preventing upper GI ulcers and dyspepsia. This suggestion was recently confirmed during clinical trials with a new ibuprofen/famotidine combination that reduced the risk of ulcers by 50% compared with ibuprofen alone.
Plasma histamine levels are increased in patients with sickle cell disease (SCD), potentially promoting endothelial P-selectin expression and vaso-occlusion via histamine type 2 (H2) receptors. We conducted a prospective, non-comparative, single-centre study to determine whether famotidine, a H2 receptor antagonist, reduces P-selectin expression in SCD children. The median plasma P-selectin level was significantly reduced after 29 days of oral famotidine (53.2 ng/mL [IQR: 46.7-63.4] vs. 69.9 ng/mL [IQR: 53.6-84.2], median difference -10.2 ng/mL [IQR: -21.8 to -2.7], p = 0.005) in 28 patients. No effect was observed on other adhesion molecules, inflammation or haemolysis markers, except decreased reticulocyte count. No adverse events deemed related to famotidine were observed. Randomized controlled trials are now needed to assess the efficacy of famotidine in preventing vaso-occlusion in SCD.
Jejunal perfusion of cimetidine resulted in the appearance of lumenal cimetidine sulfoxide in both rats and humans. In the rat, ileal perfusion yielded negligible sulfoxide metabolite as compared with that of the jejunum. Jejunal co-perfusion of an anionic-exchange inhibitor, 4,4'-diisothiocyanostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid, blocked the appearance of drug sulfoxide, and methionine co-perfusion yielded concentration-dependent inhibition of lumenal cimetidine sulfoxide. Intravenous injection of high concentrations of cimetidine sulfoxide did not produce detectable lumenal metabolite levels during jejunal perfusion of drug-free buffer, providing in situ evidence that lumenal metabolite is generated by the small intestine. The extent of the appearance of lumenal sulfoxide was significantly greater for cimetidine than for the other three marketed H2-antagonists in rat jejunum. Variable intestinal clearance of this extensively prescribed class of therapeutic agents may contribute to their absorption variability.
This Review is being updated and replaced following the publication of a new Protocol (Martin AE, Newlove-Delgado TV, Abbott RA, Bethel A, Thompson-Coon J, Nikolaou v, Logan S. Pharmacological interventions for recurrent abdominal pain in childhood (Protocol). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD010973. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010973). It will remain withdrawn when the new Review is published. The editorial group responsible for this previously published document have withdrawn it from publication.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the use and potential benefit of famotidine in the management of schizophrenia. DATA SOURCES: Clinical literature accessed through MEDLINE (February 1998-October 1998). Key search terms included famotidine, schizophrenia, and histamine. DATA SYNTHESIS: Schizophrenia is a complicated disorder associated with high morbidity if left unmanaged. Histamine2 (H2)-antagonists may be an alternative to conventional treatments. An evaluation of studies focusing on famotidine in the management of schizophrenic symptoms was conducted. CONCLUSIONS: Famotidine can improve schizophrenic symptoms that were otherwise refractory to typical antipsychotic agents. Further studies should be conducted to determine if other H2-antagonists are also effective.
Absorption of posaconazole oral suspension is influenced by several factors including diet, medications, and mucosal integrity. However, there are few prospective data about which is the most important modifiable factor in routine clinical practice. We prospectively analyzed clinical risk factors associated with low posaconazole trough concentrations in 114 patients receiving anticancer chemotherapy due to acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome who received posaconazole oral suspension. In multivariate analyses, risk factors for drug level<500ng/mL included low calorie intake, mucositis>/=grade 2, H(2) blocker famotidine and proton-pump inhibitor. The only significant risk factor for drug level<700ng/mL was famotidine use (adjusted relative risk, 3.18; 95% confidence interval, 1.07-9.11; P=0.038). In conclusion, medication of H(2) blocker famotidine should be cautious in patients with hematologic malignancy receiving posaconazole suspension.
Critically ill patients routinely receive H(2) antagonists for stress ulcer prophylaxis while at risk for gastrointestinal bleeding. In these patients it is often difficult to assess accurately the cause of adverse effects such as thrombocytopenia. We evaluate the literature to better define thrombocytopenia related to H(2) antagonist administration and discuss mechanism, potential as a risk factor and case reports describing the severity and duration of thrombocytopenia.
Lemborexant is a dual orexin receptor antagonist approved for treating insomnia. As the solubility of lemborexant is pH-sensitive, the impact of the gastric acid-reducing agent (ARA), famotidine, on lemborexant pharmacokinetics was evaluated in a Phase 1 study. Additionally, post hoc analysis of data from Phase 3 studies examined the potential effect of concomitant ARAs on patient-reported/subjective sleep onset latency (sSOL) in subjects with insomnia. Coadministration of lemborexant 10 mg with famotidine decreased the maximum observed concentration by 27% and delayed time of maximum observed concentration by 0.5 hours. Famotidine did not affect overall lemborexant exposure based on comparison of area under the concentration curves. Concomitant ARA use in the Phase 3 studies did not impact the effect of lemborexant on sSOL; the change from baseline during the last 7 nights of 1 month of treatment with lemborexant 10 mg was -17.1 minutes with vs -17.9 minutes without ARAs. Collectively, these results indicate that lemborexant can be coadministered with ARAs.
A 59-year-old man was orally administered rabeprazole, a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), for gastroesophageal reflux disease, after which he gradually developed iron-deficiency anemia. The anemia did not improve following the administration of ferrous fumarate, and endoscopic screening of the entire gastrointestinal tract, including the small intestine, did not reveal any findings indicating the cause of the anemia. The patient was then switched from rabeprazole to famotidine and the anemia was cured within three months. There is much debate as to whether the long-term use of PPIs causes iron-deficiency. However, this case strongly suggests that PPIs can induce iron-deficiency anemia.
Metronidazole alone rarely causes Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS). We present a case of an elderly male patient who, following metronidazole use, developed neurological symptoms followed by pain and blisters on both soles, erythema of face and neck, scrotal itching and erosion, and hemorrhagic encrustation around the lips and oral mucous membrane. Initial neurological symptoms followed by mucocutaneous manifestation of SJS following metronidazole use is probably a new presentation of this case.
The H2-antagonists famotidine and nizatidine produced a dose-dependent inhibition of histamine release from human colonic mucosal and muscle mast cells stimulated with anti-IgE. The IC30 values were in the range 0.5-10 microM and the maximum inhibition approached 50%. The compounds showed similar efficacy against rat peritoneal mast cells but were more potent. The cytoprotectant misoprostol had a striking effect on the human colonic mast cells, producing more than 50% inhibition at concentrations of 0.1-1 nM, but was much less active against the rat cells.
The present study attempts to assess the alteration in patterns of gastro-oesophageal reflux as assessed by 24-h oesophageal pH monitoring by varying degrees of H2-receptor blockade with famotidine. Subjects were 12 patients with complaints of daily heartburn who demonstrated at least 6% of acid mucosal contact time by 24-h ambulatory oesophageal pH monitoring. All subjects had a positive Bernstein test, and nine of the 12 subjects had erosive oesophagitis. The study was conducted as a double-blind crossover design utilizing 40 mg nocte, 20 mg b.d., and 40 mg b.d. and placebo treatments. Results indicated that all treatments significantly reduced the 24-h percentage acid contact time (P less than 0.05) compared to placebo. The two b.d. treatment regimens also significantly (P less than 0.05) reduced the number of episodes lasting longer than 5 min. Only the b.d. regimens successfully lowered the percentage of upright acid exposure. All treatments significantly (P less than 0.01) reduced the percentage of supine acid contact time, as well as the number of episodes lasting more than 5 min. It is concluded that gastro-oesophageal reflux disease may well require a b.d. dosing regimen with famotidine in order to achieve optimal mucosal healing and day time symptom control.
BACKGROUND: Urticaria is a common skin disease characterised by itching weals or hives, which can occur almost anywhere on the body. There are a number of different subtypes and a range of available treatment options. There is lack of agreement on the efficacy of H2-receptor antagonists used in the treatment of urticaria. OBJECTIVES: To assess the safety and effectiveness of H2-receptor antagonists in the treatment of urticaria. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases up to 7 October 2011: the Cochrane Skin Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL in The Cochrane Library (2011, Issue 4), MEDLINE (from 2005), EMBASE (from 2007), and LILACS (from 1982). We also searched online trials registries for ongoing trials. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials of H2-receptor antagonists in people with a clinical diagnosis of urticaria of any duration or of any subtype. Studies including H1-antihistamines for chronic urticaria are the topic of a separate Cochrane review; thus, they were not included in this review. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality and extracted and analysed data. MAIN RESULTS: Four studies of a relatively small size, involving 144 participants, were included in this review. A combination of ranitidine with diphenhydramine was more effective at improving the resolution of urticaria than diphenhydramine administered alone (risk ratio (RR) 1.59, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.07 to 2.36). Although there was a similar improvement in itching, weal size, and intensity, cimetidine provided no statistically significant greater overall improvement in symptoms of urticaria when compared to diphenhydramine. However, a combination of these medications was more effective than diphenhydramine alone (RR 2.02, 95% CI 1.03 to 3.94). Adverse events were reported with several of the interventions, i.e. ranitidine and diphenhydramine, causing drowsiness and sedation, but there was no significant difference in the level of sedation from baseline with either famotidine or diphenhydramine. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The very limited evidence provided by this review was based on a few old studies of a relatively small size, which we categorised as having high to unclear risk of bias. Thus, at present, the review does not allow confident decision-making about the use of H2-receptor antagonists for urticaria. Although some of these studies have reported a measure of relief of symptoms of urticaria and rather minimal clinical improvement in some of the participants, the evidence was weak and unreliable. We have emphasised the lack of precision and limitations in the reported data where appropriate in this review.
Famotidine has been considered to be a potential treatment for COVID-19 but the current data is conflicting. This retrospective study was conducted by utilizing data of 9565 COVID-19 hospitalized patients. Patients treated with and without famotidine were matched by propensity score using a 1:1 matching scheme. A total of 1593 patients (16.7%) received famotidine. In-hospital mortality was similar in patients treated with and without famotidine in the propensity-matched cohorts (28.3% vs. 28.2%, p = 0.97), which remains similar irrespective of severity or concomitant treatment by steroids. Famotidine treatment was not associated with a lower risk of in-hospital mortality of COVID-19 patients.
Ghrelin, a novel growth-hormone-releasing peptide, was discovered in rat and human stomach tissues. However, its physiological and pharmacological actions in the gastric function remain to be determined. Therefore, we studied the effects of rat ghrelin on gastric functions in urethane-anesthetized rats. Intravenous administrations of rat ghrelin at 0.8 to 20 microgram/kg dose-dependently increased not only gastric acid secretion measured by a lumen-perfused method, but also gastric motility measured by a miniature balloon method. The maximum response in gastric acid secretion was almost equipotent to that of histamine (3 mg/kg, i.v.). Moreover, these actions were abolished by pretreatment with either atropine (1 mg/kg, s.c.) or bilateral cervical vagotomy, but not by a histamine H(2)-receptor antagonist (famotidine, 1 mg/kg, s.c.). These results taken together suggest that ghrelin may play a physiological role in the vagal control of gastric function in rats.
Histamine-2 receptor antagonists have been available for fifteen years for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease and related disorders. While very safe, clinicians need to know correct dosing guidelines, drug interactions, and side effect profiles. Long-term therapy should be reserved for patients at high risk of recurrence.
