Felodipine is a new calcium antagonist with vascular selectivity. It has a high potency in arterial resistance vessels and no apparent action on capacitance vessels. It lacks significant effects on myocardial contractility and cardiac conduction. It is an effective antihypertensive agent and may be safely combined with beta-adrenoceptor blockade. This report outlines work confirming the vascular selectivity of felodipine by examining its clinical effects in hypertension, ischemic heart disease, and congestive heart failure.
Grapefruit juice enhances the effect of some commonly used medications by increasing their bioavailability via the selective down-regulation of a specific subfamily of the cytochrome P450 enzyme system in the small intestine.
Grapefruit juice (GFJ) interacts with a number of drugs, and can alter pharmacokinetics parameters of the drugs. As for these interactions, most reports have focused on the elevation of drug bioavailability by GFJ, but a few recent reports have indicated that GFJ reduced the absorption of drugs not metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP). The predominant mechanisms of GFJ-drug interaction are thought to be due primarily to the inhibition of intestinal CYP3A4 activity without an apparent inhibition of hepatic CYP3A4. GFJ is also an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein, an efflux pump in intestinal cell wall enterocytes, although clinical support for this mechanism remains unclear. In addition, GFJ has recently been shown to be a potent in vitro inhibitor of the organic anion-transporting polypeptides (OATP) 1A2, intestinal uptake transporters of structurally anionic drugs. It is therefore noteworthy that intestinal OATPs-mediated drug uptake are reduced by GFJ. The furanocoumarins, major active ingredients in relation to GFJ-drug interaction, were detected in fresh grapefruit, commercial GFJ and seville orange juice. However, the specific furanocoumarins responsible for the inhibition of CYP3A4 activity in in vitro study have yet to be fully determined and corresponded with GFJ effects in in vivo study. This article summarizes our data concerning GFJ-drug interaction and many GFJ-drug effects, and reviews the mechanism of this interaction, possible active ingredients and clinical implications.
The novel finding that grapefruit juice can markedly augment oral drug bioavailability was based on an unexpected observation from an interaction study between the dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonist, felodipine, and ethanol in which grapefruit juice was used to mask the taste of the ethanol. Subsequent investigations showed that grapefruit juice acted by reducing presystemic felodipine metabolism through selective post-translational down regulation of cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) expression in the intestinal wall. Since the duration of effect of grapefruit juice can last 24 h, repeated juice consumption can result in a cumulative increase in felodipine AUC and Cmax. The high variability of the magnitude of effect among individuals appeared dependent upon inherent differences in enteric CYP3A4 protein expression such that individuals with highest baseline CYP3A4 had the highest proportional increase. At least 20 other drugs have been assessed for an interaction with grapefruit juice. Medications with innately low oral bioavailability because of substantial presystemic metabolism mediated by CYP3A4 appear affected by grapefruit juice. Clinically relevant interactions seem likely for most dihydropyridines, terfenadine, saquinavir, cyclosporin, midazolam, triazolam and verapamil and may also occur with lovastatin, cisapride and astemizole. The importance of the interaction appears to be influenced by individual patient susceptibility, type and amount of grapefruit juice and administration-related factors. Although in vitro findings support the flavonoid, naringin, or the furanocoumarin, 6',7'-dihydroxybergamottin, as being active ingredients, a recent investigation indicated that neither of these substances made a major contribution to grapefruit juice-drug interactions in humans.
Felodipine, a new antihypertensive calcium antagonist, was compared with metoprolol, a beta-blocker, and hydrochlorothiazide, a diuretic, with respect to glucose tolerance in a randomized double-blind cross-over study consisting of 11 patients, of age range 50-70 years, who had developed diabetes during antihypertensive treatment. Each treatment period lasted for 10 weeks. The blood pressure was similar irrespective of treatment. Serum glucose levels during the oral glucose tolerance test were significantly lower when the patients were treated with felodipine than when they were taking hydrochlorothiazide. Serum insulin levels appeared to decrease at an earlier stage of the test when the patients were treated with felodipine, the calcium antagonist, than with the other two antihypertensive substances, which suggests that glucose tolerance is impaired to a lesser extent during treatment with the calcium antagonist. Glucose tolerance was never completely normalized with any of the drugs tested.
This study investigated potential therapeutic differences between Amlodipine 5 mg and Felodipine ER 10 mg in 12 normotensive/borderline hypertensive subjects by comparison of the plasma drug concentration-time profiles and the blood pressure and heart rate responses. There was significantly less trough-to-peak variability in plasma drug concentrations with amlodipine with a ratio of 67%, compared to 37% for felodipine. Correspondingly there was less variability with amlodipine in the blood pressure reductions across the dosage interval. Overall, amlodipine displayed a more consistent hypotensive effect across 24 hours and lower blood pressure values at trough, i.e. 24 hours post-dose.
Raynaud's phenomenon (RP) is a peripheral circulatory disorder characterized by sudden episodes of digital artery spasm, often precipitated by cold temperature or emotional stress. Although the cause of RP is not fully known, it appears to involve inappropriate adrenergic response to cold stimuli. Treatment of RP is conservative in most patients, but in patients with severe disease includes the use of agents that promote digital vasodilation. The calcium-channel antagonists, particularly the dihydropyridine derivative nifedipine, are the most thoroughly studied drug class for the treatment of RP. Approximately two thirds of patients respond favorably, with significant reductions in the frequency and severity of vasospastic attacks. Nifedipine use is often limited by the appearance of adverse vasodilatory effects such as headache or peripheral edema. The newer second-generation dihydropyridines such as amlodipine, isradipine, nicardipine, and felodipine also appear to be effective in patients with RP and may be associated with fewer adverse effects.
The Veterans Affairs Vasodilator-Heart Failure Trials (V-HeFT I and II) provided information about heart failure treated with conventional therapy, and evaluated the long term efficacy of vasodilators. In V-HeFT I, the combination of hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate provided a beneficial effect on prognosis in heart failure. V-HeFT II demonstrated that enalapril had a more favourable effect on 2-year survival than a combination of hydralazine plus isosorbide dinitrate. However, the hydralazine-isosorbide dinitrate combination exerted the most favourable short term impact on exercise performance and left ventricular ejection fraction. The V-HeFT studies showed that, although not all vasodilators are alike, their differing effects might be beneficial when used in combination. Determination of the potential additive effect of the calcium antagonist felodipine, a vasodilator, when used in combination with an ACE inhibitor, is the major goal of V-HeFT III.
Felodipine, a vascular selective antihypertensive calcium antagonist, was compared with hydrochlorothiazide, a diuretic, with respect to glucose tolerance. An open crossover study was performed comprising 16 non-diabetic hypertensive women (age range 59-75 years). The women continued to take a beta-blocker as a basal therapy. Each treatment period lasted three months. The blood pressure was similar irrespective of treatment. Blood glucose values were not significantly different during the oral glucose tolerance test. Serum insulin levels after glucose administration were lower when the patients were treated with felodipine than when taking hydrochlorothiazide. A possible explanation for this observation may be an increased insulin release as a consequence of treatment with a diuretic in order to maintain normal blood glucose levels during the glucose tolerance test. Felodipine appears preferable to hydrochlorothiazide as an addition to a beta blocker in hypertensive patients from a glucose metabolism point of view.
Six men with borderline hypertension took felodipine 5 mg with water, grapefruit juice, or orange juice. The mean felodipine bioavailability with grapefruit juice was 284 (range 164-469)% of that with water. The dehydrofelodipine/felodipine AUC ratio was lower, diastolic blood pressure lower, and heart rate higher with grapefruit juice than with water. Vasodilatation-related side-effects were more frequent. Orange juice had no such effects. Six healthy men took nifedipine 10 mg with water or grapefruit juice; the bioavailability with grapefruit juice was 134 (108-169)% of that with water.
Calcium channel blockers (CCBs) are a heterogeneous group of drugs often used in the therapy for hypertension and angina. Though CCBs are generally similar in terms of their efficacy yet, they differ in their ability of causing selective inhibition in the contractility of vascular smooth muscle in comparison to cardiac muscle. Felodipine is one of the most vascular selective of the available CCBs and it has no negative inotropic effects at clinically administered doses. Focus of this review is to comprehensively summarize the pharmacokinetics, efficacy, safety and tolerability of felodipine. This review is based on evaluation of relevant literature on felodipine using meta-database PubMed and ScienceDirect and internet search engine (Google Scholar). Clinical studies summarized in this review testify, on technical lines, the clinical efficacy, safety and placebo- like tolerability profile of felodipine, administered alone as well as in combination.
Felodipine is a calcium channel blocking agent used in the management of hypertension and angina. We report a case of gingival hyperplasia in a patient with chronic use of this drug. Gingival changes occurred soon after initiation of felodipine and improved upon its discontinuation. The clinical characteristics, inciting agents, proposed pathogenetic mechanisms, as well as prevention and treatment of drug-induced gingival hyperplasia are briefly reviewed.
Felodipine is a new dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker with a number of properties that enhance its suitability as a first-line antihypertensive drug for the elderly. Felodipine has a 100-fold selectivity for inhibiting the contribution of vascular smooth muscle compared with cardiac muscle. Negative inotropic action appears minimal while selectivity appears to increase with age. Felodipine has a minimal effect on smooth muscle of venous capacitance vessels, thereby greatly reducing the likelihood of orthostatic hypotension. Renal effects are favorable; the glomerular filtration rate is increased in some patients. The extended-release formulation of felodipine produces a smooth 24-hour plasma concentration curve and is effective when prescribed once daily. Felodipine appears to lower blood pressure effectively in the elderly patient with few, generally mild, adverse effects.
This review attempts to evaluate the benefit-risk balance of felodipine in the treatment of hypertension. Known positive and negative properties of felodipine are considered. Although accurate benefit-risk statements may be difficult even for old, well-established drugs it is concluded that felodipine appears to be an effective and well tolerated new antihypertensive drug. The reduction in blood pressure during felodipine treatment has been superior to that seen with established antihypertensive drugs in controlled studies.
OBJECTIVES: Calcium channel inhibitors have beneficial impact on microcirculation, but beta-blocker effect is controversial. Clinicians still do not agree on beta-blocker combination with other treatments in the management of impaired microcirculation. The aim of the present study was to describe the effects of beta-blocker metoprolol monotherapy and combined with calcium channel inhibitor felodipin on digital microcirculation in primary Raynaud's syndrome. METHODS: We enrolled in this study 46 patients suffering from both hypertension and primary Raynaud's syndrome. Fifteen patients were treated with beta-blocker monotherapy (metoprolol), 13 received combined beta-blocker and calcium channel blocker therapy (felodipin and metoprolol), while 18 patients without any medications served as controls. Measurement of digital microcirculation was carried out with laser Doppler scanner. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Our investigation concludes that the concurrent administration of beta-blockers with calcium channel inhibitors positively reduces symptoms in patients suffering from Raynaud's syndrome.
1. The rate and extent of felodipine absorption from an oral solution, conventional and extended-release tablets were investigated in two groups of healthy volunteers (n = 18 + 15). 2. The antihypertensive effect of felodipine conventional tablets twice daily (n = 71) and extended-release tablets once daily (n = 76) were compared in a parallel-group study in hypertensive patients. 3. As from a solution, felodipine was completely absorbed from the two solid dosage forms. The rate of absorption increased in the order extended-release tablets, conventional tablets, solution. 4. The extended-release tablet gave more sustained plasma concentrations than the conventional tablet. 5. The extended-release tablet given once daily gave similar blood pressure control to the conventional tablet given twice daily.
Felodipine is a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist which selectively relaxes vascular smooth muscle. By acting at peripheral arterioles, it lowers systemic vascular resistance and thereby produces substantial decreases in blood pressure and increases in cardiac output. Felodipine is indicated for the management of hypertension, and in patients with mild to moderate disease felodipine monotherapy markedly lowers blood pressure. It proved as effective as atenolol, and equivalent to hydrochlorothiazide, either with or without amiloride, in terms of antihypertensive activity. Comparative studies also demonstrated that once daily administration with an extended-release formulation provides equivalent antihypertensive efficacy to the same amount of drug administered twice daily as the standard tablets. As a second- or third-line treatment for patients with moderate to severe hypertension refractory to standard drug combinations, felodipine produced considerable reductions in blood pressure when added to beta-blockers and diuretics, either alone or in combination, in studies lasting up to 48 weeks. In comparative studies of multiple-drug treatments felodipine was found to have superior efficacy to hydralazine and prazosin, and was at least as effective as nifedipine, minoxidil and propranolol, when used with diuretics and/or beta-blockers. As an alternative to hydrochlorothiazide, in combination with beta-blockers, felodipine consistently controlled blood pressure in a greater percentage of patients and usually provided greater decreases in blood pressure. The main side effects with felodipine are ankle oedema, headache and flushing. Although the overall incidence of effects is quite high, they are usually mild in nature. Nevertheless, withdrawal due to side effects has been necessary in about 7% of patients overall. Thus, the efficacy of felodipine has been demonstrated in mild, moderate and severe hypertension. At the present time it seems particularly suitable as a second- or third-line treatment in refractory hypertension, but it also can be used as monotherapy for mild to moderate disease.
Hypertensive patients who had previously taken part in double-blind, controlled studies were treated with open-label felodipine for 1 year: 377 had felodipine added to a beta-blocker and 94 were receiving monotherapy. In the first group, supine blood pressure (BP), measured at the beginning of the double-blind period, was reduced from 172 +/- 23/107 +/- 8 to 140 +/- 20/86 +/- 8 mm Hg at the end of 1 year of therapy. In the monotherapy group, BP was reduced from 170 +/- 22/101 +/- 7 mm Hg measured before treatment to 149 +/- 17/90 +/- 9 mm Hg after 1 year. The most common adverse experiences that led to withdrawal were peripheral edema, headache, flushing, and dizziness. No development of tolerance was noted.
In a crossover design, control of blood pressure by extended release felodipine was compared with control by prolonged action nifedipine in 21 children with renal hypertension. Compliance with once daily felodipine was higher than with nifedipine, at 95.6 (SEM 2.7)% v 78.9 (6.0)% (p = 0.02). Mean diastolic blood pressure was lower during the day with felodipine than with nifedipine, at 77.6 (2.4) v 84.4 (2.8) mm Hg (p = 0.05). Similarly, blood pressure load (the percentage of the day during which the child had blood pressure exceeding the upper limits of normal for age) was lower for felodipine than for nifedipine: 43.5 (5.5)% v 61.3 (6.3)%. There was an opposite trend during the night, though this did not reach statistical significance. These data suggest that once a day felodipine is effective in children with hypertension. This may be because of improved compliance.
Sixteen patients participated in a double-blind cross-over trial comparing the effect of two dosages of the new calcium entry blocker, felodipine, with nifedipine in the treatment of Raynaud's phenomenon. The effect was evaluated using a symptom recording system. As no difference was found between the 3 treatments, the lower dose of felodipine (10 mg) may be preferable as only one dose per day is necessary.
