BACKGROUND: Findings from cardiovascular outcome trials suggest that fenofibrate therapy may reduce the progression of diabetic retinopathy. METHODS: We recruited and followed adults with nonreferable diabetic retinopathy or maculopathy using the national Diabetic Eye Screening (DES) program in Scotland. We randomly assigned participants to receive 145-mg fenofibrate tablets or placebo (taken daily or, in those with impaired renal function, on alternate days). The primary outcome was a composite of developing referable diabetic retinopathy or maculopathy (based on Scotland's DES grading scheme) or treatment (intravitreal injection, retinal laser, vitrectomy) for retinopathy or maculopathy. RESULTS: A total of 1151 participants were randomly assigned to treatment. During a median of 4.0 years, progression to referable diabetic retinopathy or maculopathy, or treatment thereof, occurred in 131 (22.7%) of 576 participants in the fenofibrate group and 168 (29.2%) of 575 in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.73; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.58 to 0.91; P=0.006). In the fenofibrate group compared with the placebo group, the frequencies for any progression of retinopathy or maculopathy were 185 (32.1%) vs. 231 (40.2%); hazard ratio, 0.74; 95% CI, 0.61 to 0.90 and for the development of macular edema were 22 (3.8%) vs. 43 (7.5%); hazard ratio, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.30 to 0.84. Seventeen (3.0%) participants assigned fenofibrate and 28 (4.9%) assigned placebo were given treatment for retinopathy (hazard ratio, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.31 to 1.06). There was no effect on visual function, quality of life, or visual acuity. Trial-averaged estimated glomerular filtration rate was 7.9 (95% CI, 6.8 to 9.1) ml/min/1.73 m(2) lower in participants in the fenofibrate group compared with the placebo group. Serious adverse events occurred in 208 (36.1%) participants allocated fenofibrate and 204 (35.5%) participants allocated placebo. CONCLUSIONS: Fenofibrate reduced progression of diabetic retinopathy compared with placebo among participants with early retinal changes. (Funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03439345; ISRCTN number, ISRCTN15073006.).
Lipid disorders are relatively common in dogs. Hyperlipidemia can be primary or secondary to other diseases. In humans, fenofibrate is used to control hypertriglyceridemia. In dogs, there are no studies evaluating fenofibrate in hypertriglyceridemia. The aim of the study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of fenofibrate to control severe hypertriglyceridemia in dogs. A total of 124 dogs (n = 124) with severe hypertriglyceridemia (>300 mg/dL, 3.39 mmol/L) were randomly distributed in the fenofibrate group (n = 64) and the diet group (n = 60). Dogs of the fenofibrate group were treated with fenofibrate (10 mg/Kg) once daily. Dogs of the diet group were treated with low-fat diet (10%). Serum triglycerides (TGs), total cholesterol (TC), liver enzymes, and creatine kinase concentrations were evaluated, before and after 1 mo of medical or dietary treatment. Triglyceride concentrations were reduced with fenofibrate (P < 0.001), and 85.93% of the dogs normalized their levels. Triglyceride concentrations also decreased with low-fat diet (P < 0.001), but only 26.6% of the dogs normalized their levels. Triglyceride concentrations were reduced with fenofibrate (P < 0.01) and with low-fat diet (P < 0.01). Of the cases with hypercholesterolemia, 53.7% and 50% of the dogs normalized their TC concentrations, with fenofibrate and diet, respectively. No significant adverse effects were observed (3% showed diarrhea). Fenofibrate was safe and effective in reducing and normalizing TG concentrations in dogs with severe hypertriglyceridemia, regardless of the cause of hyperlipidemia. The low-fat diet was effective in reducing, but not normalizing, TG concentrations. Fenofibrate and low-fat diet were effective in reducing TC concentrations. This is the first study evaluating fibrates in dogs with severe hypertriglyceridemia and comparing results with a low-fat diet.
Pravafenix((R)) is a fixed-dose combination of 40mg of pravastatin and 160 mg of fenofibrate. The rationale behind the use of Pravafenix((R)) is based on the increased residual cardiovascular risk observed in high risk patients with hypertriglyceridemia and/or low HDL cholesterol levels despite treatment with statins in monotherapy. In this article, we review the available evidence on the clinical efficacy of Pravafenix((R)), which shows complementary benefits in the overall lipid profile of high risk patients with mixed dyslipidemia not controlled with 40-mg pravastatin or 20-mg simvastatin.
Chemotherapy-induced hypertriglyceridaemia (HTG) is a potential serious adverse event. Severe HTG with triglycerides (TG) >11.3 mmol/L (1000 mg/dL) can cause acute pancreatitis in addition to cardiovascular diseases such as coronary artery disease. While the association of capecitabine (5-fluorouracil (5-FU) prodrug) with clinically relevant HTG is a well-known adverse reaction, 5-FU is not typically associated with HTG. We here report the case of a patient who developed 5-FU-associated grade 4 HTG with TG level raising up to 37.1 mmol/L (3286 mg/dL) occurring after the ninth cycle of adjuvant FOLFOX (Fluorouracil and Oxaliplatin) chemotherapy. Fenofibrate treatment and diet were started. Chemotherapy was postponed and then resumed for two additional cycles. However, severe HTG recurred shortly after. Chemotherapy was therefore permanently stopped. Approximately 8 weeks after chemotherapy discontinuation, TG fell back to range at 2.1 mmol/L (189 mg/dL) allowing interruption of fenofibrate without HTG recurrence at 3 months.
For nearly 30 years ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) represented the only pharmacological treatment option available for primary biliary cholangitis (PBC). This changed at the end of 2016 when obeticholic acid was licensed in Europe for PBC patients not responding to UDCA. Novel treatment concepts involving the modulation of nuclear receptor signaling in cholestatic and other liver diseases have led to a host of new potential options, studies and drug candidates for the treatment of PBC. The analysis of large multinational cohorts has additionally confirmed the effectiveness of UDCA in slowing PBC progression, and has led to the development of new definitions for the risk assessment of PBC patients under therapy, which will be an asset for clinical decision making. One issue that remains unresolved is the therapeutic management of extrahepatic symptoms associated with PBC, namely fatigue and pruritus, which are the main factors influencing the quality of life of affected individuals. Their pathophysiological basis is poorly understood and treatment remains unsatisfactory.
BACKGROUND: Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus are at increased risk of cardiovascular disease, partly owing to dyslipidaemia, which can be amenable to fibrate therapy. We designed the Fenofibrate Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes (FIELD) study to assess the effect of fenofibrate on cardiovascular disease events in these patients. METHODS: We did a multinational, randomised controlled trial with 9795 participants aged 50-75 years, with type 2 diabetes mellitus, and not taking statin therapy at study entry. After a placebo and a fenofibrate run-in phase, we randomly assigned patients (2131 with previous cardiovascular disease and 7664 without) with a total-cholesterol concentration of 3.0-6.5 mmol/L and a total-cholesterol/HDL-cholesterol ratio of 4.0 or more or plasma triglyceride of 1.0-5.0 mmol/L to micronised fenofibrate 200 mg daily (n=4895) or matching placebo (n=4900). Our primary outcome was coronary events (coronary heart disease death or non-fatal myocardial infarction); the outcome for prespecified subgroup analyses was total cardiovascular events (the composite of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, stroke, and coronary and carotid revascularisation). Analysis was by intention to treat. The study was prospectively registered (number ISRCTN 64783481). FINDINGS: Vital status was confirmed on all but 22 patients. Averaged over the 5 years' study duration, similar proportions in each group discontinued study medication (10% placebo vs 11% fenofibrate) and more patients allocated placebo (17%) than fenofibrate (8%; p<0.0001) commenced other lipid treatments, predominantly statins. 5.9% (n=288) of patients on placebo and 5.2% (n=256) of those on fenofibrate had a coronary event (relative reduction of 11%; hazard ratio [HR] 0.89, 95% CI 0.75-1.05; p=0.16). This finding corresponds to a significant 24% reduction in non-fatal myocardial infarction (0.76, 0.62-0.94; p=0.010) and a non-significant increase in coronary heart disease mortality (1.19, 0.90-1.57; p=0.22). Total cardiovascular disease events were significantly reduced from 13.9% to 12.5% (0.89, 0.80-0.99; p=0.035). This finding included a 21% reduction in coronary revascularisation (0.79, 0.68-0.93; p=0.003). Total mortality was 6.6% in the placebo group and 7.3% in the fenofibrate group (p=0.18). Fenofibrate was associated with less albuminuria progression (p=0.002), and less retinopathy needing laser treatment (5.2%vs 3.6%, p=0.0003). There was a slight increase in pancreatitis (0.5%vs 0.8%, p=0.031) and pulmonary embolism (0.7%vs 1.1%, p=0.022), but no other significant adverse effects. INTERPRETATION: Fenofibrate did not significantly reduce the risk of the primary outcome of coronary events. It did reduce total cardiovascular events, mainly due to fewer non-fatal myocardial infarctions and revascularisations. The higher rate of starting statin therapy in patients allocated placebo might have masked a moderately larger treatment benefit.
Many lipid-lowering drugs improve cardiovascular (CV) outcomes. However, when therapies have been studied in addition to statins, it has been challenging to show an additional clinical benefit in terms of CV event reduction, although overall safety seems acceptable. This debate has been complicated by recent guidelines that emphasize treatment with high-potency statin monotherapy. Combination therapy allows more patients to successfully reach their ideal lipid targets. Further testing of novel therapies may introduce an era of potent low-density lipoprotein decrease without dependence on statins, but until then, they remain the mainstay of therapy.
Lipids disorder is the principal cause of atherosclerosis and may present with several forms, according to blood lipoprotein prevalence. One of the most common forms is combined dyslipidemia, characterized by high levels of triglycerides and low level of high-density lipoprotein. Single lipid-lowering drugs may have very selective effect on lipoproteins; hence, the need to use multiple therapy against dyslipidemia. However, the risk of toxicity is a concerning issue. In this review, the effect and safety of an approved combination therapy with simvastatin plus fenofibrate are described, with an analysis of pros and cons resulting from randomized multicenter trials, meta-analyses, animal models, and case reports as well.
Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPAR-alpha) belongs to the family of ligand-regulated nuclear receptors (PPARs). These receptors after heterodimerization with retinoid X receptor (RXR) bind in promotor of target genes to PPAR response elements (PPREs) and act as a potent transcription factors. PPAR-alpha and other receptors from this family, such as PPAR-beta/delta and PPAR-gamma are expressed in the brain and other organs and play a significant role in oxidative stress, energy homeostasis, mitochondrial fatty acids metabolism and inflammation. PPAR-alpha takes part in regulation of genes coding proteins that are involved in glutamate homeostasis and cholinergic/dopaminergic signaling in the brain. Moreover, PPAR-alpha regulates expression of genes coding enzymes engaged in amyloid precursor protein (APP) metabolism. It activates gene coding of alpha secretase, which is responsible for non-amyloidogenic pathway of APP degradation. It also down regulates beta secretase (BACE-1), the main enzyme responsible for amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide release in Alzheimer Diseases (AD). In AD brain expression of genes of PPAR-alpha and PPAR-gamma coactivator-1 alpha (PGC-1alpha) is significantly decreased. PPARs are altered not only in AD but in other neurodegenerative/neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorder. PPAR-alpha downregulation may decrease anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory processes and could be responsible for the alteration of fatty acid transport, lipid metabolism and disturbances of mitochondria function in the brain of AD patients. Specific activators of PPAR-alpha may be important for improvement of brain cells metabolism and cognitive function in neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental disorders.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Reduction of serum low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels by statins, ezetimibe and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors has been shown to significantly reduce cardiovascular events risk. However, fasting and postprandial hypertriglyceridemia as well as reduced high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) remain as residual risk factors of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases (ASCVD). To treat patients with hypertriglyceridemia and/or low HDL-C, drugs such as fibrates, nicotinic acids, and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids have been used. However, fibrates were demonstrated to cause side effects such as liver dysfunction and increase in creatinine levels, and thus large-scale clinical trials of fibrates have shown negative results for prevention of ASCVD. The failure could be attributed to their low selectivity and potency for binding to peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) alpha. To resolve these issues, the concept of selective PPARalpha modulator (SPPARMalpha) with a superior balance of efficacy and safety has been proposed and pemafibrate (K-877) has been developed. RECENT FINDINGS: Pemafibrate, one of SPPARMsalpha, was synthesized by Kowa Company, Ltd. for better efficiency and safety. Clinical trials in Japan have established the superiority of pemafibrate on effects on serum triglycerides (TG) reduction and HDL-C elevation as well safety. Although available fibrates showed worsening of liver and kidney function test values, pemafibrate indicated improved liver function test values and was less likely to increase serum creatinine or decrease estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). Very few drug-drug interactions were observed even when used concomitantly with statins. Furthermore, pemafibrate is metabolized in the liver and excreted into the bile, while many of available fibrates are mainly excreted from the kidney. Therefore, pemafibrate can be used safely even in patients with impaired renal function since there is no significant increase in its blood concentration. A large-scale trial of pemafibrate, PROMINENT, for dyslipidemic patients with type 2 diabetes is ongoing. Pemafibrate is one of novel SPPARMsalpha and has superior benefit-risk balance compared to conventional fibrates and can be applicable for patients for whom the usage of existing fibrates is difficult such as those who are taking statins or patients with renal dysfunction. In the current review, all the recent data on pemafibrate will be summarized.
Phenofibrate is an hypolipemiant drug derived from fibric acid. Cutaneous side effects such as pruritus, rash, urticarial lesions and some rare cases of photosensitivity have been described (1-3). The reported photosensitivity cases are clinically described as eczematous (1-3); some have been reproduced by photopatch-testing (2, 3). We studied a patient with a clinical and histopathological lichenoid eruption over light-exposed areas clearly related to phenofibrate therapy for an essential hypercholesterolemia.
The earliest and most significant change in diabetic retinopathy (DR) is blood-retinal barrier (BRB) dysfunction, followed by two main pathologies that may cause severe visual impairment: Diabetic Macular Edema (DME) and Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy (PDR). The pathological hallmarks of BRB dysfunction include loss of tight junction integrity, VEGF- and AGE-induced damage, oxidative stress, and inflammatory changes. Recently, several BRB protective factors have been reported. Our aim is to give a review of those protective factors and discuss new potential therapeutic targets for DR.
Fenofibrate is a fibric acid derivative that has been marketed since the mid-1970's (1998 in the United States). Its active metabolite, fenofibric acid, is responsible for the primary pharmacodynamic effects of the drug: reductions in total plasma cholesterol, low density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycerides, and very low-density lipoprotein concentrations and increases in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and apolipoproteins AI and AII concentrations. These effects are mediated by activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPAR(alpha)). The drug has broad spectrum utility, with documented efficacy in Fredrickson types IIa, IIb, III, IV, and V hyperlipidemias. Fenofibrate is well tolerated, with digestive and musculoskeletal side effects similar to those of other fibrates. Results of the initial cardiovascular morbidity/mortality outcomes study with fenofibrate (known as DAIS [Diabetes Atherosclerosis Intervention Study]) were encouraging vis-a-vis slowing of atherosclerotic progression in the coronary vasculature of type II diabetics. The results of other ongoing outcome trials are eagerly awaited. These results will help to establish the overall place of fenofibrate in the hypolipidemic armamentarium.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most frequent inflammatory and demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS). The underlying pathophysiology of MS is the destruction of myelin sheath by immune cells. The formation of myelin plaques, inflammation, and injury of neuronal myelin sheath characterizes its neuropathology. MS plaques are multiple focal regions of demyelination disseminated in the brain's white matter, spinal cords, deep grey matter, and cerebral cortex. Fenofibrate is a peroxisome proliferative activated receptor alpha (PPAR-alpha) that attenuates the inflammatory reactions in MS. Fenofibrate inhibits differentiation of Th17 by inhibiting the expression of pro-inflammatory signaling. According to these findings, this review intended to illuminate the mechanistic immunoinflammatory role of fenofibrate in mitigating MS neuropathology. In conclusion, fenofibrate can attenuate MS neuropathology by modulating different pathways, including oxidative stress, autophagy, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammatory-signaling pathways, and neuroinflammation.
Fenofibrate induced myopathy is a rare adverse event. We present a case of muscle pain and quadriparesis following administration of 200mg of fenofibrate for 35 days. Patient gradually improved after stopping the drug. As per our knowledge, this is probably the first case report of fenofibrate induced myopathy from India.
Disturbances of lipoprotein metabolism represent one of the most important risk factors for vascular events. However, dyslipidaemic patients often have a number of additional abnormalities (such as endothelial dysfunction, hypertension, low-grade inflammation, haemostatic abnormalities and hyperuricaemia) that may accelerate the atherosclerotic process. Thus, the ideal lipid-modifying drug, along with exerting beneficial effects on lipoprotein metabolism, should also improve these coexisting disturbances. Fibric acid derivatives (fibrates) are a class of lipid-modifying drugs mainly used in patients with elevated triglyceride levels. These drugs mainly exert their actions via the activation of specific nuclear receptors called peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors alpha (PPARalpha). In this review, we summarize the current evidence suggesting that fenofibrate, one of the most widely used fibric acid derivatives, along with its well established actions on lipids also exerts several other antiatherogenic actions. Based on recently published studies, fenofibrate is a useful option for patients with primary combined dyslipidaemias or secondary dyslipidaemias, such as those associated with diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome or HIV infection. Additionally, in cases of refractory dyslipidaemia, the combination of fenofibrate with statins is a therapeutic option.
Drug-induced thrombocytopenia is a common entity in clinical practice. However, having in consideration the severity of the case, it becomes imperative to distinguish non-immune thrombocytopenia from the po-tentially life-threatening immune-mediated forms. The authors report a rare clinical case of a 79-year-old man presenting with purpuric rash and gingival hemorrhage while on fenofibrate treatment (sixth day). The evolu-tion was favorable after drug removal and corticosteroid administration. Drug-associated thrombocytopenia is reported by manufacturers as an extremely rare event. This is the second case report of immune throm-bocytopenia to fenofibrate. The first event was reported for publication in 2015.
The rapid escalation in the global prevalence diabetes, with more than 30% being afflicted with diabetic retinopathy (DR), means it is likely that associated vision-threatening conditions will also rise substantially. This means that new therapeutic approaches need to be found that go beyond the current standards of diabetic care, and which are effective in the early stages of the disease. In recent decades several new pharmacological agents have been investigated for their effectiveness in preventing the appearance and progression of DR or in reversing DR; some with limited success while others appear promising. This up-to-date critical review of non-traditional systemic treatments for DR is based on the published evidence in MEDLINE spanning 1980-December 2014. It discusses a number of therapeutic options, paying particular attention to the mechanisms of action and the clinical evidence for the use of renin-angiotensin system blockade, fenofibrate and calcium dobesilate monohydrate in DR.
INTRODUCTION: Statin use results in a significant reduction of cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. However, patients still have residual CVD risk, even if they are receiving optimal statin treatment. AREAS COVERED: This review, based on a Pubmed/Scopus search, discusses the available evidence regarding the use of a fixed-dose fenofibrate plus simvastatin combination. This combination is useful for patients with mixed dyslipidaemia because it improves the overall lipoprotein profile. Although in clinical trials the rate of adverse events was not significantly greater than monotherapy, patients who receive combination treatment should be monitored carefully. Furthermore, in the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) Study, this combination did not result in a significant reduction of CVD events compared with simvastatin monotherapy. However, a possible benefit in this trial was observed in the subgroup of patients with high triglyceride and low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels. EXPERT OPINION: The fixed-dose fenofibrate plus simvastatin combination treatment produces additive results and is safe when patients are properly monitored. Existing evidence appears to support the addition of fenofibrate to simvastatin treatment for the reduction of residual CVD risk in patients with atherogenic dyslipidaemia. However, this combination did not lead to better clinical outcomes in the absence of dyslipidaemia.
The relationship between lipids and the development and/or severity of diabetic retinopathy (DR) is complex. Large epidemiologic studies suggest an inconsistent and overall modest association between serum triglycerides or major cholesterol species and the severity of DR; however, certain specific lipoprotein species may have stronger associations with DR severity, suggesting a pathophysiological role for lipoproteins analogous to that seen in atherosclerosis. In this lipoprotein-mediated DR pathogenesis model, damage to the blood-retinal barrier allows extravasation of lipoprotein species, which are modified in the intraretinal environment, creating substantial local damage. Additionally, hypolipidemic therapy with statins and fibrates--particularly the latter--have been shown to modulate DR in large-scale studies. Since serum lipid profile changes do not necessarily correlate with DR modulation, the efficacy of these agents may be due to their tissue-specific changes in lipoproteins and/or their anti-inflammatory, antioxidative, antiangiogenic, and antiapoptotic functions.
