Fentanyl, a potent lipid-soluble opioid which was first synthesized more than 40 years ago, is still the most popular opioid used in the perioperative period throughout the world. Fentanyl's introduction, versatility, and popularity have resulted in its use in many acute and chronic pain conditions and a multitude of novel delivery systems in the last two decades. In spite of the development of more potent, safer, faster onset, and both shorter and longer lasting alternative opioids, fentanyl remains the mainstay of anesthesiologists and Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists in the perioperative period, and for many pain physicians throughout the world.
Fentanyl withdrawal is common, but pharmacological management has largely mirrored traditional approaches to opioid withdrawal. Observations in a large urban center suggest alternative approaches, including the need for dose modification, should be considered.
Fentanyl is a potent synthetic opioid used as a narcotic analgesic supplement in general and regional anesthesia as well as in management of persistent, severe chronic pain. Alarming epidemiological and forensic medicine reports, accumulated mainly during the last two decades, point to a growing increase in illicit use of fentanyl, mainly in North America and Europe. Toxicological data indicates that fentanyl use is inextricably linked with polydrug use. There are two main sources of fentanyl on the "recreational" drug market. First, the most common, combines illicitly manufactured fentanyl from clandestine sources. The drug is often mixed up with heroin ("fake heroin") to increase its potency at a little cost, or included in cocaine products. It can also be mixed into and sold as oxycodone-, hydrocodone- or alprazolam-containing tablets. The other way to gain fentanyl is through the diversion of fentanyl-containing medicines, especially transdermal patches (FTPs). Fentanyl extracted from FTP can be administered intravenously, insufflated or inhaled after volatilization. The drug can also be delivered by oral or transmucosal application of the whole patch, or by rectal insertion. The most common overdose symptoms are coma, lethargy, respiratory depression and arrest. Although naloxone, an opioid receptor antagonist, is the standard drug for fentanyl overdose rescue, attempts to revive patients with naloxone could be unsuccessful, due to the rapid onset of fentanyl's action. As the fentanyl problem is constantly growing, there is an urgent need for new, effective harm-reduction strategies and technologies, as well as overdose maintenance.
Fentanyl, introduced more than 50 years ago, has become the most often used opioid for intraoperative analgesia. Since the early 1990s the fentanyl patch has been available for management of chronic pain of all forms of cancer as well as the persistent, intense pain from many noncancerous maladies. More than a half dozen rapid-onset transmucosal fentanyl preparations have been developed, approved, launched, and popularized for "breakthrough" pain syndromes in the past 20 years. The purpose of this article is to describe why this opioid has become so important in the treatment of pain in modern clinical practice. The data indicate that fentanyl's popularity has occurred because it has minimal cardiovascular effects, does not result in increases in plasma histamine, is relatively short in onset of action and duration of effect, is easy and inexpensive to synthesize and prepare for the marketplace, and is now familiar to clinicians working in pain and perioperative medicine throughout the world.
By exposing the mu-receptor (MOP-R) to more than one exogenous ligand, the administration during general anaesthesia of more than one opioid with principal action on the receptor may confound and lead to complications or unexpected outcomes. The giving of such a 'mixed message' can result in respiratory depression, excess sedation and delayed recovery to an unusual degree. We present a case of apparent extreme opioid sensitivity and discuss a possible mechanism. Such occurrences may be more common than previously realised.
Sufentanil, a potent alpha-1 agonistic opioid, was synthesized in mid-1970s. It was introduced into clinical practice ten years later, gaining some popularity over the last twenty years. A piperidine derivative, sufentanil has been reported to be 6-10 times more potent than fentanyl, depending on the route of administration; it has been registered for intravenous, epidural and subarachnoid administration. Its reported off-label use has included intra-articular and intranasal administration; moreover, it has been applied as an adjunct in peripheral blocks. In the review, contemporary uses of sufentanil, together with detailed pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics are presented. The author concludes that the limited side effects of sufentanil, together with its attractive pharmacokinetic profile, should promote its wider use in clinical practice.
OBJECTIVE: To review the use of transdermal fentanyl for the treatment of moderate to severe chronic pain. The article provides background on the pharmacology and pharmacokinetics of the drug, as well as the properties of the transdermal system. In addition, clinical trials, adverse effects, and therapeutic considerations and recommendations are presented. DATA SOURCES: Clinical trials, review articles, and reference texts. STUDY SELECTION: Comparative clinical trials involving the use of transdermal fentanyl on postoperative and chronic pain patients. DATA EXTRACTION: Data from clinical human trials published in the English language were reviewed. Trials were assessed by sample size, opioid dosage regimen, and therapeutic outcome. DATA SYNTHESIS: Transdermal fentanyl was found to be effective in the control of chronic and postoperative pain. In one trial the overall patient satisfaction with pain control was 79 percent for the transdermal fentanyl group and 44 percent for the placebo group. In another trial, the amount of additional parenteral morphine was significantly lower for the group receiving transdermal fentanyl than for the placebo group (49.9 +/- 4.9 vs. 77.0 +/- 6.3 mg, respectively, p < 0.01). The most common adverse effects recorded were nausea (45-85 percent), pruritus (14-60 percent), and sedation (40-59 percent). The cost of analgesic therapy with this delivery system is higher than that of parenteral opioid analgesia, but less than patient-controlled analgesia. CONCLUSIONS: The transdermal fentanyl formulation offers some minor advantages over other forms of conventional pain management. Results of early clinical trials are promising, but more studies are needed to evaluate its long-term effectiveness and adverse effects. Specifically, comparisons with standard parenteral and patient-controlled opioid analgesia in chronic malignant and nonmalignant pain are necessary for adequate evaluation of transdermal fentanyl.
This cohort study uses data from the Drug Analysis Service of Health Canada to describe changes in the presence of benzodiazepines mixed with fentanyl in drug seizures in Canada from 2018 to 2021.
Cancer-related pain is a common clinical problem, experienced by  approximately 90% of patients with cancer. The mainstay of treatment remains opioids and the WHO analgesic ladder. Following the principles of the analgesic ladder, 80% of patients can achieve pain control. However, breakthrough pain remains a form of cancer-related pain that is particularly difficult to manage in both specialist and generalist settings. The focus of this article is the mismatch between the temporal characteristics of the majority of cancer-related breakthrough pain which is fast onset and resolution, with the pharmacological profile of oral morphine. The contribution of fast-acting fentanyl preparations to the treatment of breakthrough pain and the evidence for the various commercially available preparations will be considered.
This review considers a few of the controversies and most recent data pertaining to the clinical intraoperative use of the potent opioid sufentanil. Although sufentanil is used extensively as the opioid component of "balanced" anesthesia, opioids themselves are not total anesthetics. Sufentanil is effective in reducing the so-called stress responses that can occur with balanced anesthesia. Although no conclusive data have shown that such reduction in stress response improves anesthetic outcome, many clinicians continue to choose sufentanil for both convenience and improved hemodynamic control. Recent pharmacokinetic modeling suggests that sufentanil would be a good choice for balanced anesthesia. Additionally, initial postoperative analgesia appears to work better when sufentanil rather than fentanyl is used intraoperatively. Although cost considerations remain important, cost analysis would suggest that, on a per-patient basis, choice of intraoperative opioid has very little effect on total hospital costs.
ALZA and Crescendo are developing E-TRANS fentanyl, an electrotransport system (ETS) delivery offentanyl that allows self-titration of the drug by the patient, for the potential management of acute pain. The product was previously being developed in collaboration with Janssen, but by February 2000, Janssen was no longer involved in its development. In January 1998, Janssen, ALZA and Crescendo had plans to develop the product for the potential treatment of chronic pain in addition to the acute pain indication; however, no further development for this indication has been reported since that date. ETS is able to deliver drugs that normally would not diffuse across the skin. A small electric current passes through the patient's skin, between the two electrodes on the patch. Charged drug molecules are attracted to the electrode of the opposite polarity to their own. Manipulating the charge on drug molecules is relatively easy in most instances, so the technology should be applicable to the majority of drugs that do not lend themselves to passive diffusion. ETS technology is also potentially useful in delivering rapid boluses of drug on demand. In February 2000, Merrill Lynch predicted E-TRANS fentanyl sales at US $30 million in 2002, rising to US $131 million in 2004. Analysts at SG Cowen predicted in March 2001, that E-TRANS fentanyl would be rolled out during 2003 and that sales would reach US $40 to 50 million in 2004. In April 2001, Merrill Lynch predicted earliest launch in 2003.
AIM: To investigate the relationship between effective fentanyl sublingual spray (FSS) doses for breakthrough cancer pain (BTCP) and around-the-clock (ATC) transdermal fentanyl patch (TFP). METHODS: Adults tolerating ATC opioids received open-label FSS for 26 days, followed by a 26-day double-blind phase for patients achieving an effective dose (100-1600 microg). RESULTS: Out of 50 patients on ATC TFP at baseline, 32 (64%) achieved an effective dose. FSS effective dose moderately correlated with mean TFP dose (r = 0.4; p = 0.03). Patient satisfaction increased during the study. Common adverse event included nausea (9%) and peripheral edema (9%). CONCLUSION: FSS can be safely titrated to an effective dose for BTCP in patients receiving ATC TFP as chronic cancer pain medication. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00538850.
BACKGROUND: Fentanyl and non-pharmaceutical fentanyls (NPFs) have been responsible for numerous outbreaks of overdoses all over the United States since the 1970s. However, there has been a growing concern in recent years that NPFs are contributing to an alarming rise in the number of opioid-related overdoses. METHODS: The authors conducted a narrative review of the published and grey literature on fentanyl and NPFs in PubMed, Google Scholar, and Google using the following search terms: "fentanyl", "non-pharmaceutical fentanyl", "fentanyl analogs", "fentanyl laced heroin" and "fentanyl overdose". References from relevant publications and grey literature were also reviewed to identify additional citations for inclusion. RESULTS: The article reviews the emergence and misuse of fentanyl and NPFs, their clinical pharmacology, and the clinical management and prevention of fentanyl-related overdoses. CONCLUSIONS: Fentanyl and NPFs may be contributing to the recent rise in overdose deaths in the United States. There is an urgent need to educate clinicians, researchers, and patients about this public health threat.
Historically, xylazine has been utilized in veterinary medicine for decades as an anesthetic and analgesic sedative to facilitate safe handling, diagnostic testing, and surgical procedures in large animals. Currently, xylazine is an emerging threat to human health. It has been detected in the illicit drug supply chain, often as an adulterant. It has been more commonly added to illicit substances, most notably fentanyl, by drugmakers to enhance drug effect. End users are often unaware of its presence. This is alarming given the large number of xylazine-involved overdose deaths while laboratory detections are deficient and reversal agents are absent. Herein, we present the first documented case of xylazine identified via gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry at University of California Davis Health despite a peculiarly mild clinical presentation. We hope to increase awareness of this potentially fatal adulterant that is often missed in evaluation and engender further opportunities to study this ongoing issue.
Breakthrough pain is a transitory flare of pain occurring in most cancer patients against a background of otherwise controlled persistent pain. Treatment of breakthrough pain is a challenging phenomenon. Oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate (OTFC; brand name Actiq, Chephalon Inc., West Chester, PA), a new opioid formulation with a unique delivery system, reflects the characteristics of breakthrough pain (rapid onset of action and short duration), making it an effective treatment for cancer patients who already receive opioids and experience flares of pain. This review article aims to present the role of oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate in the management of breakthrough pain in cancer patients. In particular, it is going to discuss the synthesis, clinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties, toxicity, and clinical efficacy of this novel agent.
Pharmaceutical care of the hospice patient offers unique challenges in the management of pain and other symptoms. Lessons learned in providing hospice care can be used in the care of nonterminal patients as well to optimize patient-specific care, regardless of care setting or life expectancy.
Fentanyl transdermal patches (FTPs) have been used for many years in the treatment armamentarium for chronic pain. By design, FTPs release drug into the skin at a constant rate and thereby provide drug in a fashion similar to continuous intravenous infusion without the disadvantages of a venous catheter and the constant presence of an analgesia pump. Pediatric patients may require doses of FTP other than the five commercially available strengths. Application of a partial FTP allows for more flexibility in dosing. Yet, very little information is provided in the literature to suggest a procedure for applying partial FTP. A technique of using a partially occluded FTP is presented in an effort to encourage further study of this and perhaps other techniques.
Breakthrough pain is a transitory flare of pain occurring in most cancer patients against a background of otherwise controlled persistent pain. Treatment of breakthrough pain is a challenging phenomenon. Oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate (Actiq, Cephalon, Inc, West Chester, PA), a new opioid formulation with a unique delivery system, reflects the characteristics of breakthrough pain (rapid onset of action and short duration), making it an effective treatment for cancer patients who already receive opioids and experience flares of pain. This review article aims to present the role of oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate in the management of breakthrough pain in cancer patients. In particular, it is going to discuss the synthesis, clinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties, toxicity, and clinical efficacy of this novel agent.
An 86-year-old white female was admitted to hospice care with lung cancer. Even with optimal medical management, she suffered from dyspnea and required opioid therapy. However, the patient had a true morphine and hydromorphone allergy. She was administered nebulized fentanyl for symptomatic relief of dyspnea with good effect and she did not experience any allergic response.
This article outlines the process that led to the introduction of the fentanyl lozenge for acute pain management. It starts with the historical context before discussing the recognition of an ongoing problem and then identifies the options that were considered. There follows a description of the pharmacology of fentanyl before describing the trial of concept that was conducted. This leads into an outline of the meetings and committees that had to be engaged with before the final acceptance and subsequent ushering in. The final section describes an option that was unsuccessful.
