IMPORTANCE: Allergic rhinitis affects an estimated 15% of the US population (approximately 50 million individuals) and is associated with the presence of asthma, eczema, chronic or recurrent sinusitis, cough, and both tension and migraine headaches. OBSERVATIONS: Allergic rhinitis occurs when disruption of the epithelial barrier allows allergens to penetrate the mucosal epithelium of nasal passages, inducing a T-helper type 2 inflammatory response and production of allergen-specific IgE. Allergic rhinitis typically presents with symptoms of nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, postnasal drainage, sneezing, and itching of the eyes, nose, and throat. In an international study, the most common symptoms of allergic rhinitis were rhinorrhea (90.38%) and nasal congestion (94.23%). Patients with nonallergic rhinitis present primarily with nasal congestion and postnasal drainage frequently associated with sinus pressure, ear plugging, muffled sounds and pain, and eustachian tube dysfunction that is less responsive to nasal corticosteroids. Patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis typically have physical examination findings of edematous and pale turbinates. Patients with perennial allergic rhinitis typically have erythematous and inflamed turbinates with serous secretions that appear similar to other forms of chronic rhinitis at physical examination. Patients with nonallergic rhinitis have negative test results for specific IgE aeroallergens. Intermittent allergic rhinitis is defined as symptoms occurring less than 4 consecutive days/week or less than 4 consecutive weeks/year. Persistent allergic rhinitis is defined as symptoms occurring more often than 4 consecutive days/week and for more than 4 consecutive weeks/year. Patients with allergic rhinitis should avoid inciting allergens. In addition, first-line treatment for mild intermittent or mild persistent allergic rhinitis may include a second-generation H1 antihistamine (eg, cetirizine, fexofenadine, desloratadine, loratadine) or an intranasal antihistamine (eg, azelastine, olopatadine), whereas patients with persistent moderate to severe allergic rhinitis should be treated initially with an intranasal corticosteroid (eg, fluticasone, triamcinolone, budesonide, mometasone) either alone or in combination with an intranasal antihistamine. In contrast, first-line therapy for patients with nonallergic rhinitis consists of an intranasal antihistamine as monotherapy or in combination with an intranasal corticosteroid. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Allergic rhinitis is associated with symptoms of nasal congestion, sneezing, and itching of the eyes, nose, and throat. Patients with allergic rhinitis should be instructed to avoid inciting allergens. Therapies include second-generation H1 antihistamines (eg, cetirizine, fexofenadine, desloratadine, loratadine), intranasal antihistamines (eg, azelastine, olopatadine), and intranasal corticosteroids (eg, fluticasone, triamcinolone, budesonide, mometasone) and should be selected based on the severity and frequency of symptoms and patient preference.
Antihistamines targeting the histamine H(1) receptor play an important role in improving and maintaining the quality of life of patients with allergic rhinitis. For more effective and safer use of second-generation drugs, which are recommended by various guidelines, a classification based on their detailed characteristics is necessary. Antihistamines for first-line therapy should not have central depressant/sedative activities. Sedative properties (drowsiness and impaired performance) are associated with the inhibition of central histamine neurons. Brain H(1) receptor occupancy (H(1)RO) is a useful index shown to be correlated with indices based on clinical findings. Antihistamines are classified into non-sedating (<20%), less-sedating (20(-)50%), and sedating (>/=50%) groups based on H(1)RO. Among the non-sedating group, fexofenadine and bilastine are classified into "non-brain-penetrating antihistamines" based on the H(1)RO. These two drugs have many common chemical properties. However, bilastine has more potent binding affinity to the H(1) receptor, and its action tends to last longer. In well-controlled studies using objective indices, bilastine does not affect psychomotor or driving performance even at twice the usual dose (20 mg). Upon selecting antihistamines for allergic rhinitis, various situations should be taken into our consideration. This review summarizes that the non-brain-penetrating antihistamines should be chosen for the first-line therapy of mild allergic rhinitis.
Second-generation histamine H(1) receptor antagonists were developed to provide efficacious treatment of allergic rhinitis (AR) and chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) while decreasing adverse effects associated with first-generation agents. When comparing the efficacy and safety profiles of the newest second-generation antihistamines - desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine - many pharmacological and clinical criteria must be considered. Most importantly, these elements should not be evaluated separately but, rather, as parts of a puzzle that create a whole picture. As a class, second-generation antihistamines are highly selective for the H(1) receptor. Some bind to it with high affinity, although there is marked heterogeneity among the various compounds. They have a limited effect on the CNS, and clinical studies have noted almost no significant drug-drug interactions in the agents studied. No major cytochrome P450 inhibition has been reported with desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine, and the bioavailability of desloratadine is minimally affected by drugs interfering with transporter molecules. Of the second-generation antihistamines, desloratadine has the greatest binding affinity for the H(1) receptor. The use of desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine is not associated with clinically relevant antimuscarinic effects. Desloratadine and fexofenadine do not impair cognitive or psychomotor functioning and are comparable with placebo in terms of somnolence. Based on these pharmacological characteristics, as well as clinical endpoints such as symptom scores, quality-of-life surveys, inflammatory cell counts and investigators' global evaluations, we conclude that desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine are all efficacious treatments for AR and CIU. However, differences among the antihistamines in relation to a lack of significant interaction with drug transporter molecules and somnolence in excess of placebo may provide some advantages for the overall profile of desloratadine compared with fexofenadine and levocetirizine.
Second-generation histamine H1 receptor antagonists (antihistamines) have been developed to reduce or eliminate the sedation and anticholinergic adverse effects that occur with older H1 receptor antagonists. This article evaluates second-generation antihistamines, including acrivastine, astemizole, azelastine, cetirizine, ebastine, fexofenadine, ketotifen, loratadine, mizolastine and terfenadine, for significant features that affect choice. In addition to their primary mechanism of antagonising histamine at the H1 receptor, these agents may act on other mediators of the allergic reaction. However, the clinical significance of activity beyond that mediated by histamine H1 receptor antagonism has yet to be demonstrated. Most of the agents reviewed are metabolised by the liver to active metabolites that play a significant role in their effect. Conditions that result in accumulation of astemizole, ebastine and terfenadine may prolong the QT interval and result in torsade de pointes. The remaining agents reviewed do not appear to have this risk. For allergic rhinitis, all agents are effective and the choice should be based on other factors. For urticaria, cetirizine and mizolastine demonstrate superior suppression of wheal and flare at the dosages recommended by the manufacturer. For atopic dermatitis, as adjunctive therapy to reduce pruritus, cetirizine, ketotifen and loratadine demonstrate efficacy. Although current evidence does not suggest a primary role for these agents in the management of asthma, it does support their use for asthmatic patients when there is coexisting allergic rhinitis, dermatitis or urticaria.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: According to current guidelines, oral antihistamines are the first-line treatment for chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU). Up-dosing antihistamines to 4-fold the licensed dose is recommended if control is not achieved. Such indications are based mainly on expert opinion. Objectives: To critically review and analyze clinical evidence on the efficacy and safety of higher-than-licensed dosage of second-generation oral antihistamines in the treatment of CSU. MATERIAL AND METHODS: A systematic literature review was performed following a sensitive search strategy. All articles published in PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library between 1961 and October 2018 were examined. Publications with CSU patients prescribed secondgeneration antihistamines in monotherapy compared with placebo, licensed dosages, and/or higher dosages were included. Articles were evaluated by peer reviewers. Quality was evaluated using the Jadad and Oxford scores. RESULTS: We identified 337 articles, of which 14 were included in the final evaluation (fexofenadine, 6; cetirizine, 2; levocetirizine and desloratadine, 1; levocetirizine, 1; rupatadine, 2; ebastine, 1; and bilastine, 1). Only 5 studies were placebo-controlled. The number of patients included ranged from 20 to 439. The observation lapse was </=16 weeks. High fexofenadine doses produced a significant dosedependent response and controlled urticaria in most patients. Cetirizine, levocetirizine, rupatadine, and bilastine were more effective in up-dosing. The most frequent adverse events were headache and drowsiness. CONCLUSION: The low quality and heterogeneity of the articles reviewed made it impossible to reach robust conclusions and reveal the need for large-scale randomized clinical trials.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has announced its intention to withdraw the approval of terfenadine (Seldane), terfenadine with pseudoephedrine (Seldane D), and generic versions of terfenadine. Before granting approval for the marketing of fexofenadine (Allegra), terfenadine's active metabolite, the FDA determined terfenadine's benefits outweight its risks, despite its, known potential for serious cardiac effects.
A patient with recurrent idiopathic urticaria reported exacerbations after treatment with cetirizine. Prick test to cetirizine was negative. Double-blind challenge tests with mizolastine, loratadine, fexofenadine, dexchlorpheniramine, ebastine, ketotifen, and placebo were negative, whereas hydroxyzine and its active metabolite, cetirizine, reproduced the urticaria. Identification of uncommon adverse reactions to H1 antihistamines is important, particularly because they may mimic the underlying disease.
A 40-year-old male medical student presented with urticarial vasculitis secondary to occupational formaldehyde exposure. Serum sickness and delayed pressure urticaria also featured prominently during his illness. Initial symptom control was achieved with oral prednisolone (25 mg/day tapered to zero over 2 weeks) and oral antihistamine therapy (fexofenadine 180 mg once daily, promethazine 20 mg once daily, ranitidine 150 mg twice daily); however, subsequent exposures to formaldehyde produced transient symptom flares that broke through the prednisolone cover. A complete recovery occurred only after strict elimination of all exposure to formaldehyde, both occupationally and in the home environment, was achieved.
H1-antihistamines are probably the most frequently used drugs in allergic diseases, with widely established efficacy, tolerance, and safety. We report a patient with urticaria due to ingestion of ebastine and fexofenadine. Skin prick tests, patch tests, and basophil activation tests with the implicated drugs and antihistamines from other families were negative. The oral challenges with the implicated antihistamines and other antihistamines tested were positive, but the patient tolerated an oral challenge with cetirizine. We present a patient with urticaria induced by different antihistamines in whom the diagnosis was established by oral challenge. The mechanism of sensitization remains unclear.
Concomitant administration of grapefruit juice can increase the plasma concentration of numerous drugs in humans and decrease the concentration of a few others. Such elevations of drug plasma concentrations have, on occasion, resulted in adverse clinical effects. Increased concentrations are primarily mediated by chemicals in grapefruit juice, which inhibit the CYP 3A4 drug-metabolizing enzyme in the small intestines. This inhibition decreases the first-pass metabolism of drugs using the CYP 3A4 intestinal system and increases the bioavailability and maximal plasma drug concentrations (Cmax) of the CYP 3A4 substrates. The effect of grapefruit juice on drug metabolism is most pronounced in drugs with a high first-pass metabolism (eg, felodipine, amiodarone), in which it inhibits the first-pass metabolism of the CYP 3A4 substrates leading to an increase in Cmax and area under the concentration time curve (AUC). The use of grapefruit juice with a few specific drugs (eg, fexofenadine, digoxin) may lower plasma drug concentrations by inhibiting drug absorption catalyzed by the organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP).
OBJECTIVES: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a global health problem. Almost 10%-25% of population worldwide is affected by AR. Oral/intranasal H1-antihistamine, decongestants, leukotriene receptor antagonists, and intranasal corticosteroids are the pillars in the management of AR. The combination therapy of montelukast with antihistaminic provides enhancing and complimentary effects, thereby reducing the symptoms effectively, but there are scanty data regarding the comparisons of combinations. Therefore, we aimed to compare the efficacy, safety, and cost-effectiveness of montelukast-levocetirizine and montelukast-fexofenadine combination in patients of AR. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy patients with AR participated in a prospective, randomized, double-blind, parallel, active-controlled, comparative 4-week trial. The patients between the age group of 18-65 years of either gender having moderate-severe intermittent or mild persistent AR were included in the study. The study inclusion criteria required the patients with total nasal symptom score (TNSS) of 5 or higher. The patients were randomly divided into two treatment groups with montelukast-levocetirizine (10 mg and 5 mg) in one group and montelukast-fexofenadine (10 mg and 120 mg) in another group. TNSS parameter was the main effectiveness parameter. RESULTS: Evaluation of TNSS revealed significant difference (P < 0.05) when compared from baseline to 4(th) week in both groups. The mean change of TNSS, i.e., 9.46 was significant (P < 0.05) in montelukast-fexofenadine group. The cost-effectiveness ratio was less in montelukast-levocetirizine group than in montelukast-fexofenadine group. CONCLUSION: The decrease in TNSS was more in montelukast-fexofenadine group, but the cost-effectiveness is more with montelukast-levocetirizine combination.
The nonsedating histamine H1 receptor antagonist fexofenadine is the active metabolite of terfenadine. It reduced the allergic response in animal models of allergy and did not prolong the QT interval (QTc) in dogs or rabbits at plasma concentrations many times higher than those seen after administration of therapeutic dosages. Similarly, relative to placebo, fexofenadine did not affect mean QTc in patients given dosages of up to 480 mg/day for 2 weeks or in volunteers who received up to 800 mg/day for 6 days or 240 mg/day for 12 months. In a double-blind clinical trial, oral fexofenadine 120 or 180mg once daily controlled symptoms in patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis as effectively as cetirizine. Other double-blind clinical trials showed that fexofenadine 40 to 240mg twice daily was significantly more effective than placebo. Fexofenadine 180 or 240mg once daily was significantly more effective than placebo in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria. The drug was well tolerated in these clinical trials, with an adverse event profile similar to that seen with placebo. The most common adverse events were headache, throat irritation, viral infection, nausea, dysmenorrhoea, drowsiness, dyspepsia and fatigue.
There continues to be a great deal of interest in the anti-asthmatic role of antihistamines. Antihistamines have recently been shown to have anti-inflammatory properties that are more extensive than simply the blocking of histamine receptors. For example, new evidence suggests that the suppression of cell adhesion molecule expression occurs with these drugs. The anti-inflammatory and anti-asthmatic effects of antihistamines have been evaluated in patients with both allergic asthma and rhinitis, given the established association between allergic inflammation of the upper and lower airways, with evidence to suggest that antihistamines have clinically relevant anti-asthmatic properties. As well as conferring benefits in asthma symptom control and the measurement of lung function, studies assessing the effect of histamine receptor antagonists on bronchial hyperresponsiveness suggest that there is bronchoprotection during both methacholine and mannitol challenges. Recently, there has also been considerable interest in the effect of combining an antihistamine with a leukotriene receptor antagonist. This combination has an anti-asthmatic effect that is greater than that of either drug given alone and may be comparable to inhaled corticosteroid therapy.
Chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) is a serious disorder that can greatly compromise quality of life. While H1 antihistamines are the accepted first-line treatment for CIU, older generations of these agents (e.g., hydroxyzine, diphenhydramine) are associated with anticholinergic and CNS effects, such as drowsiness and sedation, that can pose risks to patients, especially when driving. Second-generation agents available in the United States (U.S.) (e.g., cetirizine, desloratadine, fexofenadine, levocetirizine, loratadine) has greatly reduced these CNS effects, making them the current treatments of choice in CIU, but their potency and tolerability profiles vary. Differences in duration of in vivo receptor occupancy may affect the potency of H1 antihistamines. Levocetirizine appears to have greater in vivo H1 receptor occupancy compared with later generation H1 antihistamines, which may confer an advantageous efficacy/safety profile. This has been confirmed in a recent head-to-head study showing that levocetirizine was more effective than desloratadine in improving pruritus in CIU patients. Fexofenadine has been shown to have a low occupancy of H1 antihistamine receptors in the brain, which reduces the likelihood of sedation. More studies are required to further assess receptor occupancy and other factors that may differentiate the second-generation H1 antihistamines.
Fexofenadine is administered as a racemic mixture of (R)- and (S)-enantiomers. The plasma concentrations of (R)-fexofenadine in humans are about 1.5-fold higher than those of the (S)-enantiomer. Such differences in the pharmacokinetics between fexofenadine enantiomers are likely to be dependent on stereoselectivity for af fi nity to drug-transporters. Areas covered: This review focuses on elucidation of differences in clinical pharmacokinetics between fexofenadine enantiomers. Expert opinion: Differences in pharmacokinetics between fexofenadine enantiomers were caused by organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP) 2B1, with a minor contribution from P-glycoprotein (P-gp). In vitro studies using OATP2B1 cRNA showed that (R)-fexofenadine uptake into oocytes is greater than (S)-enantiomer uptake. P-gp inducers, carbamazepine, and inhibitors such as itraconazole and verapamil show greater effects on the pharmacokinetics of (S)-fexofenadine. Apple juice and grape fruit juice, OATP2B1 inhibitors, significantly decrease the exposure of both fexofenadine enantiomers, particularly the (S)-enantiomer, but do not change the t(1/2). Rifampicin significantly increases plasma concentrations of both enantiomers through inhibition of OATP1B3, whereas enantioselectivity of fexofenadine uptake by OATP1B3-expressing cells has not been observed. Combinations of multiple transporters such as OATP2B1 and P-gp facilitate enantioselective disposition of fexofenadine. Drug-transporters appear to be capable of chiral discrimination for transport of drugs with an asymmetric center.
In children, as in adults, H1-antagonists are useful in the treatment of allergic rhinoconjunctivitis. Level 1 evidence for their efficacy in this disorder has been obtained in many well-designed pediatric studies. The widespread use of H1-antagonists in upper respiratory tract infections or otitis media in children is not supported by a strong scientific rationale. H1-antagonists are not harmful in children with asthma and, indeed, may have some beneficial effects in children with mild asthma. Their role in delaying or preventing asthma from developing in high-risk infants and toddlers is currently an important area of clinical investigation. The evidence base for their use in children with urticaria or atopic dermatitis still contains large gaps. First-generation H1-antagonists are presumed to be safe for use in infants and children. While they have undoubtedly been administered without apparent harm to millions in this age group, they impair CNS function far more commonly than is generally realized. Their use should be restricted to two uncommon situations: children with urticaria or atopic dermatitis whose pruritus is so severe that the sedation produced by an old H1-antagonist, such as hydroxyzine, is a benefit rather than a risk; and children with anaphylaxis who require intravenous diphenhydramine as adjunctive treatment to epinephrine and other modalities. Apart from these exceptions, in patients of all ages, second-generation H1-antagonists free from CNS adverse effects are clearly the medications of choice. Pediatric formulations of the new H1-antagonists cetirizine, fexofenadine, and loratadine are now available for use.
Chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) can have a profound effect on patient quality of life (QOL). Ideally, any therapy used to treat CIU should be effective across a wide range of doses without causing unwanted side effects; a wide therapeutic window allows the physician to tailor treatment to the individual. Oral H1 antihistamines are the mainstay of therapy for CIU, but agents within this class diverge in their individual therapeutic indices. The literature was reviewed to compare the currently available oral H1 antihistamines regarding their efficacy and safety at a wide range of doses. If sedation and cognitive impairment are considered relevant to treatment selection due to their effect on QOL and safety, then newer-generation agents should be selected over older-generation antihistamines. There are few well-controlled clinical studies in which newer-generation agents have been directly compared. Moreover, there are no evidence-based data demonstrating statistical superiority of one newer-generation agent over another in the treatment of CIU. However, of the newer agents, those that are labelled nonsedating at recommended doses (fexofenadine, loratadine, and desloratadine) should be selected over cetirizine. In cases where the physician judges that a higher-than-recommended dose should be prescribed, or when the patient is likely to take a higher dose, the relative safety profile of these agents demands detailed consideration.
Olopatadine is one of the second-generation H1 antihistamines that were used for treating allergic disorders initially in Asia, and now also in Western countries. Whereas several trials compared the efficacy on chronic urticaria among second-generation H1 antihistamines, no study has directly compared the clinical efficacy between olopatadine and other H1 antihistamines in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU). In this study, we address this issue for the first time and conclude that olopatadine is a good candidate for the treatment of CIU.
Microdose studies using non-radiolabeled compounds enable assessment of the clinical pharmacokinetics of drug candidates in humans without the need to synthesize radiolabeled compounds. We have demonstrated that the quantification limits of many drugs measured by LC-MS/MS are low enough to allow estimation of their pharmacokinetic parameters following administration of a microdose. Our previous microdose studies with LC-MS/MS demonstrated the linear pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine between microdoses and therapeutic doses. We also obtained time profiles of plasma concentrations of nicardipine and its multiple metabolites following administration of a microdose. A significant advantage of using non-radiolabeled compounds is the ability to perform cassette microdose studies. By administering multiple drug candidates to the same subject, we can select compounds with appropriate pharmacokinetic properties simultaneously. We can also clarify major factors dominating the pharmacokinetics of drug candidates by cocktail microdosing of the test compounds and probe substrates with or without specific inhibitors for enzymes/transporters.
The number of diagnostic positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) procedures performed in the USA and worldwide is rapidly increasing. Although the benefits of these procedures are obvious, the increasing use of radiopharmaceuticals requires a better understanding of potential adverse affects and their proper management. We present herein the first report of an allergic reaction to fluorodeoxyglucose in the setting of repeated PET/CT scans for restaging purposes in a patient with pyriform sinus cancer.
