Incidence of systemic candidiasis is increasing with improvement in the survival of high risk neonates who undergo multiple interventions. Therapies available to treat systemic fungal infection are few and have several drawbacks. Fluconazole, a new triazole derivative may be a useful anti-fungal agent in view of its excellent oral absorption, easy administration, low plasma protein affinity, long half-life, high concentrations in urine and CSF, minimal adverse reactions, wide spectrum of anti-fungal activity and high specificity for fungal cytochrome P450 system. Its utility in neonates and children with candidiasis has already been documented by few case reports and studies.
In many instances a report from the clinical laboratory indicating candiduria represents colonization or procurement contamination of the specimen and not invasive candidiasis. Even if infection of the urinary tract by Candida species can be confirmed, antifungal therapy is not always warranted. Further investigation may reveal predisposing factors, which if corrected or treated, result in the resolution of the infection. For those with symptomatic urinary tract infections (UTIs), the choice of antifungal agent will depend upon the clinical status of the patient, the site of infection, and the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the agent. Because of its safety, achievement of high concentrations in the urine, and availability in both an oral and intravenous formulation, fluconazole is preferred for the treatment of Candida UTIs. Flucytosine is concentrated in urine and has broad activity against Candida spp, but its use requires caution because of toxicity. Low-dose amphotericin B may be useful for Candida UTIs in selected patients. The role of echinocandins and azoles that do not achieve measurable concentrations in the urine is not clear. Small case series note some success, but failures have also occurred. Irrigation of the bladder with antifungal agents has limited utility. However, with fungus balls, irrigation of the renal pelvis through a nephrostomy tube can be useful in combination with systemic antifungal agents.
Cutaneous candidiasis is a common skin disease, and several treatments have been investigated within the last fifty years. Yet, systematic reviews are lacking, and evidence-based topical and systemic treatment strategies remain unclear. Thus, the aim of this review was to summarize efficacy and adverse effects of topical and oral therapies for cutaneous candidiasis in all age groups. Two individual researchers searched PubMed and EMBASE for 'cutaneous candidiasis' and 'cutaneous candidiasis treatment', 'intertrigo', 'diaper dermatitis' and 'cheilitis'. Searches were limited to 'English language', 'clinical trials' and 'human subjects', and prospective clinical trials published in abstracts or articles were included. In total, 149 studies were identified, of which 44 were eligible, comprising 41 studies of 19 topical therapies and four studies of three systemic therapies for cutaneous candidiasis. Topical therapies were investigated in infants, children, adolescents, adults and elderly, while studies of systemic therapies were limited to adolescents and adults. Clotrimazole, nystatin and miconazole were the most studied topical drugs and demonstrated similar efficacy with complete cure rates of 73%-100%. Single-drug therapy was as effective as combinations of antifungal, antibacterial and topical corticosteroid. Four studies investigated systemic therapy, and oral fluconazole demonstrated similar efficacy to oral ketoconazole and topical clotrimazole. Limitations to this review were mainly that heterogeneity of studies hindered meta-analyses. In conclusions, clotrimazole, nystatin and miconazole were the most studied topical drugs and demonstrated equal good efficacy and mild adverse effects similar to combinations of antifungal, antibacterial and topical corticosteroids. Oral fluconazole was as effective as topical clotrimazole and is the only commercially available evidence-based option for systemic treatment of cutaneous candidiasis.
Cryptococcosis is an opportunistic mycosis that mainly affects immunosuppressed patients. The treatment is a combination of three antifungal agents: amphotericin B, 5-flucytosine and fluconazole. However, these drugs have many disadvantages, such as high nephrotoxicity, marketing bans in some countries and fungal resistance. One of the solutions to find possible new drugs is pharmacological repositioning. This work presents repositioned drugs as an alternative for new antifungal therapies for cryptococcosis. All the studies here were performed in vitro or in animal models, except for sertraline, which reached phase III in humans. There is still no pharmacological repositioning approval for cryptococcosis in humans, though this review shows the potential of repurposing as a rapid approach to finding new agents to treat cryptococcosis.
Fluconazole is a new systemic azole antifungal agent, with the imidazole group substituted by a triazole, presenting a decrease in lipophilicity, soluble in water, weakly bound to plasma proteins, and a wide range of formulations. The time to reach steady-state with a once daily dosage is approximately 7 days. Distribution of fluconazole is extensive and even throughout the tissues, and the drug circulates as a free drug. Half-life elimination is approximately 30 h. Indications are given for fungal infections in AIDS patients and mycoses.
QUESTION: I have a patient with persistent breast and nipple thrush. Other therapies have failed, so I have decided to treat her with a loading dose of 400 mg of oral fluconazole followed by 100 mg twice daily for at least 2 weeks. Is there any need for her to interrupt breastfeeding during this treatment? ANSWER: Available data regarding fluconazole use during breastfeeding are reassuring. Fluconazole is also used in the treatment of fungal diseases in infants and has a good safety profile. Therefore, there is no need to interrupt breastfeeding when a mother is treated with fluconazole.
Onychomycosis has been treated for years with oral antifungal agents, and more recently in the United States with a topical nail lacquer. Griseofulvin was the first significant oral agent available to manage onychomycosis. The introduction of the azoles (ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole) and the allylamine, terbinafine, led to improved cure rates and a broad spectrum of activity. Pharmacokinetic studies have shown that the newer oral agents penetrate the nail within approximately one to two weeks after the start of therapy and remain for several months after the end of treatment. This article reviews the oral antifungal agents used to treat onychomycosis.
There are no specialized formulations of antifungal drugs in Japan which are prepared for children. Modification of the therapeutic doses by age groups or by body weight of the patients from the recommended doses for adults as well as special precautions against side effects are needed for pediatric use. Reports focusing on the side effects of topical and systemic antifungal drugs are reviewed. All the newly introduced systemic drugs, such as fluconazole, itraconazole and terbinafine, have been well tolerated during the treatment of fungal infections of neonates and infants.
This pharmacoepidemiology study uses Swedish and Norwegian registry data to investigate associations between fluconazole use during pregnancy and subsequent stillbirth and neonatal death.
Antifungal therapy, especially with the azoles, could promote the incidence of less susceptible isolates of Cryptococcus neoformans and C. gattii species complexes (SC), mostly in developing countries. Given that these species affect mostly the immunocompromised host, the infections are severe and difficult to treat. This review encompasses the following topics: 1. infecting species and their virulence, 2. treatment, 3. antifungal susceptibility methods and available categorical endpoints, 4. genetic mechanisms of resistance, 5. clinical resistance, 6. fluconazole minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs), clinical outcome, 7. environmental influences, and 8. the relevance of host factors, including pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) parameters, in predicting the clinical outcome to therapy. As of now, epidemiologic cutoff endpoints (ECVs/ECOFFs) are the most reliable antifungal resistance detectors for these species, as only one clinical breakpoint (amphotericin B and C. neoformans VNI) is available.
The administration of fluconazole is commonly used in both inpatient and outpatient settings for the management of candidiasis infection. Although it is associated with a relatively safe side effect profile, some patients experience adverse effects associated with increased morbidity. We describe 1 such patient, a 42-year-old woman with a history of severe eczema who developed fluconazole-induced type 1 Kounis syndrome. Review of literature indicates that this as the first case reported of fluconazole-induced type 1 Kounis syndrome.
Invasive mycoses continue to be a major problem in the growing population of immunosuppressed patients. More antifungal agents are now available than ever. The options are many, with more efficacies and less toxicity than in the past. These agents differ in terms of spectrum of activity, pharmacologic properties, and indications. In this article we discuss the three major classes of antifungal agents: the polyens, the triazoles, and the echinocandins. The emphasis is placed on their clinical use, side effects, drug interactions, and other practical issues.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a rare, life-threatening mucocutaneous condition, which may occur as an adverse reaction to a number of medications. The anitifungal agent, fluconazole, has been associated with TEN in limited reports, mainly in adults with HIV infection. We describe the case of a neonate with liver disease who developed TEN, presumably induced by fluconazole.
Patients undergoing therapy for metastatic malignancies were randomly assigned to receive fluconazole or placebo as antifungal prophylaxis. Oropharyngeal candidiasis developed in 28% of 54 evaluable patients receiving placebo but in only 2% of 58 evaluable patients receiving fluconazole (P = .0003). Among patients receiving placebo, oropharyngeal candidiasis (thrush) occurred in 30% of those receiving antibiotic therapy and in 44% of those receiving adrenal corticosteroid therapy. Oropharyngeal candidiasis developed in 54% of the placebo patients who were colonized by Candida sp at the onset of prophylaxis. Fluconazole proved to be effective for prophylaxis of oropharyngeal candidiasis in susceptible patients and was well tolerated.
As both humans and fungi are eukaryotic organisms, antifungal agents affect their cellular metabolism. Thus, a relatively few antifungals with minimal toxicity and side-effects are available compared with a plethora of antibacterials. These agents currently prescribed in dentistry belong to two major groups, the polyenes (nystatin and amphotericin B) and the azoles (imidazoles and triazoles). A newly recognized phenomenon known as the post-antifungal effect implies that antifungals, even at sub-therapeutic concentrations, may suppress the virulent attributes of yeasts, especially intra-orally where topical drug levels fluctuate dramatically during dosing intervals.
The objective of the present study was to formulate fluconazole transdermal spray for obtaining modified drug transport using eutectic mixture, ethyl cellulose, polyethylene oxide and alcohol. The formulated products were characterized. The selection of the optimized batch was done considering the results of drug transport in the first hour, the time required for 90% drug transport, viscosity and spray angle of the formulations. The inclusion of eutectic mixture, consisting of equal parts of camphor and menthol, showed improved drug transport through rat skin. The optimized batch exhibited larger mean zone of inhibition (antifungal activity), efficient in vivo activity and short term stability.
Pulmonary fungal infections in non-neutropenic ICU-patients are not frequent, however, their incidence is increasing with high morbidity and mortality, leading to prolonged stay in ICU wards and to excessive costs dependent on difficult delayed diagnosis. Candida as well as Aspergillus spp. are most important pathogens, but also species of less frequent genera must be taken into account, such as Fusarium, Scedosporium, Cryptococcus and others. Newly evaluated antimycotic agents, such as voriconazole and caspofungin, apart from fluconazole, are not only new options, but must be regarded as agents of choice in non-neutropenic patients.
This review covers the epidemiology, pathogenesis, risk factors, classification, clinical manifestations of candidiasis gastrointestinal, diagnosis and therapies.
Fixed drug eruption (FDE) is mainly characterized by skin lesions that recur at the same anatomic sites upon repeated exposures to an offending agent. It represents the most common cutaneous adverse drug reaction pattern in Indian patients. Here, we report an FDE to fluconazole.
Fluconazole is a recently approved agent for the treatment of certain fungal infections. Based on available studies, the drug is clearly effective in oropharyngeal candidiasis in immunosuppressed hosts. Current evidence suggests it may be more efficacious than other azole drugs for oropharyngeal disease. It is probably also effective in other infections due to Candida species, but controlled studies are lacking. Fluconazole is also efficacious in the treatment of cryptococcal meningitis, but recent reports question its use as initial therapy in HIV-infected patients with this illness. The drug, however, is clearly more effective than amphotericin B in the suppression of cryptococcal meningitis in AIDS patients and is the treatment of choice in this situation.
