INTRODUCTION: Depression is a multifactorial mood disorder with a high prevalence worldwide. Until now, treatments for depression have focused on the inhibition of monoaminergic reuptake sites, which augment the bioavailability of monoamines in the CNS. Advances in drug discovery have widened the therapeutic options with the synthesis of so-called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as fluoxetine. AREAS COVERED: The aim of this case history is to describe and discuss the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles of fluoxetine, including its acute effects and the adaptive changes induced after long-term treatment. Furthermore, the authors review the effect of fluoxetine on neuroplasticity and adult neurogenesis. In addition, the article summarises the preclinical behavioural data available on fluoxetine's effects on depressive-like behaviour, anxiety and cognition as well as its effects on other diseases. Finally, the article describes the seminal studies validating the antidepressant effects of fluoxetine. EXPERT OPINION: Fluoxetine is the first selective SSRI that has a recognised clinical efficacy and safety profile. Since its discovery, other molecules that mimic its mechanism of action have been developed, commencing a new age in the treatment of depression. Fluoxetine has also demonstrated utility in the treatment of other disorders for which its prescription has now been approved.
Fluoxetine is a new antidepressant which enhances serotoninergic neurotransmission through potent and selective inhibition of neuronal reuptake of serotonin. Metabolism by N-desmethylation occurs in man yielding desmethylfluoxetine, which also inhibits serotonin reuptake. Both the parent compound and metabolite possess elimination half-lives of several days facilitating the maintenance of steady-state plasma concentrations during long term treatment. Fluoxetine has overall therapeutic efficacy comparable with imipramine, amitriptyline and doxepin in patients with unipolar depression treated for 5 to 6 weeks, although it may be less effective than tricyclic antidepressants in relieving sleep disorders in depressed patients. Geriatric patients also responded as well to fluoxetine as to doxepin. The symptomatic improvement in patients with unipolar depression during short term fluoxetine treatment has been satisfactorily maintained when therapy was extended for at least 6 months: the relapse rate was low and similar to that of imipramine. Preliminary data have shown that patients with bipolar depression gained similar therapeutic benefit from fluoxetine or imipramine. Other preliminary trials have indicated that fluoxetine may be useful in obsessive-compulsive disorders. Usual doses of fluoxetine cause significantly fewer anticholinergic-type side effects than tricyclic antidepressants. Nausea, nervousness and insomnia are the most frequently reported fluoxetine-related adverse effects, but these have usually not been severe. Therapeutic doses of fluoxetine do not affect cardiac conduction intervals in patients without pre-existing cardiovascular disease and fluoxetine has been relatively safe in the small number of patients who have taken overdoses. It has not been clearly established whether some types of depression may respond more readily to fluoxetine than other antidepressants, and its overall therapeutic efficacy has not been compared with other second generation antidepressants. Thus, with its different and perhaps improved side effect profile compared with older tricyclic antidepressants, fluoxetine offers properties that could be used to advantage in many patients with depression.
In seven years, Prozac has become a social phenomenon as well as a medical treatment. This paper reviews the background of the Prozac controversy and summarizes the current psychiatric and medical uses of the drug. Prozac and the other selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors have been determined to be safe and effective treatment for depression. Physicians are sometimes asked to prescribe the drug for inconsequential reasons, but serious depressions are seen frequently in general medical practice. Physicians thus need a high level of awareness and the capability to treat depression, a major public health problem.
Serotonin syndrome usually occurs after treatment with monoamine oxydase inhibitors and drugs that enhance serotoninergic transmission. Serotonin agents, such as Proza, are commonly prescribed drugs; therefore, the serotonin syndrome appears more frequently than before. Clinicians must be able to prevent, recognize, and treat this syndrome in their practice. This review summarizes the literature of case reports of patients who developed the serotonin syndrome.
Fluoxetine is a serotonin-specific antidepressant approved in 1987 by the Food and Drug Administration for treatment of depression. In this article, information will be reviewed concerning fluoxetine's pharmacokinetics and relation to blood levels and clinical response, to use in geriatrics, to use in medical illness, and to drug interactions.
OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the literature on the use of psychotropic drugs in pregnancy and lactation. METHOD: Medline search yielded more than five hundred titles. Articles were reviewed and ninety-one were selected for reference. RESULTS: Fetal physiology and teratogenicity are discussed and the effects of specific drugs on the fetus and newborn are presented. When possible, recommendations for use or non-use are presented. CONCLUSIONS: Though no controlled studies have ever been done in pregnant women to truly prove their safety, it appears that most, but not all, current psychotropic drugs appear fairly safe for use in pregnancy.
The relatively long half-life of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine has allowed the development of a delayed-release (enteric-coated) formulation containing 90 mg fluoxetine per capsule for once-weekly oral administration. The cumulative relapse rate in patients switched to once-weekly fluoxetine 90 mg for 25 weeks (after responding to 13 weeks of fluoxetine 20 mg/day) was similar to that in patients continuing to receive fluoxetine 20 mg/day and significantly lower than seen in patients switched to placebo. The efficacy of the once-weekly formulation was also similar to that of the daily formulation in other assessment parameters (modified 17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression, Clinical Global Impressions - Severity of Illness Scale). Patient compliance (measured using an electronically monitored tablet bottle) was maintained at 87.5% in evaluable patients receiving once-weekly fluoxetine 90 mg for 12 weeks from a baseline of 85.4% after responding to 4 weeks of fluoxetine 20 mg/day; in contrast, compliance declined significantly (from 87.3% at baseline to 79.4%; p < 0.001) in patients continuing to receive 20 mg/day for 12 weeks. Once-weekly fluoxetine is well tolerated, with a tolerability profile similar to that of the immediate-release formulation.
A patient treated with fluoxetin for a manic depressive disorder developed pulmonary inflammatory nodules with noncaseating giant cell granulomas, interstitial pneumonia and non-necrotizing vasculitis, whilst remaining asymptomatic. A progressive resolution of pulmonary nodules occurred after withdrawal of the offending agent, and the chest radiograph returned to normal in 9 months. The diagnosis was assessed by an open lung biopsy.
A case of fluoxetine induced dyskinesia in an elderly woman with previous use of low dose haloperidol is described. In contrast to neuroleptic induced tardive dyskinesia it was characterised by a rapid onset after commencing fluoxetine and rapid resolution on cessation. In the case discussion we describe other cases of fluoxetine induced extrapyramidal syndromes and possible mechanisms.
Selective 5-HT (serotonin) reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) lack many of the adverse side-effects of older antidepressants. One of these compounds, fluoxetine (Prozac), has acquired manifest public awareness that is not evident with other SSRIs. Here, Clare Stanford compares the basic pharmacology of SSRIs to determine whether fluoxetine has any atypical features, and thus provide scientific justification for the attention focused on this compound. Ironically, fluoxetine might be distinctive in that it is the least selective SSRI and has marked effects on catecholamine function in the brain.
Although the literature appears to demonstrate the efficacy of standard antidepressant medications for the short-term treatment of patients with minor depression, they are not widely prescribed. In comparison, psychotherapy is generally recommended, but without convincing data to support this conviction. We, therefore, advocate successive trials with antidepressants in any depressed patient, particularly if they have failed to benefit from psychotherapy or other supportive measures for three months.
Depression often goes unrecognized and untreated in older adults, in part because of its atypical presentation and the comorbid medical conditions in this population. Depression may coexist with dementia and is more often seen in patients with certain medical illnesses. Drug therapy is effective in treating depression in 65 to 75% of older patients. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are often used in this population because of their proven efficacy, safety, and tolerability. The most common side effects of SSRIs are GI disturbances and headaches, which may be minimized by slow dose escalation. Compared with younger adults, the elderly generally require smaller doses but show a similar time course of response to anti-depressant therapy.
Outside the context of overdose and serotonin syndrome, seizures and myoclonic movements attributed to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are rare and poorly documented. We present a 77-year-old man, with no history of epilepsy, presenting in the emergency department with whole body jerks since that morning. Two days earlier, due to a prescription mistake, he was started on paroxetine 20 mg instead of his usual fluoxetine 20 mg. The patient's electroencephalogram (EEG), performed in the emergency department, revealed a bilateral synchronous parieto-occipital fast spike activity pattern, which correlated consistently with negative myoclonus. Two days after stopping paroxetine, the patient presented no seizures and no abnormalities in the EEG. We present an EEG documented case of drug-induced seizures, with a bilateral parieto-occipital pattern, secondary to paroxetine intake. A hyperexcitability of the primary somatosensory cortex inhibiting primary motor cortex output could explain the electroclinical correlation.
Within the past decade the field of psychiatry has rediscovered the neuropsychiatric syndrome of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Although excellently described over 150 years ago, for many years OCD was thought to be rare, untreatable, and to arise from hidden psychodynamic conflicts. All of these earlier ideas now appear to be wrong. Occurring in approximately 2% of adults, OCD consists of recurrent intrusive thoughts (obsessions) or senseless repetitive actions (compulsions). Although the aetiology of OCD remains unclear, recent neuro-imaging studies implicate the basal ganglia and frontal cortex as crucial structures in the pathogenesis of OCD. Genetic studies demonstrate a clear genetic component to OCD and an interesting link with chronic motor tics and the Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome. Although a true cure for the disorder remains elusive, most OCD symptoms respond well to treatment with 5HT reuptake inhibitors. The phenomenology and aetiology of OCD will be reviewed, with particular emphasis placed on the proper pharmacological treatment of this sometimes crippling disorder.
Fluoxetine is a relatively new antidepressant, reported to have minimal side-effects. Seizures associated with fluoxetine therapy are uncommon. The five cases reported so far are reviewed. A case of fluoxetine induced seizures, in a person with Down syndrome, is described.
The case of a 21-year-old man with severe developmental disabilities, ring chromosome 22 and rapid-cycling bipolar illness is presented. This is the first reported occurrence of mood disorder in a person with ring chromosome 22. Previously published case reports describing behavioural problems associated with this chromosome disorder suggest that severe hyperactivity is typical and that affected individuals may have an excited mood state. These symptoms are consistent with atypical bipolar disorder and raise the possibility that ring chromosome 22 increases the risk for atypical bipolar disorder.
Fluoxetine, a new serotonin uptake blocking antidepressant, was compared with amitriptyline in a double-blind study. Patients were diagnosed as having major depression, according to DSM-III criteria, when interviewed with the Diagnostic Interview Schedule. There was significant improvement in patient and observer ratings of depression in both groups, with no difference between groups. Recent memory improved significantly in the fluoxetine group but not in the amitriptyline group. Numbers of patients reporting side-effects were similar but the profiles of side-effects were different, with more patients on amitriptyline reporting anticholinergic and intolerable side-effects.
A 6-week multicenter, double-blind, controlled study comparing the therapeutic efficacy of two antidepressant drugs, trazodone and fluoxetine, was conducted. The hematocrit, hemoglobin, red blood cell count, serum cholesterol, serum calcium, and serum albumin levels were all significantly decreased after six weeks of trazodone treatment. Similar findings were not obvious for the fluoxetine treatment group. Trazodone caused the development of a pseudoanemia in 36% of the trazodone treatment patients compared with 20% of the fluoxetine treatment patients. The anemia was not regarded as clinically significant. Of the decreases in the patients' chemistries, only the decrease in cholesterol could not be reconciled.
Animal models exhibiting sensitivity to chronic, but not acute, antidepressant treatment are greatly needed for studying the neural mechanisms of the antidepressant response. Although several models of acute antidepressant effects provide excellent tools for antidepressant discovery, they do not permit investigation into their therapeutic effects, which require several weeks of treatment to emerge. The inhibition of feeding produced by novelty, termed 'hyponeophagia', provides an anxiety-related measure that is sensitive to the effects of chronic, but not acute or subchronic, antidepressant treatment. This review evaluates the value of hyponeophagia-based tests as tools for investigating the neurobiology of the therapeutic response to antidepressant treatment. Criteria for the development and validation of animal models used to study neurobiological mechanisms of the antidepressant response are presented. Methodological considerations affecting the reliability, specificity, and ease of use of hyponeophagia-based models are also discussed. Lastly, we present a newly revised hyponeophagia paradigm, called the novelty-induced hypophagia (NIH) test, which attempts to maximize the predictive validity and practicality of the test. The NIH paradigm provides a promising new model for investigations into the neurobiology underlying the antidepressant response.
The emergence of suicidal ideation has been noted in some case studies, where fluoxetine administration appears to be the precipitating agent. However, these observational claims are not supported by the clinical trial literature. A review of some of the trials and the case histories is followed by an assessment of the evidence, and possible explanations for the discrepancy. It is concluded that a definite link between fluoxetine and emerging suicidal ideation cannot be ascertained, but that further research is indicated. Vigilance in prescribing any antidepressant medication, including fluoxetine, is recommended.
