Three double-blind crossover trials were used to study the effects of single doses of flurbiprofen at night on pain at night, duration of morning stiffness and sleep disturbance in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. Flurbiprofen (150 mg) was shown to be superior to placebo and 150 mg was no more effective than 100 mg. Serum levels of the drug were significantly higher with 150 mg but did not correlate with clinical effects.
Obesity is one of the major risk factors of metabolic syndrome, such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes. Leptin exerts an anti-obesity effect through the Ob-Rb leptin receptor, which is mainly expressed on hypothalamic neuronal cells. Recent evidence indicated that one of the mechanisms of obesity may be the development of leptin resistance. In the present review, we discuss the mechanisms of leptin resistance in obesity, focusing on endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We previously found that flurbiprofen is a candidate drug for attenuating ER stress and the subsequent development of leptin resistance. We will discuss a possible pharmacological strategy for treating obesity by ameliorating ER stress.
A multi-centre open study of flurbiprofen was started in 1971 to provide regular clinical and laboratory data on patients with a variety of arthritic conditions. To date, 1220 patients have received the drug in a dosage varying from 75 mg to 400 mg daily. Flurbiprofen has been shown to be effective in relieving symptoms in the degenerative and inflammatory arthritides and side-effects have not proved a problem. Patients aged 65 years and over appear to tolerate the drug as well as their younger counterparts, an important finding in a group of patients notoriously intolerant of many drugs.
We reviewed the literature on 7 investigational nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): fenbufen, flurbiprofen, tiaprofenic acid, diclofenac, fenclofenac, etodolac and proquazone. These drugs all appear to be at least as effective as currently marketed NSAIDs. Toxicity reported with these newer agents is similar to that seen with other drugs in this class, with gastrointestinal complaints being most commonly reported. The frequency of gastritis and the extent of gastrointestinal microbleeding are less than what occur with aspirin therapy. Fenclofenac may affect thyroid function tests, an effect not noted with other NSAIDs. Proquazone and fenclofenac may have some effect on immunologic function similar to those of slow-acting antirheumatic drugs. These drugs decrease immunoglobulins, rheumatoid factor and C-reactive protein. The place for these drugs in the management of rheumatic diseases has yet to be defined. They may prove to be more beneficial than currently marketed drugs for some patients.
BACKGROUND: Alimentary mucositis is a significant complication of cancer therapy, with important clinical and economic implications. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In June 2005, the Mucositis Study Group of the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer/International Society for Oral Oncology conducted an evidence-based review of the literature on alimentary mucositis. The goal of this literature review was to update previously published guidelines for the management of mucositis. RESULTS: This article reports the findings of the subgroup charged with reviewing the literature related to anti-inflammatory interventions. Considerable preclinical and clinical evidence suggests that the use of anti-inflammatory agents may be a promising approach to reduce the severity of mucositis. However, there was not enough evidence to support any new guidelines advocating the use of any specific anti-inflammatory intervention. CONCLUSION: Thus, there is a need for well-designed clinical trials evaluating the use of anti-inflammatory agents in the management of mucositis.
An open study was carried out in 40 elderly patients suffering from osteoarthrosis of the hip to assess the effectiveness of 200 mg flurbiprofen daily, fiven either in tablet or liquid suspension form, over a period of 4 weeks. Statistical evaluation of the results in the 19 patients admitted to analysis showed that flurbiprofen produced significant improvement in daytime and overnight pain, and did not impair their mental status, as assessed on a modified Goldfarb scale. No significant differences were found between the response of the two groups, except for severity of night pain. Fourteen of the 19 patients included in the analysis reported side-effects, as did 18 of the 21 patients who were excluded. Only 7 patients (4 on tablets, 3 on liquid), however, were withdrawn from the trial for this reason.
Systemic or topical administration of corticosteroids may produce a rise in intraocular pressure (IOP). Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAI drugs) are alternate therapy for ocular inflammatory disease. Flurbiprofen, a new NSAI drug, was tested in double-masked fashion to delineate its effect on IOP. Flurbiprofen did not alter IOP in known high corticosteroid responders nor did it block corticosteroid-induced ocular hypertension.
Polymeric nanoparticle suspensions were prepared from Eudragit RS100R and RL100R polymer resins and loaded with flurbiprofen (FLU), with the aim at improving the availability of the drug at an intra-ocular level for the prevention of the myosis induced during extracapsular cataract surgery. Nanosuspensions were prepared by a quasi-emulsion solvent diffusion technique using different formulation parameters (drug-to-polymer ratio, initial polymer concentration, agitation speed, etc.). The resulting nanoparticles showed mean sizes around 100 nm and a fixed positive charge (zeta-potential around +40/+60 mV). Stability tests after mid-time storage (4 degrees C or room temperature) or freeze-drying were carried out to optimise a possible final pharmaceutical preparation. In vitro, dissolution tests showed a controlled release profile of FLU from the nanoparticles. In vivo anti-inflammatory efficacy was assessed in the rabbit eye after induction of an ocular trauma (paracentesis). FLU-loaded nanosuspensions did not show toxicity on ocular tissues. Moreover, an inhibition of the miotic response to the surgical trauma comparable to a control eye-drop formulation was obtained, even though an actual lower concentration of free drug in the conjunctival sac was achieved from the nanoparticle system. Drug levels in the aqueous humour were also higher after application of the nanosuspensions.
We report a case of biopsy-proven acute tubulointerstitial nephritis associated with a second course of flurbiprofen, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug of the propionic acid class. The clinical presentation and course was consistent with acute tubulointerstitial nephritis due to these agents.
A series of 4'-OH flurbiprofen Mannich base derivatives were designed, synthesized and evaluated as potential multifunctional agents for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. The biological screening results indicated that most of these derivatives exhibited good multifunctional activities. Among them, compound 8n demonstrated the best inhibitory effects on self-induced Abeta(1-42) aggregation (65.03% at 25.0 muM). Moreover, this representative compound also exhibited good antioxidant activity, biometal chelating ability and anti-neuroinflammatory activity in vitro. Furthermore, compound 8n displayed appropriate blood-brain barrier permeability. These multifunctional properties highlight compound 8n as promising candidate for further development of multi-functional drugs against AD.
Flurbiprofen pharmacokinetics were studied in 15 normal male subjects after four oral doses. Plasma levels of total (bound + free) drug were monitored for 48 h and urine was collected for 96 h after the doses. All subjects demonstrated linear relationships between administered dose and total flurbiprofen AUC, indicating that oral clearance is independent of dose for the dose range evaluated in this study. Urinary recovery data indicated that the efficacy of absorption was dose independent.
The most common, and sometimes life-threatening, side-effects associated with the human use of the analgesic, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are gastrointestinal. These include gastritis, ulceration, and severe bleeding. The aryl propionic acid class of NSAIDs are among the most widely used of these drugs in the world, including rac-ibuprofen, rac-flurbiprofen, and rac-ketoprofen. Marketed as racemates, it was assumed that the "inactive" (R)-enantiomers, having no cyclooxygenase inhibiting effect, also had no toxic effect. In a 30-day dose response study of (S)-, (R)-, and rac-flurbiprofen given daily over a range of doses the (R)-isomer alone proved to be without apparent gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity. On the other hand the racemate proved to be 2 to 4 times as ulcerogenic in enantiomerically equivalent doses as the (S)-enantiomer. These results have significant clinical implications.
Hereditary amyloid polyneuropathy is a type of protein misfolding disease. Transthyretin (TTR) is a homotetrameric serum protein and TTR tetramer dissociation is the limiting step in amyloid fibril formation. Thus, prevention of TTR dissociation is a promising therapeutic approach and some TTR stabilizers have been approved for the treatment of TTR amyloidosis. CSP-1103 (CHF5074) is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory derivative that lacks cyclooxygenase inhibitory activity. In vitro, CSP-1103 stabilizes the TTR tetramer by binding to the thyroxine (T4) binding site. We have previously shown that serum TTR levels were increased by oral CSP-1103 administration through stabilization of TTR tetramers in humanized mice at both the Ttr locus and the Rbp4 locus. To determine whether CSP-1103 stabilizes TTR tetramers in humans, multiple CSP-1103 oral doses were administered for two weeks to 48 healthy human volunteers in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study. CSP-1103 treatment stabilized TTR tetramers in a dose-dependent manner under normal or denaturing stress conditions, thereby increasing serum TTR levels. Preincubation of serum with CSP-1103 or diflunisal in vitro increased the TTR tetramer stability. Computer simulation analysis revealed that the binding affinities of CSP-1103 with TTR at pH 7.0 were similar to those of tafamidis, thus confirming that CSP-1103 has potent TTR-stabilizing activity.
The plasma concentration-time profile of acetazolamide (AZ) following an intravenous bolus dose (5 mg kg-1) was determined during control, aspirin and flurbiprofen (FLU) treatment periods. The unbound fraction of AZ in plasma increased three-fold in the presence of salicylate (SA) while, in contrast, FLU produced consistent, but statistically insignificant, increases in binding. SA caused a two-fold decrease in both unbound AZ renal clearance and apparent volume of distribution at steady-state, while FLU produced a small, but significant, increase only in the latter. The area under the concentration-time curve for AZ in erythrocytes was increased by about 40% during SA treatment while FLU had no effect. Our results suggest that on a pharmacokinetic basis FLU may be a safer nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) to co-administer with AZ.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are suspected to cause drug hypersensitivity very frequently in paediatric patients. In this article, we describe the first case of anaphylaxis to flurbiprofen in a child and provide insight into the possibility of severe reactions and even anaphylaxis to over-the-counter flurbiprofen. Finally, the importance of a rigorous allergy work-up in reaching a confident diagnosis and providing the patient with a safe alternative is shown.
Nitroflurbiprofen is a nitrosylated flurbiprofen analog under development by NicOx for the potential treatment of urinary incontinence, Alzheimer's disease (AD) and the prevention and treatment of accelerated bone resorption associated with disorders such as osteoporosis, inflammatory joint disease and Paget's disease. In addition, a topical formulation of nitroflurbiprofen is under development for the potential treatment of dermatological disorders, including contact urticaria. By 1999, nitroflurbiprofen was in phase IIa trials for urinary incontinence, Paget's disease and osteoporosis, and phase II trials of the topical formulation were underway in contact urticaria by March 2002. Phase I trials for AD had commenced by May 2003, and in September 2003, NicOx was intending to conduct further phase II trials for micturition disorders in 2003.
In a single-dose, parallel group, randomized block treatment allocation study, the relative analgesic efficacy of flurbiprofen, a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug, was compared to acetaminophen 650 mg with codeine 60 mg, zomepirac sodium 100 mg, and placebo. A total of 226 post-surgical dental patients (146 females and 80 males) participated in the study. Flurbiprofen in 50 mg and 100 mg dosages demonstrated effective analgesic activity with the 100 mg dosage being at least as effective as the acetaminophen/codeine combination. The results of this study support previous work on flurbiprofen.
Fixed drug eruption (FDE) is an unusual drug-related side effect that results in recurrent lesions whenever the causative drugs are used. FDEs usually occur as a single, sharply demarcated, round erythematous patch or plaque, occasionally with localized bullae. The most common offending agents include antimicrobials, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and antiepileptics. There are some reports where contact dermatitis and cutaneous vasculitis have been associated with the use of flurbiprofen. We present the case of a 50-year-old man with flurbiprofen-induced generalized bullous FDE. To the best of our knowledge, the most serious form of FDE, the generalized bullous FDE, to be caused by flurbiprofen has not been reported previously.
It is predictable for patients to experience postoperative pain and inflammation. Until recently, therapeutic strategies for the management of these sequelae have been symptomatic rather than preventive. This article reviews prophylactic use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication for preventing postoperative discomfort, and includes recommendations on patient selection and medication regiment.
Both radiolabeled and nonlabeled drug have been used to study the pharmacokinetics of flurbiprofen (Ansaid, Upjohn). Drug absorption is rapid, drug disappearance half-life is independent of oral dose, and the area under the plasma drug concentration versus time curve increases with increasing oral dose. Elimination of intact drug from the peripheral circulation is biphasic and rapid. Following a single oral dose of 100 mg of flurbiprofen, drug bioavailability is equivalent using regimens of four 25-mg tablets, two 50-mg tablets, or one 100-mg tablet once daily. Long-term administration of flurbiprofen appears neither to inhibit nor induce the drug's metabolism.
