Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) shows high drug resistance and leads to low survival due to the high level of mutated Tumor Protein p53 (TP53). Cisplatin is a first-line treatment option for NSCLC, and the p53 mutation is a major factor in chemoresistance. We demonstrate that cisplatin chemotherapy increases the risk of TP53 mutations, further contributing to cisplatin resistance. Encouragingly, we find that the combination of cisplatin and fluvastatin can alleviate this problem. Therefore, we synthesize Fluplatin, a prodrug consisting of cisplatin and fluvastatin. Then, Fluplatin self-assembles and is further encapsulated with poly-(ethylene glycol)-phosphoethanolamine (PEG-PE), we obtain Fluplatin@PEG-PE nanoparticles (FP NPs). FP NPs can degrade mutant p53 (mutp53) and efficiently trigger endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS). In this study, we show that FP NPs relieve the inhibition of cisplatin chemotherapy caused by mutp53, exhibiting highly effective tumor suppression and improving the poor NSCLC prognosis.
We have developed a new "drug" and approach that appear to be effective in reducing arterial age. This "drug" represents a low, subtherapeutic dose of statin and sartan and particularly their low-dose combination. The improvement of arterial wall characteristics, also reflecting in a decrease of arterial age, was achieved after a short period of treatment (one month) with the above-mentioned drugs. In addition, we have also implemented a new, innovative therapeutic approach, consisting of intermittent (cyclic) treatment-alternating short "treatment" periods and much longer "rest" periods (when the beneficial effects are still present but gradually decline). This new "drug" and approach both merit further investigation in order to confirm their antiaging efficacy.
The beneficial effects of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins) on coronary events have generally been attributed to their hypocholesterolaemic properties. However, as mevalonate and other intermediates of cholesterol synthesis (isoprenoids) are necessary for cell proliferation and other important cell functions, effects other than cholesterol reduction may explain the pharmacological properties of statins. In the present review, we discuss the current knowledge on the nonlipid-related effects of statins, with a special emphasis on their potential benefits in different diseases, such as atherosclerosis and cancer. The mechanism(s) responsible for their favourable properties are also reviewed.
The current guidelines of statins for primary cardiovascular disease (CVD) prevention were based on results from systematic reviews and meta-analyses that suffer from limitations. METHODS: We searched in PubMed for existing systematic reviews and individual open-label or double-blinded randomized controlled trials that compared a statin with a placebo or another, which were published in English until January 01, 2018. We performed a random-effect pairwise meta-analysis of all statins as a class and network meta-analysis for the specific statins on different benefit and harm outcomes. RESULTS: In the pairwise meta-analyses, statins as a class showed statistically significant risk reductions on non-fatal MI (risk ratio [RR] 0.62, 95% CI 0.53-0.72), CVD mortality (RR 0.80, 0.71-0.91), all-cause mortality (RR 0.89, 0.85-0.93), non-fatal stroke (RR 0.83, 0.75-0.92), unstable angina (RR 0.75, 0.63-0.91), and composite major cardiovascular events (RR 0.74, 0.67-0.81). Statins increased statistically significantly relative and absolute risks of myopathy (RR 1.08, 1.01-1.15; Risk difference [RD] 13, 2-24 per 10,000 person-years); renal dysfunction (RR 1.12, 1.00-1.26; RD 16, 0-36 per 10,000 person-years); and hepatic dysfunction (RR 1.16, 1.02-1.31; RD 8, 1-16 per 10,000 person-years). The drug-level network meta-analyses showed that atorvastatin and rosuvastatin were most effective in reducing CVD events while atorvastatin appeared to have the best safety profile. CONCLUSIONS: All statins showed statistically significant risk reduction of CVD and all-cause mortality in primary prevention populations while increasing the risk for some harm risks. However, the benefit-harm profile differed by statin type. A quantitative assessment of the benefit-harm balance is thus needed since meta-analyses alone are insufficient to inform whether statins provide net benefit.
Canine oral melanoma is a highly malignant cancer with a poor prognosis. Statins, commonly used drugs for treating dyslipidemia, exhibit pleiotropic anticancer effects and marked anti-proliferative effects against melanoma cells. The anticancer effects among statins vary; in human cancers, lipophilic statins have shown stronger anticancer effects compared with hydrophilic statins. However, data on the differences in the effects of various statins on canine cancer cells are lacking, hence the optimal statins for treating canine melanoma remain unknown. Therefore, this study aimed to clarify the most effective statin by comparing the anticancer effects of hydrophilic rosuvastatin and lipophilic atorvastatin, simvastatin, fluvastatin and pitavastatin on three canine oral melanoma cell lines. Time-dependent measurement of cell confluence showed that lipophilic statins had a stronger anti-proliferative effect on all cell lines than hydrophilic rosuvastatin. Quantification of lactate dehydrogenase release, an indicator of cytotoxicity, showed that lipophilic statins more effectively induced cell death than hydrophilic rosuvastatin. Lipophilic statins affected both inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of cell death. The anticancer effects of statins on canine oral melanoma cells differed in the following ascending order of IC(50) values: pitavastatin < fluvastatin = simvastatin < atorvastatin < rosuvastatin. The required concentration of pitavastatin was approximately 1/20th that of rosuvastatin. Among the statins used in this study, pitavastatin had the highest anticancer effect. Our results suggest lipophilic pitavastatin as the optimal statin for treating canine oral melanoma.
BACKGROUND: A detailed summary and meta-analysis of the dose-related effect of pravastatin on lipids is not available. OBJECTIVES: Primary objective To assess the pharmacology of pravastatin by characterizing the dose-related effect and variability of the effect of pravastatin on the surrogate marker: low-density lipoprotein (LDL cholesterol). The effect of pravastatin on morbidity and mortality is not the objective of this systematic review. Secondary objectives * To assess the dose-related effect and variability of effect of pravastatin on the following surrogate markers: total cholesterol; high-density lipoprotein (HDL cholesterol); and triglycerides. * To assess the effect of pravastatin on withdrawals due to adverse effects. SEARCH METHODS: The Cochrane Hypertension Information Specialist searched the following databases for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) up to September 2021: CENTRAL (2021, Issue 8), Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid Embase, Bireme LILACS, the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, and ClinicalTrials.gov. We also contacted authors of relevant papers regarding further published and unpublished work. The searches had no language restrictions. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized placebo-controlled trials evaluating the dose response of different fixed doses of pravastatin on blood lipids over a duration of three to 12 weeks in participants of any age with and without evidence of cardiovascular disease. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed eligibility criteria for studies to be included, and extracted data. We entered lipid data from placebo-controlled trials into Review Manager 5 as continuous data and withdrawal due to adverse effects (WDAEs) data as dichotomous data. We searched for WDAEs information from all trials. We assessed all trials using Cochrane's risk of bias tool under the categories of sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting, and other potential biases. MAIN RESULTS: Sixty-four RCTs evaluated the dose-related efficacy of pravastatin in 9771 participants. The participants were of any age, with and without evidence of cardiovascular disease, and pravastatin effects were studied within a treatment period of three to 12 weeks. Log dose-response data over the doses of 5 mg to 160 mg revealed strong linear dose-related effects on blood total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol, and a weak linear dose-related effect on blood triglycerides. There was no dose-related effect of pravastatin on blood HDL cholesterol. Pravastatin 10 mg/day to 80 mg/day reduced LDL cholesterol by 21.7% to 31.9%, total cholesterol by 16.1% to 23.3%,and triglycerides by 5.8% to 20.0%. The certainty of evidence for these effects was judged to be moderate to high. For every two-fold dose increase there was a 3.4% (95% confidence interval (CI) 2.2 to 4.6) decrease in blood LDL cholesterol. This represented a dose-response slope that was less than the other studied statins: atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, fluvastatin, pitavastatin and cerivastatin. From other systematic reviews we conducted on statins for its effect to reduce LDL cholesterol, pravastatin is similar to fluvastatin, but has a decreased effect compared to atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, pitavastatin and cerivastatin. The effect of pravastatin compared to placebo on WADES has a risk ratio (RR) of 0.81 (95% CI 0.63 to 1.03). The certainty of evidence was judged to be very low. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Pravastatin lowers blood total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol and triglyceride in a dose-dependent linear fashion. This review did not provide a good estimate of the incidence of harms associated with pravastatin because of the lack of reporting of adverse effects in 48.4% of the randomized placebo-controlled trials.
The importance of statin therapy in lipid-lowering and its role in primary and secondary prevention has been borne out of numerous clinical trials conducted over the last two decades. Concurrently, much concern has been expressed over the safety and tolerability of these drugs. Fluvastatin has demonstrated good clinical efficacy and safety. This paper reviews the various pharmacological properties and evidence supporting its use in the prevention of cardiac events.
A 36-year-old male patient, after 3 months' treatment with fluvastatin 40 mg/d for hypercholesterolemia, presented with acute pancreatitis. The pancreatitis was mild, and the patient settled on medical treatment. Other causes of the disease were ruled out. Some months later, the patient reintroduced fluvastatin on his own initiative, which caused a recurrence of pancreatitis within a few days. Previous reports are reviewed, showing that statin-induced acute pancreatitis may occur within the first day of therapy or after several months. It is generally mild and runs a benign course, and no mortality has been reported. The frequency of this side effect is unknown, but it is most likely rare.
Zika virus (ZIKV) is a mosquito-borne member of the Flaviviridae family. ZIKV infection has been associated with neurological complications such as microcephaly in newborns and Guillain-Barre syndrome in adults; thus, therapeutic agents are urgently needed. Statins are clinically approved for lowering cholesterol levels to prevent cardiovascular disease but have shown potential as antiviral drugs. In this study, we explored the possibility of utilizing statins as anti-ZIKV drugs. We found that, generally, lipophilic statins (atorvastatin, cerivastatin, fluvastatin, lovastatin, mevastatin, and simvastatin) could reduce ZIKV production in vitro and result in smaller foci of infection. Time-of-drug-addition assay revealed that early treatment with statins is more beneficial than late treatment; however, statins could not completely inhibit the entry stage of ZIKV infection. Furthermore, individual lipophilic statins differed in anti-ZIKV capacity, with fluvastatin being the most efficient at low concentrations. Taken together, this study shows that statins or their derivatives have the potential to be used as anti-ZIKV therapeutic agents.
BACKGROUND: The baseline incidence of the adverse events of statin therapy varies between countries. Notably, Chinese patients seem more susceptible to myopathy induced by simvastatin. OBJECTIVES: This research studies the adverse drug reactions (ADRs) of statin therapy in China by analysing trial-based data from the Anti-hyperlipidaemic Drug Database built by the China National Medical Products Administration Information Centre. METHODS: All clinical trials involving statin therapy (including simvastatin, atorvastatin, fluvastatin, lovastatin, pravastatin and rosuvastatin) in China from 1989 to 2019 were screened. In total, 569 clinical studies with 37 828 patients were selected from 2650 clinical trials in the database. RESULTS: Among the reported cases with ADRs (2822/37 828; 7.460%), gastrointestinal symptoms were the most common (1491/37 828; 3.942%), followed by liver disease (486/37 828; 1.285%), muscle symptoms (444/37 828; 1.174%) and neurological symptoms (247/37 828; 0.653%). Pravastatin (231/1988; 11.620%) caused the most common gastrointestinal side effects, followed by fluvastatin (333/3094; 10.763%). The least likely to cause gastrointestinal irritation was rosuvastatin (82/1846; 4.442%). CONCLUSION: In Chinese clinical trials, gastrointestinal symptoms were the most common ADR of statin use for hyperlipidaemia and other cardiovascular diseases.
Exposure to noise and ototoxic drugs are responsible for much of the debilitating hearing loss experienced by about 350 million people worldwide. Beyond hearing aids and cochlear implants, there have been no other FDA approved drug interventions established in the clinic that would either protect or reverse the effects of hearing loss. Using Auditory Brainstem Responses (ABR) in a guinea pig model, we demonstrate that fluvastatin, an inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme of the mevalonate pathway, protects against loss of cochlear function initiated by high intensity noise. A novel synchrotron radiation based X-ray tomographic method that imaged soft tissues at micrometer resolution in unsectioned cochleae, allowed an efficient, qualitative evaluation of the three-dimensional internal structure of the intact organ. For quantitative measures, plastic embedded cochleae were sectioned followed by hair cell counting. Protection in noise-exposed cochleae is associated with retention of inner and outer hair cells. This study demonstrates the potential of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, already vetted in human medicine for other purposes, to protect against noise induced hearing loss.
Brown adipose tissue (BAT), an organ that burns energy through uncoupling thermogenesis, is a promising therapeutic target for obesity. However, there are still no safe anti-obesity drugs that target BAT in the market. In the current study, we performed large scale screening of 636 compounds which were approved by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to find drugs that could significantly increase uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) mRNA expression by real-time PCR. Among those UCP1 activators, most of them were antibiotics or carcinogenic compounds. We paid particular attention to fluvastatin sodium (FS), because as an inhibitor of the cellular hydroxymethyl glutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, FS has already been approved for treatment of hypercholesteremia. We found that in the cellular levels, FS treatment significantly increased UCP1 expression and BAT activity in human brown adipocytes. Consistently, the expression of oxidative phosphorylation-related genes was significantly increased upon FS treatment without differences in adipogenic gene expression. Furthermore, FS treatment resisted to high-fat diet (HFD)-induced body weight gain by activating BAT in the mice model. In addition, administration of FS significantly increased energy expenditure, improved glucose homeostasis and ameliorated hepatic steatosis. Furthermore, we reveal that FS induced browning in subcutaneous white adipose tissue (sWAT) known to have a beneficial effect on energy metabolism. Taken together, our results clearly demonstrate that as an effective BAT activator, FS may have great potential for treatment of obesity and related metabolic disorders.
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase is the key enzyme of cholesterol synthesis. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are potent reversible inhibitors of this enzyme, which act by competing for the substrate HMG-CoA. This review is mainly devoted to the 4 main HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors used today: lovastatin, simvastatin, pravastatin and fluvastatin. Depending upon the dosage, these drugs are able to reduce plasma cholesterol levels by more than 40%. After absorption, each undergoes extensive hepatic first-pass metabolism. Up to 5 primary metabolites are formed, some of which are active inhibitors. The elimination half-lives vary from 0.5 to 3.5 hours and excretion is mainly via the faeces. A limited number of drug interactions has been reported. Increases in liver enzymes and muscle creatine kinase activity are among the most severe adverse effects. These powerful drugs should be reserved for patients with high plasma cholesterol levels and/or those with cardiovascular disease. New therapeutic approaches to atherosclerosis are currently under investigation. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are the cornerstone of this research.
BACKGROUND/AIM: Thymic carcinoma is a rare cancer type with limited treatment options. Our previous study demonstrated that statins, which inhibit 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase, can prevent thymic carcinoma. However, the mechanisms through which statins affect intracellular events in cancer cells are not well understood. The aim of the study was to determine how thymic carcinoma modulates the intracellular signals in response to statin administration. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed statin-induced protein phosphorylation in Ty82 human thymic carcinoma cells, which were cultured with fluvastatin, and protein phosphorylation was examined using western blotting. RESULTS: Treating Ty82 with fluvastatin led to ERK5 phosphorylation via protein prenylation attenuation. The antitumor effects of fluvastatin on thymic carcinoma were enhanced when combined with an ERK5 inhibitor. CONCLUSION: Statin therapy in combination with ERK5 inhibition may be a promising therapeutic approach for treating thymic carcinoma.
The identification of targeted agents with high therapeutic index is a major challenge for cancer drug discovery. We found that screening chemical libraries across neuroblastoma (NBL) tumor subtypes for selectively-lethal compounds revealed metabolic dependencies that defined each subtype. Bioactive compounds were screened across cell models of mesenchymal (MESN) and MYCN-amplified (MYCNA) NBL subtypes, which revealed the mevalonate and folate biosynthetic pathways as MESN-selective dependencies. Treatment with lovastatin, a mevalonate biosynthesis inhibitor, selectively inhibited protein prenylation and induced apoptosis in MESN cells, while having little effect in MYCNA lines. Statin sensitivity was driven by HMGCR expression, the rate-limiting enzyme for cholesterol synthesis, which correlated with statin sensitivity across NBL cell lines, thus providing a drug sensitivity biomarker. Comparing expression profiles from sensitive and resistant cell lines revealed a TGFBR2 signaling axis that regulates HMGCR, defining an actionable addiction in that leads to MESN-subtype-dependent apoptotic cell death.
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy that is often driven by chromosomal translocations. In particular, patients with t(4;14)-positive disease have worse prognosis compared to other MM subtypes. Herein, we demonstrated that t(4;14)-positive cells are highly dependent on the mevalonate (MVA) pathway for survival. Moreover, we showed that this metabolic vulnerability is immediately actionable, as inhibiting the MVA pathway with a statin preferentially induced apoptosis in t(4;14)-positive cells. In response to statin treatment, t(4;14)-positive cells activated the integrated stress response (ISR), which was augmented by co-treatment with bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor. We identified that t(4;14)-positive cells depend on the MVA pathway for the synthesis of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), as exogenous GGPP fully rescued statin-induced ISR activation and apoptosis. Inhibiting protein geranylgeranylation similarly induced the ISR in t(4;14)-positive cells, suggesting that this subtype of MM depends on GGPP, at least in part, for protein geranylgeranylation. Notably, fluvastatin treatment synergized with bortezomib to induce apoptosis in t(4;14)-positive cells and potentiated the anti-tumor activity of bortezomib in vivo. Our data implicate the t(4;14) translocation as a biomarker of statin sensitivity and warrant further clinical evaluation of a statin in combination with bortezomib for the treatment of t(4;14)-positive disease.
Obesity is associated with ~40% of cancer diagnoses but there are currently no effective preventive strategies, illustrating a need for chemoprevention. We previously demonstrated that fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) from adipose tissue stimulates malignant transformation, as measured by growth in soft agar, the gold-standard in vitro transformation assay. Because the soft agar assay is unsuitable for high throughput screens (HTS), we developed a novel method using 3D growth in ultra-low attachment conditions as an alternative to growth in agar to discover compounds that inhibit transformation. Treating non-tumorigenic, skin epithelial JB6 P(+) cells with FGF2 stimulates growth in ultra-low attachment conditions analogous to growth in the soft agar. This transformation HTS identified picropodophyllin, an insulin growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) inhibitor, and fluvastatin, an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, as potential chemopreventive agents. These compounds were validated for efficacy using two non-tumorigenic cell lines in soft agar. Another IGF1R inhibitor and other statins were also tested and several were able to inhibit growth in soft agar. This novel 3D HTS platform is fast, robust and has the potential to identify agents for obesity-associated cancer prevention.
In the initial process of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infects respiratory epithelial cells and then transfers to other organs the blood vessels. It is believed that SARS-CoV-2 can pass the vascular wall by altering the endothelial barrier using an unknown mechanism. In this study, we investigated the effect of SARS-CoV-2 on the endothelial barrier using an airway-on-a-chip that mimics respiratory organs and found that SARS-CoV-2 produced from infected epithelial cells disrupts the barrier by decreasing Claudin-5 (CLDN5), a tight junction protein, and disrupting vascular endothelial cadherin-mediated adherens junctions. Consistently, the gene and protein expression levels of CLDN5 in the lungs of a patient with COVID-19 were decreased. CLDN5 overexpression or Fluvastatin treatment rescued the SARS-CoV-2-induced respiratory endothelial barrier disruption. We concluded that the down-regulation of CLDN5 expression is a pivotal mechanism for SARS-CoV-2-induced endothelial barrier disruption in respiratory organs and that inducing CLDN5 expression is a therapeutic strategy against COVID-19.
BACKGROUND: Chemerin, an inflammatory adipokine, is upregulated in preeclampsia, and its placental overexpression results in preeclampsia-like symptoms in mice. Statins may lower chemerin. METHODS: Chemerin was determined in a prospective cohort study in women suspected of preeclampsia and evaluated as a predictor versus the sFlt-1 (soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1)/PlGF (placental growth factor) ratio. Chemerin release was studied in perfused placentas and placental explants with or without the statins pravastatin and fluvastatin. We also addressed statin placental passage and the effects of chemerin in chorionic plate arteries. RESULTS: Serum chemerin was elevated in women with preeclampsia, and its addition to a predictive model yielded significant effects on top of the sFlt-1/PlGF ratio to predict preeclampsia and its fetal complications. Perfused placentas and explants of preeclamptic women released more chemerin and sFlt-1 and less PlGF than those of healthy pregnant women. Statins reversed this. Both statins entered the fetal compartment, and the fetal/maternal concentration ratio of pravastatin was twice that of fluvastatin. Chemerin constricted plate arteries, and this was blocked by a chemerin receptor antagonist and pravastatin. Chemerin did not potentiate endothelin-1 in chorionic plate arteries. In explants, statins upregulated low-density lipoprotein receptor expression, which relies on the same transcription factor as chemerin, and NO release. CONCLUSIONS: Chemerin is a biomarker for preeclampsia, and statins both prevent its placental upregulation and effects, in an NO and low-density lipoprotein receptor-dependent manner. Combined with their capacity to improve the sFlt-1/PlGF ratio, this offers an attractive mechanism by which statins may prevent or treat preeclampsia.
Statins, in addition to their cholesterol lowering effects, can prevent isoprenylation of Rab GTPase proteins, a key protein family for the regulation of protein trafficking. Rab-GTPases have been shown to be involved in the control of membrane expression level of ion channels, including one of the major cardiac repolarizing channels, IKs. Decreased IKs function has been observed in a number of disease states and associated with increased propensity for arrhythmias, but the mechanism underlying IKs decrease remains elusive. Ca(2+)-dependent PKC isoforms (cPKC) are chronically activated in variety of human diseases and have been suggested to acutely regulate IKs function. We hypothesize that chronic cPKC stimulation leads to Rab-mediated decrease in IKs membrane expression, and that can be prevented by statins. In this study we show that chronic cPKC stimulation caused a dramatic Rab5 GTPase-dependent decrease in plasma membrane localization of the IKs pore forming subunit KCNQ1, reducing IKs function. Our data indicates fluvastatin inhibition of Rab5 restores channel localization and function after cPKC-mediated channel internalization. Our results indicate a novel statin anti-arrhythmic effect that would be expected to inhibit pathological electrical remodeling in a number of disease states associated with high cPKC activation. Because Rab-GTPases are important regulators of membrane trafficking they may underlie other statin pleiotropic effects.
