Nebivolol is a beta-1 receptor blocker used to treat hypertension, heart failure, erectile dysfunction, vascular disease, and diabetes mellitus. This review investigated the data regarding pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters, drug-drug interactions, dextrorotatory (D), and levorotatory (L) stereoisomers of nebivolol. The articles related to the PK of nebivolol were retrieved by searching the five databases; Google Scholar, PubMed, Cochrane Library, ScienceDirect, and EBSCO. A total of 20 studies comprising plasma concentration-time profile data following the nebivolol's oral and intravenous (IV) administration were included. The area under the concentration-time curve from zero to infinity (AUC(0-infinity)) was 15 times greater in poor metabolizers (PMs) than in extensive metabolizers (EMs). In hypertensive patients, L-nebivolol expressed a higher maximum plasma concentration (C(max)) than D-nebivolol, i.e. 2.5 ng/ml vs 1.2 ng/ml. The AUC(0-infinity) of nebivolol was 3-fold greater in chronic kidney disease (CKD). The clearance (CL) was increased in obese than in controls from 51.6 +/- 11.6 L/h to 71.6 +/- 17.4 L/h when 0.5 mg/ml IV solution was infused. Nebivolol showed higher C(max), AUC(0-infinity) and half-life (t(1/2)) when co-administered with bupropion, duloxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, lansoprazole, and fluoxetine. This concise review of nebivolol would be advantageous in assessing all PK parameters, which may be crucial for clinicians to avoid drug-drug interactions, prevent adverse drug events and optimize the dosage regimen in diseased patients diagnosed with hypertension and cardiovascular disorders.
BACKGROUND: The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic has not been completely controlled. Although great achievements have been made in COVID-19 research and many antiviral drugs have shown good therapeutic effects against COVID-19, a simple oral antiviral drug for COVID-19 has not yet been developed. We conducted a meta-analysis to investigate the improvement in mortality or hospitalization rates and adverse events among COVID-19 patients with three new oral antivirals (including molnupiravir, fluvoxamine and Paxlovid). METHODS: We searched scientific and medical databases, such as PubMed, Web of Science, Embase and Cochrane Library for relevant articles and screened the references of retrieved studies on COVID-19. RESULTS: A total of eight studies were included in this study. The drug group included 2440 COVID-19 patients, including 54 patients who died or were hospitalized. The control group included a total of 2348 COVID-19 patients, including 118 patients who died or were hospitalized. The overall odds ratio (OR) of mortality or hospitalization was 0.33 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.22-0.49) for COVID-19 patients in the drug group and placebo group, indicating that oral antiviral drugs were effective for COVID-19 patients and reduced the mortality or hospitalization by approximately 67%. CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that three novel oral antivirals (molnupiravir, fluvoxamine and Paxlovid) are effective in reducing the mortality and hospitalization rates in patients with COVID-19. In addition, the three oral drugs did not increase the occurrence of adverse events, thus exhibiting good overall safety. These three oral antiviral drugs are still being studied, and the available data suggest that they will bring new hope for COVID-19 recovery and have the potential to be a breakthrough and very promising treatment for COVID-19.KEY MESSAGESMany antiviral drugs have shown good therapeutic effects, and there is no simple oral antiviral drug for COVID-19 patients.Meta-analysis was conducted for three new oral antivirals to evaluate the improvement in mortality or hospitalization rates and adverse events among COVID-19 patients.We focussed on three new oral Coronavirus agents (molnupiravir, fluvoxamine and Paxlovid) and hope to provide guidance for the roll-out of oral antivirals.
Although obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) was once considered rare, recent epidemiologic data suggest a lifetime prevalence rate of 2% to 3%. The morbidity associated with OCD is quite high compared to other psychiatric conditions. This report reviews neurologic, neuropsychological, and psychosurgical findings relevant to the functional neuroanatomy of OCD. In addition, it describes more recent investigations of OCD using a variety of brain imaging techniques, including computed tomography, positron emission tomography, and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). Finally, it examines the results of an ongoing pilot study of high-resolution, full-volume, three-dimensional SPECT imaging in patients with OCD before and after treatment with fluvoxamine.
Preclinical and clinical studies demonstrated an inverse relationship between serotonergic activity and alcohol consumption. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) fluoxetine, citalopram, and fluvoxamine have subsequently been examined for their ability to reduce alcohol consumption in alcoholic subjects. Interindividual variability in response to SSRIs is large, with reductions in alcohol consumption ranging from 10% to more than 70%. Several factors, including gender, alcoholic subtype, and extent of drinking, appear to affect the treatment efficacy of the SSRIs. A significant challenge for researchers is to identify the subject variables that predict treatment response, providing a basis for guiding alcohol-dependent individuals to the treatment that is most likely to be effective for them. This article reviews the available clinical studies, discusses possible mechanisms of action for the SSRIs, and describes a model for predicting treatment responses in alcoholic subjects.
BACKGROUND: Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) represent a diverse class of medications widely prescribed for depression and anxiety. Despite their common use, there is an absence of large-scale, real-world evidence capturing the heterogeneity in their effects on individuals. This study addresses this gap by utilizing naturalistic search data to explore the varied impact of six different SSRIs on user behavior. METHODS: The study sample included  approximately 508 thousand Bing users with searches for one of six SSRIs (citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline) from April-December 2022, comprising 510 million queries. Cox proportional hazard models were employed to examine 30 topics (e.g., shopping, tourism, health) and 195 health symptoms (e.g., anxiety, weight gain, impotence), using each SSRI as a reference. We assessed the relative hazard ratios between drugs and, where feasible, ranked the SSRIs based on their observed effects. We used Cox proportional hazard models in order to account for both the likelihood of users searching for a particular topic or symptom and the associated time to that search. The temporal aspect aided in distinguishing between potential symptoms of the disorder, short-term medication side effects, and later appearing side effects. RESULTS: Differences were found in search behaviors associated with each SSRI. E.g., fluvoxamine was associated with a significantly higher likelihood of searching weight gain compared to all other SSRIs (HRs 1.85-2.93). Searches following citalopram were associated with significantly higher rates of later impotence queries compared to all other SSRIs (HRs 5.11-7.76), except fluvoxamine. Fluvoxamine was associated with a significantly higher rate of health related searches than all other SSRIs (HRs 2.11-2.36). CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals new insights into the varying SSRI impacts, suggesting distinct symptom profiles. This novel use of large-scale, naturalistic search data contributes to pharmacovigilance efforts, enhancing our understanding of intra-class variation among SSRIs, potentially uncovering previously unidentified drug effects.
OBJECTIVE: To review literature describing use of selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in the management of functional impairments associated with autistic disorder. DATA SOURCES: EMBASE (1980-3rd quarter of 2003), International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970-August 2003), and MEDLINE (1966-August 2003) were searched. Search terms included autism, autistic disorder, citalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors, and sertraline. DATA SYNTHESIS: Studies and case reports evaluating treatment outcomes associated with the use of SSRIs in managing impairments of autism were reviewed. Multiple SSRI dosing ranges were evaluated in autistic patients of different ages with various functional impairments. No specific SSRI or dose range has been shown to improve a specific autistic symptom although some patients have demonstrated improvements. CONCLUSIONS: Benefits with SSRIs in treating functional impairments in autism have been observed. Response to therapy and adverse effects are individualized. Current evidence does not support selection of one SSRI over another for any impairment associated with autism.
Within the past decade the field of psychiatry has rediscovered the neuropsychiatric syndrome of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Although excellently described over 150 years ago, for many years OCD was thought to be rare, untreatable, and to arise from hidden psychodynamic conflicts. All of these earlier ideas now appear to be wrong. Occurring in approximately 2% of adults, OCD consists of recurrent intrusive thoughts (obsessions) or senseless repetitive actions (compulsions). Although the aetiology of OCD remains unclear, recent neuro-imaging studies implicate the basal ganglia and frontal cortex as crucial structures in the pathogenesis of OCD. Genetic studies demonstrate a clear genetic component to OCD and an interesting link with chronic motor tics and the Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome. Although a true cure for the disorder remains elusive, most OCD symptoms respond well to treatment with 5HT reuptake inhibitors. The phenomenology and aetiology of OCD will be reviewed, with particular emphasis placed on the proper pharmacological treatment of this sometimes crippling disorder.
OBJECTIVE: To report two cases of sexual dysfunction induced by fluvoxamine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI). SETTING: University teaching hospital. PATIENTS: Two depressed patients who developed ejaculation and orgasmic difficulties after initiation of fluvoxamine therapy. DISCUSSION: The literature concerning sexual dysfunction with serotonergic antidepressants is reviewed, and speculated mechanisms for this untoward effect are discussed. CONCLUSIONS: Sexual dysfunction associated with antidepressant drugs, including SSRIs, may be underreported. This troublesome adverse effect may significantly affect patient comfort and compliance. Careful evaluation of sexual function is warranted, prior to and during drug treatment, especially as more serotonergic antidepressant agents become available.
OBJECTIVE: To report a case of recurrent isolated sleep paralysis (RISP), a benign parasomnia with worrisome and frightening sleep paralysis episodes. CASE: description: We describe a case of RISP in a sixteen-year-old girl who seeks medical attention for anxiety symptoms. The sleep paralysis and associated auditory and tactile hallucinations began three years before with worsening in the last year, causing fear of sleeping. The episodes were intensely frightening causing negative impact in patient's sleep, school performance and social function. Medical conditions were excluded, and she started treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor with complete resolution of symptoms. COMMENTS: Sleep complaints are often devalued. Therefore, clinicians should actively ask their patients about their sleep during health assessment.
Seven of the newest antidepressants are the serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors (fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine [currently approved in the United States for obsessive-compulsive disorder only]), a serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (venlafaxine), a postsynaptic serotonin antagonist/presynaptic serotonin reuptake inhibitor (nefazodone), and presynaptic/postsynaptic noradrenergic/serotonergic receptor antagonist (mirtazapine). Many of these drugs are potent inhibitors of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes of the liver. The CYP enzymes most relevant to the use of antidepressants and for which the most thorough data are available are the CYP1A2, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4. These 3 CYP isoenzymes are discussed in relation to some of the drugs they metabolize, and appropriate cautions are recommended for concurrent administration of these new antidepressants and other drugs frequently prescribed to elderly patients.
Fluvoxamine, a serotonin selective reuptake inhibitor, has been available as an antiobsessional agent in the United States since 1995. However, it has been utilized as an effective antidepressant for many years in various European countries. The controlled trials of fluvoxamine in the pharmacotherapy of depression are reviewed. The drug compares well with a variety of other antidepressants. It appears safe and well tolerated in daily doses of 50 to 300 mg. The most common adverse events are gastrointestinal complaints, particularly nausea. Initiating pharmacotherapy at lower doses and increasing over the period of 1 to 2 weeks minimizes this discomfort.
Cisplatin use is often limited by its ototoxic side effects, which can lead to irreversible hearing loss. Preventing cisplatin-induced ototoxicity is crucial to improve patient outcomes. Fluoxetine and fluvoxamine, both selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors antidepressants, inhibit the NLR pyrin domain-containing protein 3 inflammasome, a potential therapeutic target for preventing ototoxicity. However, human studies have not evaluated if these antidepressants may protect against cisplatin-induced ototoxicity. The object of this study is to assess the association between fluoxetine or fluvoxamine use and incidence of hearing loss or tinnitus in a large cohort of patients receiving cisplatin chemotherapy. We use a retrospective cohort study within the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs healthcare system. Adult patients with cancer who received cisplatin chemotherapy between 2000 and 2023 are included. Incidence of ototoxicity, defined by international classification of diseases revision 9-CM or international classification of diseases revision 10-CM diagnoses of hearing loss or tinnitus is compared between concurrent use of fluoxetine or fluvoxamine and cisplatin alone. A total of 20,552 patients were included. Of those, 489 received cisplatin and fluoxetine or fluvoxamine. After propensity score adjustment, the hazard of ototoxicity was lower in the group receiving fluoxetine or fluvoxamine compared to the group receiving cisplatin alone (HR = 0.62, 95% CI = (0.41-0.94)). Fluoxetine or fluvoxamine use may be associated with a reduced risk of cisplatin-induced ototoxicity. Randomized clinical trials are needed to confirm these findings and establish the efficacy of the medications in ototoxicity prevention. Further research is also warranted to investigate the potential mechanisms underlying this protective effect.
BACKGROUND: Fluvoxamine is one of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) that are regarded as the first-line drugs to manage mental disorders. It has been also recognized with the potential to treat inflammatory diseases and viral infection. However, the effect of fluvoxamine on autoimmune diseases, particularly type 1 diabetes (T1D) and the related cellular and molecular mechanisms, are yet to be addressed. METHOD: Herein in this report, we treated NOD mice with fluvoxamine for 2 weeks starting from 10-week of age to dissect the impact of fluvoxamine on the prevention of type 1 diabetes. We compared the differences of immune cells between 12-week-old control and fluvoxamine-treated mice by flow cytometry analysis. To study the mechanism involved, we extensively examined the characteristics of CD4(+) T cells with fluvoxamine stimulation using RNA-seq analysis, real-time PCR, Western blot, and seahorse assay. Furthermore, we investigated the relevance of our data to human autoimmune diabetes. RESULT: Fluvoxamine not only delayed T1D onset, but also decreased T1D incidence. Moreover, fluvoxamine-treated NOD mice showed significantly attenuated insulitis coupled with well-preserved beta cell function, and decreased Th1 and Th17 cells in the peripheral blood, pancreatic lymph nodes (PLNs), and spleen. Mechanistic studies revealed that fluvoxamine downregulated glycolytic process by inhibiting phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT signaling, by which it restrained effector T (Teff) cell differentiation and production of proinflammatory cytokines. CONCLUSION: Collectively, our study supports that fluvoxamine could be a viable therapeutic drug against autoimmunity in T1D setting.
Drug-induced intracranial hypertension is a well-established entity. We report a rare case of intracranial hypertension with papilledema in a 10-year-old boy following use of fluvoxamine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. On discontinuing the drug, the papilledema resolved over 4 months without any residual visual anomalies. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of fluvoxamine-induced intracranial hypertension with papilledema.
The effect of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor fluvoxamine (100 mg/day for 10 consecutive days) on the kinetics of a single oral dose of imipramine (50 mg) and desipramine (100 mg) was investigated in 12 healthy subjects. Compared with a control session, treatment with fluvoxamine caused a significant prolongation of imipramine half-life (from 22.8 +/- 6.4 to 40.5 +/- 5.0 h, means +/- SD, p < 0.01) and a marked decrease in imipramine apparent oral clearance (from 1.02 +/- 0.19 to 0.28 +/- 0.06 L/h/kg, p < 0.0001). No significant changes in desipramine kinetics were observed during fluvoxamine treatment. These findings indicate that, at the dosage tested, fluvoxamine markedly inhibits the demethylation of imipramine without affecting significantly the CYP2D6-mediated hydroxylation of desipramine.
Although the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) class of antidepressants shares a common primary pharmacology, namely the inhibition of serotonin reuptake, their secondary pharmacology is remarkably heterogeneous. Inhibition of serotonin reuptake and the consequent increase in serotonin availability are responsible for the relief of depressive symptoms and for some of the adverse effects of this class of drugs. Transsynaptic effects such as modulation of signalling cascades, gene expression processes and neuroplasticity are also important in the mechanism of action of antidepressants. However, this review shows that secondary properties of the SSRIs may contribute to the differences in efficacy and tolerability between members of the class. For example, fluvoxamine has affinity for sigma(1)-receptors -- a property likely to be responsible for its particular efficacy in delusional depression. By understanding the properties of SSRIs and employing careful selection of agents for individual patients, physicians are more able to tailor antidepressant treatments to their patients' particular circumstances.
We report five cases where fluvoxamine (FLVX) was added to maintenance treatment with methadone (MTD) in addict patients with affective disorders. In view of the implication of FLVX in several metabolic drug interactions, MTD plasma levels were measured before and after treatment with FLVX. A slight increase (approximately 20% of the MTD plasma level/dose ratio) occurred in two cases. In the remaining three patients, the interaction was more pronounced (40-100% increase of the MTD plasma level/dose ratio), with clinical manifestations of opiate withdrawal after stopping FLVX therapy in one case. Caution is needed when starting or stopping treatment with FLVX in patients receiving maintenance treatment with methadone.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the long-term safety and tolerability of off-label high-dose serotonin reuptake inhibitors (OLHD-SRIs) in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). METHODS: A retrospective longitudinal study was performed on 105 randomly selected outpatients diagnosed with OCD and were treated with OLHD-SRIs for at least 6 months. Patients received sertraline >200 mg/day, escitalopram >20 mg/day, fluvoxamine >300 mg/day, and fluoxetine >60 mg/day, combined with exposure and response prevention therapy. Patients were divided into three dosing groups: sertraline equivalent dose (SED) </= 200 mg/day (n = 26, 24.7%), 201-400 mg/day (n = 51, 48.5%) and 401-650 mg/day (n = 28, 26.6%). Safety and tolerability were assessed with an electrocardiogram, blood biochemistry, complete blood count, and side-effects monitoring. RESULTS: SED ranged from 100 to 650 mg/day and the mean duration of OLHD-SRI treatment was 20.8 months. The most common side-effects reported were sexual dysfunction (n = 36, 34%), weight gain (n = 28, 27%), sedation (n = 27, 26%), hyperhidrosis (n = 20, 19%), and tremor (n = 11, 10%). Abnormal ECG was documented in one patient, and another patient experienced a first-time seizure, whereas elevated liver enzymes were seen in 4.8% of the sample (n = 5). None of the patients had serotonin syndrome or drug-induced liver injury. Side-effects did not differ among the three dosing groups. CONCLUSION: OLHD-SRIs appear to be safe and well tolerated in OCD patients in SED </= 650 mg/day doses and the side-effects did not differ between the three dosing groups.
BACKGROUND: Fluvoxamine is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) that has been approved for the treatment of depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and a variety of anxiety disorders; it is available as an oral preparation. Fluvoxamine has not been approved for the treatment of infections, but has been used in the early treatment of people with mild to moderate COVID-19. As there are only a few effective therapies for people with COVID-19 in the community, a thorough understanding of the current evidence regarding the efficacy and safety of fluvoxamine as an anti-inflammatory and possible anti-viral treatment for COVID-19, based on randomised controlled trials (RCTs), is needed. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of fluvoxamine in addition to standard care, compared to standard care (alone or with placebo), or any other active pharmacological comparator with proven efficacy for the treatment of COVID-19 outpatients and inpatients. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane COVID-19 Study Register (including Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, Embase, ClinicalTrials.gov, WHO ICTRP, medRxiv), Web of Science and WHO COVID-19 Global literature on COVID-19 to identify completed and ongoing studies up to 1 February 2022. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs that compared fluvoxamine in addition to standard care (also including no intervention), with standard care (alone or with placebo), or any other active pharmacological comparator with proven efficacy in clinical trials for the treatment of people with confirmed COVID-19, irrespective of disease severity, in both inpatients and outpatients. Co-interventions needed to be the same in both study arms. We excluded studies comparing fluvoxamine to other pharmacological interventions with unproven efficacy. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We assessed risk of bias of primary outcomes using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 tool for RCTs. We used GRADE to rate the certainty of evidence to treat people with asymptomatic to severe COVID-19 for the primary outcomes including mortality, clinical deterioration, clinical improvement, quality of life, serious adverse events, adverse events of any grade, and suicide or suicide attempt. MAIN RESULTS: We identified two completed studies with a total of 1649 symptomatic participants. One study was conducted in the USA (study with 152 participants, 80 and 72 participants per study arm) and the other study in Brazil (study with 1497 high-risk participants for progression to severe disease, 741 and 756 participants per study arm) among outpatients with mild COVID-19. Both studies were double-blind, placebo-controlled trials in which participants were prescribed 100 mg fluvoxamine two or three times daily for a maximum of 15 days. We identified five ongoing studies and two studies awaiting classification (due to translation issues, and due to missing published data). We found no published studies comparing fluvoxamine to other pharmacological interventions of proven efficacy. We assessed both included studies to have an overall high risk of bias. Fluvoxamine for the treatment of COVID-19 in inpatients We did not identify any completed studies of inpatients. Fluvoxamine for the treatment of COVID-19 in outpatients Fluvoxamine in addition to standard care may slightly reduce all-cause mortality at day 28 (RR 0.69, 95% CI 0.38 to 1.27; risk difference (RD) 9 per 1000; 2 studies, 1649 participants; low-certainty evidence), and may reduce clinical deterioration defined as all-cause hospital admission or death before hospital admission (RR 0.55, 95% CI 0.16 to 1.89; RD 57 per 1000; 2 studies, 1649 participants; low-certainty evidence). We are very uncertain regarding the effect of fluvoxamine on serious adverse events (RR 0.56, 95% CI 0.15 to 2.03; RD 54 per 1000; 2 studies, 1649 participants; very low-certainty evidence) or adverse events of any grade (RR 1.06, 95% CI 0.82 to 1.37; RD 7 per 1000; 2 studies, 1649 participants; very low-certainty evidence). Neither of the studies reported on symptom resolution (clinical improvement), quality of life or suicide/suicide attempt. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Based on a low-certainty evidence, fluvoxamine may slightly reduce all-cause mortality at day 28, and may reduce the risk of admission to hospital or death in outpatients with mild COVID-19. However, we are very uncertain regarding the effect of fluvoxamine on serious adverse events, or any adverse events. In accordance with the living approach of this review, we will continually update our search and include eligible trials as they arise, to complete any gaps in the evidence.
