The Global Initiative for Asthma recommends that low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/formoterol be preferred to short-acting beta(2)-agonists as reliever therapy in adolescents and adults with asthma, across the range of asthma severity. This recommendation represents the most fundamental change in asthma management for many decades. In this commentary, we review the rationale for combination ICS/formoterol therapy, the evidence on which this recommendation has been made, the limitations in the evidence, the practical issues relevant to the implementation of ICS/formoterol reliever-based regimens in clinical practice, and the emerging evidence for the efficacy and safety of combination ICS/salbutamol reliever therapy regimens.
The use of a single inhaler containing the combination of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and formoterol, a specific long-acting bronchodilator, for both maintenance and quick relief therapy (single maintenance and reliever therapy [SMART or MART]) is recommended by both the Global Initiative for Asthma and the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Coordinating Committee in steps 3 and 4 of asthma management. This article provides practical advice about implementing SMART in clinical practice based on evidence and clinical experience. Fundamental to SMART is that ICS-formoterol provides quick relief of asthma symptoms similar to that of short-acting beta(2)-agonists such as albuterol, while reducing the risk for severe asthma exacerbations and at an overall lower ICS exposure. Most SMART clinical trials were in adults and adolescents (aged >/=12 years), using budesonide-formoterol 160/4.5 mug (delivered dose), one inhalation once or twice daily (step 3) and two inhalations twice daily (step 4). For both steps 3 and 4, patients take additional inhalations of budesonide-formoterol 160/4.5 mug, one inhalation whenever needed for symptom relief, up to a maximum for adults and adolescents of 12 total inhalations in any single day (delivering 54 mug formoterol). The efficacy and safety of SMART with budesonide-formoterol and beclometasone-formoterol have been confirmed, but other ICS-long-acting bronchodilator combinations have not been studied. The SMART regimen should be introduced with a careful explanation of its role in self-management, preferably with a customized written asthma action plan. The cost to patients and the availability of SMART treatment will depend on the prescribed dose and national or local payer agreements.
Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol (BREZTRI AEROSPHERE; TRIXEO AEROSPHERE) is an inhaled fixed-dose combination of the inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) budesonide, the long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) glycopyrronium bromide and the long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) formoterol fumarate approved for the maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is delivered via a pressurized metered-dose Aerosphere inhaler and is formulated using co-suspension delivery technology. In two pivotal phase III trials of 24-52 weeks' duration, budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol reduced the rates of moderate/severe COPD exacerbations and improved lung function to a greater extent than budesonide/formoterol and/or glycopyrronium/formoterol. Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol also demonstrated beneficial effects on dyspnoea, rescue medication requirements and health-related quality of life (HR-QOL), and reduced the risk of all-cause mortality. Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol was generally well tolerated, with the tolerability profile being generally similar to that of the individual components. Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol provides a useful and convenient option for the maintenance treatment of COPD, including for patients whose disease is inadequately controlled with dual ICS/LABA or LAMA/LABA therapy.
BACKGROUND: In patients with mild asthma, as-needed use of an inhaled glucocorticoid plus a fast-acting beta(2)-agonist may be an alternative to conventional treatment strategies. METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, double-blind trial involving patients 12 years of age or older with mild asthma. Patients were randomly assigned to one of three regimens: twice-daily placebo plus terbutaline (0.5 mg) used as needed (terbutaline group), twice-daily placebo plus budesonide-formoterol (200 mug of budesonide and 6 mug of formoterol) used as needed (budesonide-formoterol group), or twice-daily budesonide (200 mug) plus terbutaline used as needed (budesonide maintenance group). The primary objective was to investigate the superiority of as-needed budesonide-formoterol to as-needed terbutaline with regard to electronically recorded weeks with well-controlled asthma. RESULTS: A total of 3849 patients underwent randomization, and 3836 (1277 in the terbutaline group, 1277 in the budesonide-formoterol group, and 1282 in the budesonide maintenance group) were included in the full analysis and safety data sets. With respect to the mean percentage of weeks with well-controlled asthma per patient, budesonide-formoterol was superior to terbutaline (34.4% vs. 31.1% of weeks; odds ratio, 1.14; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.00 to 1.30; P=0.046) but inferior to budesonide maintenance therapy (34.4% and 44.4%, respectively; odds ratio, 0.64; 95% CI, 0.57 to 0.73). The annual rate of severe exacerbations was 0.20 with terbutaline, 0.07 with budesonide-formoterol, and 0.09 with budesonide maintenance therapy; the rate ratio was 0.36 (95% CI, 0.27 to 0.49) for budesonide-formoterol versus terbutaline and 0.83 (95% CI, 0.59 to 1.16) for budesonide-formoterol versus budesonide maintenance therapy. The rate of adherence in the budesonide maintenance group was 78.9%. The median metered daily dose of inhaled glucocorticoid in the budesonide-formoterol group (57 mug) was 17% of the dose in the budesonide maintenance group (340 mug). CONCLUSIONS: In patients with mild asthma, as-needed budesonide-formoterol provided superior asthma-symptom control to as-needed terbutaline, assessed according to electronically recorded weeks with well-controlled asthma, but was inferior to budesonide maintenance therapy. Exacerbation rates with the two budesonide-containing regimens were similar and were lower than the rate with terbutaline. Budesonide-formoterol used as needed resulted in substantially lower glucocorticoid exposure than budesonide maintenance therapy. (Funded by AstraZeneca; SYGMA 1 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02149199 .).
BACKGROUND: As asthma symptoms worsen, patients typically rely on short-acting beta(2)-agonist (SABA) rescue therapy, but SABAs do not address worsening inflammation, which leaves patients at risk for severe asthma exacerbations. The use of a fixed-dose combination of albuterol and budesonide, as compared with albuterol alone, as rescue medication might reduce the risk of severe asthma exacerbation. METHODS: We conducted a multinational, phase 3, double-blind, randomized, event-driven trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of albuterol-budesonide, as compared with albuterol alone, as rescue medication in patients with uncontrolled moderate-to-severe asthma who were receiving inhaled glucocorticoid-containing maintenance therapies, which were continued throughout the trial. Adults and adolescents (>/=12 years of age) were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio to one of three trial groups: a fixed-dose combination of 180 mug of albuterol and 160 mug of budesonide (with each dose consisting of two actuations of 90 mug and 80 mug, respectively [the higher-dose combination group]), a fixed-dose combination of 180 mug of albuterol and 80 mug of budesonide (with each dose consisting of two actuations of 90 mug and 40 mug, respectively [the lower-dose combination group]), or 180 mug of albuterol (with each dose consisting of two actuations of 90 mug [the albuterol-alone group]). Children 4 to 11 years of age were randomly assigned to only the lower-dose combination group or the albuterol-alone group. The primary efficacy end point was the first event of severe asthma exacerbation in a time-to-event analysis, which was performed in the intention-to-treat population. RESULTS: A total of 3132 patients underwent randomization, among whom 97% were 12 years of age or older. The risk of severe asthma exacerbation was significantly lower, by 26%, in the higher-dose combination group than in the albuterol-alone group (hazard ratio, 0.74; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.62 to 0.89; P = 0.001). The hazard ratio in the lower-dose combination group, as compared with the albuterol-alone group, was 0.84 (95% CI, 0.71 to 1.00; P = 0.052). The incidence of adverse events was similar in the three trial groups. CONCLUSIONS: The risk of severe asthma exacerbation was significantly lower with as-needed use of a fixed-dose combination of 180 mug of albuterol and 160 mug of budesonide than with as-needed use of albuterol alone among patients with uncontrolled moderate-to-severe asthma who were receiving a wide range of inhaled glucocorticoid-containing maintenance therapies. (Funded by Avillion; MANDALA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03769090.).
BACKGROUND: In double-blind, placebo-controlled trials, budesonide-formoterol used on an as-needed basis resulted in a lower risk of severe exacerbation of asthma than as-needed use of a short-acting beta(2)-agonist (SABA); the risk was similar to that of budesonide maintenance therapy plus as-needed SABA. The availability of data from clinical trials designed to better reflect clinical practice would be beneficial. METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, randomized, open-label, parallel-group, controlled trial involving adults with mild asthma. Patients were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups: albuterol (100 mug, two inhalations from a pressurized metered-dose inhaler as needed for asthma symptoms) (albuterol group); budesonide (200 mug, one inhalation through a Turbuhaler twice daily) plus as-needed albuterol (budesonide maintenance group); or budesonide-formoterol (200 mug of budesonide and 6 mug of formoterol, one inhalation through a Turbuhaler as needed) (budesonide-formoterol group). Electronic monitoring of inhalers was used to measure medication use. The primary outcome was the annualized rate of asthma exacerbations. RESULTS: The analysis included 668 of 675 patients who underwent randomization. The annualized exacerbation rate in the budesonide-formoterol group was lower than that in the albuterol group (absolute rate, 0.195 vs. 0.400; relative rate, 0.49; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.33 to 0.72; P<0.001) and did not differ significantly from the rate in the budesonide maintenance group (absolute rate, 0.195 in the budesonide-formoterol group vs. 0.175 in the budesonide maintenance group; relative rate, 1.12; 95% CI, 0.70 to 1.79; P = 0.65). The number of severe exacerbations was lower in the budesonide-formoterol group than in both the albuterol group (9 vs. 23; relative risk, 0.40; 95% CI, 0.18 to 0.86) and the budesonide maintenance group (9 vs. 21; relative risk, 0.44; 95% CI, 0.20 to 0.96). The mean (+/-SD) dose of inhaled budesonide was 107+/-109 mug per day in the budesonide-formoterol group and 222+/-113 mug per day in the budesonide maintenance group. The incidence and type of adverse events reported were consistent with those in previous trials and with reports in clinical use. CONCLUSIONS: In an open-label trial involving adults with mild asthma, budesonide-formoterol used as needed was superior to albuterol used as needed for the prevention of asthma exacerbations. (Funded by AstraZeneca and the Health Research Council of New Zealand; Novel START Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry number, ACTRN12615000999538.).
BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids have been used in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but the potential benefits of their use in triple therapy are not well known. We aimed to compare the efficacy of a triple therapy with corresponding dual therapies in symptomatic patients with moderate to very severe COPD, without a requirement for a history of exacerbations. METHODS: In this double-blind, parallel-group, multicentre phase 3 randomised controlled trial, we recruited patients from hospitals and care centres in Canada, China, Japan, and the USA. Eligible patients were 40-80 years of age, were current or former smokers (with a smoking history of >/=10 pack-years), had an established clinical history of COPD, and were symptomatic for COPD, despite receiving two or more inhaled maintenance therapies for at least 6 weeks before screening. We randomly assigned patients (2:2:1:1) using an interactive web response system to receive budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler 320/18/9.6 mug (BGF MDI), glycopyrrolate/ formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler 18/9.6 mug (GFF MDI), budesonide/formoterol fumarate metered-dose inhaler 320/9.6 mug (BFF MDI), or open-label budesonide/formoterol fumarate dry-powder inhaler 400/12 mug (BUD/ FORM DPI). Primary endpoints for the Europe/Canada statistical analysis approach were FEV(1) area under the curve from 0-4 h (AUC(0-4)) for BGF MDI versus BFF MDI and BGF MDI versus BUD/FORM DPI over 24 weeks; and change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough FEV(1) for BGF MDI versus GFF MDI and non-inferiority of BFF MDI versus BUD/FORM DPI (margin of -50 mL from lower bound of 95% CI) over 24 weeks. Comparisons with BUD/FORM DPI were made for the Europe/Canada statistical analysis approach only. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02497001. FINDINGS: Between Aug 20, 2015, and Jan 5, 2018, 3047 patients were screened from 215 sites, and 1902 were randomly assigned to receive BGF MDI (n=640), GFF MDI (n=627), BFF MDI (n=316), or BUD/FORM DPI (n=319). Over 24 weeks, BGF MDI significantly improved FEV(1) AUC(0-4) versus BFF MDI (least squares mean difference 104 mL, 95% CI 77 to 131; p<0.0001) and BUD/FORM DPI (91 mL, 64 to 117; p<0.0001). BGF MDI also significantly improved pre-dose trough FEV(1) versus GFF MDI (22 mL, 4 to 39; p=0.0139) and was non-inferior to BUD/FORM DPI (-10 mL, -36 to 16; p=0.4390). At week 24, patients in the BGF MDI group had a significantly improved FEV(1) AUC(0-4) compared with patients receiving BFF MDI (116 mL, 95% CI 80 to 152; p<0.0001); there was a non-significant improvement in the change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough FEV(1) at week 24 versus GFF MDI (13 mL, -9 to 36 mL; p=0.2375). The most common treatment-emergent adverse events were nasopharyngitis (n=49 [8%] in the BGF MDI group; n=41 [7%] in the GFF MDI group; n=26 [8%] in the BFF MDI group; and n=30 [9%] in the BUD/FORM DPI group) and upper respiratory tract infection (n=65 [10%]; n=38 [6%]; n=18 [6%]; and n=22 [7%]). Pneumonia incidence was low (<2%) and similar across treatments. There were two treatment-related deaths, both in the GFF MDI group. INTERPRETATION: BGF MDI was efficacious, well tolerated, and could be a more appropriate treatment than the corresponding dual therapies for symptomatic patients with moderate to very severe COPD, irrespective of exacerbation history. FUNDING: Pearl-a member of the AstraZeneca Group.
This review describes the current Danish guidelines for inhaled asthma treatment. Monotherapy with short-acting beta-agonists (SABA) taken when needed is no longer recommended in asthma therapy for adults due to safety concerns. The recommended first-line treatment is now inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) taken with formoterol or ICS taken with SABA. The choice of inhaler can have a significant impact on compliance and symptom control, and an individualized approach is therefore needed. Biological treatment may be an alternative to oral corticosteroids in selected patient groups.
IMPORTANCE: The Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) recommends 2 alternative treatments for patients receiving treatment at steps 3 to 5: single inhaler combination inhaled corticosteroid-formoterol as both maintenance and reliever (SMART) or inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist as maintenance plus short-acting beta2-agonist as reliever. OBJECTIVE: To assess whether switching to SMART is associated with longer time to first severe asthma exacerbation compared with a step up or continuation of GINA treatment step with maintenance inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever among patients with poorly controlled asthma. DATA SOURCES: For this systematic review and meta-analysis, the literature, internal study databases at AstraZeneca and the Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, and references from a previous systematic review and meta-analysis on SMART were searched to identify randomized clinical trials published from January 1990 to February 2018, that compared budesonide-formoterol by SMART with maintenance inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever. STUDY SELECTION: Trials of at least 24 weeks' duration were included if they reported baseline data on GINA treatment step, asthma control status, and efficacy measures of severe exacerbations. Included patients were adults and adolescents with asthma and baseline Asthma Control Questionnaire 5-item version scores of 1.5 or higher. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Patient-level data were identified by independent extraction, and analyses were performed using a fixed-effect model. Data analysis was performed from August 2018 to November 2021. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was time to first severe asthma exacerbation associated with each treatment, analyzed by Cox proportional hazards regression. RESULTS: Overall, 4863 patients were included (3034 [62.4%] female; mean [SD] age, 39.8 [16.3] years). Switching patients with uncontrolled asthma at GINA step 3 (n = 1950) to SMART at either step 3 or 4 was associated with a prolonged time to first severe asthma exacerbation, with a 29% reduced risk compared with stepping up to step 4 inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist maintenance plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever (hazard ratio, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.52-0.97). For patients with uncontrolled asthma at step 3 and step 4 (n = 2913), switching to SMART was associated with a prolonged time to first severe asthma exacerbation and a 30% reduced risk compared with remaining at the same treatment step (hazard ratio, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.58-0.85). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this systematic review and meta-analysis, for patients with poorly controlled asthma, SMART was associated with longer time to first severe asthma exacerbation compared with a step up or continuation of GINA step with maintenance inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever. These findings suggest that if an adult or adolescent receiving treatment at GINA step 3 or 4 has poorly controlled asthma, it is preferable to switch to the SMART regimen rather than to step up or continue the GINA treatment step with maintenance inhaled corticosteroid-long-acting beta2-agonist plus short-acting beta2-agonist reliever therapy.
The Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) was established in 1993 and publishes a yearly global strategy to improve asthma awareness, prevention and management of asthma worldwide, based on a review of the most updated evidence. The current 2024 GINA update advises that all adults and adolescents with asthma receive inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)- containing medication and should not be treated with short acting beta agonist (SABA) alone. The 2024 GINA strategy divides treatment into two 'Tracks": Track 1 (preferred Track), the reliever is as-needed combination low dose ICS-formoterol; Track 2 uses SABA as the reliever along with a separate ICS inhaler. The updates also stress the importance that individuals with asthma should have a written asthma action plan, and asthma management should be tailored to the individual to help reduce the occurrence of serious exacerbations, fatalities, and hospitalizations.
BACKGROUND: Patients with mild asthma often rely on inhaled short-acting beta(2)-agonists for symptom relief and have poor adherence to maintenance therapy. Another approach might be for patients to receive a fast-acting reliever plus an inhaled glucocorticoid component on an as-needed basis to address symptoms and exacerbation risk. METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, double-blind, multicenter trial involving patients 12 years of age or older who had mild asthma and were eligible for treatment with regular inhaled glucocorticoids. Patients were randomly assigned to receive twice-daily placebo plus budesonide-formoterol (200 mug of budesonide and 6 mug of formoterol) used as needed or budesonide maintenance therapy with twice-daily budesonide (200 mug) plus terbutaline (0.5 mg) used as needed. The primary analysis compared budesonide-formoterol used as needed with budesonide maintenance therapy with regard to the annualized rate of severe exacerbations, with a prespecified noninferiority limit of 1.2. Symptoms were assessed according to scores on the Asthma Control Questionnaire-5 (ACQ-5) on a scale from 0 (no impairment) to 6 (maximum impairment). RESULTS: A total of 4215 patients underwent randomization, and 4176 (2089 in the budesonide-formoterol group and 2087 in the budesonide maintenance group) were included in the full analysis set. Budesonide-formoterol used as needed was noninferior to budesonide maintenance therapy for severe exacerbations; the annualized rate of severe exacerbations was 0.11 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.10 to 0.13) and 0.12 (95% CI, 0.10 to 0.14), respectively (rate ratio, 0.97; upper one-sided 95% confidence limit, 1.16). The median daily metered dose of inhaled glucocorticoid was lower in the budesonide-formoterol group (66 mug) than in the budesonide maintenance group (267 mug). The time to the first exacerbation was similar in the two groups (hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.78 to 1.17). The change in ACQ-5 score showed a difference of 0.11 units (95% CI, 0.07 to 0.15) in favor of budesonide maintenance therapy. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with mild asthma, budesonide-formoterol used as needed was noninferior to twice-daily budesonide with respect to the rate of severe asthma exacerbations during 52 weeks of treatment but was inferior in controlling symptoms. Patients in the budesonide-formoterol group had approximately one quarter of the inhaled glucocorticoid exposure of those in the budesonide maintenance group. (Funded by AstraZeneca; SYGMA 2 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02224157 .).
Asthma exacerbations, defined as a deterioration in baseline symptoms or lung function, cause significant morbidity and mortality. Asthma action plans help patients triage and manage symptoms at home. In patients 12 years and older, home management includes an inhaled corticosteroid/formoterol combination for those who are not using an inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta2 agonist inhaler for maintenance, or a short-acting beta2 agonist for those using an inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta2 agonist inhaler that does not include formoterol. In children four to 11 years of age, an inhaled corticosteroid/formoterol inhaler, up to eight puffs daily, can be used to reduce the risk of exacerbations and need for oral corticosteroids. In the office setting, it is important to assess exacerbation severity and begin a short-acting beta2 agonist and oxygen to maintain oxygen saturations, with repeated doses of the short-acting beta2 agonist every 20 minutes for one hour and oral corticosteroids. Patients with severe exacerbations should be transferred to an acute care facility and treated with oxygen, frequent administration of a short-acting beta2 agonist, and corticosteroids. The addition of a short-acting muscarinic antagonist and magnesium sulfate infusion has been associated with fewer hospitalizations. Patients needing admission to the hospital require continued monitoring and systemic therapy similar to treatments used in the emergency department. Improvement in symptoms and forced expiratory volume in one second or peak expiratory flow to 60% to 80% of predicted values helps determine appropriateness for discharge. The addition of inhaled corticosteroids, consideration of stepping up asthma maintenance therapy, close follow-up, and education on asthma action plans are important next steps to prevent future exacerbations.
The Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) recommends that short-acting beta(2)-agonist (SABA) monotherapy should no longer be prescribed, and that as-needed combination inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)-formoterol is the preferred reliever therapy in adults and adolescents with mild asthma. These recommendations are based on the risks of SABA monotherapy, the evidence that ICS-formoterol reliever therapy markedly decreases the occurrence of severe asthma exacerbations compared with SABA reliever therapy alone, and because ICS-formoterol reliever therapy has a favorable risk/benefit profile compared with maintenance ICS plus SABA reliever therapy. Data supporting the use of combination ICS-albuterol reliever therapy in mild asthma are more limited, but there are studies that inform its use in this population. In this review, we compare, using a pros and cons format, the (1) long-term safety and efficacy of ICS-formoterol reliever therapy versus SABA reliever therapy alone, (2) long-term safety and efficacy of ICS-albuterol reliever therapy versus SABA reliever therapy alone, (3) immediate bronchodilator effects of ICS-formoterol versus SABA alone, and (4) clinical and regulatory factors that may inform reliever therapy prescription decisions. By presenting the evidence of these reliever inhaler options, we hope to inform the reader while also calling for necessary future effectiveness and implementation research.
In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who experience further exacerbations or symptoms, despite being prescribed dual long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) or inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/LABA therapies, triple ICS/LAMA/LABA therapy is recommended. A previous network meta-analysis showed comparable efficacy of the ICS/LAMA/LABA, budesonide/glycopyrronium bromide/formoterol fumarate (BUD/GLY/FOR) 320/18/9.6 microg, to other fixed-dose and open combination triple therapies at 24 weeks in COPD. Subsequently, the ETHOS study was published, including data for 8509 patients, assessing the efficacy and safety of BUD/GLY/FOR over 52 weeks. This network meta-analysis (NMA) was conducted to compare the relative efficacy, safety, and tolerability of BUD/GLY/FOR 320/18/9.6 microg with other fixed-dose and open combination triple therapies in COPD over 52 weeks, including data from ETHOS. A systematic literature review was conducted to identify >/= 10-week randomized controlled trials, including >/= 1 fixed-dose or open combination triple-therapy arm, in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD. The methodologic quality and risk of bias of included studies were assessed. Study results were combined using a three-level hierarchical Bayesian NMA model to assess efficacy and safety outcomes at or over 24 and 52 weeks. Meta-regression and sensitivity analyses were used to assess heterogeneity across studies. Nineteen studies (n = 37,741 patients) met the inclusion criteria of the review; 15 contributed to the base case network. LAMA/LABA dual combinations were combined as a single treatment group to create a connected network. Across all outcomes for exacerbations, lung function, symptoms, health-related quality of life, safety, and tolerability, the efficacy and safety of BUD/GLY/FOR were comparable to those of other triple ICS/LAMA/LABA fixed-dose (fluticasone furoate/umeclidinium/vilanterol and beclomethasone dipropionate/glycopyrronium bromide/formoterol fumarate) and open combinations at or over 24 and 52 weeks. Sensitivity analyses and meta-regression results for exacerbation outcomes were broadly in line with the base case NMA. In this NMA, BUD/GLY/FOR 320/18/9.6 mug showed comparable efficacy versus other ICS/LAMA/LABA fixed-dose or open combination therapies in terms of reducing exacerbation rates and improving lung function, symptoms and health-related quality of life in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD, in line with previously published meta-analysis results of triple combinations in COPD. The safety and tolerability profile of BUD/GLY/FOR was also found to be comparable to other triple combination therapies.
BACKGROUND: Maintenance and reliever therapy (MART) with inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/formoterol effectively reduces exacerbations in asthma. We aimed to investigate its efficacy compared with fixed-dose fluticasone/salmeterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). METHODS: Patients with COPD and >/=1 exacerbation in the previous 2 years were randomly assigned to open-label MART (Spiromax budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 microg 2 inhalations twice daily+1 prn) or fixed-dose therapy (Diskus fluticasone propionate/salmeterol combination (FSC) 500/50 microg 1 inhalation twice daily+salbutamol 100 microg prn) for 1 year. The primary outcome was rate of moderate/severe exacerbations, defined by treatment with oral prednisolone and/or antibiotics. RESULTS: In total, 195 patients were randomised (MART Bud/Form n=103; fixed-dose FSC n=92). No significant difference was seen between MART and FSC therapy in exacerbation rates (1.32 vs 1.32 /year, respectively, rate ratio 1.05 (95% CI 0.79 to 1.39); p=0.741). No differences in lung function parameters or health status were observed. Total ICS dose was significantly lower with MART than FSC therapy (budesonide-equivalent 928 microg/day vs 1747 microg/day, respectively, p<0.05). Similar proportions of patients reported adverse events (MART Bud/Form: 73% vs fixed-dose FSC: 68%, p=0.408) and pneumonias (MART: 5% vs FSC: 1%, p=0.216). CONCLUSIONS: This first study of MART in COPD found that budesonide/formoterol MART might be similarly effective to fluticasone/salmeterol fixed-dose therapy in moderate to severe patients with COPD, at a lower daily ICS dosage. Further evidence is needed about long-term safety.
For general practitioners there have been important novelties in the treatment of asthma due to recent modifications of the international guidelines from Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA). In Step 1, use of short-acting beta2-agonists (SABA) without concomitant inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) as controller is no longer recommended for lack of efficacy and safety reasons. Instead, low dose ICS-formoterol as needed is recommended. In Step 5, in patients with severe uncontrolled asthma GINA recommends targeted biologic therapies like interleukin antibodies. Asthma patients presenting simultaneously with symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) should receive treatment containing ICS. Independent of the current corona pandemic, GINA recommendations stay in place.
IMPORTANCE: The optimal inhaled reliever therapy for asthma remains unclear. OBJECTIVE: To compare short-acting beta agonists (SABA) alone with SABA combined with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and with the fast-onset, long-acting beta agonist formoterol combined with ICS for asthma. DATA SOURCES: The MEDLINE, Embase, and CENTRAL databases were searched from January 1, 2020, to September 27, 2024, without language restrictions. STUDY SELECTION: Pairs of reviewers independently selected randomized clinical trials evaluating (1) SABA alone, (2) ICS with formoterol, and (3) ICS with SABA (combined or separate inhalers). DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Two reviewers independently extracted data and assessed risk of bias. Random-effects meta-analyses synthesized outcomes. GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) was used to evaluate the certainty of evidence. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Asthma symptom control (5-item Asthma Control Questionnaire; range, 0-6, lower scores indicate better asthma control; minimum important difference [MID], 0.5 points), asthma-related quality of life (Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire; range, 1-7, higher scores indicate better quality of life; MID, 0.5 points), risk of severe exacerbations, and risk of serious adverse events. RESULTS: A total of 27 randomized clinical trials (N = 50 496 adult and pediatric patients; mean age, 41.0 years; 20 288 male [40%]) were included. Compared with SABA alone, both ICS-containing relievers were associated with fewer severe exacerbations (ICS-formoterol risk ratio [RR], 0.65 [95% CI, 0.60-0.72]; risk difference [RD], -10.3% [95% CI, -11.8% to -8.3%]; ICS-SABA RR, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.73-0.95]; RD, -4.7% [95% CI, -8.0% to -1.5%]) with high certainty. Compared with SABA alone, both ICS-containing relievers were associated with improved asthma control (ICS-formoterol RR improvement [MID] in total score, 1.07 [95% CI, 1.04-1.10]; RD, 4.1% [95% CI, 2.3%-5.9%]; ICS-SABA RR, 1.09 [95% CI, 1.03-1.15]; RD, 5.4% [95% CI, 1.8%-8.5%]) with high certainty. In an indirect comparison with ICS-SABA, ICS-formoterol was associated with fewer severe exacerbations (RR, 0.78 [95% CI, 0.66-0.92]; RD, -5.5% [95% CI, -8.4% to -2.0%]) with moderate certainty. Compared with SABA alone, ICS-formoterol (RD, -0.6% [95% CI, -1.3% to 0%]) was not associated with increased risk of serious adverse events (high certainty) and ICS-SABA (RD, 0% [95% CI, -1.1% to 1.2%]) was not associated with increased risk of serious adverse events (moderate certainty). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this network meta-analysis of patients with asthma, ICS combined with formoterol and ICS combined with SABA were each associated with reduced asthma exacerbations and improved asthma control compared with SABA alone.
The high-strength formulation of extrafine beclometasone dipropionate/formoterol fumarate (BDP/Form) 200/6 microg has been developed to step up inhaled corticosteroid treatment, without increasing the dose of the bronchodilator, in patients who are not controlled with previous therapies. Two clinical studies have evaluated efficacy of high-strength BDP/Form as compared with another high-dose fixed combination and BDP monotherapy. Overall, data show that BDP/Form 200/6 mug improves lung function and has beneficial effects on symptoms, use of rescue medication and asthma control, with an acceptable safety profile comparable with that of high-dose fluticasone propionate/salmeterol. Therefore, BDP/Form 200/6 mug could be considered as an effective and safe treatment for patients with asthma who are not adequately controlled with high doses of inhaled corticosteroid monotherapy or medium doses of inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta2-agonist combinations.
Inhaled therapy is often considered the cornerstone of asthma management and international guidelines recommend combination therapy of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting-beta2-agonists (LABA) in a large proportion of asthmatic patients. The effectiveness of ICS/LABA is dependent on the correct choice of device and proper inhalation technique, this influences drug delivery and distribution along the bronchial tree, including the most peripheral airways. The fixed combination of beclometasone dipropionate/formoterol fumarate (BDP/FF) is the only extrafine formulation available in pressurized metered dose inhaler (pMDI) and in dry powder inhaler (DPI). Here, we focus on the recent significant advances regarding BDP/FF fixed combination for the treatment of asthma.
