A 39-year-old man with human immunodeficiency virus infection and Kaposi sarcoma on HAART therapy and doxorubicin presented in 2007 with a hyperpigmented tongue. Physical examination also showed hyperpigmented patches on the mucosal aspects of the lips and longitudinal dark bands on multiple nails. A skin biopsy specimen showed pigmentary alteration. Such hyperpigmentation has been described in numerous case reports and case series and has been reported to resolve within weeks to months of cessation of doxorubicin.
HCV infection is a major cause of mortality worldwide. HCV-related deaths also represent a leading cause of mortality in HIV-coinfected individuals. Telaprevir is an NS3/4A protease inhibitor approved for the treatment of chronic HCV genotype 1 infection in adults in combination with pegylated interferon and ribavirin. Telaprevir-based treatment has been shown to increase rates of sustained viral response in HCV genotype-1-monoinfected patients, and studies in HCV-HIV-coinfected patients are ongoing. Drug-drug interactions of telaprevir with antiretroviral drugs were investigated in a series of studies in healthy subjects. This review summarizes the results of interaction studies with low-dose ritonavir, ritonavir-boosted HIV protease inhibitors (atazanavir, darunavir, fosamprenavir and lopinavir), efavirenz, etravirine, rilpivirine, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and raltegravir.
Etravirine (ETR) belongs to the family of non-nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), with antiviral activity in patients with resistance to first-generation NNRTIs. The drug interactions caused by ETR are due to its dual effect on the CYP450 system. ETR acts as an inducer of CYP3A4 and inhibitor of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19. This drug shows few clinically significant drug interactions, the most important of which involve the unboosted protease inhibitors, the NNRTIs efavirenz and nevirapine, full-dose ritonavir and tipranavir/ritonavir. Interaction with fosamprenavir/ritonavir is not clinically significant, although their plasma levels vary slightly when used in combination with ETR. ETR shows no interactions with darunavir/ritonavir.
There are now exactly 20 anti-HIV drugs licenced (approved) for clinical use, and > 30 anti-HIV compounds under (pre)clinical development. The licensed anti-HIV drugs fall into five categories: nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs: zidovudine, didanosine, zalcitabine, stavudine, lamivudine, abacavir and emtricitabine); nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NtRTIs: tenofovir disoproxil fumarate); non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs: nevirapine, delavirdine and efavirenz); protease inhibitors (PIs: saquinavir, indinavir, ritonavir, nelfinavir, amprenavir, lopinavir, atazanavir and fosamprenavir); and fusion inhibitors (FIs: enfuvirtide). The compounds that are currently under clinical (Phase I, II or III) or preclinical investigation are either targeted at the same specific viral proteins as the licensed compounds (i.e., reverse transcriptase [NRTIs: PSI-5004, (-)-dOTC, DPC-817, elvucitabine, alovudine, MIV-210, amdoxovir, DOT; NNRTIs: thiocarboxanilide, UC-781, capravirine, dapivirine, etravirine, rilpivirine], protease [PIs: tipranavir, TMC-114]) or other specific viral proteins (i.e., gp120: cyanovirin N; attachment inhibitors: AIs, such as BMS-488043; integrase: L-870,812, PDPV-165; capsid proteins: PA-457, alpha-HCG); or cellular proteins (CD4 downmodulators: CADAs; CXCR4 antagonists: AMD-070, CS-3955; CCR5 antagonists: TAK-220, SCH-D, AK-602, UK-427857). Combination therapy is likely to remain the gold standard for the treatment of AIDS so as to maximise potency, minimise toxicity and diminish the risk for resistance development. Ideally, pill burden should be reduced to once-daily dosing so as to optimise the patient's compliance and reduce the treatment costs.
Protease inhibitor monotherapy has been shown to be effective in maintaining long-term viral suppression in a majority of patients. Withdrawal of nucleoside analogues can prevent long-term toxicity related to these drugs. Clinical trials have recently reported preliminary data on the beneficial effect of protease inhibitor monotherapy on body fat distribution and bone metabolism. Some of the uncertainties possibly associated with protease inhibitor monotherapy such as the increased risk of neurological events and a higher level of subclinical inflammation will be discussed in this review.
Etravirine is the first next-generation nonnucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) that is approved for the treatment of HIV infection in patients who have experienced virologic failure while receiving an NNRTI-containing regimen. The drug is taken as two 100-mg tablets twice daily after a meal. Because the drug is metabolized by cytochrome P450 isoenzymes, it cannot be coadministered with a number of other drugs (fosamprenavir, high-dose ritonavir, atazanavir, rifampin, and several antiepileptic medications). Etravirine demonstrates potent in vitro activity against wild-type and NNRTI-resistant strains of HIV. In vitro resistance and treatment failure is associated with the development of multiple NNRTI resistance mutations other than the K103N mutation. Several large clinical studies have documented the benefit of adding etravirine to an optimized background regimen in patients with virologic failure who are infected with multidrug-resistant HIV. The major adverse effects of etravirine therapy are nausea and rash, which are typically self-limiting and do not lead to treatment discontinuation.
There are currently (July, 2002) six protease inhibitors approved for the treatment of HIV infection, each of which can be classified as peptidomimetic in structure. These agents, when used in combination with other antiretroviral agents, produce a sustained decrease in viral load, often to levels below the limits of quantifiable detection, and a significant reconstitution of the immune system. Therapeutic regimens containing one or more HIV protease inhibitors thus provide a highly effective method for disease management. The important role of protease inhibitors in HIV therapy, combined with numerous challenges remaining in HIV treatment, have resulted in a continued effort both to optimize regimens using the existing agents and to identify new protease inhibitors that may provide unique properties. This review will provide an overview of the discovery and clinical trials of the currently approved HIV protease inhibitors, followed by an examination of important aspects of therapy, such as pharmacokinetic enhancement, resistance and side effects. A description of new peptidomimetic compounds currently being investigated in the clinic and in preclinical discovery will follow.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety and pharmacokinetic interaction between GW433908, ritonavir (RTV), and efavirenz (EFV). METHODS: In period 1, subjects received either a once daily (QD) regimen of GW433908 1395 mg + RTV 200 mg (Study 1) or a twice daily (bid) regimen of GW433908 700 mg + RTV 100 mg (Study 2) for 14 days. In period 2, subjects received EFV 600 mg QD with either the same GW433908 + RTV regimen as in period 1 (arm 1) or with a GW433908 + RTV regimen that included an additional 100 mg of RTV (arm 2) for 14 days. Amprenavir (APV) pharmacokinetic sampling and safety assessments were performed on the last day of each period. RESULTS: Plasma APV exposure was not significantly altered when EFV was coadministered with GW433908 700 mg twice daily (BID) + RTV 100 mg BID. Plasma APV exposure was decreased when EFV was coadministered with GW433908 1395 mg QD + RTV 200 mg QD. However, administration of EFV with GW433908 1395 mg QD + RTV 300 mg QD (i.e., adding an extra 100 mg of RTV) was able to negate this interaction. Adverse events were consistent with prior data for each of the separate agents. CONCLUSION: When EFV is coadministered with the GW433908 700 mg + RTV 100 mg BID regimen, no dosage adjustment is recommended. However, when EFV is coadministered with the GW433908 1400 mg + RTV 200 mg QD regimen, an increase to RTV 300 mg QD is needed to maintain plasma APV exposure.
There are, at present, 22 compounds which have been formally approved (by the US Food and Drug Administration) for the treatment of HIV infections (AIDS). According to their point of intervention with the HIV replicative cycle, these compounds can be classified in 5 categories: (1) NRTIs (nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors): azidothymidine, didanosine, zalcitabine, stavudine, lamivudine, abacavir and emtricitabine; (2) NtRTIs (nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors): tenofovir, administered as its oral prodrug form TDF (tenofovir disoproxil fumarate); (3) NNRTIs (non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors): nevirapine, delavirdine and efavirenz; (4) PIs (HIV protease inhibitors): saquinavir, ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, amprenavir, lopinavir, atazanavir, fosamprenavir, tipranavir and darunavir; and (5) FIs (fusion inhibitors): enfuvirtide. Starting from the drugs which are currently available for the treatment of AIDS, numerous combinations could be envisaged. Drug combinations are, in principle, aimed at obtaining synergism between the compounds (reasonably expected if they act by different mechanisms), while reducing the likelihood for drug resistance development. Such anti-HIV drug combination regimes were initiated about 10 years ago and have been generally referred to as HAART (for highly active antiretroviral therapy). While HAART originally consisted of a pill burden of twenty (or more) pills per day, this has been gradually diminished over the past few years, and, since July 2006, a all-in-one pill (Atripla) has become available, which contains three anti-HIV drugs (tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, emtricitabine and efavirenz) to be taken as a single pill only once daily. Given the information that has been acquired on the therapeutic use (efficacy, safety) of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate over the past five years, it would now seem mandatory to further consider the prophylactic use of TDF [and its combination with emtricitabine (Truvada) and/or Atripla], as a single daily pill to prevent HIV infection.
Gateways to Clinical Trials are a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables have been retrieved from the Clinical Trials Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: (-)-Epigallocatechin gallate; ACP-103, Ad.Egr.TNF.11 D, adalimumab, AF-IL 12, AIDSVAX gp120 B/B, alefacept, alemtuzumab, a-Galactosylceramide, ALVAC vCP 1452, alvimopan hydrate, alvocidib hydrochloride, aminolevulinic acid hydrochloride, aminolevulinic acid methyl ester, anakinra, anidulafungin, antarelix, aprepitant, aripiprazole, arsenic sulfide, asoprisnil, atazanavir sulfate, atomoxetine hydrochloride; Bevacizumab, bimatoprost, BMS-184476, bortezomib, bosentan, botulinum toxin type B, BrachySil, brivudine; Caffeine, calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate, cannabidiol, capsaicin for injection, caspofungin acetate, CC-4047, cetuximab, CGP-36742, clofazimine, CpG-7909, Cypher; Darbepoetin alfa, dextromethorphan/quinidine sulfate, dimethylfumarate, dronabinol/cannabidiol, drotrecogin alfa (activated), duloxetine hydrochloride, dutasteride; Ecogramostim, efalizumab, eletriptan, emtricitabine, enfuvirtide, eplerenone, esomeprazole magnesium, estradiol acetate, eszopiclone, etoricoxib, exenatide, ezetimibe, ezetimibe/simvastatin; Fampridine, fondaparinux sodium, fosamprenavir calcium; Gefitinib, GPI-0100; hA 20, HTU-PA, human insulin, HuOKT 3 gamma 1(Ala 234-Ala 235), hyaluronic acid; Icatibant, imatinib mesylate, Indiplon, INKP-100, INKP-102, iodine (I131) tositumomab, istradefylline, IV gamma-globulin, ivabradine hydrochloride, ixabepilone; Lacosamide, landiolol, lanthanum carbonate, lasofoxifene tartrate, LB-80380, lenalidomide, lidocaine/tetracaine, linezolid, liposomal doxorubicin, liposomal vincristine sulfate, lopinavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, lumiracoxib, lurtotecan; Maribavir, morphine glucuronide, MVA-5 T 4; NBI-56418, NCX-4016, nesiritide, nicotine conjugate vaccine, NSC-330507; Oglufanide, omalizumab, oxipurinol; Palifermin, palonosetron hydrochloride, parecoxib sodium, PEG-filgrastim, peginterferon alfa-2a, peginterferon alfa-2b, peginterferon alfa-2b/ribavirin, PEGylated interferon alfacon-1, perospirone hydrochloride, pimecrolimus, pixantrone maleate, plerixafor hydrochloride, PowderJect lidocaine, pradefovir mesylate, prasterone, pregabalin, Prostvac VF, PT-141, PTC-124, pyridoxamine; QS-21, quercetin; R-126638, R-411, ralfinamide, rasagiline mesilate, rF-PSA, RG-2077, rhThrombin, rimonabant hydrochloride, rofecoxib, rosuvastatin calcium, rotigotine hydrochloride, rV-PSA; S-18886, S-303, seocalcitol, SGN-40, sitaxsentan sodium, SPP-301, St. John's Wort extract; Tadalafil, taxus, telithromycin, tenatoprazole, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, testosterone MDTS, testosterone transdermal patch, tgAAC-09, TH-9507, thioacetazone, tipifarnib, TQ-1011, trabectedin, travoprost, trimethoprim; Valdecoxib, valganciclovir hydrochloride, valopicitabine, voriconazole; Xcellerated T cells.
Steady-state pharmacokinetics in pregnant women prescribed ritonavir-boosted fosamprenavir (FPV) to prevent HIV transmission were assessed in the second trimester, third trimester, and postpartum. Compared with postpartum, geometric mean amprenavir (APV, FPVs active metabolite) area under the plasma concentration-time curves were 35% lower in the second trimester and 25% lower in the third trimester. Maternal APV concentrations were 9- to 15-fold above the mean APV protein-adjusted 50% inhibitory concentration for wild-type HIV. Median ratio of cord blood/maternal APV levels was 0.27, and all infants were HIV negative. FPV/ritonavir during pregnancy was well tolerated and led to virologic suppression.
Fosamprenavir, a Vertex Pharmaceuticals phosphate ester prodrug of the HIV protease inhibitor amprenavir, is under development by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK; formerly Glaxo Wellcome) for the potential treatment of HIV infection in adults and children. By November 2000, it was in phase III trials; a third phase III trial was initiated in April 2001. In October 2001, GSK expected filing in both the EU and US in 2002. In January 2002, Vertex anticipated an NDA filing during the second half of 2002. Fast-track status for fosamprenavir was received by Glaxo Wellcome in December 1999. As of January 2002, enrollment was complete for two of the three phase III trials, and an NDA was expected to be filed during 2002. Fosamprenavir was first synthesized at Vertex as part of a collaboration with Glaxo Wellcome and by 1999, it was being developed by Glaxo Wellcome as part of an ongoing agreement between the two companies. In September 2000 and January 2001, Merrill Lynch predicted a 2002 launch, with sales of pounds sterling 50 million in 2002, rising to pounds sterling 150 million in 2004.
OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, virology, safety, efficacy, and clinical use of fosamprenavir. DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE (1966-July 2005) search was conducted using fosamprenavir, Lexiva, amprenavir, and GW433908 as key words. Abstracts from infectious diseases and HIV scientific meetings were identified. Bibliographies of cited articles were reviewed. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All publications, meeting abstracts, and unpublished information were reviewed and relevant items included. Information from in vitro, preclinical, and Phase II and III clinical trials was included. DATA SYNTHESIS: Fosamprenavir is a protease inhibitor (PI) prodrug used for the treatment of HIV-1 infection. The active moiety, amprenavir, is extensively metabolized by CYP3A4. In clinical trials, fosamprenavir was at least as effective as amprenavir, with a reduced pill burden. Fosamprenavir was developed with the intention of reducing the pill burden associated with amprenavir. It has demonstrated comparable safety and efficacy with comparator PIs and is associated with limited cross-resistance to other PIs. CONCLUSIONS: Fosamprenavir is a promising antiretroviral agent with favorable efficacy and tolerability. At this time, data indicate the utility of fosamprenavir in treatment-naive and PI-experienced HIV-infected patients.
Gateways to Clinical Trials is a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables has been retrieved from the Clinical Trials Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: 101M, 166Ho-DOTMP, 3-AP; Abatacept, abetimus sodium, ACR-16, adefovir dipivoxil, alefacept, AMD-070, aminolevulinic acid hexyl ester, anatumomab mafenatox, anti-CTLA-4 MAb, antigastrin therapeutic vaccine, AP-12009, AP-23573, APC-8024, aripiprazole, ATL-962, atomoxetine hydrochloride; Bevacizumab, bimatoprost, bortezomib, bosentan, BR-1; Calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate, cinacalcet hydrochloride, clofazimine, colchicine, cold-adapted influenza vaccine trivalent, CRM197; Desloratadine, desoxyepothilone B, diethylhomospermine; Edodekin alfa, efalizumab, elcometrine, eletriptan, enfuvirtide, entecavir, EP-2101, eplerenone, erlotinib hydrochloride, etoricoxib, everolimus, exherin, ezetimibe; Febuxostat, fluorescein lisicol, fosamprenavir calcium, frovatriptan; Hemoglobin raffimer, HSPPC-96, human insulin; Imatinib mesylate, insulin detemir, insulin glargine, IRX-2, istradefylline, IV gamma-globulin, ixabepilone; Kahalalide F; L-759274, levodopa/carbidopa/entacapone, licofelone, lonafarnib, lopinavir, lurtotecan, LY-156735; MAb G250, mecasermin, melatonin, midostaurin, muraglitazar; Nesiritide, nitronaproxen; O6-Benzylguanine, olmesartan medoxomil, olmesartan medoxomil/hydrochlorothiazide, omapatrilat, oral insulin; Parecoxib sodium, PCK-3145, peginterferon alfa-2a, peginterferon alfa-2b, peginterferon alfa-2b/ ribavirin, pemetrexed disodium, peptide YY3-36, PG-CPT, phenoxodiol, pimecrolimus, posaconazole; Rasagiline mesilate, rDNA insulin, RG228, rimonabant hydrochloride, rosuvastatin calcium, rotigotine hydrochloride; S-3304, safinamide mesilate, salcaprozic acid sodium salt, SDZ-SID-791, SGN-30, soblidotin, squalamine; Telmisartan/hydrochlorothiazide, testosterone gel, TF(c)-KLH conjugate vaccine, TH-9507, theraloc, tipifarnib, tocilizumab, travoprost; ValboroPro, valdecoxib, veglin, voriconazole; Ximelagatran.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of ritonavir-boosted fosamprenavir during pregnancy and postpartum. Amprenavir (the active moiety of fosamprenavir) and ritonavir intensive pharmacokinetic evaluations were performed at steady state during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy and postpartum. Plasma concentrations of amprenavir and ritonavir were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography. The target amprenavir area under the concentration-versus-time curve (AUC) was higher than the 10th percentile (27.7 mug . h/ml) of the median area under the curve for ritonavir-boosted fosamprenavir in adults receiving twice-daily fosamprenavir-ritonavir at 700 mg/100 mg. Twenty-nine women were included in the analysis. The amprenavir AUC from time zero to 12 h (AUC(0-12)) was lower (geometric mean ratio [GMR], 0.60 [confidence interval CI, 0.49 to 0.72] [P < 0.001]) while its apparent oral clearance was higher (GMR, 1.68 [CI, 1.38 to 2.03] [P < 0.001]) in the third trimester than postpartum. Similarly, the ritonavir AUC(0-12) was lower in the second (GMR, 0.51 [CI, 0.28 to 0.91] [P = 0.09]) and third (GMR, 0.72 [CI, 0.55 to 0.95] [P = 0.005]) trimesters than postpartum, while its apparent oral clearance was higher in the second (GMR, 1.98 [CI, 1.10 to 3.56] [P = 0.06]) and third (GMR, 1.38 [CI, 1.05 to 1.82] [P = 0.009]) trimesters than postpartum. The amprenavir area under the curve exceeded the target for 6/8 (75%) women in the 2nd trimester, 18/28 (64%) in the 3rd trimester, and 19/22 (86.4%) postpartum, and the trough concentrations (C(min)) of amprenavir were 4- to 16-fold above the mean amprenavir-protein-adjusted 50% inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) of 0.146 mug/ml. Although amprenavir plasma concentrations in women receiving ritonavir-boosted fosamprenavir were lower during pregnancy than postpartum, the reduced amprenavir concentrations were still above the exposures needed for viral suppression.
We present a case of a 48-year-old white HIV-1 positive man who presented an acute myocardial infarction. The patient was on ART for the last ten years with emtricitabine/tenofovir and ritonavir-boosted fosamprenavir. Eplerenone 25 mg/day was also initiated due to a left ventricular dysfunction. A week after discharge a routine laboratory examination revealed severe hyperkalaemia. Due to suspicion of a potential drug-drug interaction, both eplerenone and ARVs were interrupted. Despite daily treatment for hyperkalaemia, serum potassium levels normalized after two weeks. Eplerenone is metabolized by the hepatic P450 cytochrome isoenzyme CYP3A4; therefore, concomitant administration with CYP3A4 inhibitors, like ritonavir, may increase plasma levels of eplerenone and, therefore, the risk of side effects, mainly hyperkalaemia. Based on this case, it is important to alert the medical community of this possible life-threatening drug-drug interaction between eplerenone and ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitor.
As of November 2010, a total of 22 antiretroviral agents are marketed in Spain. These agents are divided into 6 classes according to their mechanism of action: 1) nucleos(t)ide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI) (abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, stavudine, lamivudine, zidovudine, and tenofovir), 2) non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI) (efavirenz, etravirine, and nevirapine), 3) protease inhibitors (PI) (atazanavir, darunavir, fosamprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, tipranavir), 4) entry inhibitors (enfuvirtide), 5) coreceptor CCR5 inhibitors (maraviroc), and 6) integrase inhibitors (raltegravir). All 22 agents are indicated for the treatment of HIV-1 infection in combination with other antiretroviral drugs. Most have also proven to be active against HIV-2 (except the NNRTIs, enfuvirtide, and maraviroc) and some are active against hepatitis B virus (lamivudine, emtricitabine, and tenofovir). The present article reviews the main characteristics of the different antiretroviral agents and classes, namely, commercial presentations, paediatric and adult dosages, dose adjustments in renal and hepatic insufficiency, pharmacokinetics and interactions, mechanism of action, treatment indications, resistance, adverse effects, and safety during pregnancy and breastfeeding. Some of the characteristics of antiretrovirals are class-specific and common to other agents of the same class, and others are individual and different from those of other drugs in the same class. Knowledge of these characteristics enables us to prepare efficacious therapeutic regimens according to the specific requirements of the patient (tolerability, simplicity, adaptability to lifestyle) and clinical setting (naive, simplification, rescue, resistance).
BACKGROUND: A novel, sensitive and specific LC-MS/MS technique was developed and validated for the quantification of fostemsavir in human plasma and its pharmacokinetic application in rabbits. METHODS: Chromatographic separation of the fostemsavir and fosamprenavir (internal standard) were achieved on Zorbax C18 (50 mm x 2 mm x 5 mum) column with 0.80 mL/min flow rate and coupled with API6000 triple quadrupole MS in multi reaction monitoring mode by applying mass transitions m/z 584.16/105.03 for fostemsavir and m/z 586.19/57.07 for the internal standard. RESULTS: The calibration curve exhibited linearity in concentration range of 58.5-2340.0 ng/mL for fostemsavir. The LLOQ was 58.5 ng/mL. The validated LC-MS/MS process was effectively applied for the analysis of plasma in healthy rabbits for determinations of Fostemsavir. From the pharmacokinetic data, the mean of C(max) and T(max) were 198.19 +/- 5.85 ng/mL and 2.42 +/- 0.13, respectively. Plasma concentration reduced with t(1/2) of 7.02 +/- 0.14. AUC(0-->Last) value obtained was 2374.87 +/- 29.75 ng. h/ml, respectively. CONCLUSION: In summary, the developed method has been successfully validated and pharmacokinetic parameters were demonstrated after oral administration of Fostemsavir to healthy rabbits.
BACKGROUND: This study examined drug interactions between buprenorphine, a partial opioid agonist used for opioid dependence treatment and pain management, and the protease inhibitors (PIs) darunavir-ritonavir and fosamprenavir-ritonavir. METHODS: The pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine and its metabolites and symptoms of opioid withdrawal or excess were compared in opioid-dependent, buprenorphine-naloxone-maintained, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative volunteers (11 for darunavir-ritonavir and 10 for fosamprenavir-ritonavir) before and after 15 days of PI administration. PI pharmacokinetics and adverse effects were compared between the buprenorphine-maintained participants and an equal number of sex-, age-, race-, and weight-matched, healthy, non-opioid-dependent volunteers who received darunavir-ritonavir or fosamprenavir-ritonavir but not buprenorphine. RESULTS: There were no significant changes in buprenorphine or PI plasma levels and no significant changes in medication adverse effects or opioid withdrawal. Increased concentrations of the inactive metabolite buprenorphine-3-glucuronide suggested that darunavir-ritonavir and fosamprenavir-ritonavir induced glucuronidation of buprenorphine. CONCLUSIONS: Dose adjustments are not likely to be necessary when buprenorphine and darunavir-ritonavir or fosamprenavir-ritonavir are coadministered for the treatment of opioid dependence and HIV disease.
