BACKGROUND: AKT pathway activation is implicated in endocrine-therapy resistance. Data on the efficacy and safety of the AKT inhibitor capivasertib, as an addition to fulvestrant therapy, in patients with hormone receptor-positive advanced breast cancer are limited. METHODS: In a phase 3, randomized, double-blind trial, we enrolled eligible pre-, peri-, and postmenopausal women and men with hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative advanced breast cancer who had had a relapse or disease progression during or after treatment with an aromatase inhibitor, with or without previous cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) inhibitor therapy. Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive capivasertib plus fulvestrant or placebo plus fulvestrant. The dual primary end point was investigator-assessed progression-free survival assessed both in the overall population and among patients with AKT pathway-altered (PIK3CA, AKT1, or PTEN) tumors. Safety was assessed. RESULTS: Overall, 708 patients underwent randomization; 289 patients (40.8%) had AKT pathway alterations, and 489 (69.1%) had received a CDK4/6 inhibitor previously for advanced breast cancer. In the overall population, the median progression-free survival was 7.2 months in the capivasertib-fulvestrant group, as compared with 3.6 months in the placebo-fulvestrant group (hazard ratio for progression or death, 0.60; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.51 to 0.71; P<0.001). In the AKT pathway-altered population, the median progression-free survival was 7.3 months in the capivasertib-fulvestrant group, as compared with 3.1 months in the placebo-fulvestrant group (hazard ratio, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.38 to 0.65; P<0.001). The most frequent adverse events of grade 3 or higher in patients receiving capivasertib-fulvestrant were rash (in 12.1% of patients, vs. in 0.3% of those receiving placebo-fulvestrant) and diarrhea (in 9.3% vs. 0.3%). Adverse events leading to discontinuation were reported in 13.0% of the patients receiving capivasertib and in 2.3% of those receiving placebo. CONCLUSIONS: Capivasertib-fulvestrant therapy resulted in significantly longer progression-free survival than treatment with fulvestrant alone among patients with hormone receptor-positive advanced breast cancer whose disease had progressed during or after previous aromatase inhibitor therapy with or without a CDK4/6 inhibitor. (Funded by AstraZeneca and the National Cancer Institute; CAPItello-291 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04305496.).
BACKGROUND: PIK3CA mutations occur in approximately 40% of patients with hormone receptor (HR)-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative breast cancer. The PI3Kalpha-specific inhibitor alpelisib has shown antitumor activity in early studies. METHODS: In a randomized, phase 3 trial, we compared alpelisib (at a dose of 300 mg per day) plus fulvestrant (at a dose of 500 mg every 28 days and once on day 15) with placebo plus fulvestrant in patients with HR-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer who had received endocrine therapy previously. Patients were enrolled into two cohorts on the basis of tumor-tissue PIK3CA mutation status. The primary end point was progression-free survival, as assessed by the investigator, in the cohort with PIK3CA-mutated cancer; progression-free survival was also analyzed in the cohort without PIK3CA-mutated cancer. Secondary end points included overall response and safety. RESULTS: A total of 572 patients underwent randomization, including 341 patients with confirmed tumor-tissue PIK3CA mutations. In the cohort of patients with PIK3CA-mutated cancer, progression-free survival at a median follow-up of 20 months was 11.0 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 7.5 to 14.5) in the alpelisib-fulvestrant group, as compared with 5.7 months (95% CI, 3.7 to 7.4) in the placebo-fulvestrant group (hazard ratio for progression or death, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.50 to 0.85; P<0.001); in the cohort without PIK3CA-mutated cancer, the hazard ratio was 0.85 (95% CI, 0.58 to 1.25; posterior probability of hazard ratio <1.00, 79.4%). Overall response among all the patients in the cohort without PIK3CA-mutated cancer was greater with alpelisib-fulvestrant than with placebo-fulvestrant (26.6% vs. 12.8%); among patients with measurable disease in this cohort, the percentages were 35.7% and 16.2%, respectively. In the overall population, the most frequent adverse events of grade 3 or 4 were hyperglycemia (36.6% in the alpelisib-fulvestrant group vs. 0.7% in the placebo-fulvestrant group) and rash (9.9% vs. 0.3%). Diarrhea of grade 3 occurred in 6.7% of patients in the alpelisib-fulvestrant group, as compared with 0.3% of those in the placebo-fulvestrant group; no diarrhea of grade 4 was reported. The percentages of patients who discontinued alpelisib and placebo owing to adverse events were 25.0% and 4.2%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with alpelisib-fulvestrant prolonged progression-free survival among patients with PIK3CA-mutated, HR-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer who had received endocrine therapy previously. (Funded by Novartis Pharmaceuticals; SOLAR-1 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02437318.).
The acquisition of ligand-independent ESR1 mutations during aromatase inhibitor therapy in metastatic estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer is a common mechanism of hormonal therapy resistance. Preclinical and clinical studies have demonstrated that ESR1 mutations can preexist in primary tumors and can be enriched during metastasis. Furthermore, ESR1 mutations express a unique transcriptional profile that favors tumor progression, suggesting that selected ESR1 mutations may influence metastasis. Several groups have used sensitive detection methods using patient liquid biopsies to track ESR1 or truncal somatic mutations to predict treatment outcome and tumor progression, and some of these techniques may eventually be used to guide sequential treatment options in patients. Further development and standardization of mutation tracking in circulating tumor DNA is ongoing. Clinically, patients with ESR1 mutations derive clinical benefit when treated with fulvestrant and CDK4/6-targeted therapies, but the development of more potent selective ER degraders and/or new targeted biotherapies are needed to overcome the endocrine-resistant phenotype of ESR1 mutant-bearing tumors. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms of resistance and dissemination of ESR1 mutations as well as the detection methods for ESR1 mutation tracking, newly discovered potential therapeutic targets, and the clinical implications and treatment options for treating patients with ESR1 mutant-bearing tumors.
Approximately 75% of all breast cancers express the oestrogen and/or progesterone receptors. Endocrine therapy is usually effective in these hormone-receptor-positive tumours, but primary and acquired resistance limits its long-term benefit(1,2). Here we show that in mouse models of hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer, periodic fasting or a fasting-mimicking diet(3-5) enhances the activity of the endocrine therapeutics tamoxifen and fulvestrant by lowering circulating IGF1, insulin and leptin and by inhibiting AKT-mTOR signalling via upregulation of EGR1 and PTEN. When fulvestrant is combined with palbociclib (a cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor), adding periodic cycles of a fasting-mimicking diet promotes long-lasting tumour regression and reverts acquired resistance to drug treatment. Moreover, both fasting and a fasting-mimicking diet prevent tamoxifen-induced endometrial hyperplasia. In patients with hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer receiving oestrogen therapy, cycles of a fasting-mimicking diet cause metabolic changes analogous to those observed in mice, including reduced levels of insulin, leptin and IGF1, with the last two remaining low for extended periods. In mice, these long-lasting effects are associated with long-term anti-cancer activity. These results support further clinical studies of a fasting-mimicking diet as an adjuvant to oestrogen therapy in hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer.
Purpose This phase III study evaluated ribociclib plus fulvestrant in patients with hormone receptor-positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative advanced breast cancer who were treatment naive or had received up to one line of prior endocrine therapy in the advanced setting. Patients and Methods Patients were randomly assigned at a two-to-one ratio to ribociclib plus fulvestrant or placebo plus fulvestrant. The primary end point was locally assessed progression-free survival. Secondary end points included overall survival, overall response rate, and safety. Results A total of 484 postmenopausal women were randomly assigned to ribociclib plus fulvestrant, and 242 were assigned to placebo plus fulvestrant. Median progression-free survival was significantly improved with ribociclib plus fulvestrant versus placebo plus fulvestrant: 20.5 months (95% CI, 18.5 to 23.5 months) versus 12.8 months (95% CI, 10.9 to 16.3 months), respectively (hazard ratio, 0.593; 95% CI, 0.480 to 0.732; P < .001). Consistent treatment effects were observed in patients who were treatment naive in the advanced setting (hazard ratio, 0.577; 95% CI, 0.415 to 0.802), as well as in patients who had received up to one line of prior endocrine therapy for advanced disease (hazard ratio, 0.565; 95% CI, 0.428 to 0.744). Among patients with measurable disease, the overall response rate was 40.9% for the ribociclib plus fulvestrant arm and 28.7% for placebo plus fulvestrant. Grade 3 adverse events reported in >/= 10% of patients in either arm (ribociclib plus fulvestrant v placebo plus fulvestrant) were neutropenia (46.6% v 0%) and leukopenia (13.5% v 0%); the only grade 4 event reported in >/= 5% of patients was neutropenia (6.8% v 0%). Conclusion Ribociclib plus fulvestrant might represent a new first- or second-line treatment option in hormone receptor-positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative advanced breast cancer.
Inavolisib (Itovebi()) is an orally administered, phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase alpha (PI3Kalpha) inhibitor being developed by Genentech, a member of the Roche group, for the treatment of solid tumours. On 10 October 2024, inavolisib received its first approval in the USA in combination with palbociclib and fulvestrant for the treatment of adults with endocrine-resistant, PIK3CA-mutated, hormone receptor (HR)-positive, human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)-negative, locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer, as detected by an FDA-approved test, following recurrence on or after completing adjuvant endocrine therapy. In the EU and other countries worldwide, regulatory review of inavolisib is currently underway. This article summarises the milestones in the development of inavolisib leading to this first approval for endocrine-resistant, PIK3CA-mutated, HR-positive, HER2-negative, locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer.
The therapeutic landscape of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer includes endocrine treatments with aromatase inhibitors (AIs), selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), and selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs). Fulvestrant is the first approved SERD with proven efficacy and good tolerability in clinical practice. However, drug resistance, low receptor affinity, and parental administration stimulated the search for new oral SERDs opening a new therapeutic era in ER + breast cancer. Elacestrant is an orally bioavailable SERD that has been recently approved by the FDA for postmenopausal women with ER+, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)-mutated advanced or metastatic breast cancer with disease progression following at least one line of endocrine therapy. Other molecules of the same class currently tested in clinical trials are amcenestrant, giredestrant, camizestrant, and imlunestrant. The current review article offers a detailed pharmacological perspective of this emerging drug class, which may help with their possible future clinical applications.
Pure anti-oestrogens are a group of at least five new compounds which are able to antagonize the effects of oestrogen in all tissues and species studied. The mechanism by which the pure anti-oestrogens produce their effects remains in question, but all of them are competitive antagonists of the oestrogen receptors and, moreover, have been proposed to block the shuttling of oestrogen receptors into the cell nucleus. When studied in vitro, these compounds are able to block the oestrogen-stimulated growth of breast cancer cells. In animals, their ability to block the effects of oestrogen on breast, uterus, bone, cardiovascular system and other reproductive-associated tissues has been demonstrated. ICI 182780 has been used in preliminary clinical trials in women with advanced, tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer with promising results. Clinical trials with EM-800 are under way to assess the safety and tolerance and to obtain information on its efficacy in patients who have already been treated with tamoxifen. It seems reasonable to assume that pure anti-oestrogens will be a good alternative to tamoxifen in the treatment of breast cancer and also in some non-malignant gynaecological diseases.
Estrogen receptor-positive (ER(+)) breast cancers frequently remain dependent on ER signaling even after acquiring resistance to endocrine agents, prompting the development of optimized ER antagonists. Fulvestrant is unique among approved ER therapeutics due to its capacity for full ER antagonism, thought to be achieved through ER degradation. The clinical potential of fulvestrant is limited by poor physicochemical features, spurring attempts to generate ER degraders with improved drug-like properties. We show that optimization of ER degradation does not guarantee full ER antagonism in breast cancer cells; ER "degraders" exhibit a spectrum of transcriptional activities and anti-proliferative potential. Mechanistically, we find that fulvestrant-like antagonists suppress ER transcriptional activity not by ER elimination, but by markedly slowing the intra-nuclear mobility of ER. Increased ER turnover occurs as a consequence of ER immobilization. These findings provide proof-of-concept that small molecule perturbation of transcription factor mobility may enable therapeutic targeting of this challenging target class.
IMPORTANCE: Statistically significant overall survival (OS) benefits of CDK4 and CDK6 inhibitors in combination with fulvestrant for hormone receptor (HR)-positive, ERBB2 (formerly HER2)-negative advanced breast cancer (ABC) in patients regardless of menopausal status after prior endocrine therapy (ET) has not yet been demonstrated. OBJECTIVE: To compare the effect of abemaciclib plus fulvestrant vs placebo plus fulvestrant on OS at the prespecified interim of MONARCH 2 (338 events) in patients with HR-positive, ERBB2-negative advanced breast cancer that progressed during prior ET. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: MONARCH 2 was a global, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind phase 3 trial of abemaciclib plus fulvestrant vs placebo plus fulvestrant for treatment of premenopausal or perimenopausal women (with ovarian suppression) and postmenopausal women with HR-positive, ERBB2-negative ABC that progressed during ET. Patients were enrolled between August 7, 2014, and December 29, 2015. Analyses for this report were conducted at the time of database lock on June 20, 2019. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized 2:1 to receive abemaciclib or placebo, 150 mg, every 12 hours on a continuous schedule plus fulvestrant, 500 mg, per label. Randomization was stratified based on site of metastasis (visceral, bone only, or other) and resistance to prior ET (primary vs secondary). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was investigator-assessed progression-free survival. Overall survival was a gated key secondary end point. The boundary P value for the interim analysis was .02. RESULTS: Of 669 women enrolled, 446 (median [range] age, 59 [32-91] years) were randomized to the abemaciclib plus fulvestrant arm and 223 (median [range] age, 62 [32-87] years) were randomized to the placebo plus fulvestrant arm. At the prespecified interim, 338 deaths (77% of the planned 441 at the final analysis) were observed in the intent-to-treat population, with a median OS of 46.7 months for abemaciclib plus fulvestrant and 37.3 months for placebo plus fulvestrant (hazard ratio [HR], 0.757; 95% CI, 0.606-0.945; P = .01). Improvement in OS was consistent across all stratification factors. Among stratification factors, more pronounced effects were observed in patients with visceral disease (HR, 0.675; 95% CI, 0.511-0.891) and primary resistance to prior ET (HR, 0.686; 95% CI, 0.451-1.043). Time to second disease progression (median, 23.1 months vs 20.6 months), time to chemotherapy (median, 50.2 months vs 22.1 months), and chemotherapy-free survival (median, 25.5 months vs 18.2 months) were also statistically significantly improved in the abemaciclib arm vs placebo arm. No new safety signals were observed for abemaciclib. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Treatment with abemaciclib plus fulvestrant resulted in a statistically significant and clinically meaningful median OS improvement of 9.4 months for patients with HR-positive, ERBB2-negative ABC who progressed after prior ET regardless of menopausal status. Abemaciclib substantially delayed the receipt of subsequent chemotherapy. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02107703.
BACKGROUND: Ribociclib plus fulvestrant demonstrated significant progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) benefits in patients with hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HR+/HER2-) advanced breast cancer (ABC). Here we present a new landmark in survival follow-up for a phase III cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 inhibitor clinical trial in patients with ABC (median, 56.3 months). PATIENTS AND METHODS: This phase III, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was conducted at 174 sites (30 countries). Patients were men and postmenopausal women (age >/=18 years) with histologically/cytologically confirmed HR+/HER2- ABC. Patients could have received </=1 line of endocrine therapy (ET) but no chemotherapy for ABC. Patients, assigned 2:1, were stratified by the presence/absence of liver/lung metastases and previous ET. Patients received intramuscular fulvestrant (500 mg, day 1 of each 28-day cycle plus day 15 of cycle 1) with oral ribociclib (600 mg/day, 3 weeks on, 1 week off) or placebo. Efficacy analyses were by intention to treat. Safety was assessed in patients receiving >/=1 dose study treatment. OS was a secondary endpoint. MONALEESA-3 is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02422615; no longer enrolling). RESULTS: Between 18 June 2015 and 10 June 2016, 726 patients were randomly assigned (484, ribociclib; 242, placebo). At data cut-off (30 October 2020), median OS (mOS) was 53.7 months (ribociclib) versus 41.5 months (placebo) [hazard ratio (HR), 0.73; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.59-0.90]. Subgroup analyses were consistent with overall population. In the first-line setting, most patients in the ribociclib arm ( approximately 60%) lived longer than median follow-up; mOS was 51.8 months in the placebo arm (HR, 0.64; 95% CI 0.46-0.88). In the second-line setting, mOS was 39.7 months (ribociclib) versus 33.7 months (placebo) (HR, 0.78; 95% CI 0.59-1.04). No apparent drug-drug interaction between ribociclib and fulvestrant or new safety signals were observed. CONCLUSIONS: This analysis reported extended OS follow-up in MONALEESA-3. mOS was  approximately 12 months longer in patients with HR+/HER2- ABC treated with ribociclib plus fulvestrant compared with fulvestrant monotherapy.
Fulvestrant, a novel oestrogen receptor (ER) downregulator, is a pure anti-oestrogen which completely blocks the trophic actions of oestrogens without exerting any partial agonist effects. It reduces expression of oestrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and proliferative and cell turnover indices. The drug is well-tolerated with minimal systemic side effects. Large randomised trials have demonstrated similar efficacy to anastrozole in the treatment of postmenopausal advanced breast cancer. While results of a Phase III trial comparing fulvestrant with tamoxifen as first-line endocrine therapy for postmenopausal advanced breast cancer are awaited, future studies on its role in adjuvant and neoadjuvant settings, as well as in premenopausal women are required. With the role of tamoxifen as the gold standard of first-line therapy being challenged by the third generation aromatase inhibitors, direct comparison of the latter with fulvestrant in the first-line setting may also be worthwhile.
Alpelisib (Piqray)-an orally available phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor with specific activity against PI3K alpha (PI3Kalpha)-is being developed by Novartis for the treatment of breast cancer. Alpelisib has demonstrated efficacy in combination with fulvestrant as treatment for hormone receptor (HR)-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2)-negative breast cancer in patients with a PIK3CA mutation and was recently approved for this indication in the USA. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of alpelisib leading to this first approval.
Elacestrant is a novel, nonsteroidal, orally bioavailable selective estrogen receptor degrader (SERD) that has demonstrated activity in patients with estrogen receptor (ER)-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer previously treated with endocrine therapies including fulvestrant and/or CDK 4/6 inhibitor therapy, and in those with ESR1 mutations (ESR1-mut) known to confer endocrine resistance. Herein, we describe the design and methodology of EMERALD, an international, multicenter, randomized, open-label, active-controlled, Phase III clinical study comparing the efficacy and safety of elacestrant to standard-of-care endocrine monotherapy treatment (fulvestrant or an aromatase inhibitor, per investigator's choice) in patients with ER-positive/HER2-negative advanced breast cancer. Primary end points are progression-free survival in ESR1-mut patients and in all patients (NCT03778931; EudraCT 2018-002990-24).
IMPORTANCE: The cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 inhibitor palbociclib in combination with letrozole has become a standard first-line treatment for patients with endocrine-sensitive, hormone receptor-positive, ERBB2-negative advanced breast cancer. Meanwhile, the antiestrogen fulvestrant was shown to be superior to anastrozole in the absence of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 inhibition for this patient population. OBJECTIVE: To assess whether fulvestrant is superior to letrozole when combined with palbociclib in the first-line scenario. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this international, randomized, open-label, phase 2 clinical study conducted from July 30, 2015, to January 8, 2018, patients with hormone receptor-positive, ERBB2-negative advanced breast cancer with no prior therapy in the metastatic setting and endocrine-sensitive criteria were recruited from 47 centers in 7 countries. Data were analyzed from February 11 to May 15, 2020. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomly assigned (1:1 ratio) to receive palbociclib with either fulvestrant or letrozole. Stratification factors were type of disease presentation (de novo vs recurrent) and the presence of visceral involvement (yes vs no). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was investigator-assessed progression-free survival determined by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1. RESULTS: A total of 486 women (median age, 63 years [range, 25-90 years]; 3 Asian women [0.6%]; 4 Black women [0.8%]; 461 White women [94.9%]; 18 women of unknown race [3.7%]) were randomized (243 to fulvestrant-palbociclib and 243 to letrozole-palbociclib). Median investigator-assessed progression-free survival was 27.9 months (95% CI, 24.2-33.1 months) in the fulvestrant-palbociclib group vs 32.8 months (95% CI, 25.8-35.9 months) in the letrozole-palbociclib group (hazard ratio, 1.13; 95% CI, 0.89-1.45; P = .32). This result was consistent across the stratification factors. No significant differences were observed in objective response rate (46.5% vs 50.2%) and 3-year overall survival rate (79.4% vs 77.1%) for fulvestrant-palbociclib and letrozole-palbociclib, respectively. Grade 3-4 adverse events were comparable among treatment groups, and no new safety signals were identified. No treatment-related deaths were reported. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Although fulvestrant-palbociclib demonstrated significant antitumor activity, this randomized clinical trial failed to identify an improvement in progression-free survival with this regimen over letrozole-palbociclib in patients with endocrine-sensitive, hormone receptor-positive, ERBB2-negative advanced breast cancer. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02491983.
PURPOSE: Alpelisib is a PI3K alpha (PI3Kalpha)-selective inhibitor approved for the treatment of hormone receptor-positive/HER2-negative (HR+/HER2-) PIK3CA-mutated advanced breast cancer (ABC) based on the SOLAR-1 trial, which defined 11 substitutions in exons 7, 9, and 20 in PIK3CA (SOLAR1m). We report alpelisib effectiveness for ABC harboring SOLAR1m, as well as other pathogenic PIK3CA mutations (OTHERm) using comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP). EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A total of 33,977 tissue and 1,587 liquid biopsies were analyzed using hybrid capture-based CGP covering the entire coding sequence of PIK3CA. Clinical characteristics and treatment history were available for 10,750 patients with ABC in the deidentified Flatiron Health-Foundation Medicine clinico-genomic database (FH-FMI CGDB). RESULTS: PIK3CAm were detected in 11,767/33,977 (35%) of tissue biopsies, including 2,300 (7%) samples with OTHERm and no SOLAR1m. Liquid biopsy had 77% sensitivity detecting PIK3CAm, increasing to 95% with circulating tumor DNA fraction >/=2%. In patients with HR+/HER2- ABC and PIK3CAm receiving alpelisib/fulvestrant (ALP+FUL; n = 182) or fulvestrant alone (FUL; n = 119), median real-world progression-free survival (rwPFS) was 5.9 months on ALP+FUL [95% confidence interval (CI): 5.1-7.4] versus 3.1 months on FUL (95% CI: 2.7-3.7; P < 0.0001). In patients with OTHERm, median rwPFS was 4.0 months on ALP+FUL (95% CI: 2.8-10.1) versus 2.5 months on FUL (95% CI: 2.2-3.7; P = 0.0054). CONCLUSIONS: CGP detects diverse PIK3CAm in a greater number of patients with ABC than PCR hotspot testing; 20% of patients with PIK3CAm do not have SOLAR1m. These patients may derive benefit from alpelisib. See related commentary by Tau and Miller, p. 989.
BACKGROUND: The cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) inhibitor palbociclib, in combination with fulvestrant therapy, prolongs progression-free survival among patients with hormone-receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative advanced breast cancer. We report the results of a prespecified analysis of overall survival. METHODS: We randomly assigned patients with hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer who had progression or relapse during previous endocrine therapy to receive palbociclib plus fulvestrant or placebo plus fulvestrant. We analyzed overall survival; the effect of palbociclib according to the prespecified stratification factors of presence or absence of sensitivity to endocrine therapy, presence or absence of visceral metastatic disease, and menopausal status; the efficacy of subsequent therapies after disease progression; and safety. RESULTS: Among 521 patients who underwent randomization, the median overall survival was 34.9 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 28.8 to 40.0) in the palbociclib-fulvestrant group and 28.0 months (95% CI, 23.6 to 34.6) in the placebo-fulvestrant group (hazard ratio for death, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.64 to 1.03; P=0.09; absolute difference, 6.9 months). CDK4/6 inhibitor treatment after the completion of the trial regimen occurred in 16% of the patients in the placebo-fulvestrant group. Among 410 patients with sensitivity to previous endocrine therapy, the median overall survival was 39.7 months (95% CI, 34.8 to 45.7) in the palbociclib-fulvestrant group and 29.7 months (95% CI, 23.8 to 37.9) in the placebo-fulvestrant group (hazard ratio, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.55 to 0.94; absolute difference, 10.0 months). The median duration of subsequent therapy was similar in the two groups, and the median time to the receipt of chemotherapy was 17.6 months in the palbociclib-fulvestrant group, as compared with 8.8 months in the placebo-fulvestrant group (hazard ratio, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.47 to 0.73; P<0.001). No new safety signals were observed with 44.8 months of follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer who had sensitivity to previous endocrine therapy, treatment with palbociclib-fulvestrant resulted in longer overall survival than treatment with placebo-fulvestrant. The differences in overall survival in the entire trial group were not significant. (Funded by Pfizer; PALOMA-3 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01942135 .).
BACKGROUND: In an earlier analysis of this phase 3 trial, ribociclib plus fulvestrant showed a greater benefit with regard to progression-free survival than fulvestrant alone in postmenopausal patients with hormone-receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative advanced breast cancer. Here we report the results of a protocol-specified second interim analysis of overall survival. METHODS: Patients were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either ribociclib or placebo in addition to fulvestrant as first-line or second-line treatment. Survival was evaluated by means of a stratified log-rank test and summarized with the use of Kaplan-Meier methods. RESULTS: This analysis was based on 275 deaths: 167 among 484 patients (34.5%) receiving ribociclib and 108 among 242 (44.6%) receiving placebo. Ribociclib plus fulvestrant showed a significant overall survival benefit over placebo plus fulvestrant. The estimated overall survival at 42 months was 57.8% (95% confidence interval [CI], 52.0 to 63.2) in the ribociclib group and 45.9% (95% CI, 36.9 to 54.5) in the placebo group, for a 28% difference in the relative risk of death (hazard ratio, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.57 to 0.92; P = 0.00455). The benefit was consistent across most subgroups. In a descriptive update, median progression-free survival among patients receiving first-line treatment was 33.6 months (95% CI, 27.1 to 41.3) in the ribociclib group and 19.2 months (95% CI, 14.9 to 23.6) in the placebo group. No new safety signals were observed. CONCLUSIONS: Ribociclib plus fulvestrant showed a significant overall survival benefit over placebo plus fulvestrant in patients with hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer. (Funded by Novartis; MONALEESA-3 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02422615.).
Drug discovery in the scope of cancer therapy has been focused on conventional agents that nonselectively induce DNA damage or selectively inhibit the activity of key oncogenic molecules without affecting their protein levels. An emerging therapeutic strategy that garnered attention in recent years is the induction of Targeted Protein Degradation (TPD) of cellular targets by hijacking the intracellular proteolysis machinery. This novel approach offers several advantages over conventional inhibitors and introduces a paradigm shift in several pharmacological aspects of drug therapy. While TPD has been found to be the major mode of action of clinically approved anticancer agents such as fulvestrant and thalidomide, recent years have witnessed systematic endeavors to expand the repertoire of proteins amenable to therapeutic ablation by TPD. Such endeavors have led to three major classes of agents that induce protein degradation, including molecular glues, Proteolysis Targeting Chimeras (PROTACs) and Hydrophobic Tag (HyT)-based degraders. Here, we briefly highlight agents in these classes and key advances made in the field with a focus on clinical translation in cancer therapy.
A proportion of patients with hormone receptor-positive locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer will not have received prior endocrine therapy. However, there are limited clinical data specifically in these patients. We conducted a review of randomized phase II and III clinical studies of anastrozole, letrozole, exemestane, palbociclib, and fulvestrant to determine the evidence base supporting use of specific endocrine therapies in this patient population. From our findings, there is a paucity of clinical studies in patients with endocrine therapy-naive disease; however, it appears that first-line treatment effects are consistent between patients who have and have not received prior endocrine treatment.
