Therapeutic Reviews aim to provide essential independent information for health professionals about drugs used in palliative and hospice care. Additional content is available on www.palliativedrugs.com. Country-specific books (Hospice and Palliative Care Formulary USA, and Palliative Care Formulary, British and Canadian editions) are also available and can be ordered from www.palliativedrugs.com. The series editors welcome feedback on the articles (hq@palliativedrugs.com).
BACKGROUND: It has been a matter of much debate whether the co-administration of furosemide and albumin can achieve better diuresis and natriuresis than furosemide treatment alone. There is inconsistency in published trials regarding the effect of this combination therapy. We, therefore, conducted this meta-analysis to explore the efficacy of furosemide and albumin co-administration and the factors potentially influencing the diuretic effect of such co-administration. METHODS: In accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, we searched the PubMed, Embase, Medline, and Cochrane databases. Prospective studies with adult populations which comparing the effect of furosemide and albumin co-administration with furosemide alone were included. The outcomes including diuretic effect and natriuresis effect measured by hourly urine output and hourly urine sodium excretion from both groups were extracted. Random effect model was applied for conducting meta-analysis. Subgroup analysis and sensitivity analysis were performed to explore potential sources of heterogeneity of treatment effects. RESULTS: By including 13 studies with 422 participants, the meta-analysis revealed that furosemide with albumin co-administration increased urine output by 31.45 ml/hour and increased urine excretion by 1.76 mEq/hour in comparison to furosemide treatment alone. The diuretic effect of albumin and furosemide co-administration was better in participants with low baseline serum albumin levels (< 2.5 g/dL) and high prescribed albumin infusion doses (> 30 g), and the effect was more significant within 12 hours after administration. Diuretic effect of co-administration was better in those with baseline Cr > 1.2 mg/dL and natriuresis effect of co-administration was better in those with baseline eGFR < 60 ml/min/1.73m2. CONCLUSION: Co-administration of furosemide with albumin might enhance diuresis and natriuresis effects than furosemide treatment alone but with high heterogeneity in treatment response. According to the present meta-analysis, combination therapy might provide advantages compared to the furosemide therapy alone in patients with baseline albumin levels lower than 2.5 g/dL or in patients receiving higher albumin infusion doses or in patients with impaired renal function. Owing to high heterogeneity and limited enrolled participants, further parallel randomized controlled trials are warranted to examine our outcome. REGISTRATION: PROSEPRO ID: CRD42020211002; https://clinicaltrials.gov/.
Furosemide (frusemide) is a potent loop diuretic used in the treatment of oedematous states associated with cardiac, renal and hepatic failure, and for the treatment of hypertension. Therapy is frequently complicated by apparently erratic systemic availability from the oral route and from unpredictable responses to a given dosage. The exact mechanism of action is not fully understood, but furosemide is believed to act at the luminal surface of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle by inhibiting the active reabsorption of chloride. The response to a given dosage is modulated by the fluid and electrolyte balance of the individual. Acute and delayed tolerance has been demonstrated both in animals and in man, and is postulated to be due to the intervention of homeostatic mechanisms influencing fluid and electrolyte balances. Furosemide is delivered to its site of action by active secretion via the nonspecific organic acid pump. Comparisons between the observed diuresis/saluresis and plasma furosemide concentrations, urinary excretion rates and renal clearance found either negative or no correlations with plasma drug concentration but significant correlations with urine measurements. Response is related to the concentration of the drug in urine rather than in plasma. The most common adverse reactions attributable to furosemide therapy are essentially extensions of the therapeutic effects (i.e. fluid and electrolyte disturbances). The pharmacokinetic behaviour of furosemide is marked by a large degree of variability, derived from differences within and between both subjects and study protocols. Part of this variability can be attributed to differences in organ function, which is important in view of the types of patients treated with furosemide. On the other hand, a large proportion remains as inter- and intrasubject variation. The bioavailability of furosemide from oral dosage forms is highly variable. The poor bioavailability has been hypothesized to be due to the poor solubility of the compound, site-specific absorption, presystemic metabolism and/or other unknown mechanisms. Furosemide is highly bound to plasma proteins, almost exclusively to albumin. Although the drug is insoluble in water and favours partitioning into fatty tissue, the high degree of plasma protein binding restricts the apparent volume of distribution at steady-state to values within a multiple of 2 to 5 times the plasma volume. Furosemide has two documented metabolites--furosemide glucuronide and saluamine (CSA). The first is an accepted metabolic product, whereas the status of CSA as a metabolite is highly controversial.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
Diuretics are now commonly prescribed for women with so-called idiopathic oedema. Two patients with idiopathic oedema, one of whom was oedematous on diuretics, had the diuretics stopped. In one the oedema became much worse, and in the other oedema developed. However, this oedema disappeared spontaneously in both patients and they have remained free of oedema on no treatment. It is suggested that in some patients treated with diuretics compensatory mechanisms to retain sodium and water may be stronger than the diuretic-effect itself and may lead to perpetuation of unnecessary treatment.
We describe a 5-month-old infant who had fever of unknown origin leading to an exhaustive evaluation during a 7-week period. Fever caused by the use of furosemide was proved; the fever resolved after discontinuation of this medication and recurred after its reintroduction.
Bullous pemphigoid is a rare complication of frusemide therapy. We present two patients in whom the link between frusemide and this condition was not recognised early, and continued frusemide therapy resulted in prolonged leg blistering and ulceration. On withdrawing the drug, all lesions in both patients resolved completely. Although uncommon, this frusemide reaction needs to be borne in mind as it can add to the morbidity of elderly patients with heart failure.
Part I of this article, which appeared in the previous issue of the Journal, covered the physical properties, pharmacology, toxicology and pharmacokinetics of furosemide (frusemide). In part II the authors examine the pharmacodynamics of the drug, and suggest various areas for future study.
Use of intravenous furosemide rather than oral administration in acute decompensated congestive cardiac failure is universally recommended in international guidelines. We argue that this recommendation is not supported by the existing evidence, and suggest that trials should be performed to determine whether larger doses of oral furosemide should be prescribed prior to an IV switch. This could reduce length of hospital admissions and allow for more patients to be managed in the primary care setting.
The observation that changes in bronchial osmolarity can induce bronchoconstriction in asthma inspired the experimental studies which, unexpectedly, revealed that frusemide is an effective bronchoprotective agent against a variety of osmotic and non osmotic stimuli. Although the mechanism of this protective effect is not fully understood, studies in vivo and in vitro suggest that frusemide may inhibit the activation of different cell types induced by bronchoconstrictor stimuli. Other loop diuretics also exert bronchoprotective activity, but frusemide appears to be the more effective bronchoprotective agent of this family, regardless of their diuretic potency and lipid solubility. Despite the relatively large amount of experimental evidence, there is currently little information on the clinical effectiveness of frusemide in asthma and a long-term controlled study is currently in progress. The observations that treatment with a combination of inhaled acetylsalicylate and frusemide results in a markedly increased bronchoprotective effect compared to either drug alone, opens a new perspective in the possible clinical use of these drugs. Preliminary studies suggest that the association of these drugs is well tolerated and may result in a remarkable steroid sparing effect in patients with steroid dependent asthma, for whom a convenient alternative to long-term steroid therapy is not currently available.
Refractory edema is a clinical condition which recognises different etiologies and is characterized by decreased or absent diuretic response before the therapeutic goal is reached. Several pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic strategies are used in this setting, and further research is needed in order to optimize drug effectiveness.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To explore advances in the pharmacological treatment of refractory breathlessness and the physiological evidence for treatments. RECENT FINDINGS: The evidence for the role of oral and parenteral opioids in the reduction of breathlessness continues to strengthen from individual studies and from systematic reviews. Importantly, more data are emerging about a lack of lowering in oxygenation or carbon dioxide retention with opioid therapy. In healthy volunteers and those with refractory dyspnoea, nebulized frusemide appears to be worthy of further investigation with adequately powered phase III studies. SUMMARY: Opioids prescribed regularly can help to predictably and safely reduce breathlessness for people with a range of end-stage illnesses.
Hypertonic saline with high dose furosemide improves refractory heart failure. In this case series of 10 patients of refractory acute decompensated heart failure, effect of HSS with furosemide was compared with furosemide alone. Patients responded to the therapy better, with faster decongestion, without significant adverse effects or worsening renal function. Hence an adequately powered, randomized study is required to assess the veracity of findings in this case series of hypertonic saline in diuretic resistant acute decompensated heart failure on optimal therapy. Based on present study, hypertonic saline looks like a promising option in the management of refractory heart failure.
Kidney injury following the administration of iodinated contrast media occurs particularly in patients with reduced kidney and cardiac function and when large doses of contrast are used. There is little compelling evidence that vasodilators and anti-oxidants prevent this injury. Most prevention trials have employed intravenous volume loading as a central strategy. However, the success of this approach depends upon maintaining euvolemia while producing a vigorous diuresis. A novel strategy for maintaining euvolemia and inducing a vigorous diuresis has been developed using the RenalGuard system. In this review; the mechanism of protective action is reviewed. The trials of the RenalGuard device are reviewed and future uses of the device are discussed.
Renal toxicity is a prominent component of the toxicity profile of platinum-based chemotherapy. Kidney damage, once dose limiting for cisplatin, occurs in some patients who receive carboplatin and may occur with the third-generation platinum analog ormaplatin. Herein, we review what is known about the pathophysiology of therapy-induced renal toxicity for each of these agents and what is known about appropriate maneuvers to circumvent this toxicity. For cisplatin, hydration is always indicated and mannitol may be useful in selected settings. Furosemide is probably not generally useful. For carboplatin, hydration is important for patients with impaired renal function and for patients receiving high doses of drug (> or = 800 mg/m2). For ormplatin, renal toxicity appears not be prominent when hydration is administered in a fashion similar to cisplatin hydration. Detailed suggestions regarding the protection of kidney function when using these compounds are presented.
In a double-blind crossover study, the effectiveness of furosemide, 40 mg twice daily, was compared with hydrochlorothiazide, 50 mg twice daily, in hypertensive patients. Both hydrochlorothiazide and furosemide significantly reduced blood pressure (BP) during three months of therapy. However, the fall in BP was consistently greater with hydrochlorothiazide than with furosemide, although the difference was significant only with respect to systolic BP. The somewhat greater antihypertensive effectiveness of hydrochlorothiazide may be related to its longer action permitting a more continuous diuretic effect and, hence, maintenance of reduced extracellular fluid volume throughout the 24-hour period.
Twenty-five children with the diagnosis of acute glomerulonephritis were treated with oral or intravenous doses of furosemide. The intravenous administration of 1 mg/kg or greater resulted in an increase in urine volume in all patients. Oral doses of less than 2 mg/kg were not as effective, but there was wide variation in diuretic response to the drug. In 13 patients, plasma concentrations of furosemide were measured. The plasma half-life varied from 2.3 to 4.4 hours after intravenous administration of the drug. The plasma concentration of furosemide did not correlate with diuretic response.
Twelve infants with heart failure and one with perinatal oedema were treated with intramuscular frusemide (1.0-1.25 mg/kg). Frusemide was found to be a safe effective diuretic in infants with heart failure, resulting in clinical improvement, marked excretion of water, sodium, and chloride, with a lesser and more variable effect on potassium excretion. Complications were uncommon with this dose. The drug is most effective in acute pulmonary oedema or acute worsening of heart failure, but day-to-day control of persistent heart failure is more easily obtained by using repeated doses of oral or intramuscular frusemide plus, if needed, aldactone A or triamterene.
Previous studies demonstrated the effectiveness of diuretics in mobilizing fluid, but frequent complications occur with their use in treating ascites. To develop an effective but safe regimen for treatment of cirrhotic ascites, a two-part crossover study was done. Subjects with life-threatening complications of cirrhosis were excluded. In part one it was demonstrated that a six-day diuretic regimen with dietary sodium restriction of 10 mEq/day is safe and more effective than sodium restriction alone. In part two the duration of diuretic therapy was safely extended from six to nine days with mobilization of significantly more fluid. Careful selection of subjects, use of diuretics in modest dosages for brief periods of time, and daily monitoring of subjects were important for the success of this study.
The response to incremental doses of oral labetalol in 16 patients with hypertensive urgencies is presented. After inadequate blood pressure control with 20 mg of intravenous furosemide, each patient received a 300 mg oral dose of labetalol. Subsequent oral doses of labetalol, 100 mg, were administered at 2-hour intervals, if the diastolic blood pressure remained greater than 100 mm Hg. The maximum dose of labetalol per patient was 500 mg. Five patients required only the initial 300 mg dose of labetalol. Two patients required further therapy for satisfactory blood pressure control. Mean arterial pressure fell from 156 +/- 12 mm Hg to 123 +/- 14 mm Hg.
Bumetanide, a pharmacologically new diuretic, was evaluated in 27 subjects. Its onset of action was within 30 minutes with a peak at 90 minutes and a total duration of action of about 270 minutes. In a controlled study in oedematous patients it was equipotent with frusemide at one-fortieth the molar dosage and did not differ from frusemide with regard to its pattern of electrolyte excretion. On continuous oral administration for eight days it produced effective diuresis with minimal alteration in biochemical and haematological status. The only adverse effect was gastric discomfort in one patient.
