BACKGROUND: Gabapentin is the most commonly preferred agent for neuropathic pain in general practice as it is usually well tolerated, but occasionally, its toxicity may occur at standard doses, especially in elderly individuals, even without any prior comorbidities. CASE: We present an elderly male with normal renal parameters, who was started on gabapentin for neuropathic pain. He developed multifocal myoclonus all over the body within few days after starting gabapentin and subsided completed after withdrawal of the drug. CONCLUSION: Acute hyperkinetic movement disorders such as multifocal or segmental myoclonus in elderly patients warrant a prompt review of recent drug history, especially gabapentin, even in the background of normal renal function.
Gabapentin (Neurontin (1) ) and pregabalin (Lyrica (2) ) are first- and second-generation alpha2delta ligands, respectively, and are both approved for use as adjunctive therapy in pain control. Although they do not bind to gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors they have been successfully used to treat neuropathic pain conditions. Their mechanism of action is not yet fully understood, but research has demonstrated promising results. Despite their similarities, they have been used in combination in both clinical and research situations, and have been noted to have a synergistic effect in pain control without concern for clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions. This combined approach can be made use of to reduce the dose of an individual agent, its side effects, and to enhance therapeutic response compared to a single agent. Pharmacokinetics, drug interactions, and adverse reaction to combinations have to be taken into consideration before combination therapy with gabapentin and pregabalin is proposed as first-line treatment in refractory pain situations and in patients with low levels of tolerance for an individual agent.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Postherpetic neuralgia is an annoying pain that mainly affects older people. In order to give patients more options, this review summarizes the pharmacological and interventional treatments for postherpetic neuralgia and updates the research on the efficacy, thereby providing doctors with more treatment options. The adverse effects and effective doses of its various treatments are also presented so that the therapy can be prescribed according to their concrete physical conditions. In a word, this review is dedicated to providing a comprehensive overview of the treatment options for postherpetic neuralgia and offering patients more choices. RECENT FINDINGS: Combinational therapy is more excellent than monotherapy. The local anesthesia and gabapentin comprised outstanding compatibility. In addition, two therapeutic tools for PHN patients, especially for the intractable ones, electroacupuncture (EA), and osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT), show their efficacy and become potential options to alleviate pain. In terms of treatment, guidelines recommend patients use tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), gabapentin, pregabalin, and 5% lidocaine patches as the first-line medications, and gabapentin is investigated most, especially the gabapentin enacarbil (GEn). And drug efficacy can be limited by adverse effects and tolerated doses. Interventional treatments, with their invasiveness and operational difficulty, are usually considered for intractable patients. Combinational therapies may be used when a single therapy cannot achieve the desired effect. Therapies such as OMT and EA have also been proposed to palliate pain in some cases, and future directions of treatment may be investigated in Chinese medicine and acupuncture.
BACKGROUND: A 2017 systematic review (SR) identified 59 studies examining gabapentinoid (pregabalin and gabapentin) misuse/abuse. Evidence of gabapentinoid misuse/abuse has since grown substantially. OBJECTIVE: Update previous SR and describe new insights regarding gabapentinoid abuse. METHODS: A SR of PubMed was conducted to identify studies published from 7/29/2016-8/31/2020. Four searches were performed using the following terms: "gabapentin [MeSH] OR pregabalin [MeSH] OR gabapentinoid" AND one of the following substance misuse/abuse-related terms: "substance-related disorders [MeSH]", "overdose", "abuse", or "misuse". Clinicaltrials.gov and the Cochrane Library database were searched to identify ongoing studies or similar SRs. Reference lists of included studies were reviewed to identify additional literature. All studies with novel data related to pregabalin and/or gabapentin abuse, misuse, or overdose conducted during the study period were included. Articles not written in English, review articles, and animal studies were excluded. RESULTS: Fifty-five studies were included (29 [52.7%] from North America, 17 [30.9%] Europe, 6 [10.9%] Asia, and 3 [5.5%] Australia). Forty-six observational studies and 10 case reports/series were included (one manuscript included both). Twenty (36.4%) studied gabapentin only, 18 (32.7%) pregabalin only, and 17 (30.9%) both pregabalin/gabapentin. These studies corroborate findings from the previous SR that gabapentinoids are increasingly abused or misused to self-medicate, that gabapentinoids can produce desirable effects alone but are often used concomitantly with other drugs, and that opioid use disorder is the greatest risk factor for gabapentinoid abuse. While the original SR identified the largest studies having been published in Europe, this review identified several more generalisable US studies that have subsequently been conducted. The most concerning finding was increased evidence of associated patient harm, including increased hospital utilisation and opioid-related overdose mortality risk. CONCLUSION: Evidence suggests that gabapentinoid misuse/abuse represents a growing trend that is causing significant patient harm. Prescribers should exercise appropriate caution with use in high-risk populations and monitor for signs of misuse or abuse.
OBJECTIVE: While there are several trials that support the efficacy of various drugs for migraine prophylaxis against placebo, there is limited evidence addressing the comparative safety and efficacy of these drugs. We conducted a systematic review and network meta-analysis to facilitate comparison between drugs for migraine prophylaxis. METHODS: We searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, CENTRAL, and clinicaltrials.gov from inception to August 13, 2022, for randomized trials of pharmacological treatments for migraine prophylaxis in adults. Reviewers worked independently and in duplicate to screen references, extract data, and assess risk of bias. We performed a frequentist random-effects network meta-analysis and rated the certainty (quality) of evidence as either high, moderate, low, or very low using the GRADE approach. RESULTS: We identified 74 eligible trials, reporting on 32,990 patients. We found high certainty evidence that monoclonal antibodies acting on the calcitonin gene related peptide or its receptor (CGRP(r)mAbs), gepants, and topiramate increase the proportion of patients who experience a 50% or more reduction in monthly migraine days, compared to placebo. We found moderate certainty evidence that beta-blockers, valproate, and amitriptyline increase the proportion of patients who experience a 50% or more reduction in monthly migraine days, and low certainty evidence that gabapentin may not be different from placebo. We found high certainty evidence that, compared to placebo, valproate and amitriptyline lead to substantial adverse events leading to discontinuation, moderate certainty evidence that topiramate, beta-blockers, and gabapentin increase adverse events leading to discontinuation, and moderate to high certainty evidence that (CGRP(r)mAbs) and gepants do not increase adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: (CGRP(r)mAbs) have the best safety and efficacy profile of all drugs for migraine prophylaxis, followed closely by gepants.
INTRODUCTION: Phantom limb pain (PLP) is a type of neuropathic pain that affects the territory of an amputated limb or other surgically removed body parts. Between 60% and 90% of amputees suffer from PLP during follow-up. There are a range of therapeutic options for PLP, both pharmacological (gabapentin, amitriptyline, tricyclic antidepressants, etc) and non-pharmacological (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, hypnosis, acupuncture, etc). A widely accepted hypothesis considers PLP to be the consequence of postamputation cortical reorganisation. New treatment approaches, such as mirror therapy (MT), have been developed as a result of Ramachandran's groundbreaking research in the 1990s. This review analyses the current evidence on the efficacy of MT for treating PLP. DEVELOPMENT: We performed a literature review of publications registered from 2012 to 2017 on the CINAHL, Cochrane, Scopus, and PubMed (including Medline) databases using the descriptors "phantom limb" and "mirror therapy." We identified 115 publications addressing MT in PLP. Of these, 17 (15%) contributed useful information for pooled analysis. CONCLUSIONS: MT seems to be effective in relieving PLP, reducing the intensity and duration of daily pain episodes. It is a valid, simple, and inexpensive treatment for PLP. The methodological quality of most publications in this field is very limited, highlighting the need for additional, high-quality studies to develop clinical protocols that could maximise the benefits of MT for patients with PLP.
Gliomas synaptically integrate into neural circuits(1,2). Previous research has demonstrated bidirectional interactions between neurons and glioma cells, with neuronal activity driving glioma growth(1-4) and gliomas increasing neuronal excitability(2,5-8). Here we sought to determine how glioma-induced neuronal changes influence neural circuits underlying cognition and whether these interactions influence patient survival. Using intracranial brain recordings during lexical retrieval language tasks in awake humans together with site-specific tumour tissue biopsies and cell biology experiments, we find that gliomas remodel functional neural circuitry such that task-relevant neural responses activate tumour-infiltrated cortex well beyond the cortical regions that are normally recruited in the healthy brain. Site-directed biopsies from regions within the tumour that exhibit high functional connectivity between the tumour and the rest of the brain are enriched for a glioblastoma subpopulation that exhibits a distinct synaptogenic and neuronotrophic phenotype. Tumour cells from functionally connected regions secrete the synaptogenic factor thrombospondin-1, which contributes to the differential neuron-glioma interactions observed in functionally connected tumour regions compared with tumour regions with less functional connectivity. Pharmacological inhibition of thrombospondin-1 using the FDA-approved drug gabapentin decreases glioblastoma proliferation. The degree of functional connectivity between glioblastoma and the normal brain negatively affects both patient survival and performance in language tasks. These data demonstrate that high-grade gliomas functionally remodel neural circuits in the human brain, which both promotes tumour progression and impairs cognition.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Painful diabetic neuropathy (PDN) manifests with pain typically in the distal lower extremities and can be challenging to treat. The authors appraised the literature for evidence on conservative, pharmacological, and neuromodulation treatment options for PDN. RECENT FINDINGS: Intensive glycemic control with insulin in patients with type 1 diabetes may be associated with lower odds of distal symmetric polyneuropathy compared to patients who receive conventional insulin therapy. First-line pharmacologic therapy for PDN includes gabapentinoids (pregabalin and gabapentin) and duloxetine. Additional pharmacologic modalities that are approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) but are considered second-line agents include tapentadol and 8% capsaicin patch, although studies have revealed modest treatment effects from these modalities. There is level I evidence on the use of dorsal column spinal cord stimulation (SCS) for treatment of PDN, delivering either a 10-kHz waveform or tonic waveform. In summary, this review provides an overview of treatment options for PDN. Furthermore, it provides updates on the level of evidence for SCS therapy in cases of PDN refractory to conventional medical therapy.
Myocardial infarction/ischemia can be an underlying etiology and a major causative risk factor of cardiovascular hiccups. The objective of this systematic review was to review the literature regarding clinical features and treatments of hiccups of cardiac ischemia origin. PRISMA guidelines were followed. In elderly patients with hiccups of uncertain causes, electrocardiography is necessary to ensure the cardiogenic etiology. Both symptomatic and etiologic treatments can be effective in terminating hiccups. Of the therapeutic regimens, gabapentin is a second-line agent alternative to baclofen in treating hiccups. It is especially helpful in patients undergoing stroke rehabilitation or palliative care when chlorpromazine is prohibited due to its adverse effects. Inferior myocardial infarction is the most common cause of hiccups in this patient setting. In addition to anti-myocardial ischemia agents and percutaneous coronary intervention, coronary artery bypass grafting could be an alternative to hiccups in such patients.
AIM: This SR aims to assess the effectiveness of pregabalin and gabapentin on pain and disability caused by acute sciatica and the adverse events associated with their clinical use. DESIGN: Systematic review. DATABASES: Electronic databases of Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Clinical Trials.gov were searched from their inception until March 1st of 2021. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized trials (RCT) with adults>18 years old with acute sciatica for a minimum of 1 week and a maximum of 1 year (at least moderate pain). DATA TREATMENT: The outcomes were pain, disability and adverse events. Data was summarized using odds ratio and mean difference. GRADE was used to calculate the level of evidence. RESULTS: Eight RCT involving 747 participants were included. The effect of pregabalin was assessed in 3 RCT and in one three-arm trial (pregabalin vs limaprost vs a combination of limaprost and pregabalin). Two trials assessed the effect of gabapentin compared with placebo and one compared with tramadol. One study assessed the effect of gabapentin vs pregabalin in a crossover head-to-head trial. A statistically significant improvement on leg pain at 2 weeks and leg pain with movement at 3 and 4 months was found in a RCT comparing gabapentin with placebo. There were no statistically differences on the remaining time periods assessed for leg pain, low back pain and functional disability. CONCLUSIONS: This SR provides clear evidence for lack of effectiveness of pregabalin and gabapentin for sciatica pain management. In view of this, its routine clinical use cannot be supported.
As the population ages, spine-related pain is increasingly common in older adults. While medications play an important role in pain management, their use has limitations in geriatric patients due to reduced liver and renal function, comorbid medical problems, and polypharmacy. This review will assess the evidence basis for medications used for spine-related pain in older adults, with a focus on drug metabolism and adverse drug reactions. A PubMed/OVID search crossing common spine, neck, and back pain terms with key words for older adults and geriatrics was combined with common drug classes and common drug names and limited to clinical trials and age over 65 years. The results were then reviewed with identification of commonly used drugs and drug categories: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, corticosteroids, gabapentin and pregabalin, antispastic and antispasmodic muscle relaxants, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tramadol, and opioids. Collectively, 138 double-blind, placebo-controlled trials were the focus of the review. The review found a variable contribution of high-quality studies examining the efficacy of medications for spine pain primarily in the geriatric population. There was strong evidence for NSAID use with adjustments for gastrointestinal and renal risk factors. Gabapentin and pregabalin had mixed evidence for neuropathic pain. SNRIs had good evidence for neuropathic pain and a more favorable safety profile than TCAs. Tramadol had some evidence in older patients, but more so in persons aged < 65 years. Rational therapeutic choices based on geriatric spine pain diagnosis are helpful, such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen for arthritic and myofascial-based pain, gabapentinoids or duloxetine for neuropathic and radicular pain, antispastic agents for myofascial-based pain, and combination therapy for mixed etiologies. Tramadol can be well tolerated in older patients, but has risks of cognitive and classic opioid side effects. Otherwise, opioids are typically avoided in the treatment of spine-related pain in older adults due to their morbidity and mortality risk and are reserved for refractory severe pain. Whenever possible, beneficial geriatric spine pain pharmacotherapy should employ the lowest therapeutic doses with consideration of polypharmacy, potentially decreased renal and hepatic metabolism, and co-morbid medical disorders.
In the past two decades, the search for novel pharmacotherapies to treat alcohol addiction has been a global endeavor. This has resulted in several drugs that have been approved and successfully marketed for public use while some are still in the testing phase. These pharmacological agents, though effective for the treatment of alcoholism, are not without shortcomings; such as abuse potential, serious mental and physical adverse effects, interaction with alcohol and also poor metabolism and excretion. As more is being understood about the neurobiology of alcohol addiction as well as the unique pharmacological action of these drugs, new agents are evaluated for potential benefits when used as an adjunct in combination therapy. This review article summarizes the novel pharmacotherapeutic approaches used in the treatment of alcohol addiction by focusing on the drugs, which include neramexane, gabapentin, baclofen, aripiprazole, nalmafene, and quetiapine.
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors, clonidine, gabapentin and pregabalin have shown moderate efficacy in menopausal disorders. The effect of phytoestrogens is reported to be modest, but the side effects are not well known.
Antinociceptive therapy for chronic neuropathic pain is anecdotal in nature based on a physician's preference. However, evidence-based therapy is expected, following the chronic pain guideline established in 2021, supported by 10 pain-associated Japanese medical societies. The guideline strongly recommends the use of Ca(2+)-channel alpha2delta ligands (pregabalin, gabapentin, and mirogabalin) and duloxetine for pain relief. International guidelines also recommend administration of tricyclic antidepressants as first-line agents. Recent studies have described three classes of medicines that show comparable antinociceptive effects in painful diabetic neuropathy. Furthermore, a combination of first-line agents can improve efficacy. Antinociceptive medical therapy should be individualized based on the patient's condition and adverse effect profile of each medication.
Diabetic peripheral neuropathy occurs in up to 50% of patients with diabetes mellitus and increases the risk of diabetic foot ulcers and infections. Consistent screening and clear communication are essential to decrease disparities in assessment of neuropathic symptoms and diagnosis. Physicians should address underlying risk factors such as poor glycemic control, vitamin B12 deficiency, elevated blood pressure, and obesity to reduce the likelihood of developing neuropathy. First-line drug therapy for painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy includes duloxetine, gabapentin, amitriptyline, and pregabalin; however, these medications do not restore sensation to affected extremities. Evidence for long-term benefit and safety of first-line treatment options is lacking. Second-line drug therapy includes nortriptyline, imipramine, venlafaxine, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, topical lidocaine, and topical capsaicin. Periodic, objective monitoring of medication response is critical because patients may not obtain desired pain reduction, adverse effects are common, and serious adverse effects can occur. Opioids should generally be avoided. Nondrug therapies with low- to moderate-quality evidence include exercise and neuromodulation with spinal cord stimulation or transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation. Peripheral transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation is well tolerated and inexpensive, but benefits are modest. Other treatments, such as acupuncture, alpha-lipoic acid, acetyl-L-carnitine, cannabidiol, and onabotulinumtoxinA need further study in patients with diabetic peripheral neuropathy.
BACKGROUND: Gabapentin is an anticonvulsant medication used as an adjuvant in the treatment of neuropathic pain; few cases have been reported in which it causes acute liver injury. CLINICAL CASE: 56-year-old male patient with a history of chronic kidney disease on hemodialysis and narrowing of the spinal canal under treatment with gabapentin, who presented acute liver injury probably secondary to a dose of gabapentin; however, it remitted with the suspension of said drug. CONCLUSION: Gabapentin lacks liver metabolism; the mechanism by which it produces liver injury is still unknown; however, there are reports of hepatotoxicity associated with its administration, so its use must be individualized for each patient.
Vasomotor symptoms (VMS) related to the menopausal transition affect the majority of women and contribute to significant quality of life burden. Incidence, length, severity and report of symptoms vary by race, ethnicity, and coexisting health conditions. The pathophysiology of VMS is not fully understood and is likely multifactorial, involving changes in the hypothalamicpituitary-ovarian axis during the menopausal transition. Treatment approaches include lifestyle modifications, hormonal and non-hormonal therapies, including integrative and complementary medicine approaches. Systemic hormone therapy with estrogen is the most effective treatment. Emerging evidence suggests that treatment with SSRIs, SNRIs, and gabapentin is effective for many women who want to avoid hormone therapy. A shared decision approach to treatment decisions involves consideration of risks with treatment options and discussion of patient priorities.
IMPORTANCE: Optimal pharmacologic treatment for chronic sciatica (CS) is currently unclear. While gabapentin (GBP) and pregabalin (PGB) are both used to treat CS, equipoise exists. Nevertheless, pharmaceutical regulation authorities typically subsidize one drug over the other. This hinders interchange wherever the favored drug is either ineffective or ill-tolerated. OBJECTIVE: To assess GBP vs PGB head to head for the treatment of CS. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A preplanned interim analysis of a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy crossover trial of PGB vs GBP for management of CS at half the estimated final sample size was performed in a single-center, tertiary referral public hospital. A total of 20 patients underwent randomization from March 2016 to March 2018, and 2 were excluded with 1 lost to follow-up and the other requiring urgent surgery unrelated to the study. Patients attending a specialist neurosurgery clinic with unilateral CS were considered for trial recruitment. Chronic sciatica was defined as pain lasting for at least 3 months radiating into 1 leg only to, at, or below the knee level. Imaging (magnetic resonance imaging with or without computed tomography) corroborating a root-level lesion concordant with symptoms and/or signs was determined by the trial clinician. Inclusion criteria included patients who had not used GBP and PGB and were 18 years or older. Analyses were intention to treat and began February 2018. INTERVENTIONS: Randomly assigned participants received GBP (400 mg to 800 mg 3 times a day) then PGB (150 mg to 300 mg twice daily) or vice versa, each taken for 8 weeks. Crossover followed a 1-week washout. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was pain intensity (10-point visual analog scale) at baseline and 8 weeks. Secondary outcomes included disability (using the Oswestry Disability Index) and severity/frequency of adverse events. RESULTS: The total trial population (N = 18) consisted mostly of men (11 [61%]) with a mean (SD) age of 57 (16.5) years. A third of the cohort were smokers (5 [28%]), and more than half consumed alcohol (12 [67%]). Gabapentin was superior to PGB, with fewer and less severe adverse events. Both GBP (mean [SD], 7.54 [1.39] to 5.82 [1.72]; P < .001) and PGB (mean [SD], 7.33 [1.30] to 6.38 [1.88]; P = .002) displayed significant visual analog pain intensity scale reduction and Oswestry Disability Index reduction (mean [SD], 59.22 [16.88] to 48.54 [15.52]; P < .001 for both). Head to head, GBP showed superior visual analog pain intensity scale reduction (mean [SD], GBP: 1.72 [1.17] vs PGB: 0.94 [1.09]; P = .035) irrespective of sequence order; however, Oswestry Disability Index reduction was unchanged. Adverse events for PGB were more frequent (PGB, 31 [81%] vs GBP, 7 [19%]; P = .002) especially when PGB was taken first. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Pregabalin and GBP were both significantly efficacious. However, GBP was superior with fewer and less severe adverse events. Gabapentin should be commenced before PGB to permit optimal crossover of medicines. TRIAL REGISTRATION: anzctr.org.au Identifier: ACTRN12613000559718.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Mirogabalin is a novel gabapentinoid medication for the treatment of neuropathic pain. The purpose of this review is to discuss current evidence for its use. Gabapentinoids are widely prescribed for neuropathic pain. Mirogabalin offers theoretical advantages over traditional gabapentinoids due to its specificity for the alpha2delta-1 subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels. It is theorised that this specificity may reduce adverse drug reactions by minimising binding to the alpha2delta-2 subunit which is responsible for many of the gabapentinoid side effects. RECENT FINDINGS: Mirogabalin's slower dissociation from the alpha2delta-1 compared with alpha2delta-2, and its higher potency may also impart an efficacy benefit over traditional gabapentinoids. These theoretical advantages of mirogabalin remain inconclusive in clinical practice, with mixed evidence regarding mirogabalin versus traditional gabapentinoids. Some studies suggest a reduced side effect profile yet, others fail to demonstrate significant differences. Regarding efficacy, mirogabalin may be superior to placebo for several neuropathic pain syndromes, but evidence of widespread benefit over traditional gabapentinoids is currently lacking. SUMMARY: Mirogabalin offers theoretical promise, but large, independent studies are required to further assess its performance versus traditional gabapentinoids.
Patients with pelvic pain suffer from psychological conditions at a disproportionately high rate compared with their peers. We review environmental, genetic, inflammatory, and neurobiological factors that increase vulnerability to developing both of these conditions. We review treatment strategies for chronic pelvic pain in patients who have comorbid psychological conditions, including both nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic options.
