PURPOSE OF REVIEW: A variety of options exist for perioperative, intraoperative, and postoperative medications in cataract surgery. This article reviews some of the more timely literature on "controversial" subjects in this area. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent literature may support the rationale for intracameral vancomycin at the time of cataract surgery. The recently released fluoroquinolones moxifloxacin and gatifloxacin are reviewed in terms of their clinical properties. Pharmacologic adjuncts to surgery are discussed, as is the use of intravitreal triamcinolone both at the time of cataract surgery and postoperatively. SUMMARY: Recent advances in ophthalmic pharmacology should aid the practicing anterior segment surgeon. This may affect preoperative, postoperative, and even intraoperative regimens.
Gatifloxacin, a fluoroquinolone with extended gram-positive activity, has become extensively used in both the community and hospital environments. Unfortunately, concerns have been raised about the use of certain fluoroquinolones because of adverse drug reactions. A 44-year-old woman developed acute hepatitis while receiving gatifloxacin for chronic sinusitis. After 5 days of receiving antibiotics, the patient developed nausea, lethargy, and abdominal pain, all of which progressed over the next few days. Liver function tests were elevated, with bilirubin peaking at 9.4 mg/dl. The patient also became jaundiced. A percutaneous liver biopsy showed acute hepatitis with eosinophilic infiltrates consistent with drug-induced hepatitis. All other drugs and disease processes were ruled out as likely causes of the patient's hepatitis. Clinicians should be alerted to the possibility that hepatitis may occur with gatifloxacin administration.
PURPOSE: The development of gatifloxacin-induced dysglycemia in 13 patients is described; the details of the 3 most severe cases are presented. SUMMARY: Three elderly patients developed dysglycemia after initiation of gatifloxacin therapy. Both patients who developed hypoglycemia were receiving concomitant insulin or oral antidiabetic agents. Repeated doses of dextrose were required for management. The Naranjo et al. probability rating scale revealed that gatifloxacin was the probable cause in the majority of the 13 cases, primarily because of the temporal relationship with gatifloxacin and, in some instances, resolution of dysglycemia after drug discontinuation. Although the mechanism of gatifloxacin-induced hyperglycemia is not known, in vitro studies have found that certain quinolone antimicrobials can lower serum glucose levels by blocking adenosine 5'-triphosphate-dependent potassium channels in the pancreatic beta-cell, stimulating insulin release. It is difficult to unequivocally implicate gatifloxacin as the only cause of dysglycemia in the cases presented, as there are many explanations for poor glycemic control in hospitalized patients, such as stress, infection, decreased renal function, and concomitant drug therapies. However, the patients' medication regimens appeared to be stable before gatifloxacin administration. CONCLUSION: Thirteen patients developed dysglycemia after receiving gatifloxacin. Gatifloxacin was found to be the probable cause in the majority of cases.
INTRODUCTION: The epileptogenic potential of quinolones differs from one product to the other. The rare epileptic seizures induced by gatifloxacin were seen with the intravenous route. PATIENTS: We report two old ladies presenting with generalized status epilepticus after being treated orally with normal doses of gatifloxacin, with a good recovery. Past medical history of convulsion was the only factor found. Brain MR imaging was unremarkable. In one patient, EEG showed continuous bilateral paroxysmal discharges, predominantly frontal. CONCLUSION: Caution is warranted when using quinolones in elderly patients, especially those suffering from epilepsy.
PURPOSE: To report a case of corneal crystalline deposits from the use of gatifloxacin 0.5% topical antibiotic after combined cataract extraction and trabeculotomy ab interno surgery. METHODS: A 59-year-old woman presented after combined cataract extraction and trabeculotomy ab interno with crystalline deposits in the anterior corneal stroma. Clinical examination and slit-lamp photography were performed. RESULTS: The slit-lamp examination showed inferior white crystal deposition in the anterior stroma with overlying punctate epithelial erosions 4 weeks postoperatively. The eye was asymptomatic, but the deposition was cosmetically noticeable to the patient. Serial slit-lamp photography demonstrated resolution of the crystalline deposits 30 days after the discontinuation of eye drops. CONCLUSIONS: The authors present a rare case of stromal crystallization from topical gatifloxacin treatment. Complete resolution of corneal deposits was seen 30 days after the discontinuation of the drops without sequelae.
Molecular epidemiology of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) has been extensively studied in North America and Europe; however, limited data on CDI are available in the Asia-Pacific region. A multicentre retrospective study was conducted in this region. C. difficile isolates were subjected to multilocus sequence typing (ST) and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Totally, 394 isolates were collected from Hangzhou, Hong Kong, China; Busan, South Korea; Fukuoka, Japan; Singapore; Perth, Sydney, Australia; New York, the United States. C. difficile isolates included 337 toxin A-positive/B-positive/binary toxin-negative (A(+)B(+)CDT(-)), 48 A(-)B(+)CDT(-), and nine A(+)B(+)CDT(+). Distribution of dominant STs varied geographically with ST17 in Fukuoka (18.6%), Busan (56.0%), ST2 in Sydney (20.4%), Perth (25.8%). The antimicrobial resistance patterns were significantly different among the eight sites (chi(2) = 325.64, p < 0.001). Five major clonal complexes correlated with unique antimicrobial resistances. Healthcare-associated (HA) CDI was mainly from older patients with more frequent antimicrobial use and higher A(-)B(+) positive rates. Higher resistance to gatifloxacin, tetracycline, and erythromycin were observed in HA-CDI patients (chi(2) = 4.76-7.89, p = 0.005-0.029). In conclusion, multiple C. difficile genotypes with varied antimicrobial resistance patterns have been circulating in the Asia-Pacific region. A(-)B(+) isolates from older patients with prior antimicrobial use were correlated with HA-CDI.
The inability to use powerful antituberculosis drugs in an increasing number of patients seems to be the biggest threat towards global tuberculosis (TB) elimination. Simplified, shorter and preferably less toxic drug regimens are being investigated for pulmonary TB to counteract emergence of drug resistance. Intensified regimens with high-dose anti-TB drugs during the first weeks of treatment are being investigated for TB meningitis to increase the survival rate among these patients. Moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin and levofloxacin are seen as core agents in case of resistance or intolerance against first-line anti-TB drugs. However, based on their pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD), these drugs are also promising for TB meningitis and might perhaps have the potential to shorten pulmonary TB treatment if dosing could be optimized. We prepared a comprehensive summary of clinical trials investigating the outcome of TB regimens based on moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin and levofloxacin in recent years. In the majority of clinical trials, treatment success was not in favour of these drugs compared to standard regimens. By discussing these results, we propose that incorporation of extended PK/PD analysis into the armamentarium of drug-development tools is needed to clarify the role of moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin and levofloxacin for TB, using the right dose. In addition, to prevent failure of treatment or emergence of drug-resistance, PK and PD variability advocates for concentration-guided dosing in patients at risk for too low a drug-exposure.
Increased resistance of pneumococci and other pathogens to available antibiotics raises concerns about bacteriologic and clinical failure in children with acute otitis media. Few therapeutic options exist for patients with recurrent infections or recent treatment failure. The limited experience from the compassionate use of fluoroquinolones in pediatrics and pediatric studies has not been linked unequivocally with arthrotoxicity, the primary safety concern in children. Newer 8-methoxyfluoroquinolones may have a role in selected cases associated with multidrug-resistant pathogens.
Hypoglycemia is a rare life threatening adverse drug reaction associated with various fluoroquinolones like ciprofloxacin, gatifloxacin and levofloxacin. Moxifloxacin was considered safe in this regard. Only one case has been reported for moxifloxacin-induced hypoglycemia in a renal failure patient. Here, we are reporting the second case of hypoglycemia due to moxifloxacin without any major co-morbid condition.
The newest antimicrobial drugs have broader spectrums of activity than their predecessors. But are they better than traditional antimicrobial agents? Several drugs recently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) may be more effective against uncommon and antimicrobial-resistant pathogens, but their superior efficacy in treating common infections has yet to be proved. Dr Gleckman discusses the advantages and disadvantages of these new drugs and how they can best be used to avoid fostering the emergence of drug-resistant pathogens.
Physicians should be cautious in prescribing broad-spectrum antibiotics, particularly vancomycin and the fluoroquinolones, because widespread use of these drugs is promoting antibiotic resistance. Resistance is now found in many organisms, including staphylococci, enterococci, streptococci, pneumococci, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Some resistant strains can be treated with alternative narrower-spectrum antibiotics. In addition, five newly licensed antibiotics are available, but they should be used judiciously because of their side effects, high cost, and ability to promote additional resistance.
Gatifloxacin is a novel extended-spectrum fluoroquinolone with improved gram-positive and anaerobe coverage compared with older agents such as ciprofloxacin. It has good activity (but is slightly less active than ciprofloxacin) against Enterobacteriaceae. Gatifloxacin is generally 2- to 4-fold more active than ciprofloxacin against staphylococci, streptococci and enterococci and 4- to 16-fold more active than ciprofloxacin against anaerobes, including Clostridium and Bacteroides spp. In comparative clinical trials that included patients with lower respiratory tract, urinary tract, skin and soft tissue or gonococcal infections, clinical cure rates of > or = 89% were achieved with oral gatifloxacin 400 mg/day for 7 to 14 days. Data from a subset of North American patients included in a multinational trial showed that oral gatifloxacin 400 mg/day produced a significantly higher clinical cure rate than cefuroxime axetil 250 mg twice daily (89 vs 77%; p = 0.01) in patients with acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis. The clinical efficacy of gatifloxacin was similar to that of clarithromycin or levofloxacin or ceftriaxone (with or without erythromycin) in the treatment of patients with community-acquired pneumonia. Oral gatifloxacin 400 mg/day showed clinical and bacteriological efficacy similar to that of levofloxacin in patients with skin and soft tissue infections. In patients with urinary tract infections, clinical cure and bacterial eradication rates achieved with a single 400 g oral dose of gatifloxacin were similar to those produced with ciprofloxacin. In a pooled analysis of tolerability data from trials that included 3021 patients treated with oral gatifloxacin 400 mg/day, the most commonly reported adverse events were nausea (8%), diarrhoea (4%), headache (4%) and dizziness (3%). The drug was reported to be well tolerated. Gatifloxacin does not appear to cause phototoxic effects.
We report a patient with pancreatic abscesses and necrosis secondary to Alcaligenes faecalis infection. He initially presented with alcohol-induced acute pancreatitis. Twenty days after the initial presentation, he re-presented with increasing pain and was found to have pancreatic necrosis and abscesses. Treatment was initiated with meropenem. Because of persistent fevers, computed tomography-guided drainage was performed. The fluid grew A faecalis resistant to meropenem and the patient continued to be febrile. He recovered only after adequate surgical intervention and appropriate antibiotic coverage. Although this is the first case of A faecalis reported to cause pancreatic abscess, we believe selection of this organism occurred because surgical drainage was delayed while the patient was on the recommended treatment with meropenem. This case emphasizes the need for early surgical drainage of pancreatic abscesses to avoid the selection of such resistant pathogens.
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics are widely employed in treating infectious diseases. Lately, reports of either hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia have appeared in the medical literature. Many patients are elderly and have underlying diabetes and renal insufficiency. Of these antibiotics, dysglycemia occurs more frequently with gatifloxacin (Tequin). While hypoglycemia usually occurs within the first three days of treatment, hyperglycemia often occurs later in the treatment course. The hypoglycemia may be profound and difficult to manage. We report 4 patients with hypoglycemia while taking gatifloxacin and review the relevant literature.
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics (FQs), a new class of pollutants that seriously threaten human health through environmental and food residues, have aroused wide public concern. However, little attention has been paid to the potential toxicity of FQs' metal complex. Here, we firstly explore the proof-of-concept study of FQs' metal complex to bind bovine serum albumin (BSA) using systematical spectroscopic approaches. In detail, we have found that the complex of Al(3+) with gatifloxacin (Al(III)-GFLX complex) can effectively bind to BSA via electrostatic interaction in PBS buffer (pH = 7.4, 1x), resulting in the formation of Al(III)-GFLX-BSA complex. The negative value of DeltaG shows that the binding of Al(III)-GFLX complex to BSA is a spontaneous process. Circular dichroism spectra verify that Al(III)-GFLX complex effectively triggers the conformation changes of BSA's secondary structure. It has been proved that the interaction of small molecule with serum albumin has a significant effect on their in vivo biological effects such as absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion, and etc. Therefore, the results of this paper may offer a valuable theoretical basis for establishing safety standards of FQs' metal complex to ensure food and environmental health.
We report a case of acquired fluoroquinolone (FQ) resistance under short-course multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) treatment. The patient was managed at Kabutare hospital, one of the two specialized MDR-TB clinics in Rwanda. A low dose of moxifloxacin was used in the first three critical months. Acquired resistance was identified at the ninth month of treatment, 3 months after stopping kanamycin in a strain initially susceptible only to FQs, kanamycin, and clofazimine. Fluoroquinolone resistance was detected in the same month by deep sequencing as routinely used second-line line probe assay and phenotypic drug susceptibility testing. High-dose FQ, preferably gatifloxacin, should be used to maximize effectiveness.
We report the first 2 cases of bacterial keratitis resistant to fourth-generation fluoroquinolones after laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) and photorefractive keratectomy (PRK). The first patient had Pseudomonas aeruginosa keratitis after PRK despite treatment with moxifloxacin. The second patient was on gatifloxacin post-LASIK when she had methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) keratitis diagnosed. In both cases, culture susceptibilities showed isolates resistant to moxifloxacin and gatifloxacin, and treatment with topical aminoglycosides and surgical intervention was necessary to effect a cure. These cases show the potential limitations in the coverage of these antibiotics.
Gatifloxacin is a new 8-methoxy-fluoroquinoline antimicrobial agent. It has enhanced activity against Gram-positive and atypical agents, while retaining broad-spectrum antiGram-negative activity. For example, the MIC(90) values for respiratory tract pathogens are < or = 0.5 microg/ml for organisms such as Streptococcus pneumoniae (regardless of penicillin susceptibility), Haemophilus influenzae (beta-lactamase positive or negative), Moraxella catarrhalis (beta-lactamase positive or negative), Legionella species, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, beta-haemolytic Streptococci (macrolide sensitive or resistant), Neisseria species, most Enterobacteriaceae, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Neisseria meningitidis, Pasteurella species, Vibrio species and Yersinia enterocolitica. For methicillin-resistant S. aureus, ciprofloxacin-resistant S. aureus, Citrobacter freundii, Providencia species, Serratia species, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other non-fermentative Gram-negative bacilli, the MIC(90) are elevated. Gatifloxacin is bactericidal and exhibits a post-antibiotic effect against Gram-positive and -negative bacteria. The standard dose is 400 mg once daily and is available in both oral and iv. formulation. Gatifloxacin appears to have a low propensity for the selection of resistant mutants. Clinical trial data supports the use of gatifloxacin for treatment of patients with respiratory tract, urinary tract, skin and soft tissue infections. The side effect profile for gatifloxacin is similar to that with other agents.
Ineffectively treated tuberculosis (TB) is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. Cure of TB patients is hampered by the development of multidrug resistance in M. tuberculosis and the need of long-term treatment. The diarylquinoline derivative bedaquiline was approved in December 2012 under the accelerated-approval regulations of FDA as part of a combination therapy for treating adults with pulmonary MDR-TB for whom effective cures are not otherwise available. The bicyclic nitroimidazoles delamanid and its companion pretomanid inhibit mycolic acid synthesis via an unknown mechanism. In November 2013, delamanid received conditional approval by the European Medicines Agency for MDR-TB treatment. Use of both drugs, however, is limited owing to toxicity issues. If the aim to reduce treatment duration is pursued in order to limit costs and improve patient adherence, it is mandatory to demonstrate their noninferiority with fewer months of therapy. In three phase III clinical trials the efficacy of the most recent fluoroquinolones, gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin, has been investigated in a four-month treatment regimen of drug-susceptible TB. In all three studies, after two months the culture conversion rates of observed sputum indicated that fluoroquinolone-based therapies were likely to be superior. However, this feature did not reliably predict sterilizing activity or a risk of relapse. In other words, the shortened treatments were not noninferior to standard treatments. To counteract mycobacterial survival strategies and reduce the timelength of treatment with anti-TB drugs, other novel and powerful agents, as well as tuberculosis vaccines, are under intense clinical investigation for safety and efficacy assessment.
To determine whether a multihospital Clostridium difficile outbreak was associated with epidemic strains and whether use of particular fluoroquinolones was associated with increased infection rates, we cultured feces from C. difficile-infected patients. Use of fluoroquionolones with enhanced antianaerobic activity was not associated with increased infection rates.
