The tyrosine kinase activity of epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFRs) plays critical roles in cell proliferation, regeneration, tumorigenesis, and anticancer resistance. Non-small-cell lung cancer patients who responded to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) and obtained survival benefits had somatic EGFR mutations. EGFR-TKI-related adverse events (AEs) are usually tolerable and manageable, although serious AEs, including lung injury (specifically, interstitial lung disease (ILD), causing 58% of EGFR-TKI treatment-related deaths), occur infrequently. The etiopathogenesis of EGFR-TKI-induced ILD remains unknown. Risk factors, such as tobacco exposure, pre-existing lung fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and poor performance status, indicate that lung inflammatory circumstances may worsen with EGFR-TKI treatment because of impaired epithelial healing of lung injuries. There is limited evidence from preclinical and clinical studies of the mechanisms underlying EGFR-TKI-induced ILD in the available literature. Herein, we evaluated the relationship between EGFR-TKIs and AEs, especially ILD. Recent reports on mechanisms inducing lung injury or resistance in cytokine-rich circumstances were reviewed. We discussed the relevance of cytotoxic agents or immunotherapeutic agents in combination with EGFR-TKIs as a potential mechanism of EGFR-TKI-related lung injury and reviewed recent developments in diagnostics and therapeutics that facilitate recovery from lung injury or overcoming resistance to anti-EGFR treatment.
BACKGROUND: This study investigated the role of fibrinogen-like protein 1 (FGL1) in regulating gefitinib resistance of PC9/GR non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). METHODS: The effect of different concentrations of gefitinib on cell proliferation were evaluated using the CCK-8 assay. FGL1 expression in the normal human bronchial epithelial cell line Beas-2B, as well as four lung tumor cell lines, H1975, A549, PC9, and PC9/GR, was investigated by using western blotting and qRT-PCR. FGL1 was knocked down using small interfering RNA to evaluate the effects of FGL1 on PC9 and PC9/GR. The correlation between FGL1 expression and gefitinib resistance was determined in vitro via CCK-8 and colony formation assays, and flow cytometry and in vivo via flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: FGL1 expression was significantly upregulated in non-small cell lung cancer cells with EGFR mutation and higher in the gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell line PC9/GR than in the gefitinib-sensitive NSCLC cell line PC9. Further, FGL1 expression in PC9 and PC9/GR cells increased in response to gefitinib treatment in a dose-dependent manner. Knockdown of FGL1 suppressed cell viability, reduced the gefitinib IC50 value, and enhanced apoptosis in PC9 and PC9/GR cells upon gefitinib treatment. Mouse xenograft experiments showed that FGL1 knockdown in PC9/GR tumor cells enhanced the inhibitory and apoptosis-inducing actions of gefitinib. The potential mechanism of gefitinib in inducing apoptosis of PC9/GR cells involves inhibition of PARP1 and caspase 3 expression via suppression of FGL1. CONCLUSIONS: FGL1 confers gefitinib resistance in the NSCLC cell line PC9/GR by regulating the PARP1/caspase 3 pathway. Hence, FGL1 is a potential therapeutic target to improve the treatment response of NSCLC patients with acquired resistance to gefitinib.
The major current conventional types of metastatic breast cancer (MBC) treatments include surgery, radiation, hormonal therapy, chemotherapy, or immunotherapy. Introducing biological drugs, targeted treatment and gene therapy can potentially reduce the mortality and improve the quality of life in patients with MBC. However, combination of several types of treatment is usually recommended. Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 10-20% of all cases of breast carcinoma and is characterized by the low expression of progesterone receptor (PR), estrogen receptor (ER), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Consequently, convenient treatments used for MBC that target these receptors are not effective for TNBC which therefore requires special treatment approaches. This review discusses the occurrence of MBC, the prognosis and predictive biomarkers of MBC, and focuses on the novel advanced tactics for treatment of MBC and TNBC. Nanotechnology-based combinatorial approach for the suppression of EGFR by siRNA and gifitinib is described.
PURPOSE: Standard first-line therapy for EGFR-mutant advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-directed oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Adding pemetrexed and carboplatin chemotherapy to an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor may improve outcomes. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a phase III randomized trial in patients with advanced NSCLC harboring an EGFR-sensitizing mutation and a performance status of 0 to 2 who were planned to receive first-line palliative therapy. Random assignment was 1:1 to gefitinib 250 mg orally per day (Gef) or gefitinib 250 mg orally per day plus pemetrexed 500 mg/m(2) and carboplatin area under curve 5 intravenously every 3 weeks for four cycles, followed by maintenance pemetrexed (gefitinib plus chemotherapy [Gef+C]). The primary end point was progression-free survival (PFS); secondary end points included overall survival (OS), response rate, and toxicity. RESULTS: Between 2016 and 2018, 350 patients were randomly assigned to Gef (n = 176) and Gef+C (n = 174). Twenty-one percent of patients had a performance status of 2, and 18% of patients had brain metastases. Median follow-up time was 17 months (range, 7 to 30 months). Radiologic response rates were 75% and 63% in the Gef+C and Gef arms, respectively (P = .01). Estimated median PFS was significantly longer with Gef+C than Gef (16 months [95% CI, 13.5 to 18.5 months] v 8 months [95% CI, 7.0 to 9.0 months], respectively; hazard ratio for disease progression or death, 0.51 [95% CI, 0.39 to 0.66]; P < .001). Estimated median OS was significantly longer with Gef+C than Gef (not reached v 17 months [95% CI, 13.5 to 20.5 months]; hazard ratio for death, 0.45 [95% CI, 0.31 to 0.65]; P < .001). Clinically relevant grade 3 or greater toxicities occurred in 51% and 25% of patients in the Gef+C and Gef arms, respectively (P < .001). CONCLUSION: Adding pemetrexed and carboplatin chemotherapy to gefitinib significantly prolonged PFS and OS but increased toxicity in patients with NSCLC.
Gefitinib is an orally active, highly selective, reversible inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase domain associated with the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). EGFR gene mutations, never smoking status, Asian origin and adenocarcinoma histology are associated with good clinical responses to geftinib. Geftinib has generally been tried in the setting of chemotherapy refractory disease in patients who have failed at least one line of therapy. Trials are exploring use of geftinib as first line therapy in patients harboring EGFR mutations and also in the elderly. The most exciting feature of geftinib use is its potential for Lazarus responses in patients with poor performance status. Its use is associated with little toxicity. The success of geftinib suggests that it is important to understand the basic mechanisms underlying lung cancer in order to evolve better therapies. The review has been prepared after conducting extensive PubMed and Medline search for related articles.
Clinical trials frequently include multiple end points that mature at different times. The initial report, typically based on the primary end point, may be published when key planned coprimary or secondary analyses are not yet available. Clinical Trial Updates provide an opportunity to disseminate additional results from studies, published in JCO or elsewhere, for which the primary end point has already been reported.In a randomized, open-label, phase III NEJ009 study, gefitinib plus chemotherapy significantly improved progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) compared with gefitinib-alone in patients with untreated non-small-cell lung cancer harboring mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor. Herein, we report the updated survival outcome and long-term tolerability. Patients were randomly assigned to gefitinib (gefitinib 250 mg orally, once daily) and gefitinib combined with carboplatin plus pemetrexed (GCP in a 3-week cycle for six cycles followed by concurrent gefitinib and pemetrexed maintenance) groups. At the data cutoff (May 22, 2020), GCP demonstrated significantly better PFS2 (hazard ratio, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.62 to 0.97; P = .027) than gefitinib. However, the updated median OS was 38.5 months (95% CI, 31.1 to 47.1) and 49.0 months (95% CI, 41.8 to 56.7) in the gefitinib and GCP groups, respectively (hazard ratio, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.64 to 1.06; P = .127). The OS in both groups was similar for the overall patient population. No severe adverse events occurred since the first report. This updated analysis revealed that the GCP regimen improved PFS and PFS2 with an acceptable safety profile compared with gefitinib-alone. GCP is more efficient than gefitinib monotherapy as a first-line treatment for non-small-cell lung cancer with epidermal growth factor receptor mutations.
BACKGROUND: Tubal ectopic pregnancies can cause substantial morbidity or even death. Current treatment is with methotrexate or surgery. Methotrexate treatment fails in approximately 30% of women who subsequently require rescue surgery. Gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor, might improve the effects of methotrexate. We assessed the efficacy of oral gefitinib with methotrexate, versus methotrexate alone, to treat tubal ectopic pregnancy. METHODS: We performed a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial across 50 UK hospitals. Participants diagnosed with tubal ectopic pregnancy were administered a single dose of intramuscular methotrexate (50 mg/m(2)) and randomised (1:1 ratio) to 7 days of additional oral gefitinib (250 mg daily) or placebo. The primary outcome, analysed by intention to treat, was surgical intervention to resolve the ectopic pregnancy. Secondary outcomes included time to resolution of ectopic pregnancy and serious adverse events. This trial is registered at the ISRCTN registry, ISCRTN 67795930. FINDINGS: Between Nov 2, 2016, and Oct 6, 2021, 328 participants were allocated to methotrexate and gefitinib (n=165) or methotrexate and placebo (n=163). Three participants in the placebo group withdrew. Surgical intervention occurred in 50 (30%) of 165 participants in the gefitinib group and in 47 (29%) of 160 participants in the placebo group (adjusted risk ratio 1.15, 95% CI 0.85 to 1.58; adjusted risk difference -0.01, 95% CI -0.10 to 0.09; p=0.37). Without surgical intervention, median time to resolution was 28.0 days in the gefitinib group and 28.0 days in the placebo group (subdistribution hazard ratio 1.03, 95% CI 0.75 to 1.40). Serious adverse events occurred in five (3%) of 165 participants in the gefitinib group and in six (4%) of 162 participants in the placebo group. Diarrhoea and rash were more common in the gefitinib group. INTERPRETATION: In women with a tubal ectopic pregnancy, adding oral gefitinib to parenteral methotrexate does not offer clinical benefit over methotrexate and increases minor adverse reactions. FUNDING: National Institute of Health Research.
Gefitinib (Iressa(R)) is a selective inhibitor of epidermal growth factor, a growth factor that plays a pivotal role in the control of cell growth, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. Gefitinib is clinically used for the treatment of chemoresistant non-small cell lung cancer patients. Gefitinib is freely soluble in dimethylsulphoxide but slightly soluble in methanol and ethanol. Several methods of gefitinib synthesis are included in this review. UV spectroscopy of gefitinib showed a lambdamax of approximately 331nm, whereas IR spectroscopy principal peaks were observed at 3400cm(-1) (NH), 2956cm(-1) (CH2, CH, alkyl), 1625cm(-1) (CC, CN), 1500cm(-1) (HCCH, aryl), 1110cm(-1) (CO), 1028cm(-1) (CF). In addition, different analytical methods for determination of gefitinib are also described in this review. Pharmacokinetically, after oral administration, gefitinib is slowly absorbed with bioavailability of approximately 60% in human. Gefitinib is metabolized extensively in the liver into five metabolites by cytochrome P450s, primarily by CYP3A4 and to a lesser extent by CYP3A5 and CYP2D6. Gefitinib is eliminated mainly hepatically with total plasma clearance of 595mL/min after intravenous administration. Most of the adverse effects associated with gefitinib therapy are mild to moderate in severity and are usually reversible and manageable with appropriate intervention, such as diarrhea, dry skin, rash, nausea, and vomiting.
PURPOSE: ADJUVANT-CTONG1104 (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01405079), a randomized phase III trial, showed that adjuvant gefitinib treatment significantly improved disease-free survival (DFS) versus vinorelbine plus cisplatin (VP) in patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-positive resected stage II-IIIA (N1-N2) non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Here, we report the final overall survival (OS) results. METHODS: From September 2011 to April 2014, 222 patients from 27 sites were randomly assigned 1:1 to adjuvant gefitinib (n = 111) or VP (n = 111). Patients with resected stage II-IIIA (N1-N2) NSCLC and EGFR-activating mutation were enrolled, receiving gefitinib for 24 months or VP every 3 weeks for four cycles. The primary end point was DFS (intention-to-treat [ITT] population). Secondary end points included OS, 3-, 5-year (y) DFS rates, and 5-year OS rate. Post hoc analysis was conducted for subsequent therapy data. RESULTS: Median follow-up was 80.0 months. Median OS (ITT) was 75.5 and 62.8 months with gefitinib and VP, respectively (hazard ratio [HR], 0.92; 95% CI, 0.62 to 1.36; P = .674); respective 5-year OS rates were 53.2% and 51.2% (P = .784). Subsequent therapy was administered upon progression in 68.4% and 73.6% of patients receiving gefitinib and VP, respectively. Subsequent targeted therapy contributed most to OS (HR, 0.23; 95% CI, 0.14 to 0.38) compared with no subsequent therapy. Updated 3y DFS rates were 39.6% and 32. 5% with gefitinib and VP (P = .316) and 5y DFS rates were 22. 6% and 23.2% (P = .928), respectively. CONCLUSION: Adjuvant therapy with gefitinib in patients with early-stage NSCLC and EGFR mutation demonstrated improved DFS over standard of care chemotherapy. Although this DFS advantage did not translate to a significant OS difference, OS with adjuvant gefitinib was one of the longest observed in this patient group compared with historic data.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have been widely used for human non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment. However, acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs is the major barrier of treatment success, and new resistance mechanism remains to be elucidated. In this study, we found that elevated NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4) expression was associated with acquired EGFR-TKIs resistance. Gefitinib is the first-generation FDA-approved EGFR-TKI, and osimertinib is the third-generation FDA-approved EGFR-TKI. We demonstrated that NOX4 knockdown in the EGFR-TKI resistant cells enabled the cells to become sensitive to gefitinib and osimertinib treatment, while forced expression of NOX4 in the sensitive parental cells was sufficient to induce resistance to gefitinib and osimertinib in the cells. To elucidate the mechanism of NOX4 upregulation in increasing TKIs resistance, we found that knockdown of NOX4 significantly down-regulated the expression of transcription factor YY1. YY1 bound directly to the promoter region of IL-8 to transcriptionally activate IL-8 expression. Interestingly, knockdown of NOX4 and IL-8 decreased programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression, which provide new insight on TKIs resistance and immune escape. We found that patients with higher NOX4 and IL-8 expression levels showed a shorter survival time compared to those with lower NOX4 and IL-8 expression levels in response to the anti-PD-L1 therapy. Knockdown of NOX4, YY1 or IL-8 alone inhibited angiogenesis and tumor growth. Furthermore, the combination of NOX4 inhibitor GKT137831 and gefitinib had synergistic effect to inhibit cell proliferation and tumor growth and to increase cellular apoptosis. These findings demonstrated that NOX4 and YY1 were essential for mediating the acquired EGFR-TKIs resistance. IL-8 and PD-L1 are two downstream targets of NOX4 to regulate TKIs resistance and immunotherapy. These molecules may be used as potential new biomarkers and therapeutic targets for overcoming TKIs resistance in the future.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are common therapeutic agents for EGFR mutation-positive advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. There has been no report of rhabdomyolysis caused by an overdose of EGFR-TKIs. We herein review the existing literature on the subject and report a rare case of rhabdomyolysis due to an overdose of gefitinib, an EGFR-TKI.
Aberrant RNA modifications are frequently associated with cancers, while the underlying mechanisms and clinical significance remain poorly understood. Here, we find that the ac4C RNA acetyltransferase NAT10 is significantly upregulated in esophageal cancers (ESCAs) and associated with poor ESCA prognosis. In addition, using ESCA cell lines and mouse models, we confirm the critical functions of NAT10 in promoting ESCA tumorigenesis and progression in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, NAT10 depletion reduces the abundance of ac4C-modified tRNAs and decreases the translation efficiencies of mRNAs enriched for ac4C-modified tRNA-decoded codons. We further identify EGFR as a key downstream target that facilitates NAT10's oncogenic functions. In terms of clinical significance, we demonstrate that NAT10 depletion and gefitinib treatment synergistically inhibit ESCA progression in vitro and in vivo. Our data indicate the mechanisms underlying ESCA progression at the layer of mRNA translation control and provide molecular insights for the development of effective cancer therapeutic strategies.
Cross-talk between the tumor microenvironment (TME) and cancer cells plays an important role in acquired drug resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). The role of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), the major component of the TME, in acquired resistance remains unclear. In this study, M2-like reprogramming of TAMs and reduced phagocytosis by macrophages were observed in gefitinib-resistant lung cancer cells and tumor xenografts. CD47 was upregulated in TKI-resistant lung cancer cells, and M2 macrophage polarization and cancer cell escape from macrophage phagocytosis were enhanced. Culture medium from TKI-resistant cells led to metabolic reprogramming of TAMs. STAT3 was associated with CD47 expression in TKI-resistant lung cancer cells. Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of STAT3 enhanced the phagocytic activity of TAMs and alleviated the acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs via inhibiting the CD47-SIRPalpha signaling axis and M2 polarization in the co-culture system. Moreover, STAT3 transcriptionally regulated CD47 expression by binding to consensus DNA response elements in the intron of the CD47 gene. Furthermore, the combination of gefitinib with a STAT3 inhibitor and an anti-CD47 monoclonal antibody alleviated the acquired resistance to gefitinib in vitro and in vivo. Collectively, our study reveals the role of TAM reprogramming and the CD47-SIRPalpha axis in acquired EGFR-TKI resistance and provides a novel therapeutic strategy to overcome the acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs in lung cancer.
IMPORTANCE: Use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) is the standard therapy for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with brain metastases. Several studies have shown that adding chemotherapy to EGFR-TKIs could improve progression-free survival (PFS) in patients with EGFR-mutant advanced NSCLC; however, the efficacy of these agents in patients with brain metastases remains unclear. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy and safety of gefitinib plus chemotherapy (pemetrexed with platinum) compared with gefitinib alone in patients with untreated EGFR-mutant NSCLC brain metastases. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This open-label prospective, multicenter, phase 3 randomized clinical trial was conducted in 6 centers in China from January 13, 2016, to August 27, 2021. The median follow-up time was 21.1 months (IQR, 13.5-31.8 months). Patients with untreated confirmed brain metastases and EGFR-sensitive mutated NSCLC were enrolled. INTERVENTIONS: The eligible patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive gefitinib plus chemotherapy or gefitinib alone. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was intracranial PFS; secondary end points included PFS, overall survival (OS), intracranial objective response rate, overall objective response rate, and safety. Intention-to-treat analysis was performed. RESULTS: A total of 161 patients (87 [54.0%] women; mean [SD] age, 55 [9.8] years; range, 26-80 years) were enrolled and randomized to receive gefitinib (n = 81) or gefitinib plus chemotherapy (n = 80). The median intracranial PFS was 15.6 months (95% CI, 14.3-16.9 months) in the gefitinib plus chemotherapy group vs 9.1 months (95% CI, 8.0-10.2 months) in the gefitinib group (hazard ratio, 0.36; 95% CI, 0.25-0.53; P < .001). Similarly, the median PFS was significantly longer with gefitinib plus chemotherapy than gefitinib alone (16.3; 95% CI, 14.4-18.2 months vs 9.5; 95% CI, 8.3-10.8 months; P < .001). Gefitinib plus chemotherapy had a better intracranial objective response rate (85.0%; 95% CI, 77.0%-93.0% vs 63.0%; 95% CI, 52.2%-73.7%; P = .002) and overall objective response rate (80.0%; 95% CI, 71.0%-89.0% vs 64.2%; 95% CI, 53.5%-74.9%; P = .03) than gefitinib alone. At data cutoff, the median OS was also significantly longer in the gefitinib plus chemotherapy group vs the gefitinib group (35.0 vs 28.9 months; hazard ratio, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.43-0.99; P = .04). Grade 3 or worse adverse events were more common with gefitinib plus chemotherapy, most of which were manageable. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial, gefitinib plus chemotherapy significantly improved intracranial PFS, PFS, and OS compared with gefitinib alone in patients with untreated EGFR-mutant NSCLC brain metastases and could be an optional first-line treatment for these patients. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01951469.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway is one of the oncogenic pathways in non-small cell lung cancer. Gefitinib is classified as a first-generation EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). A variety of cutaneous adverse effects related to the drug has been reported. Cutaneous hyperpigmentation is a rare side effect of EGFR inhibitor (EGFRi). Herein, we report a 62-year-old woman with non-small cell lung carcinoma who presented with symmetrical, slate-gray-to-brownish-black macular pigmentation on sun-exposed and non-sun-exposed areas after eight months of gefitinib administration. The clinical features were consistent with lichen planus pigmentosus. This case highlights the unusual hyperpigmented condition occurring in patients taking EGFR-TKIs.
The success of targeted drug therapies for treating cancer patients has attracted broad attention both in the academic community and social society. However, rapidly developed acquired resistance is becoming a newly recognized major challenge to the continuing efficiency of these therapies. Metformin is a well-known natural compound with low toxicity derived from the plant French lilac. Our previous work has highlighted research progress of the combination of clinically applied chemotherapies and metformin by different mechanisms. We have also launched a study to combine metformin with the small molecule targeted drug gefitinib to treat bladder cancer using intravesical administration. Thus, in this minireview, we summarize recent achievements combining metformin with various targeted therapies. This work directs the potential clinical future by selecting available cancer patients and providing precise medicine by the combination of metformin and targeted drugs to overcome resistance and enhance therapeutic efficacies.
Gefitinib (ZD1839) is an orally active selective inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase, an enzyme that regulates intracellular signalling pathways implicated in the proliferation and survival of cancer cells. In human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines and xenografts, gefitinib dose-dependently inhibited cellular proliferation and tumour growth, and potentiated the cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy and/or radiation. Gefitinib is orally bioavailable and is cleared via the cytochrome P450 3A4 pathway. In patients receiving gefitinib (50 to 700 mg/day) in phase I trials, steady-state plasma concentration was reached in 7 to 10 days. In patients with advanced NSCLC who had failed one or two prior chemotherapies, gefitinib 250 or 500mg once daily induced an objective response in approximately 19% of patients in a double-blind trial (n = 210). In another double-blind trial including 216 patients with NSCLC who had failed two or more prior chemotherapies, gefitinib 250 or 500mg once daily induced an objective response in 11.8 and 8.8% of patients, respectively; approximately 40% showed an improvement in disease-related symptoms. Gefitinib was generally well tolerated and the most common adverse events were mild skin rashes and diarrhoea.
BACKGROUND: ARCHER 1050, an ongoing, randomized, open-label, phase III trial of dacomitinib versus gefitinib in newly diagnosed patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and an EGFR-activating mutation, reported significant improvement in overall survival (OS) with dacomitinib. OBJECTIVE: This paper reports an updated OS analysis of ARCHER 1050 after an extended follow-up. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this multinational, multicenter trial, adults (aged >/= 18 years or >/= 20 years in Japan and Korea) with newly diagnosed NSCLC and EGFR mutation (exon 19 deletion or exon 21 L858R substitution), and no history of central nervous system metastases, were randomized 1:1 to receive dacomitinib 45 mg/day (n = 227) or gefitinib 250 mg/day (n = 225). Randomization was stratified by race and EGFR mutation type. An ad hoc updated analysis of OS was conducted at the protocol-defined cut-off of 48 months from first dosing of the last enrolled patient (13 May 2019). RESULTS: After a median follow-up of 47.9 months, 133 (58.6%) patients had died in the dacomitinib arm and 152 (67.6%) in the gefitinib arm. The hazard ratio (HR) for OS was 0.748 (95% CI 0.591-0.947; two-sided P = 0.0155); median OS was 34.1 months with dacomitinib versus 27.0 months with gefitinib. The HR for OS in patients with dose reduction(s) in the dacomitinib arm (n = 154) compared with all patients in the gefitinib arm was 0.554 (95% CI 0.420-0.730); median OS was 42.5 months for patients with dose reduction(s) in the dacomitinib arm. The most common adverse events were diarrhea (87.7%), paronychia (61.7%), dermatitis acneiform (49.3%), and stomatitis (43.6%) with dacomitinib, and diarrhea (55.8%) and alanine aminotransferase increased (40.2%) with gefitinib. CONCLUSIONS: The OS benefit from first-line treatment with dacomitinib versus gefitinib was maintained after extended follow-up in patients with advanced NSCLC with EGFR-activating mutations. CLINICALTRIALS.GOV: NCT01774721 (registered 24 January 2013).
Gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor, is currently approved for use in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer who have failed previous chemotherapy or who are not suitable for chemotherapy in > 30 countries. The approved dose in patients with non-small cell lung cancer is 250 mg/day. The most common adverse effects are rash, diarrhoea, acne, dry skin, nausea and vomiting. Most of the effects are mild-to-moderate in nature and do not require discontinuation of therapy. The severity of many of these effects is dose-related with grade 3-4 effects more likely at a dose > 250 mg/day. The most severe adverse effect is interstitial lung disease (ILD), which occurs in approximately 1% of patients worldwide except for Japan where the incidence of ILD is 2%. ILD is fatal in approximately one out of three of the cases. The most common adverse effects associated with chemotherapy, myelosuppression and alopecia, are not commonly seen with gefitinib monotherapy.
PURPOSE: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor combined with cytotoxic chemotherapy is highly effective for the treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with EGFR mutations; however, little is known about the efficacy and safety of this combination compared with that of standard therapy with EGFR- tyrosine kinase inhibitors alone. METHODS: We randomly assigned 345 patients with newly diagnosed metastatic NSCLC with EGFR mutations to gefitinib combined with carboplatin plus pemetrexed or gefitinib alone. Progression-free survival (PFS), PFS2, and overall survival (OS) were sequentially analyzed as primary end points according to a hierarchical sequential testing method. Secondary end points were objective response rate (ORR), safety, and quality of life. RESULTS: The combination group demonstrated a better ORR and PFS than the gefitinib group (ORR, 84% v 67% [P < .001]; PFS, 20.9 v 11.9 months; hazard ratio for death or disease progression, 0.490 [P < .001]), although PFS2 was not significantly different (20.9 v 18.0 months; P = .092). Median OS in the combination group was also significantly longer than in the gefitinib group (50.9 v 38.8 months; hazard ratio for death, 0.722; P = .021). The rate of grade >/= 3 treatment-related adverse events, such as hematologic toxicities, in the combination group was higher than in the gefitinib group (65.3% v 31.0%); there were no differences in quality of life. One treatment-related death was observed in the combination group. CONCLUSION: Compared with gefitinib alone, gefitinib combined with carboplatin plus pemetrexed improved PFS in patients with untreated advanced NSCLC with EGFR mutations with an acceptable toxicity profile, although its OS benefit requires further validation.
