Drug-induced myopathy has been reported with use of lovastatin, nicotinic acid, and clofibrate. A particularly severe form, often accompanied by rhabdomyolysis, has been reported with the use of lovastatin and gemfibrozil; however, as far as we know, no case has been documented with use of gemfibrozil alone. Herein, we report the first case (to our knowledge of gemfibrozil-induced myopathy, confirmed by drug rechallenge.
Hypertriglyceridemia therapy is essential for preventing cardiovascular diseases. Fibrates belong to an important class of lipid-lowering drugs useful for the management of dyslipidaemia. By acting on the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-alpha, these drugs lower serum triglyceride levels and raise high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Fibrate monotherapy is associated with a risk of myopathy and this risk is enhanced when these agents are administered together with statins. However, whereas gemfibrozil can increase plasma concentrations of statins, fenofibrate has less influence on the pharmacokinetics of statins. Pemafibrate is a new PPAR-alpha-selective drug considered for therapy, and clinical trials are ongoing. Apart from this class of drugs, new therapies have emerged with different mechanisms of action to reduce triglycerides and the risk of cardiovascular diseases.
In vitro investigation of pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions (DDIs) has officially been part of the regulatory pathway for new drugs in the USA since the publication of an FDA guidance on the subject in 1997. The field has continued to evolve, driven by preclinical and clinical experience, improved understanding of the molecular basis of DDIs, technological advances, and a continuous dialogue between the FDA and pharmaceutical industry scientists. Some striking DDIs involve multiple molecular species and targets; their mechanisms and magnitude would have been difficult or impossible to predict with available in vitro tools. This article focuses on one such example.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Atherogenic dyslipidaemia, characterized by high plasma triglycerides (a surrogate for triglyceride-rich remnant lipoproteins) and low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), is prevalent in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and contributes to a high modifiable residual cardiovascular risk. Fibrates are effective in managing hypertriglyceridaemia but lack consistent cardiovascular benefit in clinical trials and exhibit pharmacokinetic interaction with statins (gemfibrozil) and renal and hepatic safety issues (fenofibrate). The selective peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha modulator (SPPARMalpha) paradigm offers potential for improving potency, selectivity and the benefit-risk profile. RECENT FINDINGS: The present review discusses evidence for the novel SPPARMalpha agonist, pemafibrate. Clinical trials showed robust lowering of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, elevation in HDL-C and nonlipid beneficial effects including anti-inflammatory activity. There was a favourable safety profile, with no increase in serum creatinine, evident with fenofibrate, and improved renal and hepatic safety. The cardiovascular outcomes study PROMINENT is critical to confirming the SPPARMalpha concept by validating reduction in residual cardiovascular risk in patients with T2DM and long-term safety. SUMMARY: SPPARMalpha offers a new paradigm for reducing residual cardiovascular risk in T2DM. PROMINENT will be critical to differentiating the first SPPARMalpha, pemafibrate, as a novel therapeutic class distinct from current fibrates.
Altered macrophage functions contribute to the pathogenesis of many infectious, immunological and inflammatory disease processes. Pharmacological modulation of macrophage activities therefore represents an important strategy for the prevention and treatment of inflammation-related diseases, such as atherosclerosis. This review focuses on recent advances on the role of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor transcription factor family in the modulation of lipid homeostasis and the inflammatory response in macrophages and the potential participation of these actions in the modulation of metabolic and cardiovascular disease.
Owing to the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III recommendations that patients with diabetes require a low-density lipoprotein (LDL) less than 100 mg/dL and a non-high-density lipoprotein (HDL) less than 130 mg/dL, frequently, combination lipid-lowering therapy is required. However, diabetic patients are commonly on multiple medications and have renal impairment. Therefore, the risk of myopathy with statin therapy is markedly increased. The safety of lipid-lowering therapy can be significantly improved by avoiding high-dose statins in combination with fibrates, especially gemfibrozil. To achieve non-HDL goals combining fenofibrate, or if glucose is well controlled, niacin, with a statin (not to exceed 40 mg), may significantly reduce the risk of myopathy. For diabetic patients who require additional LDL lowering, ezetimibe may provide a safe combination to a statin to achieve the LDL goal of less than 100 mg/dL.
Hyperlipidemia is a well-recognized complication of renal transplantation. In long-term survivors of renal transplantation, cardiovascular disease accounts for the majority of patient deaths. In the cyclosporine era, cardiovascular disease has surpassed infection as the number one cause of death. Risk factors in the transplant population for hyperlipidemia include age, male sex, diabetes, prednisone dose, graft impairment, obesity, and antihypertensive therapy. Recently, cyclosporine has been implicated as an aggravating factor in the development of hyperlipidemia after transplantation, although its role has been controversial. Because renal transplant recipients have other significant risk factors for the development of coronary artery disease, the amelioration of hyperlipidemia may improve long-term patient survival. Because most late deaths occur in patients with a functioning graft, long-term graft survival could also be improved. The role of corticosteroids in the development of hyperlipidemia is well established. Recent studies employing corticosteroid withdrawal after transplantation have shown a marked reduction in cholesterol despite the use of cyclosporine. Data on corticosteroid withdrawal in living related transplants at our center show a significant reduction in total cholesterol after steroid withdrawal. Data from heart transplant recipients under corticosteroid-free protocols show a similar reduction in total cholesterol. Other treatments for hyperlipidemia include diet and cholesterol-lowering agents, such as Mevacor (lovastatin; Merck Sharp & Dohme, West Point, PA). The efficacy of lowering cholesterol in this high-risk population is unknown.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) shows promising potential to enhance host defenses against Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Herein we evaluated the protective effect of PPARalpha against nontuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) infections. Using a rapidly growing NTM species, Mycobacterium abscessus (Mabc), we found that the intracellular bacterial load and histopathological damage were increased in PPARalpha-null mice in vivo. In addition, PPARalpha deficiency led to excessive production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines after infection of the lung and macrophages. Notably, administration of gemfibrozil (GEM), a PPARalpha activator, significantly reduced the in vivo Mabc load and inflammatory response in mice. Transcription factor EB was required for the antimicrobial response against Mabc infection. Collectively, these results suggest that manipulation of PPARalpha activation has promising potential as a therapeutic strategy for NTM disease.
Exaggerated postprandial hyperlipidemia has been associated with cardiovascular disease. The mechanisms underlying this association are likely to depend on a multitude of effects. Potentially atherogenic remnants of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TRL) accumulate in the postprandial state. In addition, TRL may promote the formation of small dense LDL. There are some indications that the postprandial period is a hypercoagulable state and endothelial function seems to be hampered after acute fat intake. Conventional lipid lowering drugs such as statins and fibrates have the potency of reducing postprandial hyperlipidemia, but the fibrates seem to be more effective in this respect. There is a complete lack of prospective studies linking inefficient postprandial lipid metabolism with clinical endpoints and there is also a need to include investigations of postprandial lipid metabolism in the evaluation of novel drugs affecting lipid metabolism and insulin resistance.
Statin monotherapy is generally well tolerated, with a low frequency of adverse events. The most important adverse effects associated with statins are myopathy and an asymptomatic increase in hepatic transaminases, both of which occur infrequently. Because statins are prescribed on a long-term basis, however, possible interactions with other drugs deserve particular attention, as many patients will typically receive pharmacological therapy for concomitant conditions during the course of statin treatment. This review summarizes the pharmacokinetic properties of statins and emphasizes their clinically relevant drug interactions.
Widespread use of pharmaceuticals and suboptimal wastewater treatment have led to increased levels of these substances in aquatic ecosystems. Lipid-lowering drugs such as gemfibrozil, which are among the most abundant human pharmaceuticals in the environment, may have deleterious effects on aquatic organisms. We examined the genotoxicity of gemfibrozil in a fish species, the gilthead seabream (Sparus aurata), which is commercially important in southern Europe. Following 96-h waterborne exposure, molecular (erythrocyte DNA strand breaks) and cytogenetic (micronuclei and other nuclear abnormalities in cells) endpoints were measured. Gemfibrozil was positive in both endpoints, at environmentally relevant concentrations, a result that raises concerns about the potential genotoxic effects of the drug in recipient waters.
Severe rhabdomyolysis complicated by respiratory and renal failure developed three weeks after initiation of low dose lovastatin therapy in a 79 year old, non-immunocompromised patient. The concomitant use of gemfibrozil may increase the risk of this complication.
We performed a cost-effectiveness analysis of pharmacologic treatment of high blood cholesterol levels. Agents modeled were cholestyramine, colestipol, gemfibrozil, lovastatin, niacin, and probucol. Pharmacologic effectiveness was estimated from reported studies. Cost estimates reflect societal resource consumption. Annual costs for therapy ranged from $327 (niacin) to $1881 (lovastatin, 80 mg/d). Niacin was the most efficient agent for reducing low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, having an average cost over 5 years of $139 per percent reduction in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level. Lovastatin (20 mg/d) was also efficient ($177 per percent reduction). Cholestyramine was least efficient at $347. For high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, niacin was most efficient, at $116 per percent increase in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level, followed by gemfibrozil at $271. Analyses combining low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol effects suggest that niacin and lovastatin (20 mg/d) were most efficient for reducing cardiovascular risk.
Statins (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors) are associated with myopathy, myalgias, myositis, and rhabdomyolysis. Rhabdoymyolysis is a rare complication and may cause acute renal failure, which may be fatal. In such cases, alternative therapies should be considered. In this review, we attempted to elucidate the lipid management options in patients with rhabdomyolysis and coronary artery disease. We also describe a case report of a patient who developed rhabdomyolysis from dual antilipid therapy followed by acute renal failure and non-ST elevation myocardial infarction. Such a complex case has not been reported in the literature, and lipid management options may include niacin, omega 3-fatty acids, or bile acid sequestrants. Once alternative therapies are initiated, monitoring a patient closely with evaluation for associated adverse events should be performed.
Elevated plasma triglyceride levels are increasingly recognized as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Fibric acid derivatives (fibrates) substantially decrease triglyceride levels and have been demonstrated to decrease clinical cardiovascular events in some trials. Ongoing research will elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which fibrates modify lipoprotein metabolism, clarify their use in combination with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins), and determine their role in the prevention of cardiovascular events.
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8 is a drug metabolizing enzyme of major importance. The lipid-lowering drug gemfibrozil has been identified as a strong inhibitor of CYP2C8 in vivo. This effect is due to mechanism-based inhibition of CYP2C8 by gemfibrozil 1-O-beta-glucuronide. In vivo, gemfibrozil is a fairly selective CYP2C8 inhibitor, which lacks significant inhibitory effect on other CYP enzymes. Gemfibrozil can, however, have a smaller but clinically meaningful inhibitory effect on membrane transporters, such as organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 and organic anion transporter 3. Areas covered: This review describes the inhibitory effects of gemfibrozil on CYP enzymes and membrane transporters. The clinical drug interactions caused by gemfibrozil and the different mechanisms contributing to the interactions are reviewed in detail. Expert opinion: Gemfibrozil is a useful probe inhibitor of CYP2C8 in vivo, but its effect on membrane transporters has to be taken into account in study design and interpretation. Moreover, gemfibrozil could be used to boost the pharmacokinetics of CYP2C8 substrate drugs. Identification of gemfibrozil 1-O-beta-glucuronide as a potent mechanism-based inhibitor of CYP2C8 has led to recognition of glucuronide metabolites as perpetrators of drug-drug interactions. Recently, also acyl glucuronide metabolites of clopidogrel and deleobuvir have been shown to strongly inhibit CYP2C8.
The landmark statin trials showed a significant reduction in morbidity and mortality associated with ischemic heart disease. However, it may not be widely appreciated that smoking had a marked adverse effect on outcome in these trials. In both the primary and secondary prevention setting, the effect of smoking was broadly similar. Smoking markedly increased the risk of events in the placebo and treatment groups. For example, in the primary prevention trials, this risk was 74-86% higher when smokers were compared with nonsmokers in the placebo groups. The corresponding figures for the secondary prevention trials were 23-61%. The risk of events in untreated nonsmokers was of a similar order to that seen in smokers taking statins. Although statin treatment was associated with a significant reduction in events in smokers, the best outcome was observed in nonsmokers treated with statins (primary prevention: lovastatin or pravastatin; secondary prevention: pravastatin or simvastatin). The highest risk of events in any group was in the smokers on placebo. This information may increase clinician and patient awareness as to the marked harmful effect of smoking relative to effective, evidence-based treatment (ie, the use of statins).
The bile-acid sequestrants, nicotinic acid and lovastatin, are the most effective drugs for lowering LDL-cholesterol. Nicotinic acid and gemfibrozil are more effective for lowering triglycerides and increasing HDL. Important considerations for proper selection of drugs in the treatment of the various dyslipoproteinemias are presented. Currently available drugs now permit effective control of blood lipid and lipoprotein levels.
Gemfibrozil is a lipid-modifying agent that belongs to the fibric acid derivative class. Fibric acid derivatives activate peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPAR-alpha). The primary role of these agents in clinical practice is for the management of hypertriglyceridemia. Triglycerides may be reduced by as much as 74 % in some patients. In addition to lowering triglycerides, these agents can also decrease very low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C) and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) as well as raise high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C). Based on the 2013 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Treatment of Blood Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in Adults and the National Lipid Association, pharmacologic therapy to reduce triglycerides should be considered when triglyceride levels are >/=500 mg/dL. While the use of gemfibrozil has decreased over the years for a variety of reasons, muscle-associated adverse effects is the predominant reason and the one that is most clinically relevant. However, despite these concerns, there are situations in which the use of gemfibrozil in combination with a statin may be necessary. Understanding the metabolism of gemfibrozil and the degree of interaction with the various statins will assist health-care providers to optimize safety when this combination is clinically indicated.
This subteam under the Drug Metabolism Leadership Group (Innovation and Quality Consortium) investigated the quantitative role of circulating inhibitory metabolites in drug-drug interactions using physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling. Three drugs with major circulating inhibitory metabolites (amiodarone, gemfibrozil, and sertraline) were systematically evaluated in addition to the literature review of recent examples. The application of PBPK modeling in drug interactions by inhibitory parent-metabolite pairs is described and guidance on strategic application is provided.
