The respiratory fluoroquinolones moxifloxacin, gemifloxacin, and high-dose levofloxacin are recommended in guidelines for effective empirical antimicrobial therapy of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). The use of these antibiotics for this indication in areas with a high prevalence of tuberculosis (TB) has been questioned due to the perception that they contribute both to delays in the diagnosis of pulmonary TB and to the emergence of fluoroquinolone-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In this review, we consider some of the important questions regarding the potential use of fluoroquinolones for the treatment of CAP where the burden of TB is high. The evidence suggests that the use of fluoroquinolones as recommended for 5-10 days as empirical treatment for CAP, according to current clinical management guidelines, is appropriate even in TB-endemic regions. It is critical to quickly exclude M. tuberculosis as a cause of CAP using the most rapid relevant diagnostic investigations in the management of all patients with CAP.
Cutaneous adverse events are seen with many antimicrobials. A signal was observed with gemifloxacin in the original clinical research program, however subsequent studies and analysis demonstrated a mild-moderate self-limited macular-papular rash seen most frequently when the duration of exposure was beyond 7 days, a non-approved duration. Following administration for 5 days for community-acquired respiratory tract infections the rash rate is typically less than 1.5%, a rate similar to that for other fluoroquinolones and lower than other frequently used community antimicrobials. The rash associated with gemifloxacin has not been linked with cross or subclinical-sensitization nor any systemic manifestations such as Stevens-Johnson Syndrome or Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis. This review describes the extensive studies conducted to support the use of this agent for short durations in community infections.
Despite an increasing population of patients with chronic renal insufficiency, the literature on the management of urinary tract infections (UTI) in these patients is sparse. Patients with underlying diabetes are a specific population at risk. Antimicrobial treatment of UTI requires adequate serum, renal, parenchymal, and urine concentrations of drugs with antibacterial activity versus the etiologic organism. Sulfamethoxazole and nitrofurantoin are examples of drugs with low and likely inadequate urine concentrations in patients with creatinine clearances of <50 ml/min. Urine concentrations of ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin remain sufficient as renal function fails, whereas the concentrations of gemifloxacin and moxifloxacin are too low to predict efficacy. More investigative work is needed in the management of UTI in patients with poor renal function.
1, 8- Naphthyridine nucleus belongs to significant nitrogen-containing heterocyclic compounds which has garnered the interest of researchers due to its versatile biological activities. It is known to be used as an antimicrobial, anti-psychotic, anti-depressant, anti-convulsant, anti- Alzheimer's, anti-cancer, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anti-viral, anti-hypertensive, antimalarial, pesticides, anti-platelets, and CB2 receptor agonist, etc. The present review highlights the framework of biological properties of synthesized 1, 8-naphthyridine derivatives developed by various research groups across the globe.
Macrolides, fluoroquinolones, doxycycline, and ketolides show a good intrinsic activity against intracellular pathogens which are responsible for a variable percentage of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). These therapeutic agents all seem effective in treating most cases of CAP caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, or Legionella spp. Among quinolones, the more recent fluoroquinolones, such as gemifloxacin or moxifloxacin, generally show a better intrinsic activity than the older ones. Among macrolides, azithromycin, and clarithromycin show a better pharmacokinetic profile. Both of them are available in intravenous form. It is quite common for M. pneumoniae and C. pneumoniae to continue to be shed in respiratory secretions, weeks after an effective therapy. The clinical relevance of this finding is not clear since most of these patients have a good outcome. Azithromycin, due to its advantageous pharmacokinetic profile, seems the best option when antibiotic prophylaxis is considered in some epidemiological settings. It has been proved effective in closed M. pneumoniae outbreaks.
The treatment of pneumococcal meningitis remains a major challenge, as reflected by the continued high morbidity and case fatality of the disease. The worldwide increase of penicillin-resistant pneumococci and more recently cephalosporin- and vancomycin-tolerant pneumococci has jeopardised the efficacy of standard treatments based on extended spectrum cephalosporins alone or in combination with vancomycin. This review provides a summary of newly developed antibiotics tested in the rabbit meningitis model. In particular, newer beta-lactam monotherapies (cefepime, meropenem, ertapenem), recently developed quinolones (garenoxacin, gemifloxacin, gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin) and a lipopeptide antibiotic (daptomycin) are discussed. A special emphasis is placed on the potential role of combination treatments with some of the new compounds, which are of interest based on the background of increasing resistance problems due to their often synergistic activity in the rabbit model of pneumococcal meningitis.
This review focuses on the activity of gemifloxacin, a new respiratory fluoroquinolone, against the two most important bacterial pathogens associated with lower respiratory tract infections, namely Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae.
Streptococcus pneumoniae is an important pathogen in many community-acquired respiratory infections in the United States and a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Unfortunately, S. pneumoniae is becoming increasingly resistant to a variety of antibiotics. Results of recent surveillance studies in the United States show that the prevalence of penicillin-nonsusceptible S. pneumoniae ranges from 25% to >50%, and rates of macrolide resistance among pneumococci are reported to be as high as 31%. A high prevalence of resistance to other antimicrobial classes is found among penicillin-resistant strains. Newer quinolones (e.g., gatifloxacin, gemifloxacin, and moxifloxacin) that have better antipneumococcal activity in vitro are the most active agents and therefore are attractive options for treatment of adults with community-acquired respiratory infections. Efforts should be made to prevent pneumococcal infections in high-risk patients through vaccination.
Recently, several new drugs for the treatment of bacterial infections have been developed. Quinupristin/dalfopristin, moxifloxacin and gatifloxacin have been approved throughout the world for clinical use. Levofloxacin has been approved for the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia caused by penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pnuemoniae. The Food and Drug Administration has approved linezolid for clinical use, and new drug applications for gemifloxacin and telithromycin were filed. Other new targets have surfaced in the quest for novel antibacterial agents.
The increasing resistance of Streptococcus pneumoniae, the most important community respiratory pathogen, to beta-lactams and other first-line antimicrobial agents usually employed for the empirical treatment of lower respiratory tract infections has led to the inclusion, in several current guidelines, of a fluoroquinolone with improved activity against pneumococci as the first choice agent for the management of such infections. The excellent microbiological, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic characteristics of the new fluoroquinolones (levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, gemifloxacin, and gatifloxacin) have encouraged their growing use, probably contributing to the emergence of fluoroquinolone-resistant pneumococci; although pneumococcal resistance to new fluoroquinolones is currently low, there is still concern about the potential for widespread emergence of resistance to these agents if they become indiscriminately used. Levofloxacin clinical failures have already been reported in the management of patients with pneumococcal community-acquired pneumonia; development of resistance in clinical isolates of S. pneumoniae has prompted a critical reexamination of the newer fluoroquinolones to assess their potency and to preserve their activity. An understanding of the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties, allowing selection of the most potent fluoroquinolone, will reduce the opportunity for resistance to develop. Finally, a targeted use of these agents will maintain class efficacy.
Although very useful agents, fluoroquinolones are associated with a number of adverse events, some with considerable clinical significance. Prolongation of the QT interval, for example, is an adverse effect associated with the use of fluoroquinolones. Fluoroquinolones prolong the QT interval by blocking voltage-gated potassium channels, especially the rapid component of the delayed rectifier potassium current I(Kr), expressed by HERG (the human ether-a-go-go-related gene). According to the available case reports and clinical studies, moxifloxacin carries the greatest risk of QT prolongation from all available quinolones in clinical practice and it should be used with caution in patients with predisposing factors for Torsades de pointes (TdP). Although gemifloxacin, levofloxacin, and ofloxacin are associated with a lower risk of QT prolongation compared with moxifloxacin, they should also be used with caution in patients at risk for QT prolongation. Ciprofloxacin appears to be associated with the lowest risk for QT prolongation and the lowest TdP rate. The overall risk of TdP is small with the use of fluoroquinolones. Clinicians can minimize that risk by avoiding prescriptions of multiple medications associated with QT-interval prolongation, especially in high-risk patients.
Community-acquired lower respiratory tract infections (LRTIs) exert a growing clinical and financial burden on healthcare systems and employers. In addition, antimicrobial resistance among pathogens, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, has compromised the use of commonly prescribed antimicrobial compounds. Newer fluoroquinolones have been developed to meet these emerging demands. Gemifloxacin is a potent, dual-acting fluoroquinolone with excellent activity against S. pneumoniae (MIC(90)0.03-0.06 microg/ml) including those strains demonstrating resistance to other classes of antibiotics. Gemifloxacin demonstrated excellent clinical success in community-acquired lower respiratory infections, has an acceptable safety profile, and is a cost-effective alternative in the management of LRTIs including those caused by resistant pathogens.
Quinolones are currently used as empirical therapy for treatment of community-acquired lower respiratory infections as they are effective against a broad range of conventional bacterial and 'atypical' pathogens, including Chlamydia pneumoniae. C. pneumoniae is estimated to be associated with 10-20% of community-acquired pneumonia in adults, and has recently been suggested to play a role in several non-respiratory conditions, including atherosclerosis. The newer, third-generation quinolones have enhanced activity against Gram-positive bacteria, including Streptococcus pneumoniae, and prolonged serum half-lives that permit once-daily dosing. Although gemifloxacin (SB-265805) and other new quinolones have good activity against C. pneumoniae in vitro, practically all published treatment studies have relied on serological diagnosis. Consequently, the microbiological efficacy of these agents in human infection has not been assessed. This paper reviews what is known to date of the in vivo microbiological efficacy of the quinolones against C. pneumoniae, and demonstrates the importance of assessing this parameter when evaluating the clinical utility of these agents in C. pneumoniae infection.
Rhinoscleroma is a chronic, infectious and granulomatous disease of the respiratory tract. There is often a delay in diagnosis due to unfamiliarity with the disease and also because culture is not always positive. We report a case in a 26-year-old woman with granular mass obstructing bilateral nasal cavities and causing breathing difficulty. Histopathological examination showed characteristic Mikulicz histiocytes containing numerous Gram-negative intracellular rod-shaped bacilli consistent with the diagnosis of rhinoscleroma. The patient was treated with gemifloxacin and tetracycline and remains asymptomatic over a year follow-up period. It is important to consider rhinoscleroma in cases of chronic nasal obstruction. As culture is not always positive, histopathological examination may be crucial to the diagnosis.
Strains of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae (ESBL-KP) have emerged worldwide. Concomitant ciprofloxacin resistance with ESBL production in K. pneumoniae isolates would severely restrict treatment options. Among 39 (18.5%) of 211 ESBL-KP isolates resistant to ciprofloxacin (MIC, >/=4 micro g/ml), 37 (95%) were high level resistant (MIC, >/=16 micro g/ml). These isolates were also cross resistant to the newer fluoroquinolones, including levofloxacin, gatifloxacin, gemifloxacin, and garenoxacin (BMS 284756). Sitafloxacin was most active against these ciprofloxacin-resistant ESBL-KP isolates with MICs for 67% of the isolates being </=2 micro g/ml. The molecular epidemiology of these multiresistant isolates was investigated by automated ribotyping and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). Ribotyping identified 18 different strains among the 39 ciprofloxacin-resistant ESBL-KP isolates. The majority (67%) of these isolates were contained in six ribogroups which were further confirmed by PFGE. The distribution of the six major strains of ciprofloxacin-resistant ESBL-KP within Taiwan included one (ribogroup 255.3-PFGE type E) with a nationwide distribution and several institution-specific strains. Interhospital cooperation appears necessary, with strict infection control practices coupled with restriction of fluoroquinolone and extended-spectrum beta-lactam use to control both the major epidemic strain and the more diverse strains observed within individual institutions.
We investigated the effect of calcium carbonate on the oral bioavailability of gemifloxacin. Gemifloxacin was administered alone, 2 h before, simultaneously, or 2 h after calcium carbonate in 16 volunteers. Data for 320 mg of gemifloxacin alone were as follows: maximum concentration of drug in serum (C(max)),13 microg/ml; half-life, 7.33 h; and area under the concentration-time curve from 0 h to infinity (AUC( infinity )), 6.79 microg. h/ml. Only simultaneous coadministration of calcium carbonate reduced C(max) (-17%) and AUC( infinity ) (-21%) significantly.
Intra-abdominal infections are biphasic, synergistic processes with early peritonitis and bacteremia due to aerobes and a later abscess component due to anaerobes. Although Bacteroides fragilis is the most commonly recognized pathogen, other anaerobes, including other members of the B. fragilis-group species, are major components of infection. Anaerobic bacteremia is often associated with an intra-abdominal source. New antimicrobial agents with anaerobic activity are in various stages of development for the therapy of intra-abdominal infections. The in vitro activity and the currently available sparse clinical data are reviewed for a new carbapenem (ertapenem), several fluoroquinolones (trovafloxacin, moxifloxacin, and gemifloxacin), and a desfluoroquinolone (BMS-284756).
The activity of moxifloxacin was compared with that of other antimicrobial agents against 54 strains of Ureaplasma spp., 54 strains of Mycoplasma hominis, 14 strains of Mycoplasma genitalium, and 44 strains of Chlamydia trachomatis. Moxifloxacin inhibited 90% of all isolates at a concentration </=1 mg/L, being the most active compound against C. trachomatis and sharing the highest activity with garenoxacin and gemifloxacin against mycoplasmas. Moxifloxacin killed the 30 mycoplasma isolates tested at a concentration </=1 mg/L, except those resistant to fluoroquinolone. Thus, moxifloxacin has attracted interest as a potential therapy for mycoplasmal or chlamydial urogenital infections.
