A 13-year-old girl had chronic polymicrobial bacteremia with Enterobacter hafnia and Enterobacter agglomerans in the absence of any demonstrable underlying illness, use of immunosuppressive drugs, or discovery of portal of entry of the bacteria. She was treated successfully with a prolonged course of carbenicillin and aminoglycoside antibiotics which were tolerated well. The only side effect of the therapy was a transient episode of vestibular dysfunction which was reversible following cessation of gentamicin. The principles of management of polymicrobial bacteremia are presented.
BACKGROUND: Gentamicin is used commonly as an empiric antibiotic prior to culture evidence in the treatment of ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) in surgical patients. METHODS: The published literature on the use of gentamicin for empiric therapy in VAP was reviewed and in combination with the author's personal experience, an evaluation has been made about the indications for the use of this antibiotic in VAP. RESULTS: Empiric gentamicin use appears to benefit less than 1% of patients in the treatment of presumptive VAP. The problematic pharmacokinetics of gentamicin use in this patient population combined with potential toxicity from the drug can be observed to yield greater risks than benefits in this clinical situation when published evidence is reviewed. CONCLUSION: There is no definitive evidence to support empiric use of gentamicin in the treatment of VAP when evaluated on a cost-effective basis.
Tobramycin is a new antibiotic resembling gentamicin. We measured the minimal inhibitory concentrations of these two antibiotics against five bacterial species that cause hospital-acquired infections and are resistant to many presently available antibiotics. The organisms tested were 500 strains of Pseudomones aeruginosa, 100 strains of each of Proteus rettgeri and Pr. morganii, 50 strains of Pr. vulgaris and 250 strains of Providencia stuartii. Tobramycin was 2 to 4 times more active than gentamicin against Ps. aeruginosa; all except 6 of 70 strains resistant to 4 mug/ml of gentamicin were sensitive to 4 mug/ml of tobramycin. The two antibiotics showed a similar degree of activity against the other four species. Tobramycin promises to be of particular value in the treatment of Pseudomonas infections.
For a decade gentamicin has been used extensively because of its antimicrobial efficacy and the relatively low prevalence of clinical toxicity. Recently the more frequent appearance of resistant organisms, reports of increased nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity, and the development of newer aminoglycoside antibiotics have raised doubts about the continued use of this agent. This paper reassesses the role of gentamicin. It is clear that an appreciation of the pharmacokinetics and the clinical use of gentamicin as well as an understanding of the patterns of toxicity in animals and humans can lead to more efficient treatment with this antimicrobial agent. Despite ample competition from a number of newer aminoglycoside antibiotics, gentamicin will probably continue to be used widely in the near future.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the quality of custom-made antibiotic carriers which are produced for hospitals in a central service laboratory. These sterile products, made according to antibiogram, showed quality parameters which are comparable with commercially available products in terms of antibiotic release and other relevant properties.
The results of 49 serum gentamicin assays from children of 2 weeks to 11 years of age are presented. The dose of gentamicin given 8-hourly intramuscularly ranged from 0-7 mg/kg-4-9 mg/kg. Doses of 1-7 mg/kg or less did not give adequate serum concentrations. As a result of these observations it is suggested that an intramuscular dose of 2-5 mg/kg given 8-hourly is suitable for most children in the absence of renal failure, but that adjustment of the dose according to serum gentamicin concentration is necessary.
Sustained antibiotic release is important to prevent the infections after surgical treatments such as guided tissue regeneration (GTR). Electrospinning provides a simple way to fabricate nanofibers for drug delivery. In this study, a simple method to achieve sustained antibiotic release by introducing mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs)with electrospinning is developed. The nanoparticles entrapped nanofibers (MSNs-PCL) were successfully fabricated, and a sustained release of gentamicin was demonstrated. The gentamicin loaded MSNs-PCL showed strong antimicrobial effects against E. coli, indicated the sustained release behavior and the retained bioactivity. The MSNs-PCL synthesized by electrospinning method shows great potential for biomedical applications such as fabricating GTR membranes.
Forty patients undergoing routine bronchoscopy were randomised to receive inhaled micronised gentamicin powder (180 mg) or nebulised gentamicin solution (160 mg) one hour before the procedure. Similar levels of gentamicin were detected in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in the two groups (micronised powder (n = 20) 9.3 (SD 9.3) mg/l, nebulised solution (n = 20) 8.0 (7.8) mg/l). The micronised gentamicin powder preparation caused cough in half the patients but this did not stop their receiving a full dose. Dry powder gentamicin may be a convenient formulation for long term inhaled treatment if the problem of cough can be overcome.
Two patients developed acute tubular necrosis, characterized clinically by acute oliguric renal failure, while they were receiving a combination of cephalothin sodium and gentamicin sulfate therapy. Patients who are given this drug regimen should be observed very carefully for early signs of nephrotoxicity. High doses of this antibiotic combination should be avoided especially in elderly patients. Patients with renal insufficiency should not be given this regimen.
An 83-year-old man developed acute kidney failure after intra-articular use of gentamicin sponges for a periprosthetic hip infection. Haemodialysis was necessary for clearance of gentamicin, and for kidney function replacement. It is important to be aware that there is a risk of renal toxicity due to gentamicin when using a locally applied sponge.
Antibiotic-loaded acrylic bone cement is widely used in total joint replacement to reduce infections. Walking results in cyclic loading, which has been suggested to stimulate antibiotic release. The goal of this study is to compare antibiotic release from cyclically loaded bone cement with the release from unloaded bone cement. Two models of the frontal aspect of a femoral stem were cemented with CMW 1 Radiopaque G, Palacos R-G and Palamed G. Both were immersed in water, and the gentamicin concentration in the water was monitored. One model was cyclically loaded at 5 Hz during immersion achieving physiological stresses in the bone cement mantle. After 10.8 x 10(6) cycles, initial release of gentamicin from Palamed G was increased significantly for loaded over unloaded, but not from CMW 1 Radiopaque G and Palacos R-G.
Systemic gentamicin can cause acute bilateral, simultaneous, symmetrical loss of vestibular function manifested by symptoms and signs of chronic vestibular insufficiency (ataxia and oscillopsia). We report 6 patients presenting with ataxia and oscillopsia, but without a history of vertigo, who had severe unilateral loss of vestibular function on caloric testing. The absence of vertigo in these patients could be explained by two possible mechanisms: either, the unilateral loss of vestibular function was subacute, occurring over several days so that compensation could occur, or bilateral vestibular loss occurred which was then followed by asymmetrical recovery of vestibular function. The second hypothesis is supported by the observation that vestibular hair cells can regenerate after aminoglycoside damage.
A method of care for these infected nonunions is prolonged intravenous systemic antibiotic treatment and implantation of methyl methacrylate antibiotic carrier beads to delivery high local doses of antibiotics. This method requires a second surgery to remove the beads once the infection has cleared. Recent studies have investigated the use of biodegradable materials that have been impregnated with antibiotics as tools to treat bone infections. In the present study, human demineralized bone matrix (DBM) was investigated for its ability to be loaded with an antibiotic. The data presented herein demonstrates that this osteoinductive and biodegradable material can be loaded with gentamicin and release clinically relevant levels of the drug for at least 13 days in vitro. This study also demonstrates that the antibiotic loaded onto the graft has no adverse effects on the osteoinductive nature of the DBM as measured in vitro and in vivo. This bone void filler may represent a promising option for local antibiotic delivery in orthopedic applications.
Netilmicin sulfate, the 1-N-ethyl derivative of sisomicin, is a new aminoglycoside recently released for use in Canada and not yet released in the U.S. Its place in therapeutics, compared with gentamicin (G), tobramycin (T), and amikacin (A), is not yet established. Preliminary work in animals has suggested a lower incidence of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity than with other aminoglycosides, and in vitro work has suggested some activity against G/T-resistant organisms. However, netilmicin appears to be virtually identical to G,T, and A in antimicrobial spectrum (except for its poorer activity against P. aeruginosa), human toxicity, and clinical use. For G/T-resistant organisms, amikacin is still the aminoglycoside of choice. In summary, netilmicin has not been demonstrated to have significant advantages over other aminoglycosides (G,T,A), and it is more expensive; thus, its potential value is limited.
The biologically available concentration of gentamicine sulfate in eight ocular tissues of 140 rabbits and 96 humans was measured by a modified disc diffusion technique. If enough topically administered gentamicine was applied, this bioassay detected it in all ocular tissues tested except the lens nucleus. The decay of antibiotic activity was faster in some tissues, eg, aqueous, than in others. A higher level of antibiotic was found in corneas altered by sutures than in virgin tissue. The degree of inflammation, the frequency of application, and the interval between the drops are directly proportional to the antibiotic level in the tissues. The antibiotic free vehicle of commercial 0.3 per cent gentamicin drops possesses an antibacterial potential.
Gentamicin is a widely-used antimicrobial agent for obstetric and gynecologic infections. Renewed excitement in this antibiotic has arisen from recent information supporting less frequent dosing. In this symposium, we will describe the pharmacokinetics of gentamicin and review new information advocating the use of once-daily administration of gentamicin.
The pharmacokinetics of clindamycin and gentamicin were studied in women given these antibiotics prior to cesarean section. Maternal clindamycin levels were within the normal range and cord levels were within the therapeutic range for this antibiotic. For gentamicin, however, maternal levels were depressed, with a concurrent depression of cord levels. This may have significant implications for the use of gentamicin in maternal and fetomaternal infections.
In 14 burn patients treated for serious Gram-negative infections, the use of the previously recommended gentamicin dose of 5 mg/kg/day was found to result in subtherapeutic serum concentrations (peak concentration less than 4 mg/L). The gentamicin half-life was found to be unusually short especially in the younger burn patients. Because of this shorter half-life the dosage interval was decreased to 4 hours to prevent extended periods of subtherapeutic serum concentrations. In addition, the daily dose of gentamicin was increased to achieve therapeutic peak concentration. Individualizing each patient's gentamicin regimen was thought to be instrumental in the favorable response of two patients with Pseudomonas ecthyma gangrenosum. The results of this study would strongly support the measurement of serum gentamicin levels in all burn patients with life-threatening infection. The gentamicin dosage regimen should then be individualized for each patient to provide optimal peak concentrations. In addition, patients demonstrating a short drug half-life may require a decreased dosage interval to prevent prolonged periods of sub-therapeutic concentrations.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVES: Gentamicin is often used for the treatment of Gram-negative infections. Due to pharmacokinetic variability in paediatric patients, appropriate dosing of gentamicin in the paediatric population is challenging. This article reviews published population pharmacokinetic models of gentamicin in paediatric patients, identifies covariates that significantly influence gentamicin pharmacokinetics, and determines whether there is a consensus on proposed dosing for intravenous gentamicin in this population. METHODS: The PubMed database was searched for articles published until the end of 2017. If the articles described population pharmacokinetic models of gentamicin in the paediatric population (after intravenous administration of gentamicin), the following data were extracted: type of study, year of publication, population characteristics and number of patients, gentamicin dosing, total number of gentamicin (serum and/or plasma) concentrations, type of population modelling approach, developed model with pharmacokinetic parameters and covariates included. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: In most of the studies, one- or two-compartment modelling was applied. The mean estimated gentamicin clearance for newborns, infants and the complete paediatric population was 0.048, 0.13 and 0.067 L/h/kg, respectively, and the mean predicted volume of distribution was 0.475, 0.35 and 0.33 L/kg, respectively. The values reflect differences in body composition and kidney maturation within the different paediatric populations. Gentamicin pharmacokinetics were most influenced by age, body size and renal function. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Based on our review, the authors agree on a prolonged dosing interval for preterm and term newborns (up to 48 hours). However, there was no agreement on proposed dosing with respect to gestational age. In general, the proposed daily doses were lower compared to those initially applied for preterm newborns and comparable to those for term newborns. For infants and children, the dosing interval remained unchanged (24 hours), but the proposed daily doses were higher than actually applied. When differences in the paediatric population are considered and an appropriate population PK model with applicable covariates is applied, dosing can be individualized. In the future, studies of gentamicin pharmacokinetics in paediatric patients should focus on currently underestimated covariates, such as fat-free mass, concomitantly administered drugs, body temperature and critical illness because these can change gentamicin PK considerably. Consequently, different dosing is required and TDM becomes even more important.
We reviewed 36 patients with gentamicin vestibulotoxicity to determine its relationship to gentamicin dosage, serum gentamicin levels, and the development of gentamicin nephrotoxicity. Thirty of the patients had received intravenous or intramuscular gentamicin; six had received intraperitoneal gentamicin. Sixteen of the 30 patients treated with intramuscular or intravenous gentamicin had received less than the recommended maximum dose of 5 mg/kg/day for less than the recommended maximum period of 10 days. Nephrotoxicity as well as vestibulotoxicity developed in 16 of these 30 patients. Gentamicin vestibulotoxicity was not recognized before discharge from hospital in 32 of the 36 patients. We conclude that as far as the vestibular system is concerned there is no safe gentamicin dose and no safe serum gentamicin level, and there is an increased risk of vestibulotoxicity in patients in whom nephrotoxicity develops. Physicians who use gentamicin should become more aware of the clinical features of vestibulotoxicity because stopping gentamicin as soon as symptoms of vestibulotoxicity appear could prevent permanent impairment of vestibular function.
