BACKGROUND: The study of xeroderma pigmentosum has yielded unforeseen advances regarding how defects in the nucleotide excision repair pathway result in this devastating disease, but development of therapeutic strategies has trailed behind the mechanistic discoveries. OBJECTIVES: This review aims to cover clinical presentation, molecular mechanisms and current management, and highlights more recent insights into targeting the deficiencies secondary to the DNA repair defects to prevent skin cancer and/or neurological degeneration. METHODS: This review article discusses novel therapeutic approaches to xeroderma pigmentosum that focus on metabolic defects downstream of nucleotide excision repair. RESULTS: Current research demonstrates that specific sulfonylureas promote clearance of DNA damage and increase resistance to ultraviolet radiation in a cellular model of xeroderma pigmentosum. Moreover, nicotinamide attenuates the effects of ultraviolet radiation in cells, and caloric restriction decreases DNA damage burden in animal models of xeroderma pigmentosum. CONCLUSIONS: Clinical management of patients with xeroderma pigmentosum still focuses on preventative avoidance of sun exposure as opposed to therapies that would improve the patients' condition; thus, novel approaches to this disease are warranted.
BACKGROUND: Data are lacking on the comparative effectiveness of commonly used glucose-lowering medications, when added to metformin, with respect to microvascular and cardiovascular disease outcomes in persons with type 2 diabetes. METHODS: We assessed the comparative effectiveness of four commonly used glucose-lowering medications, added to metformin, in achieving and maintaining a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0% in participants with type 2 diabetes. The randomly assigned therapies were insulin glargine U-100 (hereafter, glargine), glimepiride, liraglutide, and sitagliptin. Prespecified secondary outcomes with respect to microvascular and cardiovascular disease included hypertension and dyslipidemia, confirmed moderately or severely increased albuminuria or an estimated glomerular filtration rate of less than 60 ml per minute per 1.73 m(2) of body-surface area, diabetic peripheral neuropathy assessed with the Michigan Neuropathy Screening Instrument, cardiovascular events (major adverse cardiovascular events [MACE], hospitalization for heart failure, or an aggregate outcome of any cardiovascular event), and death. Hazard ratios are presented with 95% confidence limits that are not adjusted for multiple comparisons. RESULTS: During a mean 5.0 years of follow-up in 5047 participants, there were no material differences among the interventions with respect to the development of hypertension or dyslipidemia or with respect to microvascular outcomes; the mean overall rate (i.e., events per 100 participant-years) of moderately increased albuminuria levels was 2.6, of severely increased albuminuria levels 1.1, of renal impairment 2.9, and of diabetic peripheral neuropathy 16.7. The treatment groups did not differ with respect to MACE (overall rate, 1.0), hospitalization for heart failure (0.4), death from cardiovascular causes (0.3), or all deaths (0.6). There were small differences with respect to rates of any cardiovascular disease, with 1.9, 1.9, 1.4, and 2.0 in the glargine, glimepiride, liraglutide, and sitagliptin groups, respectively. When one treatment was compared with the combined results of the other three treatments, the hazard ratios for any cardiovascular disease were 1.1 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.9 to 1.3) in the glargine group, 1.1 (95% CI, 0.9 to 1.4) in the glimepiride group, 0.7 (95% CI, 0.6 to 0.9) in the liraglutide group, and 1.2 (95% CI, 1.0 to 1.5) in the sitagliptin group. CONCLUSIONS: In participants with type 2 diabetes, the incidences of microvascular complications and death were not materially different among the four treatment groups. The findings indicated possible differences among the groups in the incidence of any cardiovascular disease. (Funded by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases and others; GRADE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01794143.).
INTRODUCTION: Sulfonylureas have been the standard second-line treatment after failure of metformin monotherapy in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) but they are becoming less popular as the newer glucose-lowering agents have a relatively lower risk of hypoglycemia and some of them have been shown to reduce cardiovascular and renal events. Gliclazide differs from other sulfonylureas in several respects and may provide a suitable option for some patients with T2D. AREAS COVERED: In this article, we review the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and clinical efficacy of gliclazide based on the available literature. EXPERT OPINION: Gliclazide in the modified release (MR) formulation given once daily provides a good 24-h glycemic efficacy comparable to most other groups of glucose lowering drugs. Hypoglycemic events are less frequent than with some other sulfonylureas, and weight gain is not a major problem. Cardiovascular outcome studies have shown no evidence of increased cardiovascular events with gliclazide, and the durability of glucose lowering effects is comparable to other drug groups. Lower doses of gliclazide appear to have an incretin-enhancing effect, and overall it can provide a cost-effective treatment that is useful in many patients.
Sulfonylureas and similarly acting rapid insulin secretagogues have long been available to manage type 2 diabetes. These agents have a well understood mechanism of action and are in large part well tolerated. However, sulfonylurea therapy is unlikely to sustain adequate long-term glycemic control and has potential side effects, including hypoglycemia and weight gain. Additional concerns exist regarding detrimental effects of certain sulfonylureas on ischemic preconditioning and cardiac outcomes. Fortunately, newer agents such as glimepiride appear less likely to adversely affect the myocardium. These agents can often be used successfully as one component of combination therapy for diabetes management.
BACKGROUND: Metformin is the recommended first-line pharmacotherapy for patients with type 2 diabetes. There is no consensus on the optimum second-line pharmacotherapy. We compared the efficacy and safety of the sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor empagliflozin and the sulfonylurea glimepiride as add-on to metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes. METHODS: In this double-blind phase 3 trial, patients (aged >/=18 years) with type 2 diabetes and HbA1c concentrations of 7-10%, despite metformin treatment and diet and exercise counselling, were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio with a computer-generated random sequence, stratified by HbA1c, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), and region, to empagliflozin (25 mg once daily, orally) or glimepiride (1-4 mg once daily, orally) as add-on to metformin for 104 weeks. Patients and investigators were masked to treatment assignment. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in HbA1c levels at weeks 52 and 104. Differences in the primary endpoint were first tested for non-inferiority (based on a margin of 0.3%). If non-inferiority was shown, differences in the primary endpoint at week 104 were then tested for superiority. Analysis was done on the full-analysis set-ie, patients who were treated with at least one dose of study drug and had a baseline HbA1c value. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01167881. A 104-week extension is ongoing. FINDINGS: Between August, 2010, and June, 2011, 1549 patients were randomly assigned to receive empagliflozin (n=769) or glimepiride (n=780); four patients in the empagliflozin group did not receive the assigned treatment. Empagliflozin was non-inferior to glimepiride at both timepoints. At week 104, adjusted mean difference in change from baseline in HbA1c with empagliflozin versus glimepiride was -0.11% (95% CI -0.19 to -0.02; p=0.0153 for superiority). Adverse events were reported in 661 (86%) patients treated with empagliflozin and 673 (86%) patients treated with glimepiride. Severe adverse events were reported in 72 (9%) patients in the empagliflozin group and 68 (9%) in the glimepiride group. Serious adverse events were reported in 119 (16%) patients in the empagliflozin group and 89 (11%) in the glimepiride group. Confirmed hypoglycaemic adverse events (plasma glucose </=3.9 mmol/L or requiring assistance) at week 104 were reported in 19 (2%) patients treated with empagliflozin and 189 (24%) patients treated with glimepiride. INTERPRETATION: Empagliflozin might be an effective and a well tolerated second-line treatment option for patients with type 2 diabetes who have not achieved good glycaemic control on metformin. FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim and Eli Lilly.
The sulphonylureas act by triggering insulin release from the pancreatic beta cell. A specific site on the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive potassium channels is occupied by sulphonylureas leading to closure of the potassium channels and subsequent opening of calcium channels. This results in exocytosis of insulin. The meglitinides are not sulphonylureas but also occupy the sulphonylurea receptor unit coupled to the ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Glibenclamide (glyburide), gliclazide, glipizide and glimepiride are the primary sulphonylureas in current clinical use for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Glibenclamide has a higher frequency of hypoglycaemia than the other agents. With long-term use, there is a progressive decrease in the effectiveness of sulphonylureas. This loss of effect is the result of a reduction in insulin-producing capacity by the pancreatic beta cell and is also seen with other antihyperglycaemic agents. The major adverse effect of sulphonylureas is hypoglycaemia. There is a theoretical concern that sulphonylureas may affect cardiac potassium channels resulting in a diminished response to ischaemia. There are now many choices for initial therapy of type 2 diabetes in addition to sulphonylureas. Metformin and thiazolidinediones affect insulin sensitivity by independent mechanisms. Disaccharidase inhibitors reduce rapid carbohydrate absorption. No single agent appears capable of achieving target glucose levels in the majority of patients with type 2 diabetes. Combinations of agents are successful in lowering glycosylated haemoglobin levels more than with a single agent. Sulphonylureas are particularly beneficial when combined with agents such as metformin that decrease insulin resistance. Sulphonylureas can also be given with a basal insulin injection to provide enhanced endogenous insulin secretion after meals. Sulphonylureas will continue to be used both primarily and as part of combined therapy for most patients with type 2 diabetes.
BACKGROUND: Hypoglycemia is an adverse event (AE) that cannot be ignored in clinical practice. This study aimed to identify the most common and top drugs associated with the risk of hypoglycemia based on the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We used OpenVigil 2.1 pharmacovigilance analytics platform to query FAERS database and data from 2004 to 2023 were retrieved. The Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) was used to identify hypoglycemia cases, and DrugBank database was used to determine drug generic names. RESULTS: A total of 11,155,106 AEs reports were identified, of which 28,443 (0.25%) were related to hypoglycemia. Metformin (6926 cases) was associated with most cases of hypoglycemia. According to the disproportionality analysis, the top five drugs with the highest ROR and PRR were penamecillin, nikethamide, sotagliflozin, norethandrolone, glimepiride/pioglitazone. Nineteen of the top 50 drugs did not have hypoglycemia indicated in the package insert. CONCLUSIONS: By analyzing the FAERS database, we listed drugs with a strong hypoglycemic signal for which the label does not provide a reminder. Notably, the potential hypoglycemia risks are of great importance and should be closely monitored in medical practice.
Sulphonylureas (SU) form an important role in management of people with type 2 diabetes. This safety history of SU was tainted for various reasons, the predominant one being lack of demonstration of cardiovascular safety. Since its introduction, SU's have never been subjected to a formal study for its cardiovascular safety. The cardiovascular safety of SUs was derived from small, inadequately powered randomised controlled trials (RCT) and observational studies. CAROLINA (CARdiovascular Outcome study of LINAgliptin versus glimepiride in patients with type 2 diabetes) trial planned as a cardiovascular outcome trial randomised people with type 2 diabetes and high cardiovascular risk to Linagliptin and Glimepiride. This opinion paper outlines the salient features of this landmark trial and its implications in general cardiology practice.
Acanthamoeba keratitis is a sight-endangering eye infection, and causative organism Acanthamoeba presents a significant concern to public health, given escalation of contact lens wearers. Contemporary therapy is burdensome, necessitating prompt diagnosis and aggressive treatment. None of the contact lens disinfectants (local and international) can eradicate Acanthamoeba effectively. Using a range of compounds targeting cellulose, ion channels, and biochemical pathways, we employed bioassay-guided testing to determine their anti-amoebic effects. The results indicated that acarbose, indaziflam, terbuthylazine, glimepiride, inositol, vildagliptin and repaglinide showed anti-amoebic effects. Compounds showed minimal toxicity on human cells. Therefore, effects of the evaluated compounds after conjugation with nanoparticles should certainly be the subject of future studies and will likely lead to promising leads for potential applications.
An 89-year-old man with diabetes treated with metformin 500 mg/day and glimepiride 4 mg/day was hospitalized because of hypoglycemic right hemiparesis and dysarthria (casual glucose value 1.8 mmol/L), which resolved quickly following administration of 40 mL of 40% dextrose. Hemiparesis is a rare symptom (4.2%) of hypoglycemia. There are about 200 case reports of hypoglycemic hemiparesis. The average glucose level at which hemiparesis developed was 1.8 mmol/L. Right-sided hemiparesis predominated (R 66%; L 34%). On imaging studies, abnormal findings were frequently observed in the internal capsule or splenium of the corpus callosum. The mechanism of hemiparesis is not fully understood. The existence of cases in which hypoglycemia cannot be distinguished from stroke on imaging studies suggests the importance of measurement of the blood glucose level when the symptoms of stroke are first recognized.
GRADE Study Research Group; Nathan DM, Lachin JM, Buse JB, et al. Glycemia reduction in type 2 diabetes-microvascular and cardiovascular outcomes. N Engl J Med. 2022;387:1075-88. 36129997.
AIM: To evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of an initial triple combination therapy (TCT) compared with conventional stepwise add-on therapy (SAT) in patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes (T2D). MATERIALS AND METHODS: This multicentre, randomized, 104-week, open-label trial randomized 105 patients with drug-naive T2D (with HbA1c level >/= 8.0%, < 11.0%) to the TCT (1000 mg of metformin, 10 mg of dapagliflozin and 5 mg of saxagliptin once daily) or SAT (initiated with metformin, followed by glimepiride and sitagliptin) groups. The primary outcome was the proportion of patients who achieved an HbA1c level of less than 6.5% without hypoglycaemia, weight gain of 5% or higher, or discontinuation of drugs because of adverse events at week 104. RESULTS: HbA1c reduction from baseline at week 104 was similar between the groups (the least squares mean change was -2.56% in the TCT group vs. -2.75% in the SAT group). The primary outcome was achieved in 39.0% and 17.1% of the TCT and SAT groups, respectively, with a risk difference of 22.0 (95% confidence interval 3.0, 40.8; P = .027). HbA1c level less than 6.5% at week 104 was 46.3% in both the TCT and SAT groups, whereas the incidence of hypoglycaemia, weight gain, or discontinuation of drugs was 16.7% and 62.0% in the TCT and SAT groups, respectively (P < .001). TCT was well-tolerated and had fewer adverse events than SAT. CONCLUSIONS: Among newly diagnosed patients with T2D, initial TCT effectively lowered HbA1c levels with higher tolerability and safety than SAT for 104 weeks, suggesting a novel strategy for initial combination therapy in T2D patients.
The combination of pioglitazone hydrochloride, a thiazolidinedione, and glimepiride, a sulfonylurea, has been approved in many countries worldwide as an oral agent for the management of type 2 diabetes. Glimepiride stimulates insulin secretion from the pancreas with a decreased risk of hypoglycemia compared to glyburide. Pioglitazone increases glucose uptake in the periphery while decreasing glucose production by the liver. Combined, the two agents increase the body's sensitivity to insulin to reduce hemoglobin A1c levels by 1-2%. Pioglitazone and glimepiride also produce favorable effects on lipid profiles and blood pressure. Additionally, pioglitazone has proven to decrease the risk of certain cardiovascular events, providing evidence for macrovascular benefits. Side effects are minimal with pioglitazone and glimepiride, with weight gain and edema providing the most discomfort and complications. Patients must be monitored for the development of heart failure, though the risk is small. Guidelines are in place to limit patient selection for the use of pioglitazone based on cardiac risk factors. In general, pioglitazone and glimepiride are well tolerated.
OBJECTIVE: Hypoglycemia is a major concern in type 2 diabetes (T2DM), but little is known about its likelihood compared across common therapies. We compared the likelihood of hypoglycemia among metformin-treated patients with T2DM randomized to the addition of one of 4 common therapies. RESEARCH DESIGN & METHODS: Randomized, controlled trial of 5,047 participants with T2DM of <10 years' duration, hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) 6.8-8.5% (50.8-69.4 mmol/mol). Randomization to addition of glargine U100, glimepiride, liraglutide, or sitagliptin over 5.0 +/- 1.3 (mean +/- SD) years. HbA1c was measured quarterly; if a level >7.5% (>58.5 mmol/mol) was confirmed, rescue glargine and/or aspart insulin was added. We conducted a per-protocol analysis of 4,830, who attended at least one post-baseline visit and took at least one dose of assigned study medication. We assessed severe hypoglycemia events reported throughout the entire study. At quarterly visits, all participants were asked about hypoglycemic symptoms within the last 30 days, and those in the glargine and glimepiride groups were asked for any measured glucose <70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) within this time period. RESULTS: While participants were taking their assigned medications, severe hypoglycemia occurred in 10 (0.8%), 16 (1.3%), 6 (0.5%), and 4 (0.3%), (p<0.05) and hypoglycemic symptoms in 659 (54.2%), 833 (68.3%), 375 (32.4%), and 361 (29.1%) of participants following randomization to glargine, glimepiride, liraglutide, and sitagliptin, respectively (p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In metformin-treated patients with T2DM who add a second medication, hypoglycemia is most likely with addition of glimepiride, less with glargine, and least likely with liraglutide and sitagliptin. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01794143.
We report a patient with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE) complicated by diabetes mellitus (DM) who showed pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis (PCI) while being treated with prednisolone (PSL) and an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor (alphaGI). The PCI was ameliorated with the cessation of the alphaGI and tapering of PSL in addition to transient fasting. Multiple factors, including NPSLE, DM, and medications, may have been involved in the pathogenesis of PCI in this patient.
Glimepiride is a new generation sulphonylurea being prudently characterized in more than 2000 NIDDM patients. It has a short onset of action and a long duration of action. The same pharmacodynamic effect as with traditional sulphonylureas is achieved with secretion of less insulin, suggesting a possible extrapancreatic action. Glimepiride is given once daily in doses from 1-8 mg/day. 100% absolute bioavailability and the absence of a food interaction guarantee highly reproducible pharmacokinetics. Glimepiride is a remarkably safe drug especially in NIDDM patients at high risk e.g. the renally impaired, elderly or physically very active person. Hypoglycemia is less frequent in the first weeks of treatment than with glibenclamide. Ongoing studies are investigating the possible beneficial clinical effect of its different binding behavior to the potassium channel, especially in the heart.
Whether a sulfonylurea may be used together with insulin for treating NIDDM has been controversial. One view, based on older studies, has been that the additional benefit is too small or the level of glucose control achieved usually too poor to recommend this method. More recent studies of a more specific way of combining a sulfonylurea with insulin are more supportive. When a single injection of insulin taken in the evening is added to a sulfonylurea at the time of secondary failure of the sulfonylurea alone, glycemic control is quite simply and consistently restored to acceptable levels. At this time in the natural history of NIDDM, evening insulin combined therapy is more effective than a single injection of insulin alone, and just as effective as a more complex multiple-injection regimen without an oral agent. A recent multicenter trial of a new sulfonylurea, glimepiride, in combination with a single injection of 70/30 insulin before dinner has confirmed that this approach is safe and more consistently effective than insulin alone for obese patients beginning insulin in a setting resembling clinical practice. The available evidence suggests this form of combined therapy is suitable for routine use.
Linagliptin treatment for 104 weeks was recently reported to achieve non-inferior glucose-lowering effects compared with glimepiride in patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled with metformin. Additional analyses from this randomised, active-controlled, double-blind trial have been performed in individuals completing the study on study drug without requiring rescue therapy. In this population, significantly more patients receiving linagliptin achieved HbA1c < 7% without hypoglycaemia and without body weight gain after 2 years compared with those receiving glimepiride (54% and 23%, respectively; odds ratio of 3.9, 95% confidence interval 2.6-5.7, p < 0.0001).
