Diabetes mellitus is a major health problem due to its increasing prevalence and life-threatening complications. Antidiabetic sulfonylureas represent the first-line drugs in type 2 diabetes even though the most common associated risk is pharmacologically-induced hypoglycemia. In the development of this side effect are involved several factors including the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile of the drug, patient age and behavior, hepatic or renal dysfunctions, or other drugs associated with a high risk of interactions. If all these are controlled, the risk-benefit balance can be equal to other oral antidiabetic drugs.
An older adult with diabetes is taking glipizide, a sulfonylurea class drug. Subsequently, she experiences a hypoglycemic episode in the dental office. Prompt recognition of hypoglycemia and administration of glucose or sugar is vital. Patient and provider education about the risks of hypoglycemia in older adults may help to prevent future hypoglycemic episodes.
PURPOSE: Available data on the effects of anti-diabetic drugs on fracture risk are contradictory. Therefore, our study aimed to analyze all available data on the effects of anti-diabetic drugs on fracture risk in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients. METHODS: Embase, Medline, ClinicalTrials.gov, and Cochrane CENTRAL were searched for relevant trials. All data analyses were performed with STATA (12.0) and R language (3.6.0). Risk ratio (RR) with its 95% confidence interval (CI) was calculated by combining data for the fracture effects of anti-diabetic drugs, including sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, meglitinides, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, thiazolidinediones, biguanides, insulin, and sulfonylureas. RESULTS: One hundred seventeen eligible randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with 221,364 participants were included in this study. Compared with placebo, trelagliptin (RR 3.51; 1.58-13.70) increased the risk of fracture, whereas albiglutide (RR 0.29; 0.04-0.93) and voglibose (RR 0.03; 0-0.11) decreased the risk of fracture. Other medications were comparable in terms of their effects on fracture risk, and no statistical significance was observed. In terms of fractures, voglibose (0.01%) may be the safest option, and trelagliptin (13.64%) may be the worst. Sensitivity analysis results were consistent with those of the main analysis. No statistically significant differences were observed in the regression coefficients of age (1.03; 0.32-2.1), follow-up duration (0.79; 0.27-1.64), and sex distribution (0.63; 0.15-1.56). CONCLUSIONS: We found varied results on the association between the use of anti-diabetic drugs and fracture risk. Specifically, trelagliptin raised the risk of fracture, whereas voglibose and albiglutide showed benefit with statistical difference. Other drugs were comparable in terms of their effects on fracture risk. Some drugs (omarigliptin, sitagliptin, vildagliptin, saxagliptin, empagliflozin, ertugliflozin, rosiglitazone, pioglitazone, and nateglinide) may increase the risk of fracture, while others (such as dulaglutide, exenatide, liraglutide, semaglutide, lixisenatide, linagliptin, alogliptin, canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, glipizide, gliclazide, glibenclamide, glimepiride, metformin, and insulin) may show benefits. The risk of fracture was independent of age, sex distribution, and the duration of exposure to anti-diabetic drugs. When developing individualized treatment strategies, the clinical efficacy of anti-diabetic drugs must be weighed against their benefits and risks brought about by individual differences of patients. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: This Systematic Review was prospectively registered on the PROSPERO (https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/, registration number CRD42020189464).
BACKGROUND: Diabetes is the commonest cause of chronic kidney disease (CKD). Both conditions commonly co-exist. Glucometabolic changes and concurrent dialysis in diabetes and CKD make glucose-lowering challenging, increasing the risk of hypoglycaemia. Glucose-lowering agents have been mainly studied in people with near-normal kidney function. It is important to characterise existing knowledge of glucose-lowering agents in CKD to guide treatment. OBJECTIVES: To examine the efficacy and safety of insulin and other pharmacological interventions for lowering glucose levels in people with diabetes and CKD. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Register of Studies up to 12 February 2018 through contact with the Information Specialist using search terms relevant to this review. Studies in the Register are identified through searches of CENTRAL, MEDLINE, and EMBASE, conference proceedings, the International Clinical Trials Register (ICTRP) Search Portal and ClinicalTrials.gov. SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-RCTs looking at head-to-head comparisons of active regimens of glucose-lowering therapy or active regimen compared with placebo/standard care in people with diabetes and CKD (estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 60 mL/min/1.73 m(2)) were eligible. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Four authors independently assessed study eligibility, risk of bias, and quality of data and performed data extraction. Continuous outcomes were expressed as post-treatment mean differences (MD). Adverse events were expressed as post-treatment absolute risk differences (RD). Dichotomous clinical outcomes were presented as risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI). MAIN RESULTS: Forty-four studies (128 records, 13,036 participants) were included. Nine studies compared sodium glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors to placebo; 13 studies compared dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors to placebo; 2 studies compared glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonists to placebo; 8 studies compared glitazones to no glitazone treatment; 1 study compared glinide to no glinide treatment; and 4 studies compared different types, doses or modes of administration of insulin. In addition, 2 studies compared sitagliptin to glipizide; and 1 study compared each of sitagliptin to insulin, glitazars to pioglitazone, vildagliptin to sitagliptin, linagliptin to voglibose, and albiglutide to sitagliptin. Most studies had a high risk of bias due to funding and attrition bias, and an unclear risk of detection bias.Compared to placebo, SGLT2 inhibitors probably reduce HbA1c (7 studies, 1092 participants: MD -0.29%, -0.38 to -0.19 (-3.2 mmol/mol, -4.2 to -2.2); I(2) = 0%), fasting blood glucose (FBG) (5 studies, 855 participants: MD -0.48 mmol/L, -0.78 to -0.19; I(2) = 0%), systolic blood pressure (BP) (7 studies, 1198 participants: MD -4.68 mmHg, -6.69 to -2.68; I(2) = 40%), diastolic BP (6 studies, 1142 participants: MD -1.72 mmHg, -2.77 to -0.66; I(2) = 0%), heart failure (3 studies, 2519 participants: RR 0.59, 0.41 to 0.87; I(2) = 0%), and hyperkalaemia (4 studies, 2788 participants: RR 0.58, 0.42 to 0.81; I(2) = 0%); but probably increase genital infections (7 studies, 3086 participants: RR 2.50, 1.52 to 4.11; I(2) = 0%), and creatinine (4 studies, 848 participants: MD 3.82 mumol/L, 1.45 to 6.19; I(2) = 16%) (all effects of moderate certainty evidence). SGLT2 inhibitors may reduce weight (5 studies, 1029 participants: MD -1.41 kg, -1.8 to -1.02; I(2) = 28%) and albuminuria (MD -8.14 mg/mmol creatinine, -14.51 to -1.77; I(2) = 11%; low certainty evidence). SGLT2 inhibitors may have little or no effect on the risk of cardiovascular death, hypoglycaemia, acute kidney injury (AKI), and urinary tract infection (low certainty evidence). It is uncertain whether SGLT2 inhibitors have any effect on death, end-stage kidney disease (ESKD), hypovolaemia, fractures, diabetic ketoacidosis, or discontinuation due to adverse effects (very low certainty evidence).Compared to placebo, DPP-4 inhibitors may reduce HbA1c (7 studies, 867 participants: MD -0.62%, -0.85 to -0.39 (-6.8 mmol/mol, -9.3 to -4.3); I(2) = 59%) but may have little or no effect on FBG (low certainty evidence). DPP-4 inhibitors probably have little or no effect on cardiovascular death (2 studies, 5897 participants: RR 0.93, 0.77 to 1.11; I(2) = 0%) and weight (2 studies, 210 participants: MD 0.16 kg, -0.58 to 0.90; I(2) = 29%; moderate certainty evidence). Compared to placebo, DPP-4 inhibitors may have little or no effect on heart failure, upper respiratory tract infections, and liver impairment (low certainty evidence). Compared to placebo, it is uncertain whether DPP-4 inhibitors have any effect on eGFR, hypoglycaemia, pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, or discontinuation due to adverse effects (very low certainty evidence).Compared to placebo, GLP-1 agonists probably reduce HbA1c (7 studies, 867 participants: MD -0.53%, -1.01 to -0.06 (-5.8 mmol/mol, -11.0 to -0.7); I(2) = 41%; moderate certainty evidence) and may reduce weight (low certainty evidence). GLP-1 agonists may have little or no effect on eGFR, hypoglycaemia, or discontinuation due to adverse effects (low certainty evidence). It is uncertain whether GLP-1 agonists reduce FBG, increase gastrointestinal symptoms, or affect the risk of pancreatitis (very low certainty evidence).Compared to placebo, it is uncertain whether glitazones have any effect on HbA1c, FBG, death, weight, and risk of hypoglycaemia (very low certainty evidence).Compared to glipizide, sitagliptin probably reduces hypoglycaemia (2 studies, 551 participants: RR 0.40, 0.23 to 0.69; I(2) = 0%; moderate certainty evidence). Compared to glipizide, sitagliptin may have had little or no effect on HbA1c, FBG, weight, and eGFR (low certainty evidence). Compared to glipizide, it is uncertain if sitagliptin has any effect on death or discontinuation due to adverse effects (very low certainty).For types, dosages or modes of administration of insulin and other head-to-head comparisons only individual studies were available so no conclusions could be made. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Evidence concerning the efficacy and safety of glucose-lowering agents in diabetes and CKD is limited. SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 agonists are probably efficacious for glucose-lowering and DPP-4 inhibitors may be efficacious for glucose-lowering. Additionally, SGLT2 inhibitors probably reduce BP, heart failure, and hyperkalaemia but increase genital infections, and slightly increase creatinine. The safety profile for GLP-1 agonists is uncertain. No further conclusions could be made for the other classes of glucose-lowering agents including insulin. More high quality studies are required to help guide therapeutic choice for glucose-lowering in diabetes and CKD.
Most antihypertensive drugs have known side effects that are elicited by the careful clinician taking care of hypertensive patients. However, many antihypertensive medications utilize drug delivery systems that prolong the duration of blood pressure reduction. The gastrointestinal therapeutic system that is used with nifedipine, isradipine, and verapamil has a unique side effect. Obstruction may occur at the site of a previous surgical repair (pyloric stenosis or gastroplasty) or stenosis of the esophagus, small intestine, or colon. The same delivery system is used with methylphenidate, oxybutynin, glipizide, and doxazosin. Although this complication is rare, physicians who prescribe and care for hypertensive patients should recognize this potential problem.
The sulphonylureas act by triggering insulin release from the pancreatic beta cell. A specific site on the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive potassium channels is occupied by sulphonylureas leading to closure of the potassium channels and subsequent opening of calcium channels. This results in exocytosis of insulin. The meglitinides are not sulphonylureas but also occupy the sulphonylurea receptor unit coupled to the ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Glibenclamide (glyburide), gliclazide, glipizide and glimepiride are the primary sulphonylureas in current clinical use for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Glibenclamide has a higher frequency of hypoglycaemia than the other agents. With long-term use, there is a progressive decrease in the effectiveness of sulphonylureas. This loss of effect is the result of a reduction in insulin-producing capacity by the pancreatic beta cell and is also seen with other antihyperglycaemic agents. The major adverse effect of sulphonylureas is hypoglycaemia. There is a theoretical concern that sulphonylureas may affect cardiac potassium channels resulting in a diminished response to ischaemia. There are now many choices for initial therapy of type 2 diabetes in addition to sulphonylureas. Metformin and thiazolidinediones affect insulin sensitivity by independent mechanisms. Disaccharidase inhibitors reduce rapid carbohydrate absorption. No single agent appears capable of achieving target glucose levels in the majority of patients with type 2 diabetes. Combinations of agents are successful in lowering glycosylated haemoglobin levels more than with a single agent. Sulphonylureas are particularly beneficial when combined with agents such as metformin that decrease insulin resistance. Sulphonylureas can also be given with a basal insulin injection to provide enhanced endogenous insulin secretion after meals. Sulphonylureas will continue to be used both primarily and as part of combined therapy for most patients with type 2 diabetes.
Ingestion of sulfonylureas is life-threatening in toddlers and children due to its strong and prolonged hypoglycemic effect. The authors present a 15-mo-old boy with accidental ingestion of Glipizide who presented with encephalopathy, seizure and severe hypoglycemia. The management included parenteral dextrose and octreotide administration to maintain euglycemia, followed by complete neurological recovery within 24 h. Sulphonylurea intoxication should be considered in previously healthy toddlers and children presenting with hypoglycemia especially if any caregiver is on sulfonylurea drugs.
QUESTION: My patient was taking glipizide (an oral sulfonylurea) for type 2 diabetes. Now she is pregnant and taking insulin instead. She is very anxious to return to her previous treatment immediately after delivery because of the pain and hurdles associated with the administration of insulin. Can sulfonylureas cross into human milk and, if so, is it safe for her to breastfeed her infant? ANSWER: The exposure of infants to second-generation sulfonylureas (eg, glipizide, glyburide) through breast milk is expected to be minimal, based on the limited data available. Women with type 2 diabetes treated with sulfonylureas should not be discouraged from breastfeeding. The benefits of breastfeeding greatly outweigh the risks of these medications, if any. The baby should, however, be monitored for signs of hypoglycemia.
The pharmacokinetics of glyburide can be described by a two-compartment open model. Terminal-phase descriptions are formulation-dependent and are complicated by apparent food-associated mobilization of drug from the stomach. Some researchers indicate a possible third (or deep) compartment, but this appears to be an artifact of a nonspecific drug assay. Although no accumulation has been observed in short-term studies, further investigation of the possibility of drug accumulation with long-term therapy is needed. Distribution of glyburide is affected by high affinity for serum albumin (99 percent bound), and elimination of the drug appears to be evenly divided between biliary and renal routes. The biologic half-life of glyburide is not significantly correlated with renal function in subjects with creatinine clearances of 30 ml/minute/1.7 m2 or more. Gradations in disease state, multiple sites of sulfonylurea action, and inter-patient variability have made it difficult to relate biologic response to glyburide serum levels.
Glipizide is a 'second generation' oral hypoglycaemic agent similar in potency to glibenclamide. It is completely absorbed after oral administration and has a rapid onset of action, but the duration of its hypoglycaemic effect is shorter than that of glibenclamide. It is rapidly metabolised to inactive metabolites which are excreted in the urine. Therapeutic trials have shown the efficacy of glipizide in maturity onset diabetes mellitus to be comparable with that of glibenclamide and chlorpropamide in newly diagnosed patients unresponsive to diet as well as in patients previously treated with oral hypoglycaemic drugs. Glipizide is well tolerated, but careful adjustment of dosage and attention to diet may be needed to avoid hypoglycaemic symptoms a few hours after a single daily dose.
The role of sulphonylureas (SUs) in modern clinical practice poses ongoing clinical debate. With the advent of newer agents in diabetes management, there is an increasing shift away from the prescribing of SUs, but not necessarily to more effective agents. This review provides a different perspective on the debate, reflecting in depth upon the physiology of SUs, drawing on insights gained from monogenic diabetes to highlight the potential benefit of lower doses of SUs, and the probable benefit of gliclazide over most other, if not all SUs, in terms of sulphonylurea failure and cardiovascular outcomes.
Drug repurposing of non-cancer drugs represents an attractive approach to develop new cancer therapy. Using the TRAMP transgenic mouse model, glipizide, a widely used drug for type 2 diabetes mellitus, has been identified to suppress prostate cancer (PC) growth and metastasis. Angiogenesis is intimately associated with various human cancer developments. Intriguingly, glipizide significantly reduces microvessel density in PC tumor tissues, while not inhibiting prostate cancer cell proliferation from the MTT assay and flow cytometry investigation. Moreover, glipizide inhibits the tubular structure formation of human umbilical vein endothelial cells by regulating the HMGIY/Angiopoietin-1 signaling pathway. Taken together, these results demonstrate that glipizide has the potential to be repurposed as an effective therapeutic for the treatment of PC by targeting tumor-induced angiogenesis.
Oral hypoglycemic agents have been in clinical use since 1956 in the United States. Two new second-generation sulfonylureas, glipizide and glyburide, have been marketed recently. This article reviews the pharmacology of the oral sulfonylureas, compares the drugs from a safety and efficacy standpoint, and provides updated information regarding their use in the management of type II non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
We performed three oral glucose-tolerance tests and three muscle biopsies over a period of approximately three years in 41 asymptomatic patients with chemical diabetes. At base line, 13 (32 per cent) had an increased capillary basement-membrane width in muscle. Twenty-three patients received glipizide, a new oral hypoglycemic compound, and 18 received placebo. In the patients receiving placebo the mean width of the muscle capillary basement membrane increased from 135.9 +/- 9.0 nm (S.E.M.) to 169.3 +/- 9.5 nm (P = 0.01), but in those receiving glipizide the value decreased to a level no different from that in subjects without diabetes: from 152.9 +/- 2.9 to 127.5 +/- 5.1 nm (P = 0.01). These findings suggest that microangiopathy, as indicated by an increased capillary basement-membrane width in muscle, may be present in a considerable number of patients with asymptomatic diabetes and that the changes can be reversed by early drug treatment.
Despite the fact that sulfonylurea orally administered hypoglycemic agents have been used in the treatment of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus for almost 30 years, only recently have their mechanisms of action been delineated. In addition to the four agents previously available, two so-called second-generation agents were approved last year for use in the United States. The indications, contraindications, and guidelines for the use of these agents, as well as their mechanisms of action and the differences among them, are reviewed in this article. When appropriately used, these agents can provide a safe and effective adjunct to diet therapy in the management of patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and thus should be considered as an alternative to insulin therapy for such patients.
The objective of the present study was to develop a rat model that replicates the natural history and metabolic characteristics of human type 2 diabetes and is also suitable for pharmacological screening. Male Sprague-Dawley rats (160-180 g) were divided into two groups and fed with commercially available normal pellet diet (NPD) (12% calories as fat) or in-house prepared high-fat diet (HFD) (58% calories as fat), respectively, for a period of 2 weeks. The HFD-fed rats exhibited significant increase in body weight, basal plasma glucose (PGL), insulin (PI), triglycerides (PTG) and total cholesterol (PTC) levels as compared to NPD-fed control rats. Besides, the HFD rats showed significant reduction in glucose disappearance rate (K-value) on intravenous insulin glucose tolerance test (IVIGTT). Hyperinsulinemia together with reduced glucose disappearance rate (K-value) suggested that the feeding of HFD-induced insulin resistance in rats. After 2 weeks of dietary manipulation, a subset of the rats from both groups was injected intraperitoneally with low dose of streptozotocin (STZ) (35 mg kg(-1)). Insulin-resistant HFD-fed rats developed frank hyperglycemia upon STZ injection that, however, caused only mild elevation in PGL in NPD-fed rats. Though there was significant reduction in PI level after STZ injection in HFD rats, the reduction observed was only to a level that was comparable with NPD-fed control rats. In addition, the levels of PTG and PTC were further accentuated after STZ treatment in HFD-fed rats. In contrast, STZ (35 mg kg(-1), i.p.) failed to significantly alter PI, PTG and PTC levels in NPD-fed rats. Thus, these fat-fed/STZ-treated rats simulate natural disease progression and metabolic characteristics typical of individuals at increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes because of insulin resistance and obesity. Further, the fat-fed/STZ-treated rats were found to be sensitive for glucose lowering effects of insulin sensitizing (pioglitazone) as well as insulinotropic (glipizide) agents. Besides, the effect of pioglitazone and glipizide on the plasma lipid parameters (PTG and PTC) was shown in these diabetic rats. The present study represents that the combination of HFD-fed and low-dose STZ-treated rat serves as an alternative animal model for type 2 diabetes simulating the human syndrome that is also suitable for testing anti-diabetic agents for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
Glipizide is a second generation of sulphonylurea compound, effective in lowering of blood glucose, well-tolerated as well as safe during long-term treatment. Glipizide is the agent characterized by rapid pharmacological action. It is indicated both in monotherapy and combined treatment with insulin or biguanides. This drug is particularly indicated in diabetes treatment in elderly patients due to short time of action as well as lack of hyperinsulinemic effect. Data in literature suggest that glipizide combined with insulin is much more effective in the induction of remission in recent diagnosed diabetes when compared to intensive insulin therapy.
We studied the effect of long-term glipizide therapy in a small group of closely monitored patients. Fasting plasma glucose, glucose tolerance, glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, and insulin sensitivity were measured on multiple occasions throughout the investigation. Our observations show that glipizide therapy is effective in certain patients with noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus over a prolonged time period. The major effect of the drug appears to be mediated by its alteration of insulin sensitivity, but glipizide also causes a sustained increase in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in most patients.
Drug-metabolizing enzyme activity is one of many factors affecting patient response to medications. The objective of this review is to highlight the potential for genetic variability in cytochrome P450 enzyme activity that can lead to interperson differences in response to drugs. Awareness and application of this knowledge will improve drug use in clinical practice and provide the physician with further appreciation that standard drug dosing may not be appropriate in all patients.
