Repaglinide is a novel insulin secretagogue being developed for the management of type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. It stimulates release of insulin from the pancreatic beta-cell, but appears to bind to a different receptor site from sulphonylureas. Repaglinide lowers fasting and postprandial blood glucose levels in animals, healthy volunteers and patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Repaglinide is rapidly absorbed and eliminated, which may allow a relatively fast onset and offset of action. Excretion occurs almost entirely by non-renal mechanisms. In comparative clinical trials in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, repaglinide 0.5 to 4 mg twice or 3 times daily before meals provided similar glycaemic control to glibenclamide (glyburide) 2.5 to 15 mg/day. Addition of repaglinide to existing metformin therapy resulted in improved glycaemic control. In contrast with glibenclamide, use of repaglinide allowed patients to miss a meal without apparently increasing the risk of hypoglycaemia.
In the view of progressively aging human population and increased occurrence of dysmetabolic disorders, such as diabetes mellitus, cognitive impairment becomes a major threat to the national health. To date, the molecular mechanisms of cognitive dysfunction are partially described for diabetes and diseases of different nature, such as Alzheimer disease or Parkinson disease. The emergence of data pointing towards pleotropic effects of hypoglycaemic medicines indicates involvement of their targets in pathogenesis of cognitive impairment. We are aiming here to review available data on the most widely used hypoglycaemic drug, glibenclamide and find possible relationship of its targets to the pathogenesis of cognitive impairment.
Sulphonylureas have remained the mainstay of oral therapy for type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). They stimulate insulin release from pancreatic beta cells. Pharmacokinetic differences between the various sulphonylureas are of clinical importance in terms of the time to onset of action, timing of drug administration in relation to food intake, magnitude and duration of the glucose-lowering effect and the risk of serious hypoglycaemia. Recent studies with improved analytical sensitivity have shown that the elimination half-life of glibenclamide is longer than previously thought and that 2 metabolites of glibenclamide have significant hypoglycaemic activity. Furthermore, single dose studies in healthy volunteers using an integrated pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic model have identified clear concentration-effect relationships for both glibenclamide and its metabolites after oral and intravenous administration. Under multiple dose conditions, kinetic-dynamic relations have been identified with shorter-acting drugs in dosages that give discontinuous sulphonylurea exposure. However, at continuous exposure, i.e. sustained 24-hour therapeutic concentrations in plasma, there is evidence indicating the development of tolerance, which may be caused by downregulation of beta cell sensitivity. As more sophisticated concentration-effect studies appear, it has become evident that currently recommended maximum daily doses of many sulphonylureas are too high.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is defined as carbohydrate intolerance with onset or first recognition during pregnancy. When medical nutrition therapy is not successful in maintaining target glucose values during pregnancy complicated by GDM, medication is required. Insulin has been the traditional treatment under such circumstances. The use of oral antidiabetic medications in the management of gestational diabetes has increased over the past several years. Recent studies have shown the equivalence to insulin of both glyburide and metformin in terms of pregnancy outcomes in GDM. However, both agents have been shown to cross the placenta to the fetus, and thus they should be used with caution and patients counseled appropriately.
The article presents a review of the literature on the use of a fundamentally new technique for prevention and treatment of cerebral edema. A drug glibenclamide, which is used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus, is able to reduce cerebral edema and neuronal damage as evidenced by the results of preclinical trials in rodents and the first results of drug application in patients. The article describes the mechanism of glibenclamide action and discusses the potential for its application.
BACKGROUND: Glibenclamide has garnered attention due to its multifaceted neuroprotective effects in cases of acute central nervous system injury. We initiated a trial to explore the effectiveness and safety of a high dose of glibenclamide in the management of cerebral oedema following aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage (aSAH). METHODS: This trial constituted a single-centre, randomised clinical study. Half of the 56 patients assigned to the glibenclamide group received 15 mg of glibenclamide tablets daily for 10 days (5 mg, three times/day). The primary outcome was the proportion of patients achieving the subarachnoid haemorrhage early brain oedema score dichotomy (defined as Subarachnoid Haemorrhage Early Brain Oedema Score 0-2) at the 10-day postmedication. The secondary outcome of cerebral oedema was the concentration of sulfonylurea receptor 1-transient receptor potential melastatin 4 (SUR1-TRPM4) in the plasma and cerebrospinal fluid. RESULTS: We enrolled 56 patients diagnosed with aSAH, who were admitted to the neurosurgery intensive care unit between 22 August 2021 and 25 April 2023. The primary outcome revealed that the glibenclamide group exhibited a notably higher proportion of mild cerebral oedema in comparison to the placebo group (60.7% vs 42.9%, adjusted OR: 4.66, 95% CI 1.14 to 19.10, p=0.032). Furthermore, the concentration of SUR1-TRPM4 in the cerebrospinal fluid of the glibenclamide group was significantly higher than the placebo group (p=0.0002; p=0.026), while the plasma TRPM4 concentration in the glibenclamide group was significantly lower than the placebo group (p=0.001). CONCLUSION: Oral administration of high-dose glibenclamide notably reduced radiological assessment of cerebral oedema after 10 days of medication. Significant alterations were also observed in the concentration of SUR1-TRPM4 in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid. However, it is worth noting that glibenclamide was associated with a higher incidence of hypoglycaemia. Larger trials are warranted to evaluate the potential benefits of glibenclamide in mitigating swelling and then improving neurological function. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ChiCTR2100049908.
Oral hypoglycemics have been avoided in pregnancy due to their potential to cause fetal hyperinsulinemia/hypoglycemia. A recent human study has shown glyburide to minimally cross the placenta, allowing a safe new treatment for gestational diabetes. The mechanisms for the minimal placental passage of this small molecule are not clear. In this presentation, the role of pKa, molecular weight, lipid solubility, and protein binding is considered. Out of these physical and pharmacologic characteristics, the very extensive plasma protein binding and short elimination half-life of glyburide appear to be major determinants of its minimal transplacental transfer.
Many reasons have been put forth to explain the inability to translate neuroprotection in animal stroke models to humans. Following our determination that glibenclamide is an anti-edema drug, not a neuroprotective drug, and the revelation that the "gold standard" middle cerebral artery occlusion used for animal studies models large hemispheric infarction, a subpopulation of ischemic stroke that develops clinically relevant edema that contributes significantly to poor outcomes, we designed an innovative approach to studying the drug in patients with large hemispheric infarction. The approach included careful selection of the relevant patient population, which gave us a high degree of confidence to move forward into humans. Initial human studies showed drug effects consistent with the animal studies. The considerations leading to the development plan are described.
Glipizide is a second-generation sulfonylurea in which the substitutions on the arylsulfonylurea nucleus are large, relatively nonpolar groups. This chemical change increases the intrinsic hypoglycemic activity of the molecule 100-fold on a weight basis compared to first-generation agents. In addition, the pharmacokinetic properties, spectrum and severity of side effects and metabolism of this agent are somewhat different from those of first-generation sulfonylureas. The most important component of the antidiabetic action of glipizide is its effect in potentiating insulin action. Glipizide-mediated increases in nutrient-stimulated insulin secretion may contribute to its antidiabetic action. The drug is effective in controlling the blood glucose in patients with noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. It is at least as effective as and probably more effective than first-generation sulfonylureas in controlling hyperglycemia in diabetes. Glipizide is relatively free of serious side effects and is contraindicated principally in patients with significant liver or kidney disease.
A specific, sensitive, and simple radioimmunoassay was developed for the oral hypoglycemic drug glibenclamide, N-4-[2-(5-chloro-2-methoxy-benzamide)-ethyl]-benzenesulfonyl-N'-cyclohexylurea. Antiserum against glibenclamide was obtained from rabbits immunized with an antigen prepared by conjugating the diazonium salt of N(p-amino-benzamidoethyl)-benzenesulfonyl-N'-cyclohexylurea to bovine serum albumin through the diazocoupling. [3H]glibenclamide was used as a tracer. Dextran-coated charcoal was used to separate bound and free [3H]glibenclamide in the reaction mixture. The radioimmunoassay is able to determine as little as 25 pg of glibenclamide directly in plasma without the need for extraction. The antiserum used for the assay was highly specific for glibenclamide, and did not cross-react with two known major metabolites of glibenclamide. Comparable values of glibenclamide in dog plasma were obtained by radioimmunoassay and liquid chromatography. Plasma concentrations of glibenclamide in diabetic patients on glibenclamide treatment can be determined by radioimmunoassay, and the method has been applied to the routine assay of clinical samples. This radioimmunoassay seems to be useful for monitoring plasma glibenclamide concentrations.
QUESTION: My patient was taking glipizide (an oral sulfonylurea) for type 2 diabetes. Now she is pregnant and taking insulin instead. She is very anxious to return to her previous treatment immediately after delivery because of the pain and hurdles associated with the administration of insulin. Can sulfonylureas cross into human milk and, if so, is it safe for her to breastfeed her infant? ANSWER: The exposure of infants to second-generation sulfonylureas (eg, glipizide, glyburide) through breast milk is expected to be minimal, based on the limited data available. Women with type 2 diabetes treated with sulfonylureas should not be discouraged from breastfeeding. The benefits of breastfeeding greatly outweigh the risks of these medications, if any. The baby should, however, be monitored for signs of hypoglycemia.
The classical sulphonylurea derivatives like glibenclamide and tolbutamide are widely prescribed in non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus in order to stimulate insulin secretion. The insulinotropic effect of these agents is based on the closure of adenosine-5'-triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive potassium channels (KATP-channels) in the beta-cells of the pancreas. Interestingly, the cardiovascular system also shares these KATP-channels. The open state probability of these channels is regulated by the intracellular concentration of ATP. During ischaemia, the KATP-channels are thought to open by a fall in the cytosolic ATP concentration. The increase in the extracellular adenosine concentration, and the release of endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor (EDHF) during ischaemia may further contribute to the opening of cardiovascular KATP-channels. Sulphonylurea derivatives like glibenclamide and tolbutamide have been reported to block the opening of KATP-channels in several types of tissues including myocardial and vascular smooth muscle cells. Since the opening of KATP-channels is regarded as an endogenous cardioprotective mechanism, the blocking effect of sulphonylurea derivatives in the cardiovascular system may have deleterious effects. Human studies on this issue have just been initiated, and preliminary results point towards a significant interaction between glibenclamide and cardiovascular KATP-channels at clinically relevant concentrations. In this regard, the introduction of more pancreas specific sulphonylurea derivatives like glimepiride, which do not interact with cardiovascular KATP-channels, is a promising development.
Oral hypoglycemic agents have been in clinical use since 1956 in the United States. Two new second-generation sulfonylureas, glipizide and glyburide, have been marketed recently. This article reviews the pharmacology of the oral sulfonylureas, compares the drugs from a safety and efficacy standpoint, and provides updated information regarding their use in the management of type II non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
During pregnancy, when glycaemic levels remain uncontrolled, despite lifestyle modification, pharmacotherapy is advised, usually insulin which has been the gold standard for treatment. Recent studies however suggest that certain oral anti diabetic agents (OADs) may be safe and acceptable alternatives. There may be potential advantages for the use of metformin over insulin in GDM with respect to maternal weight gain and neonatal outcomes. However, as metformin crosses the placenta, its use during pregnancy raises concerns regarding potential adverse effects on the mother and foetus. Glibenclamide, a second generation sulfonylurea, more effective in glycaemic control in women with GDM has a lower treatment failure rate than metformin but there is lack of long term follow up data. Even though generally well tolerated, some studies report higher rates of preeclampsia, macrosomia, neonatal jaundice, neonatal hypoglycaemia and longer stay in neonatal care unit.
BACKGROUND: Rifampicin is a potent inducer of the hepatic microsomal enzyme system. However, the drug has been shown to cause clinically important interactions with many drugs. This study was designed to test the interaction of rifampicin with the oral hypoglycaemic agent glibenclamide. METHODS: Twenty-nine well-controlled diabetic patients on a combination therapy of diet and glibenclamide, and willing to participate in the trial, received a daily dose of 450 mg (body weight < 50 kg) or 600 mg (body-weight > 50kg) of rifampicin for 10 days. RESULTS: There was a significant (p < 0.001) worsening of fasting and post-prandial blood sugar after administration of rifampicin. Dose modification of glibenclamide was required in 15 of the 17 patients in whom the diabetes became uncontrolled. Blood sugar normalized by day 6 after stopping rifampicin in all patients. CONCLUSION: Rifampicin and glibenclamide interact. Therefore, necessary dose modifications should be made in order to achieve euglycaemia if these two drugs are given together.
Despite the fact that sulfonylurea orally administered hypoglycemic agents have been used in the treatment of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus for almost 30 years, only recently have their mechanisms of action been delineated. In addition to the four agents previously available, two so-called second-generation agents were approved last year for use in the United States. The indications, contraindications, and guidelines for the use of these agents, as well as their mechanisms of action and the differences among them, are reviewed in this article. When appropriately used, these agents can provide a safe and effective adjunct to diet therapy in the management of patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and thus should be considered as an alternative to insulin therapy for such patients.
This study was aimed at the assessment of incidence of malignancies in type 2 diabetic patients treated with different sulphonylureas. A matched case-control study was performed. Cases were 195 diabetic patients aged 69.0 +/- 9.2 years who had an incident malignancy. Controls were 195 diabetic patients, unaffected by cancer, who were matched with the corresponding case for age, sex, duration of diabetes, BMI, HbA1(c), comorbidity, smoking and alcohol abuse. Exposure to hypoglycaemic drugs during the 10 years preceding the event (or matching index date) was assessed. After adjusting for concomitant therapies, exposure to metformin and gliclazide for more than 36 months was associated with a significant reduction in the risk of cancer (adj. ORs with 95% CI: 0.28 (0.13-0.57), p < 0.001, and 0.40 (0.21-0.57), p = 0.004, respectively). Conversely, use of glibenclamide for at least 36 months was associated with increased incidence of malignancies (adj. OR 2.62 (1.26-5.42); p = 0.009). Treatment with insulin, thiazolidinediones, or acarbose, was not associated with significant differences in the incidence of cancer. Long-term treatments with individual sulphonylureas could have differential effects on the risk of cancer. In particular, the possible protective effect of gliclazide, as well as the risk associated with glibenclamide, deserves further investigation.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the major outcomes of use of metformin and glyburide in treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus. METHODS: Studies published in English, in the last 10 years, in the databases MEDLINE(R), SciELO, LILACS and Cochrane Library were analyzed, and randomized controlled trials were selected. Health Sciences Descriptors were used to compose the search phrase, and the keywords "Gestational diabetes", "Glyburide", "Metformin" and their variations were searched in the Medical Subject Headings. PRISMA systematization was used to prepare this review, and a meta-analysis was conducted aiming to mathematically show the results of fasting blood glucose, postprandial blood glucose, birth weight and weight gain during pregnancy after using metformin and glyburide. RESULTS: The studies evaluated birth weight, neonatal hypoglycemia, mode of delivery, need for intensive care, Apgar score, macrosomia, fasting glucose, postprandial glucose and weight gain during pregnancy. In 60% of studies, there were no statistically significant differences regarding safety and efficacy of administration of metformin and glyburide. Meta-analysis demonstrated the absence of statistical differences between these drugs in fasting blood glucose (p=0.821), postprandial blood glucose (p=0.217) and birth weight (p=0.194). However, significant differences were shown in weight gain during pregnancy (p=0.036). CONCLUSION: The methods are effective, but the adverse effects of glyburide are more common; therefore, the use of metformin should be recommended, if in monotherapy.
Normal pregnancy development involves gradual decline in insulin sensitivity, which sometimes requires pharmacotherapy. Insulin is the drug of choice for gestational and pregestational diabetes. Metabolism of traditional insulins results in inadequate onset and duration of action and marked peak activity. These properties increase risk of excessive glucose excursions, which are especially undesirable during pregnancy. Insulin analogs have been emerging as a safer and more effective treatment of diabetes during pregnancy. Areas covered: This manuscript reviews currently used antihyperglycemic agents: fast and long-acting insulins, metformin and glyburide. Trials demonstrating their efficacy and safety during pregnancy are described. Certain drug metabolism considerations (e.g. affinity to IGF-1) are emphasized. Expert opinion: The theories that insulin analogs bind to immunoglobulin and cross placenta have been disproved. Lispro, aspart, glargine and detemir do not transfer across the placenta and do not result in adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes. In addition, favorable pharmacokinetic profiles (rapid onset and 24-hour near peakless activity) substantially reduce blood glucose variability including hypoglycemia. We believe that insulin analogs should be given strong consideration for the treatment of diabetes during pregnancy. Metformin has also proven to be safe and may be considered as an initial single agent for milder gestational diabetes.
Saxagliptin and its active metabolite M2 are dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors that improve glycaemic control by preventing the inactivation of the incretin hormones glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide. This increases GLP-1 levels, stimulates insulin secretion and reduces postprandial glucagon and glucose levels. In well designed, 24-week trials in treatment-naive patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, monotherapy with oral saxagliptin 2.5 or 5 mg once daily significantly improved glycaemic control, as measured by mean glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA(1c)) levels, relative to placebo. In large, well designed, 24-week trials, combination therapy with saxagliptin 5 mg once daily plus metformin significantly improved HbA(1c) levels relative to single-agent saxagliptin or metformin in treatment-naive patients; in treatment-experienced patients with inadequate glycaemic control, the addition of saxagliptin 2.5 or 5 mg once daily to metformin, glyburide or a thiazolidinedione, significantly improved HbA(1c) levels relative to continued use of existing monotherapy. Saxagliptin as monotherapy or in combination with other oral antihyperglycaemics was generally well tolerated, with most adverse events being of mild to moderate severity. In clinical trials, the incidence of hypoglycaemic events in patients receiving saxagliptin was generally similar to that in patients receiving placebo or other oral antihyperglycaemic agents. Saxagliptin therapy was not associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular events according to pooled data from eight clinical trials. Saxagliptin generally had a weight-neutral effect.
