Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol (BREZTRI AEROSPHERE; TRIXEO AEROSPHERE) is an inhaled fixed-dose combination of the inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) budesonide, the long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) glycopyrronium bromide and the long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) formoterol fumarate approved for the maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is delivered via a pressurized metered-dose Aerosphere inhaler and is formulated using co-suspension delivery technology. In two pivotal phase III trials of 24-52 weeks' duration, budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol reduced the rates of moderate/severe COPD exacerbations and improved lung function to a greater extent than budesonide/formoterol and/or glycopyrronium/formoterol. Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol also demonstrated beneficial effects on dyspnoea, rescue medication requirements and health-related quality of life (HR-QOL), and reduced the risk of all-cause mortality. Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol was generally well tolerated, with the tolerability profile being generally similar to that of the individual components. Budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol provides a useful and convenient option for the maintenance treatment of COPD, including for patients whose disease is inadequately controlled with dual ICS/LABA or LAMA/LABA therapy.
Indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) 110/50mcg was the first once-daily, long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA)/long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) fixed-dose combination (FDC) approved in Europe for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Development of IND/GLY was driven by the need to improve the standard of care for patients with this disease, in terms of symptom control and exacerbation frequency. IGNITE, an adaptive, comprehensive, and innovative Phase 3 development program, demonstrated the efficacy of IND/GLY in optimising bronchodilation, reducing symptoms, and reducing exacerbations in patients with COPD. IGNITE challenged contemporary thinking about the pharmacological treatment and management of patients with this disease.
BACKGROUND: Most guidelines recommend either a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) plus an inhaled glucocorticoid or a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) as the first-choice treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who have a high risk of exacerbations. The role of treatment with a LABA-LAMA regimen in these patients is unclear. METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, noninferiority trial. Patients who had COPD with a history of at least one exacerbation during the previous year were randomly assigned to receive, by inhalation, either the LABA indacaterol (110 mug) plus the LAMA glycopyrronium (50 mug) once daily or the LABA salmeterol (50 mug) plus the inhaled glucocorticoid fluticasone (500 mug) twice daily. The primary outcome was the annual rate of all COPD exacerbations. RESULTS: A total of 1680 patients were assigned to the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group, and 1682 to the salmeterol-fluticasone group. Indacaterol-glycopyrronium showed not only noninferiority but also superiority to salmeterol-fluticasone in reducing the annual rate of all COPD exacerbations; the rate was 11% lower in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (3.59 vs. 4.03; rate ratio, 0.89; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.83 to 0.96; P=0.003). The indacaterol-glycopyrronium group had a longer time to the first exacerbation than did the salmeterol-fluticasone group (71 days [95% CI, 60 to 82] vs. 51 days [95% CI, 46 to 57]; hazard ratio, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.78 to 0.91], representing a 16% lower risk; P<0.001). The annual rate of moderate or severe exacerbations was lower in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (0.98 vs. 1.19; rate ratio, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.75 to 0.91; P<0.001), and the time to the first moderate or severe exacerbation was longer in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (hazard ratio, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.70 to 0.86; P<0.001), as was the time to the first severe exacerbation (hazard ratio, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.66 to 1.00; P=0.046). The effect of indacaterol-glycopyrronium versus salmeterol-fluticasone on the rate of COPD exacerbations was independent of the baseline blood eosinophil count. The incidence of adverse events and deaths was similar in the two groups. The incidence of pneumonia was 3.2% in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group and 4.8% in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (P=0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol-glycopyrronium was more effective than salmeterol-fluticasone in preventing COPD exacerbations in patients with a history of exacerbation during the previous year. (Funded by Novartis; FLAME ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01782326.).
INTRODUCTION: Long acting bronchodilators are nowadays the central treatment for management of stable COPD. Several combinations exist within the market with different formulation devices. This article reviews a recent dual combination of glycopyrronium and formoterol fumarate in an innovative pMDI-fixed dual combination, Bevespi(R) Aerosphere. AREAS COVERED: This article explored the literature to understand the place of this novel combination and unique delivery drug device in today's therapeutic arsenal. Clinical efficacy and safety have been evaluated through the different clinical trials published in public databases. EXPERT OPINION: Within the fixed-dose combinations, Glycopyrrolate and formoterol fumarate offer a credible unique pMDI option to be given twice a day. LABA-LAMA offers an ICS-free alternative in COPD pharmacology which represents an important treatment option given the current debate over whether or not, maintenance triple therapy combined with ICS are benefic in the long term.
Until quite recently, clinical guidelines and reviews on the treatment of hyperhidrosis advised against the use of systemic therapies based on their unacceptable adverse effects and a lack of evidence of usefulness. Numerous studies published over the past few years, however, have shown that, when used appropriately, these treatments are effective and in general have a favorable tolerability profile, making them an additional option for the treatment of hyperhidrosis, particularly for disease that is widespread, multifocal, or resistant to other treatments. In this review, the first of its kind, we examine the systemic therapies available for hyperhidrosis, including antihypertensives, psychoactive agents, and in particular oral anticholinergics, although none of these drugs are currently approved for this indication.
In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who experience further exacerbations or symptoms, despite being prescribed dual long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LABA) or inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/LABA therapies, triple ICS/LAMA/LABA therapy is recommended. A previous network meta-analysis showed comparable efficacy of the ICS/LAMA/LABA, budesonide/glycopyrronium bromide/formoterol fumarate (BUD/GLY/FOR) 320/18/9.6 microg, to other fixed-dose and open combination triple therapies at 24 weeks in COPD. Subsequently, the ETHOS study was published, including data for 8509 patients, assessing the efficacy and safety of BUD/GLY/FOR over 52 weeks. This network meta-analysis (NMA) was conducted to compare the relative efficacy, safety, and tolerability of BUD/GLY/FOR 320/18/9.6 microg with other fixed-dose and open combination triple therapies in COPD over 52 weeks, including data from ETHOS. A systematic literature review was conducted to identify >/= 10-week randomized controlled trials, including >/= 1 fixed-dose or open combination triple-therapy arm, in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD. The methodologic quality and risk of bias of included studies were assessed. Study results were combined using a three-level hierarchical Bayesian NMA model to assess efficacy and safety outcomes at or over 24 and 52 weeks. Meta-regression and sensitivity analyses were used to assess heterogeneity across studies. Nineteen studies (n = 37,741 patients) met the inclusion criteria of the review; 15 contributed to the base case network. LAMA/LABA dual combinations were combined as a single treatment group to create a connected network. Across all outcomes for exacerbations, lung function, symptoms, health-related quality of life, safety, and tolerability, the efficacy and safety of BUD/GLY/FOR were comparable to those of other triple ICS/LAMA/LABA fixed-dose (fluticasone furoate/umeclidinium/vilanterol and beclomethasone dipropionate/glycopyrronium bromide/formoterol fumarate) and open combinations at or over 24 and 52 weeks. Sensitivity analyses and meta-regression results for exacerbation outcomes were broadly in line with the base case NMA. In this NMA, BUD/GLY/FOR 320/18/9.6 mug showed comparable efficacy versus other ICS/LAMA/LABA fixed-dose or open combination therapies in terms of reducing exacerbation rates and improving lung function, symptoms and health-related quality of life in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD, in line with previously published meta-analysis results of triple combinations in COPD. The safety and tolerability profile of BUD/GLY/FOR was also found to be comparable to other triple combination therapies.
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is currently the 4th leading cause of death worldwide but is projected to be the 3rd leading cause of death by 2020. In Portugal, the estimated prevalence of COPD in the Lisbon region is 14.2%, and a large proportion of underdiagnosed disease has been detected. In 2016, a Portuguese panel of experts proposed pharmacological treatment approaches to COPD based on the evidence available at the time. However, given that the GOLD 2017 report introduced considerable changes to the 2016 version, and that new evidence has emerged regarding treatment options, these proposals need to be updated. Also, and based on several studies, the concept of Pre-GOLD patients, which has diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic implications, is introduced, along with a proposed algorithm for the identification and treatment of these patients.
Inhaled corticosteroids, along with beta2-agonists and anti-muscarinics, represent the cornerstone of asthma treatment. Although the advent of monoclonal antibodies has dramatically changed severe asthma management, there are still patients ineligible or with poor response to biologics. Moreover, high costs associated with monoclonal antibodies prescription are still an open issue, leading clinicians to carefully assess cost-benefit ratio before their administration. From this perspective, the use of single-inhaler Beclometasone Dipropionate/Formoterol Fumarate/Glycopyrronium in patients with severe asthma could not only improve their clinical and functional performance, but also postpone biologic prescription, with positive repercussions on healthcare costs.
Primary hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) commonly affects the axillae, palms, soles, scalp, face, and the groin. Patients may have multiple areas involved making localized therapy challenging. Systemic therapy may be necessary and can be used as monotherapy or combined with other hyperhidrosis treatments for optimal outcomes. Systemic therapy can also be used to treat secondary hyperhidrosis and compensatory hyperhidrosis. Patient selection and counseling are key, and monitoring for side effects is required throughout therapy.
Long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of the treatment of COPD. With the advent of several combination inhalers with long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMAs) and long-acting beta agonists (LABAs), the choice of therapy in the treatment of COPD has been ever expanding. With the focus of COPD management shifting from FEV(1)-based treatment escalation to symptoms and risk-based treatment, we are seeing a paradigm shift in COPD treatment with early introduction of LAMA-LABA combination as a single inhaler. Glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate fixed-dose combination formulated in a familiar metered-dose inhaler format using proprietary co-suspension technology is a new option on the market. We purport to discuss the evidence behind the approval of the drug combination and its place in therapy.
The effects of glycopyrrolate 10 microgram kg-1 i.v. given at induction of anaesthesia were compared with those of atropine 20 microgram kg-1 i.v. given at induction and oral atropine 30 microgram kg-1 given 90 min before operation. Antisialagogue effect, changes in axillary temperature, heart rate, frequency of cardiac arrhythmia and postoperative restlessness were determined. Patients who had received oral atropine had more pharyngeal secretions, a lower heart rate and a greater frequency of cardiac arrhythmia than when either atropine or glycopyrrolate was given i.v. Secretions were significantly less during operation when i.v. glycopyrrolate was used.
Noisy breathing during the terminal stages of life (death rattle) is one of the most common and most difficult symptoms to treat. In palliative medicine there are still no accepted guidelines for the treatment of death rattle in the final phase of life. In the first part of this article a description of death rattle is presented and in the second part a systematic literature review gives an insight into the effectiveness of interventions for death rattle. Two databases (Embase and Medline) were searched up to 2010 which identified 134 studies but only 6 met the inclusion criteria (2 cohort and 4 experimental studies) in which scopolamine, glycopyrrolate, butyl scopolamine, atropine and octreotide were tested. There is a lack of conclusive studies which investigated the effectiveness of treatment of death rattle. Furthermore, the identified studies revealed methodical problems. In general non-drug therapy is recommended as first choice. If anticholinergics are considered the selection also depends on whether simultaneous sedation is desired or not. The English full text version of this article will be available in SpringerLink as of November 2012 (under "Supplemental").
IMPORTANCE: Clinical guidelines on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) recommend inhalers containing long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) over inhalers containing inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) and LABAs. However, data from randomized clinical trials comparing these combination inhalers (LAMA-LABAs vs ICS-LABAs) have been conflicting and raised concerns of generalizability. OBJECTIVE: To assess whether LAMA-LABA therapy is associated with reduced COPD exacerbations and pneumonia hospitalizations compared with ICS-LABA therapy in routine clinical practice. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a 1:1 propensity score-matched cohort study using Optum's Clinformatics Data Mart, a large commercial insurance-claims database. Patients must have had a diagnosis of COPD and filled a new prescription for a combination LAMA-LABA or ICS-LABA inhaler between January 1, 2014, and December 31, 2019. Patients younger than 40 years were excluded, as were those with a prior diagnosis of asthma. The current analysis was performed from February 2021 to March 2023. EXPOSURES: Combination LAMA-LABA inhalers (aclidinium-formoterol, glycopyrronium-formoterol, glycopyrronium-indacaterol, tiotropium-olodaterol, or umeclidinium-vilanterol) and combination ICS-LABA inhalers (budesonide-formoterol, fluticasone-salmeterol, fluticasone-vilanterol, or mometasone-formoterol). MAIN OUTCOME: The primary effectiveness outcome was first moderate or severe COPD exacerbation, and the primary safety outcome was first pneumonia hospitalization. Propensity score matching was used to control for confounding between the 2 groups. Logistic regression analysis was used to estimate propensity scores. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% CIs were estimated using Cox proportional hazards models stratified on matched pairs. RESULTS: Among 137 833 patients (mean [SD] age, 70.2 [9.9] years; 69 530 [50.4%] female) (107 004 new ICS-LABA users and 30 829 new LAMA-LABA users), 30 216 matched pairs were identified for the primary analysis. Compared with ICS-LABA use, LAMA-LABA use was associated with an 8% reduction in the rate of first moderate or severe COPD exacerbation (HR, 0.92; 95% CI, 0.89-0.96) and a 20% reduction in the rate of first pneumonia hospitalization (HR, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.75-0.86). These findings were robust across a range of prespecified subgroup and sensitivity analyses. CONCLUSION: In this cohort study, LAMA-LABA therapy was associated with improved clinical outcomes compared with ICS-LABA therapy, suggesting that LAMA-LABA therapy should be preferred for patients with COPD.
Rationale: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular and cardiopulmonary events. In the phase III, 52-week ETHOS trial (NCT02465567), triple therapy with budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (BGF) reduced rates of moderate/severe exacerbations and all-cause mortality compared with dual therapy with glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF) or budesonide/formoterol fumarate (BFF). However, the effect of BGF on cardiovascular events versus GFF remains unevaluated. Furthermore, the effect of BGF on time to first severe exacerbation has not been reported. Objectives: To assess the effects of BGF 320/18/9.6 mug (BGF 320) and other inhaled corticosteroid-containing arms on cardiovascular and severe cardiopulmonary endpoints versus GFF in patients with COPD from the ETHOS trial. Methods: Patients with moderate to very severe COPD and a history of exacerbations were randomized to twice-daily BGF 320, BGF 160/18/9.6 mug, BFF 320/9.6 mug, or GFF 18/9.6 mug (GFF). Time to first severe COPD exacerbation was a prespecified endpoint; post hoc cardiovascular and severe cardiopulmonary endpoints included time to first major adverse cardiac event, time to first cardiovascular adverse event (AE) of special interest, time to first cardiac AE, and time to the composite endpoint of first severe cardiopulmonary event. Measurements and Main Results: BGF 320 reduced the rate of first occurrence (hazard ratio [95% confidence interval]) of cardiovascular and severe cardiopulmonary events versus GFF, including for time to first cardiovascular adverse event of special interest (0.63 [0.48, 0.82]), cardiac AE (0.60 [0.48, 0.76]), and severe cardiopulmonary event (0.80 [0.67, 0.95]). Conclusions: BGF had a benefit on cardiovascular endpoints and severe cardiopulmonary events versus GFF in patients with moderate to very severe COPD.
Gastrointestinal obstruction is associated with nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Antisecretory agents can relieve these symptoms, even in the absence of surgical or mechanical intervention. These medical management approaches are outlined, and recommendations are made.
The purpose of this review is to discuss the cardiovascular risk associated with inhaled anticholinergics in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Several meta-analyses of data for tiotropium raised the possibility of an increased risk for arrhythmia, angina, myocardial infarction, etc. This review includes the data of retrospective studies of databases using databases, randomized controlled trials, and meta-analyses of clinical trials. The conclusions of studies were inconsistent. In most clinical trials the incidence of cardiovascular adverse events was similar in active treatment and placebo groups, especially in patients with previous cardiovascular diseases. Considering meta-analyses, there is little, if any, evidence for the association between anticholinergics and the development of cardiovascular symptoms. The author discusses the presence and function of cholinergic receptor subtypes in human heart, and cardiac functions controlled by the autonomic nervous system via these receptors, their possible role, and pharmacokinetic properties of inhaled anticholinergics. The author concludes that it is not possible to find evidence of increased cardiovascular harm of inhaled anticholinergics.
Glycopyrronium/formoterol (Bevespi Aerosphere((R))) is a fixed-dose combination of the long-acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium bromide and the long-acting beta(2)-agonist formoterol fumarate delivered via a pressurized metered dose inhaler (pMDI) and formulated using co-suspension delivery technology. It is approved in the USA and EU for use as maintenance treatment in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and in Japan to relieve symptoms in patients with COPD. In the PINNACLE trials in patients with moderate to very severe COPD, glycopyrronium/formoterol was associated with significantly greater improvements in lung function than its monocomponents and placebo at 24 weeks and its monocomponents and open-label tiotropium over 52 weeks. In the AERISTO trial, glycopyrronium/formoterol was non-inferior to umeclidinium/vilanterol dry powder inhaler for peak change in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) within 2 h postdose, but not for the change in morning predose trough FEV(1), over 24 weeks. Glycopyrronium/formoterol was generally well tolerated in patients with moderate to very severe COPD, with most adverse events (AEs) being of mild or moderate severity. Thus, glycopyrronium/formoterol pMDI formulated using co-suspension delivery technology is a useful new addition that extends treatment options for patients with COPD.
OBJECTIVE: To review the efficacy and safety of various drug treatments for sialorrhea. Pharmacotherapy for drug-induced sialorrhea is not addressed. DATA SOURCES: Clinical studies were identified using PubMed (1966-October 2001). Key search terms included sialorrhea and drug therapy. DATA SYNTHESIS: Sialorrhea is a social and physical detriment to patients. Drug treatment, although not necessarily the treatment of choice for all patients, can offer some symptom relief. CONCLUSIONS: Literature has documented that benztropine, glycopyrrolate, and scopolamine can reduce the incidence of sialorrhea. Although the literature evaluating the therapeutic options has limitations (e.g., small sample size, inconsistent outcome measurements), glycopyrrolate may have an advantage over the other agents due to fewer adverse effects.
