The mechanisms of actions of cough medicines are not always known. The problem is exacerbated for herbal medicines, where the effectiveness of the plant or its phytochemicals have rarely been carefully evaluated. Moreover, the most active phytomedicinal constituent is difficult to identify, and the expense and difficulty of such studies discourages sponsors who may not be able to benefit by subsequent exclusive marketing of the herbal remedy. Most popular herbs used as cough medicines appear to be demulcents whose action is confined to the oropharynx. It is probable that the vast majority of allegedly effective herbal cough medicines act as non-specific emetic-expectorants. The proof of activity of even marketed herbal derivatives such as guaifenesin and codeine is difficult to obtain. It is therefore likely that herbal cough medications will never be shown to be more active than placebos. Nevertheless, these plant products will continue to be popular remedies for patients and their health care advisors.
In health, the airways are lined by a layer of protective mucus gel that sits atop a watery periciliary fluid. Mucus is an adhesive, viscoelastic gel, the biophysical properties of which are largely determined by entanglements of long polymeric gel-forming mucins, MUC5AC and MUC5B. This layer entraps and clears bacteria and inhibits bacterial growth and biofilm formation. It also protects the airway from inhaled irritants and from fluid loss. In diseases such as cystic fibrosis there is almost no mucin (and thus no mucus) in the airway; secretions consist of inflammatory-cell derived DNA and filamentous actin polymers, which is similar to pus. Retention of this airway pus leads to ongoing inflammation and airway damage. Mucoactive medications include expectorants, mucolytics, and mucokinetic drugs. Expectorants are meant to increase the volume of airway water or secretion in order to increase the effectiveness of cough. Although expectorants, such as guaifenesin (eg, Robatussin or Mucinex), are sold over the counter, there is no evidence that they are effective for the therapy of any form of lung disease, and when administered in combination with a cough suppressant such as dextromethorphan (the "DM" in some medication names) there is a potential risk of increased airway obstruction. Hyperosmolar saline and mannitol powder are now being used as expectorants in cystic fibrosis. Mucolytics that depolymerize mucin, such as N-acetylcysteine, have no proven benefit and carry a risk of epithelial damage when administered via aerosol. DNA-active medications such as dornase alfa (Pulmozyme) and potentially actin-depolymerizing drugs such as thymosin beta(4) may be of value in helping to break down airway pus. Mucokinetic agents can increase the effectiveness of cough, either by increasing expiratory cough airflow or by unsticking highly adhesive secretions from the airway walls. Aerosol surfactant is one of the most promising of this class of medications.
Cough is one of the most common symptoms prompting patients to be seen by health care providers in the United States. Persistent cough can disrupt daily activities such as conversation, eating, breathing, and sleeping, and it can become extremely debilitating both physically and mentally. Pharmacological treatments include dextramethorphan, opioid cough suppressants, benzonatate, inhaled ipratropium, and guaifenesin. Successful cough suppression has also been demonstrated in several studies with the use of nebulized lidocaine. Nebulized lidocaine also appears to be well tolerated by patients with minimal side effects including dysphonia, oropharyngeal numbness, and bitter taste. Studies conducted thus far have been small, so larger randomized control trials comparing nebulized lidocaine to placebo need to be conducted in the future.
BACKGROUND: Acute cough due to upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) is a common symptom. Non-prescription, over-the-counter (OTC) medicines are frequently recommended as a first-line treatment, but there is little evidence as to whether these drugs are effective. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of oral OTC cough preparations for acute cough in children and adults in community settings. SEARCH METHODS: We searched CENTRAL (2014, Issue 1), MEDLINE (January 1966 to March week 3 2014), EMBASE (January 1974 to March 2014), CINAHL (January 2010 to March 2014), LILACS (January 2010 to March 2014), Web of Science (January 2010 to March 2014) and the UK Department of Health National Research Register (March 2010). SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing oral OTC cough preparations with placebo in children and adults suffering from acute cough in community settings. We considered all cough outcomes; secondary outcomes of interest were adverse effects. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently screened potentially relevant citations, extracted data and assessed study quality. We performed quantitative analysis where appropriate. MAIN RESULTS: Due to the small numbers of trials in each category, the limited quantitative data available and the marked differences between trials in terms of participants, interventions and outcome measurement, we felt that pooling of the results was inappropriate.We included 29 trials (19 in adults, 10 in children) involving 4835 people (3799 adults and 1036 children). All studies were placebo-controlled RCTs. However, assessment of the risk of bias of the included studies was limited by poor reporting, particularly for the earlier studies.In the adult studies, six trials compared antitussives with placebo and had variable results. Three trials compared the expectorant guaifenesin with placebo; one indicated significant benefit, whereas the other two did not. One trial found that a mucolytic reduced cough frequency and symptom scores. Two studies examined antihistamine-decongestant combinations and found conflicting results. Four studies compared other combinations of drugs with placebo and indicated some benefit in reducing cough symptoms. Three trials found that antihistamines were no more effective than placebo in relieving cough symptoms.In the child studies, antitussives (data from three studies), antihistamines (data from three studies), antihistamine-decongestants (two studies) and antitussive/bronchodilator combinations (one study) were no more effective than placebo. No studies using expectorants met our inclusion criteria. The results of one trial favoured active treatment with mucolytics over placebo. One trial tested two paediatric cough syrups and both preparations showed a 'satisfactory response' in 46% and 56% of children compared to 21% of children in the placebo group. One new trial indicated that three types of honey were more effective than placebo over a three-day period.Twenty-one studies reported adverse effects. There was a wide range across studies, with higher numbers of adverse effects in participants taking preparations containing antihistamines and dextromethorphan. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results of this review have to be interpreted with caution because the number of studies in each category of cough preparations was small. Availability, dosing and duration of use of over-the-counter cough medicines vary significantly in different countries. Many studies were poorly reported making assessment of risk of bias difficult and studies were also very different from each other, making evaluation of overall efficacy difficult. There is no good evidence for or against the effectiveness of OTC medicines in acute cough. This should be taken into account when considering prescribing antihistamines and centrally active antitussive agents in children; drugs that are known to have the potential to cause serious harm.
Mucus in the airways is a complex mixture of water, lipids, glycoproteins, sugars, and electrolytes that serves as a lubricant for the epithelium. The efficient flow of respiratory mucus is a first level of immune defense that requires an appropriate viscosity and elasticity for optimal barrier and ciliary functions. Thickening and drying of airway mucus by respiratory tract infections, allergies, and drugs can impair evacuation. Tenacious, bothersome mucus is an annoying and frequent symptom of rhinitis that is difficult to manage. Common remedies include adequate hydration through fluid intake and nasal washes. The use of mucoactive agents is controversial due to limited data and equivocal efficacy in available studies. Nonetheless, some patients benefit. This review examines the use of guaifenesin (glyceryl guaiacolate) on bothersome nasal mucus associated with rhinitis, including the available published data and clinical experience.
For patients and their loved ones, delirium can be a frightening experience. A fluctuating mental status is important to identify because it often signals a need for additional treatment. The Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) diagnostic algorithm enables nurses to assess for delirium by identifying the four features of the disorder that distinguish it from other forms of cognitive impairment. It can be completed in five minutes and is easily incorporated into ongoing assessments of hospitalized patients. (This screening tool is included in the series Try This: Best Practices in Nursing Care to Older Adults, from the Hartford Institute for Geriatric Nursing at New York University's College of Nursing.) For a free online video demonstrating the use of this tool, go to http://links.lww.com/A209.
Adverse drug reactions lead to a significant number of hospital admissions each year and thus contribute to the overall financial burden of health care. Some of these drug reactions are allergic responses. As the overall predictability of allergic responses to drugs remains low, efforts to improve our understanding of the processes underlying these responses continue as we strive toward the ultimate goal of primary prevention. Allergic reactions range from mild pruritic to severe systemic anaphylactic responses. We report a case of a young healthy man who developed an anaphylactic reaction to an over-the-counter expectorant. A skin test showed that the patient had an immunoglobulin E-mediated allergic response to guaifenesin, one of the components of commonly available cough medications. Our review of published literature showed that this is the first report of a severe allergic response to guaifenesin.
The management of airway secretions in the mechanically ventilated patient is a routine task throughout all intensive care units. The current treatment strategies are primarily based on anecdotal experiences rather than statistical evidence. Areas covered: This review article evaluates the data from published trials surrounding mucoactive agents and their use in the critically ill patient population. We completed an extensive search through PUBMED and CINAHL via EBSCO, along with the Cochran library to find all trials using mucoactive agents in the critically ill patient population. Expert commentary: Overall, the role of mucoactive agents in the intensive care unit is a field within pulmonary critical care that is in need of evidence-based recommendations. We feel that there is great opportunity for investigators to evaluate different mucoactive therapies in this patient population and to determine their effect on clinical outcomes.
Guaifenesin, a widely used ingredient in over-the-counter cough and cold medications, has been a subject of debate regarding its efficacy in treating respiratory conditions. Despite its historical use and US Food and Drug Administration approval, recent studies have questioned its claimed expectorant effect and its effectiveness in managing symptoms. This article examines the available evidence, highlighting the lack of significant benefits over placebo for upper respiratory disease. The rationale for clinical use is examined alongside the potential downside and alternatives to recommending guaifenesin as a treatment option.
Methocarbamol, a compound related to mephenesin, has in vitro hemolytic potential. A study was performed to determine whether any hemolysis was detectable after intravenous injection. Methocarbamol and its vehicle (50% polyethylene glycol-300) was compared with vehicle alone and with normal saline controls in high- and low-dose regimens in normal volunteers. Significant increases in plasma hemoglobin were detected 30 min after intravenous injection of methocarbamol or its vehicle alone. Maximum initial plasma hemoglobin levels were approximately 10 mg/dl with vehicle alone, but only 4 mg/dl with the methocarbamol added. Serum haptoglobin levels fell after both high-dose methocarbamol and vehicle during the 3-day period of treatment. Hemolysis, though detectable, did not exceed levels found under physiologic circumstances such as exercise, and represents only a small fraction of the normal daily hemolysis of aged erythrocytes.
OBJECTIVES: Ephedrine and guaifenesin are herbal supplements that have experienced increased use over the past decade. Ephedrine has been used as a stimulant and weight-loss product, guaifenesin as an expectorant and cough suppressant; both are found in combination in many antitussives and expectorants. This paper reviews the reported cases of ephedrine- and guaifenesin-induced nephrolithiasis, as well as the diagnostic techniques and treatments that have been successfully used for these stones. DESIGN: A systematic review of the literature pertaining to nephrolithiasis and the compounds ephedrine and guaifenesin was conducted. RESULTS: Ephedrine and guaifenesin use results in over 35% of urinary stones that are related to pharmaceutical metabolites, and collectively are present in 0.1% of all urinary stones. These calculi are radiolucent, requiring the use of computerized tomography (CT scan) for diagnosis. Alkalinization therapy offers an alternative to surgical intervention and may have a role in prevention of recurrence. CONCLUSIONS: Ephedrine and guaifenesin have been shown to cause nephrolithiasis in cases of abuse when taken individually or in combination. It is important for the clinician to be aware of the potential for these compounds to cause nephrolithiasis.
In diabetic patients, an early index of peripheral neuropathy is the slowing of conduction velocity in large myelinated neurons and a lack of understanding of the basic pathogenic mechanisms hindered therapeutics development. Racemic (R/S)-guaifenesin (1) was identified as a potent enhancer of neurite outgrowth using an in vitro screen. Its R-enantiomer (R)-1 carried the most biological activity, whereas the S-enantiomer (S)-1 was inactive. Focused structural variations to (R/S)-1 was conducted to identify potentially essential groups for the neurite outgrowth activity. In vivo therapeutic studies indicated that both (R/S)-1 and (R)-1 partially prevented motor nerve conduction velocity slowing in a mouse model of type 1 diabetes. In vitro microsomal assays suggested that compounds (R)-1 and (S)-1 are not metabolized rapidly, and PAMPA assay indicated moderate permeability through the membrane. Findings revealed here could lead to the development of novel drugs for diabetic neuropathy.
The clinical manifestations of colonic urticaria vary, depending on the presence of associated abnormalities. A case of an association between colonic urticaria and cecal volvulus is described.
BACKGROUND: Alternatives to opioid analgesia are needed to reduce the risk of abuse, misuse, and diversion. Musculoskeletal pain is a significant contributor to postoperative pain after ventral hernia repair (VHR). We report the impact of methocarbamol on opioid prescribing after VHR. METHODS: Review of all robotic and open VHR, Jan 2020-July 2022. Data was collected in the Abdominal Core Health Quality Collaborative (ACHQC) with additional chart review to assess for opioid refills. A 2:1 propensity score match was performed comparing opioid prescribing in patients prescribed vs not prescribed methocarbamol. RESULTS: 101 patients received methocarbamol compared with 202 without. Similar number of patients received an opioid prescription (87.1 vs 86.6%; p = 0.904). Study patients received significantly lower MME prescription at discharge (60 v 75; p = 0.021) with no difference in refills (12.5 vs 16.6%; p = 0.386). CONCLUSION: Addition of methocarbamol to a multimodal analgesic regimen after VHR facilitates reduction in prescribed opioid with no increase in refills.
A fatal methocarbamol intoxication is presented. Significant toxicologic findings were blood concentrations of 525 mg/L methocarbamol and 140 mg/dL ethanol. Analysis was by thin-layer, gas-liquid, and high pressure liquid chromatography. Toxicology data relevant to the interpretation of case findings are discussed.
Illicit drug use is prevalent worldwide; over 24 million people are estimated to have used recreational drugs during the past month in the UK and USA alone. Illicit drug use can result in a wide spectrum of potential medical complications that include many urological manifestations. To ensure optimal care and treatment, urologists need to be cognizant of these complications in their patients, particularly among youths. Ketamine uropathy is thought to affect over one-quarter of ketamine users and can lead to severe lower urinary tract symptoms, as well as upper tract obstruction. Cannabis use has been associated with an increased risk of bladder cancer, prostate cancer and nonseminomatous germ cell tumours in case-control studies. Fournier's gangrene has been reported following injection of heroin and cocaine into the penis. Excessive use of cough medicines can lead to the development of radiolucent stones composed of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine and guaifenesin. As the current evidence is mostly limited to case reports and case series, future epidemiological studies are needed to fully address this issue.
A new skeletal muscle relaxant, methocarbamol, was used in the treatment of 38 patients with a variety of severe neurological disorders and skeletal muscle spasm states.Eighty-two per cent of the patients studied obtained a beneficial result ranging from excellent to fair. Mild side effects such as drowsiness were observed in five patients, mild weakness in three patients and excessive perspiration in one. In two of the five patients who complained of drowsiness, it disappeared upon reduction of dosage and did not reappear when original dosage was reinstituted.
We report on a patient with bilateral ureteral calculi composed of guaifenesin metabolite as determined by infrared spectroscopy. These stones may be associated with excessive guaifenesin intake related to the current popularity of ephedrine preparations.
