Haloperidol (HP) is widely used in the treatment of several forms of psychosis. Despite of its efficacy, HP use is a cause of concern for the elevated risk of adverse drug reactions. adverse drug reactions risk and HP efficacy greatly vary across subjects, indicating the involvement of several factors in HP mechanism of action. The use of biomarkers that could monitor or even predict HP treatment impact would be of extreme importance. We reviewed the elements that could potentially be used as peripheral biomarkers of HP effectiveness. Although a validated biomarker still does not exist, we underlined the several potential findings (e.g., about cytokines, HP metabolites and genotypic biomarkers) which could pave the way for future research on HP biomarkers.
The pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of risperidone, an important atypical antipsychotic drug with potent serotonin-5-HT2 and dopamine-D2 receptor blocking effects, are presented. The pharmacology of atypical versus typical antipsychotic drugs is discussed in the contest of a pathophysiological conceptualization for schizophrenia which incorporates a parkinsonian model with an important role for serotonin and excitatory amino acid neurotransmission. In the normal therapeutic dose range, risperidone displays dose-linear pharmacokinetics in humans and reaches steady-state within 24 hours. Risperidone metabolism yields a active metabolite, 9-OH-risperidone, that has a similar pharmacological profile to the patient compound and therefore contributes to the clinical efficacy of the drug.
After cessation of long-term treatment with haloperidol, a 77-year-old man developed severe dyskinetic-dystonic movements involving mainly the tongue and associated also with oromandibular dystonia and blepharospasm that were manifested exclusively during the process of eating and that interfered with feeding. There were no spontaneous involuntary movements nor were they apparent during any other simple or complex activations of the orofacial musculature.
The use of two antipsychotics for the treatment of individuals with psychiatric disorders is not uncommon in clinical practice but is rarely documented in the literature. The present article suggests an alternative method of treating individuals who show a partial but inadequate response to antipsychotic monotherapy. A rational strategy for augmenting one antipsychotic with a second, based on pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic principles, is provided. The present approach considers the 5-hydroxytryptamine2 to dopamine2 ratio, other complementary receptor affinities and drug-drug interactions involving the cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. The present article presents a rationale for augmenting haloperidol in patients who are partially responsive to clozapine.
Haloperydol is a butyrophenone, typical neuroleptic agent characterized as a high antipsychotics effects in the treatment of schizophrenia and in palliative care to alleviation many syndromes, such as naursea, vomiting and delirium. Clinical problems occurs during and after administration of the drug are side effects, particularly extrapyrramidal symptoms (EPS). The neurotoxicity of haloperydol may be initiated by the cationic metabolites of haloperydol, HPP+, RHPP+, formed by oxidation and reduction pathways. These metabolites are transported by human organic cation transporters (hOCT) to several brain structures for exapmle, in substantia nigra, striatum, caudate nucleus, hippocampus. After reaching the dopaminergic neurons inhibits mitochondrial complex I, evidence for free radical involvement, thus leading to neurodegeneration.
A case of haloperidol-induced bronchospasm is described, and possible etiologies are suggested. Since haloperidol is commonly used in the treatment of psychoses, it is important for clinicians to be aware of this potentially lethal yet treatable side-effect.
Torsade de pointes is a malignant dysrhythmia that has been reported in a variety of clinical settings and associated with several pharmacologic agents. Patients with a prolonged QTc for heart rate are at higher risk for the development of this arrhythmia. We review the literature supporting the relationship of haloperidol to the development of this malignant dysrhythmia. Clinicians in the critical care setting should be aware of potentially lethal drug-induced ventricular tachydysrhythmias such as torsade de pointes.
A short-cut review was carried out to establish whether haloperidol is effective at treating the symptoms of cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS). One study was directly relevant to the question. The author, date and country of publication, patient group studied, study type, relevant outcomes, results and study weaknesses of that paper were tabulated. The clinical bottom line was that no controlled studies exist to report on the use of haloperidol. Alternative agents, used mainly off-label, show better promise at effectively treating symptoms of CHS based on case series and reports.
Since their introduction into clinical practice in the early 1960s, long-acting depot antipsychotics have been widely used as maintenance therapy for patients with schizophrenia. The improved pharmacokinetics of injectable long-acting antipsychotic therapies have provided more reliable drug delivery and reduced differences in peak and trough plasma levels of the drug. Studies that have compared short-acting oral antipsychotics with long-acting injectable antipsychotics, although imperfect, support injectable antipsychotics as having real benefit over oral antipsychotics on patient outcome owing largely to improved adherence. If patients forget or refuse to take their prescribed oral medications, weeks or months may go by before they experience an exacerbation; the effects of nonadherence become apparent too late to preempt the problem. On the other hand, if a patient fails to show up for an injection, the problem of nonadherence can be immediately addressed. When injectable medication is combined with an active psychosocial treatment program that will respond assertively to nonadherence, relapse rates may be reduced. By preventing or delaying relapse, consistent treatment can improve the patient's quality of life and lead to an overall reduction in the cost of care.
Antipsychotic-induced laryngeal dystonia is a life-threatening side-effect of both high- and low-potency classical antipsychotics, and its diagnosis often remains elusive. We review all cases of acute laryngeal dystonia due to antipsychotics available in the literature, including controversial ones, and add two new cases. There are no reports of acute laryngeal dystonia due to atypical antipsychotics. Antipsychotic-induced laryngeal dystonia has been reported predominantly in young males, but does not correlate to the dosage or the category of the drug. There have been reports of acute laryngeal dystonia due to metoclopramide. Differential diagnosis includes other extrapyramidal side-effects and allergic reactions. Treatment consists of the administration of anticholinergic agents.
Haloperidol has been used extensively for the treatment of psychotic disorders, and it has been suggested that the monitoring of plasma haloperidol concentration is clinically useful. Different assay methodologies have been used in research and clinical practice to examine the relationship between response and plasma concentration of the drug. Chemical assays such as high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) and gas-liquid chromatography (GLC) have good precision and sensitivity; radioimmunoassay (RIA) is generally more sensitive, but less precise and specific. Radioreceptor assay quantifies dopaminereceptor blocking activity but does not provide results comparable with those of HPLC, GLC and RIA. Large doses of haloperidol can safely be given intravenously and intramuscularly for rapid neuroleptisation; the bioavailability of this agent administered orally ranges from 60 to 65%. However, there is large interindividual, but not intraindividual, variability in plasma haloperidol concentrations and most pharmacokinetic parameters. This interindividual variability could be partially explained by the reversible oxidation/reduction metabolic pathway of haloperidol: it is metabolised via reduction to reduced haloperidol, which is biologically inactive. Different extents of enterohepatic recycling, and ethnic differences in metabolism, could also account for the observed variability in haloperidol disposition. Although not conclusive from different clinical studies, it appears that a plasma haloperidol concentration range of 4 micrograms/L to an upper limit of 20 to 25 micrograms/L produces therapeutic response. The role of reduced haloperidol in determining clinical response is not clear, although in some studies a high reduced haloperidol/haloperidol concentration ratio has been suggested to be associated with therapeutic failure. Measurements of red blood cell or cerebrospinal fluid haloperidol concentration have also been proposed as determinants of therapeutic response, but results from different studies are inconsistent, and do not seem to provide a significant advantage over plasma concentration monitoring. Physiological parameters such as prolactin and homovanillic acid levels have been evaluated, with the latter showing some promise that warrants further investigation. Haloperidol decanoate can be characterised by a flip-flop pharmacokinetic model because its absorption rate constant is slower than the elimination rate constant. Its plasma concentration peaks on day 7 after intramuscular injection. The elimination half-life is about 3 weeks, and the time to steady-state is about 3 months.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is a rare but potentially fatal complication of treatment with antipsychotic medications. Prior to 1994, there was no accepted set of diagnostic criteria. This article presents four adolescents admitted at Cleveland Clinic Foundation from 1985 to 1998, illustrating the broad spectrum of neuroleptic malignant syndrome. A review of the pediatric literature is discussed as to the current risk factors, pathogenesis, management, and outcome. Early recognition and supportive and specific treatment of neuroleptic malignant syndrome reduced the morbidity and mortality.
Haloperidol, a butyrophenone derivative, was first used 30 years ago and has since become one the most frequently prescribed neuroleptics, employed in the treatment of numerous psychiatric and neurological syndromes. It has a very good antipsychotic effect; its sedative effects are moderate compared against weakly potent neuroleptics, and its vegetative side effects are only slight. In a review of the literature, the data found during the past 30 years are commented upon, such as data on pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, indications, undesirable effects, interactions, dosage, contraindications and precautionary measures - all of them having implications on research on neuroleptics as a whole.
Haloperidol levels in blood were measured monthly in 43 refractory chronic schizophrenic patients referred to a locked skilled nursing facility for long-term treatment. Gross toxic side effects (seizures, catatonia, confusion) and Neuroleptic Induced Deficit Syndrome in conjunction with blood levels over 30 ng/ml were identified in 13 of our 43 patients. Blood level reductions contributed to a reduction of side effects and clinical improvement and led to the expedited discharge of 6 of these 13 patients of the toxic subgroup. Considerable blood level variation was evident in single samples, and four levels appeared necessary to develop confidence for accuracy. Significant dose to blood level interindividual variability was identified, thereby bringing into question fixed-dose approaches to patients. The results strongly suggest the utility of haloperidol blood levels in the clinical setting.
We have presented pharmacokinetic parameters of bromperidol (BP) in 14 healthy Korean subjects. Additionally, we have investigated the effects of dose and genetic polymorphisms on BP metabolism and on extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS). The T(max) (3.9 +/- 0.9 h), clearance (1.37 +/- 0.52 ml/h/kg), and t(1/2) (20.4 +/- 3.7 h) obtained in our study are comparable to those in previous Caucasian studies, although pharmacokinetic profiles were affected by the BP dose. We could not prove any significant correlations between BP metabolism or adverse effects and genetic factors because the number of subjects was small. Further studies with a larger population are needed to determine the influence of genetic factors on BP therapy.
In this study haloperidol appeared to affect the performance on a selected category of cognitive tasks considered to represent shifting aptitude. A pretest--post-test design was used with two groups of subjects: 17 patients suffering from idiopathic spasmodic torticollis, and 17 controls who were matched for age and intelligence. The results are discussed in relation to previous findings on haloperidol and cognition, shifting disorder in Parkinson's disease and changes in behavioural organization found in animals with an experimentally induced dopaminergic hypoactivity.
Five patients who developed an agitated delirium in association with use of an intra-aortic balloon pump are presented. The differential diagnosis of delirium in critically ill cardiac patients is reviewed and effective pharmacologic treatment strategies (involving rapid and aggressive management with intravenous haloperidol) are discussed.
Individual response to medication depends on several factors (age, gender, body weight, general clinical condition, genetics, diet, hydration status, comorbidities, co-administered drugs and their mode of administration, smoking, alcohol overuse, environmental factors, e.g. sunlight) that may contribute to adverse drug reactions even at therapeutic doses. Patients in palliative care are at increased risk of these reactions. Unwanted drug effects diminish the quality of life and may lead to a suboptimal dying process. Haloperidol is one of the three most commonly used drugs in palliative care and the most commonly employed typical antipsychotic. It has also been recommended for inclusion into the palliative care emergency kit of home care teams. As such, it is important to be fully conversant with the indications, benefits, and risks of haloperidol, especially in the context of palliative care.
Schizophrenic patients who have been prescribed atypical antipsychotics have a potential risk of gaining weight. The implications of weight gain for clinical care may differ depending on whether a patient is underweight or overweight at baseline. The exact mechanism for weight gain is not known, but several factors have been identified that can help predict which patients are at risk for gaining weight. These factors include better clinical outcome, increased appetite, and low baseline body mass index. In patients treated with olanzapine for up to 3 years, weight gain trended toward a plateau at approximately 36 weeks. Weight gain interventions, including behavioral modifications, show promise in controlling or reducing weight in patients treated with antipsychotics.
OBJECTIVE: Response to typical antipsychotic medication has been associated with achieving a level of striatal dopamine D2 receptor occupancy in the range of 65% to 70%. We undertook this study to determine whether response to the atypical antipsychotic olanzapine occurs at lower levels of D2 receptor occupancy. METHOD: Eighteen patients who presented with a first episode of psychosis were randomized to receive olanzapine 5 mg daily or haloperidol 2 mg daily in a double-blind design. We acquired positron emission tomography (PET) scans using the D2 ligand [11C]raclopride within the first 15 days of treatment to determine the percentage of D2 receptors occupied by the medication. According to response, dosage was then adjusted to a maximum dosage of 20 mg daily of either drug. PET scans were repeated after 10 to 12 weeks of treatment. RESULTS: At the first PET scan, the 8 olanzapine-treated patients had significantly lower D2 receptor occupancies (mean 63.4%, SD 7.3) than those observed in the 10 patients treated with haloperidol (mean 73.0%, SD 6.1). When patients were rescanned following dosage adjustment, mean D2 receptor occupancies were greater than 70% in both groups. D2 receptor occupancies did not differ significantly between the olanzapine-treated group (mean 72.0%, SD 5.7) and the haloperidol-treated group (mean 78.7%, SD 7.6). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that, in patients being treated for a first episode of psychosis, olanzapine has its antipsychotic effect at approximately the same levels of D2 receptor occupancy as are achieved with low dosages of haloperidol.
