Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is an alkalinizing lysosomatropic drug that accumulates in lysosomes where it inhibits some important functions by increasing the pH. HCQ has proved to be effective in a number of autoimmune diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Areas covered: In this review the mechanisms of action, the efficacy, and the safety of HCQ in the management of patients with SLE have been reviewed. HCQ may reduce the risk of flares, allow the reduction of the dosage of steroids, reduce organ damage, and prevent the thrombotic effects of anti-phospholipid antibodies. The drug is generally safe and may be prescribed to pregnant women. However, some cautions are needed to prevent retinopathy, a rare but serious complication of the prolonged use of HCQ. Expert opinion: HCQ may offer several advantages not only in patients with mild SLE but can also exert important beneficial effects in lupus patients with organ involvement and in pregnant women. The drug has a low cost and few side effects. These characteristics should encourage a larger use of HCQ, also in lupus patients with organ involvement.
Chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are derivatives of the heterocyclic aromatic compound quinoline. These economical compounds have been used as antimalarial agents for many years. Currently, they are used as monotherapy or in conjunction with other therapies for the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjogren's syndrome (SS) and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS). Based on its effects on the modulation of the autophagy process, various clinical studies suggest that CQ and HCQ could be used in combination with other chemotherapeutics for the treatment of various types of cancer. Furthermore, the antiviral effects showed against Zika, Chikungunya, and HIV are due to the annulation of endosomal/lysosomal acidification. Recently, CQ and HCQ were approved for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of infected patients with the coronavirus SARSCoV- 2, causing the disease originated in December 2019, namely COVID-2019. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the pharmacological effects of these drugs: 1) disruption of lysosomal and endosomal pH, 2) inhibition of protein secretion/expression, 3) inhibition of antigen presentation, 4) decrease of proinflammatory cytokines, 5) inhibition of autophagy, 6) induction of apoptosis and 7) inhibition of ion channels activation. Thus, evidence has shown that these structures are leading molecules that can be modified or combined with other therapeutic agents. In this review, we will discuss the most recent findings in the mechanisms of action of CQ and HCQ in the immune system, and the use of these antimalarial drugs on diseases.
Chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are the most common drugs used to relieve acute and chronic inflammatory diseases. In this article, we present a review about the use of CQ and HCQ in antitumor therapies based on autophagy mechanisms. These molecules break/discontinue autophagosome-lysosome fusions in initial phases and enhance antiproliferative action of chemotherapeutics. Their sensitizing effects of chemotherapy when used as an adjuvant option in clinical trials against cancer. However, human related-MDR genes are also under risk to develop chemo or radioresistance because cancer cells have ability to throw 4-aminoquinolines out from digestive vacuoles well. Additionally, they also have antitumor mechanism unrelated to autophagy, including cell death from apoptosis and necroptosis and immunomodulatory/anti-inflammatory properties. However, the link between some anticancer mechanisms, clinical efficacy and pharmacological safety has not yet been fully defined.
INTRODUCTION: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder that affects almost every organ system and it is treated with immunomodulation and immunosuppression. SLE patients have an intrinsically dysfunctional immune system which is exacerbated by disease activity and leaves them vulnerable to infection. Treatment with immunosuppression increases susceptibility to infection, while hydroxychloroquine use decreases this risk. Infectious diseases are a leading cause of hospitalization and death. AREAS COVERED: This narrative review provides an overview of recent epidemiology and predictors of infections in SLE, delineates the risk of infection by therapeutic agent, and provides suggestions for risk mitigation. Articles were selected from Pubmed searches conducted between September 2019 and January 2020. EXPERT OPINION: Despite the large burden of infection, effective and safe preventative care such as universal hydroxychloroquine use and vaccination are underutilized. Future efforts should be directed to quality improvement, glucocorticoid reduction, and validation of risk indices that identify patients at the highest risk of infection.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Pregnancies in women with antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) are associated with several pregnancy complications. The current treatment to prevent obstetric aPL-mediated morbidity is largely based on low-dose aspirin (LDA) and low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). Alternative treatment regimens to prevent obstetric aPL-related morbidity include the addition of the antimalarial hydroxychloroquine (HCQ). The aim of this systematic review is to identify the currently available evidence on the efficacy of HCQ to prevent aPL-related obstetric morbidity. RECENT FINDINGS: We identified four retrospective observational studies. No definite signal of harm was identified as none of the studies reported adverse outcomes. When comparing a total of 214 aPL-positive women with a total of 250 HCQ-exposed aPL-positive pregnancies and 521 pregnancies not exposed to HCQ, we found that HCQ exposure was not associated with an increased rate of live births [pooled OR 1.33; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.62--2.86]). There was considerable heterogeneity in the analysis (I = 59%). SUMMARY: HCQ seems well tolerated in pregnancy. However, because of the heterogeneity of available studies, the questions whether women with aPL (or some subpopulation of those) might benefit from this agent during pregnancy remains unanswered. Randomized controlled data are needed.
Recent publications have brought attention to the possible benefit of chloroquine, a broadly used antimalarial drug, in the treatment of patients infected by the novel emerged coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). The scientific community should consider this information in light of previous experiments with chloroquine in the field of antiviral research.
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is an antimalarial drug that has historically been used to treat and prevent malaria. However, its mechanism of action has not yet been fully elucidated. HCQ affects various cellular and molecular pathways through different mechanisms. HCQ has also been shown to be a disease‑improving agent for the treatment of rheumatic diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis and primary Sjogren's syndrome. Although generally considered safe, adverse reactions have been reported with the use of HCQ and clinicians should carefully monitor patients with rheumatism when prescribing these drugs. The purpose of the present review is to strengthen the clinical use of HCQ for autoimmune diseases while highlighting the adverse effects that may occur during treatment.
Since chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) can inhibit the invasion and proliferation of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in cultured cells, the repurposing of these antimalarial drugs was considered a promising strategy for treatment and prevention of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). However, despite promising preliminary findings, many clinical trials showed neither significant therapeutic nor prophylactic benefits of CQ and HCQ against COVID-19. Here, we aim to answer the question of why these drugs are not effective against the disease by examining the cellular working mechanisms of CQ and HCQ in prevention of SARS-CoV-2 infections.
As of April 21, 2020, more than 2.5 million cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, have been reported in 210 countries and territories, with the death toll at 171,810. Both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have gained considerable media attention as possible therapies, resulting in a significant surge in demand. In overdose, both medications can cause severe, potentially life-threatening effects. Here, we present a brief overview of the pharmacology of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, manifestations of toxicity, and treatment considerations.
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is known as one of the most fascinating synthetic antimalarial drugs during the last 50 years. It is currently among the most commonly employed medicines for the clinical treatment of rheumatic diseases, especially systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis. In related mechanism studies, it has been found that HCQ possesses various immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory activities. In addition, the effects of HCQ on anti-platelet, metabolic pathways, and antineoplasticity have also been disclosed in more recent studies. These significant findings on HCQ suggest the potential therapeutic applications of HCQ for treatment of many diseases, such as cancers, skin disease, antiphospholipid syndrome, etc. This review focuses on recent in vitro and clinical trials on its pharmacological mechanisms, therapeutic activities, and potential adverse effects.
Antimalarials are under-utilized, disease-modifying agents that are useful in the management of lupus erythematosus. Antimalarials can promote a remission in non-organ-threatening lupus and decrease its risk of dissemination. They are especially useful for cutaneous and inflammatory joint disease and have modest actions in improving serositis, fatigue, and cognitive dysfunction. As agents that do not depress the bone marrow or promote opportunistic infections, antimalarials have potential applications in combination with other antilupus medications and with each other.
The unique immunomodulatory properties of hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) have attracted considerable interest beyond its use for malaria and rheumatological diseases, including a variety of dermatological conditions. Over recent years, especially after the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, the prescription of HCQ has also significantly expanded, sometimes inappropriately, thus posing additional challenges on its optimal use, due to emerging safety issues. In this review, we provide dermatologists with the latest advancements on selected clinically relevant toxicities, namely retinopathy, pro-arrhythmia, cutaneous reactions, and neuropsychiatric effects. It is hoped this update can assist dermatologists to identify high-risk patients for tailored monitoring, screening, and risk minimization strategies, thus supporting safer HCQ prescribing.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has become a global pandemic. It is still uncontrolled in most countries and no therapies are currently available. Various drugs are under investigation for its treatment. The disease is known to have worse outcomes in patients who have underlying cardiovascular disease. Chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, remdesivir and lopinavir/ritonavir are currently being studied in trials and show some promise. Conduction disorders, heart failure, and mortality have been reported with the use of these drugs. It is important to have knowledge of potential cardiotoxic effects of these drugs before using them for COVID-19 patients for better allocation of healthcare resources and improvement in clinical outcomes.
Here, we review current hydroxychloroquine screening guidelines and controversies regarding specific screening tests and acceptance of the guidelines. Screening tests are described, and their predictive results are analysed, with special emphasis on early changes. Further research is needed to come to a conclusion about the efficacy of the new proposed dose.
Erythroderma is characterized by diffuse erythema and scaling of the skin involving more than 90% of the total body skin surface area. Drug-induced erythroderma has rarely been reported with hydroxychloroquine. We report a case of a 50-year-old female patient, with systemic lupus erythematosus, who developed itchy lesions all over the body 1 month after starting treatment with hydroxychloroquine. Drug-induced erythroderma was suspected. Hydroxychloroquine was withdrawn and the patient was treated with emollients, mid-potency corticosteroids, and oral antihistamines. A biopsy was done which confirmed the diagnosis of erythroderma. She recovered with treatment and was discharged. A careful history and clinical examination to search for potential causative factors will help prevent disabling sequelae in erythroderma.
Hydroxychloroquine and quinacrine are frequently used to treat rheumatic diseases. Ocular toxicity, although infrequent, is one of the potential side effects of antimalarial therapies. Current recommendations are unifocal in being developed by only ophthalmologists who do not treat patients for their rheumatic diseases. The data used to create the recommendations are meager and retrospective. Comanagement of patients with rheumatic disease who are exposed to antimalarial therapies requires a greater interaction between ophthalmologists and rheumatologists.
INTRODUCTION: Hydroxycloroquine (HCQ) has been extensively studied for treatment and prevention of coronavirus diseases 2019 (COVID-19) from the start of the pandemic. Conflicting evidence about its usefulness has begun to accrue. METHODS: In the face of controversial results about clinical efficacy of HCQ, we performed a rapid systematic review to assess its safety in the framework of COVID-19 randomized clinical trials. RESULTS: Five studies investigating 2291 subjects were included. The use of HCQ was associated with higher risk of adverse event compared with placebo or standard of care: odds ratio 4.57, 95% confidence interval 2.14-9.45. CONCLUSION: Safety profile of HCQ appears to be unsatisfactory when used to treat or prevent COVID-19, especially in the light of unproved clinical benefit.
The authors describe the first case of drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms syndrome caused by hydroxychloroquine treatment in a male patient affected by seronegative arthritis.
