Neonatal hypertension is increasingly recognized as dramatic improvements in neonatal intensive care, advancements in our understanding of neonatal physiology, and implementation of new therapies have led to improved survival of premature infants. A variety of factors appear to be important in determining blood pressure in neonates, including gestational age, birth weight, and postmenstrual age. Normative data on neonatal blood pressure values remain limited. The cause of hypertension in an affected neonate is often identified with careful diagnostic evaluation, with the most common causes being umbilical catheter-associated thrombosis, renal parenchymal disease, and chronic lung disease. Clinical expertise may need to be relied upon to decide the best approach to treatment in such patients, as data on the use of antihypertensive medications in this age group are extremely limited. Available data suggest that long-term outcomes are usually good, with resolution of hypertension in most infants. In this review, we will take a case-based approach to illustrate these concepts and to point out important evidence gaps that need to be addressed so that management of neonatal hypertension may be improved.
Hypertensive emergency is a condition in which there is elevation of both systolic and diastolic blood pressure with the presence of acute target organ disease. Hypertensive urgency is a condition where the blood pressure is elevated (diastolic > 120 mmHg) with the absence of acute target organ disease. Hypertensive emergencies are best managed with parenteral drugs and careful intraarterial blood pressure monitoring. Hydralazine has been widely used in treatment of hypertension in eclampsia and preeclampsia, and its safety has been demonstrated in these patients. Sodium nitroprusside (SNP) has the most reliable antihypertensive activity, which begins immediately after its administration and ends when the infusion is stopped. As with diazoxide, it should be used with caution in patients with impaired cerebral flow. SNP is the preferred drug in obtaining controlled hypotension in patients undergoing neurovascular surgery. Intravenous nitroglycerin is useful in patients prone to myocardial ischemia, but should be avoided in patients with increased intracranial pressure. Esmolol is effective in controlling both supraventricular tachyarrhythmias and severe hypertension. Its short onset of duration of action make it useful in the emergent setting, but because of its negative inotropic effect its use should be avoided in patients with low cardiac output. Verapamil should not be used in patients with preexisting conduction abnormalities. Nicardipine is a potent arteriolar vasodilator without a significant direct depressant effect on myocardium. As with other afterload reducing agents, it should not be used in patients with severe aortic stenosis. Because angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors generally cause cerebral vasodilatation, enalaprilat may be particularly beneficial for patients who are at high risk of developing cerebral hypotensive episodes secondary to impaired cerebral circulation. Fenoldopam, a selective post-synaptic dopaminergic receptor (DA1) has been shown to be effective in treating severe hypertension with a lower incidence of side effects than SNP. Hypertensive urgencies can usually be managed with oral agents. Oral nifedipine, captopril, clonidine, labetalol, prazosin, and nimodipine have all been shown to be effective in these situations.
Perioperative hypertension is commonly encountered in patients that undergo surgery. While attempts have been made to standardize the method to characterize the intraoperative hemodynamics, these methods still vary widely. In addition, there is a lack of consensus concerning treatment thresholds and appropriate therapeutic targets, making absolute recommendations about treatment difficult. Nevertheless, perioperative hypertension requires careful management. When treatment is necessary, therapy should be individualized for the patient. This paper reviews the pharmacologic agents and strategies commonly used in the management of perioperative hypertension.
The prevalence of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy is increasing. The etiology and pathophysiology of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy remain poorly understood. Hypertensive disorders are a major cause of maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. Treatment of hypertension decreases the incidence of severe hypertension, but it does not impact rates of preeclampsia or other pregnancy complications. Several antihypertensive medications are commonly used in pregnancy, although there is a lack of randomized controlled trials. Severe hypertension should be treated immediately to prevent maternal end-organ damage. Appropriate antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum management is important in caring for patients with hypertensive disorders.
BACKGROUND: Despite its approval in 1953, hydralazine hydrochloride continues to be used in the management of resistant hypertension, a condition frequently managed by nephrologists and other clinicians. Hydralazine hydrochloride undergoes metabolism by the N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) enzyme. NAT2 is highly polymorphic as approximately 50% of the general population are slow acetylators. In this review, we first evaluate the link between NAT2 genotype and phenotype. We then assess the evidence available for genotype-guided therapy of hydralazine, specifically addressing associations of NAT2 acetylator status with hydralazine pharmacokinetics, antihypertensive efficacy, and toxicity. SUMMARY: There is a critical need to use hydralazine in some patients with resistant hypertension. Available evidence supports a significant link between genotype and NAT2 enzyme activity as 29 studies were identified with an overall concordance between genotype and phenotype of 92%. The literature also supports an association between acetylator status and hydralazine concentration, as fourteen of fifteen identified studies revealed significant relationships with a consistent direction of effect. Although fewer studies are available to directly link acetylator status with hydralazine antihypertensive efficacy, the evidence from this smaller set of studies is significant in 7 of 9 studies identified. Finally, 5 studies were identified which support the association of acetylator status with hydralazine-induced lupus. Clinicians should maintain vigilance when prescribing maximum doses of hydralazine. Key Messages: NAT2 slow acetylator status predicts increased hydralazine levels, which may lead to increased efficacy and adverse effects. Caution should be exercised in slow acetylators with total daily hydralazine doses of 200 mg or more. Fast acetylators are at risk for inefficacy at lower doses of hydralazine. With appropriate guidance on the usage of NAT2 genotype, clinicians can adopt a personalized approach to hydralazine dosing and prescription, enabling more efficient and safe treatment of resistant hypertension.
Historical aspects of the development and application of the vasodilator hydralazine are reviewed. The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and mechanism of action are discussed, with emphasis on the parenteral use of this drug. It is reiterated that parenteral hydralazine is the preferred drug for the treatment of severe preeclampsia, but its usefulness in other forms of accelerated hypertension is also addressed. Through comparisons with other established antihypertensive agents, the efficacy and pharmacoeconomic potential of hydralazine are stressed.
KEY POINTS AND PRACTICAL RECOMMENDATIONS: *  Hydralazine and minoxidil act by dilating resistance arterioles, thus reducing peripheral resistance, with no dilating effect on the venous side of the circulation. *  There is a baroreflex-mediated venoconstriction, resulting in an increase in venous return to the heart, along with a direct catecholamine-mediated positive inotropic and chronotropic stimulation of the heart. *  Hydralazine therapy is usually combined with a sympathetic inhibitor to prevent expression of this reflex, as well as with a diuretic agent to prevent sodium retention caused by reduction in renal perfusion pressure. *  Hydralazine is indicated in the long-term therapy of essential hypertension, in the short-term therapy of pregnancy-induced hypertension and eclampsia, and in the therapy of hypertensive crisis. *  Adverse effects include the anticipated tachycardia, fluid retention, and headache, caused by the vasodilation, especially in the early days of therapy, but may frequently be prevented by the concomitant use of a beta-blocker. *  As with other drugs that are N-acetylated, there is a low risk of lupus-like syndrome with high doses and long-term use. *  Because of the severity of adverse effects with minoxidil, its usage is limited to persons with severe hypertension unresponsive to other treatments. *  Hirsutism, a common side effect of minoxidil, is particularly bothersome in women and reverses in a few months after discontinuation. *  Sodium nitroprusside is used in the intensive care setting to lower pressure in hypertensive crisis or to treat severe left ventricular failure, particularly valuable when elevated pressure or severe left ventricular failure threatens the patient's survival. *  Although nitrates have not achieved widespread use as antihypertensive agents, they are effective in producing sustained blood pressure (BP) reductions when added to other antihypertensive regimens.
Increasing experimental and clinical evidence points to a subset of severe preeclamptic women who are hypovalemic with a low cardiac index and a high systemic vascular resistance, and in whom vasodilatory therapy may cause precipitate falls in maternal perfusion pressure, unless anticipated by prior correction of the hypovolemia. Since there is a paucity of adequately controlled clinical trials with appropriate definitions of hypotension or perinatal outcome, the consequences of such episodes for the preterm fetus are unknown. Epidemiologic evidence, using a logistic regression analysis model, is reviewed, which points to an association between a hypotensive episode following a commonly used drug, hydralazine, and a worse perinatal outcome in a study of severely hypertensive women delivered less than 32 weeks. An estimate of this risk, using the odds ratio, is 5.97 (95% confidence interval 1.84 to 19.35).
A 59-year-old man was diagnosed as having constrictive pericarditis 17 months after a typical hydralazine-induced autoimmune syndrome. This late complication of hydralazine has been reported only once. Ten years later the patient was found to have anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies directed against myeloperoxidase.
This mini-review highlights the chemical and cytoprotective properties of various hydralazine analogues that block the induction of cell death by acrolein, a highly toxic contributor to "carbonyl stress" during a diverse range of human diseases. Recent work on the action of hydralazine against various carbonyl-mediated pathologies is also reviewed.
Vasodilator agents are relatively new additions to the armamentarium for the management of patients with congestive heart failure. Myocardial failure, irrespective of the aetiology, tends to create a vicious cycle characterised by reduced cardiac output and elevated systemic vascular resistance, which further decrease cardiac output by increasing left ventricular ejection impedance. The rationale for the use of vasodilators is to interrupt the vicious cycle by decreasing the left ventricular ejection impedance by peripheral vasodilatation. Although most vasodilator agents produce qualitatively similar haemodynamic responses, quantitatively their haemodynamic effects differ considerably. Knowledge of the haemodynamic effects of the various vasodilators helps in the selection of a particular drug for the management of such patients. This article reviews the mechanisms of action, haemodynamic effects, pharmacokinetics, clinical usage and adverse effects of non-parenteral vasodilator agents currently available for the management of patients with chronic heart failure.
INTRODUCTION: Hydralazine is a vasodilator used to treat hypertension, pre-eclampsia, and heart failure. The current article reviews the clinical pharmacokinetics (PK) of hydralazine, which can be useful for clinicians in optimizing its dose and dosing frequency to avoid adverse effects and unexpected interactions that could risk patients' lives. AREAS COVERED: This review has summarized the PK parameters for hydralazine after performing an extensive literature search. It includes 20 publications that were selected after applying eligibility criteria out of a pool of literature that was searched using Google Scholar, PubMed, Cochrane Central, and EBSCO databases. The included studies consisted of concentration vs. time profiles of hydralazine. If the PK data were not tabulated in the given study, the concentration vs. time profiles were scanned for the extraction of the PK data. The PK parameters were calculated by applying a non-compartmental analysis (NCA). EXPERT OPINION: The current review will aid clinicians in understanding hydralazine PK in different disease populations. This clinical PK data might also be helpful in the development of a pharmacokinetic model of hydralazine.
Vasodilators are a group of drugs with various degrees of arteriolar or venous dilatation used in the treatment of congestive heart failure when symptoms persist after digoxin and diuretic therapy. Nitrates and captopril provide the most consistent improvement in symptoms. Reduced mortality rates in congestive heart failure with vasodilator therapy has not been demonstrated, and prediction of clinical response to therapy is difficult.
The metabolism of hydralazine in a group of slow acetylator patients with the drug-induced lupus syndrome was compared with the metabolism in asymptomatic control subjects. There were no toxicologically significant difference in metabolite excretion between the groups which reached statistical significance, although there were interesting trends. However, the single lupus patient with the rapid acetylator phenotype excreted considerably greater quantities of phthalazinone than control patients and also increased amounts of hydrazine and hydralazine hydrazones. These results and the trends overall are consistent with the hypothesis that the metabolism of hydralazine may indeed be responsible for the drug induced lupus syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we investigated the in vivo ameliorative effects of vitamin E in a hydralazine-induced lupus model, which closely resembles SLE in humans. We aim to shed light on its potential as a therapeutic agent for managing SLE. METHODS: Forty BALB/c mice were used in this study. Hydralazine hydrochloride was orally administered in a concentration of 25 mg/kg to the five mice groups once weekly for a period of 5 weeks to induce a lupus-like condition. The untreated group was the normal control group. To confirm the development of lupus, an ANA test was conducted. After the mice tested positive for ANA, drug treatments commenced. The negative control group did not receive any drug treatment. The treatments included prednisolone, methotrexate and vitamin E, all administered at a concentration of 25 mg/kg, with a higher dose of vitamin E (50 mg/kg) also administered. RESULTS: Notably, on day 35, after drug treatment, we observed that mice that received vitamin E at a dosage of 50 mg/kg (3.01+/-0.100) had a slight decrease in lymphocyte hydrogen peroxide radicals when compared with the group receiving 25 mg/kg of vitamin E (3.30+/-0.100) (p<0.05). This finding suggests that the scavenging potential of vitamin E is dose dependent. CONCLUSION: This study suggests that vitamin E supplementation, especially at a higher dose (50 mg/kg), holds promise in ameliorating lupus-like conditions. These findings warrant further exploration and may offer a potential avenue for improving the disease status of patients experiencing SLE.
Microfluidic devices have emerged as revolutionary, novel platforms for in vitro drug evaluation. In this work, we developed a facile method for evaluating antihypertensive drugs using a microfluidic chip. This microfluidic chip was generated using the elastic material poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) and a microchannel structure that simulated a blood vessel as fabricated on the chip. We then cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) inside the channel. Different pressures and shear stresses could be applied on the cells. The generated vessel mimics can be used for evaluating the safety and effects of antihypertensive drugs. Here, we used hydralazine hydrochloride as a model drug. The results indicated that hydralazine hydrochloride effectively decreased the pressure-induced dysfunction of endothelial cells. This work demonstrates that our microfluidic system provides a convenient and cost-effective platform for studying cellular responses to drugs under mechanical pressure.
Vasodilator drugs counteract the major haemodynamic abnormality of hypertension, namely, arteriolar constriction. As a group, they tend to cause tachycardia and fluid retention, but these side-effects are variable within the group. Vasodilator drugs are effective in the treatment of the whole range of hypertensive diseases, from severe refractory hypertension to mild hypertension. With increasing recognition of the necessity of treatment in mild asymptomatic hypertension, those vasodilator drugs which can be used on their own, such as prazosin and calcium antagonists, are attractive as initial therapy, because they do not have adverse effects on the levels of atherogenic lipids and other risk factors for vascular disease. The major current use of vasodilator drugs in combination with a thiazide and a beta-adrenoreceptor-blocking drug is in the treatment of moderate-to-severe hypertension.
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) is a complex clinical syndrome with significant morbidity and mortality and seems to be responsible for approximately 50% of heart failure cases and hospitalizations worldwide. First-line treatments of patients with HFrEF, according to the ESC and AHA guidelines, include beta-blockers, angiotensin receptor/neprilysin inhibitors, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. This quadruple therapy should be initiated during hospital stay and uptitrated to maximum doses within 6 weeks after discharge according to large multicenter controlled trials. Quadruple therapy improves survival by approximately 8 years for a 55-year-old heart failure patient. Additional therapeutic strategies targeting other signaling pathways such as ivabradine, digoxin, and isosorbide dinitrate and hydralazine combination for African Americans, as well as adjunctive symptomatic therapies, seem to be necessary in the management of HFrEF. Although second-line medications have not achieved improvements in mortality, they seem to decrease heart failure hospitalizations. There are novel medical therapies including vericiguat, omecamtiv mecarbil, genetic and cellular therapies, and mitochondria-targeted therapies. Moreover, mitraclip for significant mitral valve regurgitation, ablation in specific atrial fibrillation cases, omecamtiv mecarbil are options under evaluation in clinical trials. Finally, the HeartMate 3 magnetically levitated centrifugal left ventricular assist device (LVAD) has extended 5-year survival for stage D HF patients who are candidates for an LVAD.
The present systematic review and meta-analysis investigated the effects of hydralazine compared with other antihypertensive drugs in maternal, perinatal and neonatal outcomes of pregnant women with hypertensive disorders. Twenty studies with 1283 participants were included. Of them, 626 received hydralazine and 657 other antihypertensive treatments, such as labetalol, nifedipine, ketanserin, diazoxide, urapidil, isradipine and epoprostenol. Women receiving hydralazine had higher heart rate (WMD: 13.4, 95%CI: 0.1 to 26.8 beats/min), increased number of adverse effects (RR: 1.21, 95%CI: 1.01 to 1.45) and gave birth to neonates of lower birthweight (WMD: 13.4, 95%CI: 0.1 to 26.8 beats/min) compared with other antihypertensive treatments at the end of follow-up. When studies, which used antihypertensive agents that are no longer indicated for hypertension in pregnancy, were excluded in the sensitivity analyses, hydralazine found not to have a statistically significant difference compared with labetalol and nifedipine regarding the reduction of maternal blood pressure (WMD: 1.72, 95%CI: -1.47 to 4.9 mmHg for systolic, WMD: 0.26, 95%CI: -1.75 to 2.28 mmHg for diastolic), maternal heart rate (WMD: 13.56, 95%CI: -5.62 to 32.74 beats/min), low birthweight (WMD: -88.62, 95%CI: -243.24 to 66 beats/min) and adverse events (RR: 1.19, 95%CI: 0.99 to 1.43). Hydralazine seems not to be inferior compared to labetalol and nifedipine for safety and efficacy.
Two patients with bullous systemic lupus erythematosus are reported. In one, the disease appears to have been caused by hydralazine. The cutaneous lesions of bullous SLE have not been previously reported in drug-induced lupus.
