BACKGROUND: Nephrolithiasis is one of the most common conditions affecting the kidney and is characterized by a high risk of recurrence. Thiazide diuretic agents are widely used for prevention of the recurrence of kidney stones, but data regarding the efficacy of such agents as compared with placebo are limited. Furthermore, dose-response data are also limited. METHODS: In this double-blind trial, we randomly assigned patients with recurrent calcium-containing kidney stones to receive hydrochlorothiazide at a dose of 12.5 mg, 25 mg, or 50 mg once daily or placebo once daily. The main objective was to investigate the dose-response effect for the primary end point, a composite of symptomatic or radiologic recurrence of kidney stones. Radiologic recurrence was defined as the appearance of new stones on imaging or the enlargement of preexisting stones that had been observed on the baseline image. Safety was also assessed. RESULTS: In all, 416 patients underwent randomization and were followed for a median of 2.9 years. A primary end-point event occurred in 60 of 102 patients (59%) in the placebo group, in 62 of 105 patients (59%) in the 12.5-mg hydrochlorothiazide group (rate ratio vs. placebo, 1.33; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.92 to 1.93), in 61 of 108 patients (56%) in the 25-mg group (rate ratio, 1.24; 95% CI, 0.86 to 1.79), and in 49 of 101 patients (49%) in the 50-mg group (rate ratio, 0.92; 95% CI, 0.63 to 1.36). There was no relation between the hydrochlorothiazide dose and the occurrence of a primary end-point event (P = 0.66). Hypokalemia, gout, new-onset diabetes mellitus, skin allergy, and a plasma creatinine level exceeding 150% of the baseline level were more common among patients who received hydrochlorothiazide than among those who received placebo. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with recurrent kidney stones, the incidence of recurrence did not appear to differ substantially among patients receiving hydrochlorothiazide once daily at a dose of 12.5 mg, 25 mg, or 50 mg or placebo once daily. (Funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation and Inselspital; NOSTONE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03057431.).
Hypersensitivity reactions to drugs may cause very rapid physiologic derangements that can be fatal in the absence of adequate compensatory mechanisms or definitive treatment. For the most part, adverse drug reactions that progress over the course of minutes are mediated either by mast cell or complement activation. If a patient survives the acute event, appropriate long-term management requires the identification and future avoidance of the inciting drug. Here, we describe a patient who experienced two life-threatening multisystem reactions with cardiopulmonary compromise minutes after taking hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ). The reactions were associated with systemic vascular leak resulting in hypotension and non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Our recent Veterans Administration Cooperative Study--involving 683 hypertensive male patients--showed that a diuretic was more effective than a beta blocker in controlling hypertension in most respects. In addition, in this study we failed to find evidence that thiazide-induced hypokalemia was associated with increased evidence of cardiac arrhythmias in patients without overt heart disease. We are concerned that the current desire to avoid hypokalemia at all costs may result in the prescription of ineffective dosages of diuretics for the treatment of hypertension.
International hypertension guidelines endorse the use of combination therapy to achieve blood pressure control in the majority of patients. Angiotensin AT1 receptor blockers, in combination with diuretics, are among the preferred combinations, with telmisartan plus hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) being an effective and well-tolerated combination. This article provides an up-to-date review of the existing data on telmisartan/HCTZ combination for the management of hypertension in patients with additional cardiovascular risk factors, including reports emerging from a number of recent clinical trials and secondary analyses of older trials. The accumulated evidence from clinical trials demonstrates that telmisartan/HCTZ combinations are effective and well tolerated in patients with mild-to-severe hypertension, including subgroups of patients with cardiovascular risk factors such as advanced age, obesity, chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus and treatment-resistant hypertension.
Blockade of angiotensin II receptors was first achieved in the 1970s using a peptide, saralasin acetate. Although it was effective in lowering blood pressure, it required parenteral administration and had a short duration of action and partial agonist activity. These disadvantages are absent with losartan, a selective, orally administered, nonpeptide blocker of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor that recently became available for clinical use. Losartan has a sustained duration of action, permitting once-daily dosing in many patients, and lacks partial agonist activity. More than 3300 hypertensive patients have received losartan in Phase III, controlled clinical trials. Losartan given concomitantly with a low dose (12.5 mg) of hydrochlorothiazide further reduces blood pressure. Its overall incidence of adverse experiences is similar to that of placebo. Because of its efficacy, specificity, duration of action, and safety profile, losartan should be considered as first-line therapy for the treatment of patients with hypertension.
The therapeutic and biochemical effects of two commonly employed diuretic preparations were compared in a double-blind fashion in 32 patients with congestive heart failure. At the doses employed, furosemide and a fixed combination of spironolactone and hydrochlothiazide maintained control of the clinical manifestations of congestive heart failure to about the same degree. However, significant biochemical changes in the renin-aldosterone system were found in patients receiving the spironolactone/thiazide combination therapy. A significant increase in plasma renin activity and a significantly greater increase in aldosterone excretion were found in the spironolactone/thiazide group compared to the furosemide group. No significant differences were observed in serum potassium levels or 24-hour potassium excretion rates in patients treated with the two diuretic preparations.
Japanese patients with uncontrolled essential hypertension received single-blind losartan 50 mg/hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg (L50/H12.5) for 8 weeks. Patients whose blood pressure (BP) remained uncontrolled were randomized double-blind to fixed-dose losartan 50 mg/hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg/amlodipine 5 mg (L50/H12.5/A5) or L50/H12.5 for 8 weeks followed by open-label L50/H12.5/A5 for 44 weeks. Adverse events were assessed. After 8 weeks, diastolic and systolic BP were reduced significantly more with L50/H12.5/A5 versus L50/H12.5 (both p < 0.001). Mean changes in diastolic and systolic BP were sustained for 44 weeks. L50/H12.5/A5 was well-tolerated and improved BP significantly versus L50/H12.5 in Japanese patients with uncontrolled essential hypertension.
The goal of antihypertensive treatment is to reduce cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events associated with high blood pressure. A combination therapy with different antihypertensive agents is more successful than monotherapy in most hypertensive patients, with the added advantage of a better safety profile. Therefore, treatment of hypertensive patients with fixed-dose combination therapy consisting of the angiotensin II receptor blocker losartan along with hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) has several potential benefits over monotherapy with each individual component. It provides more effective blood pressure control, a reduction in the likelihood of adverse effects and facilitation of patient compliance due to a simple once-daily regimen. One of the advantages of the combination of losartan with HCTZ is the potential reduction in HCTZ-induced metabolic disorders; in particular, this combination can have attractive benefits for patients of hyperuricemia. Losartan plus HCTZ fixed-dose combination therapy is frequently recommended for the treatment of hypertension and lowers blood pressure in mild-to-moderate and even severe hypertensive patients to a level comparable with other classes of antihypertensive agents in combination with HCTZ. Fixed-dose combination therapy with losartan plus HCTZ is a logical choice as antihypertensive therapy for patients in whom combination therapy is necessary to achieve additional blood pressure reduction.
The findings in a patient who developed low-pressure pulmonary edema on two separate occasions immediately following the ingestion of a single triamterene-hydrochlorothiazide tablet (Dyazide) are presented. It is postulated that this was related to the hydrocholorothiazide component of the drug. Although 12 cases have been reported, the pathophysiology remains obscure. Mitogenic stimulation of the patient's lymphocytes to concanavalin A, phytohemagglutinin, and pokeweed mitogen was assessed. Blastogenic responses to Staphylococcus aureus antigen, triamterene, and hydrochlorothiazide were also assessed. No hypersensitivity response could be demonstrated to either triamterene or hydrochlorothiazide. The initially low white blood cell count, associated with hemoconcentration, increased in the first 24 h in the hospital. This observation is consistent with intrapulmonary sequestration of granulocytes causing pulmonary edema.
In a double-blind crossover study, the effectiveness of furosemide, 40 mg twice daily, was compared with hydrochlorothiazide, 50 mg twice daily, in hypertensive patients. Both hydrochlorothiazide and furosemide significantly reduced blood pressure (BP) during three months of therapy. However, the fall in BP was consistently greater with hydrochlorothiazide than with furosemide, although the difference was significant only with respect to systolic BP. The somewhat greater antihypertensive effectiveness of hydrochlorothiazide may be related to its longer action permitting a more continuous diuretic effect and, hence, maintenance of reduced extracellular fluid volume throughout the 24-hour period.
In the final analysis of this study at Week 26, 26% of the patients randomized to receive amlodipine attained blood pressure control with amlodipine alone compared with 33% of the patients allocated to hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ). Neither amlodipine nor HCTZ produced clinically significant changes in pulse rate or in the electrocardiogram. Amlodipine treatment did not appear to produce clinically significant changes in blood lipids; HCTZ, however, produced an increase in total plasma cholesterol (delta 22.9 +/- 8.6 mg/dl). The incidence of side effects and the rate of patient withdrawal in the amlodipine and HCTZ groups were comparable. As expected, HCTZ therapy caused well-recognized biochemical alterations in cholesterol and potassium levels, whereas amlodipine was metabolically neutral.
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are highly effective antihypertensive agents with excellent safety profiles. ARBs have been shown to improve cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in hypertensive patients with heart failure or diabetic nephropathy. For this later class of patients, the American Diabetes Association recommends ARBs as the primary treatment option. The ARBs function by blocking the binding of angiotensin-II (A-II) to its receptor, thereby inhibiting the action of A-II. Unlike the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, which block the production of A-II through the ACE pathway, the ARBs effectively inhibit A-II regardless of whether it is produced through ACE or some alternate enzyme pathway. This difference in action offers a distinct advantage of ARBs over ACE inhibitors. Olmesartan medoxomil, the latest addition to the ARB class, is a long-acting, safe and well-tolerated antihypertensive drug. The combination of olmesartan medoxomil with a low-dose diuretic, potentiates the blood pressure lowering effect of either agent alone and is highly effective in achieving the recommended blood pressure goals in the majority of patients treated.
Felodipine, a new antihypertensive calcium antagonist, was compared with metoprolol, a beta-blocker, and hydrochlorothiazide, a diuretic, with respect to glucose tolerance in a randomized double-blind cross-over study consisting of 11 patients, of age range 50-70 years, who had developed diabetes during antihypertensive treatment. Each treatment period lasted for 10 weeks. The blood pressure was similar irrespective of treatment. Serum glucose levels during the oral glucose tolerance test were significantly lower when the patients were treated with felodipine than when they were taking hydrochlorothiazide. Serum insulin levels appeared to decrease at an earlier stage of the test when the patients were treated with felodipine, the calcium antagonist, than with the other two antihypertensive substances, which suggests that glucose tolerance is impaired to a lesser extent during treatment with the calcium antagonist. Glucose tolerance was never completely normalized with any of the drugs tested.
Diuretics are commonly prescribed by physicians to contract the ECF volume. In two clinical situations combining different classes of diuretics make sense: First, if a loop diuretic at maximal dose alone does not lead to sufficient diuresis or second, if the side effect of a diuretic needs to be corrected by adding a diuretic of another class. The latter is clinically often used to counteract loop or thiazide diuretic-induced hypokalemia by the addition of a potassium sparing diuretic. Key to a reasonable combination of diuretics is understanding of the pharmaco-kinetics and knowledge of the molecular targets of the diuretics involved.
Diuretics have been used for decades in the treatment of hypertension. Its efficacy has been demonstrated in numerous clinical trials. It is well known that the reduction in cardiovascular risk is a consequence of the reduction in blood pressure levels regardless of the drug used, but thiazide diuretics continue to be first-line drugs, especially in low doses and combined with other drugs. The debate on the advantages of using chlorthalidone or hydrochlorothiazide continues, however hydrochlorothiazide is drug most used and for which there is greater availability. The association with potassium-sparing diuretics increases the effectiveness and reduces the adverse reactions of thiazides. A new group of drugs, close to potassium-sparing diuretics, that antagonise aldosterone synthase are showing promising results as antihypertensives. There are no significant differences between men and women regarding the antihypertensive effect of thiazide diuretics.
Three patients with impaired renal function suffered complications of hyperkalaemia within 10 days of beginning therapy with hydrochlorothiazide and amiloride combination (Moduretic). The possible relationship between hyperkalaemia and this diuretic is discussed.
The comparative efficacy and safety of lofexidine and clonidine in patients with mild to moderate systemic hypertension were evaluated. Patients who met established criteria were administered lofexidine or clonidine in a double-blind manner. The dose of either drug, along with hydrochlorothiazide if necessary, was titrated to blood pressure response or to the occurrence of side effects. Treatment with the dose established during titration was continued for 12 weeks. Blood pressure and the occurrence of side effects were evaluated during weekly clinic visits. Twenty-six patients completed all portions of the study. The decrease in blood pressure compared with that with the placebo was significant for both drugs (p less than 0.05). The daily dose of clonidine required for blood pressure control was less than that of lofexidine (p less than 0.05). Concomitant diuretic therapy was required equally as often for both drugs. Clonidine caused adverse effects more frequently than did lofexidine. The effectiveness of lofexidine is comparable to that of clonidine, but lofexidine has a lower incidence of toxicity.
In a randomised double blind study in patients with mild to moderate hypertension, piretanide 6 mg once and twice daily significantly reduced both supine and erect blood pressure. This was seen after only 2 weeks and a further progressive reduction was evident over the ensuing 12-week trial period. The higher dose produced a mean maximal fall of 29% in supine diastolic pressure, compared with 23% after the lower dose; the difference is not significant. Hydrochlorothiazide 50 mg/amiloride 5 mg twice daily (HCT/A) also reduced supine blood pressure significantly after 2 weeks, but the reduction in erect diastolic blood pressure did not achieve statistical significance until 8 weeks. The maximal effect (a 13% fall in supine diastolic blood pressure) was significantly less than that of either piretanide regimen. Blood pressures in this group also returned more rapidly to pretreatment levels during the placebo washout phase at the end of the study. HCT/A produced a significant sustained rise in serum potassium and a reduction in serum sodium and chloride. Piretanide had minimal effects on serum electrolytes.
* The fixed-dose combination of irbesartan/hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) is approved in the US for use as initial therapy in patients who are likely to need multiple agents to achieve their blood pressure (BP) goals. * In a 12-week, randomized, double-blind, multicentre trial in 538 patients with moderate hypertension that was untreated or uncontrolled by monotherapy, the mean reduction from baseline in seated systolic BP (SeSBP) at week 8 (primary endpoint) was significantly greater with irbesartan/HCTZ than with either irbesartan or HCTZ as monotherapy. * In addition, the proportion of patients with moderate hypertension achieving controlled BP (SeSBP < 140 mmHg/seated diastolic BP [SeDBP] < 90 mmHg) at 12 weeks was significantly greater with irbesartan/HCTZ combination therapy than with irbesartan or HCTZ monotherapy. * In a 7-week, randomized, double-blind, multicentre trial in 697 patients with severe hypertension that was untreated or uncontrolled by monotherapy, a significantly greater proportion achieved a trough SeDBP of < 90 mmHg following 5 weeks of combination therapy with irbesartan/HCTZ compared with irbesartan monotherapy (primary endpoint). * Furthermore, the proportion of patients with severe hypertension achieving controlled BP of < 140/90 mmHg was significantly greater at all timepoints of the trial compared with irbesartan monotherapy. * Irbesartan/HCTZ combination therapy had a similar tolerability profile to irbesartan and HCTZ monotherapy. Most adverse events were of mild to moderate intensity.
