INTRODUCTION: Sickle cell anemia (SCA) is a severe, inherited hemoglobin disorder affecting 100,000 persons in the US and millions worldwide. Hydroxyurea, a once daily oral medication, has emerged as the primary disease-modifying therapy for SCA. The accumulated body of evidence over 30 years demonstrates that hydroxyurea is a safe and effective therapy for SCA, but hydroxyurea remains underutilized for a variety of reasons. AREAS COVERED: In this review, we summarize the available evidence regarding the pharmacology, clinical, and laboratory benefits, and safety of hydroxyurea therapy for the treatment of SCA. The purpose of this review is to provide the reader a comprehensive understanding of hydroxyurea and to reinforce the fact that hydroxyurea is a safe and effective medication for the treatment of SCA. EXPERT OPINION: In our opinion, hydroxyurea therapy should be considered standard-of-care for SCA, representing an essential component of patient management. Early initiation and broader use of hydroxyurea will alter the natural history of SCA, so affected children can live longer and healthier lives. In addition, hydroxyurea use should be extended to low-resource settings such as sub-Saharan Africa, where the burden of SCA and the need for hydroxyurea is arguably the greatest.
Hydroxyurea (HU) is mostly referred to as an inhibitor of ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) and as the agent that is commonly used to arrest cells in the S-phase of the cycle by inducing replication stress. It is a well-known and widely used drug, one which has proved to be effective in treating chronic myeloproliferative disorders and which is considered a staple agent in sickle anemia therapy and-recently-a promising factor in preventing cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease. The reversibility of HU-induced replication inhibition also makes it a common laboratory ingredient used to synchronize cell cycles. On the other hand, prolonged treatment or higher dosage of hydroxyurea causes cell death due to accumulation of DNA damage and oxidative stress. Hydroxyurea treatments are also still far from perfect and it has been suggested that it facilitates skin cancer progression. Also, recent studies have shown that hydroxyurea may affect a larger number of enzymes due to its less specific interaction mechanism, which may contribute to further as-yet unspecified factors affecting cell response. In this review, we examine the actual state of knowledge about hydroxyurea and the mechanisms behind its cytotoxic effects. The practical applications of the recent findings may prove to enhance the already existing use of the drug in new and promising ways.
We report 2 cases of squamous dysplasia associated with long-term hydroxyurea therapy. The association between hydroxyurea and multiple aggressive squamous cell carcinomas, Bowen's disease, and multiple actinic keratoses in sun-exposed areas after a variable latency period has been increasingly reported. On reviewing the literature, 17 cases were identified and are reviewed, with emphasis on possible pathogenetic mechanisms of carcinogenicity. Squamous dysplasia, a precursor state to a more aggressive condition of multiple squamous cell carcinomas in photoexposed areas, should be added to the well-known cutaneous toxicities of hydroxyurea therapy.
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a group of disorders affecting the hemoglobin in erythrocytes. SCD is associated with significant morbidity and mortality and occurs most commonly among people of African ancestry. In 2014, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute updated its guidelines for the management of SCD. These guidelines were implemented to provide evidence-based recommendations to assist primary care clinicians in the proper management of patients with SCD. This article reviews the current practice guidelines for SCD, with attention to health maintenance and hydroxyurea.
Hydroxyurea is an effective treatment in chronic plaque psoriasis that is relatively simple to prescribe. Dose-related bone marrow toxicity is the principal side-effect of therapy although clinically significant complications are few, provided that blood counts are monitored carefully. In contrast with many other second-line agents, renal and liver disease do not necessarily preclude treatment, and there are few drug interactions likely to be of clinical relevance in dermatology. Recent studies on the use of hydroxyurea for sickle cell disease may provide more information on predicting the maximal tolerated dose and potential hazards of long-term therapy in nonmalignant disease and perhaps revive interest in the drug's use in dermatology.
Hydroxyurea's place in the scheme of psoriasis therapy has diminished in recent years. Some practitioners mistakenly believe that it is used only in desperate situations, is of little or no benefit in patients unresponsive to more conventional systemic therapies, and may predispose patients to the development of secondary malignancies. Moreover, a legitimate argument against the use of this drug may be made by physicians concerned about the proliferation of systemic therapies for what is a benign, albeit unsightly, eruption. However, hydroxyurea therapy is not without advantages. It is easily dosed, relatively inexpensive, and has few contraindications or subjective side effects. In addition, patients with common systemic disorders such as hyperlipidemia, mild renal insufficiency, and cardiopulmonary disease who may not be potential candidates for other medications may be managed with hydroxyurea.
Individual genetic composition is an important cause of variations in the response and tolerance to drug treatment. Pharmacogenomics is a modern discipline aiming to delineate individual genomic profiles and drug response. To date, there are several medical disciplines where pharmacogenomics is readily applicable, while in others its usefulness is yet to be demonstrated. Recent experimental evidence suggest that besides genomic variation within the human beta-globin gene cluster, other variants in modifier genes residing outside the human beta-globin gene cluster are significantly associated with response to hydroxyurea treatment in beta-type hemoglobinopathies patients, deducted from the increase in fetal hemoglobin levels. This article aims to provide an update and to discuss future challenges on the application of pharmacogenomics for beta-type hemoglobinopathies therapeutics in relation to the current pharmacological treatment modalities for those disorders.
Hydroxyurea is an old drug that is often used to control essential thrombocythemia and polycythemia vera in patients with high-risk disease. It is usually well tolerated and cheap and has been proven effective in many studies for the prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications associated with these disorders. However, many clinicians are reluctant to use it because of the perceived risk of progression to acute leukemia. Several recent, large studies have given this drug a new lease on life. Relevant results from these studies are discussed, and the risk of leukemia is placed in perspective to demonstrate that hydroxyurea remains the drug of choice in patients with either of these disorders.
Hydroxycarbamide is a nonalkylating antiproliferative and antiviral agent that has been used for over 40 years to treat a variety of neoplastic and non-neoplastic conditions. Hydroxycarbamide is readily absorbed and widely distributed throughout the body. It acts primarily to inhibit DNA synthesis, which underpins its use in solid tumors, viral infections and chronic myeloproliferative disorders. Hydroxycarbamide is an effective treatment for preventing transient ischemic attacks associated with thrombocytosis in chronic myeloproliferative disorders because it is a nitric oxide donor. While its mechanism of action and side-effect profile are well defined, its potential for leukemic transformation as a single agent is still a matter of controversy. Based on a search of the Medline database, this article encompasses the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, clinical use and tolerability of hydroxycarbamide, plus its potential for mutagenicity with special reference to the chronic myeloproliferative disorders. The toxicity profile of hydroxycarbamide is also discussed to enable clinicians to balance potential risks with therapeutic benefits.
Hydroxyurea is the first drug that, under well-organized, large-scale trials in adults, has shown a beneficial effect on the clinical course of sickle cell disease. Several small-scale trials have been conducted in children, but they used different therapeutic schedules, and only one was a single-blind crossover trial. Still, children are clearly good responders to the treatment because a rapid clinical improvement was observed, with decreased frequencies of vaso-occlusive crises, acute chest syndromes, and transfusion requirements. Despite large interindividual variations, virtually all the children studied increased their fetal hemoglobin, mean corpuscular volume, and total hemoglobin. Follow-up varied from 6 months to 59 months. More than in adults, the fetal hemoglobin increase was sustained, and few side effects were observed. Large-scale, placebo-controlled studies seem no longer needed. Guidelines concerning patient selection, dosing schedules, and monitoring protocols as well as exhaustive registries for the detection of long-term side effects are necessary.
Sickle cell disease is probably the first known assembly disease, and its mechanism has been extensively studied. It arises because of the expression of a mutant hemoglobin that can polymerize, and which does so by a double nucleation mechanism that is now seen to operate in other diseases. The polymers so formed lead to circulatory obstruction in the microcirculation. The accuracy of the description that has been developed is sufficient to describe precisely the impact of molecules that cannot join polymers but that still crowd the solution, including fetal hemoglobin. The one approved drug, hydroxyurea, is thought to achieve its benefit by enhancing the production of fetal hemoglobin, but the effects of the drug on polymerization exceed what the added fetal hemoglobin can accomplish. While some possible answers to this mystery are suggested, no mechanism has been conclusively established for the remarkably efficacy of the one drug available to treat this disease.
Due to its oral route of administration and mild toxicity profile, as well as its potent laboratory and clinical effects, hydroxyurea (or hydroxycarbamide) has been the primary focus of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) induction strategies for the treatment of children with sickle cell anemia (SCA). When administered orally once a day, hydroxyurea treatment is very well tolerated with little short-term toxicity. Hydroxyurea has documented laboratory efficacy with increases in Hb and HbF; treatment also significantly reduces the number of painful episodes, acute chest syndrome, transfusions, and hospitalizations. Most young patients reach a maximum tolerated dose of hydroxyurea at 25-30 mg/kg/d, where they will achieve key laboratory thresholds (Hb >/= 9 g/dL and HbF >/= 20%) without excessive myelosuppression. Potential long-term toxicities continue to be of great concern and should be monitored in all patients with SCA who receive hydroxyurea therapy. To date, however, no increases in stroke, myelodysplasia, or carcinogenicity have been detected in SCA patient cohorts, with drug exposure now reaching 15 years for some treated children. Taken together, available evidence suggests that hydroxyurea represents an inexpensive and effective treatment option that should be offered to most, if not all, patients with SCA. As countries in Africa develop newborn screening programs to identify SCA, the widespread use of hydroxyurea may prove to be a useful treatment to help ameliorate the disease in resource-limited settings. Hydroxyurea is the only currently available disease-modifying therapy for SCA, and is emerging as a safe and effective treatment for all patients with SCA, in both developed and developing countries.
INTRODUCTION: In sickle cell disease (SCD), a single amino acid substitution at beta6 of the hemoglobin (Hb) chain replaces glutamate with valine, forming HbS instead of the normal adult HbA. Loss of a negative charge, and the conformational change in deoxygenated HbS molecules, enables formation of HbS polymers. These not only distort red cell morphology but also have other profound effects so that this simple etiology belies a complex pathogenesis with multiple complications. Although SCD represents a common severe inherited disorder with life-long consequences, approved treatments remain inadequate. Hydroxyurea is currently the most effective, with a handful of newer treatments, but there remains a real need for novel, efficacious therapies. AREAS COVERED: This review summarizes important early events in pathogenesis to highlight key targets for novel treatments. EXPERT OPINION: A thorough understanding of early events in pathogenesis closely associated with the presence of HbS is the logical starting point for identification of new targets rather than concentrating on more downstream effects. We discuss ways of reducing HbS levels, reducing the impact of HbS polymers, and of membrane events perturbing cell function, and suggest using the unique permeability of sickle cells to target drugs specifically into those more severely compromised.
Thrombocytosis is a common clinical problem and it represents either a primary myeloid disorder (a clonal process) or a reactive phenomenon. While reactive thrombocytosis is often inconsequential, clonal thrombocytosis may require cytoreductive therapy to prevent thrombohemorrhagic complications. In this regard, a controlled clinical trial has previously demonstrated the efficacy of hydroxyurea in reducing the risk of thrombosis in high-risk patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET). Despite the absence of similar evidence for clinical benefit, the platelet-lowering agent anagrelide has been widely used in both ET and polycythemia vera (PV) and recent reports of serious side-effects suggest that such practice might be detrimental to patients. In the current review we provide basic drug information as well as a critical assessment of anagrelide treatment in ET and related disorders.
Hydroxyurea (HU) is an anti-cancer drug that is used for the treatment of hemoglobinopathies as a gamma-globin inducer. However, its dose-dependent effects have hampered its clinical reliability. Resveratrol (RSV) is an antioxidant and gamma-globin inducer. The present study aimed to assess their combined effects on the gamma-globin gene expression and reactive oxygen species (ROS) level of K562 cells. The results indicated that the gamma-globin gene expression was approximately two folds higher in the group treated with RSV 50 microM + HU 25 microM in comparison to HU 100 muM alone (***p < 0.001). However, there was an inverse relationship between the expression of gamma-globin gene and HU concentration in the combined groups. Furthermore, the combinations of RSV and HU significantly reduced ROS levels compared to single drugs. Overall, the combination of these compounds was an appropriate strategy for increasing gamma-globin expression, reducing oxidant levels, and alleviating the adverse effects of HU.
An atypical form of macrocytosis termed volumetric macrocytosis is described. In contrast to the macrocyte associated with megaloblastic anemia and the pseudomacrocyte caused by viscoelastic defects, the volumetric macrocyte is characterized by an increased mean corpuscular volume and a normal cell diameter. The volumetric macrocyte proves to be thicker than the normocytic red blood cell. This large erythrocyte is overhydrated and contains an increased quantity of hemoglobin. The cell has many characteristics in common with the red blood cells of neonates. Volumetric macrocytosis accompanies sustained hydroxyurea therapy and may represent a drug-induced dyserythropoiesis.
ABSTRACTBackground: Current guidelines recommend hydroxyurea (HU) as frontline therapy for patients with high-risk essential thrombocythemia (ET) to prevent thrombosis. However, little is known about the impact of HU on thrombosis or survival among these patients in the real-world setting. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted of older adults (aged >/=66 years) diagnosed with ET from 2007 through 2013 using the linked SEER-Medicare database. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to assess the effect of HU on overall survival, and multivariable competing risk models were used to assess the effect of HU on the occurrence of thrombotic events. RESULTS: Of 1,010 patients, 745 (73.8%) received HU. Treatment with HU was associated with a significantly lower risk of death (hazard ratio [HR], 0.52; 95% CI, 0.43-0.64; P<.01). Every 10% increase in HU proportion of days covered was associated with a 12% decreased risk of death (HR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.86-0.91; P<.01). Compared with nonusers, HU users also had a significantly lower risk of thrombotic events (HR, 0.51; 95% CI, 0.41-0.64; P<.01). CONCLUSIONS: Although underused in our study population, HU was associated with a reduced incidence of thrombotic events and improved overall survival in older patients with ET.
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is one of the most common genetic diseases with some 250,000 new births each year. Most patients suffer intermittent pain crises and life-threatening events while life expectancy is considerably reduced. Until the last decade management was purely preventative or supportive aimed at symptom control. Apart from stem cell transplant, there is no cure but the oral chemotherapeutic drug hydroxyurea (HU) has now established a role in ameliorating the disease and improving life expectancy for most patients. There are side effects and risks of HU treatment in SCD but for moderate and severely affected patients, the benefits can be significant.
Hydroxyurea (HU) is an antineoplastic agent that enhances fetal hemoglobin. The clinical significance induced by this compound is well known in sickle cell disease. This clinical significance could also be expected in beta-thalassemia patients. Although studies on beta-thalassemia major patients showed significant results, but these clinical responses are expected to be more in thalassemia intermedia (TI) patients because of lesser alpha/beta globin imbalance. Studies showed that HU therapy in TI patients has significant effects on increasing Hb levels that can cause reducing blood transfusion dependency and transfusion free in some patients, decreasing skeletal deformities and splenomegaly and increasing energy state. So HU therapy could be a useful alternative to blood transfusion in some TI patients.
Hydroxyurea decreases painful events among children with sickle cell disease (SCD) but could increase the risk of infections in treated patients through leucopenia. We performed a case-control study, comparing hydroxyurea treatment for SCD in cases with an invasive bacterial infection and in controls without infection. No difference was found.
