OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this systematic review is to assess the efficacy and safety of hydroxyzine for insomnia in adults. METHODS: A comprehensive literature search of PubMed, Embase, and CENTRAL databases was conducted to identify relevant published studies through October 2022 using the search terms: hydroxyzine and sleep, insomnia, sleep disorder or sleep initiation and maintenance disorders. Studies identified for review included prospective, interventional designs or cohort trials that reported impact of hydroxyzine on sleep in adults. Animal studies, case reports, non-English articles, letters to the editor, case studies, and conference abstracts were excluded. Data were extracted using a standardized systematic process. RESULTS: Five articles were identified for inclusion, including 1 open-label and 4 randomized controlled trials, evaluating a total of 207 patients receiving hydroxyzine 25 mg, 50 mg, or 100 mg at bedtime. Mixed efficacy was demonstrated in the sleep measures of sleep onset, sleep maintenance, and sleep quality. The most common adverse drug effect was dry mouth, although 4 of the 5 studies did not report safety outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: The studies in this review suggest hydroxyzine could be considered as a short-term treatment option for adults with insomnia for whom previous therapy was ineffective, not tolerated, or contraindicated. Additional long-term studies with an active comparator are needed to further establish its role in insomnia treatment.
Background Chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is characterised by the development of crops of red, itchy, raised weals or hives with no identifiable external cause.Objectives To assess the effects of H1-antihistamines for CSU.Search methods We searched the following databases up to June 2014: Cochrane Skin Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL (2014, Issue 5), MEDLINE(from 1946), EMBASE (from 1974) and PsycINFO (from 1806). We searched five trials registers and checked articles for references to relevant randomised controlled trials.Selection criteria We included randomised controlled trials of H1-antihistamines for CSU. Interventions included single therapy or a combination of H1-antihistamines compared with no treatment (placebo) or another active pharmacological compound at any dose.Data collection and analysis We used standard methodological procedures as expected by The Cochrane Collaboration.Our primary outcome measures were proportion of participants with complete suppression of urticaria: 'good or excellent' response,50% or greater improvement in quality of life measures, and adverse events.We present risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals(CIs). Main results We identified 73 studies (9759 participants); 34 studies provided data for 23 comparisons. The duration of the intervention was up to two weeks (short-term) or longer than two weeks and up to three months (intermediate-term).Cetirizine 10mg once daily in the short term and in the intermediate term led to complete suppression of urticaria by more participants than was seen with placebo (RR 2.72, 95% CI 1.51 to 4.91). For this same outcome, comparison of desloratadine versus placebo in the intermediate term (5 mg) (RR 37.00, 95% CI 2.31 to 593.70) and in the short term (20 mg) (RR 15.97, 95% CI 1.04 to 245.04)favoured desloratadine, but no differences were seen between 5 mg and 10 mg for short-term treatment.Levocetirizine 20 mg per day (short-term) was more effective for complete suppression of urticaria compared with placebo (RR 20.87,95% CI 1.37 to 317.60), and at 5 mg was effective in the intermediate term (RR 52.88, 95% CI 3.31 to 843.81) but not in the shortterm, nor was 10 mg effective in the short term.Rupatadine at 10 mg and 20 mg in the intermediate term achieved a 'good or excellent response' compared with placebo (RR 1.35,95% CI 1.03 to 1.77).Loratadine (10 mg) versus placebo (RR 1.86, 95% CI 0.91 to 3.79) and loratadine (10 mg) versus cetirizine (10 mg) (RR 1.05, 95%CI 0.76 to 1.43) over short-term and intermediate-term treatment showed no significant difference for 'good or excellent response' or for complete suppression of urticaria, respectively.Loratadine (10 mg) versus desloratadine (5 mg) (intermediate-term) showed no statistically significant difference for complete suppression of urticaria (RR 0.91, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.06) or for 'good or excellent response' (RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.64 to 1.71). For loratadine(10 mg) versus mizolastine (10 mg) (intermediate-term), no statistically significant difference was seen for complete suppression of urticaria (RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.64 to 1.16) or for 'good or excellent response' (RR 0.88, 95% CI 0.55 to 1.42).Loratadine (10mg) versus emedastine (2mg) (intermediate-term) showed no statistically significant difference for complete suppression(RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.39) or for 'good or excellent response' (RR 1.09, 95% CI 0.96 to 1.24); the quality of the evidence was moderate for this comparison.No difference in short-term treatment was noted between loratadine (10mg) and hydroxyzine (25mg) in terms of complete suppression(RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.32 to 3.10).When desloratadine (5 to 20 mg) was compared with levocetirizine (5 to 20 mg), levocetirizine appeared to be the more effective (P value < 0.02).In a comparison of fexofenadine versus cetirizine, more participants in the cetirizine group showed complete suppression of urticaria(P value < 0.001).Adverse events leading to withdrawals were not significantly different in the following comparisons: cetirizine versus placebo at 10 mg and 20 mg (RR 3.00, 95% CI 0.68 to 13.22); desloratadine 5 mg versus placebo (RR 1.46, 95% CI 0.42 to 5.10); loratadine 10 mg versus mizolastine 10 mg (RR 0.38, 95% CI 0.04 to 3.60); loratadine 10mg versus emedastine 2mg (RR 1.09, 95%CI 0.07 to 17.14);cetirizine 10 mg versus hydroxyzine 25 mg (RR 0.78, 95% CI 0.25 to 2.45); and hydroxyzine 25 mg versus placebo (RR 3.64, 95%CI 0.77 to 17.23), all intermediate term.No difference was seen between loratadine 10 mg versus mizolastine 10 mg in the proportion of participants with at least 50%improvement in quality of life (RR 3.21, 95% CI 0.32 to 32.33).Authors' conclusions Although the results of our review indicate that at standard doses of treatment, several antihistamines are effective when compared with placebo, all results were gathered from a few studies or, in some cases, from single-study estimates. The quality of the evidence was affected by the small number of studies in each comparison and the small sample size for many of the outcomes, prompting us to downgrade the quality of evidence for imprecision (unless stated for each comparison, the quality of the evidence was low).No single H1-antihistamine stands out as most effective. Cetirizine at 10 mg once daily in the short term and in the intermediate term was found to be effective in completely suppressing urticaria. Evidence is limited for desloratadine given at 5 mg once daily in the intermediate term and at 20 mg in the short term. Levocetirizine at 5 mg in the intermediate but not short term was effective for complete suppression. Levocetirizine 20 mg was effective in the short term, but 10 mg was not. No difference in rates of withdrawal due to adverse events was noted between active and placebo groups. Evidence for improvement in quality of life was insufficient.
Even though pruritus affects a significant number of people with chronic disease, it is rarely adequately treated. Drug therapies often rely on antihistamines, which have not shown to be beneficial in systemic pruritus. Hydroxyzine is frequently used to treat pruritus associated with kidney failure. Since Canada's sole manufacturer of hydroxyzine is no longer making this product, this is an ideal time to review the mechanisms of itch in advanced organ failure and the specific therapies that give relief. Although there is literature describing itch in patients with cancer, this article is limited to pathogenesis and treatment of systemic itch secondary to chronic, noncancer diseases. We summarize recent systematic reviews, although the studies included in these reviews are often small, and mostly cohort studies.
Four patients who complained of an inexplicable pruritus of several weeks to several years in duration are presented. General medical studies were unremarkable and the skin was normal except for erythematous papular lesions at sites recently scratched. The skin changes could be reproduced by multiple firm strokes with the broad edge of a tongue blade. The transitory, discrete, follicular, urticarial papules so elicited have been labeled by us as follicular dermographism. It is an entity to be distinguished from cholinergic and aquagenic urticaria. We postulate that follicular dermographism occurs during periods of transient antigenemia. At such times, the frictional force of scratching or the tongue blade test releases antigen from the blood stream to trigger focal urticaria at sites of high density mast cells, namely around the hair follicle. Hydroxyzine is an effective therapy.
The second-generation H1-receptor antagonists terfenadine, astemizole, loratadine, and cetirizine are important first-line drugs for the relief of symptoms in patients with allergic rhinoconjunctivitis or chronic urticaria and may eventually supplant the potentially sedating first-generation H1-receptor antagonists in the treatment of these disorders. Terfenadine, astemizole, loratadine, and cetirizine produce an incidence of central nervous system and anticholinergic adverse effects similar to that produced by placebo. Our ability to use H1-receptor antagonists optimally has been greatly enhanced by recent pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies of these medications.
BACKGROUND: Cetirizine, a widely used agent for allergic disorders, has recently been topically used for treating androgenetic alopecia (AGA). We aimed to summarize the current evidence regarding the effectiveness and safety of topical cetirizine for treating AGA. METHODS: We searched Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials. We included both randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and non-randomized clinical trials. FINDINGS: We initially identified 102 records, of which, we included two RCTs and one non-randomized clinical trial, which were of moderate-to-high risk of bias. All included trials used 1% topical cetirizine as the intervention with various regimens. Topical cetirizine was likely to be more effective than a placebo for treating AGA. In comparison with topical minoxidil, topical cetirizine appears to be less effective for improving total and vellus hair density, but it might have a longer-lasting effect. Further, cetirizine might be as effective as minoxidil in improving hair diameter. CONCLUSION: One percent topical cetirizine may serve as a choice for treating AGA, especially for patients with a negative response to topical minoxidil. In order to fully understand the role of topical cetirizine for AGA, additional well-designed RCTs are needed.
Cetirizine, a metabolite of hydroxyzine, is an antihistamine with as distinguishing features: 1) exquisite anti-H1 specificity: cetirizine appears unique in being devoid of action on receptors other than the H1 receptor; 2) potency: at unit dose it is the most potent antihistamine in the skin and the lung; 3) absence of metabolism. These three characteristics suggest that cetirizine be considered the choice H1 antagonist for experiments on the immediate allergic reaction. Cetirizine additionally in vitro inhibits the migration of eosinophils, and in vivo, in the skin, the infiltration by eosinophils that is characteristic for the late phase allergic reaction. Other antihistamines are less active or inactive with respect to this property. According to several lines of evidence, the effect of cetirizine on eosinophils is unlikely to be due to H1 antagonism, but is more likely a novel property of the compound.
Nightmares are highly prevalent and distressing for the sufferer, which underlines the need for well-documented treatments. A comprehensive literature review and meta-analysis of the effects of different pharmacological placebo-controlled randomized clinical trials, covering the period up to 1 December 2022, was performed. Searches were conducted in PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, PsychInfo, Cinahl, and Google Scholar, resulting in the identification of 1762 articles, of which 14 met the inclusion criteria: pharmacological intervention of nightmares, based on a placebo-controlled randomized trial published in a European language, reporting outcomes either/or in terms of nightmare frequency, nightmare distress, or nightmare intensity, and reporting sufficient information enabling calculation of effect sizes. Most studies involved the effect of the alpha(1)-adrenergic antagonist prazosin in samples of veterans or soldiers suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder. Other medications used were hydroxyzine, clonazepam, cyproheptadine, nabilone, and doxazosin. The vast majority of studies were conducted in the USA. The studies comprised a total of 830 participants. The Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale was the most frequently used outcome measure. The results showed an overall effect size of Hedges' g = 0.50 (0.42 after adjustment for publication bias). The synthetic cannabinoid nabilone (one study) showed the highest effect size (g = 1.86), followed by the histamine H(1)-antagonist hydroxyzine (one study), and prazosin (10 studies), with effect sizes of g = 1.17 and g = 0.54, respectively. Findings and limitations are discussed, and recommendations for future studies are provided.
Cetirizine, a human metabolite of hydroxyzine, is a selective H1-receptor antagonist currently approved for the treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis, perennial allergic rhinitis, and chronic urticaria. In U.S. clinical trials, transient reversible hepatic transaminase elevations were observed in <2% of patients during cetirizine therapy. We report a case of cetirizine-induced cholestasis in a 28-year-old man with no previous hepatobiliary disease after a 2-year period of taking cetirizine on a daily basis. The treatment of this patient included the use of ursodeoxycholic acid, as well as hydroxyzine, for symptomatic relief of pruritus. In light of the patient's clinical and biochemical improvement while using hydroxyzine, it appears that the hepatic metabolism of hydroxyzine to metabolites, including cetirizine, is not involved in the pathogenesis of this particular case of drug-induced hepatotoxicity. Cetirizine should be considered as a potential cause of drug-induced cholestasis.
"I fear a trip to the dentist more than I fear death" is the response one person gave in a national survey recently cited in USA Today. While clearly representing an extreme, the results of many surveys suggest that fear of dentistry is still prevalent and is a measure of the failure of current therapeutic approaches to reduce pain and anxiety sufficiently to enable people, especially those with special needs, to visit the dentist. Patients who are fearful would likely seek oral health care more regularly if anesthesia and sedation were more readily available. Taking into consideration that the safety of anxiolytic drugs is highly dependent on the drug, dose, and route of administration used, oral premedication should be the sedative technique used by most dentists because it is efficacious, requires little monitoring when appropriate doses are used, and is unlikely to result in serious morbidity.
Benzodiazepines have traditionally been used to treat acute anxiety disorders, but they are not ideal in the treatment of chronic generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). Following long-term therapy, benzodiazepines have the potential to produce dependency and withdrawal symptoms. In addition, although agents such as the benzodiazepines and buspirone alleviate anxiety, they have little effect on depression, which is a common comorbidity of GAD. Antidepressants have long been viewed as promising alternatives to benzodiazepines for the treatment of some types of anxiety. Although they have been shown to be useful in the treatment of panic disorder, social anxiety disorder/social phobia, and obsessive-compulsive disorder, they have not until recently been regarded as potential therapies for GAD. Treatment with antidepressants has opened up a new area of investigation into the pharmacotherapy of GAD, with a growing body of evidence supporting the role of therapies such as paroxetine and venlafaxine extended release.
H1-receptor antagonists are usually first-line treatment given for seasonal allergic rhinitis. However, many patients suffer with symptoms of allergic rhinitis rather than tolerate the sedative and anticholinergic side effects of the first-generation H1-receptor antagonists. Researchers have sought to replace these older H1-receptor antagonists with a new generation of H1-receptor antagonists that approach the optimal therapy: clinically effective, safe, free of side effects, and convenient for the patient. Among the new second-generation H1-receptor antagonists are terfenadine and astemizole (already marketed) and loratadine and cetirizine, which are expected to be approved soon. All four demonstrate efficacy, convenience, and minimal side effects on the central nervous system. In this review of the current treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis, the clinical studies that compare these four new second-generation H1-receptor antagonists are discussed.
Cetirizine is the carboxylated metabolite of hydroxyzine, and has high specific affinity for histamine H(1) receptors. Pseudoephedrine is a sympathomimetic drug that acts directly on alpha-adrenergic receptors. black triangle Cetirizine/pseudoephedrine 5/120 mg twice daily was significantly more effective than intranasal budesonide 100 microg or placebo at improving nasal obstruction, nasal patency and reducing the volume of nasal secretion, and was significantly more effective than intranasal xylometazoline 0.1% with respect to nasal secretion, during house dust mite faeces challenge in three randomised, cross- over studies among volunteers with seasonal or perennial rhinitis. The onset of action of cetirizine/pseudoephedrine was reported to be approximately 30 minutes. black triangle The bioavailability of cetirizine and pseudoephedrine is similar after administration of cetirizine/pseudoephedrine 5/120 mg bilayer tablets or coadministration of cetirizine 5 mg tablets plus pseudoephedrine sustained-release (SR) 120 mg caplets. black triangle Cetirizine 5mg plus pseudoephedrine SR 120 mg twice daily for 2 to 3 weeks was significantly more effective than each drug given alone at reducing mean total symptom scores for seasonal or perennial allergic rhinitis in two randomised, double-blind, multicentre trials. In both studies, the mean proportion of days during which the five measured symptoms (nasal obstruction, sneezing, rhinorrhoea, nasal pruritus and ocular pruritus) were absent or mild was significantly greater in recipients of the cetirizine plus pseudoephedrine SR. black triangle In one study, cetirizine 5 mg plus pseudoephedrine SR 120 mg was significantly more effective at reducing nasal obstruction than either drug alone. black triangle Cetirizine 5mg plus pseudoephedrine SR 120 mg twice daily for 2 to 3 weeks was well tolerated in patients with seasonal or perennial allergic rhinitis. The most common adverse events were dry mouth, insomnia, headache, somnolence, asthenia and nervousness.
The second generation H1 antihistamines were considered to have an improved risk/benefit ratio because of their low penetration into the brain and their very low incidence of CNS depressant effects. Nevertheless, the cardiac rhythm disturbances described under terfenadine and astemizole intake drew the attention to the fact that the low penetration into the brain is only one limited item in the evaluation of their respective therapeutic indices. A correct evaluation of the therapeutic index should always comprise a large series of items: all desired and not desired effects and properties should be considered together with the physicobiochemical mechanisms of the drugs at cell and membrane levels.
The absence of blisters, the presence of mild systemic symptoms, and the patient's age guided the diagnosis.
A review of 33 patients in whom repeat chemonucleolysis was performed in the period between 1979 and 1983 indicates satisfactory results in 24 patients for a 73% success rate. Immediate sensitivity reactions (anaphylaxis) were seen in three patients and all were successfully managed by appropriate medical therapy. The last 12 patients were pretreated with histamine1 antagonists (hydroxyzine) and histamine2 antagonists (cimetidine). In this group there was not a single anaphylactic reaction. According to these results, repeat chemonucleolysis is a viable alternative to laminectomy and discectomy for patients suffering from recurrent lumbar disc herniations that are refractory to conservative therapy. The increased risk of sensitivity to the enzyme can be minimized by pretreatment with histamine blockers.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the usefulness of oral hydroxyzine for the treatment of symptomatic interstitial cystitis. METHODS: This study was an open-label, nonconsecutive case series of patients treated by their local physicians, in consultation with the authors. A case-report form using visual analog scales was used to assess outcomes. RESULTS: Out of 140 patients, 90 (65%) returned the case-report forms. A 40% reduction in symptom scores was reported. This rose to 55% in patients with a history of allergies. CONCLUSIONS: Hydroxyzine is a useful drug for the symptomatic treatment of IC, especially in patients with documented allergies and/or evidence of bladder mast cell activation.
INTRODUCTION: Up to one in five people may have generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) at some point, and most have other health problems. Less than half of people have full remission after 5 years. GAD may have a genetic component, and has also been linked to previous psychological or other trauma. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of treatments for GAD? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to May 2011 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 74 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: abecarnil, antidepressants (duloxetine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, imipramine, opipramol, paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine), antipsychotic drugs (trifluoperazine), applied relaxation, benzodiazepines, buspirone, cognitive behavioural therapy, hydroxyzine, and pregabalin.
Aquagenic urticaria (AU) is a rare disorder, and to be diagnosed other types of physical urticarias must be excluded. In this case report, clinical aspects, investigational methodology, and finally some considerations for the treatment of AU are reviewed, with special attention given to the good response to hydroxyzine in this case, the first one described in Brazil.
Opioid analgesics are among the oldest known medications. In spite of long usage, clinical success in controlling pain in many settings appears to be limited by a lack of understanding of the clinical pharmacology of these agents. Efforts to achieve better outcomes often focus on the use of adjunctive agents, such as hydroxyzine, in an attempt to control postoperative pain with a minimum of toxicity. Although such combined therapies are exceedingly common, clinical data supporting a hypothesis of an "opioid-sparing" effect of hydroxyzine are marked by serious methodologic flaws, including lack of placebo control, lack of statistical analyses, and use of subjective assessments, all of which compromise the validity of such conclusions. In doses that may contribute to pain relief, hydroxyzine demonstrates a significant potential for causing respiratory depression which is additive to that of opioids, but not reversible with naloxone. In total, the data do not confirm the purported clinical benefits of hydroxyzine-opioid combinations in comparison with appropriate regimens of opioids alone.
