Ibuprofen was introduced in England in 1967 and in the United States in 1974 as an anti-inflammatory drug in humans. It has weak but definite anti-inflammatory properties similar to those of aspirin, milligram for milligram, but with considerably less adverse effect on the stomach. Ibuprofen is chemically related to fenoprofen and naproxen, but lack of effect for any one in this chemical class of propionic-acid derivatives does not necessarily mean lack of effect for any other in an individual patient. The drug has analgesic properties, probably related to its anti-inflammatory effect. It inhibits prostaglandin synthesis and has no effect on the adrenopituitary axis, making it a nonsteroidal agent. Ibuprofen has been shown to be effective in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis and is probably effective in ankylosing spondylitis, gout, and Bartter's syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Cyclooxygenase inhibitors are commonly used in infants with patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), but the benefit of these drugs is uncertain. METHODS: In this multicenter, noninferiority trial, we randomly assigned infants with echocardiographically confirmed PDA (diameter, >1.5 mm, with left-to-right shunting) who were extremely preterm (<28 weeks' gestational age) to receive either expectant management or early ibuprofen treatment. The composite primary outcome included necrotizing enterocolitis (Bell's stage IIa or higher), moderate to severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia, or death at 36 weeks' postmenstrual age. The noninferiority of expectant management as compared with early ibuprofen treatment was defined as an absolute risk difference with an upper boundary of the one-sided 95% confidence interval of less than 10 percentage points. RESULTS: A total of 273 infants underwent randomization. The median gestational age was 26 weeks, and the median birth weight was 845 g. A primary-outcome event occurred in 63 of 136 infants (46.3%) in the expectant-management group and in 87 of 137 (63.5%) in the early-ibuprofen group (absolute risk difference, -17.2 percentage points; upper boundary of the one-sided 95% confidence interval [CI], -7.4; P<0.001 for noninferiority). Necrotizing enterocolitis occurred in 24 of 136 infants (17.6%) in the expectant-management group and in 21 of 137 (15.3%) in the early-ibuprofen group (absolute risk difference, 2.3 percentage points; two-sided 95% CI, -6.5 to 11.1); bronchopulmonary dysplasia occurred in 39 of 117 infants (33.3%) and in 57 of 112 (50.9%), respectively (absolute risk difference, -17.6 percentage points; two-sided 95% CI, -30.2 to -5.0). Death occurred in 19 of 136 infants (14.0%) and in 25 of 137 (18.2%), respectively (absolute risk difference, -4.3 percentage points; two-sided 95% CI, -13.0 to 4.4). Rates of other adverse outcomes were similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Expectant management for PDA in extremely premature infants was noninferior to early ibuprofen treatment with respect to necrotizing enterocolitis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, or death at 36 weeks' postmenstrual age. (Funded by the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development and the Belgian Health Care Knowledge Center; BeNeDuctus ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02884219; EudraCT number, 2017-001376-28.).
OBJECTIVES: This review attempts to bring together information from a large number of recent studies on the clinical uses, safety and pharmacological properties of ibuprofen. Ibuprofen is widely used in many countries for the relief of symptoms of pain, inflammation and fever. The evidence for modes of action of ibuprofen are considered in relation to its actions in controlling inflammation, pain and fever, as well as the adverse effects of the drug. SUMMARY OF OUTCOMES: At low doses (800-1,200 mg day(-1)) which in many countries are approved for non-prescription (over-the-counter) sale ibuprofen has a good safety profile comparable with paracetamol. Its analgesic activity is linked to its anti-inflammatory effects and is related to reduction in the ex vivo production in blood of cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-1 and COX-2 derived prostanoids. Higher prescription doses (circa 1,800-2,400 mg day(-1)) are employed long-term for the treatment of rheumatic and other more severe musculo-skeletal conditions. Recent evidence from large-scale clinical trials with the newer coxibs, where ibuprofen was as a comparator, have confirmed earlier studies which have shown that ibuprofen has comparable therapeutic benefits with coxibs and other NSAIDs. For long-term usage (6+ months) there are greater numbers of drop-outs due to reduced effectiveness of therapy, a feature which is common with NSAIDs. Spontaneous reports of adverse events and adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in clinical trails from long-term coxib comparator studies, as well as in epidemiological studies, shows that ibuprofen has relatively low risks for gastro-intestinal (GI), hepato-renal and other, rarer, ADRs compared with other NSAIDs and coxibs. A slightly higher risk of cardiovascular (CV) events has been reported in some, but not all studies, but the risks are in general lower than with some coxibs and diclofenac. The possibility that ibuprofen may interfere with the anti-platelet effects of aspirin, though arguably of low grade or significance, has given rise to caution on its use in patients that are at risk for CV conditions that take aspirin for preventing these conditions. Paediatric use of ibuprofen is reviewed and the main results are that the drug is relatively safe and effective as a treatment of acute pain and fever. It is probably more effective than paracetamol as an antipyretic. CONCLUSIONS: This assessment of the safety and benefits of ibuprofen can be summarized thus: (1) Ibuprofen at OTC doses has low possibilities of serious GI events, and little prospect of developing renal and associated CV events. Ibuprofen OTC does not represent a risk for developing liver injury especially the irreversible liver damage observed with paracetamol and the occasional liver reactions from aspirin. (2) The pharmacokinetic properties of ibuprofen, especially the short plasma half-life of elimination, lack of development of pathologically related metabolites (e.g. covalent modification of liver proteins by the quinine-imine metabolite of paracetamol or irreversible acetylation of biomolecules by aspirin) are support for the view that these pharmacokinetic and notably metabolic effects of ibuprofen favour its low toxic potential. (3) The multiple actions of ibuprofen in controlling inflammation combine with moderate inhibition of COX-1 and COX-2 and low residence time of the drug in the body may account for the low GI, CV and renal risks from ibuprofen, especially at OTC doses.
The anti-inflammatory drug ibuprofen is considered to be an emerging contaminant because of its presence in different environments (from water bodies to soils) at concentrations with adverse effects on aquatic organisms due to cytotoxic and genotoxic damage, high oxidative cell stress, and detrimental effects on growth, reproduction, and behavior. Because of its high human consumption rate and low environmental degradation rate, ibuprofen represents an emerging environmental problem. Ibuprofen enters the environment from different sources and accumulates in natural environmental matrices. The problem of drugs, particularly ibuprofen, as contaminants is complicated because few strategies consider them or apply successful technologies to remove them in a controlled and efficient manner. In several countries, ibuprofen's entry into the environment is an unattended contamination problem. It is a concern for our environmental health system that requires more attention. Due to its physicochemical characteristics, ibuprofen degradation is difficult in the environment or by microorganisms. There are experimental studies that are currently focused on the problem of drugs as potential environmental contaminants. However, these studies are insufficient to address this ecological issue worldwide. This review focuses on deepening and updating the information concerning ibuprofen as a potential emerging environmental contaminant and the potential for using bacteria for its biodegradation as an alternative technology.
INTRODUCTION: fever is the primary symptom of most childhood illnesses and a cause of concern to their caregivers. The antipyretics commonly used to treat fever are ibuprofen and paracetamol. Most studies on the effectiveness of ibuprofen and paracetamol in treating fever in under-fives were conducted in Europe and North America with very few in African children. This study was aimed at assessing the effectiveness and safety of a single dose therapy of ibuprofen versus paracetamol for treating childhood fever in Nigeria. METHODS: a randomized, controlled clinical trial was conducted in the University of Calabar Teaching Hospital, in Nigeria. A total of 140 eligible children aged 6-59 months with tympanic temperature of 38 degrees C-40 degrees C were enrolled, and 70 of them were assigned to one arm that received a single dose of ibuprofen (10mg/kg) and 70 had paracetamol (15mg/kg). After drug administration, the children were admitted and observed in the hospital for six hours during which period a half-hourly temperature measurement and monitoring for adverse events were done. RESULTS: the overall result showed that ibuprofen had a better fever reducing effect compared to paracetamol. The proportion of afebrile children in the ibuprofen versus paracetamol group at 1.5-2.5 hours of administration of the drugs was statistically significant (p = 0.04). The adverse events of both drugs were mild and quite comparable with vomiting being the commonest. CONCLUSION: ibuprofen is more effective in the treating fever in under-fives compared to paracetamol. The adverse events of both drugs were mild and comparable.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the analgesic and antipyretic efficacy and safety of ibuprofen compared to acetaminophen in children and adults. DATA SOURCES: Literature searches were performed using PubMed/MEDLINE (through August 2009) and EMBASE (through January 2008) and were restricted to the English language. In PubMed/MEDLINE, search terms used were ibuprofen, acetaminophen, paracetamol, clinical trials, and randomized controlled trials. EMBASE search terms included ibuprofen and acetaminophen, restricted to human and clinical trials. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All English-language articles identified from the data sources were reviewed. Multiple review articles were studied for any pertinent references and this yielded additional articles. Only articles that directly compared ibuprofen and acetaminophen were eligible for this review. DATA SYNTHESIS: Eighty-five studies that directly compared ibuprofen to acetaminophen were identified; 54 contained analgesic efficacy data, 35 contained antipyretic/temperature reduction data, and 66 contained safety data (some articles contained more than 1 type of data). Qualitative review of the literature revealed that, for the most part, ibuprofen was more efficacious than acetaminophen for the treatment of pain and fever in both pediatric and adult populations, and that these 2 drugs were equally safe. Meta-analyses on the subset of randomized clinical trial articles that reported sufficient quantitative information to calculate either an odds ratio (adverse event [AE]) or standardized mean difference (pain and fever) confirmed the qualitative results for adult (standardized mean difference [SMD] 0.69; 95% CI 0.57 to 0.81) and pediatric (SMD 0.28; 95% CI 0.10 to 0.46) pain at 2 hours postdose and pediatric fever (SMD 0.26; 95% CI 0.10 to 0.41) at 4 hours postdose. Conclusions regarding adult fever/temperature reduction could not be made due to a lack of evaluable data. The combined odds ratio for the proportion of adult subjects experiencing at least 1 AE slightly favored ibuprofen; however, the difference was not statistically significant (1.12; 95% CI 1.00 to 1.25). No significant difference between drugs in AE incidence was found for pediatric patients (0.82; 95% CI 0.60 to 1.12). CONCLUSIONS: Ibuprofen is as or more efficacious than acetaminophen for the treatment of pain and fever in adult and pediatric populations and is equally safe.
Nonprescription ibuprofen is useful for managing minor aches and pains, reducing fever, and relieving symptoms of dysmenorrhea. For these indications, ibuprofen's effectiveness has been judged to be equal or superior to other available nonprescription analgesics. Ibuprofen is not recommended for self-treatment in children less than 12 years old.
Ibuprofen is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug frequently administered to children of various ages for relief of fever and pain and is approved as an over-the-counter medication in many countries worldwide. Although there are extensive data on its efficacy and safety in children and adults, there are divergent dosing recommendations for analgesia and treatment of fever in infants, especially in the age group between 3 and 6 months of age. In this article, we have assessed the safety and efficacy of ibuprofen use in infants in an attempt to find the optimal method of pain and fever management in this specific age group. Based on the current evidence, short-term use of ibuprofen is considered safe in infants older than 3 months of age having a body weight above 5-6 kg when special attention is given to the hydration of the patient. Ibuprofen should be prescribed based on body weight using a dose of 5-10 mg/kg. This dose can be administered 3-4 times a day resulting in a maximum total daily dose of 30-40 mg/kg. The rectal route has been shown to be less reliable because of erratic absorption, especially in young infants. Since most efficacy and safety data have been derived from trials in infants with fever, future studies should focus on the efficacy of ibuprofen in young infants with pain.
CONTEXT: There is uncertainty whether acetaminophen and ibuprofen are similar in their effects and safety when used as single or dual (alternating or combined) therapies. OBJECTIVE: To assess the comparative efficacy of acetaminophen, ibuprofen alone, alternating, or combined through a systematic review and network meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES: Medline, Embase, and CENTRAL from inception to September 20, 2023. STUDY SELECTION: Randomized trials comparing acetaminophen, ibuprofen, both alternating, and both combined, for treating children with fever. DATA EXTRACTION: Two reviewers independently screened abstracts and full texts, extracted the data, and assessed the risk of bias. We performed pairwise and network meta-analysis using the random-effects model. RESULTS: We included 31 trials (5009 children). We found that combined (odds ratio [OR], 0.19; confidence interval [CI], 0.09-0.42) and alternating therapies (OR, 0.20; CI, 0.06-0.63) may be superior to acetaminophen, whereas ibuprofen at a high dose may be comparable (OR, 0.98; CI, 0.63-1.59) in terms of proportion of afebrile children at the fourth hour. These results were similar at the sixth hour. There were no differences between ibuprofen (low or high dose), or alternating, or combined with acetaminophen in terms of adverse events. LIMITATIONS: We only evaluated the efficacy and safety during the first 6 hours. CONCLUSIONS: Dual may be superior to single therapies for treating fever in children. Acetaminophen may be inferior to combined or alternating therapies to get children afebrile at 4 and 6 hours. Compared with ibuprofen, acetaminophen was also inferior to ibuprofen alone at 4 hours, but similar at 6 hours. PROSPERO registration: CRD42016035236.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Previously published studies have suggested the lack of a pharmacokinetic interaction between ibuprofen and paracetamol when they are delivered as a fixed-dose oral combination. The aim of this study was to determine the pharmacokinetic profile and safety of a fixed-dose intravenous (IV) combination, containing 3 mg/mL ibuprofen and 10 mg/mL paracetamol, in comparison with its individual components. The study also assessed the relative bioavailability of the same doses of the active ingredients when they were administered as an oral formulation. METHODS: A single-dose, open-label, randomized, five-period cross-over sequence pharmacokinetic study was undertaken in 30 healthy volunteers. Serial plasma samples were assayed for both paracetamol and ibuprofen concentrations, using validated liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry methods. Pharmacokinetic parameters were computed using standard non-compartmental analyses. Adverse events were also assessed. The ratios of the maximum measured plasma concentration (C max), the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) from time zero to the time of the last measurable plasma concentration (AUCt ) and AUC from time zero to infinity (AUCinfinity) were analysed for bioequivalence as determined by 90% confidence intervals. RESULTS: The pharmacokinetic parameters of ibuprofen and paracetamol were very similar for the combination and monotherapy IV preparations; the ratios of the C max, AUC t and AUCinfinity values fell within the 80-125% acceptable bioequivalence range. Precise dose proportionality for both compounds was also determined for the half dose of the IV formulation in comparison with the full dose. The relative bioavailability of paracetamol (93.78%) and ibuprofen (96.45%) confirmed the pharmacokinetic equivalence of the oral and IV formulations of the fixed-dose combination. CONCLUSION: Concomitant administration of 3 mg/mL ibuprofen and 10 mg/mL paracetamol in a fixed-dose IV combination does not alter the pharmacokinetic profiles of either drug. The IV and oral dose forms of such a combination are pharmacokinetically equivalent.
PURPOSE: Effect size estimates of analgesic drugs can be misleading. Ibuprofen (400 mg, 600 mg, 800 mg), paracetamol (1000 mg, 500 mg), paracetamol 1000 mg/codeine 60 mg, and placebo were investigated to establish the multidimensional pharmacodynamic profiles of each drug on acute pain with calculated effect size estimates. METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, single-dose, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, single-centre, outpatient, and single-dose study used 350 patients (mean age 25 year, range 18 to 30 years) of homogenous ethnicity after third molar surgery. Primary outcome was sum pain intensity over 6 h. Secondary outcomes were time to analgesic onset, duration of analgesia, time to rescue drug intake, number of patients taking rescue drug, sum pain intensity difference, maximum pain intensity difference, time to maximum pain intensity difference, number needed to treat values, adverse effects, overall drug assessment as patient-reported outcome measure (PROM), and the effect size estimates NNT and NNTp. RESULTS: Ibuprofen doses above 400 mg do not significantly increase analgesic effect. Paracetamol has a very flat analgesic dose-response profile. Paracetamol 1000/codeine 60 mg gives similar analgesia as ibuprofen from 400 mg, but has a shorter time to analgesic onset. Active drugs show no significant difference in maximal analgesic effect. Other secondary outcomes support these findings. The frequencies of adverse effects were low, mild to moderate in all active groups. NNT and NTTp values did not coincide well with PROMs. CONCLUSION: Ibuprofen doses above 400 mg for acute pain offer limited analgesic gain. Paracetamol 1000 mg/codeine 60 mg is comparable to ibuprofen doses from 400 mg. Calculated effect size estimates and PROM in our study seem not to relate well as clinical analgesic efficacy estimators. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00699114.
Poor profiles of potential drug candidates, including pharmacokinetic properties, have been acknowledged as a significant hindrance to the development of modern therapeutics. Contemporary drug discovery and development would be incomplete without the aid of molecular modeling (in-silico) techniques, allowing the prediction of pharmacokinetic properties such as clearance, unbound fraction, volume of distribution and bioavailability. As with all models, in-silico approaches are subject to their interpretability, a trait that must be balanced with accuracy when considering the development of new methods. The best models will always require reliable data to inform them, presenting significant challenges, particularly when appropriate in-vitro or in-vivo data may be difficult or time-consuming to obtain. This article seeks to review some of the key in-silico techniques used to predict key pharmacokinetic properties and give commentary on the current and future directions of the field.
A high percentage of preterm infants fails to respond to a single course of indomethacin or ibuprofen. Thus, it has been suggested that the actual dose regimens of these drugs could be inadequate because of large interindividual pharmacokinetics variations in premature infants. We tested the hypothesis that a high-dose regimen of ibuprofen was more effective than the current regimen in closing PDA. We demonstrated that a single course of ibuprofen at 20-10-10 mg/kg/day is more effective than a 10-5-5 mg/kg/day course in closing PDA without significant adverse effects. Many other questions regarding the pharmacological treatment of PDA are still debated.
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS) is a rare but severe dermatological condition that typically occurs after the ingestion of medications such as nonsteroidal drugs, antibiotics, and anticonvulsants. Extracutaneous manifestations of the syndrome can occur and may involve the conjunctiva, trachea, buccal mucosa, gastrointestinal tract, and genitourinary tract. Cholestatic liver disease, which may precede the skin manifestations of SJS, has been reported to occur in SJS, but the medical literature has only 10 case reports describing this phenomenon (1-9). We report the case of a 19-year-old female with SJS and cholestatic liver disease. A discussion of the underlying pathophysiology of SJS and its treatment follows.
Recent published evidences on ibuprofen and meloxicam confirm the need of faster oral drug absorption to overcome the pathophysiological conditions associated with dental pain (due to excessive vagal nerve suppression) in order to provide relief in acute pain management. While the communication provides relevant case studies to support the hypothesis in both dental pain and migraine attacks, it also provides biopharmaceutical and pharmacokinetic challenges of developing such a strategy for faster oral drug absorption. It is envisaged that the unmet need in this area, to overcome the pathophsiological barriers, should provide impetus for further research exploration in formulation strategies and biopharmaceutical/pharmacokinetic integration.
NSAIDs are used throughout the World Health Organization three-step analgesic ladder, and are indicated for pain in all stages of malignancy. Side-effects are common with NSAIDs. Much has been written about NSAIDs and COX, since the discovery of COX-1 and COX-2 isoforms. How do you choose the appropriate NSAID? The choice of NSAID continues to be dependent upon associated gastroduodenal toxicity and the related risk factors of individual patients. Choosing the appropriate NSAID should minimize the likelihood of needing additional medications to manage adverse effects and symptoms caused by the NSAID therapy itself.
The 2-arylpropionic acid derivatives, or "profens," are an important class of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that have been in clinical use for almost 30 years. Widely used members of this drug class include naproxen, ibuprofen, ketoprofen, flurbiprofen, and tiaprofenic acid. With the exception of S-naproxen, the profens have until recently been used clinically as racemic agents, and a "single enantiomer versus racemate" debate has emerged. Several important issues should be considered in the debate: the antinociceptive activity of the R-enantiomer of at least one profen (flurbiprofen), the possible role of cyclooxygenase (COX)-independent properties of the R-enantiomers in the gastrointestinal toxicity of the racemates, the increase in the formation of potentially immunogenic drug-protein adducts when racemates are administered, and the likelihood that the use of racemates increases the propensity of the profens to alter the pharmacokinetics of other drugs. This review will demonstrate how the use of individual enantiomers can improve understanding of the mechanisms by which the profens elicit their biologic effects.
Though all non-narcotic analgesics have equivalent efficacy against tension-type headache, ibuprofen's generally favorable side-effect profile makes it a reasonable first choice.
Carbon quantum dots (CDs) have attracted increased attention in recent decades because of their various applications in biosensing, bioimaging and drug delivery. In the present study, we have synthesized bifunctional ibuprofen-based carbon quantum dots (ICDs) using a simple one-step microwave-assisted method, for simultaneous bioimaging and anti-inflammatory effects. The ICDs exhibited high stability, low toxicity, negligible cytotoxicity and good biocompatibility in water. In particular, the produced ICDs demonstrated a decent imaging ability and excellent anti-inflammatory effects in vivo, making them potentially useful in bioimaging and future clinical treatment. Our results demonstrated that ICDs show promise in applications such as multifunctional biomaterials, depending on the selection of carbon sources, which would provide important guidance for the future design of multifunctional CDs in the field of biomedicine.
To date, aspirin desensitization is employed with patients with nonsteroidal anti-in fl ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) exacerbated respiratory diseases (NERD) or with aspirin or NSAIDs hypersensitive patients needing a stent procedure for coronary artery disease. On the other hand, few data exist regarding aspirin desensitization in other cardiological features and particularly we haven't data on different NSAIDs desensitization. Only for NERD patients we have data on ketorolac use. We report an efficacious desensitization procedure for ibuprofen in urticaria/angioedema patient with pericarditis and myocarditis associated.
