Two prostacyclins (prostaglandin E(1) and prostaglandin I(2)) are potent vasodilators. Aerosolized prostacyclins reduce pulmonary artery pressure, improve right heart function, and increase arterial oxygenation by improving ventilation/perfusion matching. This report describes aerosolized prostacyclins and compares them to inhaled nitric oxide. I review the types of inhalable prostacyclins and their indications, evidence of efficacy, delivery, and adverse effects.
Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger's disease) is an inflammatory obliterative, nonatherosclerotic, vascular disease that affects the small- and medium-sized arteries, veins, and nerves. It is causally related to tobacco use, although the exact mechanism is unknown. Its clinical presentation is manifested by distal arterial ischemia and superficial thrombophlebitis. Thromboangiitis obliterans usually becomes quiescent if the patient is able to stop smoking cigarettes. However, if smoking continues, amputation commonly results.
Rheologically active pharmacotherapy is of high importance in many dermato-logical diseases. The intravenous administration of iloprost belongs to the most effective systemic therapeutic agents that serve this pharmacodynamic approach and additionally substantial knowledge on the safety and efficacy exists. We review the dermatologically relevant data in order to offer an easy, thematically focused overview to practicing dermatologists.
A short cut review was carried out to establish whether an infusion of iloprost can be used to treat frostbite to reduce the risk of needing an amputation. Three studies were directly relevant to the question. The author, date and country of publication, patient group studied, study type, relevant outcomes, results and study weaknesses of these papers are tabulated. The clinical bottom line is that iloprost may reduce the risk of amputation after frostbite.
The prostacyclins-prostanoids were one of the first medications used to treat pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Three prostanoids have been developed to treat PAH: epoprostenol, treprostinil, and iloprost. In the acute setting, experience is growing, using the inhaled forms of these three medications. Inhalation may improve ventilation/perfusion matching, whereas in the intravenous form these medications may cause nonselective pulmonary vasodilation and may worsen ventilation/perfusion matching. Currently, there are no universal recommendations for dosing delivery of inhaled prostanoids to intubated patients in the intensive care unit setting.
Iloprost (Ventavis, Bayer Schering Pharma, Germany) is a synthetic prostacyclin that is used in its inhalative form for the therapy of pulmonary arterial hypertension. Long-term therapy can increase exercise capacity and quality of life. The use of modern nebulizers especially designed for the administration of iloprost guarantees the pulmonary deposition of the required doses and systematically minimizes side effects. Regarding existing data, inhalative iloprost acts in effective and safe combination with other classes of medication; indeed, such combination therapy is frequently necessary in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Prostacyclin is a substance produced by endothelial cells that induces vasodilation and inhibition of platelet aggregation and of vascular cell migration and proliferation. A dysregulation of the prostacyclin metabolic pathways has been shown in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. The clinical use of prostacyclin has been made possible by the synthesis of stable analogues that possesses different pharmacokinetic properties but share similar pharmacodynamic effects. The greatest experience has been collected with intravenous epoprostenol while other compounds like subcutaneous UT-15, inhaled iloprost and oral beraprost are currently in different stages of clinical development. Although favorable results have been reported for each compound, different benefit-to-side effects profiles characterize the various modalities of the administration.
Inhaled iloprost is a drug from the group of prostacyclins used in the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension. Its efficacy and safety have allowed its use as monotherapy and combination therapy. This review describes the product characteristics, amenable to treatment groups, and updated clinical evidence of drug use.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a serious complication of systemic sclerosis (SSc) and a leading cause of death in patients with it. Recent publications suggest that a prevalence of 10-15% is likely. The prognosis remains poor compared to that of idiopathic PAH. WHO recommends annual echocardiography for PAH screening of patients with SSc. Right heart catheterization is necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Nevertheless, more than half of all SSc patients have symptoms classified as WHO functional class III or IV at diagnosis. Prostacyclin therapy, delivered via continuous intravenous infusion (epoprostenol), has been demonstrated to be effective in patients with severe PAH (both idiopathic and scleroderma-related). Prostacyclin analogs (such as treprostinil and iloprost) are other options. Bosentan is the first endothelin receptor antagonist approved in the EU for the treatment of PAH, both idiopathic and related to connective tissue diseases such as scleroderma, in patients in WHO functional class III. Sildenafil by its selective inhibition of phosphodiesterase type 5 is also effective against both types of PAH. It too is now approved in the EU for this purpose in patients in WHO functional class III, but we do not yet have any information about its long-term effects in scleroderma.
Since continuous IV epoprostenol was approved in the U.S., parenteral prostanoid therapy has remained the gold standard for the treatment of patients with advanced pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Prostanoid agents can be administered as continuous intravenous infusions, as continuous subcutaneous infusions and by intermittent nebulization therapy. This article presents data from clinical trials of available prostanoid agents, and their varied routes of administration. The varied routes of administration allow for the incremental use of this class of agents in advanced PAH, and if PAH progresses. Prostanoids will remain a major component of PAH therapy for the foreseeable future.
Digital ulcers (DU's) are one of the main symptoms of systemic scleroderma and occur in approximately 60% of all scleroderma patients. Due to possible complications such as infections, gangrene or amputation, they require regular medical attention and a good wound treatment by doctors and nursing staff. A definition of DU's has not yet been established. In 2009 the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) published guidelines for the treatment of DU's. An improvement of the healing of active ulcers has been described with Iloprost. Bosentan significantly reduced the frequency of occurrence of new DU's. In some small studies PDE-5 inhibitors appear helpful. Further studies with other therapeutic approaches will follow in the next few years.
Cholesterol atheroembolism (CAE) is a systemic disorder whose incidence has increased in recent decades and that presents high morbidity and mortality. Although several therapeutic alternatives have been reported, there is no consensus about the best treatment for this disease. In this paper we report the case of a patient with CAE with skin, bowel and kidney involvement who presented a good response to combined therapy with steroids and prostaglandin analogues. Although there are no conclusive studies, we recommend this therapeutic alternative in the management of CAE with organic failure.
BACKGROUND: In many cases, Ilomedin((R)) infusions are applied as part of a perioperative measure in patients with peripheral arterial occlusive disease because it makes a relevant vasodilatatory effect in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and with/without peripheral neuropathy. AIMS: A prospective case-control study was performed to investigate the effect of prostanoids on peripheral resistance in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and patients without type 2 diabetes mellitus, as well as the role of peripheral neuropathy in patients undergoing arterial reconstruction. METHODS: Sixty patients undergoing arterial reconstruction were enrolled. Sufficient data were collected on 38 patients. Prior to surgery, peripheral nerve conduction velocity was measured. Blood flow volume at the common femoral artery was assessed intraoperatively using a Doppler flowmeter at four time points: at baseline before arterial reconstruction (T0), after reconstruction (T1), after 5 (T2) and 10 min (T3) after intra-arterial application of 3000 ng of Ilomedin. Peripheral resistance units were calculated as a function of mean arterial pressure and flow volume using the following formula: peripheral resistance unit = mean arterial pressure (mm Hg) / flow volume (mL/min). RESULTS: Ilomedin produced an immediate and significant drop of peripheral resistance in patients without type 2 diabetes mellitus as well as in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Patients with peripheral neuropathy showed a less pronounced effect to Ilomedin compared to individuals with normal nerve conduction velocity.
Thrombotic microangiopathy, including the two related syndromes thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic-uremic syndrome, is a rare and severe multisystem disorder, due to widespread deposition of intravascular microthrombi consisting mainly of platelets, with subsequent consumption thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, renal abnormalities, and neurologic disturbances. The epidemic, verotoxin-induced hemolytic-uremic syndrome, typically associated with prodromal diarrhea, mainly affects young children in small outbreaks. By contrast, idiopathic thrombotic microangiopathy generally affects adults in a sporadic form; it has a more devastating course and a less favourable outcome. Over 90% of the reported cases in the adult, when untreated, have progressed to death within three months of diagnosis. Since the introduction of plasma exchange, a dramatic change in the prognosis of the disease has taken place, although the mortality rate still remains considerable. Indeed, improved survival is the most striking feature of adult thrombotic microangiopathy compared to some decades ago. In the present article we will focus on the evolving concepts able to exert a considerable impact in the management of the adult idiopathic form of thrombotic microangiopathy.
Pulmonary hypertension is a major risk factor in cardiac surgery and has significant impact on morbidity and mortality in the perioperative period. Nitric oxide (NO) is considered to be the gold standard for treatment of pulmonary hypertension in the perioperative setting. The aerosolized administration of the prostacyclin analogue iloprost is a new alternative with similar pulmonary-selective vasodilation and virtually no systemic side-effects. Relevant complications including increased postoperative bleeding have not been observed.
In a well-established two phase model of paracetamol toxicity in hamster hepatocytes cell death was accompanied, but not preceded, by a rise in cytosolic free calcium [Ca2+]i. Cell death appears to involve reversible oxidative damage, possibly to the cytoskeleton or mitochondria. In this model low concentrations (10(-8) to 10(-14) M) of iloprost, a stable analogue of prostacyclin, offered protection against the toxic effects of paracetamol. In preliminary studies with a rat liver epithelial cell line transduced with murine P4501A2 the toxicity of paracetamol was attenuated by iloprost. Inhibition of protein synthesis with cycloheximide had no effect on paracetamol toxicity but abolished the cytoprotective effect of iloprost.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare, but severe and life-threatening disease characterized by vasoconstriction and remodeling of the pulmonary arterioles, leading to progressive increase in pulmonary vascular resistance and ultimately to right-heart failure. In the last two decades, significant progress in treatment of PAH has been made, with currently 12 drugs approved for targeted therapy. Among these, the stable prostacyclin analogues iloprost and treprostinil have been repurposed for inhalation. The paper highlights the development of the two drugs emphasizing the rationale and advantages of the inhalative approach. Despite substantial advances in the specific, mainly vasodilatory PAH therapy, disease progression is mostly inevitable and mortality remains unacceptably high. Thus, introduction of new drugs targeting the cancer-like remodeling of the diseased pulmonary arteries is urgently needed. Inhalation offers pulmonary selectivity and will hopefully pioneer the repurposing of novel highly potent drugs for effective aerosol therapy of PAH.
Iatrogenic acute limb ischaemia (ALI) in neonates is a rare but severe event with potentially deleterious outcomes. In the neonatal intensive care unit, this risk is increased due to the high rate of catheterisation procedures. ALI management includes pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions, but no commonly accepted clinical guidelines are available. In the present case, a peripheral catheter was erroneously placed in the left brachial artery of a term infant, causing blockage and ischaemia in the limb. The catheter was immediately removed, the affected limb was elevated and warm compresses were applied to the contralateral limb. The patient was treated with fresh frozen plasma, heparin, iloprost and topical nitroglycerin. Three nerve block procedures were also performed. At 6-8 days of age, significant improvement was observed. The patient was discharged at 17 days of age with near-complete resolution, whereas complete resolution was observed at postdischarge follow-up.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a disease characterized by an elevation in pulmonary artery pressure that can lead to right ventricular failure and death. Conventional treatment is based on non-specific drugs (warfarin, oxygen, diuretics). Pure vasodilators like calcium channel antagonists have little or no effect on the vast majority of patients. Although there is no cure for PAH, newer medical therapies have been shown to improve a variety of clinically relevant end-points including survival, functional class, exercise tolerance, haemodynamics, echocardiographic parameters and quality of life measures. Intravenous prostacyclin, was the first introduced drug for treatment of PAH and remains the first-line treatment for the most severe patients. Since then the list of approved drugs for PAH has expanded to include prostacyclin analogues with differing routes of administration, a dual endothelin receptor antagonist, and a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor. Novel drugs have also shown promise in experimental trials and are likely to be added to the list of options. This article reviews the current treatments strategies for PAH.
The last few years have brought a resurgence in interest in managing systemic sclerosis. In the past year, there have been reports of small series of patients and several well-designed, double-blind, controlled trials. Treatment has been directed at a variety of potential pathogenic mechanisms. Stanazol, iloprost, plasmapheresis, thyroxine, and calcitonin were felt to have positive effects on vascular aspects of disease, ie, Raynaud's phenomenon. Immune-mediated treatment using antithymocyte and antilymphocyte globulin, cyclosporine, and methotrexate were encouraging in a small number of patients, but controlled studies of plasma exchange, extracorporeal phototherapy, and 5-fluorouracil were not very exciting. Changing fibroblast function was used with some success in some patients with D-penicillamine and interferon gamma, but not ketotifen. A very dramatic improvement in the survival of renal crisis occurred with the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. Hopefully, this improvement in survival will also occur in the other visceral abnormalities. All this activity in the therapy of systemic sclerosis will certainly lead to improvement in the overall management of disease.
