BACKGROUND: Patients with newly diagnosed chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) need long-term therapy with high efficacy and safety. Asciminib, a BCR::ABL1 inhibitor specifically targeting the ABL myristoyl pocket, may offer better efficacy and safety and fewer side effects than currently available frontline ATP-competitive tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). METHODS: In a phase 3 trial, patients with newly diagnosed CML were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive either asciminib (80 mg once daily) or an investigator-selected TKI, with randomization stratified by European Treatment and Outcome Study long-term survival score category (low, intermediate, or high risk) and by TKI selected by investigators before randomization (including imatinib and second-generation TKIs). The primary end points were major molecular response (defined as BCR::ABL1 transcript levels </=0.1% on the International Scale [IS]) at week 48, for comparisons between asciminib and investigator-selected TKIs and between asciminib and investigator-selected TKIs in the prerandomization-selected imatinib stratum. RESULTS: A total of 201 patients were assigned to receive asciminib and 204 to receive investigator-selected TKIs. The median follow-up was 16.3 months in the asciminib group and 15.7 months in the investigator-selected TKI group. A major molecular response at week 48 occurred in 67.7% of patients in the asciminib group, as compared with 49.0% in the investigator-selected TKI group (difference, 18.9 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 9.6 to 28.2; adjusted two-sided P<0.001]), and in 69.3% of patients in the asciminib group as compared with 40.2% in the imatinib group within the imatinib stratum (difference, 29.6 percentage points; 95% CI, 16.9 to 42.2; adjusted two-sided P<0.001). The percentage of patients with a major molecular response at week 48 was 66.0% with asciminib and 57.8% with TKIs in the second-generation TKI stratum (difference, 8.2 percentage points; 95% CI, -5.1 to 21.5). Adverse events of grade 3 or higher and events leading to discontinuation of the trial regimen were less frequent with asciminib (38.0% and 4.5%, respectively) than with imatinib (44.4% and 11.1%) and second-generation TKIs (54.9% and 9.8%). CONCLUSIONS: In this trial comparing asciminib with investigator-selected TKIs and imatinib, asciminib showed superior efficacy and a favorable safety profile in patients with newly diagnosed chronic-phase CML. Direct comparison between asciminib and second-generation TKIs was not a primary objective. (Funded by Novartis; ASC4FIRST ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04971226).
Protein kinases regulate nearly all aspects of cell life, and alterations in their expression, or mutations in their genes, cause cancer and other diseases. Here, we review the remarkable progress made over the past 20 years in improving the potency and specificity of small-molecule inhibitors of protein and lipid kinases, resulting in the approval of more than 70 new drugs since imatinib was approved in 2001. These compounds have had a significant impact on the way in which we now treat cancers and non-cancerous conditions. We discuss how the challenge of drug resistance to kinase inhibitors is being met and the future of kinase drug discovery.
IMPORTANCE: In newly diagnosed Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), disease progression due to acquired resistance to first- or second-generation BCR::ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitors is common. Ponatinib inhibits BCR::ABL1 and all single-mutation variants, including T315I. OBJECTIVE: To compare frontline ponatinib vs imatinib in adults with newly diagnosed Ph+ ALL. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Global registrational, phase 3, open-label trial in adults aged 18 years or older with newly diagnosed Ph+ ALL. From January 2019 to May 2022, eligible patients at 77 sites were randomized 2:1 to ponatinib (30 mg/d) or imatinib (600 mg/d) with reduced-intensity chemotherapy, followed by single-agent ponatinib or imatinib after the cycle 20 phase of the trial. The last date of follow-up for this analysis was August 12, 2022. INTERVENTION: Patients received ponatinib, 30 mg/d, or imatinib, 600 mg/d, with reduced-intensity chemotherapy, followed by single-agent ponatinib or imatinib after cycle 20. The ponatinib dose was reduced to 15 mg on achievement of minimal residual disease-(MRD) negative complete remission. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point of this interim analysis was MRD-negative complete remission (</=0.01% BCR::ABL1 [MR4] centrally assessed by reverse transcriptase-quantitative polymerase chain reaction), with complete remission maintained for at least 4 weeks at the end of cycle 3. The key secondary end point was event-free survival. RESULTS: Of 245 patients randomized (median age, 54 years; 133 [54.3%] female), 232 (ponatinib, n = 154; imatinib, n = 78) who had p190 or p210 dominant isoforms verified by the central laboratory were analyzed for the primary end point. The MRD-negative complete remission rate (primary end point) was significantly higher with ponatinib (34.4% [53/154]) vs imatinib (16.7% [13/78]) (risk difference, 0.18 [95% CI, 0.06-0.29]; P = .002). At the data cutoff, event-free survival had not met the prespecified number of events. Median event-free survival was not reached in the ponatinib group and was 29 months in the imatinib group. The most common adverse events were similar between treatment groups. Arterial occlusive events were infrequent and comparable between groups (ponatinib, 2.5%; imatinib, 1.2%). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Ponatinib demonstrated a superior rate of MRD-negative complete remission at the end of induction vs imatinib when combined with reduced-intensity chemotherapy in adults with newly diagnosed Ph+ ALL. The safety profile of ponatinib was comparable with imatinib. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03589326.
Imatinib mesylate is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor used in the treatment of a variety of oncological conditions. It has been associated with a spectrum of pigmentary cutaneous side effects. Despite the well-known association of eruptive melanocytic nevi with the use of other tyrosine kinase inhibitors, this phenomenon has not been linked to the administration of imatinib. We present the first case of imatinib-induced eruptive nevi in an 18-year-old patient with acute lymphocytic leukaemia in remission.
June 2018 was the 20th anniversary of the clinical use of the first tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), imatinib, for chronic myeloid leukemia. Since then, the change in prognosis for patients with this disease is one of the major success stories of modern cancer medicine. The dilemmas that face physicians and patients are no longer only those concerned with delaying inevitable progression to the terminal blastic phase or selecting the individuals most likely to benefit from allogeneic stem-cell transplantation; rather, they are now focused also on the choice of TKI, the management of comorbidities and adverse effects, strategies to improve quality of life, and the appropriateness of a trial of therapy discontinuation. Interestingly, with 4 TKIs approved for frontline use, the choice of initial therapy continues to cause controversy, a situation made more complicated by the tantalizing prospect of treatment-free remission. In this manuscript, we will explore the factors influencing this decision and try to provide a pragmatic and clinically applicable solution.
Imatinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor and is used for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) since 2002. We present a patient who suffered from fluid retention and periorbital edema secondary to this drug.
The advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) has improved prognosis and outcome of patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) considerably. In comparison to imatinib, first line use of second generation inhibitors nilotinib, dasatinib and bosutinib lead to faster and deeper molecular remissions accompanied by a novel adverse event profile. Essential part of the management of CML patients is a consequent use of cytogenetic and molecular follow up with standardized methods to regularly assess the remission status. Long lasting remission without treatment in an important minority of patients prompted the hope for curability of CML. The use of interferon alpha in parallel with or after TKI therapy is associated with the induction of an immune response against the leukemic clone with further improved remission rate. The cooperative management of CML patients permits the early use of novel treatment options in patients at risk.
BACKGROUND: Signalling through platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) and mast/stem cell growth factor receptor kit (c-KIT) plays a critical role in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). We examined the preclinical efficacy of inhaled seralutinib, a unique small-molecule PDGFR/CSF1R/c-KIT kinase inhibitor in clinical development for PAH, in comparison to a proof-of-concept kinase inhibitor, imatinib. METHODS: Seralutinib and imatinib potency and selectivity were compared. Inhaled seralutinib pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics were studied in healthy rats. Efficacy was evaluated in two rat models of PAH: SU5416/Hypoxia (SU5416/H) and monocrotaline pneumonectomy (MCTPN). Effects on inflammatory/cytokine signalling were examined. PDGFR, CSF1R and c-KIT immunohistochemistry in rat and human PAH lung samples and microRNA (miRNA) analysis in the SU5416/H model were performed. RESULTS: Seralutinib potently inhibited PDGFRalpha/beta, CSF1R and c-KIT. Inhaled seralutinib demonstrated dose-dependent inhibition of lung PDGFR and c-KIT signalling and increased bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 2 (BMPR2). Seralutinib improved cardiopulmonary haemodynamic parameters and reduced small pulmonary artery muscularisation and right ventricle hypertrophy in both models. In the SU5416/H model, seralutinib improved cardiopulmonary haemodynamic parameters, restored lung BMPR2 protein levels and decreased N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), more than imatinib. Quantitative immunohistochemistry in human lung PAH samples demonstrated increased PDGFR, CSF1R and c-KIT. miRNA analysis revealed candidates that could mediate seralutinib effects on BMPR2. CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled seralutinib was an effective treatment of severe PAH in two animal models, with improved cardiopulmonary haemodynamic parameters, a reduction in NT-proBNP, reverse remodelling of pulmonary vascular pathology and improvement in inflammatory biomarkers. Seralutinib showed greater efficacy compared to imatinib in a preclinical study.
Dasatinib is one of the second generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) which is approved for the treatment of patients with chronic phase CML (CP-CML) both in the front line and in the second line setting. Pleural effusion (PE) is a unique toxicity associated with dasatinib use. Our aim was to study the incidence of pleural effusion in our cohort of patients who were treated with dasatinib for CP-CML and the safety upon TKI switch. A total of 390 patients were treated with dasatinib during their course of treatment for CP-CML. A total of 69 patients (17.6%) developed any grade of PE. About 33 (48%) patients developed CTCAE grade 2 PE, 34 (49%) grade 3 and only 1 patient developed grade 4 PE. Recurrence of PE was observed in 34 (49%) patients. While only 12 patients (17.3%) continued using dasatinib after development of PE, dasatinib was discontinued in the other 57 patients. Therapy was switched to bosutinib in 13 patients out of which 6 (46%) patients re-developed PE. While only 12.5% patients developed re-accumulation of pleural fluid in patients switched to imatinib, none of the patients switched to nilotinib re-developed PE. A change in TKI to bosutinib was associated with a 46% risk of recurrence of PE in patients who develop PE on dasatinib for the treatment of CP-CML. The incidence of recurrent PE was markedly lower in patient switched to imatinib or nilotinib.
Oral molecular-targeted agents are used clinically for the treatment of various types of cancer. However, even when treatment is started at the dosage indicated in the medical package insert, we have experienced many cases in which treatment had to be stopped early owing to the occurrence of serious side effects or an insufficient therapeutic effect. In recent years, a wide range of studies has been conducted on the therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of oral molecular-targeted therapeutic agents to prevent serious side effects and maximize the therapeutic effect. In Japan, the TDM of imatinib has been covered by insurance since 2012, and the TDM of sunitinib has been covered since 2018. In contrast, tyrosine kinase inhibitors may have severe side effects, but their TDM is not covered by medical insurance. We aimed to identify a safe, highly effective chemotherapy regimen based on scientific evidence gathered from Japanese patients. We examined the relationship between the plasma concentration of drugs and clinical findings, such as side effects and treatment effects, at our hospital. In this symposium review, we introduce our results based on the treatment of patients with renal cell carcinoma.
Therapeutic drug monitoring is used in the clinical setting in the optimisation of dosages to overcome inter-patient pharmacokinetic variability, increasing efficacy whilst reducing toxicity. Imatinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, displaying large variations in plasma concentrations that impact therapeutic success. As a result, imatinib has been the focus in the development of innovative techniques, aimed at its quantification in plasma. Liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry is currently the gold standard; however, cost and availability of the equipment limit its wider application in clinical settings. Recent advances in the field have shown Raman spectroscopy and electrochemistry to be key techniques for the development of promising analytical tools. This article reviews the latest advances towards less costly, more portable solutions that can be used at the point of care. Graphical abstract.
The association of cancer and pregnancy is increasingly frequent. This is related, partially, to the increasingly belated age of pregnancy. The management of cancer in pregnancy is a complicated issue. The use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) during pregnancy remains rare and only few data are available concerning their transplacental passage. The aim of this work is to review the data described in the literature, in order to highlight the risks incurred by the fetus, associated with these TKIs' treatment. Up to 189 pregnancies of women treated with TKIs during part or throughout their pregnancy have been described. Clinical data are reassuring and would be in favor of taking the treatment in terms of the balance maternal profit versus fetal risk. These data must, nevertheless, be interpreted with caution.
This review presents the clinical pharmacokinetics of imatinib mesylate. Aspects regarding absorption, tissue distribution, elimination and kinetic interactions are also discussed.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), a myeloproliferative neoplasm defined by the t(9;22)(q34;q11) chromosomal translocation, primarily affects older adults. Historically, effective treatment options were not available for older CML patients ineligible for curative allogeneic stem cell transplant, and the disease was therefore usually fatal within several years of diagnosis. The development of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) that effectively target the constitutively active mutant tyrosine kinase in CML has dramatically improved outcomes for all patients with CML, including older patients. While older patients were underrepresented in prospective trials, TKI therapy can be successfully administered to older adults with CML with excellent efficacy and proven tolerability. TKI selection and monitoring for adverse events should be tailored based on co-morbidities. As with younger patients, life expectancy of older adults with CML now approaches that of age-matched controls. Here we review guidelines for management of older adults with CML.
Side effects of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment vary in children and adults with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). As children have a much longer life expectancy than adults, TKI therapy may continue for decades and with long-term consequences that differ from adults. Children may develop endocrinopathies related to "off-target" effects of TKIs, such as delayed growth, changes in bone metabolism, thyroid abnormalities, and effects on puberty and fertility. These endocrinopathies present additional challenges for pediatric patients with CML. This review critically evaluates the literature on long-term endocrine side effects of TKIs in the pediatric CML population and provides suggested recommendations.
INTRODUCTION: Imatinib Mesylate (IM), a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has been reported to cause several adverse reactions, most of them with cutaneous involvement. Non- Lichenoid IM associated skin reactions have been sufficiently- recorded. To our knowledge, Lichenoid Drug Eruption (LDE) is recorded in a minority of registries. CASE REPORT: To describe an LDE induced case by IM treatment. TREATMENT AND OUTCOME: Histological Confirmation and promptly dermatological consultation relieved successfully the cutaneous adverse event. DISCUSSION: Ongoing expansion of IM usage in a wide spectrum of new indications is more likely to make physicians experience such LDE cutaneous side effects more often. Hence, they should be highly suspicious to early detect these distinct histologic entities, handle these undesired complications and guarantee satisfactory immediate outcomes, avoiding frivolous IM dosage modifications.
AIM: To investigate the possible role of imatinib, an inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase activity of PDGF-R, in desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT). PATIENTS & METHODS: From August 2005 to June 2009, DSRCT patients refractory to conventional treatment were enrolled. Patients received imatinib 400 mg daily. Primary end point of this open label, prospective, Phase II trial was objective response rate. RESULTS: Of the 13 enrolled patients, eight were evaluable for response. Median age was 20 years (range: 9-32). Objective responses at 3 months were: stable disease in one patient and progressive disease in seven patients. CONCLUSION: Imatinib showed no efficacy in the treatment of DSRCT unresponsive to conventional therapy, despite molecular-based selection of patients.
INTRODUCTION: Imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is the first-line therapy for patients with KIT mutation in gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dyspepsia and abdominal pain are common gastrointestinal adverse reactions of imatinib, but imatinib-induced ulcerative colitis (UC) is rarely reported. CASE REPORT: We presented a case of UC induced by imatinib in a 56-year-old male patient who experienced this adverse event after 5 years of imatinib 400 mg/d treatment following GIST resection. MANAGEMENT AND OUTCOME: The patient's diarrhea and bloody stools showed significant improvement following the discontinuation of imatinib therapy and administration of antidiarrheal medications. Then, imatinib was restarted at a daily dosage of 400 mg. DISCUSSION: UC is a rare adverse event associated with imatinib. Physicians should consider the possibility of UC induced by imatinib when patients present with diarrhea and bloody stool after receiving imatinib treatment. This case offered objective evidence of UC induced by imatinib.
Asciminib is a myristoyl site BCR::ABL1 inhibitor approved for patients with chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia (CP-CML) failing >/=2 prior lines of therapy. The Australasian Leukaemia and Lymphoma Group conducted the Asciminib Evaluation in Newly Diagnosed CML study to assess efficacy of asciminib for newly diagnosed CP-CML. Patients commenced asciminib 40 mg twice daily. Patients with treatment failure, defined as BCR::ABL1 of >10% at 3 or 6 months, or >1% at 12 or 18 months, received either imatinib, nilotinib, or dasatinib in addition to asciminib. In patients with suboptimal response, defined as levels of 1% to 10% at 6 months, >0.1% to 1% at 12 months, or >0.01% to 1% at 18 months, the asciminib dose was increased to 80 mg twice daily. With a median follow-up of 21 months (range, 0-36), 82 of 101 patients continue asciminib. Most common reasons for treatment discontinuation were adverse events (6%), loss of response (4%), and withdrawn consent (5%). There were no deaths; 1 patient developed lymphoid blast crisis. The coprimary end points were early molecular response (BCR::ABL1 of </=10% at 3 months), achieved in 93% (96% confidence interval [CI], 86-97%), and major molecular response by 12 months achieved in 79%; (95% CI, 70-87%), respectively. Cumulative incidence of molecular response 4.5 was 53% by 24 months. One patient had 2 cerebrovascular events; no other arterial occlusive events were reported. Asciminib as frontline CP-CML therapy leads to high rates of molecular response with excellent tolerance and a low rate of discontinuation for toxicity. This trial was registered at https://www.anzctr.org.au/ as #ACTRN12620000851965.
Imatinib, a specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor is a new anticancer agent, which has shown excellent efficacy in managing chronic myeloid leukemia. It is well tolerated with few side effects. Commonest adverse events are maculopapular eruptions and periorbital edema were reported. Severe adverse reactions are seen in 5% of patients. Exfoliative dermatitis has been very rarely reported with this drug. We report a case of a 55-year-old female who initially presented with a maculopapular rash and developed erythroderma on continuation of the drug.
