Clinical experience has firmly established the usefulness of imipramine in the management of enuresis. Our report describes the serious dose-related cardiac and central nervous system toxic effects of imipramine. Comparison of the human and animal toxicity data is presented and recommendations are given for safe human dose ranges.
Dose comparison trials were undertaken with trazodone given once, twice and thrice daily. Therapeutic effects were the same but once daily dosage produced drowsiness whilst thrice daily dosage did not. In a double-blind comparison to imipramine, anti-depressant effects were similar, except at 6 weeks when imipramine was significantly better. There were no significant differences in relief of anxiety symptoms.
In animal pharmacological studies viloxazine has shown similarities to imipramine. The antidepressant effects of the substance were independently recognized in seven uncontrolled clinical trials and verified in 11 published standard controlled clinical studies in which viloxazine in the dosage range from 150- to 300-mg dosage was equal in overall therapeutic efficacy to imipramine and amitriptyline, but produced a lower incidence of side effects.
Although the literature appears to demonstrate the efficacy of standard antidepressant medications for the short-term treatment of patients with minor depression, they are not widely prescribed. In comparison, psychotherapy is generally recommended, but without convincing data to support this conviction. We, therefore, advocate successive trials with antidepressants in any depressed patient, particularly if they have failed to benefit from psychotherapy or other supportive measures for three months.
Four (17%) of 23 consecutive female outpatients developed significant urinary or urgency incontinence when treated with lithium carbonate. The symptoms remitted or abated with the addition of oxybutynin (an anticholinergic drug), imipramine, or with decreased lithium dosing. A proposed mechanism involves lithium-induced changes in bladder cholinergic-adrenergic balance.
The literature dealing with the convulsant effects of the antidepressant drugs of the non-monoamine oxidase inhibitor variety is reviews. It is concluded that most of these drugs do lower the seizure threshold and may precipitate seizures even at normal therapeutic doses. The pathophysiology of antidepressant-induced seizures is discussed, and attention is drawn to biochemical differences in those antideprssants that have the least epileptogenic potential or may even be anticonvulsant. The clinical difficulties regarding administration of antidepressant drugs to epileptic patients are mentioned, and some practical advice is offered.
The combination of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors with tricyclic antidepressants has proven useful in treatment-resistant depression but has the potential for adverse drug-drug interactions. In the present study, the metabolism of a single dose of imipramine was studied before and after treatment with paroxetine. Paroxetine induced significant elevations of approximately 50% in half-life, area under the curve, and Cmax of imipramine and decreased clearance twofold. The effects on desipramine pharmacokinetics were even more pronounced. These findings indicate a significant interaction of paroxetine with the CYP2D6 isoenzyme.
There are few controlled studies of combined behavioral-pharmacological treatments of agoraphobia with panic. This review of the empirical evidence from studies using exposure in vivo as the behavioral modality and imipramine as the pharmacological agent suggests that these treatments have mutually potentiating effects in this disorder.
The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical trials, side effects, and dosage of amoxapine are reviewed. Amoxapine is a tricyclic dibenzoxazepine antidepressant that is chemically similar to the antipsychotic agent loxapine. In animal tests, amoxapine and its metabolites block reuptake of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine, with little effect on serotonin. It is rapidly and virtually completely absorbed when administered orally; peak serum concentrations occur one to two hours after ingestion. Amoxapine is widely distributed throughout body tissues and is 90% bound to serum proteins. Aromatic hydroxylation in the liver produces two major metabolites, which are excreted in the urine primarily but also in the feces. Amoxapine's elimination half-life is eight hours; one of the metabolites has a long half-life (30 hours). In clinical trials, amoxapine has been compared with amitriptyline and imipramine in several types of depressed patients. In some studies, amoxapine's therapeutic effects were measurable earlier (at one or two weeks after initiation of therapy) than those of the amitriptyline or imipramine, but generally only a portion of the depression-rating scales yielded statistically significant differences. Side effects noted during amoxapine therapy include hypotension (42%), drowsiness (14%), xerostomia (14%), constipation (12%), blurred vision (7%), fatigue (5%), and vertigo (5%). Amoxapine is approved by FDA for use in patients with neurotic or reactive depressive disorders, endogenous or psychotic depression, and depression accompanied by anxiety or agitation. The usual adult dosage is 200-300 mg daily, either in divided doses or a single bedtime dose. Amoxapine is a safe and effective antidepressant with no striking advantages over other available agents.
A 5-week double-blind study compared amoxapine to imipramine (2:1 dosage ratio) in the treatment of depressed outpatients. The two agents were similar in anti-depressant efficacy and rapidity of action. The most common adverse reactions to both drugs were anticholinergic effects and sedation; cardiovascular effects were minimal. A few amoxapine-treated patients developed adverse effects typical of neuroleptic drugs: some experienced extrapyramidal signs, one developed galactorrhea, and most showed elevated plasma prolactin concentrations. Amoxapine was associated with significant neuroleptic activity in plasma. No correlation was found between blood levels of either drug and therapeutic response.
The initiation of a prophylactic treatment for migraine depends on the frequency of migraine attacks and the extent of the function disability associated with these attacks. Antidepressants have good evidence of efficacy in the prophylactic treatment for migraine. In general, among the antidepressants, amitriptyline is the most frequently prescribed by headache specialists. Several clinical trials on this drug have also evidenced the remarkable benefits of amitriptyline in the prophylactic treatment of migraine attack. In evidence-based guidelines developed by Japanese Headache Society and American Neurological Association, it is classified as a Group 1 drugs (effective drug for the prevention of migraine attack). Moreover, these drugs are more useful in cases where there is comorbidity with conditions such as depression. The side-effects of these drugs are sleepiness and dry mouth. Administration of amytriptyline at low dose can reduce the frequency of side effects such as sleepiness.
In a 6-week study the efficacy of combined treatment of imipramine plus mianserin was compared to combined treatment of desipramine plus mianserin in patients with post-stroke depression. Patients were required to have a minimum baseline total score of 15 on the 17-item Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD). The Melancholia Scale (MES) was also used to measure severity of depressive states to show that somatic symptoms had little influence on the evaluation of depression. Out of 120 stroke patients screened, 20 patients fulfilled the inclusion criteria. The doses of the drugs were flexible, using side-effects as a guide during treatment. Both intention to treat analysis and efficacy data (excluding patients who had dropped out during the first 2 weeks of treatment) showed that imipramine (mean dose 75 mg daily) plus mianserin (mean dose 25 mg daily) was superior to desipramine (mean dose 66 mg daily) plus mianserin (27 mg daily). The MES was found to be more sensitive than the HAMD for measuring change in depressive states during treatment. The assessment of side-effects using the UKU scale showed good tolerance in general. The only difference between the two treatment groups was seen in micturition disturbances, where the imipramine treated patients had most complaints after 14 days of treatment, but the symptoms disappeared despite continuous treatment.
Enuresis is a common problem in childhood. It has a number of causes and is usually self-limited. Initial evaluation includes urinalysis and culture; an extensive urologic work-up should not be undertaken prematurely. Methods of treating enuresis are varied and are well worth a trial, although they provide only temporary remission in many cases. Techniques include pharmacotherapy and hypnosis.
Reviews current information about panic disorder that establishes its prevalence, heritable nature, course and complications. With this brief introduction, develops a general strategy for the management of panic disorder that entails careful diagnostic assessment, recognition of the risk of complications (i.e. major depression, phobic avoidance, substance abuse), education, supportive psychotherapy and the use of medication in the acute control of symptoms and the long term management of the vulnerability to panic attacks.
The authors report the case of a psychotic preschool child who manifested a seizure disorder while on imipramine treatment. They note that according to his history and physical exam, the child fell within a group which seems predisposed to this side effect. Although tricyclic antidepressant compounds can be used judiciously with seizure-prone individuals, the authors recommend that alternative modalities be given first consideration.
Treatment of childhood enuresis must begin with a careful history, physical examination, urinalysis, and urine culture to determine if one is dealing with uncomplicated or complicated enuresis. The majority of patients will have uncomplicated enuresis; there are several treatment options available to the physician that can be tailored to the individual patient. Parental support, empathy, and patience are key elements in any successful plan of management of the child with enuresis. Likewise, reassurance, periodic feedback, and encouragement of the parents and child by the physician are necessary for optimal results.
Jitteriness appears to be a specific side effect of tricyclic antidepressant treatment in panic disorder patients. In addition, the patients with jitteriness have lower serum iron levels compared to those that do not develop jitteriness (p = 0.01).
The recently completed long-term maintenance trial of full-dose imipramine for recurrent unipolar disorder provided an opportunity to examine the extent to which such doses (200-300 mg daily) are associated with persistent and adverse side effects, particularly weight change. In 115 patients we monitored weight change during the three-year maintenance treatment phase to the point of trial completion, recurrence or termination. No differences were noted between individuals receiving active medication (average gain of 5.8 lbs. during an average treatment period of 725 days) versus those randomized to the 'no-drug' cells (average gain of 2.8 lbs. during an average treatment period of 422 days). Numerous other factors such as body mass index, previous weight gain and gender did not play a differential role in establishing why some individuals gained weight during long-term treatment of depression regardless of specific treatment.
Pharmacological treatments for alcohol dependence have focused increasingly on agents that reduce alcohol craving and consumption or that treat psychiatric disorders associated with drinking relapse. Clinicians who treat alcohol-dependent patients must find the optimal dose of these agents to maximize response. Determining the best dosing strategy has been the goal of recent treatment studies with alcohol-dependent patients. One study, for example, showed that an opiate antagonist medication had a dose-dependent relationship with patient outcome and retention in treatment. Another dosing consideration involves the effect of long-term alcohol abuse on drug metabolism (e.g., when treating alcohol-dependent patients for comorbid psychiatric disorders). This was demonstrated in a study of recently abstinent patients who were taking the antidepressant desipramine for major depression. Alcohol-dependent patients had higher hepatic enzyme activities and lower plasma levels of desipramine relative to oral dose than did a comparison group of depressed patients without an alcohol use disorder.
We here report the synthesis of ethylene glycol N-interlinked imipramine dimers of various lengths from the tricyclic antidepressant desipramine via an amide coupling reaction followed by reduction with lithium aluminium hydride. The target molecules were found to be potent inhibitors of cellular viability while inducing cell type specific death mechanisms in three cancer cell lines including a highly chemoresistant Burkitt's lymphoma cell line. Basic amine analogues were found to be important for increased potency. Imipramine and desipramine were also tested for apoptotic activity and were found to be much less active than the novel dimeric compounds. Imipramine dimers were only found to be moderate inhibitors of the human serotonin transporter (hSERT) having IC(50) values in the micromolar region whilst the induction of cell death occurred independently of hSERT expression. These results demonstrate the potential of newly designed and synthesised imipramines derivatives for use against malignant cells, including those resistant to standard chemotherapy.
