Psoriasis is a complex chronic inflammatory skin disease with unclear molecular mechanisms. We found that the Src homology-2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SHP2) was highly expressed in both psoriatic patients and imiquimod (IMQ)-induced psoriasis-like mice. Also, the SHP2 allosteric inhibitor SHP099 reduced pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in PBMCs taken from psoriatic patients. Consistently, SHP099 significantly ameliorated IMQ-triggered skin inflammation in mice. Single-cell RNA sequencing of murine skin demonstrated that SHP2 inhibition impaired skin inflammation in myeloid cells, especially macrophages. Furthermore, IMQ-induced psoriasis-like skin inflammation was significantly alleviated in myeloid cells (monocytes, mature macrophages, and granulocytes)-but not dendritic cells conditional SHP2 knockout mice. Mechanistically, SHP2 promoted the trafficking of toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) from the Golgi to the endosome in macrophages by dephosphorylating TLR7 at Tyr1024, boosting the ubiquitination of TLR7 and NF-kappaB-mediated skin inflammation. Importantly, Tlr7 point-mutant knock-in mice showed an attenuated psoriasis-like phenotype compared to wild-type littermates following IMQ treatment. Collectively, our findings identify SHP2 as a novel regulator of psoriasis and suggest that SHP2 inhibition may be a promising therapeutic approach for psoriatic patients.
Treatment of actinic keratoses (AKs) can help lower the risk of eventual skin cancer and address field pre-cancerization. This review compares the different therapeutic options for actinic keratosis. Databases used include Medline, EMBASE, Web of Science and the Cochrane Library from inception to December 2019. Randomized control trials that were related to any approved or recognized treatment for actinic keratosis were included. 1186 studies were found, of which 80 with 6748 patients were included in the analysis. A network meta-analysis was not possible due to interstudy heterogeneity. The greatest degree of improvement was seen with photodynamic therapy (PDT) used adjunctively with other modalities, but this was not significantly different compared to other treatments. PDT, cryotherapy, imiquimod, ingenol mebutate (IMB), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), trichloroacetic acid (TCA), and ablative fractional laser (AFXL), were all non-inferior to one another in terms of percent clearance of AKs, but the lowest rates of clearance were seen with diclofenac sodium. When results were substratified by body site, 5-FU, combination PDT and combination 5-FU with calcipotriol were the most beneficial for AKs on the head and neck, although they often caused the highest proportion of initial side effects. Absence of randomized control trials for surgical treatments and non-ablative laser limits comparison of these treatments to other modalities. Limitations include the lack of standardized outcome reporting limited the comparability of results across trials. The results of this analysis do not account for individual patient risk or cumulative risk for development of skin cancer. At present, PDT, cryotherapy, imiquimod, IMB, 5-FU, TCA, AFXL, and combination treatments are similarly efficacious in reducing AKs in immunocompetent patients.Registration: N/A.
No clear guidelines are available for the management of pregnant women with condyloma acuminata, a human papillomavirus-associated benign neoplasm that develops in the genital tract. We performed a systematic review to gain a better understanding of the management of condyloma acuminata during pregnancy. In this review, we mainly focused on treatments. We searched PubMed, Google Scholar, and Web of Science to identify studies on the treatment of condyloma acuminata during pregnancy. Thirty articles met the inclusion criteria. The treatment methods described in the literature were laser therapy, cryotherapy, imiquimod, photodynamic therapy, trichloroacetic acid, and local hyperthermia. The most effective treatment remains unclear. Various factors must be considered when deciding how to treat. Based on our assessment of the literature, we recommend cryotherapy as the first-choice treatment and laser therapy as the second-choice treatment. Imiquimod can be considered in cases such as extensive condyloma acuminata that is not easily treated by cryotherapy or laser therapy. In such cases, sufficient informed consent must be obtained from the patient. Cryotherapy, laser therapy, and imiquimod have been administered during all 3 trimesters with no severe adverse effects, but we cautiously recommend reserving laser therapy until the third trimester because of the lower risk of recurrence before delivery. There are still many unclear points regarding the management of condyloma in pregnancy, and further research is needed.
Severe psoriasis, a chronic inflammatory skin disease is increasingly being effectively managed by targeted immunotherapy but long-term immunotherapy poses health risk and loss of response. Therefore, there is a need for alternative therapy strategies. Mesenchymal stem/stromal cell (MSC) exosomes are widely known for their potent immunomodulatory properties. Here we investigated if topically applied MSC exosomes could alleviate psoriasis-associated inflammation. Topically applied fluorescent exosomes on human skin explants were confined primarily to the stratum corneum with <1% input fluorescence exiting the explant over a 24-h period. Nevertheless, topically applied MSC exosomes in a mouse model of imiquimod (IMQ) psoriasis significantly reduced IL-17 and terminal complement activation complex C5b-9 in the mouse skin. MSC exosomes were previously shown to inhibit complement activation, specifically C5b-9 complex formation through CD59. Infiltration of neutrophils into the stratum corneum is characteristic of psoriasis and neutrophils are a major cellular source of IL-17 in psoriasis through the release of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). We propose that topically applied MSC exosomes inhibit complement activation in the stratum corneum and this alleviates IL-17 release by NETS from neutrophils that accumulate in and beneath the stratum corneum.
Skin cancer is a broad term used to describe a number of different malignant indications of the skin. Skin cancers mostly comprise of the keratinocyte cancers [Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC) and cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC)], and melanoma. Surgical excision of these malignancies has been the preferred treatment of patients for decades. However, the decision to perform surgery can be affected by various considerations, including co-morbidities of the patient, the anatomical site of the lesion and potential intolerance for repeated excisions. Topical treatment of skin cancer may therefore be more appropriate in certain instances. Topical treatment potentially allows for higher drug levels at the tumor site, and may result in less overall toxicity than systemic agents. This review will specifically address the current agents used in topical treatment of skin cancers, and introduce emerging treatments from the natural product field that may also find utility in these indications.
BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a common chronic inflammatory skin disease. Keratinocytes hyperproliferation and excessive inflammatory response contribute to psoriasis pathogenesis. The agents able to attenuate keratinocytes hyperproliferation and excessive inflammatory response are considered to be potentially useful for psoriasis treatment. Daphnetin exhibits broad bioactivities including anti-proliferation and anti-inflammatory. This study aims to evaluate the anti-psoriatic potential of daphnetin in vitro and in vivo, and explore underlying mechanisms. METHODS: HaCaT keratinocytes was stimulated with the mixture of IL-17A, IL-22, oncostatin M, IL-1alpha, and TNF-alpha (M5) to establish psoriatic keratinocyte model in vitro. Cell viability was measured using Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8). Quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed to measure the mRNA levels of hyperproliferative marker gene keratin 6 (KRT6), differentiation marker gene keratin 1 (KRT1) and inflammatory factors IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-alpha, IL-23A and MCP-1. Western blotting was used to detect the protein levels of p65 and p-p65. Indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) was carried out to detect p65 nuclear translocation. Imiquimod (IMQ) was used to construct psoriasis-like mouse model. Psoriasis severity (erythema, scaling) was scored based on Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI). Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed to examine histological change in skin lesion. The expression of inflammatory factors including IL-6, TNF-alpha, IL-23A and IL-17A in skin lesion was measured by qRT-PCR. RESULTS: Daphnetin attenuated M5-induced hyperproliferation in HaCaT keratinocytes. M5 stimulation significantly upregulated mRNA levels of IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-alpha, IL-23A and MCP-1. However, daphnetin treatment partially attenuated the upregulation of those inflammatory cytokines. Daphnetin was found to be able to inhibit p65 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation in HaCaT keratinocytes. In addition, daphnetin significantly ameliorate the severity of skin lesion (erythema, scaling and epidermal thickness, inflammatory cell infiltration) in IMQ-induced psoriasis-like mouse model. Daphnetin treatment attenuated IMQ-induced upregulation of inflammatory cytokines including IL-6, IL-23A and IL-17A in skin lesion of mice. CONCLUSIONS: Daphnetin was able to attenuate proliferation and inflammatory response induced by M5 in HaCaT keratinocytes through suppression of NF-kappaB signaling pathway. Daphnetin could ameliorate the severity of skin lesion and improve inflammation status in IMQ-induced psoriasis-like mouse model. Daphnetin could be an attractive candidate for future development as an anti-psoriatic agent.
In this ever-expanding world of immunologic advancements, Drs Langley and Pearson have undertaken this timely, succinct review of imiquimod. Given its direct actions on monocytes and macrophages, as well as the many diverse cytokine effects that follow from these events, topical imiquimod has already solidly established itself as a successful treatment for condylomata and molluscum, and will likely show continued therapeutic applications in the future.
Actinic keratosis (AK) is among the most commonly diagnosed skin diseases with potentially life-threatening repercussions if left untreated. Usage of pharmacologic agents represents one of many therapeutic strategies that can be used to help manage these lesions. Ongoing research into these compounds continues to change our clinical understanding as to which agents most benefit particular patient populations. Indeed, factors such as past personal medical history, lesion location and tolerability of therapy only represent a few considerations that clinicians must account for when prescribing appropriate treatment. This review focuses on specific drugs used in either the prevention or treatment of AKs. Nicotinamide, acitretin and topical 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) continue to be used with fidelity in the chemoprevention of actinic keratosis, although some uncertainty persists in regard to which agents should be used in immunocompetent vs. immunodeficient/immunosuppressed patients. Topical 5-FU, including combination formulations with either calcipotriol or salicylic acid, as well as imiquimod, diclofenac and photodynamic light therapy are all accepted treatment strategies employed to target and eliminate AKs. Five percent of 5-FU is regarded as the most effective therapy in the condition, although the literature has conflictingly shown that lower concentrations of the drug might also be as effective. Topical diclofenac (3%) appears to be less efficacious than 5% 5-FU, 3.75-5% imiquimod and photodynamic light therapy despite its favorable side effect profile. Finally, traditional photodynamic light therapy, while painful, appears to be of higher efficacy in comparison to its more tolerable counterpart, daylight phototherapy.
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most prevalent malignant tumor in humans and the local destruction of tissue that can result from excision has a significant impact on well-being. Treating BCC is costly for health care systems given the high incidence of this tumor, especially in older patients. Standard treatment involves either resection with histologic assessment of margins or Mohs micrographic surgery. Surgery is sometimes contraindicated, however, due to the presence of significant comorbidity or high cosmetic expectations. For such patients, nonsurgical treatments have become available. These alternatives can offer good local control of disease, preserve function, and achieve excellent cosmetic results.
BACKGROUND: Actinic keratoses (AK) are rough scaly patches that arise on chronically ultraviolet-exposed skin and can progress to keratinocyte carcinoma. OBJECTIVE: This analysis examined the literature related to the management of AK to provide evidence-based recommendations for treatment. Grading, histologic classification, natural history, risk of progression, and dermatologic surveillance of AKs are also discussed. METHODS: A multidisciplinary Work Group conducted a systematic review to address 5 clinical questions on the management of AKs and applied the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation approach for assessing the certainty of the evidence and formulating and grading clinical recommendations. Graded recommendations were voted on to achieve consensus. RESULTS: Analysis of the evidence resulted in 18 recommendations. LIMITATIONS: This analysis is based on the best available evidence at the time it was conducted. The pragmatic decision to limit the literature review to English language randomized trials may have excluded data published in other languages or limited identification of relevant long-term follow-up data. CONCLUSIONS: Strong recommendations are made for using ultraviolet protection, topical imiquimod, topical 5-fluorouracil, and cryosurgery. Conditional recommendations are made for the use of photodynamic therapy and diclofenac for the treatment of AK, both individually and as part of combination therapy regimens.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease associated with both innate and adaptive immune responses. The stimulator of interferon genes (STING) protein engages in sensing of cytosolic DNA to initiate dsDNA-driven immune responses. In vitro and in vivo anti-psoriasis effects of STING antagonist H-151 were explored. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We analysed the gene expression profile of STING and related downstream targets in the skin samples of healthy people and psoriasis patients from the GEO database. Cellular inhibitory activity of H-151 on STING pathway was confirmed via qPCR and western blotting. The preventive effect of topical application of H-151 on imiquimod-induced psoriatic mice was examined through histological, immunohistochemical, immunofluorescent, flow cytometric analysis, ELISA Kits and other approaches. Preliminary mechanistic studies were also performed. KEY RESULTS: Gene expressions of STING and its downstream target were up-regulated in lesional skin samples from psoriasis patients. Topical administration of H-151 attenuated the skin lesions in imiquimod-induced psoriatic mouse model, while the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-17, IL-23 and IL-6), infiltration of M1 macrophages and differentiation of Th17 cells were significantly suppressed by H-151 treatment. Mechanistically, H-151 inhibited STING/NF-kappaB signalling in both keratinocytes and immune cells. CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: H-151 displayed anti-inflammatory activity in both keratinocytes and immune cells, and decreased the severity of psoriatic response in vivo. Inhibition of STING signalling pathway may represent a novel therapeutic approach to psoriasis and related complications.
Cutaneous cancers are, by far, the most common malignant neoplasms of the human being. Due to the great array of clinical conditions, their worldwide increasing incidence and the steady ageing of the population, non-invasive treatments modalities that show a good clinical response, a proper benefit-risk ratio and cosmetic results are becoming increasingly important in the clinical setting. Imiquimod is a topically applied immunomodulator which is often used in the management of several premalignant and malignant cutaneous disorders. This article is a review of the current literature on its mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics, and therapeutical effects.
Psoriasis is a common chronic inflammatory skin disease characterized by inflammatory cell infiltration and epidermal hyperplasia. However, the regulatory complexity of cytokine and cellular networks still needs to be investigated. Here, we show that the expression of FXYD3, a member of the FXYD domain-containing regulators of Na(+)/K(+) ATPases family, is significantly increased in the lesional skin of psoriasis patients and mice with imiquimod (IMQ)-induced psoriasis. IL-17A, a cytokine important for the development of psoriatic lesions, contributes to FXYD3 expression in human primary keratinocytes. FXYD3 deletion in keratinocytes attenuated the psoriasis-like phenotype and inflammation in an IMQ-induced psoriasis model. Importantly, FXYD3 promotes the formation of the IL-17R-ACT1 complex by competing with IL-17R for binding to TRAF3 and then enhances IL-17A signaling in keratinocytes. This promotes the activation of the NF-kappaB and MAPK signaling pathways and leads to the expression of proinflammatory factors. Our results clarify the mechanism by which FXYD3 serves as a mediator of IL-17A signaling in keratinocytes to form a positive regulatory loop to promote psoriasis exacerbation. Targeting FXYD3 may serve as a potential therapeutic approach in the treatment of psoriasis.
Keloids are an aberrant fibroproliferative response to wound healing of the skin, leading to scar tissue that expands above and beyond the original cutaneous injury. Keloids can be difficult to treat because of their tendency to recur after treatments, including after excision. There is a myriad of treatment modalities used, which can be used as monotherapy or in combination with surgical excision or other treatment methods. This review covers many treatment approaches including surgical excision, compression, silicone sheets, steroid-impregnated tape, imiquimod, intralesional injections, cryotherapy, laser, radiation, pentoxifylline, and dupilumab.
Psoriasis is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory skin disorder characterized by epidermal hyperplasia and aberrant immune response. In addition to aberrant cytokine production, psoriasis is associated with activation of the Akt/mTOR pathway. mTOR/S6K1 regulates T-lymphocyte activation and migration, keratinocytes proliferation and is upregulated in psoriatic lesions. Several drugs that target Th1/Th17 cytokines or their receptors have been approved for treating psoriasis in humans with variable results necessitating improved therapies. Fisetin, a natural dietary polyphenol with anti-oxidant and anti-proliferative properties, covalently binds mTOR/S6K1. The effects of fisetin on psoriasis and its underlying mechanisms have not been clearly defined. Here, we evaluated the immunomodulatory effects of fisetin on Th1/Th17-cytokine-activated adult human epidermal keratinocytes (HEKa) and anti-CD3/CD28-stimulated inflammatory CD4(+) T cells and compared these activities with those of rapamycin (an mTOR inhibitor). Transcriptomic analysis of HEKa revealed 12,713 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the fisetin-treated group compared to 7,374 DEGs in the rapamycin-treated group, both individually compared to a cytokine treated group. Gene ontology analysis revealed enriched functional groups related to PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathways, psoriasis, and epidermal development. Using in silico molecular modeling, we observed a high binding affinity of fisetin to IL-17A. In vitro, fisetin significantly inhibited mTOR activity, increased the expression of autophagy markers LC3A/B and Atg5 in HEKa cells and suppressed the secretion of IL-17A by activated CD4(+) T lymphocytes or T lymphocytes co-cultured with HEKa. Topical administration of fisetin in an imiquimod (IMQ)-induced mouse psoriasis model exhibited a better effect than rapamycin in reducing psoriasis-like inflammation and Akt/mTOR phosphorylation and promoting keratinocyte differentiation and autophagy in mice skin lesions. Fisetin also significantly inhibited T-lymphocytes and F4/80(+) macrophage infiltration into skin. We conclude that fisetin potently inhibits IL-17A and the Akt/mTOR pathway and promotes keratinocyte differentiation and autophagy to alleviate IMQ-induced psoriasis-like disease in mice. Altogether, our findings suggest fisetin as a potential treatment for psoriasis and possibly other inflammatory skin diseases.
BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a common inflammatory skin disease resulting from dysregulation of the IL-23/T(H)17 immune axis. The prevalence and severity of psoriasis is higher in men than in women, although the underlying reasons for this are unclear. OBJECTIVE: We studied whether estradiol, a female hormone, plays protective roles in imiquimod-induced psoriatic inflammation in mice by regulating neutrophil and macrophage functions. METHODS: Wild-type mice and conditional knockout mice were ovariectomized, supplemented with placebo or estradiol pellets, and an imiquimod-containing cream applied. RESULTS: Mice without endogenous ovarian hormones exhibited exacerbated psoriatic inflammation including increased production of IL-17A and IL-1beta, which was reversed by exogenously added estradiol. The suppressive effect of estradiol on the production of IL-1beta and IL-17A was abolished in mice lacking estrogen receptors in neutrophils and macrophages (Esr1(f/f)Esr2(f/f)LysM-Cre+ mice). IL-1beta, which is required for production of IL-17A in the psoriasis model, was mainly produced by neutrophils and inflammatory macrophages. Estradiol suppressed IL-1beta production from neutrophils and macrophages in mice both in vivo and in vitro and from human neutrophils in vitro. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest a novel mechanism for sex-dependent differences in psoriasis clinical phenotypes that may shed new light on the pathology of psoriasis.
Imiquimod is a topically applied immunomodulator. Although initially approved for genital and perianal warts, dermatologists have prescribed this compound for many neoplastic and nonneoplastic skin conditions. The US Food and Drug Administration recently approved imiquimod for the treatment of actinic keratoses. This article reviews the literature on imiquimod in the treatment of cutaneous malignancies.
Paget's disease of the vulva is a rare form of extramammary Paget's disease mainly affecting postmenopausal women. Its pathophysiology remains largely unknown. Up to fairly recently, the only treatment for this disease was surgery, often mutilating the vulva, with significant psychosexual repercussions without the assurance of complete therapeutic efficacy. New therapeutic approaches -topical treatments, radiotherapy or chemotherapy- have emerged in recent years but lack consensual guidelines. We present a literature review of the recent results published in this field.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have recently been shown to have not only regenerative capabilities but also immunomodulating properties. For this reason, they are currently under investigation in clinical trials for the treatment of several autoimmune systemic disorders. Psoriasis is a systemic immune-mediated disease for which MSCs could have therapeutic potential. We analysed the existing literature with regard to MSC-based strategies for the treatment of psoriasis, using the MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus and Cochrane Library electronic databases from inception to the date of study. A number of studies confirm the involvement of MSCs in psoriasis pathogenesis and therefore designate MSCs as an important potential therapeutic tool in this setting. Preclinical data are mostly based on imiquimod-induced murine models of psoriasis, and confirm the anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory action of MSCs in the setting of psoriasis. Six patients affected by psoriasis were described in four clinical studies. Despite significant differences in terms of therapeutic protocols and clinical outcomes, the MSC-based regimens were efficacious in 100% of the cases. Despite more data still being needed, MSCs could be a promising therapy for psoriasis.
We discuss imiquimod associated with non-application site mucosal reactions and two of our own clinical cases. In one of our patients, erosive cheilitis developed in a young boy after using topical imiquimod 5% cream for 5 nights weekly on bilateral cheeks, chin, and near vermillion border for molluscum contagiosum. The case is discussed with concerns for imiquimod use in molluscum contagiosum when used near mucosal surfaces.
