A case of reversible indomethacin-induced oligohydramnios is presented. This case suggests a relationship between the dose of indomethacin and the quantity of amniotic fluid.
Polyhydramnios detected in a pregnancy should always be investigated thoroughly. We believe chromosomal abnormalities should be excluded, but that determination need not delay therapy. Indomethacin has been shown to reduce amniotic fluid volume in certain cases, but a strict monitoring schedule should be followed whenever it is administered. At our institution, we are investigating the effect on the fetus of newer, more selective prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors that should have beneficial effects similar to indomethacin, but be devoid of its unwanted side effects.
In a cross-sectional study the pharmacokinetics of indomethacin were studied in old and young adults without manifest organ failure. Total clearance of indomethacin after a single oral dose of 50mg was 0.8 ml/min/kg in elderly individuals (mean 79.5 +/- 1.3 years) compared with 1.4 ml/min/kg in younger individuals (mean 36.9 +/- 3.0 years). The apparent elimination rate constant averaged 0.23 h-1 in the aged and 0.32 h-1 in the young people. Oral bioavailability was close to 1 in the young but 0.77 in the elderly. The apparent volume of distribution was similar in each group. Based on these results it is suggested that the maintenance dose of indomethacin be reduced by 25% in the elderly.
Uterine contractility was recorded during the period of menstruation in six dysmenorrheic women. A variable high tonus was observed in each case. Uterine recordings were repeated during the subsequent menstruation following pre-treatment with indomethacin at an oral dose of 75 mg or 200 mg per day beginning one day before the expected onset of menstruation. A lower uterine tonus was found in all indomethacin-treated cycles. Complete alleviation of spasmodic pain was obtained in the six subjects. The endogenous concentration of 15-keto-13, 14-dihydro PGF2alpha was determined by the gas chromatography-mass spectrometry method and observed to be relatively high in women with dysmenorrhea.
The influence of indomethacin on the need for postoperative analgesics was investigated in a double-blind study of 41 patients scheduled for abdominal hysterectomy. The incidence of side effects was evaluated. The patients were randomly allocated to treatment with either indomethacin, 0.8 mg/kg i.v. preoperatively, followed by 100 mg rectally 8-hourly for 3 days (Group I), or placebo (Group P), in both cases supplemented with nicomorphine as needed. Thiopentone was used for induction of anaesthesia, followed by nitrous oxide, enflurane, suxamethonium, and pancuronium. The average nicomorphine requirement during the study was 14.0 mg/24 h lower in Group I than in Group P. The pain score values were slightly lower in Group I when resting, but similar on movement. A significant increase in perioperative blood loss was found in Group I. Beginning the indomethacin treatment with a preoperative i.v. bolus seems to offer few advantages compared to a purely postoperative regime and may increase the risk of bleeding complications.
Patients with gallstone disease commonly have impaired gallbladder emptying. To see whether non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) prevent gallstone formation by improving gallbladder emptying, we assessed the effect of indomethacin on postprandial emptying in healthy subjects and in patients with gallstone disease. Subjects received indomethacin 25 mg three times a day for a week and matching placebo for another week. Compared with placebo, indomethacin improved postprandial gallbladder emptying in all 7 patients with gallstone disease. This finding was not recorded in healthy subjects with normal gallbladders. The prevention of gallstone formation associated with ingestion of NSAIDs may be due mainly to a prokinetic effect on the gallbladder since there is no evidence to suggest that these drugs affect cholesterol crystal nucleation at ordinary therapeutic doses in man or animals.
This article presents a comprehensive review of the patent ductus arteriosus which so often affects the premature neonate. Included are a discussion of the unique anatomy and physiology of the ductus, a review of the mechanisms involved in normal closure, and factors leading to persistent patency. Various therapeutic options also are discussed, including some new and innovative approaches.
A bis-imidazolium-based amphiphilic molecule was used to form novel supramolecular gels in ethanol-water mixtures. The proportion of solvents, the concentration of gellant and the temperature are factors that strongly influence the gelling process. The physical gels that are formed comprise entangled fibers of around 100nm in diameter, able to incorporate anionic drugs, whose morphology varies depending on the drug they incorporate. These hydrogels are soft and therefore optimum for skin application. They show good stability when compared to previously reported gels. Suitable drug release and skin permeation profiles were obtained, and, moreover, they seem to promote the retention of the drug inside the skin. Finally, effective in vivo anti-inflammatory activity was observed, especially with the indomethacin-incorporated gel, which indicates that these supramolecular hydrogels are a good option for the delivery of poor water soluble drugs for the treatment of acute inflammation or other skin diseases.
Prostaglandins create conditions favorable for activation and stimulation of labor and are key components in the process of both normal and preterm labor. Antiprostaglandins may be useful in the prevention of preterm labor because they inhibit prostaglandin synthetase and reduce prostaglandin formation. The antiprostaglandin indomethacin has been the most studied as a tocolytic agent, but its success is limited because of fetal and neonatal complications associated with prolonged use. More recently, the cyclooxygenase-2 specific agents have been investigated because of their improved side effect profile. This article discusses the process of prostaglandin production and inhibition and reviews and critiques the available literature investigating the efficacy and safety of indomethacin and the newer cyclooxygenase-2 agents.
Recently, many new formulations of older drugs have been marketed as sustained-release preparations. Only some of these compounds have scientific rationale supporting their development. At least two inherent properties of a drug are desirable in considering its reformulation into a sustained-release entity. On of these properties is the demonstration of a concentration/response relationship together with a short plasma elimination half-life and inactive or uncharacterized activity of any generated metabolites. The second property is the production of transient side effects associated with dissolution and/or peak concentrations. When neither of these conditions is satisfied, then a sustained-release preparation may offer no advantages over the conventional formulation. The literature on indomethacin was examined with respect to the above conditions and it was concluded that its marketing as a sustained-release preparation is not justified and that investigations have failed to demonstrate clinical advantages of this new formulation.
A 61 year old man experienced oliguric acute renal failure during therapy with indomethacin. Proteinuria (5.1 g/24 hours) and hypertension, which accompanied renal insufficiency, cleared with recovery of function. These features may suggest drug-associated acute kidney failure.
Post-ERCP pancreatitis (PEP) remains the most common complication following ERCP. Although once considered unpredictable, understanding patient and procedure-related risk factors, and measures such as pancreatic stent placement and pharmacoprophylaxis have been shown to substantially decrease the risk of PEP. In this issue of the Journal, the role of pharmacoprophylaxis is explored in a study comparing rectal indomethacin plus sublingual nitrates vs. rectal indomethacin alone. While showing improved efficacy, dual pharmacoprophylaxis does not appear adequate to obviate the importance of technique-related variables and pancreatic stents. Rather, a comprehensive approach is likely to be the most efficacious strategy to reduce PEP.
In this randomized, double-blind study, 57 patients with ankylosing spondylitis were evaluated after 26 weeks of treatment with either flurbiprofen (Ansaid, Upjohn) or indomethacin. Flurbiprofen administered four times a day in a total daily dose of 200 mg was effective in controlling the pain and associated symptoms of ankylosing spondylitis. Pain was adequately controlled in some patients following a total daily dose of 100 mg of flurbiprofen administered twice a day. Flurbiprofen was as effective as indomethacin in most key efficacy measurements analyzed. The drug was well tolerated in doses of up to 300 mg per day, and no clinically significant laboratory abnormalities were detected. Flurbiprofen is an excellent treatment for the control of pain and inflammation in patients with ankylosing spondylitis.
A new acidly sensitive PEGylated polyethylenimine linked by Schiff base (PEG-s-PEI) was designed to render pH-sensitive PEGylation nanoassemblies through multiple interactions with indomethacin and docetaxel (DTX). DTX nanoassemblies driven by PEG-s-PEI thus formulated exhibited an excellent pH-sensitivity PEGylation cleavage performance at extracellular pH of tumor microenvironment, compared to normal tissues, thereby long circulated in blood but were highly phagocytosed by tumor cells. Consequently, this smart pH-sensitive PEGylation cleavage provided an efficient strategy to target tumor microenvironment, in turn afforded superior therapeutic outcome in anti-tumor activity.
Polyhydramnios is an uncommon cause of premature labor and delivery. After sonographic evaluation has confirmed the polyhydramnios and a determination is made of the potential etiologies, indomethacin appears to be an effective agent in reducing the amniotic fluid volume and in preventing prematurity.
A patient with seronegative inflammatory polyarthritis developed a predominantly motorperipheral neuropathy associated with the use of indomethacin. Three other cases of peripheral neuropathy associated with indomethacin treatment have been reported to the Committee on Safety of Medicines. In all cases the neuropathy regressed when indomethacinwas stopped. Peripheral neuropathy should be recognized as a rare complication of indomethacin therapy and considered in the differential diagnosis of a neuropathy accompanyingrheumatoid arthritis.
A double-blind cross-over clinical trial was performed to compare clinical effectiveness of indomethacin (3 x 25 mg/day) alone to that of a combination of indomethacin + sodium-salycylate (3 x 25 mg/day and 3 x 250 mg/day, respectively) in rheumatoid arthritis. It was established that enteral blood loss was significantly reduced by combined treatment as determined by Cr51 labelled erythrocytes in comparison to that after treatment with indomethacin alone. Therapeutic effect was maintained in both groups, no significant disparities were observed. Occurrence of subjective complaints was less frequent in the combined treatment group. It was concluded that the combined preparation consisting of indomethacin and sodium-salicylate has a favourable effect in rheumatoid arthritis.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to evaluate the results in our case series of AP ERCP over the last three years. The prophylaxis for acute pancreatitis (AP) post-endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) consists of rectal indomethacin, but some studies are not concordant. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We compared 241 ERCP performed from January 2014 to February 2015 with intravenous gabexate mesylate (Group A), with the 387 ERCP performed from March 2015 to December 2016 with rectal indomethacin (Group B) as prophylaxis for AP post-ERCP. RESULTS: There were 8 (3.31%) AP post-ERCP in Group A vs. 4 (1.03%) in Group B. CONCLUSIONS: Rectal indomethacin shows a better statistically significant performance than intravenous gabexate mesylate in the prophylaxis of AP post-ERCP, besides being cheaper.
NSAIDs are generally considered to be safe and well tolerated, but, even with the advent of selective COX-2 inhibitors, nephrotoxicity remains a concern. An impaired renal perfusion caused by the inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis is claimed like the more frequent cause of an acute renal failure due to NSAIDs, while a chronic interstitial nephritis or an analgesic nephropathy are believed the causes of a chronic renal failure. The real incidence of renal side effects of NSAIDs is still unclear and it differs between the age of the patients and the reports present in the literature. The occurrence of renal side effects following prenatal exposure to NSAIDs seems to be rare considering the large number of pregnant woman treated with indomethacin or other prostaglandin inhibitors. NSAID-related nephrotoxicity remains an important clinical problem in the newborns, in whom the functionally immature kidney may exert a significant effect on the disposition of the drugs. Instead, nephrotoxicity is a rare event in children and the risk is lower than adults. In healthy adult patients the incidence of renal adverse effects is very low, less than 1%. The risk increased with age. The elderly are at higher risk, and it is correlated at the presence of pretreatment renal disease, hypovolemia due to use of diuretics, diabetes, congestive heart failure or alteration of NSAID pharmacokinetics.
A report is given on a long-term controlled trial in which diclofenac sodium (Voltaren) was compared with indomethacin in 36 patients with rheumatoid arthritis, both drugs being administered in a dosage of 75-125 mg daily. In this trial, planned as a double-blind study, each patient was to participate for six months, after which the patients treated with diclofenac sodium were to be followed up for a further six months. By the end of the first six months, diclofenac sodium had proved to be clearly superior to indomethacin in terms of therapeutic efficacy. Moreover, unwanted effects referable to either the central nervous system or the gastro-intestinal tract were less common and less severe in the patient treated with diclofenac sodium than in those receiving indomethacin. These results demonstrate that, when given as long-term treatment to patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis, Voltaren is both effective and well tolerated.
