BACKGROUND: Intravenous saline is recommended in clinical practice guidelines as the cornerstone for preventing contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with compromised renal function. However, clinical-effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of this prophylactic hydration treatment in protecting renal function has not been adequately studied in the population targeted by the guidelines, against a group receiving no prophylaxis. This was the aim of the AMACING trial. METHODS: AMACING is a prospective, randomised, phase 3, parallel-group, open-label, non-inferiority trial of patients at risk of contrast-induced nephropathy according to current guidelines. High-risk patients (with an estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] of 30-59 mL per min/1.73 m(2)) aged 18 years and older, undergoing an elective procedure requiring iodinated contrast material administration at Maastricht University Medical Centre, the Netherlands, were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive intravenous 0.9% NaCl or no prophylaxis. We excluded patients with eGFR lower than 30 mL per min/1.73 m(2), previous dialysis, or no referral for intravenous hydration. Randomisation was stratified by predefined risk factors. The primary outcome was incidence of contrast-induced nephropathy, defined as an increase in serum creatinine from baseline of more than 25% or 44 mumol/L within 2-6 days of contrast exposure, and cost-effectiveness of no prophylaxis compared with intravenous hydration in the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy. We measured serum creatinine immediately before, 2-6 days, and 26-35 days after contrast-material exposure. Laboratory personnel were masked to treatment allocation. Adverse events and use of resources were systematically recorded. The non-inferiority margin was set at 2.1%. Both intention-to-treat and per-protocol analyses were done. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02106234. FINDINGS: Between June 17, 2014, and July 17, 2016, 660 consecutive patients were randomly assigned to receive no prophylaxis (n=332) or intravenous hydration (n=328). 2-6 day serum creatinine was available for 307 (92%) of 332 patients in the no prophylaxis group and 296 (90%) of 328 patients in the intravenous hydration group. Contrast-induced nephropathy was recorded in eight (2.6%) of 307 non-hydrated patients and in eight (2.7%) of 296 hydrated patients. The absolute difference (no hydration vs hydration) was -0.10% (one-sided 95% CI -2.25 to 2.06; one-tailed p=0.4710). No hydration was cost-saving relative to hydration. No haemodialysis or related deaths occurred within 35 days. 18 (5.5%) of 328 patients had complications associated with intravenous hydration. INTERPRETATION: We found no prophylaxis to be non-inferior and cost-saving in preventing contrast-induced nephropathy compared with intravenous hydration according to current clinical practice guidelines. FUNDING: Stichting de Weijerhorst.
PURPOSE: Multilumen central venous catheters (CVCs) are not commonly used for power injection. However, in critically ill patients, CVCs-- most of which do not have FDA approval for power injection--may be the only available venous access. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The pitfalls of multilumen CVCs are illustrated by a case report of a patient in whom extravasation of intravenously administered contrast medium occurred after power injection in a triple-lumen CVC using the lumen with the port furthest from the catheter tip. RESULTS: The underlying mechanisms for the displacement of the initially correctly placed right subclavian CVC could include elevation of both arms of the obese patient or the power injection itself. The distances between port openings and catheter tips of various commercially available multilumen CVCs are assessed. We examine the possible caveats of ECG-guided CVC placement for optimal tip position, discuss technical difficulties related to power injection via CVCs, and review commonly used drugs that may cause extravasation injury. CONCLUSION: Knowledge of the distances between CVC port openings and the catheter tip are essential for safe intravasal administration of fluids.
A double blind randomized trial of two non-ionic contrast media--iopamidol and iopromide--was performed on 101 patients undergoing left ventriculography and coronary angiography. Both products performed well in the trial and there were no statistically significant differences in side effects, cardiovascular parameters, blood analysis or film quality between the two products.
PURPOSE, MATERIAL AND METHODS: Microcirculatory disturbances may be responsible for some of the adverse effects induced by contrast media. The influence of iopromide 370 (Ultravist) on cutaneous microcirculation was therefore investigated in 15 patients in a prospective study. Twenty ml of iopromide and 20 ml 0.9% NaCl were injected as reference in the subclavian artery at the beginning of a diagnostic coronary angiography. Erythrocyte velocity was measured in ipsilateral nailfold capillaries at the beginning of, during, and after the injection continuously up to 6 min after injection. RESULTS: On average, 30 s after injection of contrast medium, erythrocyte velocity decreased significantly by 51.3% (p<0.0001) and remained reduced up to 120 s. This reaction was observed in 14 out of 15 patients. Three patients showed a temporary cessation of capillary blood flow. CONCLUSION: The adverse effects sometimes seen during coronary angiography can be explained if similar contrast medium induced microcirculatory disturbances in the myocardial vasculature.
PURPOSE: To test the compatibility of trisodium citrate, a catheter lock solution, with iodinated contrast medium. METHODS: Iohexol, iobitridol, iodixanol, ioxaglate, ioxithalamate, iomeprol, and iopromide were tested. In all tests, 2 ml of contrast medium were mixed with 2 ml of trisodium citrate solution. RESULTS: Iodixanol and ioxaglate provoked a highly viscous gluelike precipitation when mixed with trisodium citrate. A brief transient precipitate was observed with iohexol, iomeprol, and ioxithalamate. Permanent precipitation occurred with iobitridol and iopromide. CONCLUSION: One must be aware of the potential for precipitation when contrast medium is mixed with trisodium citrate solution. Before trisodium citrate solution is injected, the catheter should be thoroughly flushed with saline if a contrast medium has previously been injected through it.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the effects of patient variables, examination variables, and seasonality on allergic-like and physiologic reactions to iodinated contrast material (ICM). PATIENTS AND METHODS: All ICM-enhanced computed tomography (CT) examinations performed from June 1, 2009, to May 9, 2017, at our institution were included. Reactions were identified and categorized as allergic-like or physiologic and mild, moderate, or severe. The effect of patient and examination variables on reactions was evaluated by logistic regression models. RESULTS: A total of 359,977 CT examinations performed on 176,886 unique patients were included. A total of 1150 allergic-like reactions (0.32%; 19 severe [0.005%]) and 679 physiologic reactions (0.19%; 3 severe [0.0008%]) occurred. On multivariable analysis, iopromide had higher rates of reactions compared with iohexol (allergic-like reactions: odds ratio [OR], 3.07 [95% CI, 2.37 to 3.98], P<.0001; physiologic reactions: OR, 2.60 [1.92 to 3.52], P<.0001). Non-White patients had higher rates of reactions compared with White patients (allergic-like reactions: OR, 1.77 [1.36-2.30], P<.0001; physiologic reactions: OR, 1.76 [1.27-2.42], P=.0006). Patient age, sex, prior ICM reaction, ICM dose, CT location, and CT type were also significantly associated with reactions. No significant seasonality trend was observed (P=.07 and .80). CONCLUSION: Non-White patients and patients administered iopromide had higher rates of acute reactions compared with White patients and patients administered iohexol. Younger patients (<50 years vs 51 to 60 years), female sex, history of ICM allergy or other allergies, ICM dose, and contrast-enhanced CT location and type also correlated with higher acute reaction rates.
INTRODUCTION: Central venous catheter (CVC) access is commonplace in intensive care units. Patients undergoing computed tomographic angiography require injection of contrast at high flow rates (4.5 mL/s), often CVC access is not used due to safety concerns. The CVC might rupture at high flow rates, resulting in CVC fragmentation and embolization or contrast extravasation.The objective of this study is to determine the pressure required to burst a CVC under static load and compare this to the pressure generated by injection of contrast at high flow rates (dynamic load) through the distal (16-g) lumen of a triple-lumen CVC. METHODS: We gathered 16-cm long triple-lumen CVCs (n = 14) from patients with an average dwell time of 5.2 days (+/-2.7 days). Half the CVCs (n = 7) were subjected to static testing, where the distal lumen was occluded with the guidewire and super glue at the distal end of the catheter. The CVC was then placed into a 10-cm deep water bath at 37 degrees C to simulate in vivo conditions and water was injected until catheter rupture. Dynamic pressure testing was done with the remaining catheters, with radio-contrast injected through the unoccluded distal lumen at flow rates of 4.5 mL/s, then 7 mL/s. Pressures were recorded throughout injection. RESULTS: During static testing, 6/7 CVCs burst at the distal lumen where the glue was applied, the remaining CVC burst proximal to the hub. PSI at burst during static testing was 184.2 PSI (95% confidence interval [CI] 174.3-194.1 PSI). During dynamic testing the mean peak pressures at 7 mL/s was 81.1 PSI (95% CI 73-89.2 PSI). At 4.5 mL/s the mean peak pressure was 47.9 PSI (95% CI 42.9-52.9 PSI). CONCLUSIONS: No CVCs failed under dynamic loading with injection of contrast at flow rates (4.5 and 7 mL/s) high enough to support computed tomographic angiography. This suggests 16-cm triple-lumen CVCs can be used safely.
The persisting primitive olfactory artery (PPOA) is a rare anatomic variation of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA), being encountered in less than 1% of cases. Different morphological types were reported previously. In type 3, only once reported previously, the PPOA gives off two branches, a nasal one which courses in the olfactory sulcus to supply the territory of the anterior ethmoidal artery, and the callosomarginal artery. It is reported here a combination of rare anatomic variants found in a 71-year-old male patient investigated by computed tomography angiography. A left PPOA left the A1 segment of the ACA and was classified as subtype 3b, as its branches were the nasal one and a frontal trunk, not the callosomarginal artery. That PPOA had a characteristic hairpin turn applied on the anterior fossa floor. The ACA continued as azygos pericallosal artery, which is also a rare finding. As the nasal branch of the PPOA and its hairpin turn is closely related to the anterior fossa floor, such variant should be carefully documented when combined approaches of the skull base are planned by rhinologists and neurosurgeons.
PURPOSE: Little was known about the safety and long-term efficacy of fluoroscopically guided balloon dilation for postintubation tracheal stenosis. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the safety and long-term efficacy of fluoroscopically guided balloon dilation in patients with postintubation tracheal stenosis. METHODS: From February 2000 to November 2010, 14 patients underwent fluoroscopically guided balloon dilation for postintubation tracheal stenosis. Technical success, clinical success, and complications were evaluated. Patients were followed up for recurrent symptoms. RESULTS: In all patients, fluoroscopically guided balloon dilation was technically and clinically successful with no major complications. Following the initial procedure, six patients (43 %) remained asymptomatic during a follow-up period. Obstructive symptoms recurred in eight patients (57 %) within 6 months (mean, 1.7 months), who were treated with repeat balloon dilation (n = 4) and other therapies. Of the four patients who underwent repeat balloon dilation, three became asymptomatic. One patient became asymptomatic after a third balloon dilation. On long-term (mean, 74 months) follow-up, 71 % of patients experienced relief of symptoms following fluoroscopically guided balloon dilation. CONCLUSIONS: Fluoroscopically guided balloon dilation may be safe, is easy to perform, and resulted in effective treatment in patients with postintubation tracheal stenosis.
BACKGROUND: The risk of acute kidney injury produced by intravenous radiocontrast in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) has been well known, but little is known about the long-term effects on renal function. METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 176 CKD patients with estimated glomerular filtration rates (eGFR) <60 ml/min/1.73 m(2) who underwent computed tomography (CT) with intravenous radiocontrast at Pusan National University Hospital. Patients were divided into 3 groups (CKD stage 3, n = 104; CKD stage 4, n = 52; peritoneal dialysis, n = 20). Follow-up eGFR values were assessed on a monthly basis for up to 8 months. RESULTS: In baseline characteristics, there were no significant differences between the 3 groups (i.e., CKD stage 3, stage 4, and PD) in the variables of age, sex, presence of diabetes and follow-up period. There were no significant differences between eGFR before and after CT in all patients and each of the 3 investigated groups. In each group, data analysis according to the presence of diabetes mellitus (DM) did not show significant differences of eGFR before and after CT. CONCLUSION: Overall, these results illustrate that intravenous contrast media used in the standard CT scan have no significant long-term effects on renal function in CKD patients, irrespective of DM. Therefore, from a long-term perspective, contrast-enhanced CT might be a better option than gadolinium-based magnetic resonance imaging, which is known to be associated with fatal nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in CKD patients.
PURPOSE: To present a systematic approach to teaching a technique for arthrography of the shoulder. Using an adhesive marker-plate with radiopaque coordinates, precise sites for puncture can be identified and the need for fluoroscopic guidance obviated. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Forty-six glenohumeral arthrograms were performed in 45 patients; in 1 case involving examination of both shoulders. The stages of the technique are described in detail, as are the fundamental aspects of achieving an effective glenohumeral injection. Pain intensity was measured in all patients using a verbal description scale. RESULTS: Shoulder arthrography was successful in all cases. Average time taken for the procedure was 7 min, with no difference in the respective times required by an experienced radiologist and a resident. The procedure was well tolerated by most patients, with slight discomfort being observed in a very few cases. CONCLUSION: The arthrographic technique used in this study is simple, safe, rapid, and reproducible, and has the advantage of precise localization of the site for puncture without need for fluoroscopic guidance. The procedure described in this study can be of help in teaching residents and can reduce the learning curve for radiologists with no experience in arthrographic methods. It also reduces the time of exposure to fluoroscopy.
This prospective multicenter study analyzes the image quality and incidence of undesirable side effects in 2543 film and 1133 intravenous digital subtraction angiographic (DSA) examinations with iopromide. It can be shown that the frequency of undesired side effects in both methods is twice as high in patients at risk as in patients without special risk factors. The most frequent side effects are gastrointestinal and, in cerebral angiography, of a central nervous system nature. The image quality for 99% of the film angiographies was good or better. It could be demonstrated for the DSA that a higher iodine concentration of 370 mg I/ml tends to result in a reduction of the image quality with an increased rate of side effects.
BACKGROUND: The use of contrast agents during coronary angiography can result in contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN), particularly in patients with renal dysfunction. On the contrary, different contrast agents can induce different degree of changes in cardiac function. The objective of our meta-analysis was to compare the clinical safety of iso-osmolar contrast medium iodixanol to low-osmolar contrast medium iopromide in patients with renal insufficiency undergoing coronary angiography with or without percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). METHODS: We searched Medline, Embase, Cochrane Library, and reference lists to identify randomized controlled trials that compared iodixanol to iopromide with the incidence of CIN as an endpoint in renal impaired patients undergoing coronary angiography. Outcome measures were the incidence of CIN, absolute peak serum creatinine (Scr) increase from baseline and a composite of cardiovascular adverse events. RESULTS: A total of 8 trials with 3532 patients were pooled; 1759 patients received iodixanol and 1773 patients received iopromide. There was no significant difference in the incidence of CIN (summary odds ratio [OR] 0.50, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.19-1.35, P = .17) and peak Scr increase (mean difference -0.01 mg/dL, 95% CI -0.08 to 0.05, P = .69) when iodixanol was compared with iopromide. But iodixanol was associated with a statistically significant reduction in cardiovascular adverse events when compared with iopromide (OR 0.47, 95% CI 0.30-0.73, P = .0009). CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of pooled data from 8 randomized controlled trials of iodixanol against iopromide in patients with renal insufficiency undergoing coronary angiography with or without PCI showed that iodixanol nonsignificantly reduced the incidence of CIN, but was associated with a significantly reduced risk of cardiovascular adverse events when compared with iopromide.
PURPOSE: To determine the effect of the use of iodinated contrast agents on the formation of DNA double-strand breaks during chest computed tomography (CT). MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study was approved by the institutional review board, and written informed consent was obtained from all patients. This single-center study was performed at a university hospital. A total of 179 patients underwent contrast material-enhanced CT, and 66 patients underwent unenhanced CT. Blood samples were taken from these patients prior to and immediately after CT. In these blood samples, the average number of phosphorylated histone H2AX (gammaH2AX) foci per lymphocyte was determined with fluorescence microscopy. Significant differences between the number of foci that developed in both the presence and the absence of the contrast agent were tested by using an independent sample t test. RESULTS: gammaH2AX foci levels were increased in both groups after CT. Patients who underwent contrast-enhanced CT had an increased amount of DNA radiation damage (mean increase +/- standard error of the mean, 0.056 foci per cell +/- 0.009). This increase was 107% +/- 19 higher than that in patients who underwent unenhanced CT (mean increase, 0.027 foci per cell +/- 0.014). CONCLUSION: The application of iodinated contrast agents during diagnostic x-ray procedures, such as chest CT, leads to a clear increase in the level of radiation-induced DNA damage as assessed with gammaH2AX foci formation.
Contrast media-induced nephropathy (CIN) is a known complication of intra-arterial application of radiographic contrast media (RCM) and is associated with both short- and long-term outcomes. The development of CIN is not easy to diagnose due to a lack of a uniform definition of CIN. CIN was reported in 4 to 20% of patients after intra-arterial RCM administration during coronary angiography. An all-cause mortality rate of CIN patients amounted to 9% compared with 2% among patients not developing CIN. Pre-existing chronic renal insufficiency, especially, was described as important factor predisposing for CIN, but there was recent clinical evidence that CIN may occur also in low risk ambulatory patients, probably depending on the type of RCM used. Strongly depending on the type of RCM administered there were marked differences in the morphological changes of erythrocytes as well as endothelial cells coinciding in some cases with microcirculatory disorders in patients as well as in animal models. Iodixanol brought about the least cellular and microcirculatory effects while Iopromide induced the strongest disturbances in capillary perfusion and myocardial oxygen tension. It is unclear, however, whether this favours the development of CIN.
16 DSA investigations using intra-arterial Gd-DTPA were performed on 12 patients. The contrast medium was administered either as a 0.5 molar gadolinium solution (commercially available) or diluted with distilled water to a 0.2-0.4 molar gadolinium solution. The injection was made either by pressure injector or by hand. The aortic arch, abdominal aorta and pelvic and lower limb arteries were examined. 14 of the 16 procedures were diagnostically adequate, but compared with iodinated contrast materials, contrast was less marked. There were no cardiovascular, neurological or allergic side effects. Three patients suffered a feeling of heat and one patient had mild pain during the injection. Even large volumes rapidly injected (up to 20 ml/s of the commercially available solution) were well tolerated. DSA with intra-arterial Gd-DTPA seems to be a suitable alternative for vascular imaging if iodine-containing contrast materials are contraindicated.
Radiographic contrast media can lead to drastic changes of the morphology of erythrocytes. The change of the erythrocyte morphology is associated with a decreased deformability possibly resulting from distinctions in the loss of constituents of the membrane cytoskeleton. However, it is unclear whether there is an intravascular hemolysis as a consequence of the disintegration of the erythrocyte membrane. The results of this study showed, that free haemoglobin increased from 16.8 +/- 10.0 mg/dl to 21.6 +/- 12.6 mg/dl after Iopromide application (p = 0.240), while it slightly decreased from 20.5 +/- 10.3 mg/dl to 19.5 +/- 12.2 mg/dl after Iodixanol application (p = 0.547). The slight decrease of free haemoglobin after application of Iodixanol differed significantly compared to the increase of free haemoglobin after Iopromide application (p < 0.05). This different response is thought to give evidence to the assumption that the erythrocyte membrane integrity was compromised leading to the release of free haemoglobin as an indicator of hemolysis as well.
The new non-ionic contrast agent, iopromide (Schering) is comparable in osmolality and viscosity to the other recently developed low osmolality media, ionic and non-ionic. Its chemotoxicity, as assessed by protein binding, enzyme inhibition and effects on the coagulation cascade is significantly less than that of the conventional media and very similar to that of another established new non-ionic agent, iopamidol (Niopam, Bracco/Merck).
BACKGROUND: Many papers have focused on the importance of granulocytes in the process of reperfusion and ischemia. Most of the clinical studies measured several parameters of this process during and after coronary angiography, without taking into account the effect of the radiographic contrast media (RCM) used during this procedure. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a randomized patient study (n = 37) to evaluate the effect of ionic and non-ionic RCM on granulocyte adhesion during coronary angiography. We also evaluated the influence of the ionicity and osmolarity of the different substances on granulocyte adhesion molecules in in vitro experiments. RESULTS: The osmolarity of patient serum samples increased from 302 +/- 1 to 309 +/- 1 mOsm/kg (p < 0.05) after infusion of RCM. The CD11b expression in the samples of the non-ionic RCM treated group increased from 221 +/- 21 MFI to 377 +/- 30 MFI (p < 0.05) measured as the absolute mean fluorescence intensity (MFI), yet did not alter significantly in the ionic RCM group. In contrast, the in vitro experiments showed a reduction of the CD11b expression from 360 +/- 70 MFI to 149 +/- 30 MFI (p < 0.05) in the ionic RCM group. CONCLUSIONS: The upregulation of adhesion molecules was significantly reduced in vivo with ionic RCM, while ionic substances caused opposite effects in vitro. This effect should be taken into account when performing leukocyte functional analysis of samples taken during angiography.
Non-ionic agents have pharmacological side effects, such as seizure, alteration of cerebral function, confusion, short-term memory loss, mental aberrations and ophthalmoplegia. In this report, we present two cases that developed contrast-induced encephalopathy following coronary angioplasty by the non-ionic contrast agent, iopromide (Ultravist((R))). As a result, we concluded that iopromide-induced encephalopathy may occur during angioplasty in patients with no particular predispositions. In addition to that, contrast-induced encephalopathy should be considered as a new-onset neurological disorder.
