BACKGROUND: Ioversol is a commonly used non-ionic radiological contrast media in medical imaging to enhance the visualization of blood vessels, tissues, or organs. However, if it is not completely excreted, ioversol can interfere with urinalysis and lead to abnormal test results. METHODS: This study reported a case where the contrast media ioversol interfered with Sysmex UN automated urine analyzer. RESULTS: UC-3500 displayed no test results except the error code "0401". UF-4000 indicated "abnormally high RBCs" and no parameter results. CONCLUSIONS: Urine specimens containing contrast media are considered unqualified samples. Urinalysis should be performed only after the patient has completely excreted the contrast media.
BACKGROUND: Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is a relatively rare exfoliative dermatosis consisting of a generalized eruption of sterile, nonfollicular pustules arising on widespread erythematous and edematous skin that is usually caused by drugs. It has an acute onset, and patients often have systemic manifestations, including leukocytosis, fever, and hemodynamic instability. Rarely has AGEP been associated with radiocontrast dyes. OBSERVATIONS: We describe an 84-year-old man who developed AGEP on 2 separate occasions after receiving an infusion of an ioversol-containing radiocontrast dye. Conclusion Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis may occur after the use of intravenous radiocontrast dye.
Over 20 years have passed since the introduction of the tri-iodinated low-osmolar nonionic contrast agents such as iopamidol, iohexol, ioversol and iopromide. During this time, most cardiology practices have switched to these nonionic agents to avoid the nuisance side effects and cardiac adverse events associated with the older ionic contrast agents. Although the improved tolerability of the nonionic agents is generally attributed to their decreased osmolality (approximately half that of the older ionic contrast agents), in fact, these contrast agents also differ from the older agents in their ionicity, viscosity and direct chemotoxicity. The impact of these properties on safety, together with cost differences, should be considered when selecting a contrast agent.
The authors summarize the results of the main preclinical studies conducted to evaluate the tolerance of ioversol (Optiray), a new non ionic Low Osmolality Contrast Medium (LOCM). The various studies conducted by different routes of administration, in a number of animal species and at different dosages led to the conclusion that the product was equivalent or superior to the other non ionic agents used as references. This high inertia towards the biological systems particularly well evidenced in the neurologic tolerance studies has to be relied to the non ionic LOCM character of the agent but also to its highest hydrophilicity in its class and to the good distribution of this hydrophilicity around the molecule. These physiochemical characteristics which differentiate ioversol from the other products of its class make it a promising product for clinical use in humans.
Intravenous contrast medium (ICM) rarely induces anaphylactic reactions, including urticaria, hypotension and respiratory failure. Even the most modern ICM may cause such adverse events. Thrombocytopenia has been reported as an extreme rare consequence of ICM. Here we report on a case of a 72-year-old male patient with a self-limiting severe acute thrombocytopenia following administration of intravenous non-ionic low-osmolarity contrast medium. No such low platelet count has ever been reported. We also present a review of the literature.
BACKGROUND: Acute pericarditis is a close clinical mimic of pulmonary embolism (PE) in the emergency department, and thus many of these patients are evaluated with chest computed tomography (CT). PURPOSE: To study whether CT findings can be diagnostic of acute pericarditis. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Using the electronic medical record, we retrospectively identified 46 cases of acute pericarditis and 46 control patients with pericardial effusions due to volume overload, all of whom underwent CT examination. Cases were reviewed by two blinded academic thoracic radiologists. RESULTS: The majority, 67%, of the pericarditis cases were evaluated with PE-protocol CTs. Pericardial thickening/enhancement was the most accurate single parameter for pericarditis, with sensitivity of 54-59% and specificity of 91-96%. CONCLUSION: CT findings, while not sensitive for pericarditis, are diagnostic, with few false-positives. Radiologists should be attentive to pericardial thickening or enhancement on CT studies done for chest pain, as they may be able to suggest pericarditis as an alternative diagnosis for the chest pain.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the incidence of adverse drug reactions (ADRs), including hypersensitivity reactions (HSRs) and post-contrast acute kidney injury (PC-AKI), after intra-arterial (IA) administration of ioversol. METHODS AND MATERIALS: A systematic literature search was performed (1980-2021) and studies documenting IA use of ioversol, and reporting safety outcomes were selected. Key information on study design, patients' characteristics, indication, dose, and type of safety outcome were extracted. RESULTS: Twenty-eight studies (including two pediatric studies) with 8373 patients exposed to IA ioversol were selected. Studies were highly heterogenous in terms of design, PC-AKI definition, and studied population. PC-AKI incidence after coronary angiography was 7.5-21.9% in a general population, 4.0-26.4% in diabetic patients, and 5.5-28.9% in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). PC-AKI requiring dialysis was rare and reported mainly in patients with severe CKD. No significant differences in PC-AKI rates were shown in studies comparing different iodinated contrast media (ICM). Based on seven studies of ioversol clinical development, the overall ADR incidence was 1.6%, comparable to that reported with other non-ionic ICM. Pediatric data were scarce with only one study reporting on PC-AKI incidence (12%), and one reporting on ADR incidence (0.09%), both after coronary angiography. CONCLUSIONS: After ioversol IA administration, PC-AKI incidence was highly variable between studies, likely reflecting the heterogeneity of the included study populations, and appeared comparable to that reported with other ICM. The rate of other ADRs appears to be low. Well-designed studies are needed for a better comparison with other ICM. KEY POINTS: * PC-AKI incidence after IA administration of ioversol appears to be comparable to that of other ICM, despite the high variability between studies. * The need for dialysis after IA administration of ioversol is rare. * No obvious difference was found regarding the safety profile of ioversol between IA and IV administration.
AIM: To evaluate the influence of the intravenous injection of iodine during cardiac catheterisation, and of topical iodine antiseptics during surgical procedures, on thyroid function in full term neonates. METHODS: Twenty one full term infants with major cardiac anomalies who survived for more than a month were studied. Thyroxine and thyrotropin concentrations were measured (by radioimmunoassay) before each procedure, 24 hours after the procedure, and every week thereafter until the age of 1 month or until normal. Thyroxine values less than 64.4 nmol/l were considered low, while thyrotropin values greater than 30 mU/l were considered high. RESULTS: Thyroid function tests before iodine exposure were within normal limits in all infants. Following catheterisation or surgery six infants had raised thyrotropin concentrations; three had low thyroxine concentrations. Two of those infants were treated with L-thyroxine. CONCLUSION: Iodine exposure during cardiac catheterisation or surgery may induce transient hypothyroidism in term infants.
Combining photothermal therapy (PTT) and multimodality molecular imaging into one nanotheranostic can improve the diagnostics and therapeutics outcome of malignant tumors significantly. Herein, a heteronanostructure (named Au-Fe3O4@PDA-PEG-DTPA-Gd) has been synthesized for multimodality molecular imaging-guided PTT by conjugation of gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA) on a polydopamine (PDA) coated Au-Fe3O4 heterodimeric via a polyethylene glycol (PEG) crosslinker. Au-Fe3O4@PDA-PEG-DTPA-Gd exhibits reasonable biocompatibility, high photothermal conversion efficiency (eta = 41.3%), integration of excellent T1-/T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, the molar longitudinal relaxivity rate (r1) = 6.14 mM-1 s-1/transverse relaxation rate (r2) = 71.88 mM-1 s-1) and X-ray computed tomography imaging (CT, approximately 1.94 times higher than that of the commercial CT contrast agent ioversol) contrast functionality. The theranostic capability of Au-Fe3O4@PDA-PEG-DTPA-Gd has been verified on the triple negative breast tumor cell (MDA-MB-231 cell) and MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing mouse model. From MR/CT imaging, Au-Fe3O4@PDA-PEG-DTPA-Gd shows remarkable PTT efficacy, which completely inhibits MDA-MB-231 tumor growth in vivo with a single treatment.
History A 3-month-old previously healthy girl presented to an outside institution with a 4-day history of low-grade fever, irritability, and a tender "knot" in the upper abdomen. Ultrasonography (US) was performed at an outside hospital. US images were not available for review; however, they showed a mass in the left hepatic lobe, per the outside report, and the patient was referred to our institution for further evaluation. Her parents reported a normal full-term pregnancy, with regular prenatal care and normal prenatal US findings. The baby was born after an uncomplicated gestation. She was delivered at term via an uncomplicated cesarean section due to a maternal history of cesarean section. The perinatal course was uncomplicated, and there was no history of umbilical catheterization, per the parents. On arrival at our institution, the patient had a temperature of 38.2 degrees C. All other vital signs were normal. Palpation revealed a tender and firm mass in the periumbilical region; otherwise, physical examination findings were normal. Results of laboratory work-up were normal, except for elevated white blood cell count (26 600/mm(3) [26.6 x 10(9)/L]; normal, 6000-17 500/mm(3) [6-17.5 x 10(9)/L]). The patient underwent US followed by intravenous contrast material-enhanced (10 mL ioversol, Optiray 320; Medtronic, Santa Rosa, Calif) computed tomography (CT) on the same day.
After several years of clinical experience worldwide and numerous high-quality, randomized controlled trials in humans, the marked improvement in patient tolerance and safety of low osmolar contrast media (ionic and nonionic) has been demonstrated. Iohexol (Omnipaque), Iopamidol (Isovue), Ioxaglate (Hexabrix), and Ioversol (Optiray) are all now available in the United States.
A 53-year-old man developed transient cortical blindness after coronary angiography, which appears to be an adverse reaction to contrast agent. A possible mechanism of this complication is contrast penetration of the blood-brain barrier with direct neurotoxicity to the occipital cortex.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts (TIPS) have been used for almost 40 years as a safe and effective alternative to surgical shunts, mostly in the setting of portal hypertension. Well described procedural complications include hepatic encephalopathy, hemorrhage, liver infarction and failure. The risk of post procedural acute kidney injury (AKI) associated with intraprocedural intravenous contrast administration has not been evaluated. Using a retrospective chart review of all consecutive patients undergoing a TIPS procedure as part of routine clinical care between 2001 and 2011, we examined whether the volume of administered intravenous contrast was associated with AKI. Of 163 patients who had a TIPS procedure, 16% developed AKI as defined by a 0.3 mg/dl increase in serum creatinine within 48 h of the procedure. In adjusted analysis, a 50 ml increase of intravenous contrast was associated with a 1.27 (95% CI 1.01-1.60), p = 0.04 increased risk of AKI. Baseline serum creatinine was also associated with post procedural AKI; a 0.1 mg/dl increase in creatinine was associated with a 1.17 (1.04-1.31), p = 0.008 risk. In patients with underlying kidney dysfunction, a 50 ml increase of intravenous contrast was associated with a 1.63 (1.20-2.31), p = 0.003 adjusted risk of AKI. In conclusion, intravenous contrast administered during a TIPS procedure is associated with an increased risk of AKI, particularly in patients with impaired renal function at baseline.
BACKGROUND: The aims of this study were to assess the efficacy of percutaneous drainage of postoperative abscess after abdominal surgery and to identify factors predictive of failed drainage. METHODS: Data from 81 patients with postoperative abdominopelvic abscesses treated with percutaneous drainage were reviewed. Percutaneous drainage failure was considered when surgery was needed to control the sepsis. Predictive variables were sought using univariate and multivariate analyses with logistic regression models. RESULTS: Successful drainage requiring 1 (n = 46) or 2 (n = 17) procedures was observed in 63 patients (78%; 95% confidence interval, 67%-86%). Surgery was needed in 18 patients (22%; 95% confidence interval, 14%-38%). Residual collection after a first percutaneous drainage was the single predictive factor for failed drainage on univariate and multivariate analyses (P = .0275). CONCLUSIONS: Percutaneous imaging-guided drainage is a feasible and effective method for the treatment of abdominopelvic abscess, with a success rate of 78%. Residual collection is an independent predictor of unfavorable outcome after percutaneous drainage.
We report a fatal intravenous ioversol administration in a 60-year old male patient. Although the introduction of new low-osmolar non-ionogenic contrast media with a more favourable efficacy-toxicity balance has diminished the side-effects significantly, everyone involved in radiodiagnostic procedures should be aware of the potential life-threatening effects. Especially patients with risk factors for side-effects should be monitored carefully.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the incidence of adverse drug reactions (ADRs), including hypersensitivity reactions (HSRs) and post-contrast acute kidney injury (PC-AKI), after intravenous (IV) administration of ioversol. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic literature search (1980-2021) of studies documenting IV use of ioversol and presence or absence of ADRs, HSRs, or PC-AKI was performed. Key information including patients' characteristics, indication and dose of ioversol, safety outcome incidence, intensity and seriousness were extracted. RESULTS: Thirty-one studies (> 57,000 patients) were selected, including 4 pediatric studies. The incidence of ADRs in adults was reported in 12 studies from ioversol clinical development with a median (range) of 1.65% (0-33.3%), and 3 other studies with an incidence between 0.13 and 0.28%. The incidence of HSRs (reported in 2 studies) ranged from 0.20 to 0.66%, and acute events (4 studies) from 0.23 to 1.80%. Severe reactions were rare with a median (range) of 0 (0-4%), and none were reported among pediatric patients. The incidence of ADRs and HSRs with ioversol, especially those of severe intensity, was among the lowest in studies comparing different iodinated contrast media (ICM) of the same class. PC-AKI incidence was variable (1-42% in 5 studies); however, ioversol exposure per se did not increase the incidence. CONCLUSIONS: When administered by the IV route, ioversol has a good safety profile comparable to that of other ICM within the same class, with a low incidence of severe/serious ADRs overall, and particularly HSRs. PC-AKI incidence does not seem to be increased compared to patients who did not receive ioversol. Further well-designed studies are warranted to confirm these results. KEY POINTS: * Ioversol has a good safety profile in adult and pediatric patients when IV administered. * ADR and HSR incidence with ioversol, especially those of severe intensity, was among the lowest compared to other ICM. * IV administration of ioversol per se did not increase PC-AKI incidence.
BACKGROUND: In Japan, drug eruptions to nonionic iodinated contrast media have been reported since the products appeared on the market in 1986. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate this clinical finding, we analysed the number of patients with drug eruption to contrast media in our hospital from 1989 to 2003. METHODS: In total, 117 patients suspected of such drug eruptions were patch and intradermal tested with contrast media (as commercially sold). Those who tested positive were evaluated. RESULTS: Of the 117 patients, 69 patients (19 men; 50 women, mean +/- SD age 51.4 +/- 16.5 years, range 17-86) showed positive reactions to contrast media. The number was 6-13 annually from 1989 to 1995, and 1-4 annually from 1996 to 2003. CONCLUSION: Although our data suggest (but do not prove) that patients with drug eruption to contrast media decreased in number, this condition is still not rare in Japan. Higher annual exposure to contrast media, including pretesting, could play an important role in this observation.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to meta-analytically compare the incidence of acute adverse reactions (AARs) to nonionic iodinated contrast media (ICM) according to the type of ICM in patients who underwent radiologic examinations with administration of ICM via intravascular route. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic literature search identified studies evaluating the incidence of AARs to 7 nonionic ICM (iobitridol, iohexol, iomeprol, iopamidol, iopromide, ioversol, and iodixanol) with extractable outcomes. These outcomes were pooled using a random-effects model, and the effect of ICM type on the incidence of overall and severe AARs was evaluated using meta-regression analysis. RESULTS: Thirty studies with 1,360,488 exposures to ICM were included. The pooled incidences of overall and severe AARs to nonionic ICM were 1.03% (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.81%-1.30%; I = 0.99) and 0.0141% (95% CI, 0.0108%-0.0183%; I = 0.56), respectively. Iomeprol had the highest overall AAR incidence (1.74%; 95% CI, 0.79%-3.76%; I = 0.99), followed by iohexol (1.21%; 95% CI, 0.67%-2.17%; I = 0.99), iopamidol (1.10%; 95% CI, 0.60%-2.03%; I = 0.99), ioversol (0.88%; 95% CI, 0.43%-1.83%; I = 0.96), iodixanol (0.85%; 95% CI, 0.36%-1.95%; I = 0.99), iopromide (0.82%; 95% CI, 0.43%-1.55%; I = 0.99), and iobitridol (0.77%; 95% CI, 0.36%-1.62%; I = 0.99). Multivariable meta-regression analysis revealed that study design (P = 0.0014) and premedication (P = 0.0230) were statistically significant determinants affecting the incidence of overall AARs. Iodinated contrast media type did not affect the incidence of overall and severe AARs (P = 0.1453 and 0.4265, each). CONCLUSIONS: The varying pooled incidences of overall and severe AARs to specific types of nonionic ICM do not remain as significant after adjusting confounders. Our results may support nonrestriction of certain types of nonionic ICM in the context of AAR avoidance.
OBJECTIVE: To determine an injection protocol for pediatric hepatic CT and to investigate the use of power injection. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighty-seven studies were prospectively performed using ioversol (320 mg iodine per cc) at 2 cc/kg. Three techniques were used: helical (1 s/slice); dynamic, non-breath-hold (5.5 s/slice); dynamic, breath-hold (10 s/slice) scans. The liver-scan time for each study was determined. Scan initiation ranged from 25 to 80 s. An injection duration (50-100 seconds) was selected. From the contrast volume (2 cc/kg x kg body wt) and injection duration, the injection rate (cc/s) was calculated for each patient. Each study was grouped by injection rate corrected for body weight (cc/kg/min) into: 1.2-1.5, 1.51-2.0, and 2.01-2.4. The aortic/liver attenuation curves were plotted for each group. RESULTS: Liver-scan time for helical studies was a mean of 26 s, for dynamic, non-breath-hold studies 75 s, dynamic breath-hold scans were 154 s. Injection rates of 1.2-1.5 cc/kg/min produced a scanning interval of 165 s. Injection rates of 1.51-2.0 cc/kg/min produced a scanning interval of 120 s. Injection rates of 2.01-2.4 cc/kg/min produced a scanning interval of 90 s. There was no increase in hepatic attenuation for the injection rates 2.01-2.4 cc/kg/min compared with 1.51-2.0 cc/kg/min. There was one complication related to injection through a central line. CONCLUSIONS: An injection protocol was determined for helical studies with injection rates of 1.7-2.0 cc/kg/min with initiation at 60 s; for dynamic, non-breath-hold studies with injection rates of 1.5-1.7 cc/kg/min with initiation at 50 s; and for dynamic breath-hold studies with injection rates of 1.2-1.5 cc/kg/min with initiation at 45 s. Power injection was used safely in our population.
