Asthma is a common chronic disorder, with a prevalence of 8 to 10 percent in the U.S. population. From 5 to 10 percent of patients have severe disease that does not respond to typical therapeutic interventions. To prevent life-threatening sequelae, it is important to identify patients with severe asthma who will require aggressive management of exacerbations. Objective monitoring of pulmonary status using a peak flow meter is essential in patients with persistent asthma. Patients who have a history of fragmented health care, intubation, or hospitalization for asthma and those with mental illness or psychosocial stressors are at increased risk for severe asthma. Oxygen, beta2 agonists, and systemic corticosteroids are the mainstays of acute asthma therapy. Inhaled anticholinergic medications provide additional bronchodilation. In patients who deteriorate despite usual therapeutic efforts, evidence supports individualized use of parenteral beta2 agonists, magnesium sulfate, aminophylline, leukotriene inhibitors, or positive pressure mask ventilation before intubation.
BACKGROUND: A combination of ipratropium bromide (IB) and salbutamol is commonly used to treat asthma in children and adolescents; however, there has been a lack of consistency in its usage in clinical practice. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of IB + salbutamol in the treatment of asthma in children and adolescents. METHODS: The MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane Library as well as other Chinese biomedical databases (including China Biological Medicine Database, Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure, Chongqing VIP, and Wanfang Chinese language bibliographic database) were systematically searched from the earliest record date to September 2020 for randomized controlled trials in children and adolescents (</=18 years) with asthma who received IB + salbutamol or salbutamol alone. The primary outcomes included hospital admission and adverse events. A random effects model with a 95% confidence interval (CI) was used. Subgroup analysis was performed according to age, severity of asthma, and co-interventions with other asthma controllers. This study was registered with PROSPERO. RESULTS: Of the 1061 studies that were identified, 55 met the inclusion criteria and involved 6396 participants. IB + salbutamol significantly reduced the risk of hospital admission compared with salbutamol alone (risk ratio [RR] 0.79; 95% CI 0.66-0.95; p = 0.01; I2 = 40%). Subgroup analysis only showed significant difference in the risk of hospital admission in participants with severe asthma exacerbation (RR 0.73; 95% CI 0.60-0.88; p = 0.0009; I2 = 4%) and moderate-to-severe exacerbation (RR 0.69; 95% CI 0.50-0.96; p = 0.03; I2 = 3%). There were no significant differences in the risk of adverse events between IB + salbutamol group and salbutamol alone group (RR 1.77; 95% CI 0.63-4.98). CONCLUSION: IB + salbutamol may be more effective than salbutamol alone for the treatment of asthma in children and adolescents, especially in those with severe and moderate to severe asthma exacerbation. The very low to high quality of evidence indicated that future well-designed double-blind RCTs with large sample are needed for research on evaluating the effectiveness of IB + salbutamol treatment for asthma in children and adolescents.
The prevalence of chronic airways diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma is increasing. They lead to symptoms such as a cough and shortness of breath, partially through bronchoconstriction. Inhaled anticholinergics are one of a number of treatments designed to treat bronchoconstriction in airways disease. Both short-acting and long-acting agents are now available and this review highlights their efficacy and adverse event profile in chronic airways diseases.
Although our information on the pharmacological effects of ipratropium bromide in childhood has increased, its role has yet largely to be defined. Studies indicate that in children over the age of 2 to 3 years the optimal dose is probably 250 micrograms. For children under this age the maximum dose should probably be 125 micrograms delivered as a nebulized solution. In pre-term babies doses in excess of 20 micrograms are likely to produce side effects. Studies indicate that ipratropium bromide is effective in some pre-term babies who have airways obstruction following positive pressure ventilation but it can be a useful agent in the first 18 months of life, when beta 2-stimulants are rarely effective. Approximately 40% of children with recurrent attacks of airways obstruction obtain very useful benefit. Its place in the management of older children with asthma has yet to be defined. Although there have been a number of recent studies on the role of ipratropium bromide in childhood, information remains relatively sparse.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the world. In the majority of cases, the disease is the result of years of cigarette smoking. Contributing factors leading to bronchial obstruction in COPD include mucus hypersecretion and an increase in bronchial muscle tone, which is triggered mainly by cholinergic mechanisms. Anticholinergic bronchodilators reduce vagal cholinergic tone, the main reversible component of COPD; hence they are the first-line treatment for bronchial obstruction in COPD. In addition to improving lung function, anticholinergics improve dyspnea, quality of life and exercise tolerance, and they reduce exacerbations. When compared with other bronchodilators, anticholinergics show at least equivalent bronchodilator potency, but with fewer side effects. In addition, due to their unique site of action, anticholinergics can be effectively combined with other bronchodilators. The introduction of new, long-acting anticholinergics is a promising addition to the treatment of COPD and is expected to lead to improved treatment outcomes and improved patient compliance.
Pharmacological anisocoria is a rare but benign condition. This paper presents an eleven-year-old patient with asthma who developed ipratropium bromide-associated anisocoria during nebulizer treatment. Hypotheses regarding the possible causes of anisocoria are discussed and precautions to be taken during treatment are presented. To prevent the development of anisocoria, it was found that it is important to use the appropriate mask during nebulizer treatment, to place the mask on the face properly, and, if possible, to administer drugs by closing the eyes. Further, it is recommended that patients undergo an ophthalmological examination before discharge and that they and their families be informed that the condition is temporary.
Research clarifying the role of the parasympathetic nervous system in the pathophysiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has renewed interest in anticholinergic therapy of these disease processes. The investigational agent ipratropium bromide produces bronchodilation by competitive inhibition of cholinergic receptors on bronchial smooth muscle, antagonizing the action of acetylcholine. When administered via inhalation at therapeutic doses of 20-40 micrograms, ipratropium is somewhat less effective than beta-agonists in asthmatics. In the treatment of chronic bronchitis, however, ipratropium appears at least as effective as, and possibly superior to, the sympathomimetics. Combination therapy with beta-agonists or theophylline has resulted in enhanced effect over single-agent regimens. Due to the low serum concentrations achieved following inhalation, ipratropium has been well tolerated and is virtually free of significant adverse reactions. The primary role of ipratropium in therapy remains to be defined but appears to be as an alternative to beta-agonists in patients who fail to respond or who experience troublesome side effects. In addition, combination therapy may prove to be another important use of ipratropium in the management of COPD.
Since the 1970s, when inhaled anticholinergic agents were first introduced as adjunct therapies for the immediate treatment of pediatric asthma exacerbations, several trials have shown varying degrees of benefit from their use as bronchodilators in combination with inhaled short-acting beta-adrenergic agonists and systemic corticosteroids. Although other anticholinergics exist, ipratropium bromide (IB) specifically has emerged as the overwhelming choice of pulmonologists and emergency physicians because of its limited systemic absorption from the lungs when given as an inhaled preparation. However, although the varying trials, predominantly in the emergency department setting, have typically shown a trend toward improved outcomes, none has set forth clear dosing protocol recommendations for use by practicing physicians. It is our goal in this review of the available literature on the use of IB, as an adjunct to inhaled short-acting beta-adrenergic agonists, to summarize practical, evidence-based recommendations for use in the pediatric emergency department setting for acute asthma exacerbations. We also hope to better delineate the most effective dosing regimen in those patients who might benefit most from the addition of IB and to explore proposed additional benefits it may have as a modulator of cholinergic-induced effects from high-dose beta-agonist therapy and viral triggers.
We frequently recommend ipratropium nasal spray in our office, as it is an effective, non-addictive nasal decongestant.
Antimuscarinic treatment of airway disease has a long and colorful history leading to its present day use as an effective bronchodilator in chronic obstructed pulmonary disease (COPD) as well as an antisecretory drug for watery rhinorrhea. Present formulations are limited to ipratropium bromide, a safe and effective respiratory therapeutic. The bronchodilation from ipratropium, as documented by spirometry, has been well established both alone and in combination with albuterol. Evidence suggests that anticholinergics can affect other important aspects of COPD, such as dynamic hyperinflation, and further studies are warranted to confirm long-term physiologic effects and associated health outcomes. Finally, current development of the long-acting compound tiotropium has provided hope for the next generation of antimuscarinic agents represented by once-daily therapy.
There are few experimental data evaluating the effect of inhaled bronchodilator treatment in the critically ill patient in the intensive care unit. Extrapolating from the data that are available in chronic and acute asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) studies, it appears that both agents may be beneficial. Beta-adrenergic receptor agonists are first-line agents in asthma. However, anticholinergics may be valuable as additive agents or as single agents if the patient is intolerant of beta-adrenergic side effects. This may be especially important in the critically ill patient with multiple organ failure in whom excessive tachycardia may reduce oxygen delivery. Anticholinergics and beta 2-adrenergic agonists both appear to be beneficial in smoking-related chronic bronchitis. Finally, because of the severity of illness in the critical care setting, both drugs should be titrated to maximal effect when possible, monitoring closely for adverse effects of the larger than normal doses that are used.
This article reviews the role of anticholinergic therapy for the rhinorrhea that occurs in various rhinopathies, including irritant reactions, perennial nonallergic rhinitis, viral infection rhinitis, allergic rhinitis, and temperature-induced rhinitis. The use of a topical anticholinergic medication, ipratropium bromide, and its ability to inhibit methacholine and rhinitis-induced hypersecretion is emphasized. Ipratropium bromide appears to be both safe and effective in reducing this troublesome symptom.
Inhaled ipratropium bromide (IPR) is effective in the management of COPD. The purpose of this study was to determine if doubling the standard dose of IPR resulted in greater bronchodilation and if the addition of an inhaled beta-agonist was superior to standard dose IPR alone. Twelve male patients with stable COPD completed a double blind, randomized trial. On each of three consecutive days, following baseline spirometry, all patients inhaled two puffs of IPR. This was followed by either two additional puffs of IPR, two puffs of metaproterenol (META), or two puffs of placebo. All inhalants were delivered by an InspirEase spacer. Spirometry was repeated at 30, 60, 120, and 180 minutes. The group mean percentage increases in the FEV1 and FVC from baseline were similar at all times tested for the three protocols. In conclusion, for the group, there was no objective benefit to doubling the standard dose of IPR or combining IPR with META. Two of 12 patients benefited from combining the two bronchodilators. A potential sequence for bronchodilator testing is suggested.
AIMS: A recent communication from the United States Food and Drug Administration highlighted a possible increased risk of stroke associated with use of the relatively new inhaled anticholinergic drug, tiotropium bromide. Using the United Kingdom General Practice Research Database, we set out to assess the risk of stroke in individuals exposed to inhaled tiotropium bromide and two other inhaled treatments for airways disease. METHODS: We used the self-controlled case-series that reduces confounding and minimizes the potential for biases in the quantification of risk estimates. RESULTS: Of 1043 people with a diagnosis of incident stroke who had had at least one prescription for tiotropium bromide, 980 satisfied inclusion criteria. The age-adjusted incidence rate ratio for all-cause stoke in individuals exposed to tiotropium bromide (n = 980), ipratropium bromide (n = 4181) and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate (n = 1000) was 1.1 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.9, 1.3], 0.8 (95% CI 0.7, 0.9) and 1.0 (95% CI 0.9, 1.2), respectively. CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence of an increased risk of all-cause stroke for individuals exposed to commonly prescribed inhaled treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Forty patients presenting with watery rhinorrhoea as their main complaint were entered in an open trial of long-term intranasal ipratropium bromide. Fourteen of these (35 per cent) found it to be beneficial and completed one year of treatment. Side-effects were seen in 28 patients (70 per cent) but these were local and mild in nature. All resolved during the trial as patients adjusted the dosage to individual severity and frequency of symptoms. No significant systemic effects were noted during the course of therapy. Ipratropium is a useful drug in the treatment of watery rhinorrhoea and appears safe for long-term use.
The submucous glands of the nose have an abundant innervation from the parasympathetic nervous system, and rhinorrhea, a symptom of perennial rhinitis, is in all probability caused by an increased activity in these nerves. Pharmacological blockade with atropine-like compounds will therefore be a logical method of treatment. Rhinorrhoea was brought about in the laboratory in 15 healthy experimental subjects by the intranasal application of methacholine. The experimental subjects were pretreated with Ipratropium (Atrovent, Boehringer-Ingelheim) or placebo in a double-blind trial and it was found that Atrovent could effectively inhibit the methacholine induced hypersecretion for up to 6 hours, without local or systemic side-effects. The methacholine induced hypersecretion could also be effectively blocked in 10 patients with perennial rhinitis, and an open clinical study demonstrated that Atrovent had an effect on the spontaneous rhinorrhoea of these patients.
This study has compared the short-term bronchodilator effects of inhaled anticholinergic (ipratropium bromide) and sympathomimetic (fenoterol) agents alone and in combination in 18 asthmatic patients. the study was of double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design. The combination of 60 micrograms ipratropium bromide and 200 micrograms of fenoterol had a greater bronchodilator effect than lower dose combinations or either drug alone. Small but significant gains may be made with combination inhaled bronchodilator therapy.
This article reviews the use of ipratropium bromide concomitantly with other bronchodilators, with a focus on its use in patients with asthma. Patients with asthma generally have demonstrated a greater response to the combination of ipratropium and other anti-asthma drugs than to either drug alone. No increase in side effects has been observed when ipratropium has been used in combination with other bronchodilating drugs. Overall, the combination of ipratropium with other agents appears to offer promise in therapy for asthma; further investigation of combinations in larger patient populations is warranted.
BACKGROUND: The use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) has contributed to the depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer resulting in serious health concerns. Ipratropium bromide/salbutamol sulphate CFC-pressurized metered-dose inhalers (IB/SAL-CFC pMDI) have been in widespread use for many years without any apparent ill consequences. This combination has now been reformulated using the hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) propellant. This study sought to establish the clinical noninferiority of a new HFA-containing IB/SAL pMDI to the conventional IB/SAL-CFC pMDI in subjects with mild/moderate COPD. METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, multicenter study in two consecutive periods: a 14-day run-in period followed by a 85-day treatment period. Eligible mild-to-moderate stable COPD subjects aged 40-75 years were enrolled into the study and entered the run-in period during which subjects withdrew all the bronchodilators, except for salbutamol as rescue medication. Subjects were randomized to 85 days treatment with either IB/SAL-HFA or IB/SAL-CFC, 20 mug qid. RESULTS: Of the 290 randomized patients, 249 completed the study. The primary efficacy variable was the change in forced expiratory volume in one second from predose to 60 minutes after dosing on day 85. At the end of the treatment period, the adjusted mean change in forced expiratory volume in one second at 60 minutes was 123 mL in the IB/SAL-HFA pMDI group and 115 mL in the IB/SAL-CFC pMDI group. Because the lower limit of the 95% confidence interval for the between-group difference (-62 mL) was well within the noninferiority margin (-100 mL), the HFA formulation was deemed clinically noninferior to the CFC formulation. This finding was supported by secondary efficacy assessments. Both formulations of IB/SAL were well tolerated during the prolonged multiple dosing. CONCLUSION: It is concluded that IB/SAL-HFA pMDI provides effective bronchodilation of similar degree to that achieved with IB/SAL-CFC pMDI. Therefore, IB/SAL-HFA pMDI is a valuable alternative to IB/SAL-CFC pMDI.
Several bronchodilator medications exhibit body-time (i.e., biological rhythm)-dependent changes in their pharmacokinetics and effects. Epinephrine (Adrenalin), metaproterenol (orciprenaline), aminophylline, and ipratropium bromide all have a better effect on the tone of the airways during the night and/or morning, when bronchial patency is low, than during the day, when it is high. The pharmacokinetics of sustained-release theophyllines (SRTs) exhibit administration-time differences. Day-night dosing-time differences in the kinetics of theophylline are especially prominent in children. Generally, in day-active asthmatic children the absorption of SRT is more rapid after a morning than an evening dosing. The administration-time effect on the kinetics of SRTs also is apparent in adult patients, but the magnitude of difference between the day versus evening administrations apparently is more moderate. Initial findings from studies of unequal (morning versus evening) BID dosing schedules--more theophylline or terbutaline before bed-time than arising--reveal a better therapeutic advantage relative to equal BID dosing schedules for those patients with predominantly nocturnal symptoms. Once-daily (OD) SRTs intended for delivery of the entire daily dose at a single time also differ quantitatively in their chronokinetics. Since asthma is mainly a nocturnal disease in many patients, it has been recommended by many that ODSRTs be taken in the evening. If taken in the morning, as is the current practice in the United States, they may not ensure therapeutic theophylline blood levels during the night when most needed. Moreover, not all ODSRTs appear suitable for once-nightly administration because of unacceptable kinetics.
