BACKGROUND: Angiotensinogen is the sole precursor of angiotensin peptides and has a key role in the pathogenesis of hypertension. Zilebesiran, an investigational RNA interference therapeutic agent with a prolonged duration of action, inhibits hepatic angiotensinogen synthesis. METHODS: In this phase 1 study, patients with hypertension were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either a single ascending subcutaneous dose of zilebesiran (10, 25, 50, 100, 200, 400, or 800 mg) or placebo and were followed for 24 weeks (Part A). Part B assessed the effect of the 800-mg dose of zilebesiran on blood pressure under low- or high-salt diet conditions, and Part E the effect of that dose when coadministered with irbesartan. End points included safety, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics, and the change from baseline in systolic and diastolic blood pressure, as measured by 24-hour ambulatory blood-pressure monitoring. RESULTS: Of 107 patients enrolled, 5 had mild, transient injection-site reactions. There were no reports of hypotension, hyperkalemia, or worsening of renal function resulting in medical intervention. In Part A, patients receiving zilebesiran had decreases in serum angiotensinogen levels that were correlated with the administered dose (r = -0.56 at week 8; 95% confidence interval, -0.69 to -0.39). Single doses of zilebesiran (>/=200 mg) were associated with decreases in systolic blood pressure (>10 mm Hg) and diastolic blood pressure (>5 mm Hg) by week 8; these changes were consistent throughout the diurnal cycle and were sustained at 24 weeks. Results from Parts B and E were consistent with attenuation of the effect on blood pressure by a high-salt diet and with an augmented effect through coadministration with irbesartan, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Dose-dependent decreases in serum angiotensinogen levels and 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure were sustained for up to 24 weeks after a single subcutaneous dose of zilebesiran of 200 mg or more; mild injection-site reactions were observed. (Funded by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03934307; EudraCT number, 2019-000129-39.).
BACKGROUND: Sparsentan, a novel, non-immunosuppressive, single-molecule, dual endothelin angiotensin receptor antagonist, significantly reduced proteinuria versus irbesartan, an angiotensin II receptor blocker, at 36 weeks (primary endpoint) in patients with immunoglobulin A nephropathy in the phase 3 PROTECT trial's previously reported interim analysis. Here, we report kidney function and outcomes over 110 weeks from the double-blind final analysis. METHODS: PROTECT, a double-blind, randomised, active-controlled, phase 3 study, was done across 134 clinical practice sites in 18 countries throughout the Americas, Asia, and Europe. Patients aged 18 years or older with biopsy-proven primary IgA nephropathy and proteinuria of at least 1.0 g per day despite maximised renin-angiotensin system inhibition for at least 12 weeks were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive sparsentan (target dose 400 mg oral sparsentan once daily) or irbesartan (target dose 300 mg oral irbesartan once daily) based on a permuted-block randomisation method. The primary endpoint was proteinuria change between treatment groups at 36 weeks. Secondary endpoints included rate of change (slope) of the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), changes in proteinuria, a composite of kidney failure (confirmed 40% eGFR reduction, end-stage kidney disease, or all-cause mortality), and safety and tolerability up to 110 weeks from randomisation. Secondary efficacy outcomes were assessed in the full analysis set and safety was assessed in the safety set, both of which were defined as all patients who were randomly assigned and received at least one dose of randomly assigned study drug. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03762850. FINDINGS: Between Dec 20, 2018, and May 26, 2021, 203 patients were randomly assigned to the sparsentan group and 203 to the irbesartan group. One patient from each group did not receive the study drug and was excluded from the efficacy and safety analyses (282 [70%] of 404 included patients were male and 272 [67%] were White) . Patients in the sparsentan group had a slower rate of eGFR decline than those in the irbesartan group. eGFR chronic 2-year slope (weeks 6-110) was -2.7 mL/min per 1.73 m(2) per year versus -3.8 mL/min per 1.73 m(2) per year (difference 1.1 mL/min per 1.73 m(2) per year, 95% CI 0.1 to 2.1; p=0.037); total 2-year slope (day 1-week 110) was -2.9 mL/min per 1.73 m(2) per year versus -3.9 mL/min per 1.73 m(2) per year (difference 1.0 mL/min per 1.73 m(2) per year, 95% CI -0.03 to 1.94; p=0.058). The significant reduction in proteinuria at 36 weeks with sparsentan was maintained throughout the study period; at 110 weeks, proteinuria, as determined by the change from baseline in urine protein-to-creatinine ratio, was 40% lower in the sparsentan group than in the irbesartan group (-42.8%, 95% CI -49.8 to -35.0, with sparsentan versus -4.4%, -15.8 to 8.7, with irbesartan; geometric least-squares mean ratio 0.60, 95% CI 0.50 to 0.72). The composite kidney failure endpoint was reached by 18 (9%) of 202 patients in the sparsentan group versus 26 (13%) of 202 patients in the irbesartan group (relative risk 0.7, 95% CI 0.4 to 1.2). Treatment-emergent adverse events were well balanced between sparsentan and irbesartan, with no new safety signals. INTERPRETATION: Over 110 weeks, treatment with sparsentan versus maximally titrated irbesartan in patients with IgA nephropathy resulted in significant reductions in proteinuria and preservation of kidney function. FUNDING: Travere Therapeutics.
BACKGROUND: Sparsentan is a novel, non-immunosuppressive, single-molecule, dual endothelin and angiotensin receptor antagonist being examined in an ongoing phase 3 trial in adults with IgA nephropathy. We report the prespecified interim analysis of the primary proteinuria efficacy endpoint, and safety. METHODS: PROTECT is an international, randomised, double-blind, active-controlled study, being conducted in 134 clinical practice sites in 18 countries. The study examines sparsentan versus irbesartan in adults (aged >/=18 years) with biopsy-proven IgA nephropathy and proteinuria of 1.0 g/day or higher despite maximised renin-angiotensin system inhibitor treatment for at least 12 weeks. Participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive sparsentan 400 mg once daily or irbesartan 300 mg once daily, stratified by estimated glomerular filtration rate at screening (30 to <60 mL/min per 1.73 m(2) and >/=60 mL/min per 1.73 m(2)) and urine protein excretion at screening (</=1.75 g/day and >1.75 g/day). The primary efficacy endpoint was change from baseline to week 36 in urine protein-creatinine ratio based on a 24-h urine sample, assessed using mixed model repeated measures. Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) were safety endpoints. All endpoints were examined in all participants who received at least one dose of randomised treatment. The study is ongoing and is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03762850. FINDINGS: Between Dec 20, 2018, and May 26, 2021, 404 participants were randomly assigned to sparsentan (n=202) or irbesartan (n=202) and received treatment. At week 36, the geometric least squares mean percent change from baseline in urine protein-creatinine ratio was statistically significantly greater in the sparsentan group (-49.8%) than the irbesartan group (-15.1%), resulting in a between-group relative reduction of 41% (least squares mean ratio=0.59; 95% CI 0.51-0.69; p<0.0001). TEAEs with sparsentan were similar to irbesartan. There were no cases of severe oedema, heart failure, hepatotoxicity, or oedema-related discontinuations. Bodyweight changes from baseline were not different between the sparsentan and irbesartan groups. INTERPRETATION: Once-daily treatment with sparsentan produced meaningful reduction in proteinuria compared with irbesartan in adults with IgA nephropathy. Safety of sparsentan was similar to irbesartan. Future analyses after completion of the 2-year double-blind period will show whether these beneficial effects translate into a long-term nephroprotective potential of sparsentan. FUNDING: Travere Therapeutics.
BACKGROUND: An unmet need exists for focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) treatment. In an 8-week, phase 2 trial, sparsentan, a dual endothelin-angiotensin receptor antagonist, reduced proteinuria in patients with FSGS. The efficacy and safety of longer-term treatment with sparsentan for FSGS are unknown. METHODS: In this phase 3 trial, we enrolled patients with FSGS (without known secondary causes) who were 8 to 75 years of age; patients were randomly assigned to receive sparsentan or irbesartan (active control) for 108 weeks. The surrogate efficacy end point assessed at the prespecified interim analysis at 36 weeks was the FSGS partial remission of proteinuria end point (defined as a urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio of </=1.5 [with protein and creatinine both measured in grams] and a >40% reduction in the ratio from baseline). The primary efficacy end point was the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) slope at the time of the final analysis. The change in eGFR from baseline to 4 weeks after the end of treatment (week 112) was a secondary end point. Safety was also evaluated. RESULTS: A total of 371 patients underwent randomization: 184 were assigned to receive sparsentan and 187 to receive irbesartan. At 36 weeks, the percentage of patients with partial remission of proteinuria was 42.0% in the sparsentan group and 26.0% in the irbesartan group (P = 0.009), a response that was sustained through 108 weeks. At the time of the final analysis at week 108, there were no significant between-group differences in the eGFR slope; the between-group difference in total slope (day 1 to week 108) was 0.3 ml per minute per 1.73 m(2) of body-surface area per year (95% confidence interval [CI], -1.7 to 2.4), and the between-group difference in the slope from week 6 to week 108 (i.e., chronic slope) was 0.9 ml per minute per 1.73 m(2) per year (95% CI, -1.3 to 3.0). The mean change in eGFR from baseline to week 112 was -10.4 ml per minute per 1.73 m(2) with sparsentan and -12.1 ml per minute per 1.73 m(2) with irbesartan (difference, 1.8 ml per minute per 1.73 m(2); 95% CI, -1.4 to 4.9). Sparsentan and irbesartan had similar safety profiles, and the frequency of adverse events was similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with FSGS, there were no significant between-group differences in eGFR slope at 108 weeks, despite a greater reduction in proteinuria with sparsentan than with irbesartan. (Funded by Travere Therapeutics; DUPLEX ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03493685.).
This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of single-pill combination (SPC) antihypertensive drugs in patients with uncontrolled essential hypertension. Through Searching Pubmed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, and Web of Science collected only randomized controlled trials on the efficacy of single-pill combination antihypertensive drugs in people with uncontrolled essential hypertension. The search period is from the establishment of the database to July 2022. The methodological quality of the included studies was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Assessment, and statistical analyses were performed using Review Manage 5.3 and Stata 15.1 software. This review ultimately included 32 references involving 16 273 patients with uncontrolled essential hypertension. The results of the network meta-analysis showed that a total of 11 single-pill combination antihypertensive drugs were included, namely: Amlodipine/valsartan, Telmisartan/amlodipine, Losartan/HCTZ, Candesartan/HCTZ, Amlodipine/benazepril, Telmisartan/HCTZ, Valsartan/HCTZ, Irbesartan/amlodipine, Amlodipine/losartan, Irbesartan/HCTZ, and Perindopril/amlodipine. According to SUCRA, Irbesartan/amlodipine may rank first in reducing systolic blood pressure (SUCRA: 92.2%); Amlodipine/losartan may rank first in reducing diastolic blood pressure (SUCRA: 95.1%); Telmisartan/amlodipine may rank first in blood pressure control rates (SUCRA: 83.5%); Amlodipine/losartan probably ranks first in diastolic response rate (SUCRA: 84.5%). Based on Ranking Plot of the Network, we can conclude that single-pill combination antihypertensive drugs are superior to monotherapy, and ARB/CCB combination has better advantages than other SPC in terms of systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, blood pressure control rate, and diastolic response rate. However, due to the small number of some drug studies, the lack of relevant studies has led to not being included in this study, which may impact the results, and readers should interpret the results with caution.
BACKGROUND: Angiotensin receptor antagonists are a relatively new class of cardiovascular drugs for which the clinical application has not yet been completely defined. OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the pharmacology of the various angiotensin receptor antagonists available in Australia, including their mode of action, side effects and potential drug interactions. DISCUSSION: Angiotensin receptor antagonists are effective drugs for the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension which have a side effect profile similar to placebo. Their role in the management of hypertension remains to be defined, but they are of particular use to patients who are intolerant of ACE inhibitors because of cough. It is uncertain at the present time whether the benefits of ACE inhibition in other disorders such as congestive heart failure and following myocardial infarction will be similar for angiotensin receptor blockers.
BACKGROUND: We evaluated and compared the effects of sparsentan, a dual endothelin type A (ET(A)) and angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonist, with those of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonist irbesartan in patients with primary FSGS. METHODS: In this phase 2, randomized, double-blind, active-control Efficacy and Safety of Sparsentan (RE-021), a Dual Endothelin Receptor and Angiotensin Receptor Blocker, in Patients with Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis (FSGS): A Randomized, Double-blind, Active-Control, Dose-Escalation Study (DUET), patients aged 8-75 years with biopsy-proven FSGS, eGFR>30 ml/min per 1.73 m(2), and urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio (UP/C) >/=1.0 g/g received sparsentan (200, 400, or 800 mg/d) or irbesartan (300 mg/d) for 8 weeks, followed by open-label sparsentan only. End points at week 8 were reduction from baseline in UP/C (primary) and proportion of patients achieving FSGS partial remission end point (FPRE) (UP/C: </=1.5 g/g and >40% reduction [secondary]). RESULTS: Of 109 patients randomized, 96 received study drugs and had baseline and week 8 UP/C measurements. Sparsentan-treated patients had greater reductions in UP/C than irbesartan-treated patients did when all doses (45% versus 19%; P=0.006) or the 400 and 800 mg doses (47% versus 19%; P=0.01) were pooled for analysis. The FSGS partial remission end point was achieved in 28% of sparsentan-treated and 9% of irbesartan-treated patients (P=0.04). After 8 weeks of treatment, BP was reduced with sparsentan but not irbesartan, and eGFR was stable with both treatments. Overall, the incidence of adverse events was similar between groups. Hypotension and edema were more common among sparsentan-treated patients but did not result in study withdrawals. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with FSGS achieved significantly greater reductions in proteinuria after 8 weeks of sparsentan versus irbesartan. Sparsentan was safe and well tolerated.
BACKGROUND: Sacubitril/valsartan reduces the risk of cardiovascular mortality among patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, but its effects on kidney function and cardiac biomarkers in people with moderate to severe chronic kidney disease are unknown. METHODS: The UK HARP-III trial (United Kingdom Heart and Renal Protection-III), a randomized double-blind trial, included 414 participants with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 20 to 60 mL/min/1.73 m(2) who were randomly assigned to sacubitril/valsartan 97/103 mg twice daily versus irbesartan 300 mg once daily. The primary outcome was measured GFR at 12 months using ANCOVA with adjustment for each individual's baseline measured GFR. All analyses were by intention to treat. RESULTS: In total, 207 participants were assigned to sacubitril/valsartan and 207 to irbesartan. Baseline measured GFR was 34.0 (SE, 0.8) and 34.7 (SE, 0.8) mL/min/1.73 m(2), respectively. At 12 months, there was no difference in measured GFR: 29.8 (SE 0.5) among those assigned sacubitril/valsartan versus 29.9 (SE, 0.5) mL/min/1.73 m(2) among those assigned irbesartan; difference, -0.1 (0.7) mL/min/1.73 m(2). Effects were similar in all prespecified subgroups. There was also no significant difference in estimated GFR at 3, 6, 9, or 12 months and no clear difference in urinary albumin:creatinine ratio between treatment arms (study average difference, -9%; 95% CI, -18 to 1). However, compared with irbesartan, allocation to sacubitril/valsartan reduced study average systolic and diastolic blood pressure by 5.4 (95% CI, 3.4-7.4) and 2.1 (95% CI, 1.0-3.3) mm Hg and levels of troponin I and N terminal of prohormone brain natriuretic peptide (tertiary end points) by 16% (95% CI, 8-23) and 18% (95% CI, 11-25), respectively. The incidence of serious adverse events (29.5% versus 28.5%; rate ratio, 1.07; 95% CI, 0.75-1.53), nonserious adverse reactions (36.7% versus 28.0%; rate ratio, 1.35; 95% CI, 0.96-1.90), and potassium >/=5.5 mmol/L (32% versus 24%, P=0.10) was not significantly different between randomized groups. CONCLUSIONS: Over 12 months, sacubitril/valsartan has similar effects on kidney function and albuminuria to irbesartan, but it has the additional effect of lowering blood pressure and cardiac biomarkers in people with chronic kidney disease. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: URL: http://www.isrctn.com . Unique identifier: ISRCTN11958993.
BACKGROUND: It is unknown whether either the angiotensin-II-receptor blocker irbesartan or the calcium-channel blocker amlodipine slows the progression of nephropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes independently of its capacity to lower the systemic blood pressure. METHODS: We randomly assigned 1715 hypertensive patients with nephropathy due to type 2 diabetes to treatment with irbesartan (300 mg daily), amlodipine (10 mg daily), or placebo. The target blood pressure was 135/85 mm Hg or less in all groups. We compared the groups with regard to the time to the primary composite end point of a doubling of the base-line serum creatinine concentration, the development of end-stage renal disease, or death from any cause. We also compared them with regard to the time to a secondary, cardiovascular composite end point. RESULTS: The mean duration of follow-up was 2.6 years. Treatment with irbesartan was associated with a risk of the primary composite end point that was 20 percent lower than that in the placebo group (P=0.02) and 23 percent lower than that in the amlodipine group (P=0.006). The risk of a doubling of the serum creatinine concentration was 33 percent lower in the irbesartan group than in the placebo group (P=0.003) and 37 percent lower in the irbesartan group than in the amlodipine group (P<0.001). Treatment with irbesartan was associated with a relative risk of end-stage renal disease that was 23 percent lower than that in both other groups (P=0.07 for both comparisons). These differences were not explained by differences in the blood pressures that were achieved. The serum creatinine concentration increased 24 percent more slowly in the irbesartan group than in the placebo group (P=0.008) and 21 percent more slowly than in the amlodipine group (P=0.02). There were no significant differences in the rates of death from any cause or in the cardiovascular composite end point. CONCLUSIONS: The angiotensin-II-receptor blocker irbesartan is effective in protecting against the progression of nephropathy due to type 2 diabetes. This protection is independent of the reduction in blood pressure it causes.
In a multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial, the authors compared the antihypertensive efficacy of once-daily treatment with the new angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker (ARB) olmesartan (20 mg) with recommended starting doses of losartan (50 mg), valsartan (80 mg), and irbesartan (150 mg) in 588 patients with a cuff diastolic blood pressure (DBP) of greater than or equal to 100 and less than or equal to 115 mm Hg and a mean daytime DBP of greater than or equal to 90 mm Hg and less than 120 mm Hg, as measured by ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. Cuff and ambulatory blood pressures were monitored at baseline and after 8 weeks of treatment. All groups were predominantly white and approximately 62% male, and their mean age was approximately 52 years. In all groups, mean baseline DBP and systolic blood pressure (SBP) were approximately 104 and 157 mm Hg, respectively. The reduction of sitting cuff DBP with olmesartan (11.5 mm Hg), the primary efficacy variable of this study, was significantly greater than with losartan, valsartan, and irbesartan (8.2, 7.9, and 9.9 mm Hg, respectively). Reductions of cuff SBP with the four ARBs ranged from 8.4-11.3 mm Hg and were not significantly different. The reduction in mean 24-hour DBP with olmesartan (8.5 mm Hg) was significantly greater than reductions with losartan and valsartan (6.2 and 5.6 mm Hg, respectively) and showed a trend toward significance when compared to the reduction in DBP with irbesartan (7.4 mm Hg; p=0.087). The reduction in mean 24-hour SBP with olmesartan (12.5 mm Hg) was significantly greater than the reductions with losartan and valsartan (9.0 and 8.1 mm Hg, respectively) and equivalent to the reduction with irbesartan (11.3 mm Hg). All drugs were well tolerated. The authors conclude that olmesartan, at its starting dose, is more effective than the starting doses of the other ARBs tested in reducing cuff DBP in patients with essential hypertension.
BACKGROUND: Microalbuminuria and hypertension are risk factors for diabetic nephropathy. Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system slows the progression to diabetic nephropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes, but similar data are lacking for hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes. We evaluated the renoprotective effect of the angiotensin-II-receptor antagonist irbesartan in hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes and microalbuminuria. METHODS: A total of 590 hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes and microalbuminuria were enrolled in this multinational, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of irbesartan, at a dose of either 150 mg daily or 300 mg daily, and were followed for two years. The primary outcome was the time to the onset of diabetic nephropathy, defined by persistent albuminuria in overnight specimens, with a urinary albumin excretion rate that was greater than 200 microg per minute and at least 30 percent higher than the base-line level. RESULTS: The base-line characteristics in the three groups were similar. Ten of the 194 patients in the 300-mg group (5.2 percent) and 19 of the 195 patients in the 150-mg group (9.7 percent) reached the primary end point, as compared with 30 of the 201 patients in the placebo group (14.9 percent) (hazard ratios, 0.30 [95 percent confidence interval, 0.14 to 0.61; P< 0.001] and 0.61 [95 percent confidence interval, 0.34 to 1.08; P=0.081 for the two irbesartan groups, respectively). The average blood pressure during the course of the study was 144/83 mm Hg in the placebo group, 143/83 mm Hg in the 150-mg group, and 141/83 mm Hg in the 300-mg group (P=0.004 for the comparison of systolic blood pressure between the placebo group and the combined irbesartan groups). Serious adverse events were less frequent among the patients treated with irbesartan (P=0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Irbesartan is renoprotective independently of its blood-pressure-lowering effect in patients with type 2 diabetes and microalbuminuria.
BACKGROUND: Chemoresistance is the main reason for the poor prognosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Thus, there is an urgent need to screen out new targets and compounds to reverse chemotherapeutic resistance. METHODS: We established a bio-bank of human PDAC organoid models, covering a representative range of PDAC tumor subtypes. We screened a library of 1304 FDA-approved compounds to identify candidates efficiently overcoming chemotherapy resistance. The effects of the compounds were evaluated with a CellTiter-Glo-3D assay, organoid apoptosis assay and in vivo patient-derived xenograft (PDX), patient-derived organoid (PDO) and LSL-Kras(G12D/+); LSL-Trp53(R172H/+); Pdx1-Cre (KPC) genetically engineered mouse models. RNA-sequencing, genome editing, sphere formation assays, iron assays and luciferase assays were conducted to elucidate the mechanism. RESULTS: High-throughput drug screening of chemotherapy-resistant PDOs identified irbesartan, an angiotensin  || type 1 (AT1) receptor antagonist, which could synergistically enhance the ability of chemotherapy to kill PDAC cells. In vitro and in vivo validation using PDO, PDX and KPC mouse models showed that irbesartan efficiently sensitized PDAC tumors to chemotherapy. Mechanistically, we found that irbesartan decreased c-Jun expression by inhibiting the Hippo/YAP1 pathway and further overcame chemotherapy resistance in PDAC. We also explored c-Jun, a potential target of irbesartan, which can transcriptionally upregulate the expression of key genes involved in stemness maintenance (SOX9/SOX2/OCT4) and iron metabolism (FTH1/FTL/TFRC). More importantly, we observed that PDAC patients with high levels of c-Jun expression demonstrated poor responses to the current standard chemotherapy regimen (gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel). Moreover, patients with PDAC had significant survival benefits from treatment with irbesartan plus a standard chemotherapy regimen in two-center retrospective clinical cohorts and patients with high c-Jun expression exhibited a better response to combination chemotherapy. CONCLUSIONS: Irbesartan could be used in combination with chemotherapy to improve the therapeutic efficacy in PDAC patients with high levels of c-Jun expression. Irbesartan effectively inhibited chemotherapy resistance by suppressing the Hippo/YAP1/c-Jun/stemness/iron metabolism axis. Based on our findings, we are designing an investigator-initiated phase II clinical trial on the efficacy and safety of irbesartan plus a standard gemcitabine/nab-paclitaxel regimen in the treatment of patients with advanced III/IV staged PDAC and are hopeful that we will observe patient benefits.
A 63-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for further investigation and management of brain metastases. The patient was initially presented with a 4-day history of confusion. On the day of admission, the patient was confused, agitated, disorientated in place and time, and had visual disturbances. His blood pressure was repeatedly recorded high, with levels of systolic blood pressure between 170-210 mm Hg. A brain magnetic resonance imaging showed areas of high signal on T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images, located bilaterally in the white matter of the occipital regions and unilateral in the left frontal lobe, suggestive of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome. Aggressive treatment of hypertension resulted in complete resolution of the clinical and radiologic features of the syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the tolerability of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors with that of angiotensin II (AII)-receptor blockers and the incidence of cough and angioedema associated with their use through review of published data. DATA SOURCES: References were identified through a MEDLINE search of articles published between January 1975 and April 1997. Bibliographies of pertinent references were also reviewed. RESULTS: Results of placebo-controlled and comparative trials of the AII blockers demonstrate that they are at least as effective as ACE inhibitors for hypertension, but exhibit an incidence of cough and absent or rare angioedema like that of placebo. CONCLUSIONS: In the 10 comparative trials described, all reported a lower incidence of cough with AII blockers than with ACE inhibitors. Angioedema was not reported in the comparative trials described.
Angiotensin-II receptor antagonists (or blockers) are a newer class of antihypertensive agents. These drugs are selective for angiotensin II (type 1 receptor); unlike angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, they do not inhibit bradykinin metabolism or enhance prostaglandin synthesis. Angiotensin-II receptor antagonists are well tolerated. Cough occurs much less often with these agents than with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and they do not adversely affect lipid profiles or cause rebound hypertension after discontinuation. Clinical trials indicate that angiotensin-II receptor antagonists are effective and safe in the treatment of hypertension. Their use in congestive heart failure and renal disease is under investigation.
Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death in the Western world. Approximately half of all the people who have their 1st heart attack and 2/3 of those with their first stroke have high blood pressure levels. Hypertension affects approximately 25% of the adult population. By treating hypertension and risk factors that contribute to cardiovascular disease both mortality and morbidity can be reduced. Many drugs have proven to be effective in treating hypertension, although the individual patient's response to antihypertensive treatment varies over a wide range and cannot be predicted with methods used today. Between 30-60% of the blood pressure variation is determined by genetic factors. Also the variation in drug response is in part heritable, which defines pharmacogenetics. This review gives a general background to pharmacogenetics and its potential usage. In addition, results from recent pharmacogenetics studies on the antihypertensive effect of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonist irbesartan are presented.
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists lower blood pressure by blocking the final step in the renin pathway, whereas ACE inhibitors reduce angiotensin II production. ACE inhibitors also block kinin degradation, which may alter both efficacy and side-effects. Irbesartan, one of the newer receptor antagonists, has confirmed their tolerability and shown similar dose-related efficacy to other major classes.
High blood pressure is a very common problem in the adult and elderly population, both in developed and developing countries. A relatively large number of drug classes are available to treat this condition and prevent its complications, which are not only more frequent in the aforementioned patients but also those affected by metabolic syndrome and/or Type 2 diabetes. Irbesartan is an angiotensin-receptor blocker class drug with good antihypertensive efficacy and specific pharmacological characteristics, whose efficacy has been more deeply evaluated in metabolically complex hypertensive patients. In this review, the authors will analyze its effectiveness in preventing or delaying organ damage in hypertensive patients, with a closer look at the economic implications of treating hypertension with irbesartan in the context of available antihypertensive drugs.
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and diuretics represent the first line of therapy in patients with symptomatic heart failure. Inhibition of angiotensin II production is, however, incomplete with ACE inhibitors, due to non-ACE dependent conversion pathways. Moreover, some patients are intolerant to ACE inhibitors due to side effects or renal insufficiency. Angiotensin II receptor blockers may be an alternative to, or an additional treatment in heart failure. Preliminary studies comparing the angiotensin II receptor blocker losartan with placebo have demonstrated improved haemodynamic parameters, reduced hospitalisation and mortality in patients with heart failure. Reduced morbidity and mortality have also been found with losartan treatment, as compared to the ACE inhibitor captopril. This paper discusses the role of angiotensin II receptor blockers in the treatment of heart failure. Some results from published studies and a short description of ongoing trials are presented.
Irbesartan, (2-butyl-3-(4-[2-(2H-1,2,3,4-tetrazol-5-yl)phenyl]phenylmethyl)-1,3-diazaspiro[4.4]non-1-en-4-one), is a member of non-peptide angiotensin II receptor antagonists used worldwide in the treatment of hypertension and diabetic nephropathy in hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes, elevated serum creatinine, and proteinuria. Irbesartan can be used alone or in combination with other antihypertensive agents (e.g., hydrochlorothiazide). These combination products are indicated for hypertension in patients with uncontrolled hypertension with monotherapy or first line in patients not expected to be well controlled with monotherapy. Irbesartan is also indicated for the treatment of diabetic nephropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes and hypertension, an elevated serum creatinine, and proteinuria. Irbesartan exerts its action mainly via a selective blockade action on AT1 receptors and the consequent reduced pressor effect of angiotensin II. This article discusses, by a critical comprehensive review of the literature on irbesartan in terms of its description, names, formulae, elemental composition, appearance, and therapeutic uses. The article also discusses the methods for preparation of irbesartan, its physical-chemical properties, analytical methods for its determination, pharmacological-toxicological properties, and dosing information.
