The halogenated inhalational anaesthetics halothane, enflurane, isoflurane and desflurane can produce metabolic hepatocellular injury in humans to a variable extent. During metabolism of these anaesthetics, tissue acetylation occurs due to the formation of reactive intermediates. Proteins modified by acetylation may constitute neo-antigens with a potential for triggering an antibody-mediated immune response. The likelihood of suffering post-operative immune hepatitis depends on the amount of the anaesthetic metabolized and is thereby considerably less with enflurane, isoflurane or desflurane compared with halothane. Plasma inorganic fluoride concentrations are regularly increased after sevoflurane. Elevated inorganic fluoride concentrations have been associated with nephrotoxicity following methoxyflurane anaesthesia but not after sevoflurane. Another source of concern is the products of degradation from reactions with carbon dioxide absorbents. Most important is compound A, which has been shown to exhibit nephrotoxicity in rodents. However, no significant changes in renal function parameters have been reported in surgical patients.
Despite technological advances in surgery and anesthesia during the last few decades, the incidence of postoperative cognitive dysfunction remains a relatively common complication in surgical patients. After surgery, elderly patients in particular often exhibit a transient reversible state of cerebral cognitive alterations. Anesthetics administered as part of a surgical procedure may alter the patient's behavioral state by influencing brain activity. This concise report will address the scientific evidence on the relationship between postoperative cognitive dysfunctions and the most common inhalational agents currently used in anesthesia (volatile anesthetics: isoflurane, desflurane and sevoflurane, gaseous nitrous oxide). The available literature does not allow definitive conclusions to be drawn on the possible differences between anesthetics in relation to the subsequent occurrence of cognitive dysfunction. However, such information is crucial to improve anesthesia performance and patient safety, as well as outcomes.
Unlike normal thermoregulatory control, which is largely neuronally mediated, fever is activated by circulating pyrogens. Pyrogens are triggered by either infectious or non-infectious etiologies, all of which may be present in patients undergoing ambulatory surgery. Fever is a regulated elevation in the setpoint temperature for all thermoregulatory responses (warm and cold defenses). To increase core temperature according to the newly elevated setpoint, cold defenses such as vasoconstriction and shivering are activated. In contrast, anesthesia widens the interthreshold range, thus resulting in hypothermia. As a result, general anesthesia impairs the febrile response to pyrogenic stimulation. However, the precise nature of the interaction between fever and anesthesia has yet to be determined. Postoperative fever continues to be a major problem. Wound infections are responsible for many such fevers, although numerous other etiologies contribute. Initial diagnosis should thus focus on determining the etiology of fever. Once that is established, treatment can focus on the specific cause.
There have been remarkable efforts to characterize the key responsible pathophysiologic mechanisms, as well as to ameliorate the organ preservation and ischemia reperfusion injury with the ultimate goal of expanding the donor pool and further improvement of the outcomes of liver transplantation. Attempts to translate the experimental results from bench to bedside have yielded no valid protective concepts in the field of clinical liver transplantation yet. Nonetheless, there has been a considerable amount of ongoing clinical research to develop clinically relevant graft protective strategies. Areas covered: This review focuses on the most recent evidence based findings and ongoing clinical trials that might lead to emerging graft protective strategies in the field of clinical liver transplantation. New evidence-based findings in the donor preconditioning, organ preservation, and perioperative pharmacologic graft protection strategies in the recipient are reviewed. Expert commentary: Few strategies have been shown to exert some graft protective effects against ischemia reperfusion injury in recent clinical trials in liver transplantation. Among others, 'dynamic graft preservation' techniques have been emerging as more promising graft optimization strategies.
The lower solubilities of desflurane and sevoflurane provide a clear advantage over older potent agents, permitting more precise control over the delivery of anesthesia and more rapid recovery from anesthesia. Other pharmacological properties of these two agents at concentrations of 1 MAC or less differ little from those of older agents. Sevoflurane differs from desflurane in that it is without pungency and useful for induction of anesthesia by inhalation. It is less prone to increase pulse rate at higher concentrations. Desflurane also can cause transient increases in pulse rate and blood pressures when its concentration is rapidly increased above 6%. Sevoflurane has the disadvantage of vulnerability to degradation in vitro and in vivo, raising a concern regarding a subtle toxicity. Although neither of these new anesthetics can be said to be ideal, each may be a step in that direction.
Desflurane is a new volatile anaesthetic agent, with qualitative physiological and pharmacological effects similar to those of previously available drugs of this type. The feature that sets desflurane apart from other halogenated, volatile anaesthetics is its low solubility in blood and body tissues. Therefore, its uptake, distribution and elimination are more rapid than those for similar drugs. Desflurane undergoes negligible metabolism, and should have a low potential for producing toxic effects. Because it has a high vapour pressure desflurane needs a special delivery system, a heated, pressurised vaporizer. Its low solubility gives it the ability to produce rapid alterations in depth of anaesthesia and rapid emergence and recovery from anaesthesia.
Clinical studies have demonstrated sex-related differences in recovery from surgical anesthesia. This study aimed to characterize the emergence pattern following two anesthesia regimens in both sexes of rats. We considered six different markers of emergence from anesthesia: sigh, eye blinking, forelimb movement, mastication, neck extension, and recovery of the righting reflex (RORR). Spontaneous motor activity 24 h after the anesthesia induction was also examined. Our results showed that the rank order of the emergence latency after intraperitoneal propofol, PRO, exposure was forelimb movement < sigh < blink < mastication < neck extension < RORR, while after inhaled isoflurane, ISO, anesthesia the sequence was changed as sigh < blink < mastication < forelimb movement < neck extension < RORR in both male and female rats. Moreover, the latency to emergence after PRO in female rats was significantly higher than male rats, although following ISO there was no difference between the sexes (P < 0.001; P > 0.05, respectively). Open-field testing revealed no difference in PRO and ISO spontaneous locomotor activity due to drug administration (P > 0.05). These two anesthetics presented different emergence sequences. Although clinical data suggests that females arouse faster than males from anesthesia with propofol, our intraperitoneal technique in a rodent model had the opposite effect. Pharmacokinetic analysis demonstrated increased absorption of injected propofol for the female rats in our study, emphasizing the role of sexual dimorphism in drug distribution in rodents. Despite these pharmacokinetic differences, the pharmacodynamic effects of the drugs were remarkably consistent among both sexes through emergence.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH), an inherited myopathia varying in severity and course, is induced by halogenated anesthetic agents and depolarizing muscle relaxants. First recognized as a distinct disease entity in 1960, MH is defined as an anesthesia-related disease due to the agents by which it is triggered. Given the wide use of these preparations in prehospital emergency medicine and intensive care treatment, physicians in other disciplines may also encounter MH.
This report is of a case of a previously fit 65-year-old woman who developed postoperative liver dysfunction following an anaesthetic involving isoflurane. Biliary ultrasound demonstrated gallstones. However, serum antibodies to trifluoroacetylated proteins were detected, suggesting that immune sensitisation to the anaesthetic could have contributed to the impaired liver function.
Routine general anesthesia is considered to be safe in healthy individuals. However, pre-clinical studies in mice, rats, and monkeys have repeatedly demonstrated that exposure to anesthetic agents during early post-natal periods can lead to acute neurotoxicity. More concerning, later-life defects in cognition, assessed by behavioral assays for learning and memory, have been reported. Although the potential for anesthetics to damage the neonatal brain is well-documented, the clinical significance of the pre-clinical models in which damage is induced remains quite unclear. Here, we systematically evaluate critical physiological parameters in post-natal day 7 neonatal mice exposed to 1.5% isoflurane for 2-4 hours, the most common anesthesia induced neurotoxicity paradigm in this animal model. We find that 2 or more hours of anesthesia exposure results in dramatic respiratory and metabolic changes that may limit interpretation of this paradigm to the clinical situation. Our data indicate that neonatal mouse models of AIN are not necessarily appropriate representations of human exposures.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to summarize the most recent up to date research data and recommendations regarding anaesthetic management of patients with liver disease undergoing surgery. The incidence of chronic liver disease (CLD) continues to rise and perioperative mortality and morbidity remains unacceptably high in this group. Meticulous preoperative assessment and carefully planned anaesthetic management are vital in improving outcomes in patients with liver disease undergoing surgery. RECENT FINDINGS: The presence of cirrhosis is associated with a significantly increased risk of postoperative morbidity and mortality in patients undergoing elective surgery. The Child--Pugh--Turcotte scale and model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score remain the most commonly applied scoring systems in preoperative risk assessment, but new MELD-based indices and novel scoring systems might offer better prognostic value. Propofol and new inhalational agents (sevoflurane, desflurane) are recommended hypnotic agents. The titration of opiates in the perioperative period is recommended because of their altered metabolism in patients with liver disease. Perioperative management should include close haemodynamic monitoring and admission to a critical care area should be considered. SUMMARY: Patients with liver disease undergoing anaesthesia pose significant challenges and advanced planning and preparation are required in order to improve perioperative outcomes in this group. VIDEO ABSTRACT: http://links.lww.com/COAN/A43.
Global postoperative amnesia (profound anterograde and retrograde amnesia) is rare and usually attributed to transient global amnesia-a poorly understood condition with no broadly accepted mechanism. We report an incident of probable transient global amnesia in a patient after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram under general anesthesia, which was successfully treated with flumazenil. On the basis of the results of flumazenil administration in this and a previous case report, we would recommend a trial dose of 0.2 mg for cases of global postoperative amnesia, repeated if the first dose seems effective.
Desflurane use is associated with carbon monoxide production and sympathetic activation. These side effects can be eliminated taking into account certain recommendations such as closing fresh gas flow at the end of anaesthesia, regular replacement of carbon dioxide absorbents and the use of new absorbents for carbon monoxide production and opioid administration with slow increases of inspiration concentrations during desflurane initiation for sympathetic activation.
The physical and pharmacological properties of the structural isomers isoflurane and enflurane differ from each other and from those of other potent inhaled anaesthetics. The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) for isoflurane (1.15%) is one-and-one-half times that for halothane (0.75%) and two-thirds that for enflurane (1.7%). The blood/gas partition coefficient (1.4) for isoflurane is lower than the coefficients for all other potent inhaled agents. Despite this lower blood solubility, induction of anaesthesia is slightly faster with halothane because of isoflurane's mild pungency. Enflurane depresses ventilation more than isoflurane, which in turn is slightly more depressant than halothane. All these agents dilate constricted bronchi, and thus are useful in the anaesthetic management of patients who have asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Isoflurane has the largest circulatory margin of safety of all potent halogenated agents; it produces the least myocardial depression at a given multiple of MAC. Isoflurane may increase heart rate, particularly in younger patients, and occasionally is associated with tachycardia. It decreases total peripheral resistance, thereby decreasing systemic arterial pressure. Although results from one study suggest that isoflurane may produce a "steal" or coronary blood flow in patients with coronary artery disease, results from other studies suggest that, even in the presence of coronary artery disease, coronary blood flow to all parts of the heart remains as adequate with isoflurane as with other anaesthetics. Greater concentrations of isoflurane (1.6 MAC) increase cerebral blood flow less than does halothane. Isoflurane does not produce convulsive activity, but can produce profound muscle relaxation. It enhances the action of tubocurarine or pancuronium, and (to a lesser extent) vecuronium or atracurium. The enhancement is comparable to that produced by enflurane. Less enhancement is produced by halothane or nitrous oxide-narcotic. Only 0.17% of isoflurane taken up in man appears as urinary metabolites. This resistance to biodegradation may explain the minimal or absent hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity of isoflurane.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of desflurane on middle ear pressure. STUDY DESIGN: A prospective clinical study. METHODS: In this study, 38 ears of 19 male children that were scheduled for circumcision were included. Baseline tympanometry reading was performed on each ear just before anesthesia. After induction anesthesia with propofol a laryngeal mask was applied and desflurane administration was started. The next tympanometry reading was taken at 5th, 10th and 15th minute after administration and at the 10th minute after the cessation of desflurane. Data were analysed using Wilcoxon test. RESULTS: Mean MEP values before anesthesia in 38 ears of 19 boys were -10.32+/-33.14. After starting the administration of desflurane 5th minute mean value was 71.15+/-60.42, at the 10 th minute 111.56+/-59.03 and at the 15th minute it increased to 120.50+/-54.14, and these measurements were significantly higher than the starting value (p<0.001). After cessation of desflurane mean MEP value dropped to 57.56+/-79.06, but compared with the starting value this was also significantly higher (p<0.001). CONCLUSION: Desflurane may increase the middle ear pressure and it may be unsuitable for certain middle ear surgeries.
Since their first use, anaesthetic agents have seen major advancements and are now an indispensable element of surgical procedures. Two of the most used volatile anaesthetics are isoflurane and sevoflurane. These have neuroprotective effects on adult brains in different brain disorders, ranging from traumatic to hypoxic or ischemia-reperfusion injuries. In new-borns and elderly patients these effects are reversed, and volatile anaesthetics might have a neurotoxic effect, affecting the recovery and neurological capabilities of these patients. Since we are still using volatile anaesthetics, it is important to know in which conditions these substances are neurotoxic and neuroprotective, as well as to better understand the mechanisms underlying these effects. In this review we aim to summarise the current knowledge on the mechanisms involved in neuroprotection and neurotoxicity of neonatal, adult and aged brains and how these vary based on the brains age and underlying pathologies. This review should guide future experimental research towards less studied mechanisms and should help the development of neuroprotective strategies. Also, we provide a short summary of the substances used in experimental studies to prevent the neurotoxic effect of isoflurane and sevoflurane.
A case of fulminant hepatic failure two days following an uneventful operation during isoflurane anesthesia is presented. Investigations included elevated bilirubin and serum transaminases in the absence of any other cause of hepatic dysfunction. The patient died on the fourth postoperative day. Subsequent postmortem examination showed centrilobular coagulative necrosis consistent with drug toxicity, with isoflurane as the most likely toxic agent.
BACKGROUND: We reported a 1-1-12 wash-in scheme for desflurane-nitrous oxide (N2O) low flow anesthesia that is simple, rapid, and predictable. There remain some situations where N2O should be avoided, which limits the generalizability of this wash-in scheme. The objective of our study was to determine the performance of this scheme in contexts where N2O is not used. METHODS: We recruited 106 patients scheduled for elective surgery under general anesthesia. After induction and intubation, wash-in was started with a fresh gas flow of air:O2 1:1 L/min and a vaporizer concentration of desflurane of 12%. Controlled ventilation was then adjusted to maintain PACO2 at 30-35 mmHg. RESULTS: The alveolar concentration of desflurane (FAD) rose rapidly from 0% to 6% in 4 minutes in the same pattern as observed in our previous study in which N2O was used. An FAD of 7% was achieved in 6 minutes. An FAD of 1% to 7% occurred at 0.6, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, and 6 minutes. The rise in heart rate during wash-in was statistically significant, although not clinically so. There was a slight but statistically significant decrease in blood pressure, but this had no clinical significance. CONCLUSION: Performance of the 1-1-12 wash-in scheme is independent of the use of N2O. Respective FADs of 1%, 2%, 3%, 4%, 5%, 6%, and 7% can be expected at 0.6, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, and 6 minutes.
Desfluraneis a widely-used general anesthetics. However, recent reports showed its significant side effect in the nervous system. Desflurane could lead to the neuronal death and affect the working memory. Unfortunately, the mechanism underlying the action of desflurane is still not clear and there is still no potent medicine to prevent the lesion in the central nervous system caused by general anesthetics. In this study, we found alpha-lipoic acid, an antioxidant exerting protective effect on multiple cells tissues, could resist the neurotoxicity caused by desflurane exposure. Lipoic acid possessed strong anti-apoptotic effect on the desflurane-treated hippocampal neurons, which was mediated by the Caspase-3 dependent pathway and NF-kappaB signaling. Collectively, we found a promising candidate to be clinically applied in intervention against the damage in nervous system by the desflurane.
BACKGROUND: The purpose of the present study was to determine whether oral ketamine premedication affected the incidence of emergence agitation in children. METHODS: Thirty minutes before induction of anaesthesia, 80 children who were undergoing adenotonsillectomy with or without bilateral myringotomy and insertion of tubes received either ketamine 6 mg.kg(-1) per oral in group K or sour cherry juice alone in group C. Anaesthesia was maintained with desflurane. Emergence and recovery times were recorded. Tramadol was used for postoperative analgesia. Fentanyl (1 microg.kg(-1)) was administered for the treatment of emergence agitation or severe pain that still continued after tramadol administration. Postoperative behaviour was evaluated using a 5-point agitation scale. RESULTS: The incidence of emergence agitation was 56% in group C, and 18% in group K (P = 0.001). There was no significant difference with respect to emergence times except from time to eye opening that was significantly longer in group K (P < 0.0001). CONCLUSION: Oral ketamine premedication reduced the incidence of postanaesthesia emergence agitation in children without delaying recovery.
