Isoniazid (INH) remains a mainstay for the treatment of tuberculosis despite the fact that it can cause liver failure. Previous mechanistic hypotheses have classified this type of drug-induced liver injury (DILI) as 'metabolic idiosyncrasy' which was thought not to involve an immune response and was mainly due to the bioactivation of the acetylhydrazine metabolite. However, more recent studies support an alternative hypothesis, specifically, that INH itself is directly bioactivated to a reactive metabolite, which in some patients leads to an immune response and liver injury. Furthermore, there appear to be two phenotypes of INH-induced liver injury. Most cases involve mild liver injury, which resolves with immune tolerance, while other cases appear to have a more severe phenotype that is associated with the production of anti-drug/anti-CYP P450 antibodies and can progress to liver failure.
Chemotherapy for tuberculosis is indicated in case of disease as well as in latent tuberculosis infection. Standard medication for drug-susceptible tuberculosis consists of isoniazid and rifampicin for six months with additional pyrazinamide and ethambutol for the first two months. Prolonged treatment is necessary in cases of cavernous pulmonary tuberculosis with lack of negative cultures by two months of therapy, in tuberculosis of the central nervous system and in some cases of superficial lymph node disease. Especially in multiple-drug resistant tuberculosis prolonged treatment with three or more drugs, that have been proven to be effective by susceptability testing, is mandatory. Attention must be payed to reliable delivery of chemotherapy as well as to side effects of antituberculosis medications. The classical treatment for latent tuberculosis infection is isoniazid. Multidrug short-course therapy, which has been shown to be equally effective, enhances patients' compliance, but toxicity is increased.
Rifampin is a potent antituberculous drug. In the treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis it is highly effective provided it is given in combination with other drugs to which the patient's organisms are sensitive. Rifampin and ethambutol is a particularly powerful combination and will achieve almost 100% sputum conversion. It seems likely that rifampin will replace streptomycin, and ethambutol will replace PAS in first-treatment cases. Optimum first-line treatment will thus consist of rifampin, INH and ethambutol, with the probability of almost 100% success and the possibility also that the total duration of treatment may be considerably reduced. Rifampin is well tolerated but it may give rise to liver dysfunction and thrombocytopenia in a small proportion of patients. Patients treated with rifampin must be kept under close supervision because of the risk of side effects and, more important, because irregular treatment may lead to the development of rifampin-resistant organisms.
The emergence of drug resistance continues to afflict TB control where drug resistant strains have become a global health concern. Contrary to drug-sensitive TB, the treatment of MDR/XDR-TB is more complicated requiring the administration of second-line drugs that are inefficient than the first line drugs and are associated with greater side effects. The emergence of drug resistant Mtb strains had coincided with an innovation void in the field of drug discovery of anti-mycobacterials. However, the approval of bedaquiline and delamanid recently for use in MDR/XDR-TB has given an impetus to the TB drug discovery. The review discusses the drug discovery efforts in the field of tuberculosis with a focus on the strategies adopted and challenges confronted by TB research community. Here, we discuss the diverse clinical candidates in the current TB drug discovery pipeline. There is an urgent need to combat the current TB menace through multidisciplinary approaches and strategies making use of the recent advances in understanding the molecular biology and pathogenesis of Mtb. The review highlights the recent advances in drug discovery, with the host directed therapeutics and nanoparticles-drug delivery coming up as important tools to fight tuberculosis in the future.
Isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol are the three major drugs used in the modern treatment of patients with tuberculosis. Data on these drugs in children have been derived primarily from their clinical use in pediatrics and extrapolation from experiences in adults. A number of questions remain concerning the clinical pharmacology and appropriate use of these drugs in children. Additional pediatric pharmacokinetic studies are necessary to confirm the current dosage recommendation and use of these agents in the pediatric patient.
Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease that causes a great number of deaths in the world (1.5 million people per year). This disease is currently treated by administering high doses of various oral anti-TB drugs for prolonged periods (up to 2 years). While this regimen is normally effective when taken as prescribed, many people with TB experience difficulties in complying with their medication schedule. Furthermore, the oral administration of standard anti-TB drugs causes severe side effects and widespread resistances. Recently, we proposed an original platform for pulmonary TB treatment consisting of mannitol microspheres (Ma MS) containing iron (III) trimesate metal-organic framework (MOF) MIL-100 nanoparticles (NPs). In the present work, we loaded this system with the first-line anti-TB drug isoniazid (INH) and evaluated both the viability and safety of the drug vehicle components, as well as the cell internalization of the formulation in alveolar A549 cells. Results show that INH-loaded MOF (INH@MIL-100) NPs were efficiently microencapsulated in Ma MS, which displayed suitable aerodynamic characteristics for pulmonary administration and non-toxicity. MIL-100 and INH@MIL-100 NPs were efficiently internalized by A549 cells, mainly localized in the cytoplasm. In conclusion, the proposed micro-nanosystem is a good candidate for the pulmonary administration of anti-TB drugs.
Antituberculous agents have radically improved the prognosis of patients with active tuberculosis. Generally, 6-month and 9-month regimens have been successful, and surgical therapy is rarely necessary. Extrapulmonary tuberculosis should be managed with the drug regimens outlined for pulmonary tuberculosis. The major cause of therapeutic failure is poor compliance of the patient in taking the medication regularly. The second major cause of treatment failure is resistance of tubercle bacilli to the antimicrobial agents used. When treatment failure is apparent, careful reassessment by physicians experienced in the treatment of tuberculosis is indicated. A single drug should never be added to a failing regimen. For prophylaxis, isoniazid, given for 6 to 12 months, is effective in most cases.
Treatment of latent tuberculosis infection in children with a 3-month daily rifampicin and isoniazid regimen is safe with better compliance, adherence and completion rate than a 6- or 9-month isoniazid monotherapy http://ow.ly/x28Z30jDfCE
Anaphylaxis from isoniazid is a possible side effect to this commonly prescribed antibiotic. The case reported here illustrates that clinicians should be aware of this potentially fatal drug reaction.
Isoniazid is an antituberculous drug that is usually administered for nine to 12 months. The potential for clinically important interactions exists because this drug is a potent inhibitor of drug metabolism. Studies and case reports have shown that isoniazid inhibits the metabolism of several drugs, including phenytoin, carbamazepine, anticoagulants, benzodiazepines, and vitamin D. Furthermore, isoniazid inhibits both monoamine oxidase and diamine oxidase (histaminase). Additional study is required to document the clinical significance of other isoniazid interactions. Future investigations will identify new isoniazid interactions.
Pellagra is characterized by dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia and eventually death occurring as a result of niacin or its precursor tryptophan deficiency. Although pellagra is a well-known complication of isoniazid (INH) therapy, the clinical diagnosis may be missed or delayed that may cause life-threatening consequences. Due to the diversity of pellagra-related signs and symptoms, the diagnosis can be made with an appropriate index of suspicion. We report a 7-year-old boy presenting with INH-induced pellagra that resolved after the administration of the niacin therapy.
We report a case of pleuro-pericarditis related to administration of isoniazid. Drug-induced lupus is well known; we recall the principle clinical, biological and immunological characteristics.
Drug-induced acute pancreatitis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of acute abdomen occurring soon after the initiation of antitubercular treatment. Isoniazid-induced pancreatitis is potentially reversible: early recognition and drug withdrawal are warranted in the appropriate clinical setting. We present a case of reversible acute pancreatitis after isoniazid treatment of lymph node tuberculosis, followed by the recurrence of pancreatitis upon the reintroduction of the drug.
The Arkansas colorimetric method monitors adherence to isoniazid (INH) by the detection of INH metabolites in urine. Urine samples 4 h after INH administration in 31 human immunodeficiency virus infected children receiving daily or thrice weekly INH preventive therapy were Arkansas test-positive for 29/31 (94%), while acetylisoniazid (AcINH) was detected in 30/31 (97%) using mass spectrometry. At 24, 48 and 72 h, only 78%, 23% and 0 samples, respectively, were Arkansas-positive, while INH or AcINH was detected in respectively 94%, 69% and 33%. The Arkansas test reliably predicted INH ingestion at a clinic visit 4 h after morning doses, but did not perform well at 24 h.
High-dose isoniazid is recommended to treat multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR TB). Among 958 MDR TB isolates identified in France during 2008-2022, 93.1% exhibited high-level isoniazid resistance, and molecular testing showed limited diagnostic accuracy in predicting resistance. Clinicians should reconsider using high-dose isoniazid in MDR TB treatment because of suboptimal effect and toxicity concerns.
BACKGROUND: One month of daily rifapentine + isoniazid (1HP) is an effective, ultrashort option for tuberculosis prevention in people with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). However, rifapentine may decrease antiretroviral drug concentrations and increase the risk of virologic failure. AIDS Clinical Trials Group A5372 evaluated the effect of 1HP on the pharmacokinetics of twice-daily dolutegravir. METHODS: A5372 was a multicenter, pharmacokinetic study in people with HIV (>/=18 years) already on dolutegravir-containing antiretroviral therapy with HIV RNA <50 copies/mL. Participants received daily rifapentine/isoniazid (600 mg/300 mg) for 28 days as part of 1HP. Dolutegravir was increased to 50 mg twice daily during 1HP, and intensive pharmacokinetic sampling was performed on day 0 (before 1HP) and on the final day of 1HP treatment. RESULTS: Thirty-two participants (41% female; 66% Black/African; median [Q1, Q3] age, 42 [34, 49] years) were included in the pharmacokinetic analysis; 31 had HIV RNA <50 copies/mL at the end of 1HP dosing. One participant had an HIV RNA of 160 copies/mL at day 28, with HIV RNA <50 copies/mL upon repeat testing on day 42. The median (Q1, Q3) dolutegravir trough concentration was 1751 ng/mL (1195, 2542) on day 0 versus 1987 ng/mL (1331, 2278) on day 28 (day 28:day 0 geometric mean ratio, 1.05 [90% confidence interval, .93-1.2]; P = .43). No serious adverse events were reported. CONCLUSIONS: Dolutegravir trough concentrations with 50 mg twice-daily dosing during 1HP treatment were greater than those with standard-dose dolutegravir once daily without 1HP. These pharmacokinetic, virologic, and safety data provide support for twice-daily dolutegravir use in combination with 1HP for tuberculosis prevention. CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: NCT04272242.
Latent tuberculosis infection is a key stage in the natural history of tuberculosis, and provides an important period where strategies to prevent the development of disease may be implemented. The treatment of latent tuberculosis infection is well described in many national guidelines. In this review, we attempt to help pneumonologists to implement these guidelines accurately and appropriately, prescribing preventive treatment when the benefit-risk ratio is optimal, providing treatment most safely, performing therapeutic education and incorporating preventive treatment into the full array of measures against tuberculosis.
The effect of isoniazid on levodopa-induced dyskinesias has been evaluated in 20 patients with Parkinson's disease, following a serendipitous observation that choreic dyskinesias induced by levodopa in one parkinsonian patient were markedly reduced during treatment with isoniazid for tuberculous infection. A mean average isoniazid dose of 290 mg was given without any change in current antiparkinsonian treatment. "Benefit of dose" choreic dyskinesias were markedly reduced in 18 patients within the first few weeks of treatment. This effect was accompanied by an intolerable worsening of parkinsonian signs. All patients returned to their basal situation after isoniazid interferes with the therapeutic action of levodopa and dopamine agonists. The precise mechanism by which this action occurred is not known, but several possible explanations are discussed.
Traditional treatment of tuberculosis infection (TBI) is efficacious, but adherence is low. Eighty children with TBI received a 12-dose once-weekly isoniazid/rifapentine regimen; 79 (99%) completed therapy, 94% reported no adverse events, 1 child had mildly elevated transaminases but 1 adolescent later developed pulmonary TB. Isoniazid/rifapentine is safe, is well tolerated and has much higher completion rates than traditional TBI regimens.
Isoniazid-filled Fe2 O3 hollow nanospheres (INH@Fe2 O3 , diameter <30 nm, 48 wt % INH-load) are prepared for the first time and suggested for tuberculosis therapy. After dextran-functionalization, the INH@Fe2 O3 @DEX nanocontainers show strong activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb.) and M.tb.-infected macrophages. The nanocontainers can be considered as "Trojan horses" and show efficient, active uptake into both M.tb.-infected macrophages and even into mycobacterial cells.
