Memories associated with substance use disorders, or substance-associated cues increase the likelihood of craving and relapse during abstinence. There is a growing consensus that manipulation of synaptic plasticity may reduce the strength of substance abuse-related memories. On the biological front, there are new insights that suggest memories associated with substance use disorder may follow unique neurobiological pathways that render them more accessible to pharmacological intervention. In parallel to this, research in neurochemistry has identified several potential candidate molecules that could influence the formation and maintenance of long-term memory. Drugs that target these molecules (blebbistatin, isradipine and zeta inhibitory peptide) have shown promise at the preclinical stage. In this review, we shall provide an overview of the evolving understanding on the biochemical mechanisms involved in memory formation and expound on the premise that substance use disorder is a learning disorder.
Most antihypertensive drugs have known side effects that are elicited by the careful clinician taking care of hypertensive patients. However, many antihypertensive medications utilize drug delivery systems that prolong the duration of blood pressure reduction. The gastrointestinal therapeutic system that is used with nifedipine, isradipine, and verapamil has a unique side effect. Obstruction may occur at the site of a previous surgical repair (pyloric stenosis or gastroplasty) or stenosis of the esophagus, small intestine, or colon. The same delivery system is used with methylphenidate, oxybutynin, glipizide, and doxazosin. Although this complication is rare, physicians who prescribe and care for hypertensive patients should recognize this potential problem.
Isradipine is a potent dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker. It is highly selective for vascular smooth muscle, with very few negative inotropic or chronotropic effects. It may have minor depressant effects on the sinoatrial node, hence reducing the incidence of reflex tachycardia. The drug is extensively metabolized in the liver, with several pharmacologically inactive metabolites. As the elimination half-life is about 9 h the drug is usually given twice daily, but a once-daily modified release form is under investigation. Isradipine is effective monotherapy in essential hypertension, and has been successfully combined with pindolol and captopril. On the basis of more limited evidence it also appears to be beneficial in stable angina and in congestive cardiac failure. A trial is also under way to assess its antiatherogenic properties. Adverse effects are those predicted for a vasodilator calcium antagonist, and may be less frequent than for equivalent doses of nifedipine. This needs to be confirmed by more extensive clinical experience. Overall, isradipine can be considered favourably in essential hypertensives where a calcium channel blocker is indicated, particularly if it is desirable to avoid myocardial depression or to minimize reflex tachycardia. Its role in other cardiovascular disease awaits further evaluation.
The traditional therapy of perioperative hypertension is now being challenged by the availability of new agents. Vasodilator therapy should be the first-line choice, although dihydropyridine calcium antagonists, particularly isradipine, appear to be suitable in this setting because of their pharmacological properties. Because of its ultrashort half-life, sodium nitroprusside has to be administered by continuous infusion, even for the treatment of an acute elevation of blood pressure. This is not the case with the new agents that have longer durations of action. A bolus administration is sufficient for the correction of most elevations of arterial pressure that are due to transient adrenergic activation. Continuous infusion is required only in patients who have sustained increases of systemic vascular resistance; these are usually patients who are already hypertensive.
The issue as to whether antihypertensive drugs may exert some antiatherosclerotic effect, at least partly independent of blood pressure lowering, has been explored in several experimental models of atherosclerosis, and a large body of evidence has been obtained in favor of a specific antiatherosclerotic action of calcium antagonists and ACE-inhibitors. On the clinical side, several studies are investigating the problem in hypertensive patients in whom progression of carotid intima-media thickness (IMT) and atherosclerotic plaques is explored by sensitive quantitative B-mode ultrasound techniques. The MIDAS has indicated a slower progression, at least in the first six months, of carotid plaques in isradipine treated patients than in diuretic-treated ones. However, MIDAS as a pioneer study has been particularly valuable in giving information on the rate of growth of IMT in hypertensive patients and on the best end-point to use in carotid ultrasound trials. Baseline data of the ongoing studies ELSA and VHAS have so far provided evidence of the very high prevalence of carotid atherosclerosis among hypertensive patients, an observation that makes the evaluation of the antiatherosclerotic action of some antihypertensive agents even more important. Finally, the PHYLLIS trial using a factorial design, beside exploring the antiatherosclerotic action of an ACE-inhibitor vs a diuretic, intends to evaluate the possible benefits of associating antihypertensive therapy with lipid lowering by a statin on the progression of carotid atherosclerosis.
BACKGROUND: The sudden loss of blood supply in ischemic stroke is associated with an increase of calcium ions within neurons. Inhibiting this increase could protect neurons and might reduce neurological impairment, disability, and handicap after stroke. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of calcium antagonists for reducing the risk of death or dependency after acute ischemic stroke. We investigated the influence of different drugs, dosages, routes of administration, time intervals after stroke, and trial design on the outcomes. SEARCH METHODS: The evidence is current to 6 February 2018. We searched the Cochrane Stroke Group Trials Register (6 February 2018), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; 2018, Issue 2), MEDLINE Ovid (1950 to 6 February 2018), Embase Ovid (1980 to 6 February 2018), and four Chinese databases (6 February 2018): Chinese Biological Medicine Database (CBM-disc), China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), Chinese Scientific Periodical Database of VIP information, and Wanfang Data. We also searched the following trials registers: ClinicalTrials.gov, EU Clinical Trials Register, Stroke Trials Registry, ISRCTN registry, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, and Chinese Clinical Trial Registry, and we contacted trialists and researchers. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized controlled trials comparing a calcium antagonist versus control in people with acute ischemic stroke. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently selected trials, extracted data, assessed risk of bias, and applied the GRADE approach to assess the quality of the evidence. We used death or dependency at the end of long-term follow-up (at least three months) in activities of daily living as the primary outcome. We used standard Cochrane methodological procedures. MAIN RESULTS: We included 34 trials involving 7731 participants. All the participants were in the acute stage of ischemic stroke, and their age ranged from 18 to 85 years, with the average age ranging from 52.3 to 74.6 years across different trials. There were more men than women in most trials. Twenty-six trials tested nimodipine, and three trials assessed flunarizine. One trial each used isradipine, nicardipine, PY108-608, fasudil, and lifarizine. More than half of these trials followed participants for at least three months. Calcium antagonists showed no effects on the primary outcome (risk ratio (RR) 1.05; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.98 to 1.13; 22 trials; 22 studies; 6684 participants; moderate-quality evidence) or on death at the end of follow-up (RR 1.07, 95% CI 0.98 to 1.17; 31 trials; 7483 participants; moderate-quality evidence). Thirteen trials reported adverse events, finding no significant differences between groups. Most trials did not report the allocation process or how they managed missing data, so we considered these at high risk of selection and attrition bias. Most trials reported double-blind methods but did not state who was blinded, and none of the trial protocols were available. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence to support the use of calcium antagonists in people with acute ischemic stroke.
Raynaud's phenomenon (RP) is a peripheral circulatory disorder characterized by sudden episodes of digital artery spasm, often precipitated by cold temperature or emotional stress. Although the cause of RP is not fully known, it appears to involve inappropriate adrenergic response to cold stimuli. Treatment of RP is conservative in most patients, but in patients with severe disease includes the use of agents that promote digital vasodilation. The calcium-channel antagonists, particularly the dihydropyridine derivative nifedipine, are the most thoroughly studied drug class for the treatment of RP. Approximately two thirds of patients respond favorably, with significant reductions in the frequency and severity of vasospastic attacks. Nifedipine use is often limited by the appearance of adverse vasodilatory effects such as headache or peripheral edema. The newer second-generation dihydropyridines such as amlodipine, isradipine, nicardipine, and felodipine also appear to be effective in patients with RP and may be associated with fewer adverse effects.
Given the personal and public health burden of addictive disorders, innovative approaches to treatment are sorely needed. This systematic review examined the use of the pharmacological agent isradipine in the context of potential applications for addiction treatment. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guided a comprehensive search of PubMed, Cochrane Library, and PsycINFO between the years 1985 to July 2022. Studies were included if isradipine was administered to adults with a current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-5th edition diagnosis of a substance use disorder and/or to healthy volunteers alone and in conjunction with a substance (i.e, cocaine, methamphetamine, alcohol). A total of 16 studies with 252 participants were included in this review. Substantial variability was identified with study designs, isradipine dosages/dosing, and addictive substance of interest. Outcomes clustered in four categories: (a) cerebral blood flow (CBF), (b) hemodynamic effects, (c) subjective effects, and (d) cognitive effects. Isradipine was found to improve CBF in individuals with cocaine-induced hypoperfusion and in several studies was found to reduce parameters of blood pressure elevation after stimulant use. There were no significant findings on isradipine's effect on subjective reporting (i.e., craving, mood, drug affect) or cognition/attention. Given the limited number of studies identified in this review, there is insufficient data to draw clear conclusions. The direct effects of isradipine as a pharmacologic agent for addictive disorder treatment appear minimal, however, future work may benefit from examining the impact of isradipine as an augmentative agent within existing cue exposure paradigms for preventing cue-induced drug relapse. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2023 APA, all rights reserved).
Isradipine, a calcium antagonist of the dihydropyridine type, shows antiatherosclerotic actions that interfere with all three main mechanisms of atherosclerosis. These actions are mediated by the release of prostaglandin I2 and endothelium-derived relaxing factor, and the subsequent elevation of intracellular adenosine-3',5'-cyclic phosphate and 3',5'-guanosine monophosphate, respectively. These mechanisms have been proven in vitro and in animal models. Preliminary data in humans suggest that these mechanisms have clinical relevance in the long-term treatment of patients as well.
Of 30 patients with treatment-refractory affective illness, 10 showed a moderate to marked response to blind nimodipine monotherapy compared with placebo on the Clinical Global Impressions Scale. Fourteen inadequately responsive patients (3 unipolar [UP], 11 bipolar [BP]) were treated with the blind addition of carbamazepine. Carbamazepine augmentation of nimodipine converted four (29%) of the partial responders to more robust responders. Patients who showed an excellent response to the nimodipine-carbamazepine combination included individual patients with patterns of rapid cycling, ultradian cycling, UP recurrent brief depression, and one with BP type II depression. When verapamil was blindly substituted for nimodipine, two BP patients failed to maintain improvement but responded again to nimodipine and remained well with a blind transition to another dihydropyridine L-type calcium channel blocker (CCB), isradipine. Mechanistic implications of the response to the dihydropyridine L-type CCB nimodipine alone and in combination with carbamazepine are discussed.
The L-type calcium channel antagonist, isradipine, reduces brain ischemia in animal models of ischemic stroke. These effects of isradipine appear more pronounced in dopamine (DA) rich brain regions. These same DA-rich brain regions have also been shown to be the areas most affected by cocaine-induced ischemic changes. Using a novel quantified approach to single photon emission computerized tomography, we demonstrated that isradipine pre-treatment prevented cocaine-induced ischemic changes, especially in these DA-rich brain regions. This is the first demonstration that any medication, including isradipine, can prevent the ischemic effects of cocaine on brain blood flow. Isradipine may, therefore, be a useful therapeutic agent for the prevention of brain ischemia in cocaine addicts.
Children presenting with hypertension should be considered for emergency treatment when there is evidence of end-organ toxicity. Complications of extreme hypertension may be very serious, even life threatening, with the potential for life-long sequelae. Of greatest significance is damage to the central nervous system. Treatment of hypertensive emergencies should be directed toward the lowering of blood pressure enough to reduce toxicity, but not at a rate likely to cause hypoperfusion of vital organs. This blood pressure reduction should, in general, be carefully controlled in an intensive care unit, with attention to central nervous system, cardiac, and renal function. Intravenous agents are preferable under these circumstances, due to greater ease in modulating blood pressure. In the absence of specific contraindications, a continuous infusion of nicardipine or sodium nitroprusside is preferable. Intravenous labetalol by bolus injection, followed by continuous infusion, also may be used. Oral agents should be reserved for circumstances in which symptoms of end-organ toxicity are mild or absent. Since general pediatricians have limited experience with the treatment of hypertensive emergencies, consultation with physicians experienced in treating hypertensive emergencies is suggested when possible.
Isradipine has been shown to be an effective vasodilator in different vascular beds. Experimental evidence suggests that isradipine is a potent coronary vasodilator, and this is supported by clinical studies in both cardiology and cardiac surgery. Furthermore, in these studies, coronary vasodilation was not accompanied by evidence of any significant effect on cardiac contractility or conduction. It can be concluded that the cardiac effects of isradipine will ultimately prove to be beneficial in patients undergoing myocardial revascularization.
Calcium is thought to play an important role in the genesis of atherosclerotic lesions, but the precise mechanisms involved are unclear. In the present investigation, we have used in vitro systems to investigate the effects of calcium on one key aspect of lesion development: the migration of macrophages and macrophage/foam cells. Using agarose plate migration assays, the migratory characteristics of macrophages exposed to 1) no lipoprotein, 2) low density lipoprotein (LDL), 3) acetylated low density lipoprotein (acLDL), and ) oxidized low density lipoprotein were examined. The most marked stimulatory effect on macrophage mobility was observed when freshly isolated cells were exposed to acLDL during the migration assay. High levels of exogenous calcium were found to suppress the stimulatory effect of acLDL on migration. As the responses of macrophages exposed to a uniform concentration of agents in the surrounding medium may differ from chemotactic responses to a concentration gradient, the migration of macrophages, with and without preexposure to acLDL or LDL, was studied using microchemotaxis Boyden chambers. Under these conditions, calcium acted as a highly potent chemoattractant, especially to cells that had been preincubated with acLDL. These results suggest how elevated external calcium concentration leads initially to macrophage recruitment, and subsequently to foam cell aggregation and lipid core formation, in association with calcification, in the developing atherosclerotic plaque.
Dopamine depletion associated with parkinsonism induces plastic changes in striatal medium spiny neurons (MSN) that are maladaptive and associated with the emergence of the negative side-effect of standard treatment: the abnormal involuntary movements termed levodopa-induced dyskinesia (LID). Prevention of MSN dendritic spine loss is hypothesized to diminish liability for LID in Parkinson's disease. Blockade of striatal CaV1.3 calcium channels can prevent spine loss and significantly diminish LID in parkinsonian rats. While pharmacological antagonism with FDA approved CaV1 L-type channel antagonist dihydropyridine (DHP) drugs (e.g, isradipine) are potentially antidyskinetic, pharmacologic limitations of current drugs may result in suboptimal efficacy. To provide optimal CaV1.3 antagonism, we investigated the ability of a dual pharmacological approach to more potently antagonize these channels. Specifically, quinpirole, a D2/D3-type dopamine receptor (D2/3R) agonist, has been demonstrated to significantly reduce calcium current activity at CaV1.3 channels in MSNs of rats by a mechanism distinct from DHPs. We hypothesized that dual inhibition of striatal CaV1.3 channels using the DHP drug isradipine combined with the D2/D3 dopamine receptor agonist quinpirole prior to, and in conjunction with, levodopa would be more effective at preventing structural modifications of dendritic spines and providing more stable LID prevention. For these proof-of-principle studies, rats with unilateral nigrostriatal lesions received daily administration of vehicle, isradipine, quinpirole, or isradipine + quinpirole prior to, and concurrent with, levodopa. Development of LID and morphological analysis of dendritic spines were assessed. Contrary to our hypothesis, quinpirole monotherapy was the most effective at reducing dyskinesia severity and preventing abnormal mushroom spine formation on MSNs, a structural phenomenon previously associated with LID. Notably, the antidyskinetic efficacy of quinpirole monotherapy was lost in the presence of isradipine co-treatment. These findings suggest that D2/D3 dopamine receptor agonists when given in combination with levodopa and initiated in early-stage Parkinson's disease may provide long-term protection against LID. The negative interaction of isradipine with quinpirole suggests a potential cautionary note for co-administration of these drugs in a clinical setting.
The authors sought to determine whether sustained-release (SR) isradipine provided comparable systemic availability to that of immediate-release (IR) isradipine in non-treatment-seeking, cocaine-dependent individuals. This information could be used to design a rational dosage regimen for additional isradipine clinical trials in the treatment of stimulant dependence and related neurovascular disorders. Eight male volunteers who met Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) criteria for cocaine dependence participated in a randomized, double-blind, crossover study. Subjects received a 15-mg dose of an IR isradipine formulation and a 30-mg dose of an SR isradipine formulation, separated by a 2-day interval. Vital signs and blood sampling for isradipine serum levels were performed before and at 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4, 4.5, 5, 5.5, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 24 h after each isradipine dose administration. Neither the 15-mg dose of IR isradipine nor the 30-mg dose of SR isradipine produced significant adverse effects on cardiovascular parameters, but the IR formulation was more likely to produce marked short-term decreases in pressor response. Significant intersubject variability in serum concentrations and pharmacokinetic parameters occurred for both formulations. The relative bioavailability of the SR formulation was 55.5% of that of the IR formulation. Both formulations cumulatively may deliver about the same amount of drug, but IR isradipine achieves a higher peak concentration than SR isradipine. The more favorable cardiovascular profile of SR isradipine would, however, make it more appropriate as an investigational medication for the treatment of stimulant dependence and related neurovascular disorders.
In search of strategies to improve compliance, we assessed medication-taking behavior among 19 ambulatory hypertensives, using both pill counts and electronic monitoring. The regimen consisted of one pill each day for < or = 63 weeks with return visits at 1 to 4 week intervals. The study population was 79% male, 68% white, and 16% black with mean (+/- SEM) age 58.4 +/- 2.5 years. Only 51% of the intervisit intervals displayed > or = 80% of vial openings within the desirable range (24 +/- 6 h). Pill counts detected only 2% of suboptimal interdosing intervals identified by electronic monitoring. Early changes in compliance correlated well with later changes (r = 0.83, P = .002). A few of the subjects exhibited a large deviation from the prescription, uncorrectable with drugs having a long duration of action. We conclude that (a) pill counts tend to overestimate patients' compliance rates; (b) changes in medication-taking behavior early in therapy may predict subsequent compliance rates; and (c) prolonging drug action may compensate for some imperfect medication-taking behavior.
BACKGROUND: T-type calcium channels are aberrantly expressed in different human cancers and regulate cell cycle progression, proliferation, migration, and survival. FAK-1 can promote tumor protein degradation (p53) through ubiquitination, leading to cancer cell growth and proliferation. Similar findings are obtained regarding protease inhibitors' effect on cytokine-induced neutrophil activation that suppresses Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulatingfactor (GM-CSF) TNF-alpha-induced O2 release and adherence in human neutrophils without affecting phosphorylation of Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and p38. Nanosuspensions are carrier-free, submicron colloidal dispersions, which consist of pure drugs and stabilizers. Incorporating drug loaded in nanosuspensions offer a great advantages of passive drug targeting with improved solubility, stability, and bioavailability, as well as lower systemic toxicity. OBJECTIVE: The present investigation objective was to establish a molecular association of Protease and Focal Adhesion Kinase 1 as cancer targets for isradipine, a calcium channel blocker (CCB). Furthermore, the study also aimed to formulate its optimized nanosuspension and how the physical, morphological, and dissolution properties of isradipine impact nanosuspension stability. METHODS: Five different molecular targets, namely Cysteine Proteases (Cathepsin B), Serine Proteases (Matriptase), Aspartate Proteases, Matrix Metalloproteases (MMP), and FAK-1 were obtained from RCSB-PDB, which has some potential associations with inhibition in cancer pathogenesis. Molecular interactions of these targets with CCB isradipine were identified and established by molecular simulation docking studies. Isradipine-loaded nanosuspension was prepared by precipitation technique by employing a 2(3) factorial design. PVP K-30, poloxamer 188, and sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) were used as polymer, co-polymer, and surfactant, respectively. The nanosuspension particles were assessed for particle size, zeta potential, viscosity, polydispersity index (PDI), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), In-vitro drug release kinetics, and short-term stability study. RESULTS: Considerable interactions were found with Cysteine, Serine, Aspartate, Threonine, and Matrix metalloproteases with binding energies of -3.91, -6.7, -3.48, -8.42, respectively. Furthermore, the interaction of isradipine with FAK-1 was compared with 7 native ligands and was found to show significant interaction with binding energies of - 8.62, -7.27, -7.69, -5.67, -5.41, -7.44, -8.21, respectively. The optimized nanosuspension was evaluated and exhibited a particle size of 754.9 nm, zeta potential of 32.5 mV, viscosity of 1.287 cp, and PDI of 1.000. The In-vitro dissolution of the optimized formulation (F8) was found to be higher (96.57%) as compared to other formulations. CONCLUSION: Isradipine could act as a potential inhibitor of different proteases and FAK-1 associated with tumor growth initiation, progression, and metastasis. Furthermore, isradipine-loaded nanosuspension with optimized release could be utilized to deliver the anticancer drug in a more targeted way as emerging cancer nanotechnology.
OBJECTIVES: Isradipine is a dihydropyridine calcium channel inhibitor that has demonstrated concentration-dependent neuroprotective effects in animal models of Parkinson's disease (PD) but failed to show efficacy in a phase 3 clinical trial. The objectives of this study were to model the plasma pharmacokinetics of isradipine in study participants from the phase 3 trial; and, to investigate associations between drug exposure and longitudinal clinical outcome measures of PD progression. METHODS: Plasma samples from nearly all study participants randomized to immediate-release isradipine 5-mg twice daily (166 of 170) were collected for population pharmacokinetic modeling. Estimates of isradipine exposure included apparent oral clearance and area under the concentration-time curve. Isradipine exposure parameters were tested for correlations with 36-month changes in disease severity clinical assessment scores, and time-to-event analyses for initiation of antiparkinson therapy. RESULTS: Isradipine exposures did not correlate with the primary clinical outcome, changes in the antiparkinson therapy-adjusted Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale parts I-III score over 36 months (Spearman rank correlation coefficient, r(s) : 0.09, P = 0.23). Cumulative levodopa equivalent dose at month 36 was weakly correlated with isradipine plasma clearance (r(s) : 0.18, P = 0.035). This correlation was sex dependent and significant in males, but not females. Those with higher isradipine exposure had decreased risk of needing antiparkinson treatment over 36 months compared with placebo (hazard ratio: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.78-0.98, P = 0.02). INTERPRETATION: In this clinical trial, higher isradipine plasma exposure did not affect clinical assessment measures of PD severity but modestly decreased cumulative levodopa equivalent dose and the time needed for antiparkinson treatment initiation. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02168842.
