BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) and its progression are thought to be caused and driven by misfolding of alpha-synuclein (ASYN). UCB0599 is an oral, small-molecule inhibitor of ASYN misfolding, aimed at slowing disease progression. OBJECTIVE: The aim was to investigate safety/tolerability and pharmacokinetics (PK) of single and multiple doses of UCB0599. METHODS: Safety/tolerability and PK of single and multiple doses of UCB0599 and its metabolites were investigated in two phase 1 studies in healthy participants (HPs), where food effect and possible interaction with itraconazole (ITZ) were assessed (UP0030 [randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-escalation, crossover study, N = 65] and UP0078 [open-label study, N = 22]). Safety/tolerability and multi-dose PK of UCB0599 were subsequently investigated in a phase 1b randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of participants with PD (UP0077 [NCT04875962], N = 31). RESULTS: Across all studies, UCB0599 displayed rapid absorption with linear, time-independent PK properties; PK of multiple doses of UCB0599 were predictable from single-dose exposures. No notable food-effect was observed; co-administration with ITZ affected UCB0599 disposition (maximum plasma concentration and area under the curve increased ~1.3- and ~2 to 3-fold, respectively) however, this did not impact the safety profile. Hypersensitivity reactions were reported in UP0030 (n = 2) and UP0077 (n = 2). Treatment-related adverse events occurred in 43% (UCB0599), and 30% (placebo) of participants with PD were predominantly mild-to-moderate in intensity and were not dose related. CONCLUSIONS: Seventy-three HPs and 21 participants with PD received UCB0599 doses; an acceptable safety/tolerability profile and predictable PK support continued development of UCB0599 for the slowing of PD progression. A phase 2 study in early-stage PD is underway (NCT04658186). (c) 2022 UCB Pharma. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
Anidulafungin is the newest addition to the antifungal arsenal. It possesses fungicidal activity against Candida spp., including isolates that are azole and polyene resistant. In addition, it is fungistatic against Aspergillus spp. Anidulafungin is unique in that it possesses no clinically relevant drug interactions and does not require dosage adjustment in renal or hepatic impairment. Anidulafungin was well tolerated in clinical trials and its clinical efficacy has been demonstrated in the treatment of candidemia and other forms of candidiasis.
Onychomycosis has been treated for years with oral antifungal agents, and more recently in the United States with a topical nail lacquer. Griseofulvin was the first significant oral agent available to manage onychomycosis. The introduction of the azoles (ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole) and the allylamine, terbinafine, led to improved cure rates and a broad spectrum of activity. Pharmacokinetic studies have shown that the newer oral agents penetrate the nail within approximately one to two weeks after the start of therapy and remain for several months after the end of treatment. This article reviews the oral antifungal agents used to treat onychomycosis.
There are no specialized formulations of antifungal drugs in Japan which are prepared for children. Modification of the therapeutic doses by age groups or by body weight of the patients from the recommended doses for adults as well as special precautions against side effects are needed for pediatric use. Reports focusing on the side effects of topical and systemic antifungal drugs are reviewed. All the newly introduced systemic drugs, such as fluconazole, itraconazole and terbinafine, have been well tolerated during the treatment of fungal infections of neonates and infants.
One of the most well-known drug interactions in pediatric oncology concerns the co-administration of itraconazole, an antifungal triazole, and vincristine, an antileukemic agent, which seems to enhance the risk of neurotoxicity of the latter, mediated through the cytochrome CYP450 enzyme system. The aim of this article is to review the metabolism of these two drugs, to analyze the published cases with severe triazole-enhanced vincristine neurotoxicity, to discuss the pathophysiological mechanisms of this adverse effect, and to contribute in understanding the differences in triazole-vincristine interaction severity.
Lipid nanocapsules (LNCs) are extensively used as drug carrier systems, due to their small size distribution, biocompatibility and ease of preparation. They are especially useful for lipophilic drugs to overcome physicochemical constraints that limit their efficacy, such as low solubility in aqueous media. The aim of this work was to investigate the relationship between the intracellular availability of poorly soluble drugs delivered via LNCs and their biological efficacy in cells in vitro. Cyclosporin A (CsA) with a logP(Oct) = 4.3 (Lucangioli et al., 2003) and Itraconazole (It) with a logP(Oct) = 6.2 (Bhardwaj et al., 2013) served as model lipophilic compounds, as they are highly promising candidates for the treatment of neovascular ocular diseases. Due to their lipophilic properties and the resulting preference for the oily core of LNCs, high encapsulation efficiencies were achieved. Drug-loaded LNCs with particle sizes around 50 nm were grafted with an alphavbeta3 integrin ligand (RGD) to optimize cellular uptake by human dermal microvascular endothelial cells. Even though RGD-LNCs showed excellent internalization, they exhibited insufficient inhibitory effects in vitro regarding endothelial cell proliferation, vascular endothelial growth factor expression, and tube formation in contrast to free drugs. This loss of efficacy could be explained by negligible intracellular availability of the poorly soluble drugs from LNCs.
OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, mycology, chemistry, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, safety, tolerability, dosage, administration, and economic issues of intravenous itraconazole. DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE search from 1978 to June 2000 of the English-language literature and an extensive review of meeting abstracts was conducted. Due to the paucity of published information concerning the pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and safety of the intravenous formulation of intravenous itraconazole, additional information was obtained from the manufacturer. DATA EXTRACTION: Data from in vitro and preclinical studies, as well as Phase II and III clinical trials, were included. DATA SYNTHESIS: The triazole antifungal agent itraconazole is available in a cyclodextrin-based intravenous formulation. Intravenous itraconazole is indicated for the treatment of pulmonary and extrapulmonary blastomycosis; histoplasmosis, including chronic cavitary pulmonary disease and disseminated, nonmeningeal histoplasmosis; and pulmonary and extrapulmonary aspergillosis in patients who are intolerant of or who are refractory to amphotericin B. This formulation provides quicker and more consistent therapeutic concentrations than the oral formulations. Clinical data comparing the efficacy of intravenous itraconazole with that of amphotericin B are lacking. CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous itraconazole offers a less toxic alternative for patients with pulmonary and extrapulmonary blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and aspergillosis who cannot receive oral medications or who are intolerant of or refractory to amphotericin B.
Invasive mycoses continue to be a major problem in the growing population of immunosuppressed patients. More antifungal agents are now available than ever. The options are many, with more efficacies and less toxicity than in the past. These agents differ in terms of spectrum of activity, pharmacologic properties, and indications. In this article we discuss the three major classes of antifungal agents: the polyens, the triazoles, and the echinocandins. The emphasis is placed on their clinical use, side effects, drug interactions, and other practical issues.
AIMS: To review the basis and optimal use of therapeutic drug monitoring of antimicrobial agents. METHODS: Antimicrobial agents for which a reasonable case exists for therapeutic drug monitoring were reviewed under the following headings: pharmacokinetics, why monitor, therapeutic range, individualisation of therapy, sampling times, methods of analysis, interpretative problems and cost-effectiveness of monitoring. RESULTS: There is a strong historical case for monitoring aminoglycosides. The recent move to once-daily dosing means that criteria for therapeutic drug monitoring need to be redefined. Vancomycin has been monitored routinely but many questions remain about the most appropriate approach to this. A case can be made for monitoring teicoplanin, flucytosine and itraconazole in certain circumstances. CONCLUSIONS: The approach to monitoring aminoglycosides needs to be redefined in the light of once-daily dosing. It is premature to suggest that less stringent monitoring is necessary as toxicity remains a problem with these drugs. The ideal method of monitoring vancomycin remains to be defined although a reasonable case exists for measuring trough concentrations, mainly to ensure efficacy. Teicoplanin is monitored occasionally to ensure efficacy while flucytosine is monitored occasionally to avoid high concentrations associated with toxicity. Itraconazole has various pharmacokinetic problems and monitoring has been suggested to ensure that adequate concentrations are achieved.
As both humans and fungi are eukaryotic organisms, antifungal agents affect their cellular metabolism. Thus, a relatively few antifungals with minimal toxicity and side-effects are available compared with a plethora of antibacterials. These agents currently prescribed in dentistry belong to two major groups, the polyenes (nystatin and amphotericin B) and the azoles (imidazoles and triazoles). A newly recognized phenomenon known as the post-antifungal effect implies that antifungals, even at sub-therapeutic concentrations, may suppress the virulent attributes of yeasts, especially intra-orally where topical drug levels fluctuate dramatically during dosing intervals.
Twenty-two male and 20 female adults with Down's syndrome were examined. Ten of the men and two of the women had a follicular rash consistent with Malassezia folliculitis. Oral itraconazole treatment produced a significant improvement in the rash, accompanied by a decrease in the skin Malassezia count. Clinical relapse occurred when therapy was discontinued, and was accompanied by return of the Malassezia yeasts.
Plasma drug concentration and electrocardiogram (ECG) data from a drug-drug interaction (DDI) study employing the metabolic inhibitor itraconazole have been used as part of a prospectively defined pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modelling strategy to quantify the potential for QT interval prolongation from basmisanil, an investigational compound. ECG data were collected on multiple days during repeat dosing treatment regimens, thereby allowing the capture of QT data across a wide range of drug concentrations in each study participant and encompassing both "therapeutic" and "supra-therapeutic" exposures. The data were used to develop a non-linear mixed effect concentration-QT (C-QT) model that differentiated drug-induced QT prolongation from other factors altering QT interval duration. Food effects were accounted by quantitating their influences on the parameters describing the diurnal variation of QT. The final model demonstrated that itraconazole does not cause QT prolongation, while for basmisanil, the 1-sided upper 95% CI of the QT interval at 240 mg (the highest dose tested in ongoing phase 2 studies) with DDI, was below the 10 ms threshold considered to be of clinical significance by regulatory authorities. The empirical modelling was complemented with a human mechanistic cardiac single cell model that was used to simulate the change in action potential duration as a function of drug concentration. The results of the two approaches were in agreement, suggesting that the effect of basmisanil on QT interval duration can be attributed to the effect on hERG alone. The C-QT model for basmisanil can be used to derive the QT interval corrected changes in heart rate (QTc) and thus inform cardiac safety strategy in later development without the need for a separate, dedicated study.
Ever since the introduction of itraconazole and terbinafine in the management of onychomycosis, there has been a revival of interest in the latter. In order to comprehend the intricate emerging scenario, an endeavor has been made to form a distinct outline in the shape of an overview on several of their facets. The review, therefore, envisages forming and facilitating instant decision-making.
We explored concentration-toxicity relationships for itraconazole among 216 patients. Logistic regression revealed a progressive increase in the probability of toxicity with increasing concentrations of itraconazole. Classification and regression tree analysis suggested that 17.1 mg/L of itraconazole (measured using a bioassay) was the concentration level at which the population of patients was separated into 2 groups, each with a high and a low probability of toxicity.
Nanocrystals and nanosuspensions have become realistic approaches to overcome the formulation challenges of poorly water-soluble drugs. They also represent a less-known but versatile platform for multiple therapeutic applications. They can be integrated into a broad spectrum of drug delivery systems including tablets, hydrogels, microneedles, microparticles, or even functionalized liposomes. The recent progresses, challenges, and opportunities in this field are gathered originally together with an informative case study concerning an itraconazole nanosuspension-in-hydrogel formulation. The translational aspects, historical and current clinical perspectives are also critically reviewed here to shed light on the incoming generation of nanocrystal formulations.
Itraconazole diffusion in sputum was studied in 11 cystic fibrosis patients with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. There was a high interindividual variability in sputum itraconazole concentration and sputum/serum drug concentration ratio. Three children had sputum drug concentrations before oral administration that were lower than the itraconazole MIC at which 90% of Aspergillus fumigatus strains were inhibited, although their serum drug concentrations were within the therapeutic range.
Itraconazole (ITZ)-loaded microemulsion (ME) systems for intranasal (IN) delivery were developed for the treatment of human rhinovirus serotype 1B (HRV1B) infection. ITZ was incorporated into the oil-in-water (o/w) ME formulation composed of benzyl alcohol (oil), Cremophor EL (surfactant), Solutol HS15 (cosurfactant), and water. The optimized composition of ME was determined by constructing pseudo-ternary phase diagram. ITZ ME formulation with about 150nm mean diameter and spherical shape was prepared and the solubility of ITZ in blank ME was markedly improved (up to 13.9mg/mL). The initial value of droplet size was maintained with four times dilution in the aqueous buffer and 72h incubation. Released amounts of drug from ME formulation were significantly enhanced compared to drug suspension group (p<0.05). Particularly, ITZ ME group displayed lower levels of inflammatory markers in the lung compared to ITZ suspension group after their IN administration in the HRV1B-infected mouse model (p<0.05). Developed ITZ ME formulation via IN route can be a promising candidate for the treatment of rhinovirus infection.
In separate but identically designed studies the oral pharmacokinetics of 100 mg doses of the 2 antimycotics fluconazole and itraconazole were examined in Japanese and German subjects (both n = 12), both fasting and concomitant to a heavy breakfast. The results with the 2 races were compared. With fasting subjects no significant difference was found with either antimycotic for any parameter. With fluconazole the pharmacokinetic parameters after food were essentially the same for the 2 races. The only significant difference, a delay of 1.5 h in the median tmax in the Japanese relative to the Germans, should not be of practical importance. In contrast, the mean AUC for itraconazole in Japanese subjects after the meal was only 54.9% of the value with Germans (p < 0.05); the corresponding Cmax was only 54.7% (p < 0.01). As itraconazole is normally administered together with food, this suggests that there is a possibility of underdosage in Japanese subjects. There appears to be no such problem with fluconazole.
High-dose ketoconazole (400 mg q.d. for >/=5 days) has been the gold-standard strong cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) inhibitor in drug development drug-drug interaction (DDI) studies. In 2013, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) advised against using this ketoconazole regimen following review of clinical safety reports. We systematically evaluated 19 strong CYP3A inhibitors from regulatory guidances and a literature database to identify itraconazole (200 mg b.i.d. on day 1, q.d. on days 2-6) and clarithromycin (500 mg b.i.d. for 7 days) as acceptable ketoconazole alternatives.
A 10-year-old Saudi boy was diagnosed to have basidiobolomycosis after a stormy course of his ailment. Therapy was initiated with intravenous antifungal, voriconazole, which was well tolerated for 6 weeks except for local excoriation at the site of ileostomy. He developed drug-induced hepatitis on oral voriconazole, therefore, switched to oral itraconazole following which he experienced severe chest pain. Alternatively, co-trimoxazole (bactrim) an antibacterial with antifungal activity was prescribed but he had the intolerance to it as well. Unfortunately, posaconazole as an alternative antifungal was not available in our centre. We report here a Saudi boy who developed an intolerance to most common antifungals used clinically 6 weeks after the therapy was initiated.
