BACKGROUND: Use of topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to treat chronic musculoskeletal conditions has become widely accepted because they can provide pain relief without associated systemic adverse events. This review is an update of 'Topical NSAIDs for chronic musculoskeletal pain in adults', originally published in Issue 9, 2012. OBJECTIVES: To review the evidence from randomised, double-blind, controlled trials on the efficacy and safety of topically applied NSAIDs for chronic musculoskeletal pain in adults. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, EMBASE, and our own in-house database; the date of the last search was February 2016. We also searched the references lists of included studies and reviews, and sought unpublished studies by asking personal contacts and searching online clinical trial registers and manufacturers' web sites. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised, double-blind, active or inert carrier (placebo) controlled trials in which treatments were administered to adults with chronic musculoskeletal pain of moderate or severe intensity. Studies had to meet stringent quality criteria and there had to be at least 10 participants in each treatment arm, with application of treatment at least once daily. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed studies for inclusion and extracted data. We used numbers of participants achieving each outcome to calculate risk ratio and numbers needed to treat (NNT) or harm (NNH) compared to carrier or other active treatment. We were particularly interested to compare different formulations (gel, cream, plaster) of individual NSAIDs. The primary outcome was 'clinical success', defined as at least a 50% reduction in pain, or an equivalent measure such as a 'very good' or 'excellent' global assessment of treatment, or 'none' or 'slight' pain on rest or movement, measured on a categorical scale. MAIN RESULTS: We identified five new studies for this update, which now has information from 10,631 participants in 39 studies, a 38% increase in participants from the earlier review; 33 studies compared a topical NSAID with carrier. All studies examined topical NSAIDs for treatment of osteoarthritis, and for pooled analyses studies were generally of moderate or high methodological quality, although we considered some at risk of bias from short duration and small size.In studies lasting 6 to 12 weeks, topical diclofenac and topical ketoprofen were significantly more effective than carrier for reducing pain; about 60% of participants had much reduced pain. With topical diclofenac, the NNT for clinical success in six trials (2343 participants) was 9.8 (95% confidence interval (CI) 7.1 to 16) (moderate quality evidence). With topical ketoprofen, the NNT for clinical success in four trials (2573 participants) was 6.9 (5.4 to 9.3) (moderate quality evidence). There was too little information for analysis of other individual topical NSAIDs compared with carrier. Few trials compared a topical NSAID to an oral NSAID, but overall they showed similar efficacy (low quality evidence). These efficacy results were almost completely derived from people with knee osteoarthritis.There was an increase in local adverse events (mostly mild skin reactions) with topical diclofenac compared with carrier or oral NSAIDs, but no increase with topical ketoprofen (moderate quality evidence). Reporting of systemic adverse events (such as gastrointestinal upsets) was poor, but where reported there was no difference between topical NSAID and carrier (very low quality evidence). Serious adverse events were infrequent and not different between topical NSAID and carrier (very low quality evidence).Clinical success with carrier occurred commonly - in around half the participants in studies lasting 6 to 12 weeks. Both direct and indirect comparison of clinical success with oral placebo indicates that response rates with carrier (topical placebo) are about twice those seen with oral placebo.A substantial amount of data from completed, unpublished studies was unavailable (up to 6000 participants). To the best of our knowledge, much of this probably relates to formulations that have never been marketed. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Topical diclofenac and topical ketoprofen can provide good levels of pain relief beyond carrier in osteoarthritis for a minority of people, but there is no evidence for other chronic painful conditions. There is emerging evidence that at least some of the substantial placebo effects seen in longer duration studies derive from effects imparted by the NSAID carrier itself, and that NSAIDs add to that.
A COMMON OBSERVATION: Ketoprofene gels, widely used to treat benign conditions, can provoke local intolerance. The most commonly reported clinical features include eczema, sometimes severe acute contact photoallergy that often spread beyond the site of application and may even lead to a long-duration generalized reaction. DIAGNOSIS: Photoallergological tests allow positive diagnosis of the ketoprofene-induced contact photosensitization and underline the role of the benzophenone ring, explaining certain cross allergies with fenofibrate and oxybenzone. PRECAUTIONS FOR USE: The primary rule is to avoid sun exposure, requiring better information for prescribers and patients.
Drug-induced photosensitivity reactions are significant adverse effects. Ketoprofen is one of the most common drugs that can cause skin rash in sun-exposed areas. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ketoprofen, are often used for a variety of symptoms, including pain and fever. An understanding of the presentation and clinical course of ketoprofen-induced photosensitivity is necessary to correctly diagnose and manage this condition. Ketoprofen-induced photosensitivity reactions usually present as photoallergic dermatitis, which is a cell-mediated immune process. The benzophenone moiety in ketoprofen plays a major role in ketoprofen's ability to act as a photosensitizer. Several agents, such as fenofibrate and octocrylene have been found to be associated with aggravation of ketoprofen-induced photoallergic dermatitis or cross-photosensitization, and these reactions result from structural similarities with ketoprofen. Treatment of ketoprofen-induced photoallergic dermatitis includes discontinuation of ketoprofen, topical or systemic corticosteroids and avoidance of sun exposure and agents known to exacerbate dermatitis. In conclusion, photoallergic dermatitis is a significant adverse effect of ketoprofen. Some agents known to worsen dermatitis may be found in sun protection products (notably, octocrylene in sunscreen). Educating the patient to avoid these products is critical to treatment. Since NSAIDs, such as ketoprofen, are used commonly for a variety of illnesses, drug-induced photoallergic dermatitis should be high on the differential in individuals using these medications who present with acute onset of a rash in sun-exposed areas.
Topical ketoprofen (KP) is widely used because of its anti-inflammatory effect. Parallel with its popular usage, the number of reported cases of ketoprofen-induced photoallergic contact dermatitis has increased. A review of the literature was made to evaluate the spectrum of cross sensitization in patients with ketoprofen-induced photoallergic contact dermatitis using ketoprofen and other structurally similar chemicals and sunscreens, fragrance components, as well as the presence of prolonged photosensitivity related to it. Furthermore, the distinction between true cross-reactivity and concomitant sensitization may be difficult. Therefore, further investigations are needed to gain a more complete understanding of this important topic. This article also reviews some patents related to alternative treatment of musculoskeletal diseases and/or treatment of allergic reactions due to NSAIDs use.
OBJECTIVE: Tension-type headache is the most common type of primary headache and results in a huge socioeconomic burden. This network meta-analysis (NMA) aimed to compare the efficacy and safety of simple analgesics for the treatment of episodic tension-type headache (ETTH) in adults. METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Library, PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, Chinese BioMedical Literature database and International Clinical Trials Registry Platform databases for eligible randomized clinical trials reporting the efficacy and/or safety of simple analgesics. A Bayesian NMA was performed to compare relative efficacy and safety. The surface under the cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA) was calculated to rank interventions. PROSPERO registration number: CRD42018090554. RESULTS: We highlighted six studies including 3507 patients. For the 2 h pain-free rate, the SUCRA ranking was ibuprofen > diclofenac-K > ketoprofen > acetaminophen > naproxen > placebo. All drugs except naproxen reported a higher 2 h pain-free rate than placebo, with a risk ratio (RR) of 2.86 (95% credible interval, CrI: 1.62-5.42) for ibuprofen and 2.61 (1.53-4.88) for diclofenac-K. For adverse events rate, the SUCRA ranking was: metamizol > diclofenac-K > ibuprofen > lumiracoxib > placebo > aspirin > acetaminophen > naproxen > ketoprofen. The adverse event rates of all analgesics were no higher than those of placebo, except for ketoprofen. Moreover, all drugs were superior to placebo in the global assessment of efficacy. In particular, the RR of lumiracoxib was 2.47 (1.57-4.57). Global heterogeneity I(2) between the studies was low. CONCLUSIONS: Simple analgesics are considered more effective and safe as a placebo for ETTH in adults. Our results suggest that ibuprofen and diclofenac-K may be the two best treatment options for patients with ETTH from a comprehensive point of view (both high-quality evidence).
Although oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are effective in the treatment of a variety of acute and chronic pain conditions, their use may be associated with serious systemic adverse effects, particularly gastrointestinal disorders. In order to minimise the incidence of systemic events related to such agents, topical NSAIDs have been developed. Topical NSAIDs, applied as gels, creams or sprays, penetrate the skin, subcutaneous fatty tissue and muscle in amounts that are sufficient to exert a therapeutic effect on peripheral and central mechanisms in the absence of high plasma concentrations. Data indicate that topical NSAIDs are effective at relieving pain in a number of acute and chronic pain indications. This review article discusses the pharmacokinetics, efficacy and tolerability of a new formulation of ketoprofen available as a topical patch. The topical patch containing ketoprofen 100mg as the active principle has been developed using a novel delivery system that dispenses therapeutic doses of the drug directly to the site of injury. Pharmacokinetic data indicate that although plasma levels of ketoprofen are higher when the drug is administered as a patch versus a gel, the total systemic bioavailability of ketoprofen 100 mg administered via a patch is no more than 10% of that reported for ketoprofen 100 mg administered orally. Because the patch facilitates ketoprofen delivery over a 24-hour period, the drug remains continually present in the tissue subjacent to the site of application. High tissue but low plasma ketoprofen concentrations mean that while tissue concentrations are high enough to exert a therapeutic effect, plasma concentrations remain low enough to not result in systemic adverse events caused by elevated serum NSAID levels. Phase III clinical trials in patients with non-articular rheumatism and traumatic painful soft tissue injuries showed that the topical ketoprofen patch was significantly more effective than placebo at reducing pain during daily activities and spontaneous pain after 7 days' treatment. Moreover, the topical ketoprofen patch was well tolerated; adverse events were primarily cutaneous in nature and occurred in a similar number of ketoprofen and placebo recipients suggesting that these events were related to the patch itself rather than the active ingredient. The incidence of gastrointestinal adverse events was low (<8% of all patients), and occurred in a similar proportion of patients receiving ketoprofen and placebo. Thus, the topical ketoprofen patch appears to be a simple, effective and safe therapeutic option for the treatment of local painful inflammation.
Forty-seven patients with active rheumatoid arthritis took part in an 8-week controlled study in which clotrimazole was compared with a standard nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent, ketoprofen. Although clotrimazole was shown to be effective in the treatment of the disease and superior to ketoprofen in certain measurements, if was also responsible for a high incidence of adverse effects. Improvement with clotrimazole took place more slowly but was more sustained than with ketoprofen. A significant rise in plasma cortisol and a fall in white cell count was observed in the clotrimazole treated patients.
Irradiation of ketoprofen in neutral aqueous medium gave rise to 3-ethylbenzophenone as the major photoproduct. Its formation is justified via protonation of a benzylic carbanion or hydrogen abstraction by a benzylic radical. Minor amounts of eight additional compounds were isolated. Four of them are derived from the benzylic radical: 3-(1-hydroperoxyethyl)benzophenone, 3-(1-hydroxyethyl)benzophenone, 3-acetylbenzophenone and 2,3-bis-(3-benzoylphenyl)butane. The other four products involve initial hydrogen abstraction by the excited benzophenone chromophore of ketoprofen: 1,2-bis-(3-ethylphenyl)-1,2-diphenyl-1,2-ethanediol, 2-(3-benzoylphenyl)-1-(3-ethylphenyl)-1-phenylpropan-1-ol, alpha-(3-ethylphenyl)phenylmethanol, 1,2-bis-[3-(2-hydroxycarbonylethyl) phenyl]-1,2-diphenyl-1,2-ethanediol. The latter process was found to mediate the photoperoxidation of linoleic acid through a type I mechanism, as evidenced by the inhibition produced by the radical scavengers butylated hydroxyanisole and reduced glutathione. The major photoproduct, which contains the benzophenone moiety but lacks the propionic acid side chain, also photosensitized linoleic acid peroxidation. Because lipid peroxidation is indicative of cell membrane lysis, the above findings are highly relevant to explain the photobiological properties of ketoprofen.
The anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities of orally administered nimesulide and ketoprofen were assessed in a group of 71 paediatric patients (aged 7 to 14 years) with orthopaedic disorders. Both drugs had similar efficacy. The greatest advantage of nimesulide was its better tolerability: only 3 nimesulide-treated patients (8.6%) experienced side effects related to the drug, compared with 12 (33%) of the ketoprofen-treated children.
Ketoprofen administered via the rectal route seemed to be valuable when given at night to patients with various rheumatic syndromes and may be particularly useful for patients who show gastric intolerance of the capsules. Anal intolerance was noted in 12% of the patients.
Bioequivalence studies of topical formulations have attracted increased interest as the European Medicines Agencies "Guideline on quality and equivalence on locally applied, locally acting cutaneous products" describes them in the context of the approval of generics. Since the guideline only proposes tape stripping as a destructive method for bioequivalence testing in in vitro skin penetration, the aim of this study was to investigate the suitability of confocal Raman spectroscopy (CRS) as a non-destructive alternative. To validate the CRS results, tape stripping and CRS experiments using ketoprofen as a model API were performed consecutively on the same samples of ex vivo porcine skin after frozen storage and compared. All experiments were also carried out on two different animal test subjects to investigate a possible influence of inter-individual variations. Furthermore, the influence of the chosen incubation times inside and outside of the steady state was determined. We were able to show that CRS and tape stripping results were very similar both in overall detected API amounts as well as in the results of bioequivalence testing, proving CRS is not only suitable for quantitative skin penetration experiments but also for bioequivalence testing. Inter-individual variations were found to be relevant when comparing formulations measured on different subjects. Bioequivalence testing however reached the same results on both subjects. Finally, the chosen incubation time was limited by skin disintegration, the reaching of steady state however did not influence the results of bioequivalence testing.
INTRODUCTION: Ketoprofen (K) was synthesized in 1968. K belongs to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and has analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic properties. K is commonly used due to rapid absorption, simple metabolism, high antinociceptive activity and fast blood brain barrier crossing. However, this substance causes various side effects which are the major factors affecting its' popularity. Many researchers have modified this drug to discover an improved and safe NSAID. AIM: The aim of the review was to find in recent publications data bout future prospects of K of improved safety for the gastric mucosa after oral administration. METHOD: Systematic literature review was conducted in March 2021 (2015 onwards). We selected 22 articles from PubMed, Google Scholar, Medline Complete databases. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Many studies aimed at obtaining K with lower ulcerogenic properties. This article describes K with lysine, new K delivery systems, K in form of hydrogels, prodrugs and codrugs of K, K as ATB-352, K with zinc, K encapsulated as proliposomal powders and several substances that reduce the gastric side effects of K described after 2015. CONCLUSION: Our review confirms that modifications of K maintain its' desirable actions and decrease ulcer producing side effect. Some new forms of K were also found to have better activity profile compared to the parent drug.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this systematic review of the literature and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) was to compare the efficacy of orally administered ketoprofen with that of ibuprofen and/or diclofenac. METHODS: The literature was systematically reviewed in accordance with the Cochrane Collaboration guidelines. The search was restricted to randomised clinical trials published in the Medline and Embase databases up to June 2011, and comparing the efficacy of oral ketoprofen (50-200 mg/day) with ibuprofen (600-1800 mg/day) or diclofenac (75-150 mg/day). RESULTS: A total of 13 RCTs involving 898 patients met the inclusion criteria: eight comparing ketoprofen with ibuprofen, and five comparing ketoprofen with diclofenac. The results of the meta-analysis showed a statistically significant difference in efficacy in favour of ketoprofen. The difference between ketoprofen and the pooled ibuprofen/diclofenac data was also statistically significant (0.459, 95% CI 0.33-0.58; p=0.00) at all point-estimates of the mean weighted size effect. Ketoprofen was significantly superior to both diclofenac (mean = 0.422; 95% CI 0.19-0.65; p=0.0007) and ibuprofen (mean = 0.475; 95% CI 0.32-0.62; p=0.0000) at all point-estimates. Heterogeneity for the analysed efficacy outcome was not statistically significant in any of the meta-analyses. CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy of orally administered ketoprofen in relieving moderate-severe pain and improving functional status and general condition was significantly better than that of ibuprofen and/or diclofenac.
A randomised controlled trial was conducted to investigate efficacy of paracetamol and dexketoprofen trometamol for perineal pain relief after perineal repair. Subjects were randomly assigned to receive two doses of either 50 mg of intravenous dexketoprofen trometamol via slow i.v. infusion (Group I, n = 49) or 1,000 mg of paracetamol via intravenous infusion (Group II, n = 46). The main outcome measure was a VAS (visual analogue scale) for pain recorded at 1 h (VAS 1). A total of 82 patients were included in the final analysis (Group I, n = 41; Group II, n = 41). There was no difference among groups in terms of pain scores at the beginning (VAS 0). The pain was decreased in 70% of the patients in Group I and in 62% of the patients in Group II (p = 0.502). Both paracetamol and dexketoprofen are effective in perineal pain relief after episiotomy or perineal tear repair.
Mushroom poisoning is an important reason of plant toxicity. Wild mushrooms that gathered from pastures and forests can be dangerous for human health. The clinical outcomes and symptoms of mushroom toxicity vary from mild gastrointestinal symptoms to acute multiple organ failure. Toxic effects to kidney and liver of amatoxin are common but cardiotoxic effects are unusual. In this case, we reported the cardiotoxic effect of amatoxin with the elevated troponin-I without any additional finding in electrocardiography, echocardiography and angiography.
A double-blind trial of azapropazone (300 mg. 4-times daily) and ketoprofen (50 mg. 4-times daily) was carried out in 50 patients with acute backache sufficiently severe to necessitate hospital admission. Of 39 patients who completed the full 3-weeks' study period, 18 preferred azapropazone therapy, 10 preferred ketoprofen, and 11 showed either preference for the intermediate placebo period or no preference at all. Ten patients suffered from sufficiently severe side-effects with ketoprofen to necessitate their withdrawal from the trial. There were no similar episodes of withdrawal occurring during the azapropazone period.
Various drugs are known to cause pill esophagitis. Antimicrobial drugs and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are the most common causes of pill-induced esophagitis. Most patients suffer only self-limiting pain, but serious complications can occur. A 21-year-old man was admitted to our outpatient clinic with retrosternal chest pain, dysphagia, and odynophagia complaints, which occurred within 2 weeks after starting dexketoprofen trometamol. An upper endoscopy system examination revealed three well-demarcated ulcers in the esophagus at 35 cm from the incisors. Dexketoprofen trometamol may cause esophageal lesions. This rare disorder should be considered in patients presenting with sudden-onset retrosternal pain in addition to dysphagia and odynophagia.
Ninety patients with rheumatoid arthritis completed a double-blind crossover trial comparing fenoprofen, ibuprofen, ketoprofen, and naproxen. Fenoprofen and naproxen were slightly more effective than the other two drugs but there were striking individual variations in response. Groups of patients could be identified who preferred each of the four drugs. The commonest side effects were those related to the upper gastrointestinal tract; these showed individual variation and seldom occurred with more than one or two of the drugs. Side effects were least common with ibuprofen and naproxen. Since naproxen combined greater effectiveness with a lower incidence of side effects it must be regarded as the first choice among these drugs. It may be necessary to try several drugs before finding the right one for a particular patient.
INTRODUCTION: Acute musculoskeletal injuries are one of the most common painful presentation when admission to the emergency department. The aim of the study is to compare the tenoxicam mesotherapy with intravenous dexketoprofen in pain control in patients with acute musculoskeletal injury. METHODS: This parallel randomized controlled trial was conducted with the patients admitted to the emergency department with musculoskeletal injury. Intravenous dexketoprofen was administered to the control group, and mesotherapy treatment was performed to the other group. Differences between 10th, 30th, 60th and 120th minutes VAS scores and on the admission VAS score, clinically meaningful change in pain intensity, and adverse effect of the procedures were compared among groups. THE RESULTS: The differences in VAS scores and the presence of clinically meaningful change in pain intensity were statistically significantly higher in mesotherapy group than the systemic therapy group in all time periods. During one-week follow-up period, there was no reported adverse effect neither in mesotherapy group nor in the systemic therapy group. CONCLUSIONS: The mesotherapy treatment may be superior than the systemic therapy for pain relief in musculoskeletal injury in short term follow-up in emergency department settings.
Ketoprofen is a drug belonging to the family of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The present review examines the main available clinical evidence of ketoprofen in the treatment of acute and chronic pain, of both rheumatic and traumatic origin, as well as postoperative pain. Ketoprofen has shown to be an excellent choice of drug for the treatment of chronic pain in patients with osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis or gout, demonstrating a high level of efficacy with good tolerability also in elderly patients. Even in the treatment of acute forms of pain such as bursitis, tendinitis and back pain, ketoprofen compares favourably to other NSAIDs (e.g., ibuprofen and diclofenac) in terms of efficacy. Ketoprofen has been shown to be effective also for the treatment of post-operative pain, particularly in the orthopaedic field, with an efficacy similar to opioids in some studies. In this setting, some evidence indicates that ketoprofen exhibits additional important benefits, showing to be effective in the prophylaxis of heterotopic calcification following hip or pelvic major intervention, without affecting the bone healing process. Moreover, the use of ketoprofen in elastomeric pump in combination with opioids or other NSAIDs has proven to be effective and safe. In conclusion, available data confirm that ketoprofen is effective and well tolerated, through different administration routes, for the treatment of various forms of rheumatic, traumatic and post-surgical pain, and may therefore be considered as a valid therapeutic option for these patients.
