Nocturnal bruxism is a common oromandibular movement disorder highly prevalent in children, but its pathophysiological mechanism has not been fully explained. Iatrogenic sleep bruxism has been described following treatment with several psychotropic medications. However, no case of antihistamine-induced bruxism has been reported to date. Herein, we describe a 4-year-old child who experienced nocturnal bruxism during treatment for bronchospasm and rhinitis with the antihistamine ketotifen. Drug rechallenge was also performed. CONCLUSION: The present case adds useful information to our knowledge of bruxism. Complex and poorly understood interactions between multiple central nervous system neurotransmitters, such as histamine, serotonin, and dopamine, are involved.
A patient with idiopathic anaphylaxis (IA), classified as generalized IA with frequent episodes, had original episodes in 1985 and has been managed and studied by the authors since 1987. Although her episodes of IA appear to have been controlled by prednisone, progressively larger doses of prednisone have been required. The patient was classified as a patient with corticosteroid-dependent IA, a subset of patients with IA in whom a remission cannot be induced with prednisone and in whom prednisone cannot be stopped. A trial of ketotifen is in progress without definitive effect on prednisone requirement. Because this corticosteroid-dependent patient with IA, which is potentially fatal, cannot be managed on less than 90 mg of alternate-day prednisone, we propose the term malignant IA to categorize such severe cases of IA.
Opinions on the pathogenesis of bronchial asthma have changed considerably in recent years. An immunologic mechanism to explain the state of bronchial hyperresponsiveness in asthmatic patients was not widely accepted in the past. However, with increasing knowledge of immunologic, biochemical and neurogenic mechanisms, a better understanding of the pathophysiology of asthma has evolved. This has encouraged investigators to develop new drugs to control asthmatic symptoms. The treatment of asthma consists of measures to control acute attacks and to prevent recurrences. We try to present in this paper a comprehensive review of asthma prophylaxis in children. This includes environmental control, parent/patient education, physiotherapy/psychotherapy, allergy extract immunotherapy and drug prophylaxis. The pharmacologic actions, advantages and disadvantages of drugs used for prophylaxis are discussed. A double-blind investigation on the safety and efficacy of Ketotifen among Filipino asthmatic patients demonstrated beneficial results compared with other countries. An algorithm of the use of various drugs in the prophylaxis of childhood asthma is presented.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Multiple action drugs, such as azelastine, epinastine, ketotifen and olopatadine, have recently been suggested to combine antihistaminic effect, mast cell stabilization and anti-inflammatory action. This pharmaceutical class is, therefore, rapidly becoming the first choice for prevention and treatment for allergic conjunctivitis. RECENT FINDINGS: Increasing in-vitro studies have been performed to investigate the mast-cell-stabilizing effect of multiple action drugs. Most of the study results agree that these drugs are able to inhibit histamine and several neoformed mediators, including cytokines and arachidonic acid-derived products, from mast cells. However, the mechanisms of action have not yet fully been elucidated. Most of the results from clinical trials as well as the in-vivo experimental studies, including the conjunctival provocation model, support the evidence of a stabilizing effect of these drugs. SUMMARY: Evidence of a different inhibitory effect of multiple action compounds on the pro-inflammatory mediators released from the mast cells suggests the possibility to target different phases of the allergic reaction, leading to a potential improvement in the management of allergic patients.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Allergic conjunctivitis is an IgE-mediated inflammatory of conjunctiva. Despite the fact that histamine is a major mediator in this condition, use of topical antihistamines often gives only temporarily relief. Therapeutic agents aiming at inflammatory cascades of the disease are desirable particularly in cases with prolonged and severe allergic conjunctivitis. The article reviews these new treatment armamentariums with regard to their mechanism of actions and clinical efficacy. RECENT FINDINGS: Some second generation of antihistamines demonstrated anti-inflammatory properties such as inhibition of histamine release from mast cells as well as interference with the production cytokines and adhesion molecules from cord blood and conjunctival mast cells. Among these agents, ketotifen, epinastine and olopatadine are agents of major interest and are thus reviewed. Cromolyn, nedocromil, topical corticosteroids and immunotherapy, especially sublingual immunotherapy, are among other modes of therapy examined. Finally, the review focuses on cyclosporine A and tacrolimus, immunomodulators that have been extensively studied in the therapy of severe conjunctivitis such as atopic and vernal keratoconjunctivitis with promising results. SUMMARY: Several immunomodulatory options are currently available for treatment of allergic conjunctivitis. These therapeutic availabilities bring about a better therapeutic outcome for patients with allergic conjunctivitis, particularly those on the severe end of the spectrum.
H1-receptor antagonists are usually first-line treatment given for seasonal allergic rhinitis. However, many patients suffer with symptoms of allergic rhinitis rather than tolerate the sedative and anticholinergic side effects of the first-generation H1-receptor antagonists. Researchers have sought to replace these older H1-receptor antagonists with a new generation of H1-receptor antagonists that approach the optimal therapy: clinically effective, safe, free of side effects, and convenient for the patient. Among the new second-generation H1-receptor antagonists are terfenadine and astemizole (already marketed) and loratadine and cetirizine, which are expected to be approved soon. All four demonstrate efficacy, convenience, and minimal side effects on the central nervous system. In this review of the current treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis, the clinical studies that compare these four new second-generation H1-receptor antagonists are discussed.
Preclinical Research The mechanisms mediating canine pruritus are poorly understood with few models due to limited methods for inducing pruritus in dogs. Chloroquine (CQ) is a widely used antimalarial drug that causes pruritus in humans and mice. We have developed a canine model of pruritus where CQ reliably induced pruritus in all dogs tested following intravenous administration. This model is presently being used to test antipruritic activity of drug candidate molecules. This publication has been validated in a blinded cross-over study in eight beagle dogs using the reference standards, oclacitinib and prednisolone, and has been used to test a new compound, norketotifen. All compounds reduced CQ-induced pruritus in the dog. The sensitivity of the model was demonstrated using norketotifen, which at three dose levels, dose-dependently, inhibited scratching events compared with placebo.
According to recent literature, the "anti-allergy" properties of antihistamines are linked to their antagonistic ability on receptor H1. In the majority of experimental models the immediate allergic responses is followed by a late phase. Especially at the pulmonary level, the presence of a late response after an allergic provocation is considered to correlate with the severity of asthma. The reference anti-allergy drugs, such as the inhaled corticosteroids or the cromones, without anti H1 activity, inhibit this late pulmonary response. Azelastine, ketotifen and cetirizine, three substances that are antagonistic to the anti-H1 receptor reduce the late pulmonary response. In addition, these three substances have other "anti-allergy" characteristics. Azelastine inhibits production of superoxide by the pulmonary neutrophils and eosinophils after PAF provocation in animals. Cetirizine significantly inhibits eosinophil infiltration in the bronchoalveolar lavage liquid in asthmatics with a late allergic bronchospasm. The presence of anti-histaminic and anti-allergy characteristics on the same molecule may perhaps convey a supplementary therapeutic benefit in the treatment of allergic symptoms.
In a double-blind investigation the aspecific bronchus threshold was estimated by administration of methacholine to 16 young atopic patients with proven airways hyperreactivity (PC20 histamine less than or equal to 2 mg/ml. The influence of prolonged oral administration (12 weeks) of ketotifen (2 mg/day) on the bronchus threshold value has been studied. No significant elevation was found. It could be concluded that administration of ketotifen, even in prolonged administration, has no anticholinergic effects.
IBS is a chronic, fluctuating disorder that continues to be the subject of considerable research. 2010 saw some key advances across all aspects of IBS, including further advances in our understanding of the pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment of this condition.
In an open, uncontrolled study, the effect of 12 weeks of daily administration of ketotifen, an antihistamine-like drug with a mast cell stabilizing effect, on the semen quality of 55 men with leukocytospermia and unexplained infertility was examined. After 4 weeks of treatment, white blood cell count dramatically diminished and was accompanied by a significant improvement in sperm motility. A significant increase of morphologically normal sperm cells was observed at 8 weeks of treatment, and these changes remained until at least 4 weeks after the end of treatment.
Accumulating evidence indicates that there are at least two phenotypes of wheezing in preschool years with distinct natural history. Frequent wheezing in the first 3 years of life with risk factors for asthma (e.g., eczema, maternal asthma) predicts symptoms in older age, while infrequent viral-associated wheezing without risk factors for asthma has a benign prognosis. This systematic review summarizes evidence on the use of anti-inflammatory medications in preschool children with wheezing. Literature search was performed using Medline and the Cochrane Library. Retrieved articles were critically appraised. Episodic use of high-dose inhaled corticosteroids (>1,600 mcg/day of beclomethasone) may ameliorate severity of intermittent viral-associated wheezing. Maintenance inhaled corticosteroids can control symptoms in children with frequent wheezing associated with risk factors for asthma. Inhaled corticosteroids do not alter the natural history of wheezing even when started early in life and could have a negative impact on linear growth rate. Short courses of oral corticosteroids have been proposed as an effective measure to control exacerbations of symptoms although there is little evidence supporting their use. Some studies support the administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications (leukotriene pathway modifiers, cromones, methylxanthines) for mild frequent wheezing. Maintenance inhaled corticosteroids is the most effective measure for controlling frequent wheezing in preschool children, especially when accompanied by risk factors for asthma. This treatment does not affect the natural history of wheezing, although deceleration of linear growth rate is the most commonly recognized systemic adverse effect.
A patient with NF1 was treated with oral ketotifen for 30 years since infancy. Review of the patient's course and treatment details establishes a basis for reconsideration of several fundamental precepts about NF1 pathogenesis. The data suggest a distinctive benefit to treating an NF1 patient with an inhibitor of mast cell degranulation before cutaneous neurofibromas are clinically apparent: the neurofibromas appear to be arrested at a very early stage of development. The patient's skin was especially remarkable for both the paucity of cutaneous neurofibromas and the distinctive monotonous uniformity of those present, which were small and flat or barely sessile. While the data do not, of themselves, prove that ketotifen treatment commencing in childhood preempts neurofibroma maturation, in the context of earlier publications, they certainly warrant further investigation.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: The significance of the association between many gastrointestinal pathologies and autism is yet to be discovered. The aim of this report is to highlight an association between autism and microscopic eosinophilic colitis in 2 children. The possible mechanisms that may connect these two conditions are discussed. METHODS AND RESULTS: A rare association between autism and microscopic eosinophilic colitis in 2 children is reported through retrospective chart review. Common causes of secondary eosinophilic colitis were excluded. CONCLUSION: This report suggests the possibility of either impaired intestinal barrier function or an aberrant immune system that predisposes autistic children to sensitization to environmental antigens. Large controlled studies are needed to examine this hypothesis.
The Andrew J. Weiland Medal is presented by the American Society for Surgery of the Hand to a midcareer researcher who is dedicated to advancing patient care in the field of hand surgery. This essay, awarded the Weiland Medal in 2012, focuses on posttraumatic elbow joint contractures. Joint contractures are well known to hand surgeons because they limit function of our patients. There is a thorough understanding of the pathoanatomy underlying joint contractures. However, the mechanisms leading to the pathoanatomy are either unknown or partially understood, depending on the etiology of the particular clinical condition. This review describes our research over the past 14 years on posttraumatic elbow joint contractures. It defines pathologic cellular, matrix, and growth factor changes in the joint capsule, elaborates on the development of an animal model of posttraumatic joint contractures, presents an evaluation of a potential prevention strategy based on our research, and outlines future plans to bring this work to the clinical realm for the benefit of patients.
PURPOSE: Eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EG) is a rare condition of unknown etiology characterized by vomiting, diarrhea, protein-losing enteropathy, and eosinophilic infiltration of the gastrointestinal mucosa. The potential association of EG with allergy and related mast-cell release of mediators led us to evaluate the ability of an antihistamine drug to modify the course of the disease. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Six patients with protracted gastrointestinal symptoms were diagnosed with EG because of histologic evidence of predominantly eosinophilic infiltrates in the gastrointestinal mucosa. Each patient was treated in an open trial for 12 months with ketotifen (Zaditen), an antihistamine of the H1 class that is known to stabilize mast cells. RESULTS: All six patients improved clinically; four also gained weight. Total serum IgE levels decreased after 4 to 6 months of therapy. Clearing of eosinophilic infiltrates was documented in the four patients who underwent follow-up mucosal biopsies. CONCLUSION: We conclude that ketotifen treatment represents a safe and effective alternative to traditional systemic corticosteroid therapy for treatment of EG.
Fibrosis is a destructive, end-stage disease process. In the skin, it is associated with systemic sclerosis and scarring with considerable health burden. Ketotifen is a clinical antihistamine and mast cell stabilizer. Studies have demonstrated mast cell-dependent anti-fibrotic effects of ketotifen but direct effects on fibroblasts have not been determined. Human dermal fibroblasts were treated with pro-fibrotic transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGFbeta) followed by ketotifen or control treatments to determine direct effects on fibrotic fibroblasts. Ketotifen impaired TGFbeta-induced alpha-smooth muscle actin gene and protein responses and decreased cytoskeletal- and contractility-associated gene responses associated with fibrosis. Ketotifen reduced Yes-associated protein phosphorylation, transcriptional coactivator with PDZ binding motif transcript and protein levels, and phosphorylation of protein kinase B. In a fibroblast-populated collagen gel contraction assay, ketotifen reduced the contractile activity of TGFbeta-activated fibroblasts. In a murine model of bleomycin-induced skin fibrosis, collagen density and dermal thickness were significantly decreased in ketotifen-treated mice supporting in vitro findings. These results support a novel, direct anti-fibrotic activity of ketotifen, reducing pro-fibrotic phenotypic changes in fibroblasts and reducing collagen fibres in fibrotic mouse skin. Together, these findings suggest novel therapeutic potential and a novel mechanism of action for ketotifen in the context of fibrosis.
A 30-year-old male with eosinophilic fasciitis (EF) associated with morphoea and vitiligo is described. The patient showed a partial response to prednisone, but did not respond to hydroxychloroquine, D-penicillamine and cimetidine. In the light of reports of increased plasma histamine levels, and a putative role of mast cells in the pathogenesis of EF, ketotifen (a mast cell stabilizer) was prescribed. This non-toxic drug has allowed the patient to continue hard physical labour without further relapses and without corticosteroid therapy.
Intranasal administration has been widely explored as a potential treatment for allergic rhinitis, and improving intranasal penetration and retention of drugs is a challenging requirement to further improve efficacy. Delivery strategies of nanocarriers that enhance mucosal adhesion or mucus penetration have been proposed to improve nasal drug delivery; however, delivery efficiency remains limited by excessive pulmonary deposition and nonspecific cell phagocytosis. In this work, a "nasal in situ assembly" strategy was presented to construct intranasal morphology transformation nanomedicines with enhanced effective drug concentration for long-term intervention of allergic rhinitis. The polymer-polypeptide nanomedicine (PHCK) with a CCR3 antagonistic peptide (C) and a pH-responsive polyethylene glycol (H) was developed, encapsulating ketotifen (KT). PHCK nanoparticles displayed nasal mucosa permeability and transformed to nanofibers in the acidic environment of the nasal cavity, realizing responsive burst release of KT simultaneously. The fibrotic reassembly reduced the cellular internalization of nanomedicine and increased the CCR3 blockade on the eosinophil (EOS) membranes. Both in vitro and in vivo data indicated that PHCK achieved improved drug accumulation and retention in the nasal cavity and decreased pulmonary deposition, then effectively inhibited mast cell degranulation and EOS chemotaxis. This study demonstrates that the "nasal in situ assembly" strategy can improve drug delivery efficiency upon nasal responsive morphologic transformation, providing exploratory perspectives for nasal delivery platforms establishment and boosting therapeutic effect of allergic rhinitis.
The effect of a novel anti-allergic drug, betotastine besilate (betotastine) on interleukin (IL)-5 production by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) was investigated. PBMC of Dermatophagoides farinae extract (Df)-sensitive donors produced IL-5 and showed a proliferative response upon stimulation with relevant antigen (10 microg/ml). Df-induced IL-5 production by PBMC was significantly inhibited by betotastine at 10 and 100 microM. Betotastine also suppressed proliferation of PBMC with less potency. The effect of betotastine on IL-5 production was enhanced and significant even at 0.1 microM when the drug was added 120 min before antigen stimulation. Ketotifen and cetirizine also inhibited IL-5 production, but the effects of these drugs were significant only at 100 microM. These findings indicate that the suppression of IL-5 production may be involved in the anti-allergic effect of betotastine.
