The paper is devoted to the most complicated aspects of low back pain. The differences between specific and nonspecific low back pain using the "red flags" system is highlighted. The authors consider the causes of pain chronification (the "yellow flags" system) and the necessity of using a biopsychosocial model. Main pathogenetic mechanisms of chronic muscle/skeletal pain are considered and the possible involvement of several mechanism in the pathogenesis of chronic pain as well as the use of complex therapy is discussed. The high efficacy and safety of ketorolac in treatment of nonspecific muscle/skeletal pain is demonstrated.
Recent research has suggested that ketorolac has an analgesic ceiling effect, meaning that despite increased dosages, the patient obtains no additional pain relief and is more likely to suffer adverse drug reactions. This article describes the outcomes of these studies and the recommendation to use the lowest possible dose for the shortest time when treating patients with acute pain.
Pain remains a tremendous burden on patients and for the health care system, with uncontrolled pain being the leading cause of disability in this country. There are a variety of medications that can be used in the treatment of pain, including ketorolac, oxymorphone, tapentadol, and tramadol. Depending on the clinical situation, these drugs can be used as monotherapy or in conjunction with other types of medications in a multimodal approach. A strong appreciation of pharmacologic properties of these agents and potential side effects is warranted for clinicians.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are used extensively for the management of acute and chronic pain, with ketorolac tromethamine being one of the most frequently used parenteral analgesics in the emergency department (ED). The drugs may commonly be used at doses above their analgesic ceiling, offering no incremental analgesic advantage while potentially adding risk of harm. We evaluate the analgesic efficacy of 3 doses of intravenous ketorolac in ED patients with acute pain. METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind trial to assess the analgesic efficacy of 3 doses of intravenous ketorolac (10, 15, and 30 mg) in patients aged 18 to 65 years and presenting to the ED with moderate to severe acute pain, defined by a numeric rating scale score greater than or equal to 5. We excluded patients with peptic ulcer disease, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, renal or hepatic insufficiency, allergies to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, pregnancy or breastfeeding, systolic blood pressure less than 90 or greater than 180 mm Hg, and pulse rate less than 50 or greater than 150 beats/min. Primary outcome was pain reduction at 30 minutes. We recorded pain scores at baseline and up to 120 minutes. Intravenous morphine 0.1 mg/kg was administered as a rescue analgesic if subjects still desired additional pain medication at 30 minutes after the study drug was administered. Data analyses included mixed-model regression and ANOVA. RESULTS: We enrolled 240 subjects (80 in each dose group). At 30 minutes, substantial pain reduction was demonstrated without any differences between the groups (95% confidence intervals 4.5 to 5.7 for the 10-mg group, 4.5 to 5.6 for the 15-mg group, and 4.2 to 5.4 for the 30-mg group). The mean numeric rating scale pain scores at baseline were 7.7, 7.5, and 7.8 and improved to 5.1, 5.0, and 4.8, respectively, at 30 minutes. Rates of rescue analgesia were similar, and there were no serious adverse events. Secondary outcomes showed similar rates of adverse effects per group, of which the most common were dizziness, nausea, and headache. CONCLUSION: Ketorolac has similar analgesic efficacy at intravenous doses of 10, 15, and 30 mg, showing that intravenous ketorolac administered at the analgesic ceiling dose (10 mg) provided effective pain relief to ED patients with moderate to severe pain without increased adverse effects.
In June 2013, the European Medicine Agency recommended limiting codeine use in paediatric patients, creating a void in managing moderate pain. We reviewed the literature published in English (1985-June 2017) on the pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic and safety profile of ketorolac, a possible substitute for codeine and opioids, for treating moderate-to-severe pain. We found that gastrointestinal side effects were mainly reported with prolonged use, significant bleeding was reported in adenotonsillectomy, and adverse renal effects appeared to be limited to patients with specific coexisting risk factors. CONCLUSION: The short-term use of ketorolac appears to be safe for children in many situations.
BACKGROUND: Breast augmentation can cause severe postoperative pain; therefore, some surgeons perform wound infiltration with a local anesthetic solution. This study investigated the postoperative pain relief of local analgesics in breast augmentation surgery. METHODS: We searched three databases for randomized controlled trials evaluating the outcomes of local wound irrigation with local analgesics during or after breast augmentation surgery. The solutions included ropivacaine, bupivacaine, bupivacaine plus ketorolac. The control groups may be saline alone or no irrigation. Network meta-analysis was further employed based on the frequentist approach. Outcomes were reported as weighted mean differences with 95% confidence intervals. RESULTS: Comparisons between the interventions of our included studies revealed that only bupivacaine plus ketorolac (versus placebo) significantly reduced pain at 1 h postoperatively, as indicated by the visual analog scale pain score reduction of 2.22 (- 3.98, - 0.47). Other comparisons showed no significant differences. Moreover, three of the included studies reported postoperative medication use. Two of them reported that postoperative narcotic use was reduced, but the others did not report any such reduction. CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed possibility that local irrigation with bupivacaine plus ketorolac might reduce pain 1 h after surgery. In addition, local anesthesia might reduce postoperative narcotic use. However, due to the small number of included studies, the clinical benefits of local anesthesia in breast augmentation surgery require further confirmation. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE III: This journal requires that authors assign a level of evidence to each article. For a full description of these Evidence-Based Medicine ratings, please refer to the Table of Contents or the online Instructions to Authors www.springer.com/00266 .
BACKGROUND: The use of ketorolac in children undergoing tonsillectomy remains limited because of the concern about postoperative bleeding. METHODS: A search was performed addressing the question: For patients undergoing a surgical tonsillectomy, does a weight-appropriate single dose of intravenous ketorolac affect the incidence of postoperative hemorrhage? RESULTS: Five systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria. A Cochrane Review included 15 studies with 1,101 pediatric subjects and focused on perioperative bleeding requiring intervention. Many of the systematic reviews appraised the same studies. Subgroup analysis often allowed assessment of the effects of ketorolac administration. FINDING: There was no consensus on the increased risk of bleeding when nonsteriodal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ketorolac are given to pediatric patients undergoing tonsillectomy. The conclusions varied from ketorolac should not be used to it is safe to use with these patients. CONCLUSIONS: The perianesthesia team must carefully weigh the risks and benefits before deciding to use ketorolac with this subset of patients.
Providing pain management for known opioid abusers is a challenging clinical task, in part because little is known about their pain experience and analgesic requirements. This study was designed to describe pain tolerance and analgesic response in a sample of opioid addicts stabilized in methadone-maintenance (MM) treatment (n = 60) in comparison to matched nondependent control subjects (n = 60). By using a placebo-controlled, two-way factorial design, tolerance to cold-pressor (CP) pain was examined, both before and after oral administration of therapeutic doses of common opioid (hydromorphone 2 mg) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (ketorolac 10 mg) analgesic agents. Results showed that MM individuals were significantly less tolerant of CP pain than control subjects, replicating previous work. Analgesic effects were significant neither for medication nor group. These data indicate that MM opioid abusers represent a pain-intolerant subset of clinical patients. Their complaints of pain should be evaluated seriously and managed aggressively.
Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage is used to achieve biliary decompression in jaundiced patients with biliary obstruction. High drain output >2000 mL/day is rare, and can cause dehydration and electrolyte derangements, without effective treatments. We present the first patient, to our knowledge, who reacted to the use of the analgesic ketorolac with progressive reduction in biliary output, in the setting of malignant biliary obstruction from duodenal adenocarcinoma.
BACKGROUND: We report our experience with a bridging multimodal pain management program that provides comprehensive 48-hour pain control in patients undergoing total shoulder replacement (TSR). METHODS: The study included all patients undergoing unilateral TSR by 1 surgeon between May 2015 and April 2017. There were 62 patients (23 men, 39 women) with an average age of 68 years (range 38-92 years). Of these, 31 underwent standard nonconstrained TSR and 31 underwent reverse TSR. The bridging multimodal pain management protocol included scalene block regional anesthesia using 0.25% bupivacaine enhanced with 4 mg of dexamethasone, application of 20 mg of liposomal bupivacaine diluted with 40 mL of normal saline in the periarticular soft tissues at time of closure, scheduled 24 hours of intravenous acetaminophen and ketorolac, and immediate cryotherapy. Parameters measured included hospital length of stay, postoperative use of intravenous narcotics, and 30-day hospital readmission. RESULTS: The median length of stay was 1 day (range, 1-6; average, 1.5 days). Overall, 41 patients (66%) were discharged on postoperative day 1. Intravenous narcotics were required postoperatively in 22 patients (35.5%). There were no 30-day readmissions. CONCLUSION: This bridging multimodal pain management protocol resulted in a length of stay of 1 day for 66% of patients, even for higher-risk patients with American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status Classification III (63%). Of the 62 patients, 64% (n = 40) did not require postoperative intravenous narcotics. For properly selected patients, this program may be considered for performing TSR as an ambulatory procedure.
Unrelieved postoperative pain following arthroplasty has been shown to delay patients' recovery and discharge from the hospital. Undertreatment of acute pain may also result in greater use of healthcare resources and ultimately lead to poor outcomes. This article reviews a multimodal approach to reduce pain at each step of the pain nocioception process by combining various analgesics that each operate through a different site or mechanism of action, allowing the physician to tailor the regimen to the patient. A therapeutic combination of analgesics (eg, opioids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and bupivicaine) can provide adequate pain relief; however, regional anesthesia is fraught with side effects. The use of multimodal analgesia reduces hospital stay, decreases medical complications, and increases patient satisfaction.
BACKGROUND: Epidural analgesia gives excellent pain relief but is associated with substantial side effects. We compared wound infiltration combined with intraarticular injection of local anesthetics for pain relief after total hip arthroplasty (THA) with the well-established practice of epidural infusion. METHODS: 80 patients undergoing elective THA under spinal block were randomly assigned to receive either (1) continuous epidural infusion (group E) or (2) infiltration around the hip joint with a mixture of 100 mL ropivacaine 2 mg/mL, 1 mL ketorolac 30 mg/mL, and 1 mL epinephrine 0.5 mg/mL at the conclusion of surgery combined with one postoperative intraarticular injection of the same substances through an intraarticular catheter (group A). RESULTS: Narcotic consumption was significantly reduced in group A compared to group E (p = 0.004). Pain levels at rest and during mobilization were similar in both groups but significantly reduced in group A after cessation of treatment. Length of stay was reduced by 2 days (36%) in group A compared to group E (p < 0.001). INTERPRETATION: Wound infiltration combined with 1 intraarticular injection can be recommended for patients undergoing THA. Further studies of dosage (high/low) and duration of intraarticular treatment are warranted.
1. Although the analgesic effect of opioids on experimental cold pressor (CP) pain has been well demonstrated, the analgesic effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) on experimental CP pain has been less reliable, a finding complicated by inconsistencies in how CP analgesic effect is measured. 2. In the present study, a clinically relevant CP response of pain tolerance was used to assess the previously undescribed analgesic efficacy of the potent NSAID ketorolac (10 mg, p.o.), on CP pain across gender in a sample of normal subjects (n = 50). 3. Using a placebo-controlled crossover design, neither a main nor interaction effect for ketorolac on CP pain tolerance was detected. When examined by gender, male subjects exhibited a large placebo response to CP pain under study conditions, whereas women (albeit less pain tolerant at baseline) evidenced no placebo effect but a modest-to-good NSAID analgesic response. 4. Findings on the gender-specific placebo and analgesic NSAID response, integrated with the current literature, indicate that the lack of NSAID analgesic efficacy in the CP pain model may be related to unexamined and differential effects of how gender affects NSAID analgesic effect.
OBJECTIVE: The primary objective of this article is to review the basic science of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), their clinical effects, indications, potential complications, and ethical issues associated with the use of injectable NSAIDs in the treatment of athletes. These objectives are presented taking into consideration the contemporaneous issues associated with the treatment of amateur and professional athletes. DATA SOURCES: A nonformal review of the published medical literature and lay media focusing on the use of injectable NSAIDs in athletes was used for this article. MAIN RESULTS: All NSAIDs work through the inhibition of the cyclooxygenase (COX) pathway (either one or both subtypes) to reduce inflammation and inhibit pain by reducing prostaglandin and thromboxane synthesis. Complications related to NSAID use involve primarily the gastrointestinal, renal, and cardiovascular systems through this COX pathway inhibition. Ketorolac is the only NSAID currently available in an injectable form. Despite its analgesic efficacy comparable with opioid medication, injectable ketorolac has the potential to cause bleeding in collision athletes resulting from impaired hemostasis. CONCLUSIONS: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug medications are currently used at every level of competition. Injectable ketorolac is an effective analgesic and anti-inflammatory drug. However, its potential effectiveness must be weighed against the risk of potential complications in all athletes, especially those who participate in contact/collision sports. The team physician must balance the goal of treating pain and inflammation with the ethical implications and medical considerations inherent in the administration of injectable medications solely to prevent pain and/or return the athlete to competition.
INTRODUCTION: The opioid epidemic in the United States is an ongoing public health crisis that is in part fueled by excessive prescribing by physicians. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) is a procedure that conventionally involves opioid prescriptions for adequate post-operative pain control. We aimed to evaluate the feasibility of a non-opioid pain regimen by evaluating post-operative outcomes in PCNL patients discharged without opioids. MATERIALS AND METHODS: As a quality improvement measure to reduce opioid consumption our department began routinely prescribing oral ketorolac instead of oxycodone-acetaminophen for pain control after PCNL. We retrospectively compared patients undergoing PCNL who had received ketorolac prescriptions (NSAID) to those who received oxycodone-acetaminophen prescriptions (NARC). Demographic, operative, and post-operative factors were obtained and compared in both groups. Peri-operative factors and demographics were compared using either Chi-squared tests, Mann-Whitney U tests. Surgical outcomes were compared between the two groups using Chi-squared tests and Fisher's exact tests. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to determine whether ketorolac use was an independent predictor of post-surgical pain-related encounters. Primary outcome was unplanned pain-related healthcare encounters inclusive of office phone calls, unscheduled office visits, and emergency department (ED) visits. Secondary outcome measures were non-pain-related healthcare encounters, hospital readmissions, pain-related rescue medications prescribed, and post-op complications. RESULTS: There were similar demographics and peri-operative characteristics amongst patients in both cohorts. There was no significant difference identified between NSAID and NARC regarding unplanned pain-related encounters (8/70, 11.4% vs. 10/70, 14.3%, p = 0.614). However, NARC experienced more unplanned phone calls (42, 60% vs. 24, 34.3%, p = 0.004). Multivariate analysis revealed only prior stone surgery was predictive of pain-related encounters after PCNL (p = 0.035). CONCLUSION: Our results show that there were no significant differences in pain-related encounters between those who received ketorolac and oxycodone-acetaminophen following PCNL. A non-opioid pathway may mitigate the potential risk associated with opioid prescription without compromising analgesia. Prospective comparative studies are warranted to confirm feasibility.
Postlaparoscopic shoulder pain (PLSP) frequently follows laparoscopic surgery. In this placebo-controlled study, we evaluated the efficacy of two perioperative doses of pregabalin 300 mg 12 h apart for preventing and attenuating PLSP after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The frequency and severity of PLSP, need for postoperative rescue analgesia, and side effect profiles were assessed for 48 h postoperatively. In both groups, the overall incidence of PLSP did not differ significantly, and the pain score for PLSP, time to first rescue analgesia, and cumulative ketorolac consumption were similar at each timepoint. However, the 2-h postoperative incidence of oversedation was higher with pregabalin.
BACKGROUND: Aspirin exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) consists of nasal polyposis, rhinosinusitis, asthma, and aspirin (ASA) sensitivity. OBJECTIVE: This article details how to diagnose and treat AERD and describes the procedures associated with ASA challenge and desensitization, benefits associated with ASA desensitization, and appropriate doses for treatment. METHODS: Criteria for diagnosis of AERD as well as desensitization protocols for oral ASA challenge and combined intranasal ketorolac and oral ASA challenge, are detailed in this article based on literature review. RESULTS: AERD requires a multidimensional approach to treat the disease given the multiple conditions. With successful ASA desensitization and maintenance of ASA administration, all patients are able to achieve ASA tolerance and select patients are able to achieve improvement in clinical markers such as global scores and reduction in use of topical and systemic corticosteroids.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are among the most commonly used drugs in the world. While the role of NSAIDs as cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors is well established, other targets may contribute to anti-inflammation. Here we report caspases as a new pharmacological target for NSAID family drugs such as ibuprofen, naproxen, and ketorolac at physiologic concentrations both in vitro and in vivo. We characterize caspase activity in both in vitro and in cell culture, and combine computational modeling and biophysical analysis to determine the mechanism of action. We observe that inhibition of caspase catalysis reduces cell death and the generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Further, NSAID inhibition of caspases is COX independent, representing a new anti-inflammatory mechanism. This finding expands upon existing NSAID anti-inflammatory behaviors, with implications for patient safety and next-generation drug design.
CONTEXT: The use of injectable medications to help athletes quickly return to the field of play after injury is common. Understanding the effects and risks of these medications will help providers make informed decisions regarding their use in this patient population. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the utilization, efficacy, and adverse effects of injectable ketorolac and corticosteroids in athletes. DATA SOURCES: This systematic review followed the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines. A systematic search of the literature was performed using multiple databases (PubMed, Embase, Cochrane, Web of Science, and ClinicalTrials.gov). Secondary references were appraised for relevant articles. No randomized controlled trials or other prospective studies were identified. Articles included retrospective database reviews and physician survey studies. STUDY SELECTION: A total of 6 studies met the inclusion and exclusion criteria and were reviewed by 2 independent reviewers with a third consulted in the case of disagreement, which was not needed. STUDY DESIGN: Systematic review. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level 5. DATA EXTRACTION: Two reviewers recorded rate of use, effectiveness of treatment, and reported side effect data. RESULTS: Most studies centered around the football athlete, either professional or collegiate. Professional football game day use of intramuscular ketorolac declined from 93.3% (28/30) in 2002 to 48% in 2016. Collegiate football game day use of intramuscular ketorolac declined from 62% in 2008 to 26% in 2016. Game day corticosteroid injection was far lower than ketorolac usage. Both medications were reported to be effective with few adverse events. CONCLUSION: Use of injectable ketorolac is common but declining in professional and college football. Pain control efficacy is good, and risk of adverse events is low. The incidence of injectable corticosteroid use in athletes is unknown. Use of injectable corticosteroids in athletes allows for early return to sport activities with no reported complications.
The intensity and duration of pain following surgical placement of dental implants has not been well studied. Thus, the aim of this open-label study was to characterize the nature of postsurgical pain following the placement of one to three implants. The secondary goal was to explore the analgesic efficacy and tolerability of intranasal ketorolac in this patient population. Following implant surgery, postoperative pain was rated moderate or severe in 25/28 patients (89 percent), requiring prn analgesic dosing for up to 3 days in 14/25 individuals (56 percent). Intranasal ketorolac displayed an analgesic onset within 20 minutes, a duration of at least 6 hours, and was well tolerated by the cohort with brief stinging of the nasal mucosa reported by 9/25 individuals (36 percent).
