For more than two decades, amphotericin B has been the single broad-spectrum agent for the treatment of systemic mycoses. Amphotericin B is not always effective, must be given parenterally, and is associated with a host of adverse reactions. Despite amphotericin B toxicity, until recently the systemic mycoses did not rate enough attention to prompt a search for new alternatives. However, three recent events have overcome this inertia: the gradually increasing use of potent immunosuppressive agents and broad-spectrum antibacterial drugs; the discovery of the relatively nontoxic azole classes of antifungal drugs in the 1980s and the rapid emergence of AIDS, with its severe accompanying opportunistic fungal infections. In just ten years we have seen the emergence of second-generation imidazole and third-generation triazole antifungal drugs and, most recently, entirely new classes of agents. It is remarkable that so many alternatives are becoming available just at the time when new antifungal drugs have become a major need. This discussion will concentrate on the new antifungal drugs of the past ten years, with the exception of developments in the polyenes and flucytosine, which are covered elsewhere.
Although the prominent broad-spectrum activity of ketoconazole was reported in the early 1980s, its effect against Malassezia species was most pronounced; thus, it was developed for the treatment of various skin infections in which a link with these fungal species was proposed. Later, a number of ancillary properties were described for ketoconazole that comprised its anti-inflammatory, antiseborrheic, and antiproliferative profile. The incorporation of ketoconazole in an adapted vehicle could further promote its efficacy. Recently, a new formulation-an anhydrous gel containing ketoconazole 2%-was launched in which all of the ancillary properties were optimized.
Onychomycosis has been treated for years with oral antifungal agents, and more recently in the United States with a topical nail lacquer. Griseofulvin was the first significant oral agent available to manage onychomycosis. The introduction of the azoles (ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole) and the allylamine, terbinafine, led to improved cure rates and a broad spectrum of activity. Pharmacokinetic studies have shown that the newer oral agents penetrate the nail within approximately one to two weeks after the start of therapy and remain for several months after the end of treatment. This article reviews the oral antifungal agents used to treat onychomycosis.
Itraconazole, a new orally active triazole antifungal, has been tested in patients with pityriasis versicolor. A number of studies have shown that itraconazole is effective for this mild fungal skin disease. The total dose required for effective treatment is 1000 mg, and it has been given as 200 mg for 5 days or 7 days. The organisms disappear slowly from the skin, even when dead, and the results should be assessed clinically and mycologically at around 3 to 4 weeks after treatment. Numerous studies have shown that itraconazole is superior to placebo and as effective as selenium sulfide, clotrimazole, and ciclopirox olamine. It is also better tolerated by patients than selenium sulfide.
INTRODUCTION: Seborrhoeic dermatitis affects at least 1-3% of the population. Malassezia (Pityrosporum) ovale is thought to be the causative organism, and causes inflammation involving T cells and complement. Seborrhoeic dermatitis tends to relapse after treatment. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical questions: What are the effects of topical treatments for seborrhoeic dermatitis of the scalp in adults? What are the effects of topical treatments for seborrhoeic dermatitis of the face and body in adults? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library and other important databases up to February 2006 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found nine systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: bifonazole, emollients, ketoconazole, lithium succinate, selenium sulphide, tar shampoo, terbinafine, and topical steroids (betamethasone valerate, clobetasol propionate, clobetasone butyrate, hydrocortisone, mometasone furate).
Treatment of chromoblastomycosis is frequently difficult and unsatisfactory. A representative case is presented of this chronic subcutaneous fungal infection, characterized by warty, cauliflower-like lesions usually on the extremities. Chromoblastomycosis and its treatment are reviewed, with attention to itraconazole, a new triazole compound, as the possible drug of choice.
Age of the patient, climate, season, and local environmental factors influence the onset and course of tinea versicolor (pityriasis versicolor). A number of effective topical therapies are available. In addition, a single dose of 400 mg of oral ketoconazole eliminates the disease and can be used prophylactically in some cases to prevent recurrence.
Male and female pattern hair loss affects a large percentage of the population, and patients frequently present for treatment of this to their dermatologist. Here we review the many treatments available for hair loss. We review the evidence for each, and outline the most effective treatment strategies for both men and women. LEARNING OBJECTIVE: At the conclusion of this article, the reader should be able to describe the most effective treatments for hair loss, understand their mechanism(s) of action, and explain which treatments are the best in different settings.
Amphotericin B is effective in therapy for blastomycosis but causes a number of serious adverse reactions. Because ketoconazole has in-vitro activity against Blastomyces dermatitidis, we administered this agent in a dosage of 400 mg/d to 46 patients with blastomycosis, with 43 patients receiving at least 1 month of therapy. Thirty-five patients had cure without relapse over a mean follow-up of 17 months. Six had a relapse of infection but 4 of these had been noncompliant with therapy. Two patients improved initially but ultimately had progression of disease despite maintenance of adequate serum levels. Adverse effects were common but not severe. Three patients with extensive infection died--2 had received only one dose of ketoconazole and 1 had received therapy for only 2 weeks. The cure rate in these patients suggests that ketoconazole may replace amphotericin B as the initial treatment of blastomycosis that is not overwhelming.
Fluconazole and itraconazole are two investigational triazole antifungal agents that are currently undergoing clinical trials in the United States. Both are active orally, have favorable pharmacokinetics (i.e., good bioavailability, long half-life, low plasma protein binding), and possess activity against several systemic fungal pathogens. In addition, preliminary information suggests that these agents are substantially less toxic than currently available azole compounds. Fluconazole and, to a lesser degree, itraconazole have been shown to be highly effective for the treatment of cryptococcal meningitis. The potential for drug interactions is much lower with these agents compared to drugs such as ketoconazole.
Systemic candidiasis is a disease of increasing incidence and proportions, which appears to be associated with the advances in modern medicine. It involves primarily patients with severe debilitating and malignant disease who are receiving immunosuppressive, cytotoxic, antimetabolite, and antibiotic therapy. Side effects of these otherwise major therapeutic agents predispose patients to opportunistic fungal infections, of which candidiasis is the most common. The high morbidity and mortality of disseminated candidiasis in neutropenic patients are difficult obstacles to obtaining the optimal, if not full, potential of modern chemotherapy for cancer. The inability to diagnose early invasive and systemic candidiasis is a major handicap that delays timely initiation of antifungal therapy. The paucity of highly efficacious antifungal agents with low toxicity severely limits the ability to successfully cure systemic fungal infections in cancer patients. Aggressive research into the basic biology of Candida spp. is necessary for directing the development of better diagnostic methods and improved antifungal drugs.
The case of a 58-year-old man with a pruritic rash involving the pubic area that had been undiagnosed for 30 years is presented. At least 15 different primary care physicians and dermatologists evaluated the patient during this time period. Multiple treatments were unsuccessful and a definitive diagnosis was not rendered. Wood lamp evaluation of the pubic area revealed hair shaft concretions that were confirmed on histologic evaluation to be white piedra (WP). The patient was successfully treated with topical ketoconazole and the eruption completely resolved. Our case raises awareness of the use of Wood lamp and dermoscopy to evaluate for parasitic infections of the pubic hair shafts when nonspecific dermatitis presents in this area.
Nineteen patients with phaeohyphomycosis were treated with itraconazole. Of these, 17 were assessable for clinical outcome. Of these, two had received no prior therapy, five had failed amphotericin B therapy, four had failed ketoconazole or miconazole therapy, and five had failed both amphotericin B and azole therapy. One patient had received only prior surgical intervention. Fungi of seven different genera caused disease of the skin in nine patients, soft tissue in nine, sinuses in eight, bone in five, joints in two, and lungs in two. Itraconazole was given in dosages ranging from 50 to 600 mg/day for 1 to 48 months. Clinical improvement or remission occurred in nine patients. Two patients have had stabilization of disease. Six patients failed treatment, one had a relapse after initially successful treatment. Itraconazole appears to be highly effective in some patients with phaeohyphomycosis, including patients refractory to other antifungal agents.
Although rapid population growth in the Southwestern United States and travel to and through the area are increasing the potential for exposure to Coccidioides immitis, prevalence rates have declined in some endemic areas, probably because of environmental factors. With the iatrogenic immunosuppression of organ transplantation and the immunosuppression inherent in AIDS, more opportunistic infections with this organism are to be expected. The variety of cutaneous manifestations continues to challenge the dermatologist's acumen. Spherule-derived coccidioidin is an improved epidemiologic tool, and serodiagnostic techniques are easier to perform and are useful in the management of dissemination. While amphotericin B remains the standard, ketoconazole has found a definite role in the treatment of this disease in many patients. Itraconazole, now under investigation, appears very promising. Morbidity and mortality from disseminated disease appear to be declining. With current diagnostic and therapeutic methods, the prognosis for survival in immunocompetent patients is excellent.
Multiple open and double-blind studies have confirmed the efficacy of ketoconazole in the treatment of pityriasis versicolor. Single-dose (400 mg) or short-course (200 mg/d for five days) therapy may be highly effective for selected patients with pityriasis versicolor. Toxicity seems to be minimal at this dosage.
As both humans and fungi are eukaryotic organisms, antifungal agents affect their cellular metabolism. Thus, a relatively few antifungals with minimal toxicity and side-effects are available compared with a plethora of antibacterials. These agents currently prescribed in dentistry belong to two major groups, the polyenes (nystatin and amphotericin B) and the azoles (imidazoles and triazoles). A newly recognized phenomenon known as the post-antifungal effect implies that antifungals, even at sub-therapeutic concentrations, may suppress the virulent attributes of yeasts, especially intra-orally where topical drug levels fluctuate dramatically during dosing intervals.
Sixteen patients with coccidioidomycosis were treated with itraconazole for one year. Sixteen suffered from pulmonary coccidioidomycosis, two of them had associated mediastinal lesions, and one suffered from skin coccidioidomycosis. The daily dose used was 400 mg during the one-year period. Patients were clinically evaluated every month and tested for mycosis every three months. All patients except for one showed negative cultures on the third month after treatment began. Effectiveness achieved was excellent in eight patients (50 percent); a very good response was found in seven patients (44 percent); no response was seen in one patient (6 percent). There were four (25 percent) relapses and one dropout. Side effects seen were high blood pressure (19 percent) and lower limb edema (6 percent), which was temporary and at no time required discontinuing the drug therapy. We believe that itraconazole is an effective drug to treat coccidioidomycosis with a wide safety margin. It is well tolerated, and the incidence of relapses was low.
Ketoconazole has been successfully used in short-term treatment of Cushing's syndrome. We treated 4 patients who had Cushing's disease with ketoconazole administered during 5 to 18 months. Two of them are still controlled after 15 months of treatment and 7 months after treatment was withdrawn. In the other two patients, treatment was ineffective primarily and after 5 months. Our data confirm the usefulness of ketoconazole in the treatment of Cushing's disease, but they also show that primary resistance and tachyphylaxis in long-term treatment may occur, as previously reported.
In consideration of the American Journal of Otolaryngology's reviewing and editing my submission, the author(s) undersigned transfers, assigns and otherwise conveys all copyright ownership to Elsevier Inc. in the event that such work is published in the American Journal of Otolaryngology.
Systemic mycoses continue to emerge as life-threatening infections. Considerable progress in treating these infections is being achieved through better application of established available antifungal agents (amphotericin B, flucytosine, miconazole and ketoconazole), and through development of promising investigational agents (fluconazole, itraconazole). Systemic fungal infections, however, continue to present major problems, including clinical resistance, microbiological resistance, emergence of new pathogens, and involvement of more immunocompromised patients. The purpose of this paper, therefore, is to review the recent progress and current problems in treatment of systemic fungal infections.
