Neonatal hypertension is increasingly recognized as dramatic improvements in neonatal intensive care, advancements in our understanding of neonatal physiology, and implementation of new therapies have led to improved survival of premature infants. A variety of factors appear to be important in determining blood pressure in neonates, including gestational age, birth weight, and postmenstrual age. Normative data on neonatal blood pressure values remain limited. The cause of hypertension in an affected neonate is often identified with careful diagnostic evaluation, with the most common causes being umbilical catheter-associated thrombosis, renal parenchymal disease, and chronic lung disease. Clinical expertise may need to be relied upon to decide the best approach to treatment in such patients, as data on the use of antihypertensive medications in this age group are extremely limited. Available data suggest that long-term outcomes are usually good, with resolution of hypertension in most infants. In this review, we will take a case-based approach to illustrate these concepts and to point out important evidence gaps that need to be addressed so that management of neonatal hypertension may be improved.
Hypertensive emergency is a condition in which there is elevation of both systolic and diastolic blood pressure with the presence of acute target organ disease. Hypertensive urgency is a condition where the blood pressure is elevated (diastolic > 120 mmHg) with the absence of acute target organ disease. Hypertensive emergencies are best managed with parenteral drugs and careful intraarterial blood pressure monitoring. Hydralazine has been widely used in treatment of hypertension in eclampsia and preeclampsia, and its safety has been demonstrated in these patients. Sodium nitroprusside (SNP) has the most reliable antihypertensive activity, which begins immediately after its administration and ends when the infusion is stopped. As with diazoxide, it should be used with caution in patients with impaired cerebral flow. SNP is the preferred drug in obtaining controlled hypotension in patients undergoing neurovascular surgery. Intravenous nitroglycerin is useful in patients prone to myocardial ischemia, but should be avoided in patients with increased intracranial pressure. Esmolol is effective in controlling both supraventricular tachyarrhythmias and severe hypertension. Its short onset of duration of action make it useful in the emergent setting, but because of its negative inotropic effect its use should be avoided in patients with low cardiac output. Verapamil should not be used in patients with preexisting conduction abnormalities. Nicardipine is a potent arteriolar vasodilator without a significant direct depressant effect on myocardium. As with other afterload reducing agents, it should not be used in patients with severe aortic stenosis. Because angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors generally cause cerebral vasodilatation, enalaprilat may be particularly beneficial for patients who are at high risk of developing cerebral hypotensive episodes secondary to impaired cerebral circulation. Fenoldopam, a selective post-synaptic dopaminergic receptor (DA1) has been shown to be effective in treating severe hypertension with a lower incidence of side effects than SNP. Hypertensive urgencies can usually be managed with oral agents. Oral nifedipine, captopril, clonidine, labetalol, prazosin, and nimodipine have all been shown to be effective in these situations.
Perioperative hypertension is commonly encountered in patients that undergo surgery. While attempts have been made to standardize the method to characterize the intraoperative hemodynamics, these methods still vary widely. In addition, there is a lack of consensus concerning treatment thresholds and appropriate therapeutic targets, making absolute recommendations about treatment difficult. Nevertheless, perioperative hypertension requires careful management. When treatment is necessary, therapy should be individualized for the patient. This paper reviews the pharmacologic agents and strategies commonly used in the management of perioperative hypertension.
The prevalence of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy is increasing. The etiology and pathophysiology of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy remain poorly understood. Hypertensive disorders are a major cause of maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. Treatment of hypertension decreases the incidence of severe hypertension, but it does not impact rates of preeclampsia or other pregnancy complications. Several antihypertensive medications are commonly used in pregnancy, although there is a lack of randomized controlled trials. Severe hypertension should be treated immediately to prevent maternal end-organ damage. Appropriate antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum management is important in caring for patients with hypertensive disorders.
Following a hypertension symposium in Rochester, NY, in October 2005, a roundtable was convened to discuss hypertensive emergencies. Dr. Marvin Moser, Clinical Professor of Medicine at the Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, moderated the session, which included Dr. Joseph L. Izzo, Jr., Professor of Medicine at the State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, and Dr. John Bisognano, Associate Professor of Medicine at the University of Rochester School of Medicine, Rochester, NY.
Labetalol is a combined alpha- and beta-adrenoceptor blocking agent for oral and intravenous use in the treatment of hypertension. It is a nonselective antagonist at beta-adrenoceptors and a competitive antagonist of postsynaptic alpha 1-adrenoceptors. Labetalol is more potent at beta that at alpha 1 adrenoceptors in man; the ratio of beta-alpha antagonism is 3:1 after oral and 6.9:1 after intravenous administration. Labetalol is readily absorbed in man after oral administration, but the drug, which is lipid soluble, undergoes considerable hepatic first-pass metabolism and has an absolute bioavailability of approximately 25%. There are no active metabolites, and the elimination half-life of the drug is approximately 6 hours. Unlike conventional beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, labetalol, when given acutely, produces a decrease in peripheral vascular resistance and blood pressure with little alteration in heart rate or cardiac output. However, like conventional beta-blockers, labetalol may influence the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and respiratory function. Clinical studies have shown that the antihypertensive efficacy of labetalol is superior to placebo and to diuretic therapy and is at least comparable to that of conventional beta-blockers, methyldopa, clonidine and various adrenergic neuronal blockers. Labetalol administered alone or with a diuretic is often effective when other antihypertensive regimens have failed. Studies have shown that labetalol is effective in the treatment of essential hypertension, renal hypertension, pheochromocytoma, pregnancy hypertension and hypertensive emergencies. In addition, preliminary studies indicate that labetalol may be of value in the management of ischemic heart disease. The most troublesome side effect of labetalol therapy is posture-related dizziness. Other reported side effects of the drug include gastrointestinal disturbances, tiredness, headache, scalp tingling, skin rashes, urinary retention and impotence. Side effects related to the beta-adrenoceptor blocking effect of labetalol, including asthma, heart failure and Raynaud's phenomenon, have been reported in rare instances.
PURPOSE: Antihypertensive drugs are among the most prescribed drugs during pregnancy. Methyldopa, labetalol, and nifedipine have been perceived safe to use during pregnancy and are therefore recommended in international guidelines for treatment of hypertension. In this review, we provide a complete overview of what is known on the pharmacokinetics (PK) of the antihypertensive drugs methyldopa, labetalol, and nifedipine throughout pregnancy. METHODS: A systematic search was performed to retrieve studies on the PK of methyldopa, labetalol, and nifedipine used throughout pregnancy. The search was restricted to English and original studies. The systematic search was conducted on July 27, 2021, in Embase, Medline Ovid, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, and Google Scholar. Keywords were methyldopa, labetalol, nifedipine, pharmacokinetics, pregnancy, and placenta. RESULTS: A total of 1459 unique references were identified of which title and abstract were screened. Based on this screening, 67 full-text papers were assessed, to retain 30 PK studies of which 2 described methyldopa, 12 labetalol, and 16 nifedipine. No fetal accumulation is found for any of the antihypertensive drugs studied. CONCLUSION: We conclude that despite decades of prescribing methyldopa, labetalol, and nifedipine throughout pregnancy, descriptions of their PK during pregnancy are hampered by a large heterogeneity in the low number of available studies. Aiming for evidence-based and personalized dosing of antihypertensive medication in the future, further studies on the relationship of both PK and pharmacodynamics (including the optimal blood pressure targeting) during pregnancy and pregnancy-related pathology are urgently needed to prevent undertreatment, overtreatment, and side effects.
1 A new anti-hypertensive agent (labetalol) with alpha- and beta-adrenoreceptor-blocking properties has been assessed in 30 patients in a general practice. 2 Significant reduction in blood pressure and pulse rate occurred at a dose of 400 mg/d. A further significant reduction in blood pressure but not of pulse rate occurred at a dose of 800 mg/d. 3 After 4 weeks' treatment on the higher dose the mean fall in systolic and diastolic pressures compared with the pre-trial pressures was 36 and 24 mmHg, respectively. Side-effects were generally mild.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate maternal and neonatal outcomes by type of antihypertensive used in participants of the CHAP (Chronic Hypertension in Pregnancy) trial. METHODS: We conducted a planned secondary analysis of CHAP, an open-label, multicenter, randomized trial of antihypertensive treatment compared with standard care (no treatment unless severe hypertension developed) in pregnant patients with mild chronic hypertension (blood pressure 140-159/90-104 mm Hg before 20 weeks of gestation) and singleton pregnancies. We performed three comparisons based on medications prescribed at enrollment: labetalol compared with standard care, nifedipine compared with standard care, and labetalol compared with nifedipine. Although active compared with standard care groups were randomized, medication assignment within the active treatment group was not random but based on clinician or patient preference. The primary outcome was the occurrence of superimposed preeclampsia with severe features, preterm birth before 35 weeks of gestation, placental abruption, or fetal or neonatal death. The key secondary outcome was small for gestational age (SGA) neonates. We also compared medication adverse effects between groups. Relative risks (RRs) and 95% CIs were estimated with log binomial regression to adjust for confounding. RESULTS: Of 2,292 participants analyzed, 720 (31.4%) received labetalol, 417 (18.2%) received nifedipine, and 1,155 (50.4%) received no treatment. The mean gestational age at enrollment was 10.5+/-3.7 weeks; nearly half of participants (47.5%) identified as non-Hispanic Black; and 44.5% used aspirin. The primary outcome occurred in 217 (30.1%), 130 (31.2%), and 427 (37.0%) in the labetalol, nifedipine, and standard care groups, respectively. Risk of the primary outcome was lower among those receiving treatment (labetalol use vs standard adjusted RR 0.82, 95% CI, 0.72-0.94; nifedipine use vs standard adjusted RR 0.84, 95% CI, 0.71-0.99), but there was no significant difference in risk when labetalol was compared with nifedipine (adjusted RR 0.98, 95% CI, 0.82-1.18). There were no significant differences in SGA or serious adverse events between participants receiving labetalol and those receiving nifedipine. CONCLUSION: No significant differences in predetermined maternal or neonatal outcomes were detected on the basis of the use of labetalol or nifedipine for treatment of chronic hypertension in pregnancy. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02299414.
Haemodynamically, the combination of alpha 1- and beta-adrenoceptor antagonists is a logical one. alpha 1-Adrenoceptor blockade causes vasodilatation and hence counteracts elevated peripheral vascular resistance, the most consistent haemodynamic derangement in established essential hypertension. beta-Blockers, which lower elevated blood pressure by a different (not yet clearly understood) mechanism, suppress the reflex tachycardia triggered by vasodilatation. Combined alpha/beta-adrenoceptor blockade can be obtained by the simultaneous administration of both types of adrenoceptor antagonists, but also by giving drugs that possess alpha- and beta-adrenoceptor antagonistic activity in the same molecule. Carvedilol and labetalol are the best known examples of such combined alpha/beta-adrenoceptor antagonists, although their pharmacodynamic profile is a result of different receptor selectivity of their component stereoisomers, rather than combined alpha/beta-blocking activity in a single chemical entity. Both compounds have been investigated clinically in the treatment of essential hypertension in moderate-to-large scale trials. A few newer combined alpha/beta-adrenoceptor antagonists, such as amosulalol, arotinolol and medroxalol have been developed, but clinical data on these compounds are relatively scarce.
Dilevalol is a novel antihypertensive drug that combines nonselective beta blockade with selective beta 2-receptor agonist activity. Its antihypertensive effect is mediated through arterial vasodilation and a decrease in systemic vascular resistance. At rest, dilevalol has little effect on heart rate or cardiac output. The drug is rapidly and completely absorbed but undergoes significant first-pass hepatic extraction. Its elimination half-life of approximately 12 hours allows for once-daily administration. In controlled clinical trials, dilevalol was at least as effective as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and comparable to beta blockers in antihypertensive efficacy. Preliminary data indicate that dilevalol reverses left ventricular hypertrophy in some patients. It does not adversely affect renal function and may have a favorable effect on plasma lipids, especially high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. The agent is usually well tolerated and may prove to be a useful addition to our antihypertensive drugs.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes recent literature, updated safety data, and major clinical considerations for commonly used medications for arrhythmias, heart failure, hypertension, ischemic heart disease, and anticoagulation during pregnancy and lactation. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies have shown a benefit to more aggressive treatment of mild chronic hypertension to a blood pressure goal of <140/90 with oral labetalol and nifedipine remaining first-line agents. Aspirin is now routinely used for preeclampsia prevention, while experience with other antiplatelet agents, such as purinergic receptor P2Y G protein-coupled 12 (P2Y12) inhibitors, continues to grow. Data on statin therapy are rapidly changing and recent studies suggest this class may not be associated with fetal harm and can be continued in select cases. SUMMARY: As data regarding medication safety continues to evolve, a multidisciplinary team is needed for full consideration of maternal and fetal risks and benefits. Ongoing studies are needed to improve and expand our understanding of medication safety during pregnancy and lactation.
Although well established in treating hypertension and cardiovascular (CV) disease, clinical trial data suggest that beta-blockers (eg, atenolol) may be less effective than other antihypertensive classes in reducing stroke and CV mortality despite similar blood pressure (BP) reductions. One possible explanation is that atenolol is less effective in reducing central aortic pressure. Newer vasodilating beta-blockers may prove more effective in reducing central pressure and cardiovascular events. Carvedilol and labetalol appear to cause vasodilation through alpha(1)-receptor blockade; nebivolol induces endothelium-dependent vasodilation by stimulating nitric oxide bioactivity. Their favorable hemodynamic profile includes reduction of peripheral vascular resistance (PVR) while maintaining or improving cardiac output (CO), stroke volume, and left ventricular function, whereas nonvasodilating beta-blockers tend to raise PVR and reduce CO and left ventricular function. Compared with conventional beta-blockers, vasodilating beta-blockers have beneficial hemodynamic effects including decreased pressure wave reflection from the periphery, leading to decreases in central aortic blood pressure. Larger trials are needed to determine whether reduced central pressure will translate into improved CV outcomes compared with nonvasodilating beta-blockers.
Estimates of adherence to antihypertensive treatment in pregnancy are limited; identifying non-adherence could facilitate intervention and optimise blood pressure control. This study aimed to evaluate adherence to antihypertensive treatment amongst pregnant women with chronic hypertension using high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry instrumentation. Spot urine samples collected from women who were randomised to labetalol or nifedipine were assessed. Samples from 74 women were included; documented prescribing and urine metabolite detection were concordant in 88% (n = 65). Evidence of self-administration of alternative treatment was observed in 8% (n = 6). Measurement of urinary antihypertensive metabolites in pregnancy provides insight into treatment adherence.
Hypertensive crises is still a major public health problem, causing end organ damage like myocardial infarction, stroke, and renal failure. Labetalol and nitroglycerine are among the two most commonly used medicine to control the blood pressure, but there is no head to head comparison between these two medicines. This was a prospective randomized non-blinded study which included 50 patients of hypertensive crises, out which 25 patients received intravenous labetalol and 25 patients received intravenous nitroglycerine. We found that labetalol controlled the blood pressure more rapidly in comparison to nitroglycerine, without causing any extra side effect.
The response to incremental doses of oral labetalol in 16 patients with hypertensive urgencies is presented. After inadequate blood pressure control with 20 mg of intravenous furosemide, each patient received a 300 mg oral dose of labetalol. Subsequent oral doses of labetalol, 100 mg, were administered at 2-hour intervals, if the diastolic blood pressure remained greater than 100 mm Hg. The maximum dose of labetalol per patient was 500 mg. Five patients required only the initial 300 mg dose of labetalol. Two patients required further therapy for satisfactory blood pressure control. Mean arterial pressure fell from 156 +/- 12 mm Hg to 123 +/- 14 mm Hg.
Hypertensive emergencies encompass a variety of clinical conditions and several drugs are now available for use in these situations. The clinician should take into account the specific etiology of the severe hypertension, co-existing conditions of patient, and the pharmacology of agents when selecting a drug for treatment. In the case of hypertensive encephalopathy, the lowering of blood pressure is therapeutic as well as diagnostic. If the mental status does not improve within a few hours of lowering the blood pressure, other causes of hypertension should be considered. Historically, nitroprusside has been the most commonly used agent in this clinical situation. Alternative drugs that are easy to administer include labetalol and fenoldopam. Nitroglycerin and nicardipine may also be effective but clinical experience in hypertensive encephalopathy is limited. Drugs that cause sedation such as clonidine should not be used in order to avoid confusion with the neurological assessment.
Hypertension develops in most patients after transplantation when immunosuppression is based on cyclosporine and prednisone. The pathogenesis appears to be multifactorial but involves rapidly rising vasoconstrictor tone in renal and systemic vascular beds. Much of this tone reflects abnormal vascular function, characterized by impaired prostacyclin and EDRF effects, in conjunction with increased vasoconstriction due to endothelin and possibly other factors. Effective management of the transplant recipient depends on preventing excessive vasoconstriction, usually with calcium channel blocking agents.
As detailed information on the pharmacokinetics (PK) of labetalol in pregnant people are lacking, the aims of this study were: (1) to build a physiologically based PK (PBPK) model of labetalol in non-pregnant individuals that incorporates different CYP2C19 genotypes (specifically, *1/*1, *1/*2 or *3, *2/*2, and *17/*17); (2) to translate this model to the second and third trimester of pregnancy; and (3) to combine the model with a previously published direct pharmacodynamic (PD) model to predict the blood pressure lowering effect of labetalol in the third trimester. Clinical data for model evaluation was obtained from the scientific literature. In non-pregnant populations, the mean ratios of simulated versus observed peak concentration (C(max)), time to reach C(max) (T(max)), and exposure (area under the plasma concentration-time curve, AUC) were 0.94, 0.82, and 1.16, respectively. The pregnancy PBPK model captured the observed PK adequately, but clearance was slightly underestimated with mean ratios of simulated versus observed C(max), T(max), and AUC of 1.28, 1.30, and 1.39, respectively. The results suggested that pregnant people with CYP2C19 *2/*2 alleles have similar labetalol exposure and trough levels compared to non-pregnant controls, whereas those with other alleles were found to have increased exposure and trough concentrations. Importantly, the pregnancy PBPK/PD model predicted that, despite increased exposure in some genotypes, the blood pressure lowering effect was broadly comparable across all genotypes. In view of the large inter-individual variability and the potentially increasing blood pressure during pregnancy, patients may need to be closely monitored for achieving optimal therapeutic effects and avoiding adverse events.
Labetalol is a competitive antagonist of alpha 1-, beta 1-, and beta 2-adrenergic receptors. The hemodynamic effects of the drug include reduced blood pressure, heart rate, and peripheral resistance, with little change in resting cardiac output or stroke volume. In open trials and controlled studies, labetalol was an effective antihypertensive. Labetalol compared favorably with beta-blockers alone or in combination with vasodilators, for the treatment of hypertension. Reductions in heart rate are less pronounced with labetalol as compared with propranolol. Labetalol produces rapid reductions in blood pressure when administered intravenously for severe hypertension. The most frequent adverse reactions to the drug include fatigue, postural symptoms, headache, and gastrointestinal complaints. Labetalol may prove advantageous when vasodilation in addition to beta-blockade is desired, or for selected patients experiencing adverse effects attributable to beta-blockade. Until the clinical profile of labetalol is better defined, the use of the drug should be limited.
