It is challenging to balance the fetal risks associated with the use of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) against maternal and fetal risks of seizure worsening, and therefore it is very important to define and distinguish the possible risks entailed by different AEDs. This paper aims to undertake a comprehensive review regarding the possible risks of four classical (phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and valproate) and two newer (lamotrigine and levetiracetam) AEDs during pregnancy. The review focuses on major and organ-specific malformations, dose-dependent risks, mono vs polytherapy, and clinical pharmacokinetics. A discussion regarding the safety of AED use during breastfeeding is also provided.
BACKGROUND: Maternal use of valproate during pregnancy has been associated with an increased risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in children. Although most studies of other antiseizure medications have not shown increased risks of these disorders, there are limited and conflicting data regarding the risk of autism spectrum disorder associated with maternal topiramate use. METHODS: We identified a population-based cohort of pregnant women and their children within two health care utilization databases in the United States, with data from 2000 through 2020. Exposure to specific antiseizure medications was defined on the basis of prescription fills from gestational week 19 until delivery. Children who had been exposed to topiramate during the second half of pregnancy were compared with those unexposed to any antiseizure medication during pregnancy with respect to the risk of autism spectrum disorder. Valproate was used as a positive control, and lamotrigine was used as a negative control. RESULTS: The estimated cumulative incidence of autism spectrum disorder at 8 years of age was 1.9% for the full population of children who had not been exposed to antiseizure medication (4,199,796 children). With restriction to children born to mothers with epilepsy, the incidence was 4.2% with no exposure to antiseizure medication (8815 children), 6.2% with exposure to topiramate (1030 children), 10.5% with exposure to valproate (800 children), and 4.1% with exposure to lamotrigine (4205 children). Propensity score-adjusted hazard ratios in a comparison with no exposure to antiseizure medication were 0.96 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.56 to 1.65) for exposure to topiramate, 2.67 (95% CI, 1.69 to 4.20) for exposure to valproate, and 1.00 (95% CI, 0.69 to 1.46) for exposure to lamotrigine. CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of autism spectrum disorder was higher among children prenatally exposed to the studied antiseizure medications than in the general population. However, after adjustment for indication and other confounders, the association was substantially attenuated for topiramate and lamotrigine, whereas an increased risk remained for valproate. (Funded by the National Institute of Mental Health.).
Childhood absence epilepsy (CAE) is a common pediatric epilepsy syndrome with distinct seizure semiology, electroencephalography (EEG) features, and treatment. A diagnosis of CAE can be obtained during an office visit with a careful history, physical exam including prolonged hyperventilation, and a routine EEG. The treatment of choice for CAE with absence seizures only is ethosuximide. Valproic acid and lamotrigine are also effective treatments for many patients, but when compared to ethosuximide, valproic acid has more adverse effects and lamotrigine is less effective. Attention to predictors of response to treatment, including clinical, electrographic, and genetic factors, is increasing. Refractory CAE occurs in fewer than half of patients, and treatment strategies are available, though efficacy data are lacking. Careful assessment and treatment of psychosocial comorbidities is essential in caring for patients with CAE.
INTRODUCTION: This review aims to identify the optimal therapeutic dosage of anti-epileptic drugs in terms of efficacy and safety in patients with multiple comorbidities. AREAS COVERED: We have analyzed changes in terms of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of Brivaracetam, Carbamazepine, Lacosamide, Lamotrigine, Levetiracetam, Topiramate, Valproate, and Zonisamide in liver disease, chronic kidney disease, and in patients admitted to intensive care unit. Our literature search covers the past 5 years. We used PubMed, Google Scholar, and EMBASE database's to support our article. EXPERT OPINION: To ensure that the patient with seizure receives the best treatment in relation to their comorbidities, careful clinical-laboratory monitoring is necessary to maximize effectiveness while maintaining safety, especially in the case of polytherapy.
The teratogenic potential of valproate in pregnancy is well established; however, evidence regarding the long-term safety of other antiseizure medications (ASMs) during pregnancy remains limited. Using routinely collected primary care data from the UK and nationwide Swedish registries to create a cohort of 3,182,773 children, of which 17,495 were exposed to ASMs in pregnancy, we show that those exposed to valproate were more likely to receive a diagnosis of autism, intellectual disability, and ADHD, when compared to children not exposed to ASMs. Additionally, children exposed to topiramate were 2.5 times more likely to be diagnosed with intellectual disability (95% CI: 1.23-4.98), and those exposed to carbamazepine were 1.25 times more likely to be diagnosed with autism (95% CI: 1.05-1.48) and 1.30 times more likely to be diagnosed with intellectual disability (95% CI: 1.01-1.69). There was little evidence that children exposed to lamotrigine in pregnancy were more likely to receive neurodevelopmental diagnoses. While further research is needed, these findings may support considering safer treatment alternatives well before conception when clinically appropriate.
BACKGROUND: Bipolar disorder is a chronic mental disorder with repetitive mania/hypomania as well as depressive episodes, which eventually results in marked impairment in overall functioning and health-related quality of life.  A worldwide prevalence rate of 2.4% has been reported. The risk of suicide is higher in people with bipolar disorder than those with other mental disorders. Therefore, effective management of bipolar disorder in the maintenance period is warranted to minimize the risk of relapse or recurrence. Although lithium has been the standard treatment of bipolar disorder for many years, it is associated with adverse effects and teratogenicity. Lamotrigine is approved to be expected for prevention of recurrence for the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder. In addition, lamotrigine is as effective as lithium. Therefore, we performed a systematic review to confirm the efficacy and safety of lamotrigine in the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and tolerability of lamotrigine in the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder. SEARCH METHODS: We searched Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, the Cochrane Common Mental Disorders Group's Specialized Register (CCMDCTR) and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) from inception to 21 May 2021. We also searched international trial registries and contacted experts in the field. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomized controlled trials enrolling adults with bipolar disorder who were treated with lamotrigine, placebo or lithium. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviews authors independently checked the eligibility of studies and extracted data using a standardized form. Data extracted included study characteristics, participant characteristics, intervention details, settings, and outcome measures in the term of efficacy and tolerability. Study information were then entered into RevMan web. MAIN RESULTS: We included 11 studies with a total of 2314 participants in this review; 1146 were randomized to lamotrigine, 869 were randomized to placebo and, 299 to lithium. We rated all studies as having an unclear risk of bias in at least one domain of Cochrane's tool for assessing risk of bias, with the most commonly observed weakness being selection bias (random sequence generation and allocation concealment). We judged five studies to be at a high risk of detection bias (blinding of outcome assessment). These potential biases pose as major threat to the validity of the included studies in this review. Outcomes of efficacy showed a possible advantage of lamotrigine over placebo. The estimated risk ratio (RR) for recurrence of manic symptom at one year as measured by the Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) was 0.67, (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.51 to 0.87; 3 studies, 663 participants; low-certainty evidence) in favor of lamotrigine. The RR of clinical worsening with the need for additional psychotropic treatment (RR 0.82, 95% CI 0.70 to 0.98; 4 studies, 756 participants) based on moderate-certainty evidence. The possible benefits of lamotrigine were also seen for the outcome of treatment withdrawal due to any reason at 6-12 months after treatment (RR 0.88, 95% CI 0.78 to 0.99; 4 studies, 700 participants; moderate-certainty evidence). Regarding tolerability, our analyses showed that the incidence rates of adverse effects were similar between the lamotrigine group and the placebo group (short-term effect: RR 1.07, 95% CI 0.81 to 1.42; 5 studies, 1138 participants; very low-certainty evidence; long-term effect: RR 0.97, 95% CI 0.77 to 1.23; 4 studies, 756 participants; moderate-certainty evidence). In the comparison between lamotrigine and lithium, efficacy was similar between groups except for recurrence of mania episode at one year. Recurrence of manic symptoms was higher in the lamotrigine group than that of the lithium group (RR 2.13, 95% CI 1.32 to 3.44; 3 studies, 602 participants; moderate-certainty evidence). Analysis of adverse effects at 6-12 months showed that a lower proportion of participants experienced at least one adverse effect when treated with lamotrigine compared to lithium (RR 0.70, 95% CI 0.51 to 0.96; 4 studies, 691 participants; moderate-certainty evidence). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Low- to moderate-certainty evidence collectively suggests that lamotrigine may be superior to placebo as a treatment modality for bipolar disorder. In comparison to lithium, people with bipolar disorder seem to tolerate lamotrigine better in the long run; however, the demonstrated efficacy in the maintenance of bipolar disorder was similar between the two groups.
CONTEXT: Lamotrigine is a broad-spectrum anticonvulsant commonly used to treat seizure and bipolar mood disorders. Evidence from case series and retrospective studies indicate that lamotrigine overdose is usually benign. However, there are reported cases of cardiac arrest and mortality following lamotrigine overdose. We undertook a systematic review of the literature on lamotrigine overdoses to better understand the clinical severity, the relevance of serum concentrations, and therapeutic interventions for overdose. OBJECTIVES: To characterize manifestations of acute lamotrigine overdose, determine if serum concentrations predict poisoning severity, and evaluate the effectiveness of overdose management interventions. METHODS: We performed a literature search across eight databases, including Medline, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library, from database inception to April 2014. Major bibliographic databases were updated on 31 May 2017. Articles were eligible if they described acute or acute on chronic lamotrigine overdose. At least one serum lamotrigine concentration had to be reported for inclusion. Reports on chronic poisoning, studies describing adverse effects of therapeutic use, and animal studies were excluded. RESULTS: We retrieved 6238 records; 48 (51 cases) met the inclusion criteria. Cases primarily involved adults (70.6%). Potentially life-threatening symptoms of overdose included seizures (55%), Glasgow Coma Scale </=8 (20%), hypotension (12%), and wide complex tachycardia (WCT) and cardiac arrest (6%). Among the 25 cases exposed to lamotrigine alone (13 adult; 12 pediatric), 2 adult fatalities occurred (4 g and 7.5 g ingested) and 8 pediatric cases experienced seizures (all children </=3.5-years-old, 75% without an underlying seizure disorder, >/= 525 mg ingested). The lowest seizure-associated serum concentration was 3.8 mg/L and 25.6 mg/L for pediatric and adult patients, respectively, suggesting children may be more susceptible to CNS toxicity. Cardiovascular toxicities occurred primarily in adult patients (threshold >25 mg/L). Overdose interventions included benzodiazepines (53%), propofol or barbiturates (14%), NaHCO(3) (20%), lipid therapy (12%), and extracorporeal elimination (10%). NaHCO(3) yielded no response in four of nine cases with conduction delays; however, two of the four cases subsequently responded with lipid therapy. CONCLUSIONS: Most cases reporting lamotrigine exposures observed mild or no toxicity; however, large exposures were associated with severe CNS depression, seizures, cardiac conduction delays, wide complex tachycardia, and death. In adults with a serum concentration >25 mg/L, severe toxicity may occur. In patients </=3.5 years of age, ingestions of >/=525 mg may produce severe CNS depression and seizures.
The anti-epileptic drug lamotrigine (LTG) has been widely used to treat various neurological disorders, including epilepsy and bipolar disorder. However, its precise mechanism of action in the central nervous system (CNS) still needs to be determined. Recent studies have highlighted the involvement of LTG in modulating the activity of voltage-gated ion channels, particularly those related to the inhibition of neuronal excitability. Additionally, LTG has been found to have neuroprotective effects, potentially through the inhibition of glutamate release and the enhancement of GABAergic neurotransmission. LTG's unique mechanism of action compared to other anti-epileptic drugs has led to the investigation of its use in treating other CNS disorders, such as neuropathic pain, PTSD, and major depressive disorder. Furthermore, the drug has been combined with other anti-epileptic drugs and mood stabilizers, which may enhance its therapeutic effects. In conclusion, LTG's potential to modulate multiple neurotransmitters and ion channels in the CNS makes it a promising drug for treating various neurological disorders. As our understanding of its mechanism of action in the CNS continues to evolve, the potential for the drug to be used in new indications will also be explored.
IMPORTANCE: Women with epilepsy (WWE) require treatment with antiseizure medications (ASMs) during pregnancy, which may be associated with an increased risk of major congenital malformations (MCMs) in their offspring. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of MCMs after prenatal exposure to 8 commonly used ASM monotherapies and changes in MCM prevalence over time. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a prospective, observational, longitudinal cohort study conducted from June 1999 to October 2022. Since 1999, physicians from more than 40 countries enrolled ASM-treated WWE before pregnancy outcome was known and followed up their offspring until 1 year after birth. Participants aged 14 to 55 years who were exposed to 8 of the most frequently used ASMs during pregnancy were included in this study. Data were analyzed from April to September 2023. EXPOSURE: Maternal use of ASMs at conception. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: MCMs were assessed 1 year after birth by a committee blinded to type of exposure. Teratogenic outcomes across exposures were compared by random-effects logistic regression adjusting for potential confounders and prognostic factors. RESULTS: A total of 10 121 prospective pregnancies exposed to ASM monotherapy met eligibility criteria. Of those, 9840 were exposed to the 8 most frequently used ASMs. The 9840 pregnancies occurred in 8483 women (mean [range] age, 30.1 [14.1-55.2] years). MCMs occurred in 153 of 1549 pregnancies for valproate (9.9%; 95% CI, 8.5%-11.5%), 9 of 142 for phenytoin (6.3%; 95% CI, 3.4%-11.6%), 21 of 338 for phenobarbital (6.2%; 95% CI, 4.1%-9.3%), 121 of 2255 for carbamazepine (5.4%; 95% CI, 4.5%-6.4%), 10 of 204 for topiramate (4.9%; 95% CI, 2.7%-8.8%), 110 of 3584 for lamotrigine (3.1%; 95% CI, 2.5%-3.7%), 13 of 443 for oxcarbazepine (2.9%; 95% CI, 1.7%-5.0%), and 33 of 1325 for levetiracetam (2.5%; 95% CI, 1.8%-3.5%). For valproate, phenobarbital, and carbamazepine, there was a significant increase in the prevalence of MCMs associated with increasing dose of the ASM. Overall prevalence of MCMs decreased from 6.1% (153 of 2505) during the period 1998 to 2004 to 3.7% (76 of 2054) during the period 2015 to 2022. This decrease over time was significant in univariable logistic analysis but not after adjustment for changes in ASM exposure pattern. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Of all ASMs with meaningful data, the lowest prevalence of MCMs was observed in offspring exposed to levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, and lamotrigine. Prevalence of MCMs was higher with phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine, and phenobarbital, and dose dependent for the latter 3 ASMs. The shift in exposure pattern over time with a declining exposure to valproate and carbamazepine and greater use of lamotrigine and levetiracetam was associated with a 39% decline in prevalence of MCMs, a finding that has major public health implications.
BACKGROUND: Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a severe inflammatory reaction syndrome caused by genetic or acquired immune dysregulation. The majority of adult HLH cases are caused by tumors, rheumatic immune disorders, and infections. However, drug-induced HLH is rarely reported. METHODS: We report a case of HLH in an adult caused by the administration of lamotrigine, to our knowledge, only nine other cases of lamotrigine-associated HLH have been reported in adult patients. RESULTS: After discontinuing lamotrigine and using steroid hormones for the HLH, the patient's condition has been brought under control. CONCLUSIONS: This case confirms that dexamethasone is also effective for drug-induced HLH. Usually, after discontinuing the relevant medications, there is no need for further maintenance treatment.
Bipolar disorder affects women throughout their childbearing years. During the perinatal period, women with bipolar disorder are vulnerable to depressive episode recurrences and have an increased risk for postpartum psychosis. Perinatal screening is critical to identify women at risk. Although medications are the mainstay of treatment, the choice of pharmacotherapy must be made by the patient based on a risk-benefit discussion with her physician. For optimal dosing in pregnancy, therapeutic drug monitoring may be required to maintain effective drug concentrations. Residual symptoms of bipolar depression are treatable with bright light therapy as an alternative to medication augmentation.
IMPORTANCE: After the recent limitations to prescribing valproate, many studies have highlighted the challenging management of female patients of reproductive age with idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE). However, no study, to the authors' knowledge, has addressed the comparative effectiveness of alternative antiseizure medications (ASMs) in these patients. OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness and safety of levetiracetam and lamotrigine as initial monotherapy in female patients of childbearing age with IGE. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a multicenter, retrospective, comparative effectiveness cohort study analyzing data from patients followed up from 1994 to 2022. Patients were recruited from 22 primary, secondary, and tertiary adult and child epilepsy centers from 4 countries. Eligible patients were female individuals of childbearing age, diagnosed with IGE according to International League Against Epilepsy (2022) criteria and who initiated levetiracetam or lamotrigine as initial monotherapy. Patients were excluded due to insufficient follow-up after ASM prescription. EXPOSURES: Levetiracetam or lamotrigine as initial monotherapy. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW)-adjusted Cox proportional hazards regression was performed to compare treatment failure (TF) among patients who received levetiracetam or lamotrigine as initial monotherapy. RESULTS: A total of 543 patients were included in the study, with a median (IQR) age at ASM prescription of 17 (15-21) years and a median (IQR) follow-up of 60 (24-108) months. Of the study population, 312 patients (57.5%) were prescribed levetiracetam, and 231 (42.5%) were prescribed lamotrigine. An IPTW-adjusted Cox model showed that levetiracetam was associated with a reduced risk of treatment failure after adjustment for all baseline variables (IPTW-adjusted hazard ratio [HR], 0.77; 95% CI, 0.59-0.99; P = .04). However, after stratification according to different IGE syndromes, the higher effectiveness of levetiracetam was confirmed only in patients with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME; IPTW-adjusted HR, 0.47; 95% CI, 0.32-0.68; P < .001), whereas no significant differences were found in other syndromes. Patients treated with levetiracetam experienced adverse effects more frequently compared with those treated with lamotrigine (88 of 312 [28.2%] vs 42 of 231 [18.1%]), whereas the 2 ASMs had similar retention rates during follow-up (IPTW-adjusted HR, 0.91; 95% CI, 0.65-1.23; P = .60). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Results of this comparative effectiveness research study suggest the use of levetiracetam as initial alternative monotherapy in female patients with JME. Further studies are needed to identify the most effective ASM alternative in other IGE syndromes.
INTRODUCTION: Treatment of the epileptic patient during pregnancy poses a major clinical dilemma. For one thing the patient has to be kept free of seizures, but she also should be kept on monotherapy at the lowest possible dose, due to the effect such medication may have on the unborn child. DEVELOPMENT: There is a syndrome related to intra uterine exposure to the classical antiepileptic drugs, but which is not associated with any particular drug. However, the effect of the new antiepileptic drugs on unborn children is still unknown. To date, no specific pattern of malformations has been described in relation to any of these drugs. Lamotrigine is the one with which there is most clinical experience. Although there are still not enough cases studied to permit definite conclusions to be drawn, at the moment the incidence of congenital anomalies is the same as in the general population. CONCLUSIONS: The new anti-epileptic drugs have a major therapeutic advantage, not only in the management of epilepsy in different clinical situations, but also in the good results observed when using lamotrigine in patients of fertile age.
Movement disorders such as tremor and ataxia occur commonly during therapy with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Dystonias, however, are rare. Blepharospasm, although reported with neuroleptic agents, has never been reported with AEDs. Our patient developed blepharospasm during therapy with lamotrigine.
BACKGROUND: Levetiracetam and zonisamide are licensed as monotherapy for patients with focal epilepsy, but there is uncertainty as to whether they should be recommended as first-line treatments because of insufficient evidence of clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness. We aimed to assess the long-term clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of levetiracetam and zonisamide compared with lamotrigine in people with newly diagnosed focal epilepsy. METHODS: This randomised, open-label, controlled trial compared levetiracetam and zonisamide with lamotrigine as first-line treatment for patients with newly diagnosed focal epilepsy. Adult and paediatric neurology services across the UK recruited participants aged 5 years or older (with no upper age limit) with two or more unprovoked focal seizures. Participants were randomly allocated (1:1:1) using a minimisation programme with a random element utilising factor to receive lamotrigine, levetiracetam, or zonisamide. Participants and investigators were not masked and were aware of treatment allocation. SANAD II was designed to assess non-inferiority of both levetiracetam and zonisamide to lamotrigine for the primary outcome of time to 12-month remission. Anti-seizure medications were taken orally and for participants aged 12 years or older the initial advised maintenance doses were lamotrigine 50 mg (morning) and 100 mg (evening), levetiracetam 500 mg twice per day, and zonisamide 100 mg twice per day. For children aged between 5 and 12 years the initial daily maintenance doses advised were lamotrigine 1.5 mg/kg twice per day, levetiracetam 20 mg/kg twice per day, and zonisamide 2.5 mg/kg twice per day. All participants were included in the intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis. The per-protocol (PP) analysis excluded participants with major protocol deviations and those who were subsequently diagnosed as not having epilepsy. Safety analysis included all participants who received one dose of any study drug. The non-inferiority limit was a hazard ratio (HR) of 1.329, which equates to an absolute difference of 10%. A HR greater than 1 indicated that an event was more likely on lamotrigine. The trial is registered with the ISRCTN registry, 30294119 (EudraCt number: 2012-001884-64). FINDINGS: 990 participants were recruited between May 2, 2013, and June 20, 2017, and followed up for a further 2 years. Patients were randomly assigned to receive lamotrigine (n=330), levetiracetam (n=332), or zonisamide (n=328). The ITT analysis included all participants and the PP analysis included 324 participants randomly assigned to lamotrigine, 320 participants randomly assigned to levetiracetam, and 315 participants randomly assigned to zonisamide. Levetiracetam did not meet the criteria for non-inferiority in the ITT analysis of time to 12-month remission versus lamotrigine (HR 1.18; 97.5% CI 0.95-1.47) but zonisamide did meet the criteria for non-inferiority in the ITT analysis versus lamotrigine (1.03; 0.83-1.28). The PP analysis showed that 12-month remission was superior with lamotrigine than both levetiracetam (HR 1.32 [97.5% CI 1.05 to 1.66]) and zonisamide (HR 1.37 [1.08-1.73]). There were 37 deaths during the trial. Adverse reactions were reported by 108 (33%) participants who started lamotrigine, 144 (44%) participants who started levetiracetam, and 146 (45%) participants who started zonisamide. Lamotrigine was superior in the cost-utility analysis, with a higher net health benefit of 1.403 QALYs (97.5% central range 1.319-1.458) compared with 1.222 (1.110-1.283) for levetiracetam and 1.232 (1.112, 1.307) for zonisamide at a cost-effectiveness threshold of  pound20 000 per QALY. Cost-effectiveness was based on differences between treatment groups in costs and QALYs. INTERPRETATION: These findings do not support the use of levetiracetam or zonisamide as first-line treatments for patients with focal epilepsy. Lamotrigine should remain a first-line treatment for patients with focal epilepsy and should be the standard treatment in future trials. FUNDING: National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.
Pharmacogenomics (PGx) is a research area aimed at identifying genetic factors that are associated with drug responses, including drug efficacy, adverse drug reactions, and the appropriate drug dosage on a case-to-case basis. To promote the clinical implementation of PGx testing, which is currently of limited use in clinical practice, recent research has focused on providing reliable evidence for its clinical utility. In neurology, psychiatry, and neurosurgery, several human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles have been reportedly associated with cutaneous adverse drug reactions (cADRs) induced by antiepileptic drugs, which significantly carry the risk of developing cADRs. Prior to using antiepileptic drugs such as carbamazepine and lamotrigine, which are prone to cause severe cADRs, preemptive HLA genetic testing and therapeutic interventions such as drug selection and dosage adjustment based on the results of the tests can reduce the incidence of cADRs in the population before the initiation of treatment.
PURPOSE: Epilepsy may be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), which have been reported to decrease bone mineral density (BMD). Current data is conflicting and variable, and little is known with regard to how duration of AED use or specific AEDs, such as CYP-450 enzyme-inducing (EIAEDs) versus non-enzyme inducing (NEIAEDs) drugs affect BMD. We sought to systematically review BMD changes due to AED use to identify trends in reporting. METHODS: A literature search via Medline (PubMed), EMBASE, and Cochrane databases was performed. Peer-reviewed articles were identified that reported on BMD measurements in conjunction with AEDs. RESULTS: Twenty-six studies met inclusion criteria. Long-term therapy was shown across multiple, well-controlled studies to have the most significant BMD loss. Carbamazepine had the most frequent reporting of unfavorable effects on bone health and Lamotrigine seemed to show the most bone-protective qualities. Serum biochemical markers of bone turnover did not significantly correlate with measured BMD changes. CONCLUSION: The present study provides evidence that long-term AED therapy is the most significant risk factor for BMD loss. Furthermore, there was little compelling evidence to support that EIAEDs, as a class, were more harmful to bone than NEIAEDs, which has been previously suggested in multiple studies. Early clinical concern for significant loss of BMD may not be warranted as lower BMD was less likely to be observed during the initial years of AED therapy. Furthermore, serum markers of bone turnover are not clinically reliable in assessing BMD changes in patients taking AEDs.
Anti-seizure medications (ASMs) may improve or be detrimental to sleep. A literature review (as an update to the 2014 review by Jain and Glauser [https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.12478]) of 25 ASMs of interest (articles from 12 ASMs included) on the effect of ASMs/non-drug treatments on sleep in patients with epilepsy was conducted. The most common objective instrument was polysomnography, and the most common subjective measures were the Epworth Sleepiness Scale and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. Eslicarbazepine acetate, lacosamide, and perampanel improved or had no effect on sleep. Perampanel was associated with low incidence of insomnia, and lacosamide with low incidence of daytime sleepiness adverse events. Clonazepam, felbamate, lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, and phenobarbital worsened or had no effect on sleep. Lamotrigine may be associated with insomnia risk and phenobarbital with daytime sleepiness. Data for valproic acid were mixed. Overall, cannabidiol, carbamazepine, and levetiracetam had no effect on sleep. Epilepsy surgery may benefit sleep in patients with a good surgical outcome. Some ASMs, and, possibly, epilepsy surgery, may have positive effects on sleep, possibly linked to achieving seizure control. Nonetheless, other ASMs may worsen sleep in some settings. Clinicians should consider such observations when making treatment decisions, particularly for patients with comorbid sleep disorders.
Following the introduction of lamotrigine in 1994 as a treatment for epilepsy in the United States, the drug has seen progressively greater application in psychiatry, particularly as a treatment for bipolar disorder. This review critically evaluates the support for lamotrigine use across a broad range of psychiatric disorders as well as discuss its pharmacology, side-effect profile, and interactions with other medications.
Lamotrigine has been demonstrated to be effective as both an antiepileptic drug and a mood stabiliser. For epilepsy it is less efficacious than valproate in primary generalised epilepsy, but it is comparable to some traditional drugs in partial epilepsy. In psychiatry it has significant advantages over other mood stabilisers for the treatment and prevention of depressive phases of bipolar illness, but not for the treatment of mania. It has a more benign adverse effect profile than older antiepileptic agents and is not a proven teratogen. Risk of adverse reactions is reduced by commencing treatment at a markedly reduced dose that is gradually increased.
