Digoxin is a cardiac glycoside used as drug in case of heart problems, including congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation or flutter, and certain cardiac arrhythmias. It has a very narrow therapeutic window of the medication. Digoxin is toxic substance with well known cardiotoxic effect. In this work, pharmacology and toxicology of digoxin are summarized; Its pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, available acute toxicity data (different species, different administration routes) are summarized in this article. Moreover, its treatment side effect and human poisonings are thoroughly discussed. Finally, appropriate therapy regimen is proposed.
Macrolide antibiotics appear to be able to enhance the oral bioavailability of digoxin by altering the gastrointestinal flora that metabolize digoxin to less active dihydro metabolites, thus leading to increased serum digoxin concentrations and possible digoxin toxicity in select patients stabilized on digoxin therapy. This interaction may be of clinical importance in up to 10% of the population. Currently, the orally administered erythromycin, clarithromycin, and roxithromycin have been implicated. Although realistically this interaction may be encountered rarely, when it does occur, it can be of clinical significance.
BACKGROUND: Digoxin is widely used in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF). OBJECTIVES: The goal of this paper was to explore whether digoxin use was independently associated with increased mortality in patients with AF and if the association was modified by heart failure and/or serum digoxin concentration. METHODS: The association between digoxin use and mortality was assessed in 17,897 patients by using a propensity score-adjusted analysis and in new digoxin users during the trial versus propensity score-matched control participants. The authors investigated the independent association between serum digoxin concentration and mortality after multivariable adjustment. RESULTS: At baseline, 5,824 (32.5%) patients were receiving digoxin. Baseline digoxin use was not associated with an increased risk of death (adjusted hazard ratio [HR]: 1.09; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.96 to 1.23; p = 0.19). However, patients with a serum digoxin concentration >/=1.2 ng/ml had a 56% increased hazard of mortality (adjusted HR: 1.56; 95% CI: 1.20 to 2.04) compared with those not on digoxin. When analyzed as a continuous variable, serum digoxin concentration was associated with a 19% higher adjusted hazard of death for each 0.5-ng/ml increase (p = 0.0010); these results were similar for patients with and without heart failure. Compared with propensity score-matched control participants, the risk of death (adjusted HR: 1.78; 95% CI: 1.37 to 2.31) and sudden death (adjusted HR: 2.14; 95% CI: 1.11 to 4.12) was significantly higher in new digoxin users. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with AF taking digoxin, the risk of death was independently related to serum digoxin concentration and was highest in patients with concentrations >/=1.2 ng/ml. Initiating digoxin was independently associated with higher mortality in patients with AF, regardless of heart failure.
The use of digoxin in the therapy of systolic heart failure and certain supraventricular tachycardias is controversial. This review of the art and science of digoxin presents information needed by physicians considering digoxin therapy for these common cardiovascular disorders.
IMPORTANCE: There is little evidence to support selection of heart rate control therapy in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation, in particular those with coexisting heart failure. OBJECTIVE: To compare low-dose digoxin with bisoprolol (a beta-blocker). DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Randomized, open-label, blinded end-point clinical trial including 160 patients aged 60 years or older with permanent atrial fibrillation (defined as no plan to restore sinus rhythm) and dyspnea classified as New York Heart Association class II or higher. Patients were recruited from 3 hospitals and primary care practices in England from 2016 through 2018; last follow-up occurred in October 2019. INTERVENTIONS: Digoxin (n = 80; dose range, 62.5-250 mug/d; mean dose, 161 mug/d) or bisoprolol (n = 80; dose range, 1.25-15 mg/d; mean dose, 3.2 mg/d). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was patient-reported quality of life using the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey physical component summary score (SF-36 PCS) at 6 months (higher scores are better; range, 0-100), with a minimal clinically important difference of 0.5 SD. There were 17 secondary end points (including resting heart rate, modified European Heart Rhythm Association [EHRA] symptom classification, and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide [NT-proBNP] level) at 6 months, 20 end points at 12 months, and adverse event (AE) reporting. RESULTS: Among 160 patients (mean age, 76 [SD, 8] years; 74 [46%] women; mean baseline heart rate, 100/min [SD, 18/min]), 145 (91%) completed the trial and 150 (94%) were included in the analysis for the primary outcome. There was no significant difference in the primary outcome of normalized SF-36 PCS at 6 months (mean, 31.9 [SD, 11.7] for digoxin vs 29.7 [11.4] for bisoprolol; adjusted mean difference, 1.4 [95% CI, -1.1 to 3.8]; P = .28). Of the 17 secondary outcomes at 6 months, there were no significant between-group differences for 16 outcomes, including resting heart rate (a mean of 76.9/min [SD, 12.1/min] with digoxin vs a mean of 74.8/min [SD, 11.6/min] with bisoprolol; difference, 1.5/min [95% CI, -2.0 to 5.1/min]; P = .40). The modified EHRA class was significantly different between groups at 6 months; 53% of patients in the digoxin group reported a 2-class improvement vs 9% of patients in the bisoprolol group (adjusted odds ratio, 10.3 [95% CI, 4.0 to 26.6]; P < .001). At 12 months, 8 of 20 outcomes were significantly different (all favoring digoxin), with a median NT-proBNP level of 960 pg/mL (interquartile range, 626 to 1531 pg/mL) in the digoxin group vs 1250 pg/mL (interquartile range, 847 to 1890 pg/mL) in the bisoprolol group (ratio of geometric means, 0.77 [95% CI, 0.64 to 0.92]; P = .005). Adverse events were less common with digoxin; 20 patients (25%) in the digoxin group had at least 1 AE vs 51 patients (64%) in the bisoprolol group (P < .001). There were 29 treatment-related AEs and 16 serious AEs in the digoxin group vs 142 and 37, respectively, in the bisoprolol group. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with permanent atrial fibrillation and symptoms of heart failure treated with low-dose digoxin or bisoprolol, there was no statistically significant difference in quality of life at 6 months. These findings support potentially basing decisions about treatment on other end points. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02391337 and clinicaltrialsregister.eu Identifier: 2015-005043-13.
Digoxin has been used for more than 50 years in patients with Atrial Fibrillation (AF), with the goal of Controlling Heart Rate (HR) and restoring sinus rhythm. In the last two decades, several studies have correlated therapeutic use of digoxin with increased mortality. However, such studies have potential biases that cannot be disregarded, mainly because they are cross-sectional experiments or post-hoc analyses of Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs). Despite uncertainties regarding the safety of digoxin in this setting, it remains one of the most prescribed drugs for AF worldwide. On the other hand, the absence of any RCTs designed to evaluate mortality makes a definitive conclusion more difficult to reach; therefore, this medication must be used with care. In this review, we explored the therapeutic use of digoxin in the context of AF, discussed mortality data by means of critical analysis in the light of the best available evidence, and position ourselves in relation to more rigorous control of serum levels of this drug in daily practice.
An increase in serum digoxin concentration occurs in 90% of patients given quinidine. On average, the serum digoxin doubles during treatment with therapeutic doses of quinidine. Almost every patient treated with quinidine will have a decrease in the renal clearance of digoxin and many will have a decrease in the volume of distribution of digoxin. Whether changes in the inotropic effect of digoxin occur during concurrent quinidine administration is an unsettled area. However, gastrointestinal and cardiac toxicity, which closely resemble digitalis toxicity, often occur when quinidine causes the serum digoxin concentration to rise. These effects subside when the digoxin dose is reduced. Therefore it is prudent to monitor serum digoxin concentrations during concomitant quinidine treatment and to adjust the digoxin dose according to the results. When the toxicity is severe or dose adjustment is difficult, another antiarrhythmic drug should be selected.
Digoxin remains one of the oldest therapies for heart failure; however, its safety and efficacy have been controversial since its initial use. Questions that remain include the clinical efficacy of digoxin when added to contemporary medical therapy, when and if it should be added, and how to minimize adverse effects. In this review, we will summarize recent data on the use of digoxin in systolic heart failure and address some of the controversies regarding the role of digoxin in the modern era of heart failure treatment.
Accidental poisoning or overdoses occur frequently in children. These are difficult to recognise because young children cannot communicate their symptoms; this means that specific symptoms can be missed, which can delay the diagnosis. A 5-month-old boy was accidently given a tenfold dose of digoxin for 5 days. He developed feeding difficulties, vomiting, weight loss, elevated urea and creatinine levels, hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia and ECG abnormalities. The digoxin plasma concentration was 7.6 microg/l. The patient was given digoxin antibodies, following which the digoxin concentration was < 0.3 microg/l; 12 hours later the digoxin concentration was 3.1 microg/l as a result of redistribution; 2 days after the administration of digoxin antibodies the plasma concentration was within the therapeutic range.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: A number of recent observational analyses have assessed clinical outcomes associated with digoxin use in patients with atrial fibrillation. In this review, we review these data and provide suggestions on the contemporary use of digoxin in patients with atrial fibrillation as supported by the recent evidence. RECENT FINDINGS: Observational data from clinical trials and registries have provided variable results on the safety and efficacy of chronic digoxin use in patients with atrial fibrillation. In general, results have been consistent with an associated increase in adverse clinical outcomes with digoxin use in atrial fibrillation patients without heart failure. In atrial fibrillation patients with heart failure, while the weight of evidence suggested an associated risk with digoxin therapy, the results are inconsistent. In patients with atrial fibrillation without heart failure, digoxin should generally be avoided. In atrial fibrillation patients with heart failure, digoxin should generally be reserved for patients that do not achieve adequate rate control or are not tolerant of other rate control therapies.
Digoxin therapy has no effect on mortality in heart failure. Digoxin may be useful for maintaining clinical stability and exercise capacity in patients with symptomatic heart failure. Digoxin appears to be of most benefit in patients with severe heart failure, cardiomegaly and a third heart sound. Digoxin should be used as a second-line drug after diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and beta-blockers in patients with congestive heart failure who are in sinus rhythm. Digoxin should be used as a first-line drug in patients with congestive heart failure who are in atrial fibrillation. ARRHYTHMIAS: Digoxin has a limited, but useful, role, either alone or in combination with other agents such as beta-blockers, diltiazem or verapamil, in achieving satisfactory resting ventricular rate control in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation. In patients who lead a predominantly sedentary lifestyle (perhaps particularly in those who are elderly), digoxin alone may be the agent of choice.
Digoxin is the oldest cardiac medication used in contemporary medicine. With a complex pharmacokinetic profile and narrow therapeutic index, its use in managing patients with atrial arrhythmias or heart failure can present a challenge to today's clinicians. Digoxin dosing based on patient-specific factors such as age, lean body weight, and renal function will allow practitioners to minimize drug toxicity while maintaining clinical efficacy. The ability to recognize digoxin overdose, which can manifest in both the acute and chronic settings, helps guide the appropriate dosing of digoxin immune globulins to reverse toxicity. Understanding this unique medication is essential for clinicians to ensure digoxin is used safely and effectively in practice.
Although digoxin remains one of the most widely prescribed drugs in the United States, potential pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic interactions between this compound and other drugs, diseases, and events commonly encountered in the perioperative period remain largely unappreciated. Furthermore, the therapeutic benefit of discontinuing or initiating digoxin treatment preoperatively remains unclear. We present a basic review of current knowledge regarding digoxin pharmacology and examine those concepts from the perspective of clinical anesthesiologists.
The authors report about a patient who was admitted after developing nausea, vomiting, change in vision and lethargy. She was on digoxin 250 mcg once daily among all her other medications in the wake of a recent stroke that was accompanied by atrial fibrillation (AF). Her digitalis levels shortly before and on admission were 3.4 and 2.9 ng/ml, respectively. Her admission rhythm was slowly conducted AF at an average of 35 bpm. After a careful assessment by the cardiology consultant in charge, she received Digibind infusion for a chronic digitalis toxicity with the digoxin immune Fab dose based on the formula recommended in the product literature.(3) A few days observation on the ward ensured that her resting heart rate rose to 65 bpm and that she did not need a pacemaker for a slow AF. Her functional status remained reasonably good as she enjoyed a satisfactory recovery postthrombolysis for her recent stroke.
Digoxin and other low doses of drugs that have inotropic properties may have an important role to play in the therapy of patients with chronic heart failure. There is convincing evidence that digoxin is effective in relieving the signs and symptoms of heart failure due to systolic dysfunction. While earlier results with some of the other agents have been disappointing, recent data suggest that a reevaluation of these agents is necessary. There is now compelling evidence that lower doses of these agents may be clinically useful without necessarily having any significant hemodynamic effects. The recent experience with vesnarinone is especially promising in showing that therapy with these agents may improve survival in addition to improving clinical status. It is becoming recognized that hemodynamic activity should not necessarily be a prerequisite for clinical utility for those agents. The neuroendocrine and electrophysiologic effects of many of these agents, including digitalis, remain incompletely characterized and may play an important role in their therapeutic benefit. It appears that certain drugs that have inotropic properties may be effective only when their inotropic effects are not readily demonstrated. Further research into the appropriate mechanisms of action and proper dosing of these drugs may lead to a renewed interest in the use of positive inotropes for chronic heart failure.
The serum digoxin concentration increased in 25 of 27 study patients (93%), and the mean serum digoxin concentration rose from 1.4 ng/ml to 3.2 ng/ml during quinidine therapy. Anorexia, nausea, or vomiting developed in 16 patients (59%) but disappeared in all ten patients for whom the digoxin dose alone was reduced, suggesting that digoxin excess caused these symptoms. Ventricular premature depolarizations developed in three patients after starting quinidine therapy; ventricular tachycardia developed in one patient, and another died suddenly. When starting quinidine therapy in patients who are taking digoxin, the clinical course, ECG, and serum digoxin level should be followed closely.
The current extensive use of digoxin in elderly patients with left ventricular failure and sinus rhythm may not be clinically justifiable; in a significant proportion of these patients the frequency of digitalis toxicity may outweight the therapeutic benefits of the drug. When digoxin is used in elderly patients, the specific geriatric pharmacology of the drug must be considered. Clinical benefit should be documented before proceeding to long-term maintenance therapy. In selected elderly patients, withdrawal of digoxin with careful follow-up may be a worthwhile procedure. Studies are needed comparing the relative benefits and toxicities of digoxin versus diuretics in the management of heart failure in the elderly.
A case of digoxin poisoning following the co-administration of digoxin and clarithromycin in a 28 year old male is described. Since the aetiology of chronic digoxin poisoning is often unclear, clinicians should be aware of the potential drug-drug interaction between digoxin and clarithromycin.
Recommendations for correct therapy with digoxin from twenty-five sources are reviewed. Some recommendations may be unsuitable for use with high bioavailability tablets; some are accompanied by insufficient data relating to factors affecting both the response to digoxin and its handling by the body. Guidelines based on pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic principles are suggested to help decide optimal digoxin treatment schedules in the presence and absence of non-cardiac disease.
In patients with heart failure and atrial fibrillation cardiac glycosides, generally in combination with beta-blockers, are indicated to control ventricular rate. In systolic heart failure and sinus rhythm, however, the use of digitalis continues to be debated. There are special concerns that cardiac glycosides might lead to an increased mortality rate in women. Retrospective analyses, however, do not indicate any sex-based differences in the effectiveness of cardiac glycosides. Beneficial effects of cardiac glycosides in heart failure seem to be related to the attenuation of sympathetic activation and neurohumoral alterations, which is already obtained at low digoxin serum concentrations, while high serum levels are associated with increased mortality. Therefore, in patients with sinus rhythm who remain symptomatic under an optimized therapy with ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and diuretics in addition to digitalis should be considered regardless of the gender. However, target serum digoxin concentrations should be low in a range of 0.5 to 0.8 ng/ml.
