Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, inflammatory, systemic autoimmune disease, affecting the joints with varying severity among patients. The risk factors include age, gender, genetics, and environmental exposure (cigarette smoking, air pollutants, and occupational). Many complications can follow, such as permanent joint damage requiring arthroplasty, rheumatoid vasculitis, and Felty syndrome requiring splenectomy if it remains unaddressed. As there is no cure for RA, the treatment goals are to reduce the pain and stop/slow further damage. Here, we present a brief summary of various past and present treatment modalities to address the complications associated with RA.
Takayasu arteritis (TAK) is a challenging chronic, granulomatous, large-vessel systemic vasculitis, mostly due to difficulties in early diagnosis and assessing actual disease activity. Since there are no specific diagnostic laboratory tests, biomarkers, or autoantibodies, many patients experience considerable delay in diagnosis. Remembering the possibility of TAK together with the use of acute phase responses and appropriate imaging studies may be helpful for early diagnosis. Since there may be discrepancies between systemic and vascular wall inflammation, using only acute phase responses is not reliable in assessing current disease activity. Therefore, physical examination and new imaging findings should also be used to assess current disease activity. Despite its limitations, the Indian Takayasu Clinical Activity Score (ITAS2010) may also be helpful for this purpose. The rationale of medical treatment is to suppress both vascular and systemic inflammation with appropriate systemic immunosuppression, including corticosteroids and conventional immunosuppressive agents. In cases of refractory disease activity, leflunomide and biologic agents such as TNF inhibitors and tocilizumab may be tried. In selected cases with persistent lesions that cannot be reversed with medical treatment, endovascular interventions including balloon angioplasty, stent and stent graft replacement, or surgery may be tried. However, such procedures should be performed after suppression of inflammation, i.e. during inactive disease. Prognosis of TAK is probably getting better with lower mortality rates reported in recent years, probably due to the use of more effective medical treatments as well as the use of endovascular interventions when necessary and available.
Leflunomide is an oral disease-modifying antirheumatic drug administered to patients with rheumatoid and psoriatic arthritis. This drug inhibits dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, an enzyme critical in the production of intracellular pyrimidines, and down-regulates tumor necrosis factor-alfa activity. Leflunomide has demonstrated usefulness in treating cutaneous psoriasis along with other dermatologic and rheumatologic conditions.
Mitochondrial dynamics orchestrate many essential cellular functions, including metabolism, which is instrumental in promoting cancer growth and metastatic progression. However, how mitochondrial dynamics influences metastatic progression remains poorly understood. Here, we show that breast cancer cells with low metastatic potential exhibit a more fused mitochondrial network compared to highly metastatic cells. To study the impact of mitochondrial dynamics on metastasis, we promoted mitochondrial elongation in metastatic breast cancer cells by individual genetic deletion of three key regulators of mitochondrial fission (Drp1, Fis1, Mff) or by pharmacological intervention with leflunomide. Omics analyses revealed that mitochondrial elongation causes substantial alterations in metabolic pathways and processes related to cell adhesion. In vivo, enhanced mitochondrial elongation by loss of mitochondrial fission mediators or treatment with leflunomide notably reduced metastasis formation. Furthermore, the transcriptomic signature associated with elongated mitochondria correlated with improved clinical outcome in patients with breast cancer. Overall, our findings highlight mitochondrial dynamics as a potential therapeutic target in breast cancer.
Leflunomide (Arava) was approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis by the regulatory authorities in the US and Europe in 1998. This approval was based on three pivotal randomised clinical trials conducted in the US and Europe. This report will focus on the use of leflunomide in rheumatoid arthritis based on the data from these trials as well information on the efficacy and safety learned from post release clinical experience.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and side effects of methotrexate and leflunomide in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) as the first disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD). METHODS: We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical studies that included patients who took methotrexate, leflunomide, placebo or another DMARD for RA treatment. A systematic review yielded 1971 articles from databases; once completely reviewed, 73 trials that completed inclusion criteria were selected. In structured workshops for discussion and assessment of each article, 6 could be meta-analyzed for the primary and secondary outcomes: achievement of American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 20 and its core set components; and change of serum C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, Health Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index (HAQ-Di), liver enzyme aspartate transaminase/alanine transaminase ratio, new gastrointestinal (GI) side effects and infections. RESULTS: A total of 1984 patients were included: 986 took leflunomide and 998 methotrexate. The probability of achieving ACR 20 had an odds ratio (OR) of 0.88 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.74, 1.06) with a trend toward favoring methotrexate; reduction of the swollen joint count was greater for methotrexate: mean difference=0.82 (95%CI 0.24, 1.39); tender joint count, physician global assessment, HAQ-Di, and serum CRP levels revealed no significant difference between groups. Increased liver enzymes were more frequent in the leflunomide group, OR=0.38 (95%CI 0.27, 0.53), and new GI complaints were more common with methotrexate (OR=1.44; 95%CI 1.17, 1.79). There was no difference in the incidence of non-severe infections. CONCLUSION: Leflunomide used as the first DMARD in RA seemed to be as efficacious as methotrexate; only the reduction of swollen joint count was more marked for methotrexate. Leflunomide was linked to a greater increase in liver enzymes, but there were fewer GI complaints.
Leflunomide, an inhibitor of dihydroorotase dehydrogenase and thereby pyrimidine synthesis, was approved for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in 1998. During the following years, leflunomide was used in various preclinical studies as a potential cancer treatment; at the same time, more mechanisms underlying the anticancer effect of leflunomide were identified. Thus, leflunomide has been identified as a potent anticancer drug. This article summarizes the mechanisms as well as results of leflunomide in the evolving field of cancer therapy.
INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) can spontaneously improve during pregnancy. However, a considerable proportion of patients can experience a flare and high disease activity has been associated with an increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcome. Thus, the treatment of RA in pregnant women should be selected taking into account both the potential harmful effects of the treatment and the risk associated with discontinuation. AREAS COVERED: Recent publications regarding safety of the most important disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) during pregnancy has been reviewed. A systematic literature search of MEDLINE was conducted using pregnancy, teratogenicity, adverse effects, embryo/foetal-toxicity as key search terms for each DMARD. EXPERT OPINION: A great body of evidence suggest that hydroxychloroquine, sulfasalazine, and non-fluorinated steroids can be continued throughout pregnancy, while methotrexate and leflunomide should be discontinued 3 months before pregnancy. Continuation of TNFi during the first part of pregnancy should be considered when benefits outweigh the potential risk of teratogenicity. Data regarding other biologics are scant and, at present, they should be stopped before pregnancy.
Leflunomide, a new immunomodulatory agent, was prescribed to a 67-year-old female patient with rheumatoid arthritis. Fifteen days later she developed diarrhoea and elevated liver enzymes. A liver biopsy showed a pattern of acute hepatitis. The patient was homozygous for the rare CYP2C9*3 allele, which determines the slowest metabolic rate for CYP2C9 enzymatic activity, that is probably involved in the metabolism of leflunomide. Liver damage subsided in few weeks. This case illustrates the risk of hepatotoxicity by leflunomide and suggests that it is possibly related to CYP2C9 polymorphism.
Glucocorticoids (GC) remain the gold standard of the treatment of giant cell arteritis provided objectives of GC-tapering are accurately followed: 15 to 20mg/day at 3 months, 10mg/day at 6 months, 5mg/day at 9-12 months and withdrawal between 12 and 18 months. In case of corticodependance at >/=7.5 mg/day of prednisone or intolerance to GC, a GCsparing therapy has to be introduced, mainly methotrexate or tocilizumab. Individual characteristics of each patient, data about the efficacy of the treatment, its cost and how easy the follow-up under this treatment is are important factors to consider for choosing the right GC-sparing therapy. For all these reasons, except particular situations, we prefer using methotrexate before tocilizumab. Prevention of cardiovascular events is an important aspect of the treatment of GCA. We recommend using aspirin (75-100mg/day) during the first month of treatment or longer in case of occurrence of an ischemic complication. Each patient treated for GCA should receive a prevention of osteoporosis with respect of usual recommendations.
Leflunomide (LEF) is a prodrug that is rapidly converted to its active metabolite A77 1726, that inhibits the novo pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis, mediated especially by the dihydroorotate dehidrogenase (DHODH). DMARD properties were documented in rheumatoid arthritis with efficacy, safety and limiting of radiological progression demonstrated in multiple studies. LEF has been also used in other autoimmune diseases, like Psoriatic Arthritis, Wegener granulomatosis, Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Sarcoidosis and others. This article reviews the place of LEF in clinical practice and outlines its potential applications beyond the officially recognized indication: rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Leflunomide (LEF) is a well-known disease-modifying anti-rheumatic agent (DMARDs) that was approved in 1998 for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) management. It is enzymatically converted into active metabolite teriflunomide (TER) inside the body. LEF and TER possess several pharmacological effects in a variety of diseases including multiple sclerosis, cancer, viral infections and neurobehavioral brain disorders. Despite the aforementioned pharmacological effects exploring these effects in nanomedicine applications has been focused mainly on RA and cancer treatment. This review summarises the main pharmacological, and pharmacokinetic effects of LEF along with highlighting the applications of nanoencapsulation of LEF and its metabolite in different diseases.
Leflunomide, a new oral immunomodulatory agent, is effective for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Its mechanism of action in suppressing inflammation is based in its inhibition of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, an enzyme responsible for de novo synthesis of pyrimidine containing ribonucleotides. It is the first disease-modifying antirheumatic drug approved for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with an indication for retardation of joint damage by radiography. Side effects are generally mild and include diarrhea, rashes, reversible alopecia, and elevation of hepatic transaminases. Despite the concern about hepatotoxicity, combination use with methotrexate in treating patients with rheumatoid arthritis has been shown to be safe. Other autoimmune diseases in which leflunomide has been used successfully include Felty syndrome, vasculitis, Sjogren syndrome, Wegener granulomatosis, and bullous pemphigoid.
Leflunomide (Arava), Aventis Pharmaceuticals) is an immunomodulating drug that interferes with the metabolism of pyrimidine by inhibiting dihydro-orotate dehydrogenase (DHO-DH) in mitochondria, thereby blocking T- and B cell proliferation. Antibody production is also affected by DHO-DH blockade. Other immunomodulatory effects of leflunomide have also been reported. Symptomatic and structural effects of leflunomide in active rheumatoid arthritis have been strictly evaluated by double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled studies that were aimed at validating its use in rheumatoid arthritis. Further trials are now required to confirm efficacy and safety of this drug in combination with other agents.
Leflunomide is a new immunosuppressive medicine that has been effectively used in the therapy of rheumatoid arthritis and subsequently used with success in animal models and patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). However, its use has also been associated with significant and serious adverse reactions involving hematological, hepatic, immune, dermatological and respiratory systems. In the current review, we attempt to describe the two sides of this drug in the treatment of SLE.
Drug-induced aseptic meningitis is uncommon and occurs primarily in patients with autoimmune disease. We report the first known case of leflunomide-induced aseptic meningitis, in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis.
Leflunomide, an isoxazole derivative, is a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug. It has successfully been used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis as a feasible alternative to methotrexate. Recently, leflunomide has been used in certain dermatologic conditions. Medline/PubMed search revealed only 201 articles of its application in dermatologic conditions, of which 21 were relevant for inclusion. Prime mode of action of leflunomide is through the inhibition of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, a key enzyme in the de novo pyrimidine synthesis pathway used by lymphocytes for clonal expansion. The current level of evidence and strength of recommendation suggest its use in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. However, the use of leflunomide in severe atopic dermatitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Wegener's granulomatosis, primary Sjogren's syndrome, bullous pemphigoid, dermatomyositis, sarcoidosis and systemic sclerosis still requires further evaluation.
Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the most prevalent pathological cancer occurring in the head and neck area. Progress has previously been made regarding treatment strategies of OSCC, however the 5‑year survival rate of these patients is only 50%. The present study examined if leflunomide (LEF), a drug primarily used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, exhibited antitumor effects in OSCC. The results demonstrated that LEF inhibited cell proliferation and blocked the cell cycle at the S phase in OSCC cells, with upregulation of cyclin A protein expression. LEF reduced the expression of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, which is an essential enzyme in the de novo pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway. LEF additionally inhibited colony formation in soft agar and reduced tumor growth in a xenograft model. The results suggested that LEF may act as a potential therapeutic agent in the treatment of OSCC in the future.
INTRODUCTION: Noninfectious aortitis has been increasingly reported worldwide with a growing prevalence in western medicine. Attributed to our increasingly diverse population, western surgeons must be vigilant to promptly differentiate these cases from its more common infectious counterpart in order to ensure subsequent appropriate management of these patients. METHODS: We present a case report of a 71-year-old Indo-Caribbean male who presented with nonspecific abdominal and back pain, found to have aortitis of a noninfectious etiology.Results and conclusion: While our patient's process was ultimately managed without surgical intervention, the varied clinical presentation along with the lack of specific laboratory markers pose a challenge for surgeons to appropriately diagnose and manage aortitis. Appropriate diagnostic imaging, the utilization of a multidisciplinary team, and close patient monitoring are key components for effective management of this increasingly prevalent disease process.
Leflunomide is a low-molecular weight, synthetic, oral agent specifically developed for immunosuppression. Because of activity in animal models, leflunomide was tested in rheumatoid arthritis(RA). These investigations have demonstrated that leflunomide reduces the clinical symptoms and signs of RA, improves health related quality of life, and retards structural damage. Leflunomide has been evaluated in RA patients as monotherapy and in combination with methotrexate. Close monitoring for adverse events with particular attention for monitoring liver enzymes for hepatic toxicity is important during treatment with leflunomide.
