BACKGROUND: A phase 2 study showed that progression-free survival was longer with palbociclib plus letrozole than with letrozole alone in the initial treatment of postmenopausal women with estrogen-receptor (ER)-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative advanced breast cancer. We performed a phase 3 study that was designed to confirm and expand the efficacy and safety data for palbociclib plus letrozole for this indication. METHODS: In this double-blind study, we randomly assigned, in a 2:1 ratio, 666 postmenopausal women with ER-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer, who had not had prior treatment for advanced disease, to receive palbociclib plus letrozole or placebo plus letrozole. The primary end point was progression-free survival, as assessed by the investigators; secondary end points were overall survival, objective response, clinical benefit response, patient-reported outcomes, pharmacokinetic effects, and safety. RESULTS: The median progression-free survival was 24.8 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 22.1 to not estimable) in the palbociclib-letrozole group, as compared with 14.5 months (95% CI, 12.9 to 17.1) in the placebo-letrozole group (hazard ratio for disease progression or death, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.46 to 0.72; P<0.001). The most common grade 3 or 4 adverse events were neutropenia (occurring in 66.4% of the patients in the palbociclib-letrozole group vs. 1.4% in the placebo-letrozole group), leukopenia (24.8% vs. 0%), anemia (5.4% vs. 1.8%), and fatigue (1.8% vs. 0.5%). Febrile neutropenia was reported in 1.8% of patients in the palbociclib-letrozole group and in none of the patients in the placebo-letrozole group. Permanent discontinuation of any study treatment as a result of adverse events occurred in 43 patients (9.7%) in the palbociclib-letrozole group and in 13 patients (5.9%) in the placebo-letrozole group. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with previously untreated ER-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer, palbociclib combined with letrozole resulted in significantly longer progression-free survival than that with letrozole alone, although the rates of myelotoxic effects were higher with palbociclib-letrozole. (Funded by Pfizer; PALOMA-2 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01740427 .).
BACKGROUND: Ribociclib has been shown to have a significant overall survival benefit in patients with hormone receptor (HR)-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative advanced breast cancer. Whether this benefit in advanced breast cancer extends to early breast cancer is unclear. METHODS: In this international, open-label, randomized, phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned patients with HR-positive, HER2-negative early breast cancer in a 1:1 ratio to receive ribociclib (at a dose of 400 mg per day for 3 weeks, followed by 1 week off, for 3 years) plus a nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor (NSAI; letrozole at a dose of 2.5 mg per day or anastrozole at a dose of 1 mg per day for >/=5 years) or an NSAI alone. Premenopausal women and men also received goserelin every 28 days. Eligible patients had anatomical stage II or III breast cancer. Here we report the results of a prespecified interim analysis of invasive disease-free survival, the primary end point; other efficacy and safety results are also reported. Invasive disease-free survival was evaluated with the use of the Kaplan-Meier method. The statistical comparison was made with the use of a stratified log-rank test, with a protocol-specified stopping boundary of a one-sided P-value threshold of 0.0128 for superior efficacy. RESULTS: As of the data-cutoff date for this prespecified interim analysis (January 11, 2023), a total of 426 patients had had invasive disease, recurrence, or death. A significant invasive disease-free survival benefit was seen with ribociclib plus an NSAI as compared with an NSAI alone. At 3 years, invasive disease-free survival was 90.4% with ribociclib plus an NSAI and 87.1% with an NSAI alone (hazard ratio for invasive disease, recurrence, or death, 0.75; 95% confidence interval, 0.62 to 0.91; P = 0.003). Secondary end points - distant disease-free survival and recurrence-free survival - also favored ribociclib plus an NSAI. The 3-year regimen of ribociclib at a 400-mg starting dose plus an NSAI was not associated with any new safety signals. CONCLUSIONS: Ribociclib plus an NSAI significantly improved invasive disease-free survival among patients with HR-positive, HER2-negative stage II or III early breast cancer. (Funded by Novartis; NATALEE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03701334.).
This review describes the current evidence regarding the putative indications of letrozole (LTZ) in fertility treatment. Prior to intrauterine insemination, LTZ is recommended in women with normogonadotrophic oligo-anovulation. In ovulatory women, LTZ is equal to clomiphene and may be used instead of exogenous gonadotrophin. LTZ may be used as co-treatment in poor responders prior to in vitro fertilization/intracytoplasmic sperm injection. In addition, LTZ prior to frozen-thawed embryo transfer is increasingly used in women with normogonadotrophic oligo-anovulation.
Letrozole, an aromatase inhibitor that blocks estrogen synthesis by inhibiting the final step of the estrogen biosynthetic pathway, has been used in the applications of a wide range of infertility settings. It has been more than 20 years since the initial clinical trial of letrozole for ovulation induction. In light of the accumulating clinical and basic evidence, the efficacy and safety of letrozole have been identified. This mini review focuses on our current knowledge of the applications and mechanisms of letrozole for female infertility and various questions are put forward about how letrozole could be more effectively used.
The highly active estrogen metabolism and receptor protein expression are to blame for the elevated breast cancer (BC) rate in post-menopausal women. Letrozole is a powerful endocrine medication that targets and inhibits the aromatase, often known as an aromatase inhibitor (AI). It aids in the adjuvant, neoadjuvant, and metastatic treatment of HR+ breast cancer because it can boost FSH production for ovulation induction. It has recently been used in infertile pre-menopausal women. The main advantages of utilizing letrozole to enhance follicle development may be wasted in current infertility treatments. We went into great length in this review about the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and distinct adverse effects of the drug on the heart, kidney, liver, embryo, bone, and ovary. It also causes apoptosis, necrosis, and fibrosis, which all result in the demise of cancer cells. Its central and peripheral effects on follicle formation, estrogen production in the ovaries, and their clinical implications are explored in detail in this work.
BACKGROUND: The inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) could potentially overcome or delay resistance to endocrine therapy in advanced breast cancer that is positive for hormone receptor (HR) and negative for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). METHODS: In this randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial, we evaluated the efficacy and safety of the selective CDK4/6 inhibitor ribociclib combined with letrozole for first-line treatment in 668 postmenopausal women with HR-positive, HER2-negative recurrent or metastatic breast cancer who had not received previous systemic therapy for advanced disease. We randomly assigned the patients to receive either ribociclib (600 mg per day on a 3-weeks-on, 1-week-off schedule) plus letrozole (2.5 mg per day) or placebo plus letrozole. The primary end point was investigator-assessed progression-free survival. Secondary end points included overall survival, overall response rate, and safety. A preplanned interim analysis was performed on January 29, 2016, after 243 patients had disease progression or died. Prespecified criteria for superiority required a hazard ratio of 0.56 or less with P<1.29x10(-5). RESULTS: The duration of progression-free survival was significantly longer in the ribociclib group than in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.43 to 0.72; P=3.29x10(-6) for superiority). The median duration of follow-up was 15.3 months. After 18 months, the progression-free survival rate was 63.0% (95% confidence interval [CI], 54.6 to 70.3) in the ribociclib group and 42.2% (95% CI, 34.8 to 49.5) in the placebo group. In patients with measurable disease at baseline, the overall response rate was 52.7% and 37.1%, respectively (P<0.001). Common grade 3 or 4 adverse events that were reported in more than 10% of the patients in either group were neutropenia (59.3% in the ribociclib group vs. 0.9% in the placebo group) and leukopenia (21.0% vs. 0.6%); the rates of discontinuation because of adverse events were 7.5% and 2.1%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients receiving initial systemic treatment for HR-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer, the duration of progression-free survival was significantly longer among those receiving ribociclib plus letrozole than among those receiving placebo plus letrozole, with a higher rate of myelosuppression in the ribociclib group. (Funded by Novartis Pharmaceuticals; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01958021 .).
BACKGROUND: In a previous analysis of this phase 3 trial, first-line ribociclib plus letrozole resulted in significantly longer progression-free survival than letrozole alone among postmenopausal patients with hormone receptor (HR)-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative advanced breast cancer. Whether overall survival would also be longer with ribociclib was not known. METHODS: Here we report the results of the protocol-specified final analysis of overall survival, a key secondary end point. Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive either ribociclib or placebo in combination with letrozole. Overall survival was assessed with the use of a stratified log-rank test and summarized with the use of Kaplan-Meier methods after 400 deaths had occurred. A hierarchical testing strategy was used for the analysis of progression-free survival and overall survival to ensure the validity of the findings. RESULTS: After a median follow-up of 6.6 years, 181 deaths had occurred among 334 patients (54.2%) in the ribociclib group and 219 among 334 (65.6%) in the placebo group. Ribociclib plus letrozole showed a significant overall survival benefit as compared with placebo plus letrozole. Median overall survival was 63.9 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 52.4 to 71.0) with ribociclib plus letrozole and 51.4 months (95% CI, 47.2 to 59.7) with placebo plus letrozole (hazard ratio for death, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.63 to 0.93; two-sided P = 0.008). No new safety signals were observed. CONCLUSIONS: First-line therapy with ribociclib plus letrozole showed a significant overall survival benefit as compared with placebo plus letrozole in patients with HR-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer. Median overall survival was more than 12 months longer with ribociclib than with placebo. (Funded by Novartis; MONALEESA-2 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01958021.).
BACKGROUND: In MONARCH 2, the addition of abemaciclib to fulvestrant significantly improved both progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) in patients with hormone receptor-positive (HR+), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-) advanced breast cancer (ABC) with disease progression on prior endocrine therapy. In MONARCH 3, the addition of abemaciclib to a nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor (NSAI) as initial therapy for HR+, HER2- ABC significantly improved PFS. Here, we present the prespecified final OS results for MONARCH 3. PATIENTS AND METHODS: MONARCH 3 is a randomized, double-blind, phase III study of abemaciclib plus NSAI (anastrozole or letrozole) versus placebo plus NSAI in postmenopausal women with HR+, HER2- ABC without prior systemic therapy in the advanced setting. The primary objective was investigator-assessed PFS; OS was a gated secondary endpoint, and chemotherapy-free survival was an exploratory endpoint. RESULTS: A total of 493 women were randomized 2 : 1 to receive abemaciclib plus NSAI (n = 328) or placebo plus NSAI (n = 165). After a median follow-up of 8.1 years, there were 198 OS events (60.4%) in the abemaciclib arm and 116 (70.3%) in the placebo arm (hazard ratio, 0.804; 95% confidence interval 0.637-1.015; P = 0.0664, non-significant). Median OS was 66.8 versus 53.7 months for abemaciclib versus placebo. In the subgroup with visceral disease, there were 113 OS events (65.3%) in the abemaciclib arm and 65 (72.2%) in the placebo arm (hazard ratio, 0.758; 95% confidence interval 0.558-1.030; P = 0.0757, non-significant). Median OS was 63.7 months versus 48.8 months for abemaciclib versus placebo. The previously demonstrated PFS benefit was sustained, and chemotherapy-free survival numerically improved with the addition of abemaciclib. No new safety signals were observed. CONCLUSIONS: Abemaciclib combined with an NSAI resulted in clinically meaningful improvement in median OS (intent-to-treat population: 13.1 months; subgroup with visceral disease: 14.9 months) in patients with HR+ HER2- ABC; however, statistical significance was not reached.
BACKGROUND: In MONALEESA-2, ribociclib plus letrozole showed improved progression-free survival compared with letrozole alone as first-line treatment for postmenopausal patients with hormone receptor (HR)-positive, HER2-negative, advanced breast cancer. MONALEESA-7 aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of ribociclib plus endocrine therapy in premenopausal women with advanced, HR-positive breast cancer. METHODS: This phase 3, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was done at 188 centres in 30 countries. Eligible patients were premenopausal women aged 18-59 years who had histologically or cytologically confirmed HR-positive, HER2-negative, advanced breast cancer; an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1; measurable disease as per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1 criteria, or at least one predominantly lytic bone lesion; and had not received previous treatment with cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 inhibitors. Endocrine therapy and chemotherapy in the adjuvant or neoadjuvant setting was permitted, as was up to one line of chemotherapy for advanced disease. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) via interactive response technology to receive oral ribociclib (600 mg/day on a 3-weeks-on, 1-week-off schedule) or matching placebo with either oral tamoxifen (20 mg daily) or a non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor (letrozole 2.5 mg or anastrozole 1 mg, both oral, daily), all with goserelin (3.6 mg administered subcutaneously on day 1 of every 28-day cycle). Patients and investigators were masked to treatment assignment. Efficacy analyses were by intention to treat, and safety was assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of any study treatment. The primary endpoint was investigator-assessed progression-free survival. MONALEESA-7 is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02278120 and is ongoing, but no longer enrolling patients. FINDINGS: Between Dec 17, 2014, and Aug 1, 2016, 672 patients were randomly assigned: 335 to the ribociclib group and 337 to the placebo group. Per investigator's assessment, median progression-free survival was 23.8 months (95% CI 19.2-not reached) in the ribociclib group compared with 13.0 months (11.0-16.4) in the placebo group (hazard ratio 0.55, 95% CI 0.44-0.69; p<0.0001). Grade 3 or 4 adverse events reported in more than 10% of patients in either group were neutropenia (203 [61%] of 335 patients in the ribociclib group and 12 [4%] of 337 in the placebo group) and leucopenia (48 [14%] and four [1%]). Serious adverse events occurred in 60 (18%) of 335 patients in the ribociclib group and 39 (12%) of 337 in the placebo group, of which 15 (4%) and six (2%), respectively, were attributed to the study regimen. 12 (4%) of 335 patients in the ribociclib group and ten (3%) of 337 in the placebo group discontinued treatment because of adverse events. No treatment-related deaths occurred. 11 deaths occurred (five [1%] in the ribociclib group and six [2%] in the placebo group) during or within 30 days after treatment, most of which were due to progression of the underlying breast cancer (three [1%] and six [2%]). The remaining two deaths in the ribociclib group were due to an intracranial haemorrhage in an anticoagulated patient, and a pre-existing wound haemorrhage in another patient. INTERPRETATION: Ribociclib plus endocrine therapy improved progression-free survival compared with placebo plus endocrine therapy, and had a manageable safety profile in patients with premenopausal, HR-positive, HER2-negative, advanced breast cancer. The combination could represent a new first-line treatment option for these patients. FUNDING: Novartis.
Medications to stimulate the ovaries may be used to induce ovulation in patients with anovulatory infertility or to hyperstimulate the ovaries in a controlled fashion in ovulatory patients as part of assisted reproductive treatments (ART). The pharmacology of all current major medications used to stimulate ovarian function is reviewed in this article, including letrozole, clomiphene citrate, gonadotropins, and pulsatile gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH). Novel potential compounds and adjuvant treatment approaches are also discussed, such as kisspeptin agonists and androgens.
IMPORTANCE: The cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 inhibitor palbociclib in combination with letrozole has become a standard first-line treatment for patients with endocrine-sensitive, hormone receptor-positive, ERBB2-negative advanced breast cancer. Meanwhile, the antiestrogen fulvestrant was shown to be superior to anastrozole in the absence of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 inhibition for this patient population. OBJECTIVE: To assess whether fulvestrant is superior to letrozole when combined with palbociclib in the first-line scenario. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this international, randomized, open-label, phase 2 clinical study conducted from July 30, 2015, to January 8, 2018, patients with hormone receptor-positive, ERBB2-negative advanced breast cancer with no prior therapy in the metastatic setting and endocrine-sensitive criteria were recruited from 47 centers in 7 countries. Data were analyzed from February 11 to May 15, 2020. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomly assigned (1:1 ratio) to receive palbociclib with either fulvestrant or letrozole. Stratification factors were type of disease presentation (de novo vs recurrent) and the presence of visceral involvement (yes vs no). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was investigator-assessed progression-free survival determined by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1. RESULTS: A total of 486 women (median age, 63 years [range, 25-90 years]; 3 Asian women [0.6%]; 4 Black women [0.8%]; 461 White women [94.9%]; 18 women of unknown race [3.7%]) were randomized (243 to fulvestrant-palbociclib and 243 to letrozole-palbociclib). Median investigator-assessed progression-free survival was 27.9 months (95% CI, 24.2-33.1 months) in the fulvestrant-palbociclib group vs 32.8 months (95% CI, 25.8-35.9 months) in the letrozole-palbociclib group (hazard ratio, 1.13; 95% CI, 0.89-1.45; P = .32). This result was consistent across the stratification factors. No significant differences were observed in objective response rate (46.5% vs 50.2%) and 3-year overall survival rate (79.4% vs 77.1%) for fulvestrant-palbociclib and letrozole-palbociclib, respectively. Grade 3-4 adverse events were comparable among treatment groups, and no new safety signals were identified. No treatment-related deaths were reported. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Although fulvestrant-palbociclib demonstrated significant antitumor activity, this randomized clinical trial failed to identify an improvement in progression-free survival with this regimen over letrozole-palbociclib in patients with endocrine-sensitive, hormone receptor-positive, ERBB2-negative advanced breast cancer. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02491983.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review aims to compare evidence on four criteria (embryo implantation, obstetric outcomes, patient convenience, and IVF-unit efficiency) by analyzing published research on different endometrial preparation methods for frozen embryo transfer (FET). RECENT FINDINGS: While the artificial-FET cycle provides advantages in scheduling and implantation, it falls short in ensuring optimal obstetric outcomes. In contrast, natural-FET ensures embryo implantation conditions if ovulation is correctly identified. Supplementing with exogenous progesterone shields against low corpus luteum progesterone secretion, crucial for positive obstetric outcomes. In mNC-FET, ovulation is hCG-triggered, closely resembling natural cycles and reducing monitoring visits for enhanced patient convenience.Letrozole is a recommended option for anovulatory patients, preserving endometrial thickness. It is cost-effective, less likely to induce multifollicular development than gonadotropins, and better tolerated.In a novel approach, the natural-proliferative-phase-FET initiates progesterone in an unmediated ovulatory cycle at 7 mm endometrial thickness, combining the benefits of a natural proliferative endometrium with the convenience of scheduled artificial cycles. SUMMARY: The artificial cycle offers scheduling advantages, but may compromise obstetric outcomes. Natural FET relies on accurate ovulation timing for successful implantation. mNC-FET simplifies the process using hCG induction, minimizing clinic visits for improved convenience. Letrozole is highlighted as a cost-effective and well tolerated option in anovulatory patients. A recent innovative approach combines elements of natural and artificial cycles, showing promise for FET procedures.
PURPOSE: In the initial PALOMA-2 (NCT01740427) analysis with median follow-up of 23 months, palbociclib plus letrozole significantly prolonged progression-free survival (PFS) in women with estrogen receptor-positive (ER+)/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-) advanced breast cancer (ABC) [hazard ratio (HR) 0.58; P < 0.001]. Herein, we report results overall and by subgroups with extended follow-up. METHODS: In this double-blind, phase 3 study, post-menopausal women with ER+/HER2- ABC who had not received prior systemic therapy for their advanced disease were randomized 2:1 to palbociclib-letrozole or placebo-letrozole. Endpoints include investigator-assessed PFS (primary), safety, and patient-reported outcomes (PROs). RESULTS: After a median follow-up of approximately 38 months, median PFS was 27.6 months for palbociclib-letrozole (n = 444) and 14.5 months for placebo-letrozole (n = 222) (HR 0.563; 1-sided P < 0.0001). All subgroups benefited from palbociclib treatment. The improvement of PFS with palbociclib-letrozole was maintained in the next 2 subsequent lines of therapy and delayed the use of chemotherapy (40.4 vs. 29.9 months for palbociclib-letrozole vs. placebo-letrozole). Safety data were consistent with the known profile. Patients' quality of life was maintained. CONCLUSIONS: With approximately 15 months of additional follow-up, palbociclib plus letrozole continued to demonstrate improved PFS compared with placebo plus letrozole in the overall population and across all patient subgroups, while the safety profile remained favorable and quality of life was maintained. These data confirm that palbociclib-letrozole should be considered the standard of care for first-line therapy in patients with ER+/HER2- ABC, including those with low disease burden or long disease-free interval. Sponsored by Pfizer; ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01740427.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of letrozole and clomiphene citrate (CC) for ovulation induction in infertile women with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). METHODS: In this assessor blind, randomized controlled trial, 90 infertile women with PCOS were randomized to receive either letrozole or CC for ovulation induction in incremental doses for a maximum of three cycles. Main outcome measures studied were endometrial thickness, ovulation rate, pregnancy rate, rate of monofollicular development, and time to conception. RESULTS: Mean endometrial thicknesses were 9.86 +/- 2.32 mm and 9.39 +/- 2.06 mm with letrozole and CC, respectively (P=0.751). Cumulative ovulation rates were 86.7% and 85.2% with letrozole and CC, respectively (P=0.751). Pregnancy was achieved in 42.2% of women in the letrozole group and 20.0% of women in the CC group (P=0.04). Monofollicular development was seen in 68.4% of ovulatory cycles in the letrozole group compared with 44.8% in the CC group (P=0.000). Mean time to achieve pregnancy was significantly shorter (log rank P=0.042) with letrozole (9.65 weeks) than with CC (11.07 weeks). CONCLUSION: Letrozole is a better alternative for ovulation induction in anovulatory women with PCOS as pregnancy rates are higher, time to pregnancy is shorter, and chances of multiple pregnancy are less because of high monofollicular growth.
Chemotherapy is used as neoadjuvant therapy for all subgroups of breast cancer, including ER-positive, and HER2-negative cases. However, studies have suggested that using aromatase inhibitors combined with CDK4/6-inhibitors might be an appropriate alternative in selected patients. Thus, the NEOLETRIB trial evaluates the response of ER-positive, HER2-negative luminal A/B breast cancer to the combination of letrozole and ribociclib in the neoadjuvant setting. Comprehensive molecular biology procedures, including sequential single-cell RNA-sequencing of tumor biopsies, are performed during 6 months of treatment with extensive biobanking of blood samples, tumor biopsies and gut microbiome specimens. Our findings will hopefully contribute to an improved selection of patients who may benefit from this drug combination and give new insights into the intra-tumoral changes during this treatment.Trial registration number: NCT05163106 (ClinicalTrials.gov).
BACKGROUND: Blocking the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway decreases resistance to hormonal therapy in endometrial carcinoma (EC). OBJECTIVE: In this study, the aim was to assess the efficacy and tolerability of everolimus(E)/letrozole (L) or medroxyprogesterone acetate(M)/tamoxifen(T) in the treatment of metastatic EC. STUDY DESIGN: This single stage, open-label two arm randomized phase II trial accrued women with advanced/persistent/recurrent EC. Treatment with E (10 mg daily) and L (2.5 mg daily) or T (20 mg twice daily) and M (200 mg daily alternating weeks) was randomly assigned, and stratified by prior adjuvant therapy. Treatments were administered orally. Primary endpoint was response rate. RESULTS: Between February 2015 and April 2016, everolimus/letrozole (n = 37) or MT (n = 37) was assigned to 74 patients. Median follow-up was 37 months. Eight (22%; 95% CI 11% to 37%) patients responded on EL (one CR) and nine (25%; 95% CI 14% to 41%) patients responded on MT (three CRs). Median PFS for EL and MT arms was 6 months and 4 months, respectively. On EL, chemo-nave patients demonstrated a 28 month median PFS; prior chemotherapy patients had a 4-month median PFS. On MT, patients without prior therapy had a 5-month median PFS; those with prior chemotherapy demonstrated a 3-month PFS. Common grade 3 adverse events were anemia (9 [24%] patients EL vs 2 [6%] MT) and mucositis (2 [5%] vs 0 [0%]). Grade 3/4 thromboembolic events were observed with MT but not with EL (0 [0%] vs 4 [11%]). CONCLUSIONS: EL and MT demonstrated clinically meaningful efficacy in recurrent EC patients. The higher PFS observed in chemo-naive patients is worthy of confirmation in future studies.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether a combination of letrozole and clomiphene citrate (CC) results in higher ovulation rates than letrozole alone in infertile women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). DESIGN: Open-label randomized controlled trial. SETTING: Academic medical center using two clinic sites. PATIENT(S): Women 18-40 years of age with a diagnosis of infertility and PCOS as defined by the Rotterdam criteria and no other known cause of infertility. INTERVENTIONS(S): Participants were randomized in a 1:1 ratio, stratified by age and body mass index, to either 2.5 mg letrozole alone or the combination of 2.5 mg letrozole and 50 mg CC daily on cycle days 3-7 for one treatment cycle. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Ovulation defined as mid-luteal serum progesterone concentration >/=3 ng/mL. RESULT(S): Seventy patients were randomized: 35 to letrozole alone and 35 to letrozole and CC. Results were analyzed according to the intention-to-treat principle. Women who received the combination of letrozole and CC had a statistically higher ovulation rate compared with those who received letrozole alone (27 of 35 women [77%] vs. 15 of 35 women [43%]). There were no serious adverse events or multiple-gestation pregnancies in either group. The side-effects profile was similar in the two treatment groups. CONCLUSION(S): The combination of letrozole and CC was associated with a higher ovulation rate compared with letrozole alone in women with infertility and PCOS. Further studies are needed to evaluate the effect on live birth rate. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02802865.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is characterized by menstrual irregularities, high androgen levels, and ovarian cysts. Clomiphene citrate (Clomid) and letrozole have both been investigated as ovulation induction therapies for PCOS. This interventional study aimed to compare the efficacy and safety of a stairstep practice of letrozole versus clomiphene citrate in women with PCOS. A total of 100 women diagnosed with PCOS and infertility participated in the study, which took place from March 2021 to July 2022 at the Maternity and Children Teaching Hospital in Adiwaniyah Province, Iraq. Participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups (each with 50 women): the first group received clomiphene citrate in a stair step pattern (single dose of 50 mg, 100 mg, and 150 mg) for five days, for a maximum of three cycles; the second group received letrozole in a stair step pattern (single dose of 2.5, 5, and 7.5 mg) for five days, for a maximum of three cycles. Follicle size was monitored using ultrasound to achieve a follicle size >18 mm. The ovulation rate was higher in the letrozole group (86.0%) compared to the clomiphene citrate group (72.0%), although the difference was not statistically significant (p=0.086). The pregnancy rate was slightly higher in the letrozole group (22.0% vs 18.0%), but also not statistically significant (p=0.617). However, the mean time from menstruation to ovulation was significantly shorter in the letrozole group (17.20+/-1.32 days) compared to the clomiphene citrate group (24.08 +/- 1.56 days, p<0.001). There were no significant differences in common side effects between the two groups. Overall, letrozole was found to be as safe as clomiphene citrate but demonstrated a shorter time to ovulation. Further studies with larger sample sizes are necessary to validate these findings and determine their clinical implications.
PURPOSE: In PALOMA-2, palbociclib plus letrozole significantly improved progression-free survival (PFS) as initial treatment of estrogen receptor-positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative advanced breast cancer. We assessed the benefit of palbociclib plus letrozole in Asians. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Of 666 enrolled postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative advanced breast cancer (no prior treatment of advanced disease), 95 were Asian. Patients were randomly assigned 2:1 to receive palbociclib plus letrozole or placebo plus letrozole. The primary end point was investigator-assessed PFS. Secondary end points were overall survival, objective response, patient-reported outcomes, pharmacokinetics, and safety. RESULTS: Median PFS was significantly longer in Asian patients who received palbociclib plus letrozole versus placebo plus letrozole (25.7 months [95% CI, 19.2 months to not estimable] v 13.9 months [95% CI, 7.4 to 22.0 months]; hazard ratio, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.27 to 0.87; P = .007). The most common toxicities with palbociclib were hematologic and more frequent among Asians versus non-Asians: neutropenia (any grade, 95.4% v 76.8%; grade 3/4, 89.2% v 62.5%), leukopenia (43.1% v 38.3%; 32.3% v 23.5%), and thrombocytopenia (27.7% v 13.5%; 4.6% v 1.1%). No Asians had febrile neutropenia. Discontinuation rates as a result of adverse events were similar among Asian and non-Asian patients who received palbociclib plus letrozole (10.8% and 9.5%). In Asians, quality of life (QOL) was maintained with no significant differences observed between treatments from baseline in breast cancer-specific QOL and general health status scores. Change from baseline in EuroQol five dimensions index scores was significantly higher with palbociclib plus letrozole (0.013 v -0.069; P = .0132). Geometric mean palbociclib trough concentration values were higher in Asians versus non-Asians (93.8 v 61.7 ng/mL). CONCLUSION: Consistent with the overall study population, the addition of palbociclib to letrozole significantly improved PFS in Asians. Hematologic toxicities were more frequent in Asians versus non-Asians but manageable with early dose modifications while maintaining QOL.
At present, there is no standard of care on the use of letrozole in ovarian cancer management. We performed a systematic review of the available literature addressing this issue. Data demonstrated a role for letrozole in ovarian cancer, in both the primary and recurrent setting. Letrozole, which has a favorable toxicity profile, seems to assure a prolonged recurrence-free interval, particularly when used as maintenance treatment, in low grade serous ovarian cancer; in recurrent cases it had also led to prolonged disease control. However, the optimal setting and biologically relevant patient population needs to be defined in larger trials.
