Pilsicainide is a class Ic antiarrhythmic agent used for the treatment of supraventricular and ventricular tachycardia. The pharmacodynamic effects of pilsicainide are achieved via selective sodium channel blockade. In randomized, multicentre trials in patients with atrial fibrillation, restoration of sinus rhythm was achieved in significantly more patients treated with a single oral dose of pilsicainide than those who received placebo, and in a numerically higher proportion of oral pilsicainide than intravenous disopyramide recipients. In another well designed trial in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation, the proportion of patients whose arrhythmia converted to normal sinus rhythm was significantly higher among those randomized to receive 2 weeks of oral pilsicainide therapy than among patients who received placebo. Over a 1-year period, both pilsicainide and cibenzoline (another class Ic agent) were effective in preventing recurrence of atrial fibrillation in a substantial proportion of patients in a single-centre crossover trial. There were no between-group differences in the subgroup of patients with shorter-duration atrial fibrillation, but actuarial results over 1 year significantly favoured cibenzoline over pilsicainide in patients with longer-duration atrial fibrillation. Both oral and intravenous pilsicainide have demonstrated efficacy in ventricular tachyarrhythmias, including ventricular extrasystole. Clinical trial and postmarketing surveillance data indicate that pilsicainide is generally well tolerated in most patients.
Lidocaine is an amide local anaesthetic initially used intravenously as an antiarrhythmic agent. At some point it was proposed that intravenous lidocaine (IVL) had an analgesic effect that could be potentially beneficial in perioperative settings. Since these preliminary reports, a large body of evidence confirmed that IVL had anti-inflammatory and opiate-sparing effects, a combination of characteristics leading to an array of effects such as a decrease in postoperative pain and opiate consumption, and a reduction in the duration of digestive ileus. Additional studies demonstrated IVL to possess antithrombotic, antimicrobial and antitumoral effects. Beneficial effects of IVL have been characterized in abdominal surgery but remain controversial in other types of surgeries. Because the quality of evidence was limited, due to inconsistency, imprecision and study quality, recent conclusions from meta-analysis pooling together all types of surgery stated the uncertainty about IVL benefits. Additional indications such as the prevention of propofol-induced injection pain, prevention of hyperalgesia, protection against bronchial reactivity by bronchotracheal relaxation during surgery, and the increase in depth of general anaesthesia have since emerged. IVL is rapidly distributed in the body and metabolized by the liver. With the commonly recommended doses, lidocaine's therapeutic index remains very high and the plasma concentrations stay largely below the cardiotoxic and neurotoxic threshold levels, a notion that may be used by clinicians to draw conclusions on the benefit-risk profile of IVL in comparison to other analgesic strategies. The purpose of this review is to address the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of lidocaine in healthy and pathological conditions.
A review of the clinical pharmacokinetics of lidocaine is presented. Available evidence suggests that antiarrhythmic effects are reasonably well correlated wih plasma concentration. Adverse effects also covary with plasma concentration, but available evidence suggests that the correlation is not strong. A simple, multiple-bolus loading schedule appears to be superior to techniques using loading infusions; most of the multiple-bolus protocols mandate that only enough drug be given to attain the desired pharmacologic effect. In contrast, the loading infusion protocols almost invariably require the administration of a fixed dose, regardless of what fraction of the dose has been given when arrhythmia suppression is achieved. Since multiple-bolus and constant-rate infusion techniques have been shown to reduce substantially the incidence of primary ventricular fibrillation, they should be considered appropriate prophylactic and treatment regimens for acute myocardial infarction patients.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of a new formulation of lidocaine (ELA-max) in local anesthesia in children and compare it with the eutectic mixture of local anesthetics (EMLA). DATA SOURCES: Relevant literature was identified by a MEDLINE search (1966-November 2003) using the search terms ELA-max and EMLA. Bibliographies of selected articles were also examined to include all relevant investigations. The product manufacturer was contacted for inclusion of the most recent data available. DATA SYNTHESIS: Topical anesthesia in children is clinically challenging. ELA-max has been shown to be as effective as EMLA for venipuncture in children, but with faster onset. Adverse effects, such as transient blanching with redness and erythema, have been reported. CONCLUSIONS: Further investigation is needed to determine the effectiveness of ELA-max on other painful procedures in children, as well as its safety.
Lidocaine Hydrochloride is an amide ester, which is widely used local anesthetic agent that is well tolerated but what is less known is the occurrence of systemic toxicity which manifests in the central nervous and cardiovascular systems. We report here 3 cases of Lidocaine associated Seizures.
The effect of pH on the permeation of ibuprofen and lignocaine through human skin has been modelled using a modification to the equation derived by Potts and Guy, which is normally applied to unionized entities. The results show that permeation is related to the distribution coefficient. The physicochemical properties have been predicted ab initio using commercially available software and compared to literature values. The approach is successful and shows that there is significant permeation of the ionized drugs through a lipophilic pathway, possibly as a result of ion pairing. Since the aqueous solubility of the ionized material is significantly higher than the unionized, the maximum flux through the skin may occur at a pH where ionization is high. Optimum topical or transdermal formulations may not therefore be for the free acid or free base.
Lidocaine generally is the agent of first choice against acute ventricular arrhythmias arising from many causes. It is clinically effective and well tolerated, having a rapid onset of action and a favorable electrophysiological profile. Unlike other antiarrhythmic agents, lidocaine does not interact with the autonomic nervous system. A review of the literature highlights current knowledge about this antiarrhythmic drug.
In head-injured adults sudden increases in intracranial pressure (ICP) frequently occur in response to noxious stimuli, such as endotracheal suctioning (ETS). Transient increased ICP may have potentially harmful effects upon head-injured patients. One intervention clinicians believe to be efficacious in blunting ICP response to ETS is administration of lidocaine hydrochloride. This article critiques studies that examined effects of lidocaine in attenuating the ICP response to suctioning and similar stimuli. The literature to date, while providing conflicting results, does demonstrate tentative support for the use of lidocaine prior to ETS as a means of attenuating a rise in ICP. Support was found for the intratracheal route of administration. Additionally when intratracheal lidocaine was coupled with muscle relaxants or other anesthetic agents administered at appropriate times prior to suctioning, large rises in ICP may be effectively blunted.
The use of Emla cream in the 1980s has enabled many procedures to be carried out without unnecessary pain or discomfort. Its various potential uses have been evaluated in many different specialties. This article reviews the application of Emla that have been found to be effective.
BACKGROUND: Lidocaine, an amide anesthetic, has been used in the treatment of a wide variety of pain disorders for over 75 years. In addition to pain control, lidocaine is an anti-arrhythmic agent and has anti-inflammatory properties. Lidocaine's unique properties, including nonlinear pharmacokinetics, have limited its modern-day use. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this review is to offer a better understanding of the properties of this unique treatment, which we hope will allow more practitioners to offer this to their patients. METHODS: An analysis of the history, pharmacokinetics, and relevant uses of lidocaine in headache medicine based on a synthesis of the medical literature and clinical experience. RESULTS: Lidocaine is an amide anesthetic that inhibits voltage gated sodium channels, and lidocaine metabolism occurs exclusively in the liver. One lidocaine metabolite has its own unique properties and may be an active form of the drug. CONCLUSION: Open label and retrospective studies have investigated the use of lidocaine in many headache disorders, primarily via injection or infusion. Further research into the active metabolite of lidocaine may allow for its use as a novel nonopiate treatment of chronic pain.
1 The pharmacokinetics following long term intravenous infusion of lignocaine to cardiac patients have been examined. 2 Plasma levels and half-lives of lignocaine and monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) showed wide inter-patient variability. 3 Toxicity reactions to therapy were associated with elevated lignocaine and/or MEGX plasma levels. 4 In a separate study the effect of age on the pharmacokinetics of lignocaine was examined using bolus doses (50 mg) of the drug to young and aged subjects. 5 Elderly subjects had significantly longer half-lives for lignocaine compared to younger individuals although no change in plasma clearance occurred. 6 The drug appeared to distribute differently in the aged as reflected by significantly increased apparent volumes of distribution. 7 The 24 h urinary recovery of the major metabolite (total 4-hydroxyxylidine) showed a significant reduction in the elderly when compared to the young. 8 The clinical significance of these studies with respect to lignocaine therapy has been discussed.
As part of preliminary studies for an investigation to assess the place of some drugs, including tocainide HCl, in the treatment of tinnitus, the present study was performed to establish the appropriate dose for tocainide. The effect of lidocaine HCl on tinnitus was studied in a double-blind controlled cross-over study in 22 patients. Lidocaine appeared to give significant relief. To select an optimal daily dose for the lidocaine analog tocainide HCl, this drug was administered orally to 19 patients with obstructive tinnitus in seven 4-day periods. This could be done in a single-blind controlled trial. A different dose was given in each period. Comparison of the effect on tinnitus and the associated side effects led to the choice of a daily dose of 900 mg. The effect of lidocaine HCl appeared to have no prognostic value for the effect of tocainide HCl on the tinnitus in the individual patient.
A pharmacological concept of topical peripheral pain therapy with a combination of a sodium channel blocker from the class of local anesthetics and a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) from the class of nonselective/ partially selective cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors is described. The dual mechanism of action of these substances on the cellular level interferes with pain components of both inflammatory and neuronal genesis and is functionally synergistic. This enables the combination of these agents to produce a more long-lasting analgesia than is attainable with either of the substances alone. The therapeutic indication is the symptomatic reduction of neuromuscular pain of traumatic or metabolic origin. The already more favorable safety profile for topical applications can be improved further by a possible dose reduction of the two substances.
Since its development in 1943, lidocaine has been one of the most commonly used local anesthesia agents for surgical procedures. Lidocaine alters neuronal signal transmission by prolonging the inactivation of fast voltage-gated sodium channels in the cell membrane of neurons, which are responsible for action potential propagation. Recently, it has attracted attention due to emerging evidence suggesting its potential antitumor properties, particularly in the in vitro setting. Further, local administration of lidocaine around the tumor immediately prior to surgical removal has been shown to improve overall survival in breast cancer patients. However, the exact mechanisms driving these antitumor effects remain largely unclear. In this article, we will review the existing literature on the mechanism of lidocaine as a local anesthetic, its effects on the cancer cells and the tumor microenvironment, involved pathways, and cancer progression. Additionally, we will explore recent reports highlighting its impact on clinical outcomes in cancer patients. Taken together, there remains significant ambiguity surrounding lidocaine's functions and roles in cancer biology, particularly in perioperative setting.
The efficacy of lidocaine 1 mg.kg-1 for prevention of methohexitone-induced hiccups was assessed in a double-blind fashion in 200 patients undergoing dilatation and curettage for pregnancy interruption. The patients were randomly assigned to receive either lidocaine 1% or saline 0.9% in a similar way (1 ml for every 10 kg of body weight). The incidence of hiccups was 16% in the control group compared to 6% in the lidocaine group. We speculate that this reduction in the methohexitone-induced hiccup ratio is related to lidocaine's membrane-stabilizing properties, which decrease the excitability of all the nervous structures involved in this reflex.
Pain is a well known complication of propofol injection. Premixing with lignocaine 0.1 mg.kg-1 and injection into a large forearm vein has been recommended. The amount of lignocaine to be added is often empirical when the vein on the dorsum of the hand is used. In this study we attempt to determine the optimal amount of lignocaine necessary to reduce pain when propofol is injected into a hand vein. Our study shows that a propofol emulsion containing 0.05% lignocaine is effective in reducing the incidence of propofol injection pain. The addition of lignocaine also reduces the incidence of excitatory effects. Increasing the dosage of lignocaine above 0.05% does not improve the results.
In this double-blind study, 256 surgical patients meeting eligibility criteria were randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to 1 of the 3 intradermal injection groups prior to intravenous (IV) line insertion (Group 1=1% lidocaine, Group 2=1% buffered lidocaine, and Group 3=bacteriostatic normal saline with a benzyl alcohol preservative). The most tolerable solution, as measured by the average level of pain from an intradermal insertion, was buffered lidocaine (Group 2). The most efficacious, as measured by average level of pain at IV cannulation, were Groups 1 and 2. Group 3 was the most cost-effective.
AIMS: The study was designed to assess the effect age on the monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) liver function test. METHODS: Plasma MEGX concentration was measured in 16 young and 17 elderly healthy volunteers 10, 15, 30, 45 and 60 min after intravenous injection of 1 mg kg(-1) lignocaine. RESULTS: Lower MEGX concentrations were noted in elderly subjects. The difference between young and old individuals became increasingly significant as the sampling time was increased, mainly because of a progressive decrease in intersubject variability within each of the two study groups. Linear regression analysis consistently showed that the strength of the relationships between MEGX concentration and age increased with increased sampling time and was maximal at 60 min (r = -0.70; P < 0.0001; reduction in MEGX formation (95% CI) 0.51 (0.33-0.69) ng ml(-1) per year). CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that the rate of MEGX production declines significantly with age. Therefore, when the results of the MEGX test are to be compared in different study groups, subjects should be strictly matched for age.
Lidocaine patch 5% comprises a soft, stretchy adhesive patch (l0 by 14 cm) containing 5% lidocaine (700 mg) for the topical treatment of pain associated with postherpetic neuralgia (PHN). Lidocaine provides analgesic relief by blocking neuronal sodium channels. In clinical trials (conducted over 12 hours to 24 days) involving patients with allodynia associated with PHN, treatment with lidocaine patch 5% resulted in a significant reduction in pain intensity and increased pain relief compared with vehicle patch. Lidocaine patch 5% was associated with few adverse events, the most frequent being mild skin redness or irritation at the application site which occurred with a similar incidence with lidocaine and vehicle patch.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to assess the motility of human sperm incubated with various concentrations of lignocaine. METHODS: Eleven semen samples with a sperm density greater than or equal to 20 x 10(6) ml and progressive motility greater than or equal to 40% were prepared using a swim-up technique. Aliquots from each sample were incubated for 4 hr under capacitating conditions with lignocaine concentrations of 100, 10, 1, and 0.1 microgram/ml and without additional lignocaine as a control. Digital computerized motion analysis was performed on all samples at 1, 2, and 4 hr after the addition of lignocaine. RESULTS: After 2 hr of incubation a significant (P less than 0.05) increase in the percentage of sperm with a curvilinear velocity greater than 100 microns/sec was observed in those samples incubated with 100 micrograms/ml lignocaine. This stimulatory effect was no longer apparent after a further 2 hr of incubation. No other significant changes were identified in any of the motility parameters examined. CONCLUSIONS: No adverse effects on human sperm motility were identified during incubation with low concentrations of lignocaine. A transient stimulatory effect was observed at a lignocaine concentration of 100 micrograms/ml.
