Metronidazole is a bactericidal antibiotic with strong activity against most anaerobes and certain parasites. The drug has excellent bioavailability and good penetration in most tissues, including the cerebrospinal fluid and brain abscess contents. It is usually well tolerated with few side effects. With a few exceptions, the percentage of anaerobes, including B. fragilis group, that are resistant to metronidazole remains low. Metronidazole has been used extensively in clinical practice for years, and its uses have expanded. Its exact role in the management of Crohn's disease and entities related to H. pylori is evolving.
Although clindamycin is not the drug of first choice for the majority of orofacial infections, it has a definite place in dental therapeutics. The pharmacology of this agent and its use in clinical dentistry is discussed in this review.
Clindamycin is an excellent, well tolerated, effective antimicrobial agent that can be used clinically in the treatment of specific anaerobic infections as well as clinical situations when both S. aureus and anaerobes occur together.
Clindamycin has been extensively used in the therapy of obstetric and gynecologic infections for over 20 years. This antibiotic is well known for it activity against anaerobic bacteria, particularly beta-lactamase-producing strains of the Bacteroides species. Clinicians should also recognize its very good activity against aerobic gram-positive cocci, such as the group B streptococci, but be aware of its absence of activity against aerobic gram-negative rods, such as E. coli. In combination with an aminoglycoside, clindamycin has become the standard by which other antimicrobials have been judged in the treatment of pelvic infections. A dose of 900 mg administered intravenously every 8 hours is recommended when treating the serious infections discussed. Although concern about the potential side effect of pseudomembranous colitis is valid, in practice, this is an uncommon problem that responds well to the discontinuation of clindamycin and to the treatment of the C. difficile-induced condition with vancomycin or metronidazole.
After observing a case of lincomycin (LCN)-induced respiratory insufficiency in a patient recovering from d-tubocurarine (DTC) administration, this interaction was studied in cats anesthetized with halothane-nitrous-oxide-oxide-oxygen. The sciatic nerve was stimulated with a 1.6-second tetanci train of 62.5 Hz every 10 seconds. The area under the contraction curve was electronically integrated and recorded. Five control cats received 0.01 mg/kg DTC every 2 minutes until time-tension integral response (TTIR) was zero. Five experimental cats received 10 mg/kg of LCN followed in 10 minutes by 0.01 mg/kg of DTC every 2 minutes until TTIR was zero. Both groups recovered to 50 per cent of control and were given 10 mg/kg of LCN. There was no difference between the slope of the y-intercept of the regression lines for the log-dose response curves for DTC in the two groups. LCN during recovery from DTC had a statist "Intermittent mandatory ventilation in the treatment of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease".
Drug-induced anaphylaxis is an unpredictable adverse reaction. Although it may occur with any medication, antibiotics induce more cases of anaphylaxis than any other medication class with most cases being induced by beta-lactam antibiotics. Clindamycin is an antibiotic with good gram-positive and anaerobe coverage which is often used in patients with beta-lactam allergies. We report the case of a 46-year-old female who experienced anaphylaxis after a dose of intravenous (IV) clindamycin. Following treatment with methylprednisolone, epinephrine, diphenhydramine, and albuterol, the patient stabilized. The patient's score on the Naranjo's algorithm was 8 (probable); a score of 9 (definite) limited only by absence of drug re-challenge. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a clindamycin-induced anaphylaxis where the patient was not exposed to any other agent that may have triggered the response, the first case in the United States, and only the third documented case in the literature. Clinicians should be aware of the potential for drug-induced anaphylaxis in all medications.
We report the case of a 72-old patient with persistent neutropenia diagnosed during investigation of sialadenitis. Further examination led to the diagnosis of immune neutropenia and systemic lupus erythematosus. Anamnesis and the clinical course made initial diagnosis of drug-induced lupus erythematosus implausible. Steroid trial was done, followed by maintenance therapy, with good control of symptoms.
Drug-induced acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis, or Sweet's syndrome, is rare and, to our knowledge, has not previously been associated with clindamycin therapy. We describe a 47-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes mellitus and end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis who developed Sweet's syndrome after receiving oral and intravenous clindamycin for a tooth infection. After the clindamycin was discontinued, the patient's clinical symptoms resolved over several days. Use of the Naranjo adverse drug reaction probability scale indicated a probable relationship between the patient's development of Sweet's syndrome and clindamycin therapy. Clinicians should be aware that Sweet's syndrome can occur with clindamycin treatment. Early recognition of this condition in conjunction with cessation of drug exposure, with or without antiinflammatory therapy, can produce complete recovery.
Lincomycin and clindamycin are lincosamide antibiotics used in clinical practice. Both antibiotics are bacteriostatic and inhibit protein synthesis in sensitive bacteria. They may even be bactericidal at the higher concentrations that can be reached in vivo. Clindamycin is usually more active than lincomycin in the treatment of bacterial infections, in particular those caused by anaerobic species; and it can also be used for the treatment of important protozoal diseases, e.g. malaria, most effectively in combination with primaquine. Resistance to lincomycin and clindamycin may be caused by methylation of 23S ribosomal RNA, modification of the antibiotics by specific enzymes or active efflux from the periplasmic space.
<p>Acne vulgaris (acne) is the most common skin disease we see in dermatology practice. Although rare in childhood, severe acne can affect up to 12% of the adolescent population. A chronic disease, it requires both aggressive management and effective maintenance strategies. Oral antibiotics, in combination with topical agents are recommended for treatment, with topical agents being continued as maintenance therapy to minimize resistance and recurrence. However, concerns with systemic side effects have recently resulted in a greater focus on the potential of fixed combination topical therapies to treat severe acne. Here we review the available clinical evidence. There are no studies investigating the use of fixed combination topical therapy exclusively in severe acne. However, studies assessing the treatment of moderate-to-severe acne include subpopulation data in severe patients. Adapalene 0.3%-benzoyl peroxide (BP) 2.5% was found to be effective in patients with severe acne, whereas the fixed combination with a lower concentration of adapalene (0.1%) was no more effective than vehicle. Clindamycin-BP 1.2%/3.75% gel and clindamycin-BP 1.2%/2.5% gel were both found to be effective in severe acne with an apparent BP-dose response. Clindamycin phosphate 1.2%-tretinoin 0.025% demonstrated similar efficacy in severe acne, but with little benefit over individual monads. Realistic topical treatment options now exist for the management of severe acne where patient and physician preference can impact positive outcomes.</p> <p><em>J Drugs Dermatol. 2017;16(11):1134-1138.</em></p>.
Dermatologists frequently are consulted by a pregnant patient or a woman of childbearing age who desires acne therapy. Because there are no published studies in which women took acne medications throughout pregnancy, information about safety must be obtained indirectly from studies in which the agents were taken for another indication during some portion of pregnancy. Oral tetracycline is associated with maternal liver toxicity and deciduous tooth staining in the infant, and tetracycline occasionally has been associated with other congenital anomalies. Maternal isotretinoin ingestion is associated with major craniofacial and cardiac deformities, as well as other congenital anomalies. Erythromycin, however, appears to be safe. Topical acne medications never have been implicated as a cause of fetal deformities in human beings. Dermatologists should be aware of potential toxic and teratogenic effects of acne medicines before prescribing them to women of childbearing age. Prompt reporting of adverse effects is encouraged.
This is a survey of the pharmacokinetics and mechanisms of action, orthopedic use, antimicrobial activity, and adverse reactions to erythromycin, lincomycin and clindamycin, tetracycline, chloramphenicol, polymyxins, vancomycin, and fosfomycin. Although these antibiotics are rarely preferred to more active drugs such as the beta-lactams or aminoglycosides in orthopedic sepsis, they are nevertheless highly beneficial and in some situations can be the first-choice drug.
Four cases of clindamycin-associated colitis have recently been observed at Kansas University Medical Center. There have been a few reports in the literature of colitis associated with this antibiotic, and our 4 cases are similar to those noted previously. All had the onset of diarrhea 7-14 days following the initiation of clindamycin therapy; the diarrhea persisted for weeks after the drug was discontinued. Mucosal changes ranged from focal ulceration to pseudomembrane formation. Diarrhea in a patient on clindamycin should alert the physician to the possibility of antibiotic induced colitis, a condition with significant morbidity and occasional mortality.

The usefulness of the new antibiotic, lincomycin, was assessed on both bacteriological and clinical grounds. Of 3200 strains of staphylococci isolated from clinical material, only 40 were resistant to lincomycin. These 40 were all of the same phage type and in fact almost all represented different isolations of the same staphylococcus which had spread to cross-infect various patients. Sixteen of 22 patients with staphylococcal infections, nine of 14 with pneumonia, 15 of 17 with acute exacerbations of bronchitis and two patients with other bacterial infections recovered completely with lincomycin therapy. The only side effect was diarrhea in four of the 42 patients given the drug by mouth. The place of lincomycin in therapeutics seems to be principally in the treatment of chronic osteomyelitis and, in patients allergic to the penicillins, in the treatment of staphylococcal, respiratory and other infections for which penicillin is usually employed.
In the course of the last two years, a tremendous amount of controversy has been raised over dangers accompanying the use of the antibiotic clindamycin. The controversy has been stimulated by recent reports of fatalities from pseudomembraneous colitis associated with clindamycin therapy. Varying greatly in degree of severity, the colitis has been reported in as high as 10% of all patients using the drug. The pertinence of such data, however, in a young, healthy acne population receiving small maintenance doses is questionable. Nevertheless, because of these reports, the use of clindamycin in the treatment of many of the conditions for which it was previously considered indicated, including acne, is being seriously reevaluated.
Because of problems of penicillin allergy or lack of veins for intravenous administration of antibiotics, nine patients with endocarditis were treated with clindamycin, administered intramuscularly. Five patients were heroin addicts with staphylococcal endocarditis and four had alpha-streptococcal endocarditis. The only therapeutic failure occurred in a patient with a strain of Staphylococcus aureus that became resistant to clindamycin in vivo. Such resistance has been reported to occur in vitro, and testing for it should prove useful in proper selection of cases for treatment with clindamycin, an agent that appears to be effective in selected cases of endocarditis.
Many studies have shown that clindamycin may cause pseudomembranous colitis, a potentially fatal complication. At present, prevention of this complication depends on (1) prescription of the drug only for specific severe infections, (2) early investigation and discontinuation of clindamycin if diarrhea ensues, and (3) vigorous supportive therapy.
Most infections due to Gram-positive organisms can be treated with quite a small number of antibiotics. Penicillin, cloxacillin, and erythromycin should be enough to cover 90 per cent of Gram-positive infections. The relatively narrow spectrum of these drugs should be the incentive to prescribers to use them selectively, together with adequate bacteriological investigation, in order to achieve effective treatment with a minimum of disturbance to the patient's normal bacterial flora and without any other harmful side effects.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND THE OBJECTIVE: Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is a rare, severe cutaneous reaction that usually occurs following medication exposure. Clindamycin has rarely been linked to dermatologic side effects, including AGEP. CASE SUMMARY: This report details the case of a patient who developed AGEP with vancomycin and clindamycin use. After discontinuing clindamycin, the rash improved significantly. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: Timely management of adverse skin reactions to antibiotics is paramount, and early identification of the culprit agent can allow for an alternative agent to be utilized. Clindamycin should be considered a potential causative agent for patients with skin reactions.
