Loratadine, 4-(8-Chloro-5,6-dihydro-11H-benzo[5,6]cyclohepta[1,2-b]pyridin-11-ylidene)-1-piperidinecarboxylic acid ethyl ester, is an antihistamine drug with long-acting effects and has limited selectivity for peripheral H1 receptors. It is widely used for the prevention of allergic diseases such as rhinitis chronic urticaria, and asthma. This chapter discusses, by a critical extensive review of the literature, the description of loratadine in terms of its names, formulae, elemental composition, appearance, methods of preparation. The profile contains physicochemical properties of Loratadine, including pKa value, solubility and X-ray powder diffraction. In addition, it involves Fourier transform infrared spectrometry, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and mass spectroscopy for functional groups and structural confirmation of. The chapter also includes methods of analysis of the drug such as compendial, titrimetric, electrochemical, spectroscopic, chromatographic and capillary electrophoretic methods. The chapter also covers clinical applications of the drug such as its uses, doses, ADME profiles and mechanism of action.
Background Chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is characterised by the development of crops of red, itchy, raised weals or hives with no identifiable external cause.Objectives To assess the effects of H1-antihistamines for CSU.Search methods We searched the following databases up to June 2014: Cochrane Skin Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL (2014, Issue 5), MEDLINE(from 1946), EMBASE (from 1974) and PsycINFO (from 1806). We searched five trials registers and checked articles for references to relevant randomised controlled trials.Selection criteria We included randomised controlled trials of H1-antihistamines for CSU. Interventions included single therapy or a combination of H1-antihistamines compared with no treatment (placebo) or another active pharmacological compound at any dose.Data collection and analysis We used standard methodological procedures as expected by The Cochrane Collaboration.Our primary outcome measures were proportion of participants with complete suppression of urticaria: 'good or excellent' response,50% or greater improvement in quality of life measures, and adverse events.We present risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals(CIs). Main results We identified 73 studies (9759 participants); 34 studies provided data for 23 comparisons. The duration of the intervention was up to two weeks (short-term) or longer than two weeks and up to three months (intermediate-term).Cetirizine 10mg once daily in the short term and in the intermediate term led to complete suppression of urticaria by more participants than was seen with placebo (RR 2.72, 95% CI 1.51 to 4.91). For this same outcome, comparison of desloratadine versus placebo in the intermediate term (5 mg) (RR 37.00, 95% CI 2.31 to 593.70) and in the short term (20 mg) (RR 15.97, 95% CI 1.04 to 245.04)favoured desloratadine, but no differences were seen between 5 mg and 10 mg for short-term treatment.Levocetirizine 20 mg per day (short-term) was more effective for complete suppression of urticaria compared with placebo (RR 20.87,95% CI 1.37 to 317.60), and at 5 mg was effective in the intermediate term (RR 52.88, 95% CI 3.31 to 843.81) but not in the shortterm, nor was 10 mg effective in the short term.Rupatadine at 10 mg and 20 mg in the intermediate term achieved a 'good or excellent response' compared with placebo (RR 1.35,95% CI 1.03 to 1.77).Loratadine (10 mg) versus placebo (RR 1.86, 95% CI 0.91 to 3.79) and loratadine (10 mg) versus cetirizine (10 mg) (RR 1.05, 95%CI 0.76 to 1.43) over short-term and intermediate-term treatment showed no significant difference for 'good or excellent response' or for complete suppression of urticaria, respectively.Loratadine (10 mg) versus desloratadine (5 mg) (intermediate-term) showed no statistically significant difference for complete suppression of urticaria (RR 0.91, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.06) or for 'good or excellent response' (RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.64 to 1.71). For loratadine(10 mg) versus mizolastine (10 mg) (intermediate-term), no statistically significant difference was seen for complete suppression of urticaria (RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.64 to 1.16) or for 'good or excellent response' (RR 0.88, 95% CI 0.55 to 1.42).Loratadine (10mg) versus emedastine (2mg) (intermediate-term) showed no statistically significant difference for complete suppression(RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.39) or for 'good or excellent response' (RR 1.09, 95% CI 0.96 to 1.24); the quality of the evidence was moderate for this comparison.No difference in short-term treatment was noted between loratadine (10mg) and hydroxyzine (25mg) in terms of complete suppression(RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.32 to 3.10).When desloratadine (5 to 20 mg) was compared with levocetirizine (5 to 20 mg), levocetirizine appeared to be the more effective (P value < 0.02).In a comparison of fexofenadine versus cetirizine, more participants in the cetirizine group showed complete suppression of urticaria(P value < 0.001).Adverse events leading to withdrawals were not significantly different in the following comparisons: cetirizine versus placebo at 10 mg and 20 mg (RR 3.00, 95% CI 0.68 to 13.22); desloratadine 5 mg versus placebo (RR 1.46, 95% CI 0.42 to 5.10); loratadine 10 mg versus mizolastine 10 mg (RR 0.38, 95% CI 0.04 to 3.60); loratadine 10mg versus emedastine 2mg (RR 1.09, 95%CI 0.07 to 17.14);cetirizine 10 mg versus hydroxyzine 25 mg (RR 0.78, 95% CI 0.25 to 2.45); and hydroxyzine 25 mg versus placebo (RR 3.64, 95%CI 0.77 to 17.23), all intermediate term.No difference was seen between loratadine 10 mg versus mizolastine 10 mg in the proportion of participants with at least 50%improvement in quality of life (RR 3.21, 95% CI 0.32 to 32.33).Authors' conclusions Although the results of our review indicate that at standard doses of treatment, several antihistamines are effective when compared with placebo, all results were gathered from a few studies or, in some cases, from single-study estimates. The quality of the evidence was affected by the small number of studies in each comparison and the small sample size for many of the outcomes, prompting us to downgrade the quality of evidence for imprecision (unless stated for each comparison, the quality of the evidence was low).No single H1-antihistamine stands out as most effective. Cetirizine at 10 mg once daily in the short term and in the intermediate term was found to be effective in completely suppressing urticaria. Evidence is limited for desloratadine given at 5 mg once daily in the intermediate term and at 20 mg in the short term. Levocetirizine at 5 mg in the intermediate but not short term was effective for complete suppression. Levocetirizine 20 mg was effective in the short term, but 10 mg was not. No difference in rates of withdrawal due to adverse events was noted between active and placebo groups. Evidence for improvement in quality of life was insufficient.
Second-generation histamine H(1) receptor antagonists were developed to provide efficacious treatment of allergic rhinitis (AR) and chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) while decreasing adverse effects associated with first-generation agents. When comparing the efficacy and safety profiles of the newest second-generation antihistamines - desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine - many pharmacological and clinical criteria must be considered. Most importantly, these elements should not be evaluated separately but, rather, as parts of a puzzle that create a whole picture. As a class, second-generation antihistamines are highly selective for the H(1) receptor. Some bind to it with high affinity, although there is marked heterogeneity among the various compounds. They have a limited effect on the CNS, and clinical studies have noted almost no significant drug-drug interactions in the agents studied. No major cytochrome P450 inhibition has been reported with desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine, and the bioavailability of desloratadine is minimally affected by drugs interfering with transporter molecules. Of the second-generation antihistamines, desloratadine has the greatest binding affinity for the H(1) receptor. The use of desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine is not associated with clinically relevant antimuscarinic effects. Desloratadine and fexofenadine do not impair cognitive or psychomotor functioning and are comparable with placebo in terms of somnolence. Based on these pharmacological characteristics, as well as clinical endpoints such as symptom scores, quality-of-life surveys, inflammatory cell counts and investigators' global evaluations, we conclude that desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine are all efficacious treatments for AR and CIU. However, differences among the antihistamines in relation to a lack of significant interaction with drug transporter molecules and somnolence in excess of placebo may provide some advantages for the overall profile of desloratadine compared with fexofenadine and levocetirizine.
OBJECTIVE: To review information on desloratadine, a nonsedating antihistamine. DATA SOURCES: An English-language MEDLINE search was conducted (1966-July 2002). References of identified articles were subsequently reviewed for additional data. Schering Corporation provided unpublished information. STUDY SELECTION/DATA EXTRACTION: Articles and abstracts pertaining to desloratadine were considered for inclusion, with emphasis on randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials. DATA SYNTHESIS: Desloratadine is approved for the treatment of symptoms associated with seasonal allergic rhinitis (SAR), perennial allergic rhinitis (PAR), and chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) in patients aged > or =12 years. In placebo-controlled trials, desloratadine demonstrated superior efficacy as a once-daily treatment of SAR, PAR, and CIU. Data suggest that desloratadine has antiinflammatory and decongestant activity. CONCLUSIONS: Desloratadine appears to be a "me-too" agent, with no major differences compared with other second-generation antihistamines.
We compared the effects of the first-, second- and third-generation antihistamines in different doses on enzyme activity and cytokine production by macrophages and their death using an in vitro model. It was found that decreasing the dose led to an increase in the number of viable cells; after contact with second-generation antihistamines (loratadine, desloratadine), apoptosis of macrophages predominated. A dose-dependent increase in activity of ATPase and 5'-AMP with less pronounced effect of second-generation drugs was revealed. It was shown that under the influence of drugs, macrophages do not produce IL-1beta, but actively synthesize TNFalpha and IL-10, which indicates the immunomodulatory properties of these drugs.
Desloratadine, a second-generation histamine H1 receptor antagonist, has established itself as a first-line drug for the treatment of allergic diseases. Despite its effectiveness, desloratadine exhibits an antagonistic effect on muscarinic M3 receptor, which can cause side effects such as dry mouth and urinary retention, ultimately limiting its clinical application. Herein, we describe the discovery of compound Ⅲ-4, a novel H1 receptor antagonist with significant H1 receptor antagonistic activity (IC(50) = 24.12 nM) and enhanced selectivity towards peripheral H1 receptor. In particular, Ⅲ-4 exhibits reduced M3 receptor inhibitory potency (IC(50) > 10,000 nM) and acceptable hERG inhibitory activity (17.6 +/- 2.1 muM) compare with desloratadine. Additionally, Ⅲ-4 exhibits favorable pharmacokinetic properties, as well as in vivo efficacy and safety profiles. All of these reveal that Ⅲ-4 has potential to emerge as a novel H1 receptor antagonist for the treatment of allergic diseases. More importantly, the compound Ⅲ-4 (HY-078020) has recently been granted clinical approval.
Urticaria is a common skin disease, which in its chronic form, is a very disturbing condition. Because histamine is the best-documented chemical mediator of urticaria, histamine-antagonists are the mainstay of therapy. First-generation antihistamines are limited by their tendency to produce sedation and anticholinergic side effects. Most of the newer second generation antihistamines compare well with the earlier agents in efficacy but are not limited by the same adverse side effects. Loratadine may be distinguished from other second-generation antihistamines by its pharmacodynamic profile, as well as its tolerability and safety.
There continues to be a great deal of interest in the anti-asthmatic role of antihistamines. Antihistamines have recently been shown to have anti-inflammatory properties that are more extensive than simply the blocking of histamine receptors. For example, new evidence suggests that the suppression of cell adhesion molecule expression occurs with these drugs. The anti-inflammatory and anti-asthmatic effects of antihistamines have been evaluated in patients with both allergic asthma and rhinitis, given the established association between allergic inflammation of the upper and lower airways, with evidence to suggest that antihistamines have clinically relevant anti-asthmatic properties. As well as conferring benefits in asthma symptom control and the measurement of lung function, studies assessing the effect of histamine receptor antagonists on bronchial hyperresponsiveness suggest that there is bronchoprotection during both methacholine and mannitol challenges. Recently, there has also been considerable interest in the effect of combining an antihistamine with a leukotriene receptor antagonist. This combination has an anti-asthmatic effect that is greater than that of either drug given alone and may be comparable to inhaled corticosteroid therapy.
Compound 12a (JZP-361) acted as a potent and reversible inhibitor of human recombinant MAGL (hMAGL, IC50=46 nM), and was found to have almost 150-fold higher selectivity over human recombinant fatty acid amide hydrolase (hFAAH, IC50=7.24 muM) and 35-fold higher selectivity over human alpha/beta-hydrolase-6 (hABHD6, IC50=1.79 muM). Additionally, compound 12a retained H1 antagonistic affinity (pA2=6.81) but did not show cannabinoid receptor activity, when tested at concentrations ⩽ 10 muM. Hence, compound 12a represents a novel dual-acting pharmacological tool possessing both MAGL-inhibitory and antihistaminergic activities.
Triamcinolone is a commonly used synthetic corticosteroid that has recently been tested in a large clinical trial for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and shown to have some benefits. To our knowledge, there are no reviews of the pharmacotherapy of triamcinolone. This review has a brief overview of the pharmacology of triamcinolone, followed by a discussion of the clinical trials with triamcinolone. Triamcinolone is used in the treatment of respiratory inflammation, rheumatoid arthritis and a variety of other inflammatory conditions.
Chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) is a common dermatologic disorder that may severely impair quality of life. Patients may suffer symptoms such as pruritus and disfigurement due to wheals for years or decades. Advances have been made in the last 10 years with the identification of an autoimmune pathogenesis in a significant proportion of patients. Despite this, treatment remains symptomatic, and antihistamines are the first choice of therapy once the diagnosis of CIU has been established. The goal of treatment is rapid, long-lasting symptom relief, and currently available antihistamines fail to provide this in many cases. Desloratadine is a novel, potent H1-receptor antagonist with additional inhibitory effects on inflammatory mediators such as cytokines and adhesion molecules. Newly published data on the efficacy and safety of desloratadine in CIU is highly encouraging, suggesting that the drug may improve symptom control above that currently available.
Desloratadine is the orally active major metabolite of the nonsedating H1-antihistamine loratadine. The drug had no adverse cardiovascular effects in various animal models or when administered at 9 times the recommended adult dosage for 10 days in volunteers. Therapeutic dosages had no effects on wakefulness or psychomotor performance in healthy volunteers. No clinically significant interactions have been reported between desloratadine and drugs that inhibit the cytochrome P450 system, nor does the drug potentiate the adverse psychomotor effects of alcohol. Oral desloratadine 5 mg once daily for up to 4 weeks in patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis (SAR) significantly reduced nasal (including congestion) and non-nasal symptoms and improved health-related quality of life compared with placebo. Similar beneficial effects were observed in patients with SAR and coexisting asthma (in whom asthma symptoms and use of beta2-agonists were reduced). Desloratadine 5 mg once daily for 6 weeks significantly improved pruritus and reduced the number of hives compared with placebo in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU). Sleep and daytime performance also improved. Desloratadine was well tolerated in clinical trials and had an adverse event profile similar to that of placebo in patients with SAR (with or without asthma) or CIU.
The extremely low reporting rate of cardiovascular adverse events for loratadine, the possible preferential use of loratadine in patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disorders, and the impressive lack of cardiovascular effects at extremely high concentrations in clinical and preclinical studies demonstrate the very safe cardiovascular profile of loratadine.
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is an uncommon and self-limiting skin rash commonly caused by drugs and is characterized by the acute onset of fever, pustulosis, and neutrophilia from 4 to 10 days after the drug intake. We describe a case of AGEP in a 61-year-old woman that was hospitalized for the acute onset of fever, erythroderma, and pustulosis. Clinical history revealed that she had been treating a bacterial inguinal intertrigo for 4 days with ciprofloxacin 500 mg tablets twice daily and desloratadine 5 mg tablet once daily. To the best of our knowledge, this is the third reported case of AGEP caused by ciprofloxacin, supporting two other previous reports.
Histamine is one of the most important steps in the phlogistic allergic reaction. Its activity is due to the link to specific receptors on the cellular surface. H1-receptors of second generation are the most currently prescribed drugs in allergic diseases for their high selectivity, little or no central sedative effect, rapid onset of action and long half lives. Antihistamines can modulate part of immunological mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of allergic inflammation reducing mediator release and expression of adhesion molecules, regulating the release of cytokines, chemokines and consequently inflammatory cells recruitment. The anti-inflammatory effects of cetirizine, desloratadine and levocetirizine are reviewed. Quality of life is considered too, as a main parameter in a global evaluation of the antihistamine's effects.
BACKGROUND: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is rapidly increasing in global prevalence. Symptoms of AR, particularly nasal congestion, can cause quality of life (QoL) impairment. Second-generation antihistamines are a recommended first-line therapy for AR but are not viewed as very effective for the treatment of congestion. Therefore, an antihistamine plus a decongestant, such as the combination of desloratadine and pseudoephedrine, is a convenient and efficacious treatment. OBJECTIVE: To review the clinical evidence on the efficacy and safety of combination desloratadine/pseudoephedrine for the treatment of AR symptoms, particularly nasal congestion. RESULTS: Four large studies found that improvement in nasal congestion is enhanced when patients are treated with combination desloratadine/pseudoephedrine. The combination drug significantly improved mean reflective nasal congestion scores in these studies compared with either component as monotherapy (p <or= .009 for all). These improvements in congestion were observed by day 2. Mean reductions in nasal congestion scores were comparable between the once- and twice-daily dosing regimens of the combination drug. CONCLUSION: Comprehensive treatment of AR that effectively relieves nasal congestion can also improve patient QoL. Administration of the second-generation antihistamine desloratadine in combination with the decongestant pseudoephedrine may be regarded as an efficacious and convenient option for patients with AR who are particularly troubled by nasal congestion.
BACKGROUND: Tumor-associated inflammation suggests that anti-inflammatory medication could be beneficial in cancer therapy. Loratadine, an antihistamine, has demonstrated improved survival in certain cancers. However, the anticancer mechanisms of loratadine in lung cancer remain unclear. OBJECTIVE: This study investigates the anticancer mechanisms of loratadine in lung cancer. METHODS: A retrospective cohort of 4,522 lung cancer patients from 2006 to 2018 was analyzed to identify noncancer drug exposures associated with prognosis. Cellular experiments, animal models, and RNA-seq data analysis were employed to validate the findings and explore the antitumor effects of loratadine. RESULTS: This retrospective study revealed a positive association between loratadine administration and ameliorated survival outcomes in lung cancer patients, exhibiting dose dependency. Rigorous in vitro and in vivo assays demonstrated that apoptosis induction and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) reduction were stimulated by moderate loratadine concentrations, whereas pyroptosis was triggered by elevated dosages. Intriguingly, loratadine was found to augment PPARgamma levels, which acted as a gasdermin D transcription promoter and caspase-8 activation enhancer. Consequently, loratadine might incite a sophisticated interplay between apoptosis and pyroptosis, facilitated by the pivotal role of caspase-8. CONCLUSION: Loratadine use is linked to enhanced survival in lung cancer patients, potentially due to its role in modulating the interplay between apoptosis and pyroptosis via caspase-8.
The symptoms of allergic rhinitis vary in severity over the course of the day and often are worse in the morning. This review focuses on data from clinical studies of the antihistamine desloratadine to establish whether it effectively controls the morning symptoms of allergic rhinitis. Studies of desloratadine in patients with allergic rhinitis that used instantaneous scoring to assess the severity of morning symptoms were selected for inclusion from published literature (peer-reviewed articles and abstracts presented at professional meetings). When administered once daily, desloratadine is effective in alleviating the morning symptoms of allergic rhinitis, including nasal congestion. Its action is sustained over the 24-hour dosing interval. A comparison of morning and evening dosing of desloratadine revealed equivalent relief of morning symptoms, illustrating that the effect of desloratadine is independent of the time of dosing. Clinical studies indicate that desloratadine is nonsedating and well tolerated, with no evidence of adverse cardiac effects. For many patients with allergic rhinitis, symptoms are most severe in the morning. To maximize the benefits for patients, pharmacologic agents used in the management of allergic rhinitis should be effective in controlling these peak morning symptoms. The sustained 24-hour action of desloratadine and its effective control of morning symptoms make it a valuable tool for improving the quality of life of patients with allergic rhinitis.
Heterotopic ossification (HO) is a pathological condition in which ectopic bone forms within soft tissues such as skeletal muscle. Human platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha positive (PDGFRalpha+) cells, which were proved to be the original cells of HO were incubated in osteogenic differentiation medium with Food and Drug Administration-approved compounds. Alkaline phosphatase activity was measured as a screening to inhibit osteogenic differentiation. For the compounds which inhibited osteogenic differentiation of PDGFRalpha+ cells, we examined dose dependency of its effect using alizarin red S staining and its cell toxicity using WST-8. In addition, regulation of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP)-Smad signaling which is the major signal of osteogenic differentiation was investigated by Western blotting to elucidate the mechanism of osteogenesis inhibitory effect by the compound. In vivo experiment, complete transverse incision of Achilles tendons in mice was made and mice were fed the compound by mixing with drinking water after operation. Ten weeks after operation, we assessed and quantified HO by micro-computed tomography scan. Intriguingly, we discovered desloratadine inhibited osteogenic differentiation of PDGFRalpha+ cells using the drug repositioning method. Desloratadine inhibited osteogenic differentiation of the cells dose dependently without cell toxicity. Desloratadine suppressed phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 induced by BMP2 in PDGFRalpha+ cells. In Achilles tenotomy mice model, desloratadine treatment significantly inhibited ectopic bone formation compared with control. In conclusion, we discovered desloratadine inhibited osteogenic differentiation using human PDGFRalpha+ cells and proved its efficacy using Achilles tenotomy ectopic bone formation model in vivo. Our study paved the way to inhibit HO in early clinical use because of its guaranteed safety.
BACKGROUND: An increase in dosages up to fourfold of second generation antihistamines is recommended for recalcitrant chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU). No regimen guidelines about dose de-escalation, however, are mentioned once the disease is controlled. OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the treatment outcomes and dose reduction in desloratadine assessed using the urticarial activity score over 7 consecutive days. METHODS: Medical records of all patients with CSU treated with desloratadine were collected retrospectively during a period from January 2010 to December 2013. RESULTS: Sixty-seven (94.4%) patients had remission of the disease with variable doses of desloratadine. The patients who had CSU concomitant with antithyroid antibodies or high erythrocyte sedimentation rates had a greater tendency not to respond to the standard dose. Once the disease was completely controlled, 67 patients finished the treatment, but 63 (94%) patients had recurrent symptoms. Sixty-three patients took the same dose that induced the response for a further 4 weeks before stopping or reducing the dose, 41/63 (65.1%), however developed urticaria again. Forty-one patients took the same dose for a further 8 weeks; only 2/41 (4.9%) patients developed the rash again. The mean follow-up period after the disease was controlled was 7.5 months. CONCLUSION: Most patients need higher than the standard doses to obtain remission. Once the disease is completely controlled, however, maintenance of the same dosage for at least 8 weeks before dose reduction is suggested in order to avoid recurrence of the symptoms.
