Initially thought to be virtually free of negative effects, benzodiazepines are now known to carry risks of dependence, withdrawal, and negative side effects. Among the most controversial of these side effects are cognitive effects. Long-term treatment with benzodiazepines has been described as causing impairment in several cognitive domains, such as visuospatial ability, speed of processing, and verbal learning. Conversely, long-term benzodiazepine use has also been described as causing no chronic cognitive impairment, with any cognitive dysfunction in patients ascribed to sedation or inattention or considered temporary and associated with peak plasma levels. Complicating the issue are whether anxiety disorders themselves are associated with cognitive deficits and the extent to which patients are aware of their own cognitive problems. In an attempt to settle this debate, meta-analyses of peer-reviewed studies were conducted and found that cognitive dysfunction did in fact occur in patients treated long term with benzodiazepines, and although cognitive dysfunction improved after benzodiazepines were withdrawn, patients did not return to levels of functioning that matched benzodiazepine-free controls. Neuroimaging studies have found transient changes in the brain after benzodiazepine administration but no brain abnormalities in patients treated long term with benzodiazepines. Such findings suggest that patients should be advised of potential cognitive effects when treated long term with benzodiazepines, although they should also be informed that the impact of such effects may be insignificant in the daily functioning of most patients.
The nurse administering any BZD--especially lorazepam--to a neonate must be knowledgeable about the drug's effects and risks and must remember that BZDs do not provide analgesia. The sedative effects of lorazepam will increase with concomitant use of opioids. The nurse must be alert for adverse reactions (Table 1). Close monitoring of the neonate's respiratory effort and blood pressure is important. Because of the various reported cases of myoclonus in neonates after lorazepam administration, close observation for seizure activity is imperative. Although lorazepam use may be beneficial in specific instances, administration should be approached with caution in the neonate (especially in the preterm neonate) and other agents considered.
Delirium is defined by a fluctuating level of attentiveness and has been associated with increased ICU mortality and poor cognitive outcomes in both general ICU and neurocritical care populations. Sedation use in the ICU can contribute to delirium. Limiting ICU sedation allows for the diagnosis of underlying acute neurological insults associated with delirium and leads to shorter mechanical ventilation time, shorter length of stay, and improved 1 year mortality rates. Identifying the underlying etiology of delirium is critical to developing treatment paradigms.
BACKGROUND: Clinicians often encounter agitated patients, and current treatment options include benzodiazepines and antipsychotics. Ketamine rapidly induces dissociation, maintains cardiovascular stability, spontaneous respirations, and airway reflexes. There are no prospective, randomized studies comparing ketamine to other agents in the initial management of acute agitation in the Emergency Department (ED). OBJECTIVE: Determine the efficacy and safety of ketamine compared to parenteral haloperidol plus lorazepam for initial control of acute agitation. METHODS: This study was a prospective, single-institution, randomized, open-label, real world, standard of care pilot study. Adult patients with combative agitation were randomized to ketamine (4 mg/kg IM or 1 mg/kg IV) or haloperidol/lorazepam (haloperidol 5-10 mg IM or IV + lorazepam 1-2 mg IM or IV). The primary outcome was sedation within 5 min, and secondary outcomes included sedation within 15 min, time to sedation, and safety. RESULTS: Ninety three patients were enrolled from January 15, 2018 to October 10, 2018. Significantly more patients who received ketamine compared to haloperidol/lorazepam were sedated within 5 min (22% vs 0%, p = 0.001) and 15 min (66% vs 7%, p < 0.001). The median time to sedation in patients who received ketamine compared to haloperidol/lorazepam was 15 vs 36 min respectively (p < 0.001). Patients who received ketamine experienced a significant, but transient tachycardia (p = 0.01) and hypertension (p = 0.01). CONCLUSION: In patients with combative agitation, ketamine was significantly more effective than haloperidol/lorazepam for initial control of acute agitation, and was not associated with any significant adverse effects.
Diplopia - seeing double - is a symptom with many potential causes, both neurological and ophthalmological. Benzodiazepine induced ocular side-effects are rarely reported. Lorazepam is one of the commonly used benzodiazepine in psychiatric practice. Visual problems associated with administration of lorazepam are rarely reported and the frequency of occurrence is not established. We report a rare case of lorazepam-induced diplopia in a newly diagnosed case of obsessive compulsive disorder.
Catatonia poses special diagnostic and management problems for the psychiatrist. The authors report three patients with psychogenic catatonia who received intramuscular lorazepam and experienced rapid resolution of their conditions.
This case report describes a 15-year-old boy who developed severe psychotic symptoms and EKG changes after using synthetic cannabis via "puff bars". The patient had consumed the substance for eight weeks for his sleep disturbances. His EKG showed a prolonged QTc and he became increasingly agitated and psychotic during admission. Intensive treatment with lorazeapm and antipsychotic medication resulted in reduced symptoms. This case highlights the importance of collaboration between psychiatry and somatic care, and careful monitoring of cardiovascular risks associated with synthetic cannabinoid use.
IMPORTANCE: Although several pharmacological interventions for delirium have been investigated, their overall benefit and safety remain unclear. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate evidence regarding pharmacological interventions for delirium treatment and prevention. DATA SOURCES: PubMed, Embase, ProQuest, ScienceDirect, Cochrane Central, Web of Science, ClinicalKey, and ClinicalTrials.gov from inception to May 17, 2018. STUDY SELECTION: Randomized clinical trials (RCTs) examining pharmacological interventions for delirium treatment and prevention. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: To extract data according to a predetermined list of interests, the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) guidelines were applied, and all meta-analytic procedures were conducted using a random-effects model. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcomes were treatment response in patients with delirium and the incidence of delirium in patients at risk of delirium. RESULTS: A total of 58 RCTs were included, in which 20 RCTs with 1435 participants (mean age, 63.5 years; 65.1% male) compared the outcomes of treatment and 38 RCTs with 8168 participants (mean age, 70.2 years; 53.4% male) examined the prevention of delirium. A network meta-analysis demonstrated that haloperidol plus lorazepam provided the best response rate for delirium treatment (odds ratio [OR], 28.13; 95% CI, 2.38-333.08) compared with placebo/control. For delirium prevention, the ramelteon, olanzapine, risperidone, and dexmedetomidine hydrochloride groups had significantly lower delirium occurrence rates than placebo/control (OR, 0.07; 95% CI, 0.01-0.66 for ramelteon; OR, 0.25; 95% CI, 0.09-0.69 for olanzapine; OR, 0.27; 95% CI, 0.07-0.99 for risperidone; and OR, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.31-0.80 for dexmedetomidine hydrochloride). None of the pharmacological treatments were significantly associated with a higher risk of all-cause mortality compared with placebo/control. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This network meta-analysis demonstrated that haloperidol plus lorazepam might be the best treatment and ramelteon the best preventive medicine for delirium. None of the pharmacological interventions for treatment or prophylaxis increased the all-cause mortality.
CONTEXT: Lorazepam is currently recommended for sustained sedation of mechanically ventilated intensive care unit (ICU) patients, but this and other benzodiazepine drugs may contribute to acute brain dysfunction, ie, delirium and coma, associated with prolonged hospital stays, costs, and increased mortality. Dexmedetomidine induces sedation via different central nervous system receptors than the benzodiazepine drugs and may lower the risk of acute brain dysfunction. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether dexmedetomidine reduces the duration of delirium and coma in mechanically ventilated ICU patients while providing adequate sedation as compared with lorazepam. DESIGN, SETTING, PATIENTS, AND INTERVENTION: Double-blind, randomized controlled trial of 106 adult mechanically ventilated medical and surgical ICU patients at 2 tertiary care centers between August 2004 and April 2006. Patients were sedated with dexmedetomidine or lorazepam for as many as 120 hours. Study drugs were titrated to achieve the desired level of sedation, measured using the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS). Patients were monitored twice daily for delirium using the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM-ICU). MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Days alive without delirium or coma and percentage of days spent within 1 RASS point of the sedation goal. RESULTS: Sedation with dexmedetomidine resulted in more days alive without delirium or coma (median days, 7.0 vs 3.0; P = .01) and a lower prevalence of coma (63% vs 92%; P < .001) than sedation with lorazepam. Patients sedated with dexmedetomidine spent more time within 1 RASS point of their sedation goal compared with patients sedated with lorazepam (median percentage of days, 80% vs 67%; P = .04). The 28-day mortality in the dexmedetomidine group was 17% vs 27% in the lorazepam group (P = .18) and cost of care was similar between groups. More patients in the dexmedetomidine group (42% vs 31%; P = .61) were able to complete post-ICU neuropsychological testing, with similar scores in the tests evaluating global cognitive, motor speed, and attention functions. The 12-month time to death was 363 days in the dexmedetomidine group vs 188 days in the lorazepam group (P = .48). CONCLUSION: In mechanically ventilated ICU patients managed with individualized targeted sedation, use of a dexmedetomidine infusion resulted in more days alive without delirium or coma and more time at the targeted level of sedation than with a lorazepam infusion. TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00095251.
IMPORTANCE: The use of benzodiazepines to control agitation in delirium in the last days of life is controversial. OBJECTIVE: To compare the effect of lorazepam vs placebo as an adjuvant to haloperidol for persistent agitation in patients with delirium in the setting of advanced cancer. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Single-center, double-blind, parallel-group, randomized clinical trial conducted at an acute palliative care unit at MD Anderson Cancer Center, Texas, enrolling 93 patients with advanced cancer and agitated delirium despite scheduled haloperidol from February 11, 2014, to June 30, 2016, with data collection completed in October 2016. INTERVENTIONS: Lorazepam (3 mg) intravenously (n = 47) or placebo (n = 43) in addition to haloperidol (2 mg) intravenously upon the onset of an agitation episode. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was change in Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS) score (range, -5 [unarousable] to 4 [very agitated or combative]) from baseline to 8 hours after treatment administration. Secondary end points were rescue neuroleptic use, delirium recall, comfort (perceived by caregivers and nurses), communication capacity, delirium severity, adverse effects, discharge outcomes, and overall survival. RESULTS: Among 90 randomized patients (mean age, 62 years; women, 42 [47%]), 58 (64%) received the study medication and 52 (90%) completed the trial. Lorazepam + haloperidol resulted in a significantly greater reduction of RASS score at 8 hours (-4.1 points) than placebo + haloperidol (-2.3 points) (mean difference, -1.9 points [95% CI, -2.8 to -0.9]; P < .001). The lorazepam + haloperidol group required less median rescue neuroleptics (2.0 mg) than the placebo + haloperidol group (4.0 mg) (median difference, -1.0 mg [95% CI, -2.0 to 0]; P = .009) and was perceived to be more comfortable by both blinded caregivers and nurses (caregivers: 84% for the lorazepam + haloperidol group vs 37% for the placebo + haloperidol group; mean difference, 47% [95% CI, 14% to 73%], P = .007; nurses: 77% for the lorazepam + haloperidol group vs 30% for the placebo + haloperidol group; mean difference, 47% [95% CI, 17% to 71%], P = .005). No significant between-group differences were found in delirium-related distress and survival. The most common adverse effect was hypokinesia (3 patients in the lorazepam + haloperidol group [19%] and 4 patients in the placebo + haloperidol group [27%]). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this preliminary trial of hospitalized patients with agitated delirium in the setting of advanced cancer, the addition of lorazepam to haloperidol compared with haloperidol alone resulted in a significantly greater reduction in agitation at 8 hours. Further research is needed to assess generalizability and adverse effects. TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01949662.
Aside from their pharmacokinetic properties, e.g. their speed of action and the duration of residual effects, benzodiazepines are still considered as equivalent in terms of their effects on cognition. Here we review evidence suggesting that certain benzodiazepines, especially lorazepam, differ in a number of respects, in particular with respect to their effects on cognition. We focus this review on memory, attention and visual perception, where impairments may be brought about by only a subset of benzodiazepines in spite of their administration at doses inducing similar sedative effects. This precludes an explanation in terms of sedation. Differences in the effects of benzodiazepines have also been found in electrophysiological and animal behavioural studies. These studies are important for therapeutic approaches for two reasons: first, effects of benzodiazepine prescription on cognitive functions will differ according to the benzodiazepine, contrary to what is usually believed. Less straightforwardly are the possible therapeutic implications of specific effects on cognition following treatment with lorazepam. Indeed, the specific effects this drug has on cognition may reveal not only side-effects but also effects of potential therapeutic value. Current research concentrates on a fine scale analysis of the effects of GABA on different sub-types of GABA(A) receptors. We suggest that from looking at what makes lorazepam different in a behavioural sense from other benzodiazepines we may be in a position to design innovative treatments for major aspects of complex disorders, including schizophrenia.
A review was made of the literature exploring the psychopharmacology of lormetazepam. Results from studies show that there can be a general hangover the morning following nocturnal doses of 2 mg. Findings from more recent work have shown that the 1.5 mg dose can disrupt retrieval of information from short-term memory. Lormetazepam 1 mg has no residual sedative effects. A daytime psychopharmacodynamic study showed lormetazepam 1-2 mg to have no disruptive effects 5 h after drug intake.
Methane is a suffocating gas, and "methane deaths" are largely the result of suffocation by gas-air displacement after accidental or deliberate exposure. Neither methane gas nor other suffocating gases are a common means of homicide, with the potential exception of the use of gas in chemical weapons or gas chambers. Here, we report the case of a 53-year-old woman who was killed by her husband with methane gas. The man had given his wife a dose of Lorazepam before setting up a hose that conveyed methane from the kitchen into the apartment's bedroom. The man subsequently faked his own suicide, which was later discovered.
Lorazepam is recognized as a tranquillizer. It is presented for intramuscular and intravenous injection. In a study of this drug's possible effects in premedication, its action was studied systematically when it was used for preoperative premedication. The drug has no side-effects other than drowsiness, which occurs in almost all cases. It produces very good premedication, sometimes with anterograde amnesia in the doses used. This anterograde amnesia is dependent on the dosage used but it is always accompanied by profound drowsiness, from which the patient can be roused verbally. The dose will be selected in relation to whether amnesia is desired or not. However, whatever the dose administered (over 2.5 mg), the tranquillizing effect is always of high quality.
Eighty-seven per cent of surgical patients receiving undiluted diazepam experienced pain on injection while 6-16%, depending on the dose, manifested evidence of clinical thrombophlebitis. This was improved when diazepam, 10 mg, was diluted to 20-40 ml with intravenous solution. In contrast, lorazepam appeared to have minimal irritative or injurious effects on veins whether undiluted or diluted. In view of these results and clinical studies reporting a higher patient acceptance of lorazepam than diazepam, lorazepam may be a superior drug for use in anaesthesia.
The clinical pharmacokinetics of lorazepam, a 3-hydroxy, 1,4-benzodiazepine, indicate that it is rapidly and readily absorbed, reaching peak concentrations in the blood proportional to the dose approximately 2 hours after oral administration. Blood levels decline thereafter, with an elimination half-life of about 12 hrs. Conjugation with glucuronic acid to form inactive lorazepam glucuronide is the major metabolic pathway. Seventy (70) to 75% of the administered dose is excreted as the glucuronide conjugate in the urine. On multiple-dose regimens, steady state blood levels directly proportional to the daily dose occur within 2--3 days and are maintained after several months of continuous treatment. The active drug and the glucuronide conjugate are completely eliminated from the blood within 1 week following the last dose.
Writing this article enabled Matthew Walker to revisit the few randomised controlled trials of status epilepticus. This confirmed how poor the data are and that there is little evidence to support one treatment regimen over another
To address the economic issues posed by the introduction of 5-hydroxytryptamine3 receptor antagonist (5-HT3 RA), we performed a cost-effectiveness analysis based on clinical trial data published in the recent literature. Cost calculations include initial treatment and a second-line salvage treatment. The average cost and incremental cost were established. Incremental cost corresponds to the extra cost involved in achieving total control of emesis in 1% extra patients. If 5-HT3 RA is not part of the initial treatment, salvage treatment with ondansetron is not cost-effective. Moreover, starting with the combination of ondansetron plus dexamethasone saves more money than starting with ondansetron alone. However, if the difference in emesis control is only minimal, treatment with the 5-HT3 RA remains more expensive.
"Agitation" is a term that is used to describe a wide range of dysfunctional behaviours in geriatric populations. The term is so widely used that in many cases it loses clinical meaning and therefore a more restricted use of the term is suggested. When patients with agitation are identified it is important to look for underlying treatable pathology which is often present. Controversy surrounding the most appropriate medications is reviewed with particular reference to both neuroleptics and benzodiazepines. A randomized double-blind comparison of lorazepam and alprazolam in demented patients with agitation was carried out. While both drugs were efficacious for some patients, there were significantly more serious side-effects with lorazepam. It appears that there is a role for benzodiazepines such as alprazolam in the management of the agitated demented patient.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the pharmacokinetic profile of intranasal lorazepam in comparison to currently established administration routes. Eleven healthy volunteers completed this randomized crossover study. On three occasions, each separated by a 1-week washout, subjects received a 2 mg dose of lorazepam via the intranasal, intravenous, or intramuscular route. Blood samples were collected serially from 0 to 36 hours. Noncompartmental methods were used to determine pharmacokinetic parameters. Lorazepam was well absorbed following intranasal administration with a mean (%CV) bioavailability of 77.7(11.1). Intranasal administration resulted in a faster absorption rate than intramuscular administration. Elimination profiles were comparable between all three routes. The concentration-time profile for intranasal delivery demonstrated evidence of a double peak in several subjects, suggesting partial oral absorption. Females were found to have significantly higher AUC values than males for all three delivery routes. Overall, this study demonstrated favorable pharmacokinetics of intranasal lorazepam in relation to standard administration methods. Intranasal delivery could provide an alternative, noninvasive delivery route for lorazepam.
