Losartan (Cozaar) is an angiotensin II receptor antagonist with antihypertensive activity. It is used in the management of hypertension and heart failure. Nomenclature, formulae, elemental analysis, and appearance of the drug are included in this review. The uses, applications, and the variety of synthetic pathways of this drug are outlined. Physical characteristics including: ionization constant, solubility, X-ray powder diffraction pattern, thermal methods of analysis, UV spectrum, IR spectrum, mass spectrum with fragmentation patterns, and NMR (1H and 13C) spectra of losartan together with the corresponding figures and/or tables are all produced. This profile also includes the monograph of British Pharmacopoeia, together with several reported analytical methods including: spectrophotometric, electrochemical, chromatographic, and capillary electrophoretic methods. The stability, the pharmacokinetic behavior and the pharmacology of the drug are also provided.
Losartan is the first orally available angiotensin-receptor antagonist without agonist properties. Following oral administration, losartan is rapidly absorbed, reaching maximum concentrations 1-2 hours post-administration. After oral administration approximately 14% of a losartan dose is converted to the pharmacologically active E 3174 metabolite. E 3174 is 10- to 40-fold more potent than its parent compound and its estimated terminal half-life ranges from 6 to 9 hours. The pharmacokinetics of losartan and E 3174 are linear, dose-proportional and do not substantially change with repetitive administration. The recommended dosage of losartan 50 mg/day can be administered without regard to food. There are no clinically significant effects of age, sex or race on the pharmacokinetics of losartan, and no dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with mild hepatic impairment or various degrees of renal insufficiency. Losartan, or its E 3174 metabolite, is not removed during haemodialysis. The major metabolic pathway for losartan is by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4, 2C9 and 2C10 isoenzymes. Overall, losartan has a favorable drug-drug interaction profile, as evidenced by the lack of clinically relevant interactions between this drug and a range of inhibitors and stimulators of the CYP450 system. Losartan does not have a drug-drug interaction with hydrochlorothiazide, warfarin or digoxin. Losartan should be avoided in pregnancy, as is the case with all other angiotensin-receptor antagonists. When given in the second and third trimester of pregnancy, losartan is often associated with serious fetal toxicity. Losartan is a competitive antagonist that causes a parallel rightward shift of the concentration-contractile response curve to angiotensin-II, while E 3174 is a noncompetitive "insurmountable" antagonist of angiotensin-II. The maximum recommended daily dose of losartan is 100mg, which can be given as a once-daily dose or by splitting the same total daily dose into two doses. Losartan reduces blood pressure comparably to other angiotensin-receptor antagonists. Losartan has been extensively studied relative to end-organ protection, with studies having been conducted in diabetic nephropathy, heart failure, post-myocardial infarction and hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy. The results of these studies have been sufficiently positive to support a more widespread use of angiotensin-receptor antagonists in the setting of various end-organ diseases. Losartan, like other angiotensin-receptor antagonists, is devoid of significant adverse effects.
PURPOSE: There is increasing recognition that progress in immuno-oncology could be accelerated by evaluating immune-based therapies in dogs with spontaneous cancers. Osteosarcoma (OS) is one tumor for which limited clinical benefit has been observed with the use of immune checkpoint inhibitors. We previously reported the angiotensin receptor blocker losartan suppressed metastasis in preclinical mouse models through blockade of CCL2-CCR2 monocyte recruitment. Here we leverage dogs with spontaneous OS to determine losartan's safety and pharmacokinetics associated with monocyte pharmacodynamic endpoints, and assess its antitumor activity, in combination with the kinase inhibitor toceranib. PATIENTS AND METHODS: CCL2 expression, monocyte infiltration, and monocyte recruitment by human and canine OS tumors and cell lines were assessed by gene expression, ELISA, and transwell migration assays. Safety and efficacy of losartan-toceranib therapy were evaluated in 28 dogs with lung metastatic OS. Losartan PK and monocyte PD responses were assessed in three dose cohorts of dogs by chemotaxis, plasma CCL2, and multiplex cytokine assays, and RNA-seq of losartan-treated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. RESULTS: Human and canine OS cells secrete CCL2 and elicit monocyte migration, which is inhibited by losartan. Losartan PK/PD studies in dogs revealed that a 10-fold-higher dose than typical antihypertensive dosing was required for blockade of monocyte migration. Treatment with high-dose losartan and toceranib was well-tolerated and induced a clinical benefit rate of 50% in dogs with lung metastases. CONCLUSIONS: Losartan inhibits the CCL2-CCR2 axis, and in combination with toceranib, exerts significant biological activity in dogs with metastatic osteosarcoma, supporting evaluation of this drug combination in patients with pediatric osteosarcoma. See related commentary by Weiss et al., p. 571.
BACKGROUND: Angiotensin receptor antagonists are a relatively new class of cardiovascular drugs for which the clinical application has not yet been completely defined. OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the pharmacology of the various angiotensin receptor antagonists available in Australia, including their mode of action, side effects and potential drug interactions. DISCUSSION: Angiotensin receptor antagonists are effective drugs for the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension which have a side effect profile similar to placebo. Their role in the management of hypertension remains to be defined, but they are of particular use to patients who are intolerant of ACE inhibitors because of cough. It is uncertain at the present time whether the benefits of ACE inhibition in other disorders such as congestive heart failure and following myocardial infarction will be similar for angiotensin receptor blockers.
Hypertensive nephrosclerosis is the second most common cause of end-stage renal disease after diabetes. For years, hypertensive kidney disease has been focused on the afferent arterioles and glomeruli damage and the involvement of the renin angiotensin system (RAS). Nonetheless, in recent years, novel evidence has demonstrated that persistent high blood pressure injures tubular cells, leading to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Injury primarily determined at the glomerular level by hypertension causes changes in post-glomerular peritubular capillaries that in turn induce endothelial damage and hypoxia. Microvasculature dysfunction, by inducing hypoxic environment, triggers inflammation, EMT with epithelial cells dedifferentiation and fibrosis. Hypertensive kidney disease also includes podocyte effacement and loss, leading to disruption of the filtration barrier. This review highlights the molecular mechanisms and histologic aspects involved in the pathophysiology of hypertensive kidney disease incorporating knowledge about EMT and tubulointerstitial fibrosis. The role of the Hsp70 chaperone on the angiotensin II-induced EMT after angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT(1)R) blockage, as a possible molecular target for therapeutic strategy against hypertensive renal damage is discussed.
Losartan was the ninth most prescribed drug in the United States in 2016, and several other angiotensin-II receptor blockers (ARBs) are widely prescribed. Since July 2018, >2 dozen specific ARB products have been recalled owing to the presence of potentially carcinogenic nitrosamine impurities in selected lots. As is the case with all U.S. drug recalls, the ARB recalls have been voluntary on the part of the companies involved. In April 2019, the Food and Drug Administration categorized marketed ARB products with respect to nitrosamine impurities: (1) not present, (2) to be determined with no prior lots removed from the market (TBD), or (3) to be determined in the context of prior lots having been removed from the market (TBD*). The data were structured as hundreds of rows of products. Owing to the complexity of these data, more than a year into the recalls, it remains difficult for clinicians to understand which ARB products are free of impurities.
The following describes a case of isolated visceral angioedema related to an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) medication. Additionally, we discuss the pathophysiology of drug-induced angioedema, various presentations that can be encountered, and the leading theorized mechanisms of how renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) blocking medications lead to angioedema. The goal of sharing this case is to help increase awareness of the possibility of ARB-induced angioedema and to recommend keeping visceral angioedema as part of the differential diagnosis when presented with a patient who is taking an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) or ARB medication that is experiencing gastrointestinal symptoms of unclear etiology.
INTRODUCTION: Angiotensin II receptor blockers are widely used for the treatment of arterial hypertension and heart failure. However, recent studies on animal models of seizures showed that in the brain, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system might be involved in neuroinflammation; therefore, the administration of angiotensin II receptor blockers that cross the blood/brain barrier, reduces not only blood pressure but reduces neuroinflammation-induced neuronal injury. Apart from this neuroprotective effect, these drugs exhibit anticonvulsant activity in animal models of seizures, and losartan is associated with a probable anti-epileptogenic activity. AREAS COVERED: In this review, we intended to highlight the role of drug-drug interactions involving angiotensin II receptor antagonists with antiepileptic drugs accompanied by a brief characteristic of the role of RAS in neuroinflammation. EXPERT OPINION: Some combinations of antiepileptic drugs (lamotrigine or valproate) with sartans are particularly effective in terms of enhanced seizure control. Considering a possible anti-epileptogenic activity of losartan, its combinations with antiepileptic drugs may prove especially beneficial in epileptogenesis inhibition.
The importance of the renin angiotensin system (RAS) in the development and progression of the diabetic nephropathy is confirmed with the recent demonstration that the development of nephropathy in the diabetic patients can be avoided by blockers of the RAS. For that reason, the promotion of preventive programs for the detection of microalbuminuria, from the early phases of the diabetes is needed. Control of blood pressure, of glucose and lipids are needed. If microalbuminuria is present, the administration of a blocker of RAS, even in the presence of normal blood pressure can prevent the progression to diabetic nephropathy. The main objective to prevent the development and progression of nephropathy in the diabetic patients, as well as the cardiovascular risk, is a strict control of the PA.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to report our first clinical experience using topical losartan for the treatment of severe corneal haze after epithelium-off corneal cross-linking (CXL). METHODS: A 20-year-old man presented with clinically significant corneal haze in the right eye 1 month following Ultraviolet-A/Riboflavin Epithelium-off Collagen CXL. Haze progressed to a deep stromal scar, and vision was 20/150 with no improvement on refraction, 60 days after CXL. After unsuccessful treatment with topical corticosteroids, the patient elected to start off-label treatment with topical losartan 0.8 mg/mL, administered 6 times per day. RESULTS: After 3 months of initiating topical losartan, the right eye vision improved to preoperative vision of 20/40-1. Corneal haze was significantly reduced as observed on slitlamp examination and on Scheimpflug corneal tomography (Pentacam; OCULUS, Inc. Arlington, WA). CONCLUSIONS: Topical losartan, a transforming growth factor-beta inhibitor, is a potential treatment in clinically significant corneal haze following epithelium-off corneal CXL. This clinical experience highlights the potential efficacy of topical losartan as a novel therapeutic option in such cases, but further clinical studies are needed.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the safety of using angiotensin II receptor blockers in patients who have experienced angioedema following treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. DATA SOURCES: Clinical literature identified through MEDLINE (January 1966-August 1999). Key search terms included angioneurotic edema, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, receptors-angiotensin, and losartan. DATA SYNTHESIS: ACE inhibitor-induced angioedema occurs with an incidence of 0.1-0.5%. Alternative therapy is necessary for patients who experience this potentially life-threatening adverse effect. Since angiotensin II receptor blockers do not increase concentrations of bradykinin, the proposed mechanism of ACE inhibitor-induced angioedema, they were presumed to be safe alternatives. Recent case reports, however, document angioedema following therapy with angiotensin II receptor blockers; 32% of the reported patients experienced a prior episode of angioedema attributed to ACE inhibitor therapy. CONCLUSIONS: Until the exact cause of both ACE inhibitor- and angiotensin II receptor blocker-induced angioedema is determined, angiotensin II receptor blockers should be used with extreme caution in patients with a prior history of angioedema.
Japanese patients with uncontrolled essential hypertension received single-blind losartan 50 mg/hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg (L50/H12.5) for 8 weeks. Patients whose blood pressure (BP) remained uncontrolled were randomized double-blind to fixed-dose losartan 50 mg/hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg/amlodipine 5 mg (L50/H12.5/A5) or L50/H12.5 for 8 weeks followed by open-label L50/H12.5/A5 for 44 weeks. Adverse events were assessed. After 8 weeks, diastolic and systolic BP were reduced significantly more with L50/H12.5/A5 versus L50/H12.5 (both p < 0.001). Mean changes in diastolic and systolic BP were sustained for 44 weeks. L50/H12.5/A5 was well-tolerated and improved BP significantly versus L50/H12.5 in Japanese patients with uncontrolled essential hypertension.
We report a case of coronary artery spasm documented with angiography in a patient with severe chest pain, electrocardiographic ST-segment elevations and highly elevated troponin I. Symptom onset was 15 min after the patient's first-ever intake of losartan. Although parts of the clinical presentation suggested allergy or anaphylaxis, laboratory testing did not support this.
Postoperative tissue fibrosis represents a major complication in orthopedics. Transforming growth factor beta 1 is a key molecule in the development of postoperative fibrosis. High concentrations of transforming growth factor beta 1 have also been implicated in various diseases. Agents that counteract the actions of transforming growth factor beta 1 have been investigated as potential antifibrotic medications and as adjunct treatment to platelet-rich plasma injections (increased amounts of transforming growth factor beta 1) to improve their effectiveness and/or safety profile. Losartan blocks transforming growth factor beta 1 action and has attracted special interest in orthopedic research that focuses on how to reduce the risk of postoperative fibrosis. [Orthopedics. 2018; 41(5):e591-e597.].
Inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAS) exert beneficial effects in diabetic nephropathy, but the possibility of regression of existing renal lesions remains to be investigated. Teles et al. tested the effects of the RAS inhibitor losartan in rats starting 10 months after induction of diabetes, when glomerular lesions were already present. They linked the reductions of proteinuria with regression of mesangial expansion. More advanced lesions were not affected. There were no dose-response renal effects of losartan.
Although interruption of the renin-angiotensin system with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors has evolved as the therapy of choice in heart failure based on large-scale morbidity and mortality clinical studies, treatment with angiotensin type 1 receptor blockers (ARB) offers an alternative and potentially superior method of treating this condition. Early pilot studies were quite promising; however, two well designed, large-scale trials have shown that the reduction in heart failure mortality with ARB is not significantly different from the reduction with ACE inhibitors. Possible reasons for lack of ARB superiority include insufficient dosing of ARB, differences in effects mediated through angiotensin II type 2 receptors, interaction with beta-blockers, and bradykinin-mediated effects specific to ACE inhibitors. The ACE inhibitors remain the current therapy of choice in treating heart failure until further outcomes trial data become available; however, ARB are a reasonable alternative in patients intolerant of ACE inhibitors.
BACKGROUND: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) down-regulates angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, potentially increasing angiotensin II. We hypothesized that losartan compared to usual care decreases mortality and is safe in patients hospitalized with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). We aimed to evaluate the effect of losartan versus usual care on 28-day mortality in patients hospitalized for acute COVID-19. METHODS: Eligibility criteria included adults admitted for acute COVID-19. Exclusion criteria were hypotension, hyperkalemia, acute kidney injury, and use of angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors within 7 days. Participants were randomized to losartan 25-100 mg/day orally for the hospital duration or 3 months or the control arm (usual care) in 29 hospitals in Canada and France. The primary outcome was 28-day mortality. Secondary outcomes were hospital mortality, organ support, and serious adverse events (SAEs). RESULTS: The trial was stopped early because of a serious safety concern with losartan. In 341 patients, any SAE and hypotension were significantly higher in the losartan versus usual care groups (any SAE: 39.8% vs 27.2%, respectively, P = .01; hypotension: 30.4% vs 15.3%, respectively, P < .001) in both ward and intensive care patients. The 28-day mortality did not differ between losartan (6.5%) versus usual care (5.9%) (odds ratio, 1.11 [95% confidence interval, .47-2.64]; P = .81), nor did organ dysfunction or secondary outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Caution is needed in deciding which patients to start or continue using ARBs in patients hospitalized with pneumonia to mitigate risk of hypotension, acute kidney injury, and other side effects. ARBs should not be added to care of patients hospitalized for acute COVID-19. CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: NCT04606563.
BACKGROUND: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers decrease postdiarrheal hemolytic uremic syndrome (D + HUS) sequelar proteinuria. However, proteinuria may persist in some patients. In nephropathies other than D + HUS, an additive antiproteinuric effect with coadministration of both drugs has been observed. METHODS: To assess such an effect in D + HUS, 17 proteinuric children were retrospectively studied. After a median period of 1 year post-acute stage (range 0.5-1.9) patients received enalapril alone for a median of 2.6 years (range 0.33-12.0) at a median dose of 0.4 mg/kg/day (range 0.2-0.56). As proteinuria persisted, losartan was added at a median dose of 1.0 mg/kg/day (range 0.5-1.5) during 2.1 years (range 0.5-5.0). RESULTS: The decrease in proteinuria with enalapril was 58.0 %, which was further reduced to 83.8 % from the initial value after losartan introduction. The percentage of reduction was significantly greater with the association of both drugs (p = 0.0006) compared with the effect of enalapril exclusively (p = 0.023). Serum potassium, glomerular filtration rate, and blood pressure remained unchanged. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that adding losartan to persisting proteinuric D + HUS children already on enalapril is safe and reduces proteinuria more effectively. Whereas this effect is associated with long-term kidney protection, it should be determined by prospective controlled studies.
Angioedema is an uncommon but potentially life-threatening adverse event associated with ACE inhibitor therapy which is believed to be due to potentiation of the vascular effects of bradykinin. Angiotensin receptor antagonists were not expected to produce angioedema, as they do not inhibit the catabolism of bradykinin. However, it is now apparent that angioedema is occasionally associated with angiotensin receptor antagonist therapy and may be more likely to occur in patients who have previously experienced angioedema while receiving ACE inhibitors. Angiotensin receptor antagonists cannot be considered to be a safe alternative therapy in patients who have previously experienced ACE inhibitor-associated angioedema.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to analyze the latest evidence on the effects of losartan or Ang II receptor antagonists on cartilage repair, with a focus on their clinical relevance. DESIGN: The PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Library databases were searched up to November 12th 2021 to evaluate the effects of losartan or Ang II receptor antagonists on cartilage repair in in vitro studies and in vivo animal studies. Study design, sample characteristics, treatment type, duration, and outcomes were analyzed. The risk of bias and the quality of the eligible studies were assessed using the Systematic Review Centre for Laboratory Animal Experimentation (SYRCLE) risk of bias assessment tool and Collaborative Approach to Meta-Analysis and Review of Animal Data from Experimental Studies (CAMARADES). RESULTS: A total of 12 studies were included in this systematic review. Of the 12 eligible studies, two studies were in vitro human studies, three studies were in vitro animal studies, one study was an in vitro human and animal study, and six studies were in vivo animal studies. The risk bias and quality assessments were predominantly classified as moderate. Since meta-analysis was difficult due to differences in treatment type, dosage, route of administration, and method of outcome assessment among the eligible studies, qualitative evaluation was conducted for each study. CONCLUSIONS: Both in vitro and in vivo studies provide evidence to demonstrate beneficial effects of Ang II receptor antagonists on osteoarthritis and cartilage defect models across animal species.
