The host of newly developed antidepressant drugs offer important clinical advantages to some patients, although their promises of improved therapeutic efficacy and reduced adverse effects compared with conventional treatments are not fully realized. Increased biochemical specificity and unique mechanistic or clinical profiles render these compounds valuable in research into the pathophysiology of affective disorders and mode of action of antidepressant agents.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Over the last ten years, the treatment of psychosis has seen a near explosion of creative development in both novel agents and new delivery modalities. The current review summarizes these developments over the past decade (2011-2020). We performed a systematic review utilizing PubMed and PsychInfo with the aim of identifying all the RCT and related analyses in adults with psychosis (schizophrenia and mania). RECENT FINDINGS: We identified 11 significant developments: the introduction of new antipsychotics cariprazine, brexpiprazole, lumateperone, and pimavanserin; introduction of new delivery methods: subcutaneous long-acting risperidone, aripiprazole lauroxil, transdermal asenapine, and inhaled loxapine; and the introduction of new approaches such as olanzapine/samidorphan for olanzapine-associated weight gain, examination of the TAAR1 agonist SEP 363,856 as a test of concept, and the combination of Xanomeline/Trospium, an M(1) and M(4) muscarinic receptor agonist in conjunction with a peripheral anticholinergic. Last decade has seen a tremendous development in second-generation antipsychotics which provides unprecedented treatment options for clinicians in treating psychosis.
INTRODUCTION: Agitation is commonly encountered in people with bipolar disorder, particularly when experiencing a manic episode. The number of approved pharmacological agents to manage acute episodes of agitation in this population is limited. AREAS COVERED: A search was conducted using the US National Library of Medicine PubMed.gov resource for English-language papers of clinical trials and reviews/meta-analyses, using the text words 'bipolar disorder' AND 'agitation,' as well as any papers with both two text words in the title, without any date restrictions. EXPERT OPINION: Existing pharmacologic options approved by regulatory authorities for the treatment of acute episodes of agitation associated with bipolar disorder have similar degrees of efficacy but differ in their tolerability profiles and ease of use, giving clinicians an opportunity to individualize treatment. The goal is to treat mild-moderate agitation before it evolves into severe agitation, encouraging noninvasive pharmacologic treatment options. Inhaled loxapine and sublingual dexmedetomidine are newer options with rapid onset of action and may be preferable for patients willing to cooperate with treatment.
OBJECTIVE: Pathogenic variants in KCNT2 are rare causes of developmental epileptic encephalopathy (DEE). We herein describe the phenotypic and genetic features of patients with KCNT2-related DEE, and the in vitro functional and pharmacological properties of KCNT2 channels carrying 14 novel or previously untested variants. METHODS: Twenty-five patients harboring KCNT2 variants were investigated: 12 were identified through an international collaborative network, 13 were retrieved from the literature. Clinical data were collected and included in a standardized phenotyping sheet. Novel variants were detected using exome sequencing and classified using ACMG criteria. Functional and pharmacological studies were performed by whole-cell electrophysiology in HEK-293 and SH-SY5Y cells. RESULTS: The phenotypic spectrum encompassed: (a) intellectual disability/developmental delay (21/22 individuals with available information), ranging from mild to severe/profound; (b) epilepsy (15/25); (c) neurological impairment, with altered muscle tone (14/22); (d) dysmorphisms (13/20). Nineteen pathogenic KCNT2 variants were found (9 new, 10 reported previously): 16 missense, 1 in-frame deletion of a single amino acid, 1 nonsense, and 1 frameshift. Among tested variants, 8 showed gain-of-function (GoF), and 6 loss-of-function (LoF) features when expressed heterologously in vitro. Quinidine and fluoxetine blocked all GoF variants, whereas loxapine and riluzole activated some LoF variants while blocking others. INTERPRETATION: We expanded the phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of KCNT2-related disorders, highlighting novel genotype-phenotype associations. Pathogenic KCNT2 variants cause GoF or LoF in vitro phenotypes, and each shows a unique pharmacological profile, suggesting the need for in vitro functional and pharmacological investigation to enable targeted therapies based on the molecular phenotype. ANN NEUROL 2023;94:332-349.
Despite unmet meeds regarding efficacy, tolerability and time of onset and the high importance of mental disorders very few new psychotropics have been introduced in Germany recently. Lurasidon and the new multimodal antidepressant vortioxetine demonstrating clinical efficacy in the improvement of cognition have been withdrawn from the German market due to economic reasons based on an official committee judgement "missing additional benefit". Among new substances introduced are the selective opioid modulator nalmefene for reduction of alcohol consumption, the selective alpha-2-receptor agonist guanfacine for ADHS treatment in child and youth psychiatry, the older antidepressant milnacipran and the glucagon-like-peptide-1-receptor agonist liraglutide for treatment of adipositas. In the USA the atypical antipsychotics cariprazine and brexpiprazole have been released. The introduction of the long acting depot antipsychotics aripiprazole (1 month) and paliperidone (3 months) can be seen as major progress in the treatment of schizophrenia. Loxapine is available as inhalative antipsychotic for rapid treatment of agitation in schizophrenia and mania. Atypical antipsychotics like quetiapine are recommended now as add-on treatment for therapy-resistant depressions. Ketamine and botulinum toxin are in experimental use as antidepressants. The development of psychotropics is long lasting and costly and made even more difficult by negative medial attitudes additionally. Constructive resolving attempts are needed urgently to avoid a standstill in the development of psychotropic drugs.
The early and correct assessment of psychomotor agitation (PMA) is essential to ensure prompt intervention by healthcare professionals to improve the patient's condition, protect healthcare staff, and facilitate future management. Proper training for recognizing and managing agitation in all care settings is desirable to improve patient outcomes. The best approach is one that is ethical, non-invasive, and respectful of the patient's dignity. When deemed necessary, pharmacological interventions must be administered rapidly and avoid producing an excessive state of sedation, except in cases of severe and imminent danger to the patient or others. The purpose of this brief review is to raise awareness about best practices for the management of PMA in emergency care situations and consider the role of new pharmacological interventions in patients with agitation associated with bipolar disorder or schizophrenia.
Prolongation of the QRS interval, cardiopulmonary arrest, and death in a 31-year-old woman following an overdose of 2 g amoxapine, a tricyclic antidepressant, is reported. The patient's QRS interval prolonged to beyond 100 ms throughout hospitalization. Thirty-three hours after admission she suffered a bradycardiac-hypotensive event, followed by electromechanical dissociation and subsequent death. Cardiotoxicity has not been directly related to amoxapine; a 2-g acute ingestion is the lowest reported lethal dose.
Neuroleptic medications may result in extrapyramidal symptoms that can affect swallowing. Both oral and pharyngeal phases of swallowing may be affected. Unlike the more common causes of dysphagia, especially in the elderly, drug-induced dysphagia may be reversible. This report describes a case of neuroleptic-induced dysphagia in an elderly male with Alzheimer's disease. When the loxapine was discontinued, the dysphagia improved significantly.
We describe a 46-year-old, schizophrenic woman with late-onset myoclonus after treatment with antipsychotic drugs. The myoclonic jerking of the neck with synchronous contractions of the face persisted after all the antipsychotic drugs had been discontinued. Tardive myoclonus has not been documented previously.
Antipsychotic drugs prescribed to treat psychiatric symptoms during the postpartum period are secreted into breast milk. Because breast-feeding is crucial to infant development, it is important to select a medication that poses the fewest adverse consequences. Aripiprazole, haloperidol, perphenazine, and trifluoperazine demonstrate no known developmental dangers. Olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone are cited as safe, although monitoring is recommended. Chlorpromazine and clozapine may induce developmental concerns. There are limited safety data for asenapine, fluphenazine, iloperidone, loxapine, lurasidone, paliperidone, pimozide, thioridazine, thiothixene, and ziprasidone. Clinicians should choose medications considered to be the safest and prescribe them at the lowest effective doses.
BACKGROUND: Clinicians treating psychiatric disorders in medically ill patients need a comprehensive resource for comparing the risk and types of liver injury associated with antipsychotic therapy. OBJECTIVE: We conducted a narrative review aimed at developing a comprehensive resource comparing antipsychotics with regard to risk of inducing or worsening liver injuries, types of liver injury, associated pharmacokinetic changes, dosing, monitoring, and patient counseling recommendations. METHODS: We conducted database searches of LiverTox.nih.gov, DailyMed.nlm.nih.gov, and PubMed through June of 2022. Sources describing premarketing data, observational studies, case reports and case series of antipsychotic-induced liver injuries, types of hepatic dysfunction, interventions, recovery, and treatment for 15 antipsychotics were included. Duplicate reports were excluded. Antipsychotics were graded as low, low to moderate, moderate, moderate to high, or high risk for causing or worsening a liver disease. RESULTS: Of the 1861 publications, 21 papers met criteria and were included. Evidence shows antipsychotic-induced liver dysfunction is uncommon to rare. Chlorpromazine, clozapine, and olanzapine pose the greatest risk of hepatoxicity; quetiapine and risperidone pose a moderate risk with haloperidol considered to pose low to moderate risk. Paliperidone, aripiprazole, lurasidone, and loxapine are lower-risk agents with no reports of liver failure. Transaminitis that is mild and self-limiting is the most common antipsychotic-induced liver injury followed by hepatocellular disease, steatosis, and mixed liver injury. A careful risk-benefit analysis should guide the decision to discontinue the antipsychotic in cases of severe liver disease. Dose adjustments and careful monitoring are recommended for a mild to moderate disease when the benefits of treating psychosis outweigh the risks. Patients without an existing liver disease initiating a treatment with a higher-risk antipsychotic should be counseled to report symptoms of liver injuries along with regular lab monitoring. CONCLUSIONS: Antipsychotic selection, dosing, monitoring, and counseling should be individualized based on whether a patient has an existing liver disease and if they are receiving an agent that poses a higher risk of liver injury. The consultation-liaison psychiatry provider can guide the primary team in management through thoughtful integration of the known pathophysiologic changes in hepatic disease and risk-benefit analysis of antipsychotic safety profiles.
Schizophrenia (SCZD) is a debilitating neurological disorder with a world-wide prevalence of 1%; there is a strong genetic component, with an estimated heritability of 80-85%. Although post-mortem studies have revealed reduced brain volume, cell size, spine density and abnormal neural distribution in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of SCZD brain tissue and neuropharmacological studies have implicated dopaminergic, glutamatergic and GABAergic activity in SCZD, the cell types affected in SCZD and the molecular mechanisms underlying the disease state remain unclear. To elucidate the cellular and molecular defects of SCZD, we directly reprogrammed fibroblasts from SCZD patients into human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) and subsequently differentiated these disorder-specific hiPSCs into neurons (Supplementary Fig. 1). SCZD hiPSC neurons showed diminished neuronal connectivity in conjunction with decreased neurite number, PSD95-protein levels and glutamate receptor expression. Gene expression profiles of SCZD hiPSC neurons identified altered expression of many components of the cyclic AMP and WNT signalling pathways. Key cellular and molecular elements of the SCZD phenotype were ameliorated following treatment of SCZD hiPSC neurons with the antipsychotic loxapine. To date, hiPSC neuronal pathology has only been demonstrated in diseases characterized by both the loss of function of a single gene product and rapid disease progression in early childhood. We now report hiPSC neuronal phenotypes and gene expression changes associated with SCZD, a complex genetic psychiatric disorder.
BACKGROUND: Psychomotor agitation (PMA) is a state of motor restlessness and mental tension that requires prompt recognition, appropriate assessment and management to minimize anxiety for the patient and reduce the risk for escalation to aggression and violence. Standardized and applicable protocols and algorithms can assist healthcare providers to identify patients at risk of PMA, achieve timely diagnosis and implement minimally invasive management strategies to ensure patient and staff safety and resolution of the episode. METHODS: Spanish experts in PMA from different disciplines (psychiatrists, psychologists and nurses) convened in Barcelona for a meeting in April 2016. Based on recently issued international consensus guidelines on the standard of care for psychiatric patients with PMA, the meeting provided the opportunity to address the complexities in the assessment and management of PMA from different perspectives. The attendees worked towards producing a consensus for a unified approach to PMA according to the local standards of care and current local legislations. The draft protocol developed was reviewed and ratified by all members of the panel prior to its presentation to the Catalan Society of Psychiatry and Mental Health, the Spanish Society of Biological Psychiatry (SEPB) and the Spanish Network Centre for Research in Mental Health (CIBERSAM) for input. The final protocol and algorithms were then submitted to these organizations for endorsement. RESULTS: The protocol presented here provides guidance on the appropriate selection and use of pharmacological agents (inhaled/oral/IM), seclusion, and physical restraint for psychiatric patients suspected of or presenting with PMA. The protocol is applicable within the Spanish healthcare system. Implementation of the protocol and the constituent algorithms described here should ensure the best standard of care of patients at risk of PMA. Episodes of PMA could be identified earlier in their clinical course and patients could be managed in the least invasive and coercive manner, ensuring their own safety and that of others around them. CONCLUSION: Establishing specialized teams in agitation and providing them with continued training on the identification of agitation, patient management and therapeutic alternatives might reduce the burden of PMA for both the patient and the healthcare system.
The advent of a number of new antipsychotics has been paralleled by efforts to better delineate their mechanisms of action and, in doing so, further our understanding of schizophrenia and its pathophysiology. Technological advances, such as positron emission tomography (PET), have proven to be powerful tools in this process, allowing us to evaluate in vivo models based primarily on in vitro evidence. Combined serotonin-2/dopamine-2 (5-HT2/D2) antagonism represents one such model, and we now have PET evidence available that can be extrapolated to our understanding and clinical use of both conventional and novel antipsychotics.
People living with dementia commonly experience anxiety, which is often challenging to manage. We investigated the effectiveness of treatments for the management of anxiety in this population. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials, and searched EMBASE, CINAHL, MEDLINE and PsycInfo. We estimated standardised mean differences at follow-up between treatments relative to control groups and pooled these across studies using random-effects models where feasible. Thirty-one studies were identified. Meta-analysis demonstrated non-pharmacological interventions were effective in reducing anxiety in people living with dementia, compared to care as usual or active controls. Specifically, music therapy (SMD-1.92(CI:-2.58,-1.25)), muscular approaches (SMD-0.65(CI:-1.02,-0.28)) and stimulating cognitive and physical activities (SMD-0.31(CI:-0.53,-0.09)). Pharmacological interventions with evidence of potential effectiveness included Ginkgo biloba, probiotics, olanzapine, loxapine and citalopram compared to placebo, olanzapine compared to bromazepam and buspirone and risperidone compared to haloperidol. Meta-analyses were not performed for pharmacological interventions due to studies' heterogeneity. This has practice implications when promoting the use of more non-pharmacological interventions to help reduce anxiety among people living with dementia.
138 acutely ill schizophrenic patients were treated with oral loxapine succinate for up to 4 weeks in nine studies, all of which shared an identical protocol. These nine, open-label studies were conducted primarily in outpatient settings. For most patients, loxapine, at daily dosages of 30-80 mg, was observed to provide safe, effective, and relatively immediate symptomatic relief and, in most cases, helped to keep acutely ill schizophrenic patients out of the hospital. Side effects, which occurred in 95 patients, were mostly mild and controllable and consisted mainly of extrapyramidal effects.
OBJECTIVE: In this paper, we aimed at reviewing evidence-based treatment options for bipolar mania and proposed tentative evidence-based clinical suggestions regarding the management of a manic episode, especially regarding the choice of the proper mood stabilizer and antipsychotic medication. METHOD: A narrative review was undertaken addressing 'treatment of bipolar mania'. Findings have been synthesized and incorporated with clinical experience into a model to support different treatment choices. RESULTS: To date, there is solid evidence supporting the use of several medications, such as lithium, divalproex, and carbamazepine, and antipsychotics, such as chlorpromazine, haloperidol, risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, aripiprazole, inhaled loxapine, asenapine, and cariprazine in acute mania, and some evidence supporting the use of clozapine or electroconvulsive therapy in treatment-refractory cases. However, in clinical practice, when making decisions about treatment, personalized treatment is needed, according to the different clinical presentations and more complex clinical situations within the manic episode and considering a long-term view and with the objective of not only a symptomatic but also functional recovery. After remission from acute mania, psychoeducation strategies are useful to ensure adherence. DISCUSSION: Despite the evidence forefficacy of many currently available treatments for mania, the majority of RCTs provide little direction for the clinician as to what steps might be optimal in different presentations of mania as well as in the presence of specific patient characteristics. Manic episodes should be managed on a personalized basis considering the clinical course and patient criteria and with the expectation of maintaining that treatment in the long-term.
BACKGROUND: The main goal of antipsychotic medication in the management of acute agitation in the emergency department is to rapidly induce calm without oversedation, enabling patients to participate in their own care. However, there is a paucity of comparative studies, particularly with newer fast-acting second-generation antipsychotic agents. OBJECTIVE OF THE REVIEW: This structured evidence-based review compared the onset of efficacy of antipsychotic treatments for acute agitation using data from randomized controlled trials identified by a literature search of the PubMed database. RESULTS: Based on findings from 28 blinded randomized controlled trials, onset of efficacy was rapid and generally observed at the first time point after intramuscular administration of ziprasidone (15-30 min) or olanzapine (15-30 min), but was more likely to be delayed with intramuscular haloperidol, even when combined with lorazepam (30-60 min), and intramuscular aripiprazole (45-90 min). When administered orally, rapid onset of efficacy was also consistently observed at the first assessment time point with olanzapine (15-120 min), risperidone (30-120 min), and sublingual asenapine (15 min). Significant effects were apparent for inhaled loxapine within 10-20 min. Effects were apparent within approximately 5-10 min with i.v. droperidol. Onset of efficacy was typically more rapid with second-generation antipsychotic agents than benzodiazepines, but data are limited. CONCLUSIONS: Although the patient populations of trials included in this review do not truly reflect that of the emergency department, the results provide useful information to emergency physicians on the rapid efficacy of certain newer-generation antipsychotic agents for the treatment of acutely agitated patients.
Amoxapine, a new antidepressant, is a tricyclic debenzoxazepine compound, the demethylated metabolite of the neuroleptic loxapine. In animal pharmacological studies, amoxapine has shown striking similarities to imipramine. In contrast to the prototype antidepressant drug, however, amoxapine does not interact with serotonin. In 10 uncontrolled clinical trials amoxapine was shown to have antidepressant effects in the dosage range of 100-300 mg/day. This was verified in 10 published standard, and placebo and standard controlled clinical studies in which amoxapine was superior to placebo and equal in overall therapeutic efficacy to imipramine and amitriptyline. Side effects were similar to the reference drugs.
Earlier, we reported that three Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs, trifluoperazine (TFP; an antipsychotic), amoxapine (AXPN; an antidepressant), and doxapram (DXP; a breathing stimulant), identified from an in vitro murine macrophage cytotoxicity screen, provided mice with 40 to 60% protection against pneumonic plague when administered at the time of infection for 1 to 3 days. In the present study, the therapeutic potential of these drugs against pneumonic plague in mice was further evaluated when they were administered at up to 48 h postinfection. While the efficacy of TFP was somewhat diminished as treatment was delayed to 24 h, the protection of mice with AXPN and DXP increased as treatment was progressively delayed to 24 h. At 48 h postinfection, these drugs provided the animals with significant protection (up to 100%) against challenge with the agent of pneumonic or bubonic plague when they were administered in combination with levofloxacin. Likewise, when they were used in combination with vancomycin, all three drugs provided mice with 80 to 100% protection from fatal oral Clostridium difficile infection when they were administered at 24 h postinfection. Furthermore, AXPN provided 40 to 60% protection against respiratory infection with Klebsiella pneumoniae when it was administered at the time of infection or at 24 h postinfection. Using the same in vitro cytotoxicity assay, we identified an additional 76/780 nonantibiotic drugs effective against K. pneumoniae For Acinetobacter baumannii, 121 nonantibiotic drugs were identified to inhibit bacterium-induced cytotoxicity in murine macrophages. Of these 121 drugs, 13 inhibited the macrophage cytotoxicity induced by two additional multiple-antibiotic-resistant strains. Six of these drugs decreased the intracellular survival of all three A. baumannii strains in macrophages. These results provided further evidence of the broad applicability and utilization of drug repurposing screening to identify new therapeutics to combat multidrug-resistant pathogens of public health concern.
