BACKGROUND: Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is a common adverse effect of anaesthesia and surgery. Up to 80% of patients may be affected. These outcomes are a major cause of patient dissatisfaction and may lead to prolonged hospital stay and higher costs of care along with more severe complications. Many antiemetic drugs are available for prophylaxis. They have various mechanisms of action and side effects, but there is still uncertainty about which drugs are most effective with the fewest side effects. OBJECTIVES: * To compare the efficacy and safety of different prophylactic pharmacologic interventions (antiemetic drugs) against no treatment, against placebo, or against each other (as monotherapy or combination prophylaxis) for prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting in adults undergoing any type of surgery under general anaesthesia * To generate a clinically useful ranking of antiemetic drugs (monotherapy and combination prophylaxis) based on efficacy and safety * To identify the best dose or dose range of antiemetic drugs in terms of efficacy and safety SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, Embase, the Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), the World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (WHO ICTRP), ClinicalTrials.gov, and reference lists of relevant systematic reviews. The first search was performed in November 2017 and was updated in April 2020. In the update of the search, 39 eligible studies were found that were not included in the analysis (listed as awaiting classification). SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing effectiveness or side effects of single antiemetic drugs in any dose or combination against each other or against an inactive control in adults undergoing any type of surgery under general anaesthesia. All antiemetic drugs belonged to one of the following substance classes: 5-HT(3) receptor antagonists, D(2) receptor antagonists, NK(1) receptor antagonists, corticosteroids, antihistamines, and anticholinergics. No language restrictions were applied. Abstract publications were excluded. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: A review team of 11 authors independently assessed trials for inclusion and risk of bias and subsequently extracted data. We performed pair-wise meta-analyses for drugs of direct interest (amisulpride, aprepitant, casopitant, dexamethasone, dimenhydrinate, dolasetron, droperidol, fosaprepitant, granisetron, haloperidol, meclizine, methylprednisolone, metoclopramide, ondansetron, palonosetron, perphenazine, promethazine, ramosetron, rolapitant, scopolamine, and tropisetron) compared to placebo (inactive control). We performed network meta-analyses (NMAs) to estimate the relative effects and ranking (with placebo as reference) of all available single drugs and combinations. Primary outcomes were vomiting within 24 hours postoperatively, serious adverse events (SAEs), and any adverse event (AE). Secondary outcomes were drug class-specific side effects (e.g. headache), mortality, early and late vomiting, nausea, and complete response. We performed subgroup network meta-analysis with dose of drugs as a moderator variable using dose ranges based on previous consensus recommendations. We assessed certainty of evidence of NMA treatment effects for all primary outcomes and drug class-specific side effects according to GRADE (CINeMA, Confidence in Network Meta-Analysis). We restricted GRADE assessment to single drugs of direct interest compared to placebo. MAIN RESULTS: We included 585 studies (97,516 randomized participants). Most of these studies were small (median sample size of 100); they were published between 1965 and 2017 and were primarily conducted in Asia (51%), Europe (25%), and North America (16%). Mean age of the overall population was 42 years. Most participants were women (83%), had American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status I and II (70%), received perioperative opioids (88%), and underwent gynaecologic (32%) or gastrointestinal surgery (19%) under general anaesthesia using volatile anaesthetics (88%). In this review, 44 single drugs and 51 drug combinations were compared. Most studies investigated only single drugs (72%) and included an inactive control arm (66%). The three most investigated single drugs in this review were ondansetron (246 studies), dexamethasone (120 studies), and droperidol (97 studies). Almost all studies (89%) reported at least one efficacy outcome relevant for this review. However, only 56% reported at least one relevant safety outcome. Altogether, 157 studies (27%) were assessed as having overall low risk of bias, 101 studies (17%) overall high risk of bias, and 327 studies (56%) overall unclear risk of bias. Vomiting within 24 hours postoperatively Relative effects from NMA for vomiting within 24 hours (282 RCTs, 50,812 participants, 28 single drugs, and 36 drug combinations) suggest that 29 out of 36 drug combinations and 10 out of 28 single drugs showed a clinically important benefit (defined as the upper end of the 95% confidence interval (CI) below a risk ratio (RR) of 0.8) compared to placebo. Combinations of drugs were generally more effective than single drugs in preventing vomiting. However, single NK(1) receptor antagonists showed treatment effects similar to most of the drug combinations. High-certainty evidence suggests that the following single drugs reduce vomiting (ordered by decreasing efficacy): aprepitant (RR 0.26, 95% CI 0.18 to 0.38, high certainty, rank 3/28 of single drugs); ramosetron (RR 0.44, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.59, high certainty, rank 5/28); granisetron (RR 0.45, 95% CI 0.38 to 0.54, high certainty, rank 6/28); dexamethasone (RR 0.51, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.57, high certainty, rank 8/28); and ondansetron (RR 0.55, 95% CI 0.51 to 0.60, high certainty, rank 13/28). Moderate-certainty evidence suggests that the following single drugs probably reduce vomiting: fosaprepitant (RR 0.06, 95% CI 0.02 to 0.21, moderate certainty, rank 1/28) and droperidol (RR 0.61, 95% CI 0.54 to 0.69, moderate certainty, rank 20/28). Recommended and high doses of granisetron, dexamethasone, ondansetron, and droperidol showed clinically important benefit, but low doses showed no clinically important benefit. Aprepitant was used mainly at high doses, ramosetron at recommended doses, and fosaprepitant at doses of 150 mg (with no dose recommendation available). Frequency of SAEs Twenty-eight RCTs were included in the NMA for SAEs (10,766 participants, 13 single drugs, and eight drug combinations). The certainty of evidence for SAEs when using one of the best and most reliable anti-vomiting drugs (aprepitant, ramosetron, granisetron, dexamethasone, ondansetron, and droperidol compared to placebo) ranged from very low to low. Droperidol (RR 0.88, 95% CI 0.08 to 9.71, low certainty, rank 6/13) may reduce SAEs. We are uncertain about the effects of aprepitant (RR 1.39, 95% CI 0.26 to 7.36, very low certainty, rank 11/13), ramosetron (RR 0.89, 95% CI 0.05 to 15.74, very low certainty, rank 7/13), granisetron (RR 1.21, 95% CI 0.11 to 13.15, very low certainty, rank 10/13), dexamethasone (RR 1.16, 95% CI 0.28 to 4.85, very low certainty, rank 9/13), and ondansetron (RR 1.62, 95% CI 0.32 to 8.10, very low certainty, rank 12/13). No studies reporting SAEs were available for fosaprepitant. Frequency of any AE Sixty-one RCTs were included in the NMA for any AE (19,423 participants, 15 single drugs, and 11 drug combinations). The certainty of evidence for any AE when using one of the best and most reliable anti-vomiting drugs (aprepitant, ramosetron, granisetron, dexamethasone, ondansetron, and droperidol compared to placebo) ranged from very low to moderate. Granisetron (RR 0.92, 95% CI 0.80 to 1.05, moderate certainty, rank 7/15) probably has no or little effect on any AE. Dexamethasone (RR 0.77, 95% CI 0.55 to 1.08, low certainty, rank 2/15) and droperidol (RR 0.89, 95% CI 0.81 to 0.98, low certainty, rank 6/15) may reduce any AE. Ondansetron (RR 0.95, 95% CI 0.88 to 1.01, low certainty, rank 9/15) may have little or no effect on any AE. We are uncertain about the effects of aprepitant (RR 0.87, 95% CI 0.78 to 0.97, very low certainty, rank 3/15) and ramosetron (RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.65 to 1.54, very low certainty, rank 11/15) on any AE. No studies reporting any AE were available for fosaprepitant. Class-specific side effects For class-specific side effects (headache, constipation, wound infection, extrapyramidal symptoms, sedation, arrhythmia, and QT prolongation) of relevant substances, the certainty of evidence for the best and most reliable anti-vomiting drugs mostly ranged from very low to low. Exceptions were that ondansetron probably increases headache (RR 1.16, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.28, moderate certainty, rank 18/23) and probably reduces sedation (RR 0.87, 95% CI 0.79 to 0.96, moderate certainty, rank 5/24) compared to placebo. The latter effect is limited to recommended and high doses of ondansetron. Droperidol probably reduces headache (RR 0.76, 95% CI 0.67 to 0.86, moderate certainty, rank 5/23) compared to placebo. We have high-certainty evidence that dexamethasone (RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.91 to 1.09, high certainty, rank 16/24) has no effect on sedation compared to placebo. No studies assessed substance class-specific side effects for fosaprepitant. Direction and magnitude of network effect estimates together with level of evidence certainty are graphically summarized for all pre-defined GRADE-relevant outcomes and all drugs of direct interest compared to placebo in http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4066353. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found high-certainty evidence that five single drugs (aprepitant, ramosetron, granisetron, dexamethasone, and ondansetron) reduce vomiting, and moderate-certainty evidence that two other single drugs (fosaprepitant and droperidol) probably reduce vomiting, compared to placebo. Four of the six substance classes (5-HT(3) receptor antagonists, D(2) receptor antagonists, NK(1) receptor antagonists, and corticosteroids) were thus represented by at least one drug with important benefit for prevention of vomiting. Combinations of drugs were generally more effective than the corresponding single drugs in preventing vomiting. NK(1) receptor antagonists were the most effective drug class and had comparable efficacy to most of the drug combinations. 5-HT(3) receptor antagonists were the best studied substance class. For most of the single drugs of direct interest, we found only very low to low certainty evidence for safety outcomes such as occurrence of SAEs, any AE, and substance class-specific side effects. Recommended and high doses of granisetron, dexamethasone, ondansetron, and droperidol were more effective than low doses for prevention of vomiting. Dose dependency of side effects was rarely found due to the limited number of studies, except for the less sedating effect of recommended and high doses of ondansetron. The results of the review are transferable mainly to patients at higher risk of nausea and vomiting (i.e. healthy women undergoing inhalational anaesthesia and receiving perioperative opioids). Overall study quality was limited, but certainty assessments of effect estimates consider this limitation. No further efficacy studies are needed as there is evidence of moderate to high certainty for seven single drugs with relevant benefit for prevention of vomiting. However, additional studies are needed to investigate potential side effects of these drugs and to examine higher-risk patient populations (e.g. individuals with diabetes and heart disease).
Meniere's disease (MD) is a disorder of the inner ear that causes vertigo attacks, fluctuating hearing loss, tinnitus and aural fullness. The aetiology of MD is multifactorial. A characteristic sign of MD is endolymphatic hydrops (EH), a disorder in which excessive endolymph accumulates in the inner ear and causes damage to the ganglion cells. In most patients, the clinical symptoms of MD present after considerable accumulation of endolymph has occurred. However, some patients develop symptoms in the early stages of EH. The reason for the variability in the symptomatology is unknown and the relationship between EH and the clinical symptoms of MD requires further study. The diagnosis of MD is based on clinical symptoms but can be complemented with functional inner ear tests, including audiometry, vestibular-evoked myogenic potential testing, caloric testing, electrocochleography or head impulse tests. MRI has been optimized to directly visualize EH in the cochlea, vestibule and semicircular canals, and its use is shifting from the research setting to the clinic. The management of MD is mainly aimed at the relief of acute attacks of vertigo and the prevention of recurrent attacks. Therapeutic options are based on empirical evidence and include the management of risk factors and a conservative approach as the first line of treatment. When medical treatment is unable to suppress vertigo attacks, intratympanic gentamicin therapy or endolymphatic sac decompression surgery is usually considered. This Primer covers the pathophysiology, symptomatology, diagnosis, management, quality of life and prevention of MD.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Clinical features of mal de debarquement syndrome. RESULTS: Nearly all respondents were middle-aged women (26 of 27; mean age, 49.3 years). The duration of symptoms ranged from 6 months to 10 years (mean, 3.5 years; SD, 2.5 years). The symptoms were constant in 23 (85%) patients. Neither meclizine hydrochloride nor transdermal scopolamine was helpful. Benzodiazepines were of the most benefit. Balance rehabilitation physical therapy was undertaken by 15 patients, who on average reported a small benefit. CONCLUSIONS: More than double the number of previously reported cases of mal de debarquement syndrome were identified by this study. The syndrome usually occurs in middle-aged women following an ocean cruise. Symptoms are often refractory to vestibular suppressants as well as physical therapy.
Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) is an important regulator of bone formation. Gain-of-function mutations in the FGFR3 gene result in chondrodysplasias which include achondroplasia (ACH), the most common form of dwarfism, in which skull, appendicular and axial skeletons are affected. The skeletal phenotype of patients with ACH showed defective proliferation and differentiation of the chondrocytes in the growth plate cartilage. Both endochondral and membranous ossification processes are disrupted during development. At cellular level, Fgfr3 mutations induce increased phosphorylation of the tyrosine kinase receptor FGFR3, which correlate with an enhanced activation of its downstream signaling pathways. Potential therapeutic strategies have emerged for ACH. Several preclinical studies have been conducted such as the C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) analog (BMN111), intermittent parathyroid hormone injections, soluble FGFR3 therapy, and meclozine and statin treatments. Among the putative targets to antagonize FGFR3 signaling, CNP (or BMN111) is one of the most promising strategies. BMN111 acts as a key regulator of longitudinal bone growth by downregulating the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, which is activated as a result of a FGFR3 gain-of-function mutation. Preclinical studies showed that BMN111 treatment led to a large improvement in skeletal parameters in Fgfr3Y367C/+ mice mimicking ACH. In 2014, a clinical trial (phase 2) of BMN111 in pediatric patients with ACH has started. This first clinical trial marks the first big step towards real treatment for these patients.
Achondroplasia (ACH) is a representative skeletal disorder characterized by rhizomelic shortened limbs and short stature. ACH is classified as belonging to the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) group. The downstream signal transduction of FGFR3 consists of STAT1 and RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathways. The mutant FGFR3 found in ACH is continuously phosphorylated and activates downstream signals, resulting in abnormal proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes in the growth plate and cranial base synchondrosis. A patient registry has been developed and has contributed to revealing the natural history of ACH patients. Concerning the short stature, the adult height of ACH patients ranges between 126.7-135.2 cm for men and 119.9-125.5 cm for women in many countries. Along with severe short stature, foramen magnum stenosis and spinal canal stenosis are major complications: the former leads to sleep apnea, breathing disorders, myelopathy, hydrocephalus, and sudden death, and the latter causes pain in the extremities, numbness, muscle weakness, movement disorders, intermittent claudication, and bladder-rectal disorders. Growth hormone treatment is available for ACH only in Japan. However, the effect of the treatment on adult height is not satisfactory. Recently, the neutral endopeptidase-resistant CNP analogue vosoritide has been approved as a new drug for ACH. Additionally in development are a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, a soluble FGFR3, an antibody against FGFR3, meclizine, and the FGF2-aptamer. New drugs will bring a brighter future for patients with ACH.
As dizziness can be caused by so many different pathophysiological mechanisms, it is crucial to determine the type of dizziness before proceeding with the diagnostic evaluation. Vertigo, defined as an illusion of movement, is an important subtype of dizziness that indicates a lesion somewhere within the vestibular system. Probably the most useful feature for differentiating between peripheral and central causes of vertigo is the associated symptoms. Vertigo of peripheral origin is typically associated with auditory symptoms such as hearing loss and tinnitus, while vertigo of central origin is nearly always associated with neurological symptoms such as diplopia, weakness, numbness and ataxia. Each of the common causes of vertigo has a characteristic clinical profile that should suggest a likely diagnosis after the history and examination are complete. Probably the most important treatment breakthrough is the positional manoeuvre that reliably cures benign positional vertigo (see Chapter 6). The treatment strategy for an acute peripheral vestibular lesion has evolved over the past few years. Patients are encouraged to return to normal physical activity as rapidly as possible. Repeated head, eye and body movements (vestibular rehabilitation) help the brain to recalibrate the relationship between visual, proprioceptive and vestibular signals (Chapter 9).
Treatment of vestibular migraine currently lacks a firm scientific basis, as high quality randomized controlled trials are not available. Therefore, recommendations are largely borrowed from the migraine sphere. The first therapeutic step is explanation and reassurance. Many patients do not need pharmacological treatment, as attacks may be infrequent and tolerable. Acute attacks can be ameliorated in some patients with antiemetic drugs such as diphenhydramine, meclizine, and metoclopramide. Frequent attacks may warrant pharmacological prophylaxis with metoprolol, amitriptyline, topiramate, valproic acid, or flunarizine. Nonpharmacological measures including regular exercise, relaxation techniques, stress management, and biofeedback may be similarly effective and can be combined with a pharmacological approach. Limited data indicate that the prognosis appears to be less favorable for vestibular migraine than for migraine headaches.
Motion sickness may occur during travel by sea, automobile, airplane, and space. Susceptibility changes with age and may be influenced by psychological factors. Susceptibility can be reduced in most people by medications that involve histamine or neurotransmitters acetylcholine and noradrenaline, and influence the vestibular system.
Emergency contraception is used to prevent pregnancy after a coital act not adequately protected by a regular method of contraception. In contrast to early medical abortion, emergency contraception prevents a pregnancy from starting and does not disrupt an established pregnancy. The most commonly used approaches consist of two oral doses of contraceptive steroids. The levonorgestrel-only regimen (levonorgestrel, 0.75 mg, repeated in 12 hours) appears to be more effective and better tolerated than the Yuzpe regimen (ethinyl estradiol, 100 microg, and levonorgestrel, 0.5 mg, repeated in 12 hours). In the largest randomized, controlled trial to date, levonorgestrel prevented about 85% of pregnancies that would have occurred without its use. Hormonal emergency contraception has no known medical contraindications, although it is not indicated for suspected or confirmed pregnancy. However, if hormonal emergency contraception is inadvertently taken in early pregnancy, neither the woman nor the fetus will be harmed. Nausea and vomiting associated with the Yuzpe regimen can be reduced by prophylactic use of meclizine. A strong medical and legal case exists for making hormonal emergency contraception available over the counter, as has happened in countries other than the United States. Easier access to and wider use of emergency contraception could dramatically lower the high rates of unintended pregnancy and induced abortion in the United States.
We screened pre-approved drugs for the survival of the Hu5/KD3 human myogenic progenitors. We found that meclozine, an anti-histamine drug that has long been used for motion sickness, promoted the proliferation and survival of Hu5/KD3 cells. Meclozine increased expression of MyoD, but reduced expression of myosin heavy chain and suppressed myotube formation. Withdrawal of meclozine, however, resumed the ability of Hu5/KD3 cells to differentiate into myotubes. We examined the effects of meclozine on mdx mouse carrying a nonsense mutation in the dystrophin gene and modeling for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Intragastric administration of meclozine in mdx mouse increased the body weight, the muscle mass in the lower limbs, the cross-sectional area of the paravertebral muscle, and improved exercise performances. Previous reports show that inhibition of phosphorylation of ERK1/2 improves muscle functions in mouse models for Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and cancer cachexia, as well as in mdx mice. We and others previously showed that meclozine blocks the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in cultured cells. We currently showed that meclozine decreased phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in muscles in mdx mice but not in wild-type mice. This was likely to be one of the underlying mechanisms of the effects of meclozine on mdx mice.
The study investigates teratogenic risks with ondansetron (Zofran((R))). Data from the Swedish Medical Birth Register combined with the Swedish Register of Prescribed Drugs were used to identify 1349 infants born of women who had taken ondansetron in early pregnancy, 1998-2012. Presence of congenital malformations in the offspring was identified with three national health registers. In a Mantel-Haenszel analysis adjustment was made for year of delivery, maternal age, parity, smoking in early pregnancy and pre-pregnancy body mass index. Risks were expressed as odds or risk ratios with 95% confidence intervals. No statistically significantly increased risk for a major malformation was found. The risks for a cardiovascular defect and notably a cardiac septum defect were increased and statistically significant (OR=1.62, 95% CI 1.04-2.14, and RR 2.05, 95% CI 1.19-3.28, respective). The teratogenic risk with ondansetron is low but an increased risk for a cardiac septum defect is likely.
BACKGROUND: Vertigo is a common clinical problem managed by general practitioners. OBJECTIVE: This article focuses on the acute management of a vertigo attack, specific management of conditions causing vertigo, and the long term management issues associated with chronic vertigo. DISCUSSION: Supportive treatment, antiemetic and vestibular blocking agents help relieve an acute vertigo attack, however the prolonged use of such medications is not recommended. Specific treatments for various conditions causing vertigo are available, however, the majority of patients are managed symptomatically. The patient's ability to drive safely should be carefully assessed according to Austroads guidelines and advice from an ear, nose and throat surgeon should be sought when in doubt. There is evidence to support the efficacy of vestibular rehabilitation programs for unilateral peripheral vestibular disorder and these programs should be considered. A simple program including patient education and home based exercises can be sufficient.
Defects in cellular energy metabolism represent an early feature in a variety of human neurodegenerative diseases. Recent studies have shown that targeting energy metabolism can protect against neuronal cell death in such diseases. Here, we show that meclizine, a clinically used drug that we have recently shown to silence oxidative metabolism, suppresses apoptotic cell death in a murine cellular model of polyglutamine (polyQ) toxicity. We further show that this protective effect extends to neuronal dystrophy and cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster models of polyQ toxicity. Meclizine's mechanism of action is not attributable to its anti-histaminergic or anti-muscarinic activity, but rather, strongly correlates with its ability to suppress mitochondrial respiration. Since meclizine is an approved drug that crosses the blood-brain barrier, it may hold therapeutic potential in the treatment of polyQ toxicity disorders, such as Huntington's disease.
In a large, prospective, observational study of pregnancy and child development, the antinauseant drugs prescribed to gravides for nausea and vomiting in the first 84 days of pregnancy were evaluated for their teratogenic potential. The severe congenital anomaly rates per 100 liveborn children and ther perinatal death rates of this group did not differ from the rates of the group with untreated nausea and vomiting. There was no indication that the phenothiazine derivatives, specifically the prochlorperazine derivative, as well as meclizine, cylizine, and Bendectin were associated with teratogenicity. The trimethobenzamide drug gave a slight suggestion of an excess of severe congenital anomalies.
INTRODUCTION: Despite many existing treatments, airsickness is an issue of concern for soldiers being transported by helicopter. This experiment examined the efficacy of four airsickness treatments and their effects on performance. This study replicated the transport of soldiers in the cabin of an UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter performing many of the flight maneuvers potentially experienced in a night troop transport during turbulent conditions. METHODS: A double-blinded, placebo-controlled design was used to compare the effectiveness of four airsickness countermeasures to their placebo controls. There were 64 male, non-aviator subjects (ages 18-34 yr) who were recruited for the study. Of these, 16 subjects were randomly assigned to each of 4 groups: (1) promethazine (25 mg) + caffeine (200 mg); (2) meclizine (25 mg); (3) Scopolamine patch (1.5 mg); and 4) acustimulation wristband. Each individual participated twice, once with the treatment and once with placebo. RESULTS: The findings indicated that only the combination of promethazine + caffeine showed a statistically significant reduction in nausea and motion sickness severity, and an improvement in reaction time when compared with its placebo control. DISCUSSION: Data from this study indicated that of the countermeasures tested, promethazine + caffeine was the most effective at reducing airsickness while producing the fewest side effects when compared with its placebo. In addition, this study demonstrated that over-the-counter caffeine can serve as an effective stimulant counterpart to promethazine. This may be a more appealing option than employing scheduled sympathomimetic drugs in a combat environment.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Since human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) develop into hepatic organoids through stages that resemble human embryonic liver development, they can be used to study developmental processes and disease pathology. Therefore, we examined the early stages of hepatic organoid formation to identify key pathways affecting early liver development. METHODS: Single-cell RNA-sequencing and metabolomic analysis was performed on developing organoid cultures at the iPSC, hepatoblast (day 9) and mature organoid stage. The importance of the phosphatidylethanolamine biosynthesis pathway to early liver development was examined in developing organoid cultures using iPSC with a CRISPR-mediated gene knockout and an over the counter medication (meclizine) that inhibits the rate-limiting enzyme in this pathway. Meclizine's effect on the growth of a human hepatocarcinoma cell line in a xenotransplantation model and on the growth of acute myeloid leukemia cells in vitro was also examined. RESULTS: Transcriptomic and metabolomic analysis of organoid development indicated that the phosphatidylethanolamine biosynthesis pathway is essential for early liver development. Unexpectedly, early hepatoblasts were selectively sensitive to the cytotoxic effect of meclizine. We demonstrate that meclizine could be repurposed for use in a new synergistic combination therapy for primary liver cancer: a glycolysis inhibitor reprograms cancer cell metabolism to make it susceptible to the cytotoxic effect of meclizine. This combination inhibited the growth of a human liver carcinoma cell line in vitro and in a xenotransplantation model, without causing significant side effects. This drug combination was also highly active against acute myeloid leukemia cells. CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that phosphatidylethanolamine biosynthesis is a targetable pathway for cancer; meclizine may have clinical efficacy as a repurposed anti-cancer drug when used as part of a new combination therapy. LAY SUMMARY: The early stages of human liver development were modeled using human hepatic organoids. We identified a pathway that was essential for early liver development. Based upon this finding, a novel combination drug therapy was identified that could be used to treat primary liver cancer and possibly other types of cancer.
Achondroplasia (ACH) is the prototype and most common of the human chondrodysplasias. It results from gain-of-function mutations that exaggerate the signal output of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3), a receptor tyrosine kinase that negatively regulates growth plate activity and linear bone growth. Several approaches to reduce FGFR3 signaling by blocking receptor activation or inhibiting downstream signals have been proposed. Five show promise in preclinical mouse studies. Two candidate therapies target the extracellular domain of FGFR3. The first is a decoy receptor that competes for activating ligands. The second is a synthetic blocking peptide that prevents ligands from binding and activating FGFR3. Two established drugs, statins and meclozine, improve growth of ACH mice. The strongest candidate therapy employs an analog of C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP), which antagonizes the mitogen-activated-protein (MAP) kinase pathway downstream of the FGFR3 receptor and may also act independently in the growth plate. Only the CNP analog has reached clinical trials. Preliminary results of Phase 2 studies show a substantial increase in growth rate of ACH children after six months of therapy with no serious adverse effects. A challenge for drug therapy in ACH is targeting agents to the avascular growth plate. The application of gene therapy in osteoarthritis offers insights because it faces similar technical obstacles. Major advances in gene therapy include the emergence of recombinant adeno-associated virus as the vector of choice, capsid engineering to target vectors to specific tissues, and development of methods to direct vectors to articular chondrocytes.
Entry motion sickness (EMS) affects crewmembers upon return to Earth following extended adaptation to microgravity. Anticholinergic pharmaceuticals (e.g., Meclizine) are often taken prior to landing; however, they have operationally adverse side effects (e.g., drowsiness). There is a need to develop non-pharmaceutical countermeasures to EMS. We assessed the efficacy of a technological countermeasure providing external visual cues following splashdown, where otherwise only nauseogenic internal cabin visual references are available. Our countermeasure provided motion-congruent visual cues of an Earth-fixed scene in virtual reality, which was compared to a control condition with a head-fixed fixation point in virtual reality in a between-subject design with 15 subjects in each group. We tested the countermeasure's effectiveness at mitigating motion sickness symptoms at the end of a ground-based reentry analog: approximately 1 h of 2Gx centrifugation followed by up to 1 h of wave-like motion. Secondarily, we explored differences in vestibular-mediated balance performance between the two conditions. While Motion Sickness Questionnaire outcomes did not differ detectably between groups, we found significantly better survival rates (with dropout dictated by reporting moderate nausea consecutively over 2 min) in the visual countermeasure group than the control group (79% survival vs. 33%, t(14) = 2.50, p = 0.027). Following the reentry analogs, subjects demonstrated significantly higher sway prior to recovery (p = 0.0004), which did not differ between control and countermeasure groups. These results imply that providing motion-congruent visual cues may be an effective mean for curbing the development of moderate nausea and increasing comfort following future space missions.
Because of case reports suggesting that use of transdermal scopolamine might be associated with the subsequent development of seizures, a retrospective cohort study was performed with computerized Medicaid claims data. Patients receiving transdermal scopolamine were compared with patients receiving diphenhydramine, meclizine, prochlorperazine, and promethazine. A four-fold increased risk of seizures after transdermal scopolamine use was observed in the claims data. However, this was not supported by the primary medical records. All patients who had seizures after using transdermal scopolamine either had seizures before receiving the drug as well or did not really suffer from seizures. The original finding appeared to be the result of the use of transdermal scopolamine for "dizziness, rule out seizures"; the ICD-9-CM coding system does not include "rule out" diagnoses. Thus these data do not confirm the existence of an association between seizures and the use of transdermal scopolamine. In addition, this study demonstrates the usefulness of pharmacoepidemiology studies in documenting drug safety and the importance of obtaining primary medical records when performing pharmacoepidemiologic studies with claims data.
The efficacy of transdermal scopolamine, oral meclizine, and placebo in protection against motion sickness was compared in a double-blind crossover study. Thirty-six healthy subjects were exposed to motion three times for 90 min in a ship-motion simulator. Transdermal applications were made and tablets were taken at least 12 and 2 hr before exposure to motion. Transdermal scopolamine provided better protection than placebo or meclizine. Dryness of mouth was the only side effect reported more frequently for one regimen, transdermal scopolamine.
