Hormone-replacement therapy for postmenopausal women has associated benefits and risks. The advantages of the administration of estrogen to postmenopausal women include preventing or reversing the atrophic changes of the genitourinary system, slowing of facial aging, relieving hot flushes and psychological symptoms, preventing atherosclerotic heart disease and retarding the development of osteoporosis. The disadvantages of the administration of estrogen to postmenopausal women include rare but serious clinical sequelae associated with the ingestion of the synthetic estrogen when it is one component of the combination oral contraceptives, increased risk of cancer developing in the estrogen-dependent organs and uterine bleeding. The benefits of long-term cyclic estrogen-gestagen therapy in preventing osteoporosis far outweigh the risks.
Long-acting GnRH agonists are the treatment of choice for central precocious puberty. GnRH agonists are not effective in peripheral precocious puberty, but a number of other agents, including medroxyprogesterone acetate, ketoconazole, testolactone, and androgen antagonists, may be useful.
Epilepsy is a neurologic condition that affects women and women's choices in many areas of their lives. Some antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) used in the treatment of epilepsy can interact with hormonal contraceptives. The result can be decreased effectiveness in the contraceptive with the possibility of unintended pregnancy, or decreased effectiveness of the AED that can result in seizure activity. This article provides information about concurrent AED and contraceptive use to assist health care providers in guiding women with epilepsy to make the best contraceptive choices based on their reproductive life plans.
Injectable contraception has many advantages and is a popular birth control method worldwide. Its efficacy is independent of a daily action or an intervention around the time of coitus. It is highly efficacious and well tolerated in general. In the United States, the available injectable contraceptive is depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA). Its use is associated with a decrease in bone mineral density (BMD) that is largely if not completely reversible over time and very comparable to the BMD loss associated with pregnancy and breastfeeding. The available knowledge on the impact of BMD loss on the risks of fractures later in life is incomplete, but in the light of the small magnitude of impact of DMPA on BMD and its reversibility, any increase in the risk of osteoporotic fractures is likely to be small. This article reviews the recent evidence on DMPA's efficacy, risks and benefits, and side effects with a focus on bone health issues.
Endometriosis is a common disease associated with pelvic pain and infertility. The etiology and physiology are poorly understood, often frustrating clinicians and patient. Treatment may be medical or surgical, or a combination of these. Nursing care involves education of couples about endometriosis and its physical and psychological implications.
Many factors associated with hormone function have an impact on the course of epilepsy. Patients with epilepsy may have disturbances in sexual function such as anovulatory cycles in women and decreased libido and potency in men. Data indicate seizures, especially those arising in the limbic system, may influence the hypothalamic pituitary axis. Antiepileptic drugs also influence sexual function through direct brain effects as well as through induced changes in pharmacokinetics of the sex steroid hormones. Pregnancy has been reported to be a time of increased seizures; however, this has often been associated with low drug levels, for reasons that include inadequate drug dose, possible changes in pharmacokinetics, and noncompliance. Some evidence suggests that hormones affect seizure frequency. Changes in seizures during the menstrual cycle (catamenial epilepsy) have been found in some women: seizures were fewer during the luteal phase but increased when progesterone levels declined. Some improvement in seizure frequency has been shown in pilot studies using medroxyprogesterone acetate, a synthetic progesterone. Current concepts of the interrelationship among epilepsy, sex hormones, and antiepileptic drugs are discussed.
Dysregulation of body weight has been a common complaint of women on hormonal contraception but an inconsistent event in controlled clinical studies. In a prospective trial to evaluate the relationship between depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) and change in energy intake, energy expenditure and weight change, no effect from DMPA could be documented. These results refute a causal relationship between use of DPMA and increased weight. While weight gain and use of contraception may be common concomitant events in a population with a substantial propensity for weight fluctuation, the objective data suggest that factors other than contraceptive method are important. The controlled data have major implications for appropriate management and counseling of women seeking a highly effective method of protection against pregnancy.
Menstrual manipulation, ie, adjusting the menstrual cycle by taking hormonal contraceptives, allows women to have their period less often or to avoid bleeding at inconvenient times. The authors review the various options, the benefits, and the disadvantages of this practice.
OBJECTIVE: To propose a protocol for minimizing medical complications associated with the use of cyproterone, medroxyprogesterone, and depot leuprolide to treat paraphilia. METHOD: Review of the relevant literature. RESULTS: Certain patient populations should not be treated with these medications, and medical complications associated with each can be detected early and avoided. CONCLUSIONS: For each drug, a series of screening tests prior to use and scheduled testing during use can minimize potential medical complications.
This article discusses the research which has led to the controversy of Depo-Provera, and delineates the risks discovered as a result of the studies. Questions are raised as to the advisability of the continued use of this drug.
OBJECTIVE: Endometrial hyperplasia, an entity considered a precursor to endometrial carcinoma, frequently develops in women receiving unopposed estrogens. Progestins used concomitantly with estrogens can largely prevent endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma. However, the ability of progestins to reverse endometrial hyperplasia induced by estrogens is less well recognized. The purpose of this study was to assess the medical reversal rate of endometrial hyperplasia that develops in women receiving unopposed estrogen replacement therapy (ERT). DESIGN: Review of recent literature (1990-2000). RESULTS: Based on four large series, more than 90% of endometrial hyperplasia caused by ERT can be reversed by medical treatment. Discontinuation of estrogen and oral administration of 10 mg/day of medroxyprogesterone acetate continuously for 6 weeks or cyclically for 3 months (2 weeks of each month) are the two regimens most widely used. Other progestins also have been shown to be effective. CONCLUSIONS: Progestins are highly successful in reversing endometrial hyperplasia caused by ERT.
Progestin-only contraception is a popular method of birth control in the United States and worldwide. Progestin-only implants and injections allow patients access to long-term contraception with simple options for reversal or removal. The implant is one of the most effective forms of contraception and there are few contraindications. Manufacturer-led training is required to become certified in insertion and removal. The most common adverse effect of the implant is a change in menstrual bleeding patterns. Little evidence has shown weight gain or decreased bone mineral density with use. The depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) injection is used widely and is effective. Adverse effects that may limit use include changes in bleeding patterns and bone mineral density loss, which is reversible after discontinuation. The risk of weight gain with DMPA is greatest in obese adolescents and black patients. There is no significantly increased risk of cancer with either method. Both are safe for use in the postpartum period, during breastfeeding, and immediately after abortion.
Progestins at standard doses have compared favorably with tamoxifen for the front-line treatment of women with metastatic breast cancer. Attempts to further enhance the role of progestins have centered on dosage escalation, based on European data suggesting a dose-response effect. A phase I/II pilot trial at the University of Maryland demonstrated that doses of megestrol acetate up to 1,600 mg/d were well tolerated for prolonged periods. Responses were seen in patients whose disease was refractory to both standard doses of megestrol acetate and to tamoxifen. Different mechanisms of progestin action on breast tumors are theorized at the higher doses, which could account for the dose-response effect. Two large multi-institutional dose comparison trials of megestrol acetate in metastatic breast cancer have been undertaken in the United States. The Piedmont Oncology Association recently reported a significant benefit for megestrol acetate 800 mg/d compared with the standard 160 mg/d in terms of response and disease-free and overall survival. The largest trial is currently ongoing in the Cancer and Leukemia Group B. They are comparing 800 and 1,600 mg/d with standard doses, and results from this study are eagerly anticipated.
Injectable contraceptions appeal to women who value the efficacy, convenience, and safety provided by this reversible birth control option. Since FDA approval for contraceptive use in 1992, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA)--already used by millions of women worldwide--has been used by several million U.S. women. Although women using this 3-month progestin-only injectable often experience irregular bleeding and spotting (initially), long-term DMPA use typically results in amenorrhea. Many users, including adolescents, choose DMPA because of its convenience--nearly 100% contraceptive effectiveness is achieved with 4 injections per year. Because DMPA does not contain estrogen, it represents an appropriate contraceptive choice for postpartum or lactating women, as well as those whose medical status precludes use of contraceptive doses of estrogen. Some examples include: women over age 35 who smoke, those with increased thromboembolism risk, women with cardiovascular or liver disease, as well as women with complex migraines. Although fertility resumes on the average 10 months following the last injection, suppression of ovulation occasionally persists for as long as 22 months. Consequently, DMPA is not an appropriate choice for women who may wish to conceive within the next two years. Since the use of DMPA lowers ovarian estradiol production, reversible loss of bone mineral density (BMD) may occur. Studies currently in progress may clarify DMPA's long-term impact, if any, on BMD. Therapeutic uses of DMPA include treatment of: dysmenorrhea, menorrhagia (including that associated with fibroid uterine tumors), endometriosis, endometrial hyperplasia, ovulatory pain, pain associated with ovarian adhesive disease, premenstrual dysphoria and perimenopausal symptoms.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To provide an overview of recent research and guidelines regarding contraception and breastfeeding. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies assessed lactogenesis, breastfeeding rates, and milk supply concerns in patients starting postpartum hormonal contraception. One study showed a small but statistically significant increase in milk supply concerns between users and nonusers of postpartum hormonal contraception. Mean time to lactogenesis and breastfeeding rates were similar between patients with immediate and delayed insertion of the levonorgestrel (LNG) implant in one study and the LNG intrauterine device (IUD) in another study. Two studies assessed nursing knowledge and attitudes toward postpartum contraception in breastfeeding women, showing that postpartum nurses had incorrect knowledge of contraceptive safety in this patient population. Both studies demonstrated persistent erroneous beliefs that depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) adversely affects breastfeeding. In postpartum patients intending to breastfeed, more than half intended to initiate contraception within 6 weeks postpartum and few indicated effect on breastfeeding as a factor in their decision. SUMMARY: There are no significant differences in lactogenesis, breastfeeding, and infant growth parameters between immediate postpartum (IPP) and delayed insertion of LNG implants and IUDs. Labor and delivery and postpartum nurses have persistent erroneous beliefs that DMPA negatively affects breastfeeding. Patients desire to use contraception postpartum but prenatal counseling rates and practices are of variable content and quality.
The effects of at least three doses of each of five orally administered progestins on estrogen-primed, postmenopausal endometrial biochemistry and morphologic features were analyzed. The progestins tested were norethindrone, medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), norgestrel, dydrogesterone, and progesterone. The dose required to elicit responses similar to those seen in premenopausal, secretory endometria was assessed for each of the parameters measured, and the relative potencies were calculated. Potencies, relative to a value of 1 for norethindrone, are L norgestrel 8 (D/L norgestrel 4), MPA 0.1, dydrogesterone 0.02, and progesterone 0.002. The dose of norethindrone required to elicit secretory phase activity was about 0.35 mg/day. These values agree with published data obtained with the use of different methods (delay of menstruation in premenopausal women, endometrial histologic features of estrogen-primed, ovariectomized women).
OBJECTIVE: To explore whether use of depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) in adolescent and young adult females with cerebral palsy is associated with lower bone mineral density (BMD). METHODS: A chart review of adolescent and young adult females with cerebral palsy who had undergone dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, comparing BMD among those with (n = 19) and without DMPA (n = 84) exposure. RESULTS: BMD was similar in patients with and without DMPA exposure. All patients had low BMD, with average Z-scores of less than -2 at most sites. CONCLUSION: Results suggest that DMPA is not associated with lower BMD in non-ambulatory adolescent and young adult females with cerebral palsy.
Thirty sex offenders were randomly allocated: 10 to receive medroxyprogesterone therapy (M), 10, imaginal desensitization (ID) and 10 both (ID + M). Twenty-four responded for one year though 3 subsequently relapsed. There were no significant differences in response to the 3 treatments. Four patients who did not respond to the initial treatment and the 3 who relapsed responded to further treatment. Most treated with M maintained heterosexual intercourse at pretreatment frequency. Self-reported reduction in anomalous sexual urges in patients receiving M correlated with reduced testosterone levels one month following treatment, demonstrating that the response was specific and validating the assessment by patients' self-reports. Where cost-effectiveness or time constraints are factors influencing treatment of sex offenders, one of these therapies warrants consideration.
