BACKGROUND: This is an updated version of a previously published review in The Cochrane Library (2005, Issue 2) on 'Megestrol acetate for the treatment of anorexia-cachexia syndrome'. Megestrol acetate (MA) is currently used to improve appetite and to increase weight in cancer-associated anorexia. In 1993, MA was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of anorexia, cachexia or unexplained weight loss in patients with AIDS. The mechanism by which MA increases appetite is unknown and its effectiveness for anorexia and cachexia in neoplastic and AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) patients is under investigation. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy, effectiveness and safety of MA in palliating anorexia-cachexia syndrome in patients with cancer, AIDS and other underlying pathologies. SEARCH METHODS: We sought studies through an extensive search of electronic databases, journals, reference lists, contact with investigators and other search strategies outlined in the methods. The most recent search for this update was carried out in May 2012. SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies were included in the review if they assessed MA compared to placebo or other drug treatments in randomised controlled trials of patients with a clinical diagnosis of anorexia-cachexia syndrome related to cancer, AIDS or any other underlying pathology. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two independent review authors conducted data extraction and evaluated methodological quality. We performed quantitative analyses using appetite and quality of life as a dichotomous variable, and analysed weight gain as continuous and dichotomous variables. MAIN RESULTS: We included 35 trials in this update, the same number but not the same trials as in the previous version of the review. The trials comprised 3963 patients for effectiveness and 3180 for safety. Sixteen trials compared MA at different doses with placebo, seven trials compared different doses of MA with other drug treatments and 10 trials compared different doses of MA. Meta-analysis showed a benefit of MA compared with placebo, particularly with regard to appetite improvement and weight gain in cancer, AIDS and other underlying conditions, and lack of benefit in the same patients when MA was compared to other drugs. There was insufficient information to define the optimal dose of MA, but higher doses were more related to weight improvement than lower doses. Quality of life improvement in patients was seen only when comparing MA versus placebo but not other drugs in both subcategories: cancer and AIDS. Oedema, thromboembolic phenomena and deaths were more frequent in the patients treated with MA. More than 40 side effects were studied. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This review shows that MA improves appetite and is associated with slight weight gain in cancer, AIDS and in patients with other underlying pathology. Despite the fact that these patients are receiving palliative care they should be informed of the risks involved in taking MA.
BACKGROUND: Hospitalized patients are subject to acute illness and stress which may impact appetite or weight. Loss of appetite may lead to increased morbidity or mortality. Medications such as dronabinol, megestrol, and mirtazapine are used for weight gain in the outpatient setting; however, there is limited information about safety or effectiveness when initiated inpatient. OBJECTIVES: To analyze the effectiveness and safety of appetite-stimulating medications in hospitalized patients. METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study of hospitalized patients initiated on dronabinol, megestrol, or mirtazapine for appetite. The primary outcome was change in meal intake between drug initiation and discontinuation. Secondary outcomes included documented improvement in appetite, change in weight and various laboratory parameters, and incidence of adverse effects. RESULTS: A total of 38 patients met inclusion criteria, and mirtazapine was most commonly used (42%). There was no significant difference between groups of appetite-stimulating medications with regard to mean change in meal intake, weight, albumin, or documented improvement in diet. Within groups, each agent showed numerical improvement in percentage meal intake, with a mean change from initiation to discontinuation of 17.12%. Almost half (48%) of the patients experienced improvement in diet after the start of medications. No serious adverse effects were observed. Conclusion and Relevance: In inpatients, there was no difference in change in meal intake or weight between dronabinol, megestrol, or mirtazapine, but they may show numerical improvements in meal intake. To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate the use of dronabinol, megestrol, and mirtazapine initiated in the inpatient setting.
INTRODUCTION: The focus in contraception is shifting from oral contraceptives to more effective methods, such as implants and intrauterine devices. Generics are favored by third-party payors. As a result, potentially exciting developments in branded pills to increase safety or to reduce side effects may have gone unnoticed. AREAS COVERED: This article reviews the features of each of the four new oral contraceptives that have been introduced in the United States and/or Europe in the last few years. The motivation for the development of each product is outlined as is its efficacy, safety, tolerability and the noncontraceptive applications that have been explored are described. EXPERT OPINION: The hypothesis that using estradiol in place of ethinyl estradiol would reduce the risk of venous thromboembolism is still to be proven. However, the stronger progestogens used in these formulations may offer other tangible benefits for selected women. The new products for extended cycle pill use may have less impact. The flexible regimen can be adopted using any pill, but the approved product does provide convenience to patients. Cost will continue to be the determining factor in the acceptance of these new products, unless substantial health benefits can be conclusively proven.
Cancer anorexia/cachexia is a common clinical problem that substantially impacts upon the quality of life and survival of affected patients. Extensive investigations have not supported the use of either enteral or paternal hyperalimentation for such patients. Despite positive pilot trial reports, large randomized studies have been unable to demonstrate a clinically defensible role for either pentoxifylline, cyproheptadine, or hydrazine sulfate for patients with anorexia. Multiple placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blind, clinical trials have demonstrated that corticosteroids do have appetite-enhancing properties in patients suffering from cancer anorexia/cachexia, but none of these studies has demonstrated weight gain. In comparison, multiple studies have demonstrated that the progestational agent, megestrol acetate, has both appetite-enhancing and weight-promoting properties.
After a worldwide breakdown of hormone therapy [HT] following the publications of the Women's Health Initiative trial and Million Women's Study in 2002-2003, there is now a trend to turn attention again to HT and to explore particular progestogens, which have been discredited with respect to their side effects. The progestogens to be considered should control undue proliferation of the endometrium and should not interfere negatively with the positive effects of estradiol, regarding carbohydrate and lipid metabolism as well as hemostasis. In the present review, three "newer progestogens" are scrutinized regarding their various actions, in combination with estradiol; the progestogens include dienogest, drospirenone and nomegestrol acetate. This article is part of a special issue entitled Menopause.
The experience of 6 million Norplant users has led to several more advanced implants. Implanon is a single-rod implant system containing a low androgenic progestin and requires 1 to 2 minutes for insertion and removal. Like other implants, Implanon prevents pregnancy by changing the character of the cervical mucus and interfering with luteal function. Unlike Norplant, though, Implanon is designed to prevent ovulation for the full duration of use. Implant contraception has several advantages over other types of contraception including high efficacy, minimal required maintenance, absence of estrogen, and rapid return of fertility after discontinuation. Implants can be a good choice for adolescents; women with hypertension, diabetes, anemia, endometriosis, or other medical problems; and women who are breast-feeding. Irregular bleeding is the most common adverse effect of implants and can be treated with several medication regimens. Preinsertion counseling, however, is the most important factor in ensuring satisfaction with implants. Unfortunately, no implant system is currently available in the United States since August 2000, but Implanon is expected to reach the U.S. market within the next 2 years.
Progestogens are used in clinical practice in some conditions. Their effects depend on their chemical structure, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, with important differences among various progestogens. Generally, progestins are classified according to their parent molecule, of which often they keep some features. Derivatives of 19-nor-progesterone are characterized by high selectivity of action on progestin receptor. In particular, nomegestrol acetate (NomAc) shows an important progestational potency, neutral gluco-lipid profile, and antigonadotropic activity. It is used for treating menstrual cycle disorders and for hormone replacement therapy in menopause in association with an estrogen. In future, thanks to its antigonadotropic activity, NomAc will be used in estroprogestin combinations in fertile women, thus taking advantage of its tolerability profile and obtaining numerous non-contraceptive benefits as well.
The aim is to review major clinical trials that have used megestrol acetate (MA) in the treatment of cachexia across several disease states. A review of general usage and potential side-effects are discussed. A theory that the newly approved nanocrystal formation of MA can better deliver this potent medication for treatment will also be reviewed.
This case describes the first report of a patient developing Cushing's syndrome whilst being treated with the synthetic progestogen, megestrol acetate (Megace). Drugs are the commonest cause of Cushing's syndrome. Some synthetic progestogens are known to have glucocorticoid activity at high doses. On structural grounds neither megestrol nor its major metabolites would be expected to interact with the glucocorticoid receptor, through the manufacturers report that it may have 'weak glucocorticoid activity'.
INTRODUCTION: Is the replacement of ethinyl-estradiol (EE) with estradiol (E2) in combined hormonal contraceptives (CHCs) associated with fewer metabolic effects, leading to a further improvement on safety of hormonal contraceptives? AREAS COVERED: This is a narrative review paper including all available data on the metabolic impact of CHCs containing E2 published in English up to December 2015. Modification of a metabolic variable of interest during the first months of treatment was considered as an outcome. EXPERT OPINION: E2 was extensively used in oral contraceptives associated to nomegestrol acetate (NOMAc) in a monophasic 24 + 4 or its ester E2 valerate to dienogest (DNG) in a quadriphasic 26 + 2 regimen. The impact on the lipid metabolism and the hemostatic system of these preparations seems milder than that caused by EE-based ones, associated with no change of blood pressure. The impact on bone metabolism was instead similar to EE. Data available in the literature are mainly derived from studies having secondary minor metabolic outcomes as the primary end-point, and so currently not completely applicable on the real variables of interest (arterial or venous cardiovascular events, bone fractures). The preliminar parenteral use of E2 seems promising, both transdermal and vaginal, in particular after the introduction of a specific progestin with a high anti-ovulatory activity, like nestorone.
Anticachexic or antisarcopenic medications are prescribed worldwide for geriatric patients with poor appetite and associated weight loss. They represent a valuable treatment option for managing cachexia. However, the well-publicized adverse reports about these medications in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and in the cancer population has led to some concern and much subsequent discussion over the safety of these medications being used in geriatric population. This review looks at the evidence in relation to the benefits and risks of these medications and discusses what we know about their use in the geriatric population.
OBJECTIVES: To estimate the objective response rate and toxicity associated with alternating megestrol acetate (MA) and tamoxifen citrate (T) in women with endometrial carcinoma. METHODS: Consenting patients with measurable recurrent or advanced endometrial carcinoma were eligible if they had not received prior cytotoxic or hormonal treatment. MA 80 mg BID x 3 weeks alternating with T 20 mg BID x 3 weeks orally was given. RESULTS: Of 61 patients entered, 56 eligible patients were evaluable for toxicity and response. Fifteen patients responded (12 complete, 3 partial) for an overall response rate of 27% (90% Confidence Interval: 17-38%). In 8 of 15 (53%) responders, response duration exceeded 20 months. The response rate was 38% in patients with histologic grade 1 tumors (n = 16), 24% in those with grade 2 disease (n = 17), and 22% among patients with grade 3 disease (n = 23). Women less than or equal to 60 years (n = 16) appear to have a better response rate than those >60 years (n = 40), 44% versus 20%. The response rate in patients with extra pelvic disease (n = 42) was 31% as compared to 14% in those with strictly pelvic and/or vaginal disease (n = 14). The median progression-free survival (PFS) was 2.7 months and median overall survival was 14.0 months. Two patients experienced a grade 4 thromboembolic event. Additional toxicities included one of each grade 3 gastrointestinal, grade 3 neurologic, and grade 3 genitourinary. CONCLUSION: A regimen of alternating megestrol acetate and tamoxifen is active in treating endometrial cancer and may result in a prolonged complete response (CR) in some patients.
A new combined oral contraceptive called Zoely has just been marketed in Belgium. It contains nomegestrol acetate, a progestin known for its high contraceptive reliability based on its antigonadotropic power and long half-life. This progestin is associated with estradiol and Zoely is devoid of ethinyl estradiol, which is the usual component of the majority of combined oral contraceptives and is primarily responsible for thrombotic side effects of the pill. The compositon and type of regimen of this new oral contraceptive contribute to its efficacy and excellent clinical tolerance.
QOL is highly affected in individuals suffering from pancreatic cancer. One parameter that influences negatively QOL in these patients is cancer -cachexia syndrome. During the ASCO Annual Meeting 2014, one abstract focusing on cancer-cachexia syndrome (Abstract #15208) emphasized the fact that cachexia is under diagnosed even in patients with pancreatic cancer who constitute a high-risk group for presenting this syndrome. In addition the abstract raises concerns about the benefit of the use of dronabinol and megestrol acetate in treating the cachexia syndrome in this group of patients. Another important factor that determines QOL in pancreatic cancer patients is surgical procedures-pancreatectomies that these patients may undergo. A very interesting abstract presented also at the ASCO Annual Meeting 2014 (Abstract #15234) explores the benefit of using pasireotide perioperative in ameliorating QOL of patients who had surgical intervention.
The cachexia associated with cancer and AIDS appears to result from a number of processes, most of which impair caloric intake. Although past attempts to reverse anorexia-cachexia have generally been disappointing, several promising new pharmacologic approaches are currently being evaluated, including megestrol acetate, hydrazine sulfate, metoclopramide, and dronabinol.
A man aged 65 years with metastatic renal cell carcinoma presented for evaluation after a recent fall. A thorough workup of the case was performed and secondary adrenal insufficiency induced by the administration of megestrol acetate was determined to be the cause. Adrenal insufficiency is a serious disorder that is a potential adverse event of megestrol acetate, a medication used to help patients with cancer cachexia increase their appetite and gain weight. This association is not well recognized in clinical practice, so this case highlights the importance of distinguishing possible endocrine complications induced by the long-term administration or sudden discontinuation of megestrol acetate.
Different cohort studies have shown that HRT decreases the risk of cardio-vascular (C-V) disease and the risk of bone fracture by 30 to 50%. The only controlled study (HERS study) did not show any benefit of HRT with estradiol and medroxyprogesterone (MPG) in secondary prevention. The beneficial effect of estrogens on coronary dilatation and on HDL cholesterol could be attenuated by some progestogens such as MPG but not by nomegestrol acetate. In this framework, the comparative metabolic effects of different progestogens and tibolone are described in this article. The effects of estrogens on mood and of androgens on libido are discussed. The preventive effect of estrogens on osteoporosis and on Alzheimer disease is compared to other nonhormonal treatments.
Many new cancer treatments that slow progression and extend survival are emerging. These advances bring new hope to patients and physicians, but often increase health expenditures in an already cost-conscious environment. To help guide resource allocation decisions, cost-effectiveness models are constructed to compare the costs and outcomes of new treatments with current options, and to encourage the uptake of new technologies. This study focuses on the cost-effectiveness studies published since 1997 for hormonal treatment options in advanced breast cancer. This paper: i) examines the quality of studies in terms of reporting methods and transparency of the models; ii) compares the calculated cost-effectiveness ratios; and iii) makes recommendations for future cost-effectiveness models in advanced breast cancer.
The hypothalamus plays an essential role in the regulation of the body weight of all living creatures. In it there is a convergence of signals from the nervous system and signals from the peripheral tissues, through a complex system of neurotransmitters and neuropeptides. The ever increasing understanding of this field, opens up new therapeutic possibilities, both current and future, in the treatment of eating disorders.
