IMPORTANCE: Worldwide, 47 million people live with dementia and, by 2050, the number is expected to increase to 131 million. OBSERVATIONS: Dementia is an acquired loss of cognition in multiple cognitive domains sufficiently severe to affect social or occupational function. In the United States, Alzheimer disease, one cause of dementia, affects 5.8 million people. Dementia is commonly associated with more than 1 neuropathology, usually Alzheimer disease with cerebrovascular pathology. Diagnosing dementia requires a history evaluating for cognitive decline and impairment in daily activities, with corroboration from a close friend or family member, in addition to a thorough mental status examination by a clinician to delineate impairments in memory, language, attention, visuospatial cognition such as spatial orientation, executive function, and mood. Brief cognitive impairment screening questionnaires can assist in initiating and organizing the cognitive assessment. However, if the assessment is inconclusive (eg, symptoms present, but normal examination findings), neuropsychological testing can help determine whether dementia is present. Physical examination may help identify the etiology of dementia. For example, focal neurologic abnormalities suggest stroke. Brain neuroimaging may demonstrate structural changes including, but not limited to, focal atrophy, infarcts, and tumor, that may not be identified on physical examination. Additional evaluation with cerebrospinal fluid assays or genetic testing may be considered in atypical dementia cases, such as age of onset younger than 65 years, rapid symptom onset, and/or impairment in multiple cognitive domains but not episodic memory. For treatment, patients may benefit from nonpharmacologic approaches, including cognitively engaging activities such as reading, physical exercise such as walking, and socialization such as family gatherings. Pharmacologic approaches can provide modest symptomatic relief. For Alzheimer disease, this includes an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor such as donepezil for mild to severe dementia, and memantine (used alone or as an add-on therapy) for moderate to severe dementia. Rivastigmine can be used to treat symptomatic Parkinson disease dementia. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Alzheimer disease currently affects 5.8 million persons in the United States and is a common cause of dementia, which is usually accompanied by other neuropathology, often cerebrovascular disease such as brain infarcts. Causes of dementia can be diagnosed by medical history, cognitive and physical examination, laboratory testing, and brain imaging. Management should include both nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic approaches, although efficacy of available treatments remains limited.
In aging societies, the morbidity and mortality of dementia is increasing at a significant rate, thereby imposing burden on healthcare, economy and the society as well. Patients' and caregivers' quality of life and life expectancy are greatly determined by the early diagnosis and the initiation of available symptomatic treatments. Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine have been the cornerstones of Alzheimer's therapy for approximately two decades and over the years, more and more experience has been gained on their use in non-Alzheimer's dementias too. The aim of our work was to provide a comprehensive summary about the use of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine for the treatment of Alzheimer's and non-Alzheimers's dementias.
In an ever-increasing aged world, Alzheimer's disease (AD) represents the first cause of dementia and one of the first chronic diseases in elderly people. With 55 million people affected, the WHO considers AD to be a disease with public priority. Unfortunately, there are no final cures for this pathology. Treatment strategies are aimed to mitigate symptoms, i.e., acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEI) and the N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist Memantine. At present, the best approaches for managing the disease seem to combine pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapies to stimulate cognitive reserve. Over the last twenty years, a number of drugs have been discovered acting on the well-established biological hallmarks of AD, deposition of beta-amyloid aggregates and accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau protein in cells. Although previous efforts disappointed expectations, a new era in treating AD has been working its way recently. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) gave conditional approval of the first disease-modifying therapy (DMT) for the treatment of AD, aducanumab, a monoclonal antibody (mAb) designed against Abeta plaques and oligomers in 2021, and in January 2023, the FDA granted accelerated approval for a second monoclonal antibody, Lecanemab. This review describes ongoing clinical trials with DMTs and non-pharmacological therapies. We will also present a future scenario based on new biomarkers that can detect AD in preclinical or prodromal stages, identify people at risk of developing AD, and allow an early and curative treatment.
Memantine is a clinically useful drug in many neurological disorders, including Alzheimer's disease. The principal mechanism of action of memantine is believed to be the blockade of current flow through channels of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors--a glutamate receptor subfamily broadly involved in brain function. Surprisingly, other drugs that block NMDA receptor channels, such as ketamine, exhibit serious deleterious effects. The unusual therapeutic utility of memantine probably results from inhibitory mechanisms shared with ketamine, combined with actions specific to memantine. These potentially important differences between memantine and ketamine include effects on gating of blocked channels and binding of memantine to two sites on NMDA receptors. Because modulation of NMDA receptor activity can increase or decrease excitability of neuronal circuits, subtle differences in the mechanisms of action of NMDA receptor antagonists can strongly impact on their clinical effects.
Currently, five pharmacotherapeutic options are available to treat Alzheimer's disease: memantine; the three cholinesterase inhibitors donepezil, galantamine, and rivastigmine; and combination treatments with memantine and one cholinesterase inhibitor. Selection of the best course of treatment is based upon the evidence gathered by systematic reviews and meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials. Areas covered: This article provides a risk-benefit analysis of these treatments using evidence from meta-analyses on their safety and their efficacy. Expert opinion: Memantine improves cognitive functions and behavioral disturbances more efficiently than the placebo, both as monotherapy and in combination with donepezil. Although memantine monotherapy and combination therapy are associated with a few individual adverse events such as somnolence, it is well-tolerated and its safety (all-cause discontinuation) is comparable or superior to that of the placebo (agitation). Pooled cholinesterase inhibitors are superior to the placebo in the improvement of cognitive functions, but not behavioral disturbances and they are not well-tolerated, as evaluated by the high discontinuation rate. Donepezil (10 mg/day) and oral rivastigmine and galantamine monotherapies carry the risk for some adverse events including gastrointestinal symptoms. Therefore, we consider that combined treatment with memantine and donepezil is the most useful treatment for Alzheimer's disease.
Memantine is a non-competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist that was initially indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease. It is now also considered for a variety of other pathologies in which activation of NMDA receptors apparently contributes to the pathogenesis and progression of disease. In addition to the central nervous system (CNS), NMDA receptors can be found in non-neuronal cells and tissues that recently have become an interesting research focus. Some studies have shown that glutamate signaling plays a role in cell transformation and cancer progression. In addition, these receptors may play a role in cardiovascular disorders. In this review, we focus on the most recent findings for memantine with respect to its pharmacological effects in a range of diseases, including inflammatory disorders, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, neuropathy, as well as retinopathy.
BACKGROUND: Overstimulation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor by glutamate is implicated in neurodegenerative disorders. Accordingly, we investigated memantine, an NMDA antagonist, for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. METHODS: Patients with moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease were randomly assigned to receive placebo or 20 mg of memantine daily for 28 weeks. The primary efficacy variables were the Clinician's Interview-Based Impression of Change Plus Caregiver Input (CIBIC-Plus) and the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study Activities of Daily Living Inventory modified for severe dementia (ADCS-ADLsev). The secondary efficacy end points included the Severe Impairment Battery and other measures of cognition, function, and behavior. Treatment differences between base line and the end point were assessed. Missing observations were imputed by using the most recent previous observation (the last observation carried forward). The results were also analyzed with only the observed values included, without replacing the missing values (observed-cases analysis). RESULTS: Two hundred fifty-two patients (67 percent women; mean age, 76 years) from 32 U.S. centers were enrolled. Of these, 181 (72 percent) completed the study and were evaluated at week 28. Seventy-one patients discontinued treatment prematurely (42 taking placebo and 29 taking memantine). Patients receiving memantine had a better outcome than those receiving placebo, according to the results of the CIBIC-Plus (P=0.06 with the last observation carried forward, P=0.03 for observed cases), the ADCS-ADLsev (P=0.02 with the last observation carried forward, P=0.003 for observed cases), and the Severe Impairment Battery (P<0.001 with the last observation carried forward, P=0.002 for observed cases). Memantine was not associated with a significant frequency of adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: Antiglutamatergic treatment reduced clinical deterioration in moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease, a phase associated with distress for patients and burden on caregivers, for which other treatments are not available.
BACKGROUND: The clinical benefit of memantine for Alzheimer's disease (AD) remains inconclusive. OBJECTIVE: We performed an updated systematic review and meta-analysis of the efficacy/safety of memantine in AD. METHODS: We included randomized trials of memantine for AD patients. Cognitive function scores (CF), behavioral disturbances scores (BD), and all-cause discontinuation were used as primary measures. Effect size based on a random-effects model was evaluated in the meta-analyses. RESULTS: Thirty studies (n = 7,567; memantine versus placebo: N = 11, n = 3,298; memantine + cholinesterase inhibitors (M+ChEIs) versus ChEIs: N = 17, n = 4,175) were identified. Memantine showed a significant improvement in CF [standardized mean difference (SMD) = -0.24, 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) = -0.34, -0.15, p < 0.00001, I2 = 35% ] and BD (SMD = -0.16, 95% CIs = -0.29, -0.04, p = 0.01, I2 = 52%) compared with placebo. In the sensitivity analysis including only patients with moderate-severe AD, memantine was superior to the placebo in reducing BD without considerable heterogeneity (SMD = -0.20, 95% CIs = -0.34, -0.07, p = 0.003, I2 = 36%). Compared with ChEIs, M+ChEIs showed a greater reduction in BD (SMD = -0.20, 95% CIs = -0.36, -0.03, p = 0.02, I2 = 77%) and a trend of CF improvement (SMD = -0.11, 95% CIs = -0.22, 0.01, p = 0.06, I2 = 56%). However, in the sensitivity analysis of double-blind, placebo-controlled studies only, M+ChEIs showed a significant reduction in BD compared with ChEIs without considerable heterogeneity (SMD = -0.11, 95% CIs = -0.21, -0.01, p = 0.04, I2 = 40%). When performing the sensitivity analysis of donepezil studies only, M+ChEIs was superior to ChEIs in improving CF without considerable heterogeneity (SMD = -0.18, 95% CIs = -0.31, -0.05, p = 0.006, I2 = 49%). No differences were detected in all-cause discontinuation between the groups. CONCLUSIONS: The meta-analyses suggest the credible efficacy and safety of memantine in treating AD when used alone or in combination with ChEIs.
BACKGROUND: Memantine is a moderate affinity uncompetitive antagonist of glutamate NMDA receptors. It is licensed for use in moderate and severe Alzheimer's disease (AD); in the USA, it is also widely used off-label for mild AD. OBJECTIVES: To determine efficacy and safety of memantine for people with dementia. To assess whether memantine adds benefit for people already taking cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs). SEARCH METHODS: We searched ALOIS, the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group's register of trials (http://www.medicine.ox.ac.uk/alois/) up to 25 March 2018. We examined clinical trials registries, press releases and posters of memantine manufacturers; and the web sites of the FDA, EMEA and NICE. We contacted authors and companies for missing information. SELECTION CRITERIA: Double-blind, parallel group, placebo-controlled, randomised trials of memantine in people with dementia. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We pooled and analysed data from four clinical domains across different aetiologies and severities of dementia and for AD with agitation. We assessed the impact of study duration, severity and concomitant use of ChEIs. Consequently, we restricted analyses to the licensed dose (20 mg/day or 28 mg extended release) and data at six to seven months duration of follow-up, and analysed separately results for mild and moderate-to-severe AD.We transformed results for efficacy outcomes into the difference in points on particular outcome scales. MAIN RESULTS: Across all types of dementia, data were available from almost 10,000 participants in 44 included trials, most of which were at low or unclear risk of bias. For nearly half the studies, relevant data were obtained from unpublished sources. The majority of trials (29 in 7885 participants) were conducted in people with AD.1. Moderate-to-severe AD (with or without concomitant ChEIs). High-certainty evidence from up to 14 studies in around 3700 participants consistently shows a small clinical benefit for memantine versus placebo: clinical global rating (CGR): 0.21 CIBIC+ points (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.14 to 0.30); cognitive function (CF): 3.11 Severe Impairment Battery (SIB) points (95% CI 2.42 to 3.92); performance on activities of daily living (ADL): 1.09 ADL19 points (95% CI 0.62 to 1.64); and behaviour and mood (BM): 1.84 Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) points (95% CI 1.05 to 2.76). There may be no difference in the number of people discontinuing memantine compared to placebo: risk ratio (RR) 0.93 (95% CI 0.83 to 1.04) corresponding to 13 fewer people per 1000 (95% CI 31 fewer to 7 more). Although there is moderate-certainty evidence that fewer people taking memantine experience agitation as an adverse event: RR 0.81 (95% CI 0.66 to 0.99) (25 fewer people per 1000, 95% CI 1 to 44 fewer), there is also moderate-certainty evidence, from three additional studies, suggesting that memantine is not beneficial as a treatment for agitation (e.g. Cohen Mansfield Agitation Inventory: clinical benefit of 0.50 CMAI points, 95% CI -3.71 to 4.71) .The presence of concomitant ChEI does not impact on the difference between memantine and placebo, with the possible exceptions of the BM outcome (larger effect in people taking ChEIs) and the CF outcome (smaller effect).2. Mild AD (Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) 20 to 23): mainly moderate-certainty evidence based on post-hoc subgroups from up to four studies in around 600 participants suggests there is probably no difference between memantine and placebo for CF: 0.21 ADAS-Cog points (95% CI -0.95 to 1.38); performance on ADL: -0.07 ADL 23 points (95% CI -1.80 to 1.66); and BM: -0.29 NPI points (95% CI -2.16 to 1.58). There is less certainty in the CGR evidence, which also suggests there may be no difference: 0.09 CIBIC+ points (95% CI -0.12 to 0.30). Memantine (compared with placebo) may increase the numbers of people discontinuing treatment because of adverse events (RR 2.12, 95% CI 1.03 to 4.39).3. Mild-to-moderate vascular dementia. Moderate- and low-certainty evidence from two studies in around 750 participants indicates there is probably a small clinical benefit for CF: 2.15 ADAS-Cog points (95% CI 1.05 to 3.25); there may be a small clinical benefit for BM: 0.47 NOSGER disturbing behaviour points (95% CI 0.07 to 0.87); there is probably no difference in CGR: 0.03 CIBIC+ points (95% CI -0.28 to 0.34); and there may be no difference in ADL: 0.11 NOSGER II self-care subscale points (95% CI -0.35 to 0.54) or in the numbers of people discontinuing treatment: RR 1.05 (95% CI 0.83 to 1.34).There is limited, mainly low- or very low-certainty efficacy evidence for other types of dementia (Parkinson's disease and dementia Lewy bodies (for which CGR may show a small clinical benefit; four studies in 319 people); frontotemporal dementia (two studies in 133 people); and AIDS-related Dementia Complex (one study in 140 people)).There is high-certainty evidence showing no difference between memantine and placebo in the proportion experiencing at least one adverse event: RR 1.03 (95% CI 1.00 to 1.06); the RR does not differ between aetiologies or severities of dementia. Combining available data from all trials, there is moderate-certainty evidence that memantine is 1.6 times more likely than placebo to result in dizziness (6.1% versus 3.9%), low-certainty evidence of a 1.3-fold increased risk of headache (5.5% versus 4.3%), but high-certainty evidence of no difference in falls. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found important differences in the efficacy of memantine in mild AD compared to that in moderate-to-severe AD. There is a small clinical benefit of memantine in people with moderate-to-severe AD, which occurs irrespective of whether they are also taking a ChEI, but no benefit in people with mild AD.Clinical heterogeneity in AD makes it unlikely that any single drug will have a large effect size, and means that the optimal drug treatment may involve multiple drugs, each having an effect size that may be less than the minimum clinically important difference.A definitive long-duration trial in mild AD is needed to establish whether starting memantine earlier would be beneficial over the long term and safe: at present the evidence is against this, despite it being common practice. A long-duration trial in moderate-to-severe AD is needed to establish whether the benefit persists beyond six months.
Donepezil, an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (AChEI), has been widely used to treat Alzheimer's disease (AD) in China. However, there are few studies focusing on the efficacy and safety of donepezil in Chinese patients. In this review, we discuss 1) the efficacy of donepezil and its comparison with other AChEIs or memantine, 2) the therapeutic responses to donepezil and its influencing factors, and 3) the safety and tolerability of donepezil in Chinese patients with different stages of AD and amnestic mild cognitive impairment, and further compare the similarities and differences of the results between Chinese studies and previous Western studies that predominantly enrolled Caucasian subjects. We include Chinese clinical trials and other well-designed studies investigating donepezil or using donepezil as a positive control, in which the efficacy and/or safety of donepezil have been analyzed. Based on these studies, donepezil has been shown to be effective and safe in Chinese AD patients and may impact AD biomarkers, such as hippocampal atrophy, Abeta, and tau. In addition, the therapeutic response to donepezil may be influenced by apolipoprotein E or cytochrome P450 2D6 polymorphism.
BACKGROUND: Memantine is a non-competitive N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor antagonist currently used for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease as an approved indication. However, as knowledge of signaling pathways is increasing, the therapeutic potential of memantine is being applied for the treatment of various psychiatric illnesses. METHODS: The PubMed online database was searched for the use of memantine in various psychiatric disorders. Case studies, open-label trials, and controlled trials from the search were included. RESULTS: Memantine monotherapy was found to exert efficacy in several neuropsychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, binge eating disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. For posttraumatic stress disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, memantine was found efficacious in augmentation with other medications. In obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), memantine was used as both an augmentation to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and standalone therapy, and most published studies found it to improve OCD symptoms. For schizophrenia, memantine has been reported to be consistently effective for negative symptoms only. The manic phase of bipolar disorder also appears to benefit from memantine. The depressive phase of bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder did not respond significantly to memantine. Catatonia as a symptom of various disorders improved in several case studies when memantine was used in combination with other medications. CONCLUSIONS: Memantine may have several therapeutic applications in psychiatry, reflecting the involvement of glutamate pathways in multiple psychiatric disorders.
BACKGROUND: Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) are common in individuals with Alzheimer disease (AD). Donepezil and memantine are both widely used for the treatment of moderate AD. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of donepezil and memantine in relieving BPSD in individuals with moderate AD. METHOD: We conducted a prospective, randomized, 6-month clinical trial involving 85 individuals with moderate AD divided into two groups: group 1 (n = 42) was treated with donepezil; group 2 (n = 43) was treated with memantine. We used the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) to assess the prevalence and severity of BPSD at baseline and after 6 months of treatment with donepezil or memantine. RESULTS: The two groups' baseline characteristics, including age, sex, mean length of education, and disease duration, were comparable, as were their baseline Mini-Mental State Examination scores. The NPI Total score improved from baseline to month 6 in both groups (P < 0.0001). Analyses of the NPI subdomains revealed that both donepezil treatment and memantine treatment produced statistically significant improvement in all of the NPI domains except euphoria and apathy, for which no improvement was observed after memantine treatment. Both treatments were well tolerated, with mostly mild and transient adverse effects. CONCLUSION: Specific drugs for AD, including donepezil and memantine, may be effective in treating BPSD in individuals with moderate AD, with a favorable safety profile.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the comparative efficacy and safety of cognitive enhancers by patient characteristics for managing Alzheimer's dementia (AD). DESIGN: Systematic review and individual patient data (IPD) network meta-analysis (NMA) based on our previously published systematic review and aggregate data NMA. DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Methodology Register, CINAHL, AgeLine and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials up to March 2016. PARTICIPANTS: 80 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) including 21 138 adults with AD, and 12 RCTs with IPD including 6906 patients. INTERVENTIONS: Cognitive enhancers (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine and memantine) alone or in any combination against other cognitive enhancers or placebo. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: We requested IPD from authors, sponsors and data sharing platforms. When IPD were not available, we used aggregate data. We appraised study quality with the Cochrane risk-of-bias. We conducted a two-stage random-effects IPD-NMA, and assessed their findings using CINeMA (Confidence in Network Meta-Analysis). PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: We included trials assessing cognition with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and adverse events. RESULTS: Our IPD-NMA compared nine treatments (including placebo). Donepezil (mean difference (MD)=1.41, 95% CI: 0.51 to 2.32) and donepezil +memantine (MD=2.57, 95% CI: 0.07 to 5.07) improved MMSE score (56 RCTs, 11 619 participants; CINeMA score: moderate) compared with placebo. According to P-score, oral rivastigmine (OR=1.26, 95% CI: 0.82 to 1.94, P-score=16%) and donepezil (OR=1.08, 95% CI: 0.87 to 1.35, P-score=30%) had the least favourable safety profile, but none of the estimated treatment effects were sufficiently precise when compared with placebo (45 RCTs, 15 649 patients; CINeMA score: moderate to high). For moderate-to-severe impairment, donepezil, memantine and their combination performed best, but for mild-to-moderate impairment donepezil and transdermal rivastigmine ranked best. Adjusting for MMSE baseline differences, oral rivastigmine and galantamine improved MMSE score, whereas when adjusting for comorbidities only oral rivastigmine was effective. CONCLUSIONS: The choice among the different cognitive enhancers may depend on patient's characteristics. The MDs of all cognitive enhancer regimens except for single-agent oral rivastigmine, galantamine and memantine, against placebo were clinically important for cognition (MD larger than 1.40 MMSE points), but results were quite imprecise. However, two-thirds of the published RCTs were associated with high risk of bias for incomplete outcome data, and IPD were only available for 15% of the included RCTs. PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42015023507.
BACKGROUND: The role of currently available drugs for Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been controversial, with some national formularies restricting their use, and health economists questioning whether the small clinical effects are economically worthwhile. OBJECTIVE: To estimate the efficacy and safety of donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine, and memantine for the treatment of AD. METHODS: Double-blind, placebo-controlled, with random assignment to a cholinesterase inhibitor or memantine trials were included into the pooled studies. RESULTS: Cognitive effects were significant for all drugs, ranging from a -1.29 points mean difference (95% CI -2.30 to -0.28) in the 20 mg daily memantine trials to -3.20 points (95% CI -3.28 to -3.12) in the 32 mg daily galantamine group. Only memantine had no effect on the Clinicians' Global Impression of Change scale. No behavioral benefits were observed, except for -2.72 (95% CI -4.92 to -0.52) in the 10 mg daily donepezil group and -1.72 (95% CI -3.12 to -0.33) for 24 mg daily galantamine trial. Only 5 mg daily donepezil had no effect on the function outcome. Compared with placebo, more dropouts and adverse events occurred with the cholinesterase inhibitors, but not with memantine. CONCLUSIONS: Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine are able to stabilize or slow decline in cognition, function, behavior, and global change.
Memantine, an uncompetitive antagonist with moderate affinity for NMDA receptors, demonstrates voltage-dependency and relatively fast on/off receptor kinetics. Memantine 20 mg/day significantly slowed the rate of deterioration in outpatients with moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease in a 28-week US randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre study. Memantine 10 mg/day improved measures of dementia in care-dependent inpatients with Alzheimer's disease or vascular dementia in a 12-week randomised, double-blind study. Significantly more memantine than placebo recipients were responders according to Clinical Global Impression of Change scores and the Behavioural Rating Scale for Geriatric Patients Care Dependence subscale. Memantine 20 mg/day significantly improved cognition-related outcomes (cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale) in patients with vascular dementia in two 28-week randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trials. No statistically significant between-group difference was seen in other primary endpoints. Adverse events (incidence in memantine recipients greater than in placebo recipients) occurring in patients with moderately severe to severe dementia included diarrhoea, insomnia, dizziness, headache and hallucination.
INTRODUCTION: Dementia is characterised by chronic, global, non-reversible deterioration in memory, executive function, and personality. Speech and motor function may also be impaired. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of treatments on cognitive symptoms of dementia (Alzheimer's, Lewy body, or vascular)? What are the effects of treatments on behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (Alzheimer's, Lewy body, or vascular)? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to April 2008 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 33 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine), antidepressants (clomipramine, fluoxetine, imipramine, sertraline), antipsychotics (haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone), aromatherapy, benzodiazepines (diazepam, lorazepam), cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), cognitive stimulation, exercise, ginkgo biloba, memantine, mood stabilisers (carbamazepine, sodium valproate/valproic acid), music therapy, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), omega 3 (fish oil), reminiscence therapy, and statins.
Neuropathic pain is common in the palliative care population; unless adequately treated, the pain can lead to chronic anxiety, depression, and social impairment. Many treatments have been proposed for neuropathic pain; however, it remains underdiagnosed, under-treated, and often requires long-term therapy with risk of adverse effects. Memantine (Namenda), an N-Methyl, D-aspartate receptor inhibitor currently marketed for the treatment of dementia, has been proposed as a medication for the treatment of neuropathic pain for its mechanism, safety, lack of serious adverse effects, and relatively rapid onset of action. However, clinical trials have not been promising so far and its routine use in neuropathic pain is not currently recommended.
This review article presents select recent studies that form the basis for the development of esmethadone into a potential new drug. Esmethadone is a promising member of the pharmacological class of uncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) antagonists that have shown efficacy for major depressive disorder (MDD) and other diseases and disorders, such as Alzheimer's dementia and pseudobulbar affect. The other drugs in the novel class of NMDAR antagonists with therapeutic uses that are discussed for comparative purposes in this review are esketamine, ketamine, dextromethorphan, and memantine. We present in silico, in vitro, in vivo, and clinical data for esmethadone and other uncompetitive NMDAR antagonists that may advance our understanding of the role of these receptors in neural plasticity in health and disease. The efficacy of NMDAR antagonists as rapid antidepressants may advance our understanding of the neurobiology of MDD and other neuropsychiatric diseases and disorders.
Currently available data indicate superior therapeutic effects of combination treatment for Alzheimer dementia with memantine and acetylcholine esterase inhibitors in certain clinical contexts. Out of five randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials two showed superior therapeutic effects in comparison to monotherapy with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors regarding various domains. Recently published meta-analyses and cost-benefit analyses also showed positive results. Recently published German guidelines for dementia treatment also take these new data into account and recommend combination treatment in patients with severe dementia on stable donepezil medication. This article gives an overview of current evidence for combination therapy.
A library of 34 lipophilic sulfonamides based upon the memantine core has been synthesized to identify potential drug candidates to cross the blood-brain barrier and target glioblastoma. The library was screened for in vitro activity against 4 mammalian cell lines, including U-87 (glioblastoma). Additional synthetic variation of the active compounds has validated the importance of specific regions of the pharmacophore, with the sulfonamide functionality and S-aryl unit displaying the most significant impact. In silico investigations suggest the active compounds might target DDR1 or RET proteins. The investigation has resulted in several compounds that warrant further development for lead optimization.
