Pethidine is the only member of the opioid family that has clinically important local anaesthetic activity in the dose range normally used for analgesia. Pethidine is unique as the only opioid in current use that is effective as the sole agent for spinal anaesthesia. In lower doses, intrathecal pethidine is also an effective analgesic for treating pain in labour. This paper reviews the pharmacology of intrathecal pethidine and clinical experience reported to date. Articles reviewed include those identified by a Medline search using keywords "intrathecal" or "spinal anaesthesia/ anesthesia" and "pethidine" or "meperidine". Reference lists from identified papers were scrutinized to identify further relevant articles.
A sedative technique with meperidine hydrochloride and promethazine hydrochloride via an intramuscular injection is presented. We believe this is an excellent technique because of the safety to the patient and the ease of administration. Like any technique using potentially dangerous medications, practitioners and their staff must be familiar with and prepared for possible complications. When the technique is mastered, it will be a valuable addition for treatment of certain mentally and physically handicapped patients.
Approximately one third of children with epilepsy have persistent seizures despite trials of multiple antiepileptic medications. For some of these patients, epilepsy surgery may provide freedom from seizures. However, in many cases, epilepsy surgery is not a viable treatment option. Nonpharmacological approaches are a useful adjunct to help manage seizures in these children. This review examines the role of vagus nerve stimulation, the ketogenic diet, and various forms of EEG biofeedback therapy in children with intractable epilepsy. Although the mechanism of action is not known precisely for any of these adjunctive therapies, they add an important and evolving dimension to the management of difficult to control epilepsy in children. In addition, pyridoxine-dependent seizures are discussed as an example of an etiology of refractory seizures that responds well to replacement therapy.
Ketamine in a dose of 6 mg.kg-1 was nasally administered in 86 healthy children (ASA I and II), aged from two to five years undergoing elective general, urological or plastic surgery, 20 to 40 min before the scheduled surgery time. These children were compared with 62 others, also aged from two to five years, in whom promethazine and meperidine, 1 mg.kg-1 of each, were injected im. Sedation was started as excellent in 48 and as adequate in 19 children in the ketamine group, compared with nine and 12 respectively in Group 2 (P < 0.05), while salivation was similar in both groups. We conclude that nasal ketamine is an alternative to im preanaesthetic sedation administration in children aged from two to five years.
Normeperidine, having a longer half-life than meperidine, can accumulate faster. Its excitatory neurotoxicity is manifest with administration of multiple meperidine doses or in cases of renal failure. This is a report of the lethal effects of normeperidine in a patient with renal failure who had abused meperidine.
BACKGROUND: Naloxone, a specific opiate antagonist, is available for the treatment of newborn infants with respiratory depression that may be due to transplacentally acquired opiates. AIMS: To determine if this treatment has any clinically important benefits, and whether there are any harmful effects. METHODS: Randomised controlled trials that compared naloxone with placebo or no drug for newborn infants with transplacental exposure to narcotics were systematically reviewed. The Cochrane Controlled Trials Register (CCTR; 2002, Issue 3), Medline (1966 to June 2002), and Embase (1988 to June 2002) were searched. Data were extracted, analysed, and synthesised using the standard methods of the Cochrane Neonatal Collaborative Review Group. RESULTS: Nine trials were found that fulfilled the specified inclusion criteria. Although there was evidence that naloxone increased alveolar ventilation, no data were found on the specified primary outcomes of this review: the need for assisted ventilation or admission to a neonatal unit. CONCLUSIONS: There is a need for a randomised controlled trial to determine if naloxone confers any clinically important benefits on newborn infants with respiratory depression that may be due to transplacentally acquired narcotic.
Fetal heart rate (FHR) changes occasionally follow the use of labor epidurals. Most studies of the phenomenon have focused on specific techniques, but similar timing and appearance suggest a common cause. Induction of analgesia may transiently alter the balance between factors encouraging and inhibiting uterine contractions with subsequent changes of FHR patterns. Regardless the etiology, these changes are transient and do not produce maternal or fetal morbidity. However, they must be promptly recognized and treated if necessary.
The administration of narcotic analgesics to postoperative patients was examined with 180 uncomplicated adult appendectomy patients. Narcotic analgesic doses were transcribed from the hospital records of these patients for the entire postoperative period. Equianalgesic doses were calculated so that all medications were comparable with meperidine. Eighty-three percent (n = 150) of the patients received meperidine. Patients who received meperidine were given significantly more narcotic analgesics than those who received morphine sulfate. The amount of narcotic analgesics received by patients was significantly related to their length of hospital stay. Meperidine and Tylenol #3 (acetaminophen with codeine phosphate; McNeil Pharmaceutical, Spring House, PA) comprised the significantly associated analgesics. These findings suggest a need to reexamine the current use of meperidine in postoperative analgesia.
These therapeutic approaches to the premedication of children, in our opinion, offer a more rational, probably safer, and at least equally efficacious treatment regimen as the DPT/lytic cocktail. It is understood that controlled, double-blind comparative clinical trials in children are needed of these or other potential premedicant regimens for specific pediatric procedures (e.g., cardiac catheterization, CT scans, bone marrow aspiration, gastrointestinal endoscopy, pleural taps, etc.) to establish the premedication treatment(s) with the greatest benefit-to-risk ratio. Until these data are available, we must maintain prudence in the selection (design) of premedicant regimens and carefully monitor all children receiving these "cocktails."
Pethidine is an effective epidural opioid for the treatment of acute pain. Its use has been well described in Australian and New Zealand practice, particularly in the field of obstetric anaesthesia. Reported methods of delivery have included bolus injection, continuous infusion and patient-controlled epidural analgesia. Areas of application have included treatment of postoperative pain, labour pain and intraoperative pain. Because of its intermediate lipid solubility, pethidine may have advantages over many other epidural opioids. However, potential for accumulation of norpethidine limits its use to relatively short durations of treatment.
We have studied the effect of regular perioperative administration of buccal morphine sulphate on postoperative analgesic consumption in female patients undergoing lower abdominal surgical procedures. Ten matched pairs of women were allocated randomly to receive either placebo or buccal morphine before operation and at 12-h intervals up to 44 h after operation. Pain was assessed using a visual analogue scale and taste assessed using evaluation forms. Postoperative analgesic requirements were compared using a patient-controlled analgesia system which was set to deliver bolus doses of pethidine without a background infusion. There was no significant difference in pain scores between the two groups. Compared with placebo, buccal morphine did not reduce significantly postoperative pethidine consumption. All patients receiving buccal morphine reported a taste which reduced its acceptability.
Despite the widespread use of meperidine as an analgesic, its potential for producing delirium has been overlooked. Six cases demonstrating meperidine-induced behavioral toxicity are reported. Toxicity was more likely when meperidine was combined with cimetidine or drugs having anticholinergic activity. Discontinuation of meperidine and substitution of morphine for analgesia were usually successful in treating the delirium. Physostigmine reversed the delirium in one patient. The authors suggest that the delirium results from the excessive anticholinergic activity of meperidine or its only active metabolite, normeperidine.
Two groups of patients were allowed to self-administer morphine (n = 17) or pethidine (n = 15) extradurally after abdominal surgery, for a mean period of 16 h. Bolus increments of morphine 1 mg or pethidine 20 mg were administered by programmable pump. Pain relief from extradural patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) was excellent in all but two patients in the morphine group. Pain relief was not qualitatively different between the two groups. No clinical respiratory depression was seen. The average consumption of extradural morphine was 0.52 +/- 0.29 mg h-1 (range 0.19-1.04 mg h-1) and of pethidine 18.0 +/- 8.1 mg h-1 (5.8-35.4 mg h-1). This yields an equianalgesic dose relationship of 1:35. Morphine consumption was more irregular than pethidine consumption. Morphine and pethidine plasma concentrations measured during PCA were well below the reported minimum analgesic plasma concentrations in most cases. Several patients, particularly in the pethidine group, tended to increase their opioid consumption during PCA. This could be explained by an increasingly smaller fraction of the pethidine bolus being absorbed to the subarachnoid space during frequent repetitive dosing. The large inter-individual variation in consumption makes it impossible to recommend a standard dose of extradural morphine or pethidine for analgesia of predictable duration and with a minimum of adverse effects.
The disposition of meperidine was studied in 11 term pregnant humans after the administration of a single 50 mg intravenous dose of meperidine through 48 h post-injection. Half-lives of the rapid and terminal elimination phases were calculated as 2.3 and 13.3 h, respectively. These values are much greater than previously reported half-lives which were based on data collected over less than 8 h after injection. An accurate value for t1/2 beta may be particularly important in sequential dosing of analgesic medication. These pharmacokinetic constants calculated on data collected through 48 h in this study may have important clinical correlates.
A double-blind, between-patient, two-dose comparison was comparison was performed with pethidine and nefopam in 100 subjects, the majority of whom were recovering from upper abdominal surgery. Either 15 or 30 mg of nefopam or 50 or 100 mg of pethidine were given by i.m. injection in a random order. All assessments were made by the same observer on the first day after operation, at least 4 h after the previous analgesic injection. Nefopam 15 mg was equipotent with pethidine 50 mg, peak analgesia being achieved 1 h after the i.m. injection. Pethidine 100 mg provided significantly better pain relief than nefopam 30 mg, the latter being not more effective than nefopam 15 mg apart from the duration of analgesia which was longer. The incidence of nausea and vomiting was similar after both drugs. Sweating and tachycardia were observed more frequently after nefopam, whereas sedative side-effects were more common after pethidine.
Meperidine neurotoxicity, characterized by recurrent convulsions, myoclonus, and asterixis, was diagnosed in an organ transplant recipient. Aside from cyclosporine toxicity, the literature regarding neurologic complications of transplantation contains limited reference to the neurotoxicity of therapy. The case reported illustrates how pharmacokinetic factors might render transplant patients particularly vulnerable to the neurotoxic side effects of certain medications, such as meperidine.
The aim of this prospective, randomised, blind study was to investigate the analgesic potency and tolerance of intramuscular Tramadol compared to a standard obstetric analgesia with Pethidine. Triflupromazine was administrated in combination with the two tested analgesics in order to study its efficacy in alleviating the emetic side effects of the tested analgesics. 66 parturients were randomly assigned to three groups: group A: 100 mg Tramadol (Tramal), group B: 100 mg Tramadol (Tramal) and 10 mg Triflupromazine (Psyquil), group C: 50 mg Pethidine (Alodan) and 10 mg Triflupromazine (Psyquil). No significant differences concerning duration of labour, FHR-alterations, umbilical cord blood gases, respiration pattern and Apgar Scores of the neonate occurred. In all three groups the analgesic effect was equally good. Combination of the analgesic with the antiemetic showed no reduction of the incidence and severity of side effects.
Meperidine was initially synthesized as an anticholinergic agent but was soon discovered to have analgesic properties. Although meperidine's anticholinergic effects were demonstrated in vivo, the anticholinergic effects on the biliary and renal tracts have not been demonstrated in vivo. Studies have clearly demonstrated that meperidine is no more efficacious in treating biliary or renal tract spasm than comparative mu opioids. The initial studies demonstrating the analgesic efficacy of meperidine were mostly case reports and not double-blind, randomized, controlled trials in specific populations. Subsequent comparative studies failed to demonstrate any advantages of meperidine over comparable doses of other analgesics. Meperidine was portrayed in practice and teaching as having unique clinical advantages. The analgesic effects of meperidine are not pronounced, and, in addition, meperidine use is complicated by unique side effects including serotonergic crisis and normeperidine toxicity. Meperidine's poor efficacy, toxicity, and multiple drug interactions have resulted in a movement to replace meperidine with more efficacious and less toxic opioid analgesics.
The onset, quality and duration of analgesia and side-effects of a single bolus dose of either epidural pethidine 50 mg or fentanyl 100 mcg, administered immediately post-delivery, were compared in a randomised, double-blind study of fifty-five women undergoing epidural caesarean section. The onset of effect was more rapid with fentanyl, a significantly larger number of women achieving complete pain relief fifteen minutes post-administration (P less than 0.05). The quality of analgesia was good in both groups and the quality and duration of effective analgesia not significantly different. The incidence and severity of side-effects were low, with no significant difference between groups. One patient in the pethidine group experienced early onset respiratory depression; however, she did not require active treatment. Epidural fentanyl 100 mcg appears to offer a small clinical advantage over pethidine 50 mg for intraoperative use during caesarean section.
A double-blind between-patient study was carried out comparing pentazocine with pethidine in 94 women in labour. Similar analgesic and sedative effects were obtained with the two drugs, and Apgar scores were similar for babies of both drug groups. Fewer emetic sequelae were reported after pentazocine injections, though there was no statistically significant difference between the two drug groups in incidence of other side-effects.
