This article discusses generalized anxiety disorder in terms of its defining characteristics, its relationship to other psychiatric disorders, its psychobiology, and its treatment. Although generalized anxiety disorder is frequently encountered in general practice, it has been less systematically investigated than the more dramatic forms of anxiety disorders such as panic disorder and phobias. It is concluded that although not as sharply defined as implied by DSM-III, generalized anxiety disorder appears to be a useful diagnostic category.
This article describes several examples where the development of drugs and devices for use in psychiatry followed from initial serendipitous observations. The potential psychotropic properties of chlorpromazine (Thorazine((R))) were first noted in surgical patients when the drug was being investigated as a potentiator of anesthesia. Similar findings were noted with iproniazid (Marsilid((R))), developed for the treatment of tuberculosis, and the drug was later released for clinical use as an antidepressant agent. The development of meprobamate (Miltown((R))), an approved treatment for anxiety, evolved from initial efforts to find a chemical that would inhibit the enzymatic destruction of the antibiotic drug penicillin. The psychiatric uses of lamotrigine (Lamictal((R))) and vagus nerve stimulation were prompted by initial observations that epilepsy patients receiving these treatments had positive mood effects. Nurses should be familiar with the concept of serendipity, as they often are in the best position to observe, record, and report on unexpected clinical effects in patients taking any kind of prescription or nonprescription medication.
CASE REPORT: A 39-year-old man ingested 35 g carisoprodol. He developed agitation, tachycardia, myoclonus, and coma. The blood carisoprodol was 71 micrograms/mL; the meprobamate was 26 micrograms/mL. DISCUSSION: Carisoprodol overdose is thought to induce simple central nervous system depression. This case demonstrates a severe overdose with symptoms more consistent with myoclonic encephalopathy. A review of cases presenting to the San Francisco Division of the California Poison Control System during 1997 suggests that carisoprodol is more commonly associated with agitation and bizarre movement disorders than the current literature suggests. The pharmacology and potential mechanisms of toxicity are discussed. CONCLUSION: Agitation, hypertonia, and a myoclonic encephalopathy may be seen with significant carisoprodol intoxication.
Serendipity is one of the many factors that may contribute to drug discovery. It has played a role in the discovery of prototype psychotropic drugs that led to modern pharmacological treatment in psychiatry. It has also played a role in the discovery of several drugs that have had an impact on the development of psychiatry. "Serendipity" in drug discovery implies the finding of one thing while looking for something else. This was the case in six of the twelve serendipitous discoveries reviewed in this paper, i.e., aniline purple, penicillin, lysergic acid diethylamide, meprobamate, chlorpromazine, and imipramine. In the case of three drugs, i.e., potassium bromide, chloral hydrate, and lithium, the discovery was serendipitous because an utterly false rationale led to correct empirical results; and in case of two others, i.e., iproniazid and sildenafil, because valuable indications were found for these drugs which were not initially those sought The discovery of one of the twelve drugs, chlordiazepoxide, was sheer luck.
The serendipity is the faculty for making a discovery through a combination of accident and sagacity. In psychopharmacology, the serendipity played a key role in the discovery of many psychotropic drugs, although there are marked disputes in this regard, possibly due to semantic differences in relation to the meaning of this term. We have implemented an operational definition of serendipity based on the discovery of something unexpected or not sought intentionally, irrespective of the systematic process leading to the accidental observation. The present paper analyses some representative examples of discoveries in the field of psychopharmacology according to different serendipitous intervention patterns. Following this approach there would be four different imputability patterns: pure serendipitous discoveries (valproic acid/valproate); serendipitous observation leading to a non-serendipitous discoveries (imipramine); non-serendipitous discoveries secondarily associated with serendipitous observation (barbiturates); non-serendipitous discoveries (haloperidol). We can conclude that pure serendipitous discoveries in this field are not very frequent, most common being a mixed pattern; an initial serendipitous observation which leads to a non-serendipitous discovery of clinical utility. This is the case of imipramine, lithium salts, chlorpromazine or meprobamate.
Carisoprodol (Soma, others) is a commonly prescribed, noncontrolled, skeletal muscle relaxant whose active metabolite is meprobamate. Patients for whom carisoprodol is prescribed are at risk for meprobamate dependence; several such cases have been reported. Toxicity and withdrawal associated with the use of meprobamate is high and has led to abandonment of this agent in clinical practice. Because carisoprodol possesses the same risks it should be avoided when possible, and it should be given schedule IV controlled substance status.
Carisoprodol is a centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxant of which meprobamate, a controlled substance, is the primary active metabolite. The abuse of carisoprodol has increased dramatically in the last several years. A withdrawal syndrome occurs in some patients who abruptly cease carisoprodol intake. The symptoms of this syndrome are similar to those seen with meprobamate withdrawal, suggesting that they may result from withdrawal from meprobamate accumulated with intake of excessive carisoprodol; however, carisoprodol is capable of modulating GABAA function, which may contribute to its abuse potential.There has been considerable debate about whether carisoprodol should be considered a controlled substance. Carisoprodol was removed from the market in Norway on May 1, 2008, but may still be used by specially approved patients. Carisoprodol was classified as a controlled substance in several US states, and effective January 11, 2012, became a schedule IV controlled substance at the US federal level. This article updates the literature on abuse potential and examines recent developments regarding the legal status of carisoprodol.
The premise of this review is that neuronal substrates of anxiety are amenable to investigation using brain stimulation techniques. Anxiolytics such as meprobamate and the benzodiazepines may enhance intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS) behavior. Although demonstrated by numerous investigators, this effect shows considerable variability between and within laboratories. Some of this variability is explained by sedative/muscle relaxant effects, which are dissociable from drug-induced increases in ICSS and which may mask these increases. The anticonvulsant actions of anxiolytic drugs are unlikely to account for the increases in ICSS. Rather, anxiolytics appear to increase ICSS by attenuating concurrent aversive properties of stimulation. Consistent with this explanation, anxiolytic drugs attenuate escape from aversive dorsal tegmental stimulation. The neuronal substrates of this centrally mediated escape behavior differ from those mediating footshock-induced escape. Barbiturates also enhance ICSS, possibly due in part to an excitatory component that is not involved in benzodiazepine action. Inverse benzodiazepine agonists attenuate ICSS behavior in a manner that cannot be explained by nonspecific performance impairment. These substances, however, may not necessarily enhance stimulation-induced aversiveness. A strategy is proposed to integrate brain stimulation studies with molecular approaches to anxiety. Specifically, stimulation of sites associated with fear induction or fear reduction may selectively alter the release of endogeneous anxiogens or anxiolytic substances.
In postmortem toxicology, it is important to know what the usual drug level is in blood under ordinary therapy to make correct interpretations with regard to the possible occurrence of poisoning. A commonly used source is The International Association of Forensic Toxicologists (TIAFT) list of drug concentrations providing therapeutic drug levels, usually measured in serum. In this article, published postmortem-derived blood drug reference concentration intervals were related to therapeutic serum levels of drugs from the TIAFT list to assess agreement or discrepancies with focus on the importance of postmortem redistribution. The ratio between the upper limits was evaluated. This ratio ranged from 0.13 to 11.3 for 57 compounds with a median value of 1.5. For about a third of the compounds the ratio exceeded three. There was a tendency that for highly water-soluble drugs with a low propensity for redistribution, the ratio was generally low. For example, for pentobarbital, carisoprodol, meprobamate, carbamazepine, phenazone and theophylline, the ratio ranged from 0.14 to 1.1 with a median of 0.4. For the 15 antidepressants considered, on the other hand, the ratio was relatively high, ranging from 0.6 to 4.7 (median 2.4). For antipsychotics, the ratio ranged from 0.2 to 11.3 with a median of 1.4. In conclusion, there were generally wide discrepancies between serum-based intervals as presented in the TIAFT list and published postmortem blood-based drug reference intervals. More focus on postmortem-derived intervals is encouraged, so that those that have been estimated are cited in reference publications and so that further intervals are estimated. Ultimately, a reliable database of postmortem blood-based drug reference intervals for use by the forensic community is desirable.
Zolpidem (Ambien) is an imidazopyridine hypnotic recently introduced in the USA. We report a case of a fatal overdose of Ambien. A 68-year-old female ingested at least 30 tablets of 10 mg Ambien (300 mg). She was found dead at home. Toxicological analyses revealed blood concentration of 4.1, 19.3 and 2.3 micrograms/ml of zolpidem, meprobamate and carisoprodol, respectively.
Carisoprodol is a widely prescribed muscle relaxant and is also a drug known to be a subject to abuse. Despite the fact that carisoprodol has been available for prescription since 1959, a number of gaps in our knowledge of the toxicokinetics of this common drug exist. For example, the volume of distribution (Vd) for carisoprodol in humans has not been reported. A two-compartment pharmacokinetic model describing carisoprodol metabolism and that of the primary metabolite, meprobamate, was developed to better understand the pharmacokinetics of this drug. The model accounts for first pass metabolism of carisoprodol and was able to replicate the data from several previously reported data sets. Based on an analysis of four different data sets, the Vd for carisoprodol ranged from 0.93 to 1.3 L/kg, while that for meprobamate ranged from 1.4 to 1.6 L/kg. The model was also used to estimate the probable dose of this drug in an individual where questions concerning the drug's role in her death had been posed. The model may, therefore, have significant utility for estimating doses of carisoprodol in medicolegal cases.
Several drugs that are utilized primarily for their effects on the central nervous system also affect lower urinary tract function. Most of these effects are produced by the action of these drugs on adrenergic and cholinergic receptors or by direct action of lower urinary tract musculature. Central nervous system stimulants and depressants which are known to affect the storage or evacuation role of the lower urinary tract are discussed.
A case involving a suicidal overdose resulting from the ingestion of 90 tablets (400 mg) of meprobamate is presented. The drug was quantified using a gas chromatograph equipped with a flame ionization detector (FID). While the blood level was 204.6 micrograms/ml, the maximum concentration was found in the heart (708 micrograms/g), confirming the cardiac toxicity of meprobamate. Other drugs were not detected.
BACKGROUND: A significant proportion of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)-treated patients experience anxiety anticipating the treatment, often to such an extent that they refuse or discontinue a much-needed treatment. Despite its great impact on treatment adherence, anxiety in patients receiving ECT is underexposed in the scientific literature. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to review the prevalence and specific subjects of ECT-related anxiety and therapeutic interventions to reduce it. METHODS: We performed a computerized search (EMBASE, MEDLINE, and PsycINFO) for articles meeting the following inclusion criteria: (1) qualitative (interview) studies, quantitative (questionnaire) studies, or experimental (interventional) studies that (2) report on anxiety that is related to a planned, ongoing, or past ECT treatment. RESULTS: Of 1160 search results, 31 articles were included. Electroconvulsive therapy-related anxiety is estimated to be present in 14% to 75% of patients and is most often linked to worries about memory impairment or brain damage. Only a few interventions (chlorpromazine, meprobamate, propofol, a talking-through technique, an information leaflet, and animal-assisted therapy) have been proposed to reduce patients' ECT-related anxiety. CONCLUSIONS: Electroconvulsive therapy-related anxiety is a highly prevalent phenomenon, and the literature provides little guidance for its clinical management. Most studies are of a low methodological quality and suffer from significant limitations, thereby hampering generalized conclusions. Given the clinical importance of ECT-related anxiety, further study on its nature and evolution through the course of treatment and on anxiety-reducing interventions is warranted.
INTRODUCTION: Carisoprodol is a centrally acting muscle relaxant used in the treatment of various musculoskeletal disorders whose main metabolite, meprobamate, is a controlled substance in the United States due to its sedative properties and potential for abuse. CASE DESCRIPTION: We report a case of a 51-year-old man with cognitive impairment and tremor who developed worsening tremor, anxiety, myoclonus, ataxia, and psychosis on abrupt cessation of carisoprodol. At hospital discharge, his cognitive function significantly improved compared with when he was on carisoprodol. CONCLUSION: Carisoprodol withdrawal is an important and under-recognized syndrome that should be considered in patients presenting with neurologic symptoms who are taking the medication. Carisoprodol withdrawal can be successfully treated with the use of benzodiazepines, although further studies are needed to identify the most appropriate treatment protocol.
Tranquilizers, analgetics and antidepressants are applied in different ranges in the treatment of patients on hemodialysis. Due to many different pharmacokinetic properties, no perfect rules for dosage in acute or chronic hemodialysis exist. Adequate applicable drugs without adaptation disregarding different states of renal failure are such with predominate hepatic metabolism and elimination or with inactive metabolites. In the management of acute renal failure, usually in connection with multiple organic disorders, a nonschematic, individually adapted therapy is indicated. In some substances, therapy can be determined by control of plasma concentration levels, in other drugs dosage is possible exclusively according to clinical effects. Substances with side effects on coagulation or acid-base equilibrium should be avoided. It is recommendable to get well acquainted with one substance out of each group in order to avoid polypragmasy.
Meprobamate, a benzodiazepine-like drug, was commonly prescribed for anxiety in the 1960s and 1970s, but fell out of favour, at least in part, due to the risk of dependence, for which there is little published evidence to guide clinical management. We discuss a 70-year-old man with a 45-year history of meprobamate dependency and multiple failed previous withdrawal attempts who was successfully withdrawn from meprobamate using diazepam during a 2-week inpatient stay on a specialist Addictions ward. An appropriate diazepam dose was established using the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment scale for benzodiazepines (CIWA-B). This dose was then slowly reduced over 12 days. Multidisciplinary input, especially psychological therapy tackling his underlying anxiety disorder during his admission, was thought to be particularly helpful.
A simple method has been described by which the action of drugs on the stress-induced block in milk ejection can be investigated on lactating guinea-pigs. Reserpine, meprobamate and chlorpromazine when administered to the lactating mother at various periods before suckling reduced the block in milk ejection caused by the stress. Dibenamine and dichloroisoprenaline did not affect in any way the stress-induced block. It is suggested that the stress-induced block in milk ejection is probably a nervous block and not mediated through adrenaline.
Clobazam is a benzodiazepine with anti-anxiety and anticonvulsant properties marketed in several countries. Norclobazam, a metabolite of clobazam, has similar pharmacological activity but weaker sedative and tranquilizing effect. The two drugs were detected by GC-MS and determined by HPLC-DAD in the samples from a postmortem case. The femoral blood concentrations of clobazam and norclobazam were 0.72 and 36 mug/mL, respectively. The concentration of the active norclobazam was very high. The sum of both clobazam and norclobazam blood concentration (36.72 mug/mL) was clearly toxic, but was not necessarily fatal. Other associated drugs concentrations were within their therapeutic ranges. Interactions due to drug association were discussed.
Since 1955, several alkyl-carbamates have been developed for the treatment of anxiety and epilepsy, including meprobamate, flupirtine, felbamate, retigabine, carisbamate, and cenobamate. They have each enjoyed varying levels of success as antiseizure drugs; however, they have all been plagued by the emergence of serious and sometimes life-threatening adverse events. In this review, we compare and contrast their predominant molecular mechanisms of action, their antiseizure profile, and where possible, their clinical efficacy. The preclinical, clinical, and mechanistic profile of the prototypical gamma-aminobutyric acidergic (GABAergic) modulator phenobarbital is included for comparison. Like phenobarbital, all of the clinically approved alkyl-carbamates share an ability to enhance inhibitory neurotransmission through modulation of the GABA(A) receptor, although the specific mechanism of interaction differs among the different drugs discussed. In addition, several alkyl-carbamates have been shown to interact with voltage-gated ion channels. Flupirtine and retigabine share an ability to activate K(+) currents mediated by KCNQ (Kv7) K(+) channels, and felbamate, carisbamate, and cenobamate have been shown to block Na(+) channels. In contrast to other alkyl-carbamates, cenobamate seems to be unique in its ability to preferentially attenuate the persistent rather than transient Na(+) current. Results from recent randomized controlled clinical trials with cenobamate suggest that this newest antiseizure alkyl-carbamate possesses a degree of efficacy not witnessed since felbamate was approved in 1993. Given that ceno-bamate's mechanistic profile is unique among the alkyl-carbamates, it is not clear whether this impressive efficacy reflects an as yet undescribed mechanism of action or whether it possesses a unique synergy between its actions at the GABA(A) receptor and on persistent Na(+) currents. The high efficacy of cenobamate is, however, tempered by the risk of serious rash and low tolerability at higher doses, meaning that further safety studies and clinical experience are needed to determine the true clinical value of cenobamate.
