Metformin is currently the first-line drug treatment for type 2 diabetes. Besides its glucose-lowering effect, there is interest in actions of the drug of potential relevance to cardiovascular diseases and cancer. However, the underlying mechanisms of action remain elusive. Convincing data place energy metabolism at the center of metformin's mechanism of action in diabetes and may also be of importance in cardiovascular diseases and cancer. Metformin-induced activation of the energy-sensor AMPK is well documented, but may not account for all actions of the drug. Here, we summarize current knowledge about the different AMPK-dependent and AMPK-independent mechanisms underlying metformin action.
Metformin has been the mainstay of therapy for diabetes mellitus for many years; however, the mechanistic aspects of metformin action remained ill-defined. Recent advances revealed that this drug, in addition to its glucose-lowering action, might be promising for specifically targeting metabolic differences between normal and abnormal metabolic signalling. The knowledge gained from dissecting the principal mechanisms by which metformin works can help us to develop novel treatments. The centre of metformin's mechanism of action is the alteration of the energy metabolism of the cell. Metformin exerts its prevailing, glucose-lowering effect by inhibiting hepatic gluconeogenesis and opposing the action of glucagon. The inhibition of mitochondrial complex I results in defective cAMP and protein kinase A signalling in response to glucagon. Stimulation of 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase, although dispensable for the glucose-lowering effect of metformin, confers insulin sensitivity, mainly by modulating lipid metabolism. Metformin might influence tumourigenesis, both indirectly, through the systemic reduction of insulin levels, and directly, via the induction of energetic stress; however, these effects require further investigation. Here, we discuss the updated understanding of the antigluconeogenic action of metformin in the liver and the implications of the discoveries of metformin targets for the treatment of diabetes mellitus and cancer.
Metformin has been designated as one of the most crucial first-line therapeutic agents in the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Primarily being an antihyperglycemic agent, metformin also has a plethora of pleiotropic effects on various systems and processes. It acts majorly by activating AMPK (Adenosine Monophosphate-Activated Protein Kinase) in the cells and reducing glucose output from the liver. It also decreases advanced glycation end products and reactive oxygen species production in the endothelium apart from regulating the glucose and lipid metabolism in the cardiomyocytes, hence minimizing the cardiovascular risks. Its anticancer, antiproliferative and apoptosis-inducing effects on malignant cells might prove instrumental in the malignancy of organs like the breast, kidney, brain, ovary, lung, and endometrium. Preclinical studies have also shown some evidence of metformin's neuroprotective role in Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis and Huntington's disease. Metformin exerts its pleiotropic effects through varied pathways of intracellular signalling and exact mechanism in the majority of them remains yet to be clearly defined. This article has extensively reviewed the therapeutic benefits of metformin and the details of its mechanism for a molecule of boon in various conditions like diabetes, prediabetes, obesity, polycystic ovarian disease, metabolic derangement in HIV, various cancers and aging.
IMPORTANCE: Gestational diabetes is a common complication of pregnancy and the optimal management is uncertain. OBJECTIVE: To test whether early initiation of metformin reduces insulin initiation or improves fasting hyperglycemia at gestation weeks 32 or 38. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Double-blind, placebo-controlled trial conducted in 2 centers in Ireland (one tertiary hospital and one smaller regional hospital). Participants were enrolled from June 2017 through September 2022 and followed up until 12 weeks' postpartum. Participants comprised 510 individuals (535 pregnancies) diagnosed with gestational diabetes based on World Health Organization 2013 criteria. INTERVENTIONS: Randomized 1:1 to either placebo or metformin (maximum dose, 2500 mg) in addition to usual care. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was a composite of insulin initiation or a fasting glucose level of 5.1 mmol/L or greater at gestation weeks 32 or 38. RESULTS: Among 510 participants (mean age, 34.3 years), 535 pregnancies were randomized. The primary composite outcome was not significantly different between groups and occurred in 150 pregnancies (56.8%) in the metformin group and 167 pregnancies (63.7%) in the placebo group (between-group difference, -6.9% [95% CI, -15.1% to 1.4%]; relative risk, 0.89 [95% CI, 0.78-1.02]; P = .13). Of 6 prespecified secondary maternal outcomes, 3 favored the metformin group, including time to insulin initiation, self-reported capillary glycemic control, and gestational weight gain. Secondary neonatal outcomes differed by group, with smaller neonates (lower mean birth weights, a lower proportion weighing >4 kg, a lower proportion in the >90% percentile, and smaller crown-heel length) in the metformin group without differences in neonatal intensive care needs, respiratory distress requiring respiratory support, jaundice requiring phototherapy, major congenital anomalies, neonatal hypoglycemia, or proportion with 5-minute Apgar scores less than 7. CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: Early treatment with metformin was not superior to placebo for the composite primary outcome. Prespecified secondary outcome data support further investigation of metformin in larger clinical trials. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02980276; EudraCT: 2016-001644-19.
The generally accepted mechanism of metformin's effect is stimulation of adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase (AMPK). AMPK is directly activated by an increase in AMP:ATP ratio in metabolic stress conditions including hypoxia and glucose deprivation. Lately, many novel pathways, besides AMPK induction, have been revealed, which can explain some of metformin's beneficial effects. It may help to identify new targets for treatment of diabetes and metabolic syndrome. Moreover, metformin is now attracting the attention of researchers in fields other than diabetes, as it has been shown to have anti-cancer, immunoregulatory and anti-aging effects. The aim of this review is to describe the potential anti-cancer and anti-aging properties of metformin and discuss the possible underlying mechanisms.
Metformin was first used to treat type 2 diabetes in the late 1950s and in 2022 remains the first-choice drug used daily by approximately 150 million people. An accumulation of positive pre-clinical and clinical data has stimulated interest in re-purposing metformin to treat a variety of diseases including COVID-19. In polycystic ovary syndrome metformin improves insulin sensitivity. In type 1 diabetes metformin may help reduce the insulin dose. Meta-analysis and data from pre-clinical and clinical studies link metformin to a reduction in the incidence of cancer. Clinical trials, including MILES (Metformin In Longevity Study), and TAME (Targeting Aging with Metformin), have been designed to determine if metformin can offset aging and extend lifespan. Pre-clinical and clinical data suggest that metformin, via suppression of pro-inflammatory pathways, protection of mitochondria and vascular function, and direct actions on neuronal stem cells, may protect against neurodegenerative diseases. Metformin has also been studied for its anti-bacterial, -viral, -malaria efficacy. Collectively, these data raise the question: Is metformin a drug for all diseases? It remains unclear as to whether all of these putative beneficial effects are secondary to its actions as an anti-hyperglycemic and insulin-sensitizing drug, or result from other cellular actions, including inhibition of mTOR (mammalian target for rapamycin), or direct anti-viral actions. Clarification is also sought as to whether data from ex vivo studies based on the use of high concentrations of metformin can be translated into clinical benefits, or whether they reflect a 'Paracelsus' effect. The environmental impact of metformin, a drug with no known metabolites, is another emerging issue that has been linked to endocrine disruption in fish, and extensive use in T2D has also raised concerns over effects on human reproduction. The objectives for this review are to: 1) evaluate the putative mechanism(s) of action of metformin; 2) analyze the controversial evidence for metformin's effectiveness in the treatment of diseases other than type 2 diabetes; 3) assess the reproducibility of the data, and finally 4) reach an informed conclusion as to whether metformin is a drug for all diseases and reasons. We conclude that the primary clinical benefits of metformin result from its insulin-sensitizing and antihyperglycaemic effects that secondarily contribute to a reduced risk of a number of diseases and thereby enhancing healthspan. However, benefits like improving vascular endothelial function that are independent of effects on glucose homeostasis add to metformin's therapeutic actions.
Metformin can improve patients' hyperglycemia through significant suppression of hepatic glucose production. However, up to 300 times higher concentrations of metformin accumulate in the intestine than in the circulation, where it alters nutrient metabolism in intestinal epithelial cells and microbiome, leading to increased lactate production. Hepatocytes use lactate to make glucose at the cost of energy expenditure, creating a futile intestine-liver cycle. Furthermore, metformin reduces blood lipopolysaccharides and its initiated low-grade inflammation and increased oxidative phosphorylation in liver and adipose tissues. These metformin effects result in the improvement of insulin sensitivity and glucose utilization in extrahepatic tissues. In this review, I discuss the current understanding of the impact of metformin on systemic metabolism and its molecular mechanisms of action in various tissues.
Metformin is widely used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is a biguanide developed from galegine, a guanidine derivative found in Galega officinalis (French lilac). Chemically, it is a hydrophilic base which exists at physiological pH as the cationic species (>99.9%). Consequently, its passive diffusion through cell membranes should be very limited. The mean +/- SD fractional oral bioavailability (F) of metformin is 55 +/- 16%. It is absorbed predominately from the small intestine. Metformin is excreted unchanged in urine. The elimination half-life (t(&frac12;)) of metformin during multiple dosages in patients with good renal function is approximately 5 hours. From published data on the pharmacokinetics of metformin, the population mean of its clearances were calculated. The population mean renal clearance (CL(R)) and apparent total clearance after oral administration (CL/F) of metformin were estimated to be 510 +/- 130 mL/min and 1140 +/- 330 mL/min, respectively, in healthy subjects and diabetic patients with good renal function. Over a range of renal function, the population mean values of CL(R) and CL/F of metformin are 4.3 +/- 1.5 and 10.7 +/- 3.5 times as great, respectively, as the clearance of creatinine (CL(CR)). As the CL(R) and CL/F decrease approximately in proportion to CL(CR), the dosage of metformin should be reduced in patients with renal impairment in proportion to the reduced CL(CR). The oral absorption, hepatic uptake and renal excretion of metformin are mediated very largely by organic cation transporters (OCTs). An intron variant of OCT1 (single nucleotide polymorphism [SNP] rs622342) has been associated with a decreased effect on blood glucose in heterozygotes and a lack of effect of metformin on plasma glucose in homozygotes. An intron variant of multidrug and toxin extrusion transporter [MATE1] (G>A, SNP rs2289669) has also been associated with a small increase in antihyperglycaemic effect of metformin. Overall, the effect of structural variants of OCTs and other cation transporters on the pharmacokinetics of metformin appears small and the subsequent effects on clinical response are also limited. However, intersubject differences in the levels of expression of OCT1 and OCT3 in the liver are very large and may contribute more to the variations in the hepatic uptake and clinical effect of metformin. Lactic acidosis is the feared adverse effect of the biguanide drugs but its incidence is very low in patients treated with metformin. We suggest that the mean plasma concentrations of metformin over a dosage interval be maintained below 2.5 mg/L in order to minimize the development of this adverse effect.
The biguanide metformin is the most commonly used antidiabetic drug. Recent studies show that metformin not only improves chronic inflammation by improving metabolic parameters but also has a direct anti-inflammatory effect. In light of these findings, it is essential to identify the inflammatory pathways targeted by metformin to develop a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms of action of this drug. Commonly accepted mechanisms of metformin action include AMPK activation and inhibition of mTOR pathways, which are evaluated in multiple diseases. Additionally, metformin's action on mitochondrial function and cellular homeostasis processes such as autophagy is of particular interest because of the importance of these mechanisms in maintaining cellular health. Both dysregulated mitochondria and failure of the autophagy pathways, the latter of which impair clearance of dysfunctional, damaged, or excess organelles, affect cellular health drastically and can trigger the onset of metabolic and age-related diseases. Immune cells are the fundamental cell types that govern the health of an organism. Thus, dysregulation of autophagy or mitochondrial function in immune cells has a remarkable effect on susceptibility to infections, response to vaccination, tumor onset, and the development of inflammatory and autoimmune conditions. In this study, we summarize the latest research on metformin's regulation of immune cell mitochondrial function and autophagy as evidence that new clinical trials on metformin with primary outcomes related to the immune system should be considered to treat immune-mediated diseases over the near term.
People with elevated, non-diabetic, levels of blood glucose are at risk of progressing to clinical type 2 diabetes and are commonly termed 'prediabetic'. The term prediabetes usually refers to high-normal fasting plasma glucose (impaired fasting glucose) and/or plasma glucose 2 h following a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (impaired glucose tolerance). Current US guidelines consider high-normal HbA1c to also represent a prediabetic state. Individuals with prediabetic levels of dysglycaemia are already at elevated risk of damage to the microvasculature and macrovasculature, resembling the long-term complications of diabetes. Halting or reversing the progressive decline in insulin sensitivity and beta-cell function holds the key to achieving prevention of type 2 diabetes in at-risk subjects. Lifestyle interventions aimed at inducing weight loss, pharmacologic treatments (metformin, thiazolidinediones, acarbose, basal insulin and drugs for weight loss) and bariatric surgery have all been shown to reduce the risk of progression to type 2 diabetes in prediabetic subjects. However, lifestyle interventions are difficult for patients to maintain and the weight loss achieved tends to be regained over time. Metformin enhances the action of insulin in liver and skeletal muscle, and its efficacy for delaying or preventing the onset of diabetes has been proven in large, well-designed, randomised trials, such as the Diabetes Prevention Program and other studies. Decades of clinical use have demonstrated that metformin is generally well-tolerated and safe. We have reviewed in detail the evidence base supporting the therapeutic use of metformin for diabetes prevention.
Metformin is a well-known anti-diabetic drug that has been repurposed for several emerging applications, including as an anti-cancer agent. It boasts the distinct advantages of an excellent safety and tolerability profile and high cost-effectiveness at less than one US dollar per daily dose. Epidemiological evidence reveals that metformin reduces the risk of cancer and decreases cancer-related mortality in patients with diabetes; however, the exact mechanisms are not well understood. Energy metabolism may be central to the mechanism of action. Based on altering whole-body energy metabolism or cellular state, metformin's modes of action can be divided into two broad, non-mutually exclusive categories: "direct effects", which induce a direct effect on cancer cells, independent of blood glucose and insulin levels, and "indirect effects" that arise from systemic metabolic changes depending on blood glucose and insulin levels. In this review, we summarize an updated account of the current knowledge on metformin antitumor action, elaborate on the underlying mechanisms in terms of the hallmarks of cancer, and propose potential applications for repurposing metformin for cancer therapeutics.
Metformin is the first-line option for treating newly diagnosed diabetic patients and also involved in other pharmacological actions, including antitumor effect, anti-aging effect, polycystic ovarian syndrome prevention, cardiovascular action, and neuroprotective effect, etc. However, the mechanisms of metformin actions were not fully illuminated. Recently, increasing researches showed that autophagy is a vital medium of metformin playing pharmacological actions. Nevertheless, results on the effects of metformin on autophagy were inconsistent. Apart from few clinical evidences, more data focused on kinds of no-clinical models. First, many studies showed that metformin could induce autophagy via a number of signaling pathways, including AMPK-related signaling pathways (e.g. AMPK/mTOR, AMPK/CEBPD, MiTF/TFE, AMPK/ULK1, and AMPK/miR-221), Redd1/mTOR, STAT, SIRT, Na(+)/H(+) exchangers, MAPK/ERK, PK2/PKR/AKT/ GSK3beta, and TRIB3. Secondly, some signaling pathways were involved in the process of metformin inhibiting autophagy, such as AMPK-related signaling pathways (AMPK/NF-kappaB and other undetermined AMPK-related signaling pathways), Hedgehog, miR-570-3p, miR-142-3p, and MiR-3127-5p. Thirdly, two types of signaling pathways including PI3K/AKT/mTOR and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress could bidirectionally impact the effectiveness of metformin on autophagy. Finally, multiple signal pathways were reviewed collectively in terms of affecting the effectiveness of metformin on autophagy. The pharmacological effects of metformin combining its actions on autophagy were also discussed. It would help better apply metformin to treat diseases in term of mediating autophagy.
PURPOSE: To study the efficacy and safety of various dosages of metformin as compared with placebo in patients with type II diabetes mellitus. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A 14-week, multicenter, double-blind, dose-response study was conducted. After a 3-week, single-blind, placebo-controlled washout, 451 patients with fasting plasma glucose levels of at least 180 mg/dL were randomized to receive an 11-week course of placebo or metformin given at 500, 1000, 1500, 2000, or 2500 mg daily. RESULTS: Metformin improved glucose variables as compared with placebo. The adjusted mean changes in fasting plasma glucose from baseline associated with each metformin group at week 7, 11, or at endpoint exceeded those associated with placebo by 19 to 84 mg/dL at dosages of 500 to 2000 mg daily, respectively. The corresponding between-group differences in glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) ranged from 0.6% to 2.0% at dosages of 500 to 2000 mg daily, respectively. All between-group differences were significant (P < 0.05) for both fasting plasma glucose and HbA1c at week 7, week 11, and endpoint, except for the difference between placebo and metformin 500 mg in fasting plasma glucose at endpoint (P = 0.054). Treatment-related adverse events occurred in 15% of patients in the placebo group and in 28% in the metformin group (P = 0.02); these were primarily manifested as digestive disturbances, such as diarrhea. CONCLUSIONS: Metformin lowered fasting plasma glucose and HbA1c generally in a dose-related manner. Benefits were observed with as little as 500 mg of metformin; maximal benefits were observed at the upper limits of the recommended daily dosage. All dosages were well tolerated. Metformin appears to be a useful therapeutic option for physicians who wish to titrate drug therapy to achieve target glucose concentrations.
Metformin is the oldest and most commonly used first-line antidiabetic drug because of its good clinical efficacy, high safety, low cost and easy access. At the same time, in recent years, we have found that its role as a therapeutic drug is gradually expanding. A large number of basic studies have shown that metformin may become a promising attractive candidate for drug repurposing. Therefore, it is extremely beneficial to conduct an in-depth discussion on the main mechanism of metformin. As early as the year 1950, studies showed that metformin played a biological role by regulating mitochondria. Then, ground-breaking studies showed that metformin functions by inhibiting complex I in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Although there are still many controversies about the key molecular targets of metformin, with the emergence of more and more evidence, it gradually came to be concluded that mitochondria play a central role in the application of metformin. Mitochondria are important fulcrums for cell functions. The exact mechanism of action in mitochondria of this pleiotropic anti-hyperglycaemic molecule is still unclear. This review article explores the core role of mitochondria in the pharmacological and toxicological effects of metformin, and summarises the mechanism of action if metformin in mitochondria. It also provides ideas and supporting evidence for the re-development and reuse of metformin as an old drug, as well as new insight into the treatment of human diseases.
Pioglitazone and metformin have both proven safe and efficacious in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Their combination into a single tablet seems logical. This article reviews the data that are available for this combination. Because the tablets are not currently widely available, the review examines some aspects of the effects of both agents separately and in the few trials where they have been administered concurrently, though not as a single pharmaceutical preparation. Based on this evidence, the combination appears therapeutically efficacious and clinically safe. The side effects are not multiplicative and reflect those predictable from monotherapy with either agent.
Consistent antihyperglycaemic treatment for preventing vascular complications in type 2 diabetes mellitus (2DM) often require the application of several measures. The basis of such treatment should be dietary changes and increased physical exercise. The target of antiglycemic treatment is the reduction of HbA1c to below 6.5%. Regular monitoring of HbA1c every 2-6 months is reasonable in order to recognize therapeutic failure early and adapt treatment accordingly. Metformin is the drug of first choice for the oral treatment of 2DM, once possible contraindications having been excluded. The advantage of glinides, compared with sulfonylureas, is mainly in allowing greater dietary flexibility. Although not finally decided, there are ever fewer objections against combined metformin and sulphonylurea treatment. The current guidelines of the (British)National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) specifically recommend this combination treatment. There are pointers to glitazone having protective effects in 2DM beyond its blood-sugar lowering action. However, the clinical significance of these effects requires confirmation. If adequate blood-sugar reduction cannot be achieved with oral medication it is important to initiate insulin administration as soon as possible.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is associated with insulin resistance, infertility, obesity and gestational complications. Metformin is widely used in fertility treatment of women with PCOS, due to a suggested positive effect of continued metformin treatment beyond the first trimester on pregnancy complications. Larger randomized trials have failed to confirm this. Metformin treatment has not been found to be superior to insulin treatment in women with gestational diabetes and may be associated with long-term consequences in the children in the form of overweight and disturbed glucose metabolism.
This review investigates the different biological effect of Metformin (MET) in different conditions. MET is an oral antidiabetic drug used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) particularly in overweight people. The main mechanism of action of the MET is inhibition of hepatic glucose production and reduction of insulin resistance. In addition to its antidiabetic effects, MET is also found to be related with the risk for development of several human solid cancers types such as colorectal, breast and pancreas cancer in the diabetic patients. Nowadays according to some researches, MET is believed to decrease or prevent aging and mortality. Moreover, clinical and experimental evidence has shown that MET has beneficial effects in patient with obesity, polycystic ovarian syndrome and Alzheimer's disease. Recent studies have shown that activation of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) by MET can explain its beneficial metabolic effects. In this manuscript, a reevaluation of mechanisms as well as pharmacokinetic properties, genetic variants of transporters, drug-drug interactions, side effects and potential clinical benefits of MET have been reviewed.
Metformin is an insulin-sensitizing agent with potent antihyperglycemic properties. Its efficacy in reducing hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus is similar to that of sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones, and insulin. Metformin-based combination therapy is often superior to therapy with a single hypoglycemic agent. The antihyperglycemic properties of metformin are mainly attributed to suppressed hepatic glucose production, especially hepatic gluconeogenesis, and increased peripheral tissue insulin sensitivity. Although the precise mechanism of hypoglycemic action of metformin remains unclear, it probably interrupts mitochondrial oxidative processes in the liver and corrects abnormalities of intracellular calcium metabolism in insulin-sensitive tissues (liver, skeletal muscle, and adipocytes) and cardiovascular tissue.
Noninsulin antidiabetic medications coupled with diet and exercise are effective in managing most patients with type 2 diabetes. However, it is essential to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the home antidiabetic medication regimen when the patient is hospitalized. Prescribers need to be aware of the mechanism of action of each class, contraindications, precautions, and adverse effects to formulate a safe and effective management plan. This article details the different classes of noninsulin antidiabetic medications, the mechanism of action, metabolism, elimination, dose form, usual and maximum doses, contraindications, precautions, common adverse reactions, and implications for use in the hospitalized patient.
