QUESTION: One of my patients is currently using methadone for maintenance of opioid dependence. She wants to breastfeed. Is breastfeeding safe for her infant? ANSWER: The exposure of infants to methadone through their mothers' breast milk is minimal. Women using methadone for treatment of opioid dependence should not be discouraged from breastfeeding. The benefits of breastfeeding largely outweigh any theoretical minimal risks.
We describe a patient on methadone maintenance who developed distal leg edema after years of treatment. The edema resolved when methadone was discontinued and recurred when it was restarted. This patient is compared to three others reported in the literature who also developed fluid retention shortly after being placed on methadone. We conclude that methadone induced edema can occur not only immediately, but also after years of uncomplicated treatment.
The concept of opioid equianalgesia, limitations in current dose conversion systems, equianalgesic dose tables, and computer assisted dose conversions are discussed. Conversions for methadone, fentanyl and hydromorphone are described.
Methadone and acetylmethadol, although possessing almost all of morphine's pharmacological properties, differ from other morphine-like drugs in their longer action, more gradual and less intense withdrawal syndrome, and blockade of euphoric effect of other opiates in addicts. A high percentage of patients maintained on methadone are better able to hold employment or to be otherwise socially productive than when dependent on heroin or morphine.A review of published results and procedures used in methadone maintenance treatment programs for heroin dependence is presented. Former heroin addicts are usually maintained on 80 to 120 mg. (high dose) or 20 to 60 mg. (low dose) oral methadone daily. Some programs are reported to have produced 80% success (patients employed or otherwise socially productive). Selection of patients, availability of allied therapeutic and rehabilitative facilities, strict control of supply, record keeping and periodic evaluation are considered essential.Different criteria ("drug-free" vs. "socially productive") for judging "success" of treatment of heroin-dependent persons by methadone maintenance and administrative problems in large-scale treatment programs constitute the principal aspects of controversy.
The analgesic ladder guideline proposed by the World Health Organization has been shown to be effective in controlling cancer pain in about 80 percent of patients, but the remaining 20 percent still experience pain. Several strategies have been used to manage refractory cancer pain and opioid toxicity. Switching opioids, alternative routes of opioid administration, optimizing adjuvants, and invasive procedures are proposed treatments. Extensive medical literature corroborates each one of those treatments. Rotation from one opioid to another is a noninvasive strategy to overcome opioid side effects and refractory pain. Frequently, methadone is used during opioid rotation. However, there is a lack of consensus on how to proceed on rotation from morphine to methadone. In the current era of evidence-based medicine, the medical literature fails to answer some cancer pain-management issues. The purpose of this review is to clarify a process for transitioning from morphine to methadone.
Serotonin syndrome (SS), a potentially life-threatening adverse drug reaction caused by excessive serotonergic agonism in central and peripheral nervous system serotonergic receptors, may be caused by a single drug or a combination of drugs with serotonergic activity. The syndrome results in a variety of mental, autonomic and neuromuscular changes, which can range in severity from mild to life-threatening. To our knowledge, we present the first reported case of SS associated with linezolid and methadone with a brief review of the literature.
Injection drug use is a common risk factor for HIV infection, and opioid use and dependence is the underlying condition that often fuels HIV risk behaviour and subsequent HIV seroconversion among injection drug users (IDUs). Treatment of opioid dependence often requires continued opioid administration in the form of substitution therapy, which means that opioid-using IDUs often continue receiving opioids even after cessation of illicit drug use. The concurrent use of both antiretrovirals and opioids in HIV-positive individuals is thus common. This review was undertaken to summarise current knowledge on the interactions between the opioids and antiretrovirals and to make recommendations on the treatment of HIV-positive opioid-dependent patients.
This article describes the complex problems associated with opioid dependence during pregnancy. Medical, obstetric, and psychosocial problems are presented. Methadone maintenance for the treatment of opioid dependence is described in this article. Specific issues of appropriate methadone dose during pregnancy, medical withdrawal, and the relationship of methadone dose and the severity of neonatal abstinence also are discussed.
Methadone maintenance has been used for decades to treat opioid-dependent pregnant women. The outcomes of pregnancies thus treated are vastly improved over the outcomes of pregnancies complicated by street drug use. Despite its long history of successful use during pregnancy, little is known about the long-term effects of methadone on the fetus and the newborn. Studies done in animals suggest there may be subtle effects on brain and behavior. Only recently have other treatments for opioid dependency during pregnancy been investigated. There is increasing evidence that altering the traditional methadone maintenance protocols may be beneficial, and that tapered withdrawal can be safely achieved under some circumstances.
This article addresses the management of pregnant women participating in a methadone maintenance program. An approach to management of the labor of a woman on a methadone maintenance program is described along with a summary of what to anticipate at delivery and postpartum, and options for management of the infant who manifests symptoms of the neonatal abstinence syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: Dextropropoxyphene is a commonly used analgesic despite its high toxicity in overdose and potential for abuse and dependence. This case report highlights these dangers. CLINICAL PICTURE: The case of a female who was addicted to dextropropoxyphene as an alternative to other opioids is described. Its use in high doses with other psychotropic agents resulted in adverse health effects. TREATMENT: The patient was treated with methadone and psychosocial interventions. OUTCOME: The patient reduced her drug use and experienced improved physical health and psychosocial functioning. CONCLUSIONS: Caution is needed when prescribing dextropropoxyphene because of its adverse effects compared with equally efficacious analgesics.
Methadone-maintained volunteers experienced moderately severe opiate withdrawal symptoms within 3 or 4 days of beginning phenytoin in therapeutic doses. The area under the methadone plasma concentration-time curve decreased while the ratio of the pyrrolidine-to-metabolite excretion in urine to this area increased significantly. This suggests that phenytoin accelerates methadone metabolism. Methadone dosing adjustments should be anticipated when phenytoin is initiated or discontinued in methadone-maintained patients.
Clinical success in rehabilitation of heroin addicts with maintenance treatment requires stability of the blood level in a pharmacologically effective range (optimally, 150 to 600 ng/mL)-a phenomenon that emphasizes the central importance of narcotic receptor occupation. It is postulated that the high rate of relapse of addicts after detoxification from heroin use is due to persistent derangement of the endogenous ligand-narcotic receptor system and that methadone in an adequate daily dose compensates for this defect. Some patients with long histories of heroin use and subsequent rehabilitation on a maintenance program do well when the treatment is terminated. The majority, unfortunately, experience a return of symptoms after maintenance is stopped. The treatment, therefore, is corrective but not curative for severely addicted persons. A major challenge for future research is to identify the specific defect in receptor function and to repair it. Meanwhile, methadone maintenance provides a safe and effective way to normalize the function of otherwise intractable narcotic addicts.
With the improved utilisation and widespread availability of opiates, the oral treatment of pain due to malignancy has changed radically, so that the expected need for intrathecal (IT) delivery systems for this pain has largely failed to materialise. Instead, the lack of equal progress in the design and production of non-opiates for treating non-malignant pain, in the long term, has resulted in a greater interest in the development of these IT systems in this non-malignant area.
Methadone is the major opioid substitution therapy for opioid dependence. Dosage is highly variable and is often controlled by the patient and prescriber according to local and national policy and guidelines. Nevertheless many genetic factors have been investigated including those affecting its metabolism (CYP2B6-consistent results), efflux transport (P-gp-inconsistent results), target mu-opioid receptor (mu-opioid receptor-inconsistent results) and a host of other receptors (DRD2) and signaling elements (GIRK2 and ARRB2; not replicated). None by themselves have been able to substantially explain dosage variation (the major but not sole end point). When multiple genes have been combined such as ABCB1, CYP2B6, OPRM1 and DRD2 a greater contribution to dosage variation was found but not as yet replicated. As stabilization of dosage needs to be made rapidly, it is imperative that larger internationally based studies be instigated so that genetic contribution to dosage can be properly assessed, which may or may not tailor to different ethnic groups and each country's policy towards an outcome that benefits all.
We report five cases where fluvoxamine (FLVX) was added to maintenance treatment with methadone (MTD) in addict patients with affective disorders. In view of the implication of FLVX in several metabolic drug interactions, MTD plasma levels were measured before and after treatment with FLVX. A slight increase (approximately 20% of the MTD plasma level/dose ratio) occurred in two cases. In the remaining three patients, the interaction was more pronounced (40-100% increase of the MTD plasma level/dose ratio), with clinical manifestations of opiate withdrawal after stopping FLVX therapy in one case. Caution is needed when starting or stopping treatment with FLVX in patients receiving maintenance treatment with methadone.
HISTORY AND CLINICAL FINDINGS: An otherwise healthy 25-year-old patient with heavy cannabis-abuse suffered from an undiagnosed cannabis hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) over years, which characteristically was resistant to usual antiemetics. In an apparently last attempt at healing, opiates (morphine, methadone) were administrated and improved the CHS, however, this led to an at least as equally distressing and painful opiate withdrawal syndrome. TREATMENT AND COURSE: In the controlled cannabis abstinence during the 2-week inpatient treatment of opiate addiction syndrome the CHS has not recurred. CONCLUSION: Opiates are not suited for the treatment of CHS because they are addictive and lead to respiratory depression in overdose.
OBJECTIVE: The use of opioids to treat chronic pain has come under increased scrutiny, as such use has been associated with significant risk of death, with limited data regarding the long-term effectiveness, especially when used to treat noncancer pain. The purpose of this manuscript is to discuss the cardiac effects associated with long-term opioid therapy. DESIGN: A literature search was performed using OVID. RESULTS: Most opioids have little direct negative effect on cardiac contractility. However, opioid administration can be associated with decreased cardiac function when administered in combination with other medications, including benzodiazepines. Opioids can lead to bradycardia and vasodilation, and as a result can rarely lead to edema, hypotension, orthostatic hypotension, and syncope when used at analgesic doses. While most opioids have no effect on cardiac conductivity, methadone, and buprenorphine can prolong QTc, especially when used in patients at increased risk for QTc prolongation. Electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring of QTc at baseline and following dose increases is appropriate in patients receiving these medications. CONCLUSIONS: There are limited data to suggest that chronic opioid administration may be associated with an increased risk for cardiac-related adverse effects. However, this observation has not yet been confirmed. Regardless, while opioids are an important medication for the treatment of a multitude of chronic pain conditions, careful patient selection, and diligent monitoring is likely to decrease the risk of harm and improve patient outcomes.
Methadone is a potent opioid agonist widely used in opioid maintenance therapy. In some countries, methadone is available for pain treatment. We report the cases of two patients with history of substance abuse (mainly heroin), who presented with cluster headache possibly related to high-dose methadone. One possible explanation for the severe pain described in these cases is hyperalgesia induced by high doses of methadone.
Recent data on methadone from 2008 to 2017 by the French addictovigilance network warms on the increase of methadone use, its diversion, its increase of overdose risk factors (opioids associated, occasional use) and deaths. Whereas methadone is an essential drug for opioid addiction, its use remains complex because of its pharmacology leading to increase the awareness of health professionals.
