Skeletal muscle relaxants are widely used in treating musculoskeletal conditions. However, evidence of their effectiveness consists mainly of studies with poor methodologic design. In addition, these drugs have not been proven to be superior to acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for low back pain. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses support using skeletal muscle relaxants for short-term relief of acute low back pain when nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or acetaminophen are not effective or tolerated. Comparison studies have not shown one skeletal muscle relaxant to be superior to another. Cyclobenzaprine is the most heavily studied and has been shown to be effective for various musculoskeletal conditions. The sedative properties of tizanidine and cyclobenzaprine may benefit patients with insomnia caused by severe muscle spasms. Methocarbamol and metaxalone are less sedating, although effectiveness evidence is limited. Adverse effects, particularly dizziness and drowsiness, are consistently reported with all skeletal muscle relaxants. The potential adverse effects should be communicated clearly to the patient. Because of limited comparable effectiveness data, choice of agent should be based on side-effect profile, patient preference, abuse potential, and possible drug interactions.
Skeletal muscle relaxants are a heterogeneous group of medications used to treat two different types of underlying conditions: spasticity from upper motor neuron syndromes and muscular pain or spasms from peripheral musculoskeletal conditions. Although widely used for these indications, there appear to be gaps in our understanding of the comparative efficacy and safety of different skeletal muscle relaxants. This systematic review summarizes and assesses the evidence for the comparative efficacy and safety of skeletal muscle relaxants for spasticity and musculoskeletal conditions. Randomized trials (for comparative efficacy and adverse events) and observational studies (for adverse events only) that included oral medications classified as skeletal muscle relaxants by the FDA were sought using electronic databases, reference lists, and pharmaceutical company submissions. Searches were performed through January 2003. The validity of each included study was assessed using a data abstraction form and predefined criteria. An overall grade was allocated for the body of evidence for each key question. A total of 101 randomized trials were included in this review. No randomized trial was rated good quality, and there was little evidence of rigorous adverse event assessment in included trials or observational studies. There is fair evidence that baclofen, tizanidine, and dantrolene are effective compared to placebo in patients with spasticity (primarily multiple sclerosis). There is fair evidence that baclofen and tizanidine are roughly equivalent for efficacy in patients with spasticity, but insufficient evidence to determine the efficacy of dantrolene compared to baclofen or tizanidine. There is fair evidence that although the overall rate of adverse effects between tizanidine and baclofen is similar, tizanidine is associated with more dry mouth and baclofen with more weakness. There is fair evidence that cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, and tizanidine are effective compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions (primarily acute back or neck pain). Cyclobenzaprine has been evaluated in the most clinical trials and has consistently been found to be effective. There is very limited or inconsistent data regarding the effectiveness of metaxalone, methocarbamol, chlorzoxazone, baclofen, or dantrolene compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions. There is insufficient evidence to determine the relative efficacy or safety of cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, tizanidine, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and chlorzoxazone. Dantrolene, and to a lesser degree chlorzoxazone, have been associated with rare serious hepatotoxicity.
As the population ages, spine-related pain is increasingly common in older adults. While medications play an important role in pain management, their use has limitations in geriatric patients due to reduced liver and renal function, comorbid medical problems, and polypharmacy. This review will assess the evidence basis for medications used for spine-related pain in older adults, with a focus on drug metabolism and adverse drug reactions. A PubMed/OVID search crossing common spine, neck, and back pain terms with key words for older adults and geriatrics was combined with common drug classes and common drug names and limited to clinical trials and age over 65 years. The results were then reviewed with identification of commonly used drugs and drug categories: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, corticosteroids, gabapentin and pregabalin, antispastic and antispasmodic muscle relaxants, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tramadol, and opioids. Collectively, 138 double-blind, placebo-controlled trials were the focus of the review. The review found a variable contribution of high-quality studies examining the efficacy of medications for spine pain primarily in the geriatric population. There was strong evidence for NSAID use with adjustments for gastrointestinal and renal risk factors. Gabapentin and pregabalin had mixed evidence for neuropathic pain. SNRIs had good evidence for neuropathic pain and a more favorable safety profile than TCAs. Tramadol had some evidence in older patients, but more so in persons aged < 65 years. Rational therapeutic choices based on geriatric spine pain diagnosis are helpful, such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen for arthritic and myofascial-based pain, gabapentinoids or duloxetine for neuropathic and radicular pain, antispastic agents for myofascial-based pain, and combination therapy for mixed etiologies. Tramadol can be well tolerated in older patients, but has risks of cognitive and classic opioid side effects. Otherwise, opioids are typically avoided in the treatment of spine-related pain in older adults due to their morbidity and mortality risk and are reserved for refractory severe pain. Whenever possible, beneficial geriatric spine pain pharmacotherapy should employ the lowest therapeutic doses with consideration of polypharmacy, potentially decreased renal and hepatic metabolism, and co-morbid medical disorders.
A critical examination of the literature on centrally acting, orally administered skeletal muscle relaxants (SMRs) is presented. The available comparative clinical studies are reviewed, and the pharmacology, metabolism and adverse effects of the oral SMRs are discussed briefly. The drugs covered are carisoprodol, chlorphenesin carbamate, chlorzoxazone, cyclobenzaprine hydrochloride, diazepam, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and orphenadrine citrate. The mechanism of action of these agents is not well defined, and their effects are measured mainly by subjective responses. Thus, acceptable evidence of efficacy is difficult to obtain, especially if clinical studies continue to be designed inadequately. There are inadequate data to support the superiority of any one drug. Further, unique clinical efficacy of any oral SMR in comparison to nonspecific sedation has not been established. Based on subjective responses, all agents, except diazepam, have been shown to be superior to placebo in acute disorders; cyclobenzaprine has not been evaluated in acute conditions. SMRs are less effective in chronic disorders. Combination muscle relaxant-analgesic products appear to be superior to their individual components, but the relative efficacy of these combination products in comparison to combined use of individual sedative and analgesic agents is unknown.
For patients and their loved ones, delirium can be a frightening experience. A fluctuating mental status is important to identify because it often signals a need for additional treatment. The Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) diagnostic algorithm enables nurses to assess for delirium by identifying the four features of the disorder that distinguish it from other forms of cognitive impairment. It can be completed in five minutes and is easily incorporated into ongoing assessments of hospitalized patients. (This screening tool is included in the series Try This: Best Practices in Nursing Care to Older Adults, from the Hartford Institute for Geriatric Nursing at New York University's College of Nursing.) For a free online video demonstrating the use of this tool, go to http://links.lww.com/A209.
BACKGROUND: Alternatives to opioid analgesia are needed to reduce the risk of abuse, misuse, and diversion. Musculoskeletal pain is a significant contributor to postoperative pain after ventral hernia repair (VHR). We report the impact of methocarbamol on opioid prescribing after VHR. METHODS: Review of all robotic and open VHR, Jan 2020-July 2022. Data was collected in the Abdominal Core Health Quality Collaborative (ACHQC) with additional chart review to assess for opioid refills. A 2:1 propensity score match was performed comparing opioid prescribing in patients prescribed vs not prescribed methocarbamol. RESULTS: 101 patients received methocarbamol compared with 202 without. Similar number of patients received an opioid prescription (87.1 vs 86.6%; p = 0.904). Study patients received significantly lower MME prescription at discharge (60 v 75; p = 0.021) with no difference in refills (12.5 vs 16.6%; p = 0.386). CONCLUSION: Addition of methocarbamol to a multimodal analgesic regimen after VHR facilitates reduction in prescribed opioid with no increase in refills.
A fatal methocarbamol intoxication is presented. Significant toxicologic findings were blood concentrations of 525 mg/L methocarbamol and 140 mg/dL ethanol. Analysis was by thin-layer, gas-liquid, and high pressure liquid chromatography. Toxicology data relevant to the interpretation of case findings are discussed.
We retrospectively analyzed 56 consecutive cases involving acute skeletal muscle relaxant exposure that were reported to the Poison Control Center over a 1-year period. The age range was 9 mo to 56 years (mean 18.9 +/- 13.1) with the site of exposure being the primary residence in 54 cases (96.4%). The reasons for inquiry to the Poison Center were reported to be intentional suicide in 26 cases (46.4%), accidental in 21 cases (37.5%), with intentional misuses in 5 cases (8.9%). No deaths were reported. Eighteen cases (32.1%) were reported with co-ingestants (average number of substances taken was 2.7 +/- 0.8). Of these cases 3 patients (16.7%) had major effects with life-threatening symptoms with 6 (33.3%) patients having no symptoms. Of the remaining 38 cases, 17 (44.7%) wer cyclobenzaprine, 6 (15.8%) were methocarbamol, 5 (13.2%) were carisoprodol, 5 (13.2%) were chlorzoxazone, 3 (7.89%) were Baclofen and the remainder were either life-threatening symptoms (2.6%), while 29 (74.3%) had no or minor effects with symptoms that subsided. We conclude that morbidity and mortality are low in pure skeletal muscle relaxant ingestion, however it may be increased in multiple ingestions.
A new skeletal muscle relaxant, methocarbamol, was used in the treatment of 38 patients with a variety of severe neurological disorders and skeletal muscle spasm states.Eighty-two per cent of the patients studied obtained a beneficial result ranging from excellent to fair. Mild side effects such as drowsiness were observed in five patients, mild weakness in three patients and excessive perspiration in one. In two of the five patients who complained of drowsiness, it disappeared upon reduction of dosage and did not reappear when original dosage was reinstituted.
The clinical manifestations of colonic urticaria vary, depending on the presence of associated abnormalities. A case of an association between colonic urticaria and cecal volvulus is described.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To explore the data for and against the use of the various components of multimodal analgesia in cranial neurosurgery. RECENT FINDINGS: Postcraniotomy pain is a challenging clinical problem in that analgesia must be accomplished without affecting neurologic function (i.e. 'losing the neurologic exam'). The traditional approach with low-dose opioids is often insufficient and can cause well recognized side effects. Newer multimodal analgesic approaches have proven beneficial in a variety of other surgical patient populations. The combined use of multiple nonopioid analgesics offers the promise of improved pain control and reduced opioid administration, while preserving the clinical neurologic exam. Specifically, acetaminophen and gabapentinoids should be considered for craniotomy patients, both preoperatively and postoperatively. The gabapentinoids have the added benefit of reduced nausea. Scalp blocks have moderate quality evidence supporting their use over incisional infiltration alone, with analgesia that extends into the postoperative period. Intraoperative dexmedetomidine reduces postoperative opioid requirements with the added benefit of reduced postcraniotomy hypertension. Methocarbamol, NSAIDs [both nonspecific cyclooxygenase (COX) 1 and 2 inhibitors and specific COX-2 inhibitors], ketamine, and intravenous lidocaine require further data regarding safety and efficacy in craniotomy patients. SUMMARY: Opioids are the mainstay for treating acute postcraniotomy pain but should be minimized. The evidence to support a multimodal approach is growing; neuroanesthesiologists and neurosurgeons should seek to incorporate multimodal analgesia into the perioperative care of craniotomy patients. Preoperative and postoperative gabapentin and acetaminophen, intraoperative dexmedetomidine, and scalp blocks over incisional infiltration have the most data for benefit, with good safety profiles. Further research is needed to define the safety, efficacy, and dosing parameters for NSAIDs including COX-2 inhibitors, methocarbamol, ketamine, and intravenous lidocaine in cranial neurosurgery.
An incarcerated male patient with a psychiatric history of schizoaffective disorder presented to the emergency department with muscle rigidity and mutism after receiving a 150 mg haloperidol decanoate injection. At the peak of his illness, symptoms included muscular rigidity, mutism, excessive drooling, an altered level of consciousness, tachycardia, diaphoresis and tremors. Atypical neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) was diagnosed after discrediting similar illnesses through clinical reasoning, laboratory and imaging studies. He was successfully treated during a 40-day hospitalisation with lorazepam, amantadine, methocarbamol and supportive care. This case represents an atypical presentation of NMS due to the patient's lack of fever development. Nonetheless, he satisfied many other criteria, most notably rapid symptom onset after receiving a first-generation antipsychotic medication. The case also provides an opportunity to discuss the prevalence of psychiatric illness among the US incarcerated population and incarceration as a risk factor for developing NMS.
Strychnine was used as a pesticide until 1968 and a rodenticide until 2006 when its sale was banned throughout the EU and all supplies recalled. A case of strychnine poisoning seen in a UK emergency department in 2009 is reported to remind clinicians of the features and management of this increasingly rare presentation. Prompt recognition and early intensive supportive therapy can result in a favourable outcome.
The presence of acute or chronic muscle pain and muscle spasm is a common finding in the treatment of craniomandibular disorders. A review of the literature on the centrally acting oral skeletal muscle relaxants is presented to assist the practitioner in treating CMD. The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, adverse reactions and available dosage forms of the skeletal muscle relaxants are discussed. The agents reviewed are carisoprodol, methocarbamol, chlorphenesin carbamate, metaxalone, chloroxazone, orphenadrine citrate, diazepam, and cyclobenzaprine. Their mechanisms are not well defined. Most act via selective inhibition of polysynaptic pathways in the central nervous system. Most evidence for their efficacy is based on subjective responses and there is question as to the adequacy of the clinical studies to date. Based on the data all of the relaxants (possibly excepting diazepam) are better than placebo based on subjective analyses. Although combinations with analgesics provide better symptom relief, no superiority over analgesics exists. No skeletal relaxant has been shown to be superior over any other oral relaxant. Based on recent clinical suspicions, further study of multiple pharmacologic effects of newer agents is indicated.
Conservative management of 11 consecutive cases of tetanus with diazepam in heavy doses and methocarbamol is described. All drugs were administered intravenously through a cut-down. Patients were nursed near the nurses' station for the first 3 to 5 days when fatal complications and very severe spasms are most likely to occur. There was minimal interference with the patients and a reasonable reduction in the duration of significant spasms, and complications were minimized. No neonates were included. Severity of tetanus cannot be determined only by consideration of onset of symptoms before admission. It is suggested that a combination of muscle relaxants without heavy sedation may produce an improvement in the results of conservative management of clinical tetanus.
OBJECTIVES: We tested the hypothesis that patients who received methocarbamol postoperatively experience less severe pain and require smaller doses of opioids than those who did not receive methocarbamol. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This is a retrospective cohort study of patients undergoing surgery involving the musculoskeletal system. Of 9089 patients, 704 received methocarbamol during 48 hours postoperatively, while 8385 did not receive methocarbamol. The patients who received methocarbamol postoperatively and the patients who did not receive methocarbamol were compared on the time-weighted average (TWA) pain score and opioid dose requirements in morphine milligram equivalents (MME) during the first 48 hours postoperatively, using propensity score-weighted regression models to adjusting for preoperative and intraoperative covariates. RESULTS: Postoperative 48-hour TWA pain scores were 5.5+/-1.7 (mean+/-SD), and 4.3+/-2.1 for methocarbamol and non-methocarbamol patients. Postoperative 48-hour opioid dose requirements in MME were 276 [170-347] (median [interquartile range (IQR)]) mg, and 190 [60-248] mg for methocarbamol and non-methocarbamol patients. In propensity score-weighted regression models, receiving methocarbamol postoperatively was associated with 0.97-point higher postoperative TWA pain score (95% CI, 0.83-1.11; P <0.001), and 93.6-MME higher postoperative opioid dose requirements (95% CI, 79.9 to 107.4; P <0.001), compared with not receiving methocarbamol postoperatively. DISCUSSION: Postoperative methocarbamol was associated with significantly higher acute postoperative pain burden and opioid dose requirements. Although the results of the study are influenced by residual confounding, they suggest a limited-if any-benefit of methocarbamol as an adjunct of postoperative pain management.
An evaluation of over 350 patients in a study of congenital contractures of the joints (arthrogryposis) included a review of family, pregnancy, and delivery histories for teratogenic exposures. Fifteen out of the total 350 patients studied had a possible teratogenic exposure: an infectious agent (viral or bacterial), maternal drug or toxin ingestion, chronic maternal neurologic or muscular illness, or a direct physical insult such as a structural uterine anomaly. Literature was reviewed for all human and animal cases reported with congenital contractures of the joints with an associated teratogenic insult. Those findings are discussed here.
Latrodectus mactans has now invaded towns and cities. The spider's venom is a neurotoxin that causes little local reaction but produces pain and spasm in large skeletal muscle groups within 30 minutes to three hours after the bite. Severe envenomation may result in respiratory failure and coma. First aid is of no value. Muscle relaxants are useful in treatment, as is calcium gluconate. Antivenin is indicated for high-risk victims, such as those with hypertension and persons younger than 16 or older than 60 years of age.
Submuscular placement of breast implants produces significant postoperative pain and discomfort. The standard use of narcotics alone does not optimize pain reduction. Methocarbamol was used intraoperatively and postoperatively in 62 patients undergoing manipulation of the pectoralis major associated with breast implant surgery. Significant pain relief was achieved.
Green coloured urine is atypical as it usually signifies the presence of an exogenous substance. Several substances in literature have been associated with green urine including propofol, biliverdin, metoclopramide, methylene blue, indigo blue, amitriptyline, methocarbamol, indomethacin, promethazine, cimetidine and food colourings. We present here a case of middleaged man who presented to our ER with altered mental status and green coloured urine with positive urine toxicology reports for benzodiazepine.
