Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a prevalent neurodevelopmental condition associated with impaired function and increased risk of poor outcomes in children, young people and adults with the condition. Currently approved pharmacological treatments for ADHD include a range of stimulant (methylphenidate, amphetamine) and nonstimulant (atomoxetine, guanfacine, clonidine) medications. All have been shown to be effective in treating the symptoms of ADHD and improving other functional outcomes including quality of life, academic performance, rates of accidents and injuries, and do not appear to be associated with significant adverse outcomes or side effects. In this chapter, we review medications for ADHD by summarising the mechanisms of action of each of the two main classes of compounds (stimulants and nonstimulants), the formulations of the most commonly prescribed medications within each class, their efficacy in treating ADHD symptoms and other outcomes, and other factors that influence treatment decisions including side effects and tolerability, comorbidities and medical history. We conclude with a summary of the treatment decisions made by clinicians and suggest some next steps for research. Further research is needed to understand the mechanisms of action of these medications and how exactly they improve symptoms, and to examine their effects on commonly occurring comorbidities.
INTRODUCTION: Methylphenidate remains a first-line medication for treating ADHD in children and adults. However, its behavioral pharmacological similarities to methamphetamine and cocaine have historically created concern for its potential as a drug of abuse. In September 2019, the FDA published a docket requesting comments for the development of abuse deterrent formulations for CNS stimulants, emphasizing the abuse of methylphenidate as a public health concern. AREAS COVERED: We conducted a narrative review of research on the clinical pharmacology, therapeutic efficacy, and abuse potential of methylphenidate. EXPERT OPINION: Several studies indicate that methylphenidate has at least some abuse potential. Methylphenidate, amphetamine, methamphetamine, and cocaine overlap in their subjective, reinforcing, and discriminative stimulus effects. Regardless, methylphenidate remains an efficacious treatment for ADHD in children and adults when properly adhered to, especially when paired with non-pharmacological treatments. The development of abuse deterrent formulations of methylphenidate is warranted.
BACKGROUND: Methylphenidate, modafinil, and amantadine are commonly prescribed medications for alleviating fatigue in multiple sclerosis; however, the evidence supporting their efficacy is sparse and conflicting. Our goal was to compare the efficacy of these three medications with each other and placebo in patients with multiple sclerosis fatigue. METHODS: In this randomised, placebo-controlled, four-sequence, four-period, crossover, double-blind trial, patients with multiple sclerosis who reported fatigue and had a Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS) score of more than 33 were recruited at two academic multiple sclerosis centres in the USA. Participants received oral amantadine (up to 100 mg twice daily), modafinil (up to 100 mg twice daily), methylphenidate (up to 10 mg twice daily), or placebo, each given for up to 6 weeks. All patients were intended to receive all four study medications, in turn, in one of four different sequences with 2-week washout periods between medications. A biostatistician prepared a concealed allocation schedule, stratified by site, randomly assigning a sequence of medications in approximately a 1:1:1:1 ratio, in blocks of eight, to a consecutive series of numbers. The statistician and pharmacists had no role in assessing the participants or collecting data, and the participants, caregivers, and assessors were masked to allocation. The primary outcome measure was the MFIS measured while taking the highest tolerated dose at week 5 of each medication period, analysed by use of a linear mixed-effect regression model. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03185065 and is closed. FINDINGS: Between Oct 4, 2017, and Feb 27, 2019, of 169 patients screened, 141 patients were enrolled and randomly assigned to one of four medication administration sequences: 35 (25%) patients to the amantadine, placebo, modafinil, and methylphenidate sequence; 34 (24%) patients to the placebo, methylphenidate, amantadine, and modafinil sequence; 35 (25%) patients to the modafinil, amantadine, methylphenidate, and placebo sequence; and 37 (26%) patients to the methylphenidate, modafinil, placebo, and amantadine sequence. Data from 136 participants were available for the intention-to-treat analysis of the primary outcome. The estimated mean values of MFIS total scores at baseline and the maximal tolerated dose were as follows: 51.3 (95% CI 49.0-53.6) at baseline, 40.6 (38.2-43.1) with placebo, 41.3 (38.8-43.7) with amantadine, 39.0 (36.6-41.4) with modafinil, and 38.6 (36.2-41.0) with methylphenidate (p=0.20 for the overall medication effect in the linear mixed-effect regression model). As compared with placebo (38 [31%] of 124 patients), higher proportions of participants reported adverse events while taking amantadine (49 [39%] of 127 patients), modafinil (50 [40%] of 125 patients), and methylphenidate (51 [40%] of 129 patients). Three serious adverse events occurred during the study (pulmonary embolism and myocarditis while taking amantadine, and a multiple sclerosis exacerbation requiring hospital admission while taking modafinil). INTERPRETATION: Amantadine, modafinil, and methylphenidate were not superior to placebo in improving multiple sclerosis fatigue and caused more frequent adverse events. The results of this study do not support an indiscriminate use of amantadine, modafinil, or methylphenidate for the treatment of fatigue in multiple sclerosis. FUNDING: Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute.
Methylphenidate is a useful, proven method for the effective treatment of minimal brain dysfunction (MBD). Dosage should be titrated individually for each patient, and it is best to start with small doses given at least 15 to 30 minutes before meals. Toxicity, side effects, and drug abuse are not major problems. Unfortunately it is not yet possible to determine in advance who will and will not benefit from drug therapy; not all patients do. Treatment of MBD requires a multidisciplinary approach, for no one discipline alone can satisfactorily solve the problems involved. We believe, however, that medicine is the primary therapy in most instances.
Methylphenidate is the first-line pharmacological treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Although methylphenidate has a well-established evidence base for treating ADHD, its long-term benefits are unclear. Areas covered: Physical adverse effects, psychiatric adverse events and brain development Expert opinion: Some physical adverse events have been described (e.g. sleep disturbances, growth reduction, loss of appetite), although most are of transient nature. Psychiatric adverse events seem more related to the diagnosis ADHD itself, and not stimulant treatment. Concluding, short-to-mid-term use (i.e., up to 2 years) stimulants are relatively safe, but much less is known about longer-term efficacy and safety of these drugs.
Growth deficit associated with stimulants in children who have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has long been the subject of scientific discussion. More recent studies describe the effects on the final height of children with ADHD who are treated with methylphenidate (MPH) as only slight. There are only a handful of reports of severe growth deficits attributed to MPH that are associated with gastrointestinal side effects. We describe a 10-year-old boy with ADHD and chronic asthma who underwent corticosteroid therapy and developed an almost complete growth arrest during MPH treatment. Growth hormone (GH) stimulation tests and measurement of GH-dependent growth factors point to the influence of MPH on GH secretion with subsequent impaired growth. One may conclude that some children are at risk of serious growth decrement when treated with MPH. The growth of children should thus be monitored carefully, even if there are no alarming gastrointestinal side effects from MPH. We found that the determination of growth velocity was a sensitive marker for the evaluation of growth impairment in our patient.
Methylphenidate (Ritalin) is a commonly used central nervous stimulant. It has been used in various neurological conditions, including attention deficit disorder, depression, and narcolepsy. Methylphenidate has been advocated in patients with traumatic brain injury and stroke for a variety of cognitive, attention, and behavioral problems. It also has been shown to speed recovery from poststroke depression so that patients can participate more fully in rehabilitation programs. Research suggests that it also may have a role in augmenting activity of injured neuronal tissue in the comatose patient, thus facilitating a return to consciousness. The neuroscience nurse plays an important role in monitoring response to Ritalin, including identifying its side effects. A review of the limited studies on the use of Ritalin, its mechanisms of action, dosing, and weaning provide a current understanding of this adjunctive agent's role in treatment for the neurological population.
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common condition during childhood that is associated with significant psychosocial dysfunction. Psychostimulants are the compounds that have been most extensively studied for the treatment of ADHD in children. There is substantial scientific evidence that several methylphenidate- and amphetamine-based preparations have acute efficacy in the treatment of this condition in children. The short-term safety and tolerability of these compounds has been reasonably well-studied and the risks associated with psychostimulant therapy in the short-term are generally acceptable. However, the amount of long-term effectiveness and safety data relating to these compounds is relatively small. Data that do exist suggest that long-term treatment with psychostimulants in appropriately diagnosed patients may be associated with salutary effects as well as relatively modest risks. Until more extensive, methodologically rigorous data are available, it appears that judicious psychostimulant pharmacotherapy of ADHD in children may be justified.
Methylphenidate (MPH) is mainly used for treatment of the attention-deficit hyperactivity syndrome (ADHS). Non-medical use of methylphenidate as recreational drug or performance enhancer has increased in recent years. Methylphenidate is also misused in combination with other drugs. Patients with ADHD are also at risk to misuse their prescribed methylphenidate medication. Oral and nasal abuse of methylphenidate is most common and is in general associated with minor or moderate sympathomimetic toxicity. In contrast, severe toxicity has been reported for both intravenous and intraarterial administration of crushed methylphenidate tablets.
QUESTION: An 18-year-old patient of mine, currently under treatment for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with methylphenidate, just found out that she is pregnant. What are the risks for the baby when the mother uses ADHD medications during pregnancy? ANSWER: Available evidence for amphetamines suggests no increased risk of malformations with use of therapeutic doses, and inadvertent exposure during pregnancy is unlikely to be harmful. Human data for methylphenidate and atomoxetine treatment in pregnancy are very limited. Documented cases do not suggest teratogenicity, but we cannot rule out this risk with the information available.
Methylphenidate (MPH) is the most commonly used and best-studied stimulant medication for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. However, its short duration of action usually results in a requirement to administer multiple daily doses in order to achieve optimal clinical benefit. Although a wax-matrix-based SR formulation of MPH has been available since the 1990s, it was not well accepted into clinical practice. The variable absorption profile and lack of an immediate-release component results in a slower onset of action compared with immediate-release MPH. Hence, there was a need to develop alternative longer-lasting preparations of MPH that were as efficacious as IR MPH, but which also addressed the problems inherent in multiple daily dosing. An osmotic, controlled-release (OROS) formulation of MPH HCl has been developed over the past 10 years for once-daily administration. OROS MPH has been widely accepted by clinicians and is now the most widely prescribed MPH product in North America. Clinical trials have shown OROS MPH to have a continued action over a 12-h period, to be superior to placebo and to be as effective as immediate-release MPH dosed three times daily, in reducing symptoms of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, with similar incidence of side effects. There have been a smaller number of trials comparing OROS MPH with non-stimulant treatments, such as atomoxetine.
The methylphenidate transdermal system (MTS) patch is approved by the US FDA for use in children aged 6-12 years with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This delivery system permits sustained absorption of the drug through the skin and into the bloodstream. Methylphenidate (MPH) is a CNS agent thought to act on dopamine and noradrenaline (norepinephrine) pathways and thereby blocks the reuptake of these neurotransmitters into the presynaptic neuron. In children with ADHD, MTS patches releasing MPH doses of 10-30 mg over a 9-hour period (12.5-37.5 cm2 patch size) is steadily absorbed, with mean peak plasma concentrations of d-MPH (20-46.5 ng/mL) reached in approximately 8 hours. In well controlled trials in children with ADHD, patients administered MTS patches releasing MPH 10-30 mg over approximately 9 hours showed significantly greater improvements in their ADHD symptoms than placebo recipients. MTS patches are generally well tolerated in paediatric patients with ADHD, with treatment-emergent events being similar in nature to those reported with oral MPH. The majority of adverse events were mild to moderate in intensity.
IMPORTANCE: Stimulants (methylphenidate and amphetamines) are often prescribed at unlicensed doses for adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Whether dose escalation beyond US Food and Drug Administration recommendations is associated with positive risk benefits is unclear. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the impact, based on averages, of stimulant doses on treatment outcomes in adults with ADHD and to determine, based on averages, whether unlicensed doses are associated with positive risk benefits compared with licensed doses. DATA SOURCES: Twelve databases, including published (PubMed, Cochrane Library, Embase, Web of Sciences) and unpublished (ClinicalTrials.gov) literature, up to February 22, 2023, without language restrictions. STUDY SELECTION: Two researchers independently screened records to identify double-blinded randomized clinical trials of stimulants against placebo in adults (18 years and older) with ADHD. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Aggregate data were extracted and synthesized in random-effects dose-response meta-analyses and network meta-analyses. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Change in ADHD symptoms and discontinuations due to adverse events. RESULTS: A total of 47 randomized clinical trials (7714 participants; mean age, 35 (SD, 11) years; 4204 male [56%]) were included. For methylphenidate, dose-response curves indicated additional reductions of symptoms with increments in doses, but the gains were progressively smaller and accompanied by continued additional risk of adverse events dropouts. Network meta-analyses showed that unlicensed doses were associated with greater reductions of symptoms compared with licensed doses (standardized mean difference [SMD], -0.23; 95% CI, -0.44 to -0.02; very low certainty of evidence), but the additional gain was small and accompanied by increased risk of adverse event dropouts (odds ratio, 2.02; 95% CI, 1.19-3.43; moderate certainty of evidence). For amphetamines, the dose-response curve approached a plateau and increments in doses did not indicate additional reductions of symptoms, but there were continued increments in the risk of adverse event dropouts. Network meta-analysis did not identify differences between unlicensed and licensed doses for reductions of symptoms (SMD, -0.08; 95% CI, -0.24 to 0.08; very low certainty of evidence). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Based on group averages, unlicensed doses of stimulants may not have positive risk benefits compared with licensed doses for adults with ADHD. In general, practitioners should consider unlicensed doses cautiously. Practitioners may trial unlicensed doses if needed and tolerated but should be aware that there may not be large gains in the response to the medication with those further increments in dose. However, the findings are averages and will not generalize to every patient.
OBJECTIVE: To test the effects of a standard dosage of the psychostimulant methylphenidate (MPH) - which significantly enhances intracortical inhibition but had no effects on intracortical facilitation in children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) - on intracortical excitability in healthy subjects. METHOD: In 12 healthy subjects, aged 20-40 years, intracortical inhibition and facilitation were investigated before and 70 min after the intake of 10 mg MPH using the technique of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) with the paired-stimulus paradigm. RESULTS: In comparison of the two TMS measurements, a significant enhancement in intracortical facilitation but no effects on intracortical inhibition could be stated under MPH administration. CONCLUSION: This study provides first evidence for opposite effects of MPH on intracortical excitability in healthy adult subjects showing enhanced intracortical facilitation in contrast to ADHD children in whom enhanced intracortical inhibition has recently been shown.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common neurobehavioral disorder of childhood, and congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common form of birth defect. Children with CHD are at increased risk for neurodevelopmental disorders such as ADHD. Stimulant medications, specifically methylphenidates and amphetamines, are frequently prescribed and effective in reducing the symptoms of ADHD. Despite their efficacy and long history of use, the safety of these medications has recently come into question due to isolated reports describing sudden unexplained death of children undergoing treatment. This review summarizes the current literature on the cardiovascular risks associated with the use of pharmacologic therapy for ADHD, with an emphasis on patients who had CHD.
The psychostimulant dl-methylphenidate (MPH) remains the most common drug therapy in child and adolescent psychiatry for the treatment of attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Evidence of a dopaminergic basis both for the actions of MPH and for the underlying neuropathology in ADHD continues to mount. Advances in the biopharmaceutics of MPH have been conspicuous. Novel approaches to formulation design have resulted in new MPH delivery options to overcome the short-term actions of both immediate-and sustained-release MPH. New modified-release MPH products offer the convenience of once-daily administration while providing extended absorption profiles that better mimic those of standard schedules of immediate-release MPH (i.e., the absorption phase of MPH better correlates with improved behavioral response than does the elimination phase). The oral bioavailability of MPH in females may be lower than in males. The l-MPH isomer exhibits only negligible oral bioavailability and, further, possesses little intrinsic activity at the dopamine transporter. This notwithstanding, a single-isomer d-MPH immediate-release product is now available for dosing recommended at one-half that of dl-MPH.
BACKGROUND: The process underlying the integration of perception and action is a focal topic in neuroscientific research and cognitive frameworks such as the theory of event coding have been developed to explain the mechanisms of perception-action integration. The neurobiological underpinnings are poorly understood. While it has been suggested that the catecholaminergic system may play a role, there are opposing predictions regarding the effects of catecholamines on perception-action integration. METHODS: Methylphenidate (MPH) is a compound commonly used to modulate the catecholaminergic system. In a double-blind, randomized crossover study design, we examined the effect of MPH (0.25 mg/kg) on perception-action integration using an established "event file coding" paradigm in a group of n = 45 healthy young adults. RESULTS: The data reveal that, compared with the placebo, MPH attenuates binding effects based on the established associations between stimuli and responses, provided participants are already familiar with the task. However, without prior task experience, MPH did not modulate performance compared with the placebo. CONCLUSIONS: Catecholamines and learning experience interactively modulate perception-action integration, especially when perception-action associations have to be reconfigured. The data suggest there is a gain control-based mechanism underlying the interactive effects of learning/task experience and catecholaminergic activity during perception-action integration.
The use of psychostimulants to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has been controversial for a number of reasons. In an effort to clarify the extent to which the psychostimulant methylphenidate has abuse potential, the existing published evidence has been reviewed and is summarized here, with an emphasis on delineating a number of related but independent issues that are often confused. Methylphenidate produces behavioral effects associated with abuse potential as assessed by traditional assays, but the relevance of this literature to the clinical use of the drug in the treatment of ADHD is ambiguous at best. Existing neuropharmacologic data suggest that methylphenidate has pharmacokinetic properties that reduce its abuse potential as compared with other stimulant drugs of abuse, such as cocaine.
Noven Pharmaceuticals is developing a transdermal patch formulation of methylphenidate for the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) [325808]. Phase III trials were completed in February 2002 [438893]; at this time, the company predicted a 2003 launch for the product [441478]. In April 2002, based on pivotal phase III trial results, Noven expected to file an NDA with the FDA in mid-2002 and to launch the product in the second half of 2003 [445181]. In June 2002, the NDA was filed [456552]. The original phase III trials were completed in the first quarter of 2001 [407254]. However, preliminary analysis of the phase III trial, reported in April 2001, suggested that a supplemental study would be required to support the filing [403771]. At this time, an NDA filing, originally planned for the second quarter of 2001, was rescheduled for the first half of 2002 [400122], [407640], [410285], [441478]. As of August 2001, the supplemental study was expected to begin in autumn of that year [417877]. In October 2001, enrolment was initiated in Noven's pivotal, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter phase III study of MethyPatch [427321], and it was completed in February 2002 [438893]. In May 2001, the company was issued patent US-06210705 relating to the transdermal delivery of methylphenidate for the treatment of ADHD [410285]. In June 2001, ABN AMRO predicted sales of US $61 million in 2002, rising to US $74 million in 2005 [422762]. Analysts at Morgan Stanley predicted in May 2002 that the product would make US sales of US $9.1 million in 2003, rising to US $22.5 million in 2006 [454573].
Stimulant medication and behavioral treatments are evidence-based for children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, but the combination of the 2 treatments has been understudied. In this investigation, methylphenidate (MPH) was crossed with 2 levels of behavior modification (BMOD) in a summer treatment program. Twenty-seven children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, aged 6-12, participated. Children received placebo and 3 doses of transdermal MPH (12.5 cm(2), 25.0 cm(2), and 37.5 cm(2)). BMOD was implemented on alternating weeks. Both treatments produced large and significant effects. Combined treatment was superior to either treatment alone. The effects of transdermal MPH were comparable to those found in this setting in previous studies with multiple stimulant medications and formulations. Consistent with other research, low doses of MPH--even lower than in previous studies--yielded enhanced effects in combination with behavior modification.
