Over the past four decades, a great deal has been learned about the pharmacology and mechanisms of action of antithyroid drugs. Their ability to inhibit hormone biosynthesis involves complex interactions with thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin, many of which are still poorly understood. Their spectrum of activity is much wider than previously thought, and a number of clinically important extrathyroidal actions have been identified. Despite a greater appreciation for the intricacies of antithyroid-drug pharmacology, controversies still surround the use of these agents in the treatment of thyrotoxicosis. These controversies are apt to continue until the pathophysiology of Graves' disease is fully elucidated.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To bring to the attention of healthcare professionals the additional information on propylthiouracil (PTU)-related hepatotoxicity, based on a reanalysis of medical files reported to the Food and Drug Administration (1982-2008) for acute liver failure in PTU-treated hyperthyroid patients, and propose recommendations for the clinical use of PTU. Thirteen files of PTU-related severe liver adverse effects were analyzed for the pediatric population, seventeen for nonpregnant adults and two for pregnant women. RECENT FINDINGS: The recent findings showed that the daily PTU dose administered was high in the children, with a mean of 300 mg/day for an average 10-year-old individual. With regard to treatment duration, PTU administration lasted for at least 4 months in 75% of pediatric cases. Similarly, in a majority of adult cases (64%), PTU-induced liver injury occurred after a relatively long treatment period (4 months to >1 year). SUMMARY: PTU should not be used in children, in whom methimazole (MMI) represents the logical alternative. In adults, PTU should be restricted to those rare patients with Graves' disease for whom no better alternative can be offered and in patients with thyroid storm. For the special circumstance of pregnancy, PTU is the preferred choice during early gestation; switching back to MMI during later gestational stages remains a matter of clinical judgment. It is unknown whether liver function tests monitoring is worthwhile to prevent life-threatening, PTU-related hepatotoxicity.
Anti-thyroid drugs are widely used to treat diffuse toxic goiter (Graves' disease). Of the two drugs currently available in the United States, propylthiouracil is prescribed far more often than is methimazole (Tapazole). However, compared with propylthiouracil, methimazole can be given as a single daily dose, is cheaper, and, at low doses, is associated with less major toxicity; for these reasons, methimazole should be used for the routine management of Graves' disease when anti-thyroid drugs are selected as primary therapy. On the other hand, because of certain pharmacologic factors, propylthiouracil should be used in selected situations, particularly in patients with "thyroid storm" and in pregnant or lactating women.
Antithyroid arthritis syndrome is a constellation of symptoms of myalgia, arthralgia, arthritis, fever and rash associated with the use of antithyroid medications. We report a case of a patient with severe hyperthyroidism likely secondary to Graves' disease who presented with the abovementioned symptoms after being treated with methimazole (antithyroid medication). Our aim is to increase awareness regarding this uncommon but disabilitating and life-threatening adverse effect of antithyroid medications among clinicians. We also discuss the proposed pathophysiology for this immunological reaction as well as management options in these patients.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this meta-analysis was to assess the safety of the anti-thyroid drugs (ATDs) propylthiouracil (PTU) and methimazole (MMI) in the treatment of hyperthyroidism during pregnancy. METHOD: From inception until June 2, 2022, all available studies were searched in PubMed, Web of Science, Cochrane, EBSCO, Embase, Scopus, and CNKI. RESULT: Thirteen articles satisfying the inclusion criteria were examined. Our meta-analysis indicated that pregnant women treated with MMI had a higher risk of congenital anomalies than those treated with PTU (OR 0.80, 95%CI 0.69-0.92, P = 0.002, I2 = 41.9%). Shifting between MMI and PTU during pregnancy did not reduce the risk of birth defects compared to PTU alone (OR 1.18, CI 1.00 to 1.40, P = 0.061, I2 = 0.0%). There were no statistically significant differences in hepatotoxicity (OR 1.54, 95%CI 0.77-3.09, P = 0.221, I2 = 0.0%) or miscarriage (OR 0.89, 95%CI 0.72-1.11, P = 0.310, I2 = 0.0%) between PTU and MMI exposure. CONCLUSION: The study confirmed propylthiouracil is a safer alternative to methimazole for treating hyperthyroidism in pregnant women, and it is appropriate to treat maternal thyroid disease with PTU during the first trimester of pregnancy. However, it is not clear whether switching between propylthiouracil and methimazole is a better option than treating PTU alone during pregnancy. Further studies on this matter may be needed to develop new evidence-based guidelines for the treatment of pregnant women with hyperthyroidism.
Antithyroid drugs (ATDs) are widely used for the treatment of Graves' disease (GD) in the general population. Over the past decade, there has been an increasing awareness that several disturbances of thyroid function may occur in mothers after delivery which may be more prevalent than previously appreciated. Exacerbation of immune reactions occurs 3-12 month following delivery. Management of hyperthyroidism during lactation requires special considerations and should be implemented to prevent any adverse outcomes in mother and neonate. Continuation of breastfeeding is safe and should be encouraged in hyperthyroid mothers taking ATDs, whether these are ATDs being continued after gestation or indeed ATD treatment initiated in the postpartum period. Given PTU hepatotoxicity concerns, experts currently recommend using low-to-moderate MMI doses as a first-line therapy in lactating mothers. PTU should be reserved only as a second-line agent for cases of severe hyperthyroidism (thyroid storm) and allergic reactions to previous MMI treatment. ATD should be administered in divided doses immediately following each feeding. Evaluation of thyroid function tests is advisable at least 3-4 weeks after the initiation of breastfeeding.
Objective: The present study aimed to investigate the adverse effects of the antithyroid drugs propylthiouracil (PTU) and methimazole (MMI)/carbimazole (CMZ) in treating hyperthyroidism. Methods: Qualitative analysis was performed for studies identified in a literature search up to April 20, 2019, and 30 studies were selected for meta-analysis. The study designs included case-control, randomized controlled, and retrospective cohort. Patients were in four age groups: childhood, gestating mothers, older adults, and other ages, and all were receiving PTU or MMI/CMZ. Adverse reactions to MMI/CMZ and PTU were evaluated and compared. Results: Odds of liver function injury were higher in the PTU group than in the MMI/CMZ group (odds ratio [OR], 2.40; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.16 to 4.96; P = .02). Odds of elevated transaminase were much higher in the PTU group than in the MMI/CMZ group (OR, 3.96; 95% CI, 2.49 to 6.28; P<.00001). No significant between-group differences were found in odds of elevated bilirubin, agranulocytosis, rash, or urticaria; incidence of other adverse events; or in children. Odds of birth defects during the first trimester of pregnancy were higher in the MMI/CMZ group than in the PTU group (OR, 1.29; 95% CI, 1.09 to 1.53; P = .003). Conclusion: The impact of PTU on liver injury and transaminase levels is greater than that of MMI/CMZ, but no significant between-group differences are found in the drugs' effects on bilirubin, agranulocytosis and rash, urticaria, or in children. In treating pregnancy-related hyperthyroidism, PTU should be used in the first trimester and MMI reserved for use in late pregnancy. Abbreviations: ALT = alanine aminotransferase; ATD = antithyroid drug; CI = confidence interval; CMZ = carbimazole; GD = Graves disease; MMI = methimazole; MTU = methylthiouracil; NOS = Newcastle-Ottawa Scale; OR = odds ratio; PTU = propylthiouracil; RAI = radioactive iodine.
Thionamide antithyroid drugs (ATD) are the treatment of choice for Graves' hyperthyroidism. The major drawback of ATD treatment for 1-2 years is the relapse of hyperthyroidism in about 50% of patients. Recently, it has been shown that ATD treatment for more than five years is accompanied by long-term remission in majority of patients without additional major side effects in both adults and children. Compared to radioactive iodine therapy, long-term ATD results in more favorable outcomes. This review summarizes the evidence on long-term ATD therapy regarding the remission rate of hyperthyroidism, efficacy and safety, indications and mode of therapy in patients with hyperthyroidism.
Methimazole (MMI) is a widely used antithyroid drug, but it can cause hepatotoxicity by unknown mechanisms. Previous studies showed that the hepatic metabolism of MMI produces N-methylthiourea, leading to liver damage. However, the specific enzyme responsible for the production of the toxic metabolite N-methylthiourea is still unclear. In this study, we screened cytochromes P450 (CYPs) in N-methylthiourea production from MMI. CYP2A6 was identified as the key enzyme in catalyzing MMI metabolism to produce N-methylthiourea. When mice were pretreated with a CYP2A6 inhibitor, formation of N-methylthiourea from MMI was remarkably reduced. Consistently, the CYP2A6 inhibitor prevented MMI-induced hepatotoxicity. These results demonstrated that CYP2A6 is essential in MMI bioactivation and hepatotoxicity.
DIAGNOSIS: The diagnosis of Graves' disease is mainly based on ultrasonography and laboratory diagnostics. This includes the determination of the TSH value and the peripheral thyroid hormones. TSH receptor antibody (TRAb) measurement is highly sensitive and specific for the detection of Graves' disease (GD) and helps to distinguish from autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT). However, as recent studies show, some may AIT patients may also reveal TRAb. THERAPY: Current guidelines recommend primarily the use of thiamazol/carbimazole in GD. Due to the comparatively higher hepatotoxicity, propylthiouracil is not recommended as first line therapy. In case of relapse during 12 up to 18 months of antithyroid drug therapy or after a frustrating attempt at cessation, definitive therapy should be considered. Alternatively, in accordance with the current recommendations of the European Thyroid Association, drug therapy may be continued for up to 12 months after initial diagnosis. PREGNANCY: The treatment of active GD during pregnancy is problematic due to diaplacental crossing of peripheral thyroid hormones, TSH receptor stimulating antibodies and antithyroid drugs. According to current guidelines, PTU is recommended during the first 16 weeks of pregnancy, whereas for the 2nd and 3 rd trimester no special recommendations are given. After that, you can choose which antithyroid drug might be used. The aim of antithyroid drug therapy during pregnancy is to achieve a suppressed TSH value together with normal or slightly increased fT4 while using lowest effective dose of antithyroid drug. IMMUNE CHECKPOINT INHIBITORS (ICI): The most common endocrine side effect with this therapy is thyroid dysfunction. Hyperthyroidism; occur most frequently in combination therapy (CTLA-4 / anti-PD-1 therapy) ICI mainly causes destructive thyroiditis with lymphocytic infiltration; GD is absolutely rare in this context and only few cases are described.
The paper deals with agranulocytosis as one of the side effects of methimazole. The analysis of 7 cases allows some conclusions in respect to prevention, early detection and treatment of this rare but serious complication.
Functional thyropathies present significant health risks for patients. Advanced functional thyropathies are always treated while indications for therapy of subclinical thyropathies are individual and often controversial. It is widely agreed that these disorders should be diagnosed and individuals should be followed. The drug of choice in substitution therapy of hypothyroidism is levothyroxine, in the treatment of hyperthyroidism it is methimazole. Administration of propylthiouracil should be limited to the first trimester of pregnancy, because its serious hepatotoxicity has been described. Hyperthyroidism based on thyroid nodules and immunogenic hyperthyroidism not reaching long-term remission, need to be treated radically: by surgery or radioiodine treatment. When radiation protection requirements are met, radioiodine can also be administered on an outpatient basis. Exceptionally, small doses of methimazole can be administered over an extended period of time in individual cases.
The typical propylthiouracil (PTU)-linked hepatotoxicity, is known to manifest itself by hepatocellular injury with greatly increased serum transaminase values and evidence of hepatic necrosis on liver biopsy. Herewith presented is a 33-year old, thyrotoxic woman who developed cholestatic jaundice two weeks after initiation of PTU therapy. The diagnosis was confirmed by liver biopsy. A causal link between PTU treatment and the cholestatic jaundice was suggested by: the time of onset, typical skin rash and a positive migration inhibition factor (MIF) test to PTU. Awareness of this rare complication of PTU treatment may prevent the performance of unnecessary, expensive and possibly harmful diagnostic procedures.
Graves' disease is characterized by hyperthyroidism, diffuse goitre, ophthalmopathy and, rarely, dermopathy. Although diagnostic testing is straightforward once Graves' disease is suspected, physicians need to be aware of heterogeneous and even atypical presentations of the disease, particularly in elderly patients. Because morbidity may be associated with even subtle forms of hyperthyroidism, treatment promoting long-term euthyroidism is necessary. Although all of the available treatments are effective, compliance is best assured by a full discussion of the risks and benefits of each approach. This review focuses on issues of diagnosis and management that will allow the primary care physician to identify patients with Graves' disease and guide them to recovery.
The authors review the current knowledge of fetus and woman thyroid physiology during pregnancy. They analyze the abnormalities related to hyperthyroidism, and clinical and therapeutic aspects of thyrotoxicosis; in detail possible fetal complications. They suggest the practical management of thyrotoxicosis during pregnancy.
A 49-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital with weight loss of 15 kg, nephrotic-range proteinuria (4.5 g/g.Cre), and hematuria over a 6-month period. She had received two doses of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccine one year before the onset of the disease, after which the estimated glomerular filtration rate increased. Laboratory tests and other tests led to a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism, and a kidney biopsy showed thrombotic microangiopathy-like glomerular microangiopathy comprising mainly glomerular endothelial cell damage. Thiamazole (30 mg) was started for the hyperthyroidism. Three months later, the thyroid function normalized, and two months later, the proteinuria and hematuria disappeared, suggesting that COVID-19 vaccination and these events were related.
Because of the low frequency of childhood Graves' disease, detailed evidence-based clinical studies have not been reported. Practical clinical work has been performed on the basis of adult clinical references. Therapeutic management includes antithyroid drugs, surgical thyroidectomy and radiologic therapy. Recently in the U.S.A. radiotherapy has become the recommended course of action, even for childhood Graves' disease, whereas in Japan, antithyroid drug therapy is the primary course of action for childhood Graves' disease. In some cases, thyroidectomy is performed following drug therapy. Methimazole (MMI) and propylthiouracil (PTU) have been used, however, MMI is the preferred drug treatment. Compared to PTU, MMI is administered once a day and the frequency of side effects is lower than that of PTU. Evaluation of the TSH receptor antibody value before administration of antithyroid drugs is very useful in estimating the duration of the treatment. No appropriate index has been established guiding when to quit antithyroid drug therapy.
Radioiodine therapy is now the most common definite treatment for persistent hyperthyroidism. The outcome of radioiodine therapy depends mainly on the absorbed energy dose in the diseased thyroid tissue. The administered activity and the resulting target dose in the thyroid depend on both the biokinetics of radioiodine and the actual therapeutic effect of radioiodine in the thyroid. Thyrostatic drugs have a major influence on the kinetics of radioiodine in the thyroid and may additionally have a radioprotective effect. Pre-treatment with thyrostatic medication lowers the effective half-life and uptake of radioiodine. This can reduce the target dose in the thyroid and have a negative influence on the outcome of the therapy. Discontinuation of medication shortly before radioiodine administration can increase the absorbed energy dose in the thyroid without increasing the whole-body exposure to radiation as much as would a higher or second radioiodine administration. Furthermore, administration of non-radioactive iodine-127 2-3 days after radioiodine administration can also increase the effective half-life of radioiodine in the thyroid. Thus, improving the biokinetics of radioiodine will allow lower activities to be administered with lower effective doses to the rest of the body, while achieving an equally effective target dose in the thyroid.
In the treatment of pregnant patients with Graves' disease, propylthiouracil is preferred over methimazole in early pregnancy because of a possible teratogenicity of methimazole. Methimazole is preferable to propylthiouracil in other time of pregnancy on the basis of severe liver dysfunction occasionally caused by propylthiouracil. Fetal hypothyroidism can be avoided when maternal free T4 levels are maintained at or above the upper normal limit for non-pregnant subjects. However, maternal free T4 should be kept normal for pregnant reference range when pregnancy complications develop. Fetal hypothyroidism in this setting will not affect the infant's development as long as mothers are euthyroid and the infants recover from hypothyroid state within a short time after birth. In hypothyroid women, 1-T4 dose often needs to be increased in pregnancy. Maternal T4 deficiency in early pregnancy has been suggested to affect normal brain development in the offspring. However, it has recently been shown in iodine rich area that no adverse effect on neuropsychological development was seen irrespective of the severity of maternal T4 deficiency. Insufficient iodine intake in the mother can cause low T4 in pregnancy and also inadequate production of T4 in breast-fed infants when sufficient T4 is essential for normal brain development.
PURPOSE: In Graves' disease, administration of low-dose methimazole for more than 60 months induces higher remission rates compared with the conventional duration of 12-18 months. However, the risk of recurrence and its predictors beyond 48 months of drug withdrawal are not known. The aims of this study were to determine the risk of recurrence during 84 months after withdrawal of short- or long-term methimazole therapy and a risk stratification for recurrence of hyperthyroidism. METHODS: A total of 258 patients were treated with methimazole for a median of 18 months and randomized to discontinuation of the drug(conventional short-term group; n = 128) or continuation of the treatment up to 60-120 months(long-term group; n = 130). Patients were followed for 84 months after methimazole withdrawal. Cox proportional hazards modeling was performed to identify factors associated with relapse and develop a risk-scoring model at the time of discontinuing the treatment. RESULTS: Hyperthyroidism recurred in 67 of 120(56%) of conventionally-treated patients versus 20 of 118(17%) of those who received long-term methimazole treatment, p < 0.001. Age, sex, goiter grade, triiodothyronine, thyrotropin, and thyrotropin receptor antibodies were significant predictors of recurrence in both "conventional" and "long-term" groups but free thyroxine just in the "long-term" group. The risk-scoring model had a good discrimination power (optimism corrected c-index = 0.78,95%CI = 0.73-0.82) with a range of 0-14 and sensitivity of 86% and specificity of 62% at the risk-score of eight. CONCLUSION: A relapse-free state was achieved in 83% of patients with Graves' hyperthyroidism 84 months after cessation of long-term methimazole treatment which could be predicted by some significant predictors in a simple risk-scoring system.
