IMPORTANCE: Diltiazem, a commonly prescribed ventricular rate-control medication for patients with atrial fibrillation, inhibits apixaban and rivaroxaban elimination, possibly causing overanticoagulation. OBJECTIVE: To compare serious bleeding risk for new users of apixaban or rivaroxaban with atrial fibrillation treated with diltiazem or metoprolol. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This retrospective cohort study included Medicare beneficiaries aged 65 years or older with atrial fibrillation who initiated apixaban or rivaroxaban use and also began treatment with diltiazem or metoprolol between January 1, 2012, and November 29, 2020. Patients were followed up to 365 days through November 30, 2020. Data were analyzed from August 2023 to February 2024. EXPOSURES: Diltiazem and metoprolol. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was a composite of bleeding-related hospitalization and death with recent evidence of bleeding. Secondary outcomes were ischemic stroke or systemic embolism, major ischemic or hemorrhagic events (ischemic stroke, systemic embolism, intracranial or fatal extracranial bleeding, or death with recent evidence of bleeding), and death without recent evidence of bleeding. Hazard ratios (HRs) and rate differences (RDs) were adjusted for covariate differences with overlap weighting. RESULTS: The study included 204 155 US Medicare beneficiaries, of whom 53 275 received diltiazem and 150 880 received metoprolol. Study patients (mean [SD] age, 76.9 [7.0] years; 52.7% female) had 90 927 person-years (PY) of follow-up (median, 120 [IQR, 59-281] days). Patients receiving diltiazem treatment had increased risk for the primary outcome (RD, 10.6 [95% CI, 7.0-14.2] per 1000 PY; HR, 1.21 [95% CI, 1.13-1.29]) and its components of bleeding-related hospitalization (RD, 8.2 [95% CI, 5.1-11.4] per 1000 PY; HR, 1.22 [95% CI, 1.13-1.31]) and death with recent evidence of bleeding (RD, 2.4 [95% CI, 0.6-4.2] per 1000 PY; HR, 1.19 [95% CI, 1.05-1.34]) compared with patients receiving metoprolol. Risk for the primary outcome with initial diltiazem doses exceeding 120 mg/d (RD, 15.1 [95% CI, 10.2-20.1] per 1000 PY; HR, 1.29 [95% CI, 1.19-1.39]) was greater than that for lower doses (RD, 6.7 [95% CI, 2.0-11.4] per 1000 PY; HR, 1.13 [95% CI, 1.04-1.24]). For doses exceeding 120 mg/d, the risk of major ischemic or hemorrhagic events was increased (HR, 1.14 [95% CI, 1.02-1.27]). Neither dose group had significant changes in the risk for ischemic stroke or systemic embolism or death without recent evidence of bleeding. When patients receiving high- and low-dose diltiazem treatment were directly compared, the HR for the primary outcome was 1.14 (95% CI, 1.02-1.26). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In Medicare patients with atrial fibrillation receiving apixaban or rivaroxaban, diltiazem was associated with greater risk of serious bleeding than metoprolol, particularly for diltiazem doses exceeding 120 mg/d.
BACKGROUND: Metoprolol is recommended for therapeutic use in multiple cardiovascular conditions, thyroid crisis, and circumscribed choroidal hemangioma. A detailed systematic review on the metoprolol literature would be beneficial to assess all pharmacokinetic parameters in humans and their respective effects on patients with hepatic, renal, and cardiovascular diseases. This review combines all the pharmacokinetic data on metoprolol from various accessible studies, which may assist in clinical decision making. METHODOLOGY: The Google Scholar and PubMed databases were searched to screen articles associated with the clinical pharmacokinetics of metoprolol. The comprehensive literature search retrieved 41 articles including data on plasma concentration-time profiles after intravenous and oral (immediate-release, controlled-release, slow-release, or extended-release) routes of administration, and at least one pharmacokinetic parameter was reported in all studies included. RESULTS: Out of 41 retrieved articles, six were after intravenous and 12 were after oral administration in healthy individuals. The oral studies depict a dose-dependent increase in maximum plasma concentration (C(max)), time to reach maximum plasma concentration (T(max)), and area under the concentration-time curve (AUC). Two studies were conducted in R- and S-enantiomers, in which one study reported the gender differences, depicting greater C(max) and AUC among women, whereas in another study S-metoprolol was found to have higher values of C(max), T(max), and AUC in comparison with R-metoprolol. Results in different diseases depicted that after IV administration of 20 mg, patients with renal impairment showed an increase in clearance (CL) (60 L/h vs 48 L/h) compared with healthy subjects, whereas a decrease in CL (36.6 +/- 7.8 L/h vs 48 +/- 6.6 L/h) was seen in patients with hepatic cirrhosis at a similar dose. In comparison with a single oral dose following administration of 15 mg IV in three divided doses, patients having an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) showed an increase in C(max) (823 nmol/L vs 248 nmol/L) at a steady state. Twenty different studies have reported significant changes in CL, C(max,) and AUC of metoprolol when it is co-administered with other drugs. One study has reported a drug-food interaction for metoprolol but no significant changes were seen in the C(max) and AUC. CONCLUSION: This review summarizes all the pharmacokinetic parameters of metoprolol after pooling up-to-date data from all the studies available. The summarized pharmacokinetic data presented in this review can assist in developing and evaluating pharmacokinetic models of metoprolol. Moreover, this data can provide practitioners with an insight into dosage adjustments among the diseased populations and can assist in preventing potential adverse drug reactions. This review can also help avoid side effects and drug-drug interactions.
BACKGROUND: Intravenous diltiazem and metoprolol are both commonly used to treat atrial fibrillation (AF) with rapid ventricular rate (RVR) in the emergency department (ED), but the advantages and disadvantages of these drugs cannot be verified. This meta-analysis aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of intravenous diltiazem versus metoprolol for AF with RVR. METHOD: We systematically searched PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, Cochrane library, the China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), Wanfang, China Biology Medicine disc (CBM) and the WeiPu (VIP). Meta-analysis was performed using weighted mean difference (WMD), relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). Statistical analysis was performed using Review Manager 5.4.1. RESULTS: Seventeen studies involving 1214 patients in nine randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and eight cohort studies were included in meta-analysis, including 643 patients in the intravenous diltiazem group and 571 patients group in the intravenous metoprolol. The results of the meta-analysis showed that compared with intravenous metoprolol, intravenous diltiazem was found higher efficacy (RR =1.11; 95% CI = 1.06 to 1.16, p < 0.00001), shorter average onset time (RR = -1.13; 95% CI = -1.97 to -0.28, p = 0.009), lower ventricular rate (RR = -9.48; 95% CI = -12.13 to -6.82, p<0.00001), less impact on systolic blood pressure (WMD = 3.76; 95% CI: 0.20 to 7.33, P = 0.04), and no significant difference in adverse events (RR = 0.80, 95% CI = 0.55 to 1.14, P = 0.22) and diastolic blood pressure (WMD = -1.20; 95% CI: -3.43 to 1.04, P = 0.29) was found between intravenous diltiazem and metoprolol. CONCLUSION: Intravenous diltiazem has higher efficacy, shorter average onset time, lower ventricular rate, less impact on blood pressure, and with no increase in adverse events compared to intravenous metoprolol.
Metoprolol CR/ZOK (controlled release, zero order kinetics) is a new formulation of an extensively used beta 1-selective, beta-adrenoceptor blocking drug, (beta 1-blocker), designed to provide continuous, even, plasma concentrations in the therapeutic range. It should, therefore, provide an effective well-tolerated treatment for hypertension and angina pectoris and for use in secondary prevention following a myocardial infarct. The purpose of this review is to consider the need for such a formulation, to describe its pharmaceutical development, review its pharmacology and assess its efficacy and tolerability compared with other available agents.
BACKGROUND: Trials of beta blockers in patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery have reported conflicting results. This randomised controlled trial, done in 190 hospitals in 23 countries, was designed to investigate the effects of perioperative beta blockers. METHODS: We randomly assigned 8351 patients with, or at risk of, atherosclerotic disease who were undergoing non-cardiac surgery to receive extended-release metoprolol succinate (n=4174) or placebo (n=4177), by a computerised randomisation phone service. Study treatment was started 2-4 h before surgery and continued for 30 days. Patients, health-care providers, data collectors, and outcome adjudicators were masked to treatment allocation. The primary endpoint was a composite of cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, and non-fatal cardiac arrest. Analyses were by intention to treat. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00182039. FINDINGS: All 8351 patients were included in analyses; 8331 (99.8%) patients completed the 30-day follow-up. Fewer patients in the metoprolol group than in the placebo group reached the primary endpoint (244 [5.8%] patients in the metoprolol group vs 290 [6.9%] in the placebo group; hazard ratio 0.84, 95% CI 0.70-0.99; p=0.0399). Fewer patients in the metoprolol group than in the placebo group had a myocardial infarction (176 [4.2%] vs 239 [5.7%] patients; 0.73, 0.60-0.89; p=0.0017). However, there were more deaths in the metoprolol group than in the placebo group (129 [3.1%] vs 97 [2.3%] patients; 1.33, 1.03-1.74; p=0.0317). More patients in the metoprolol group than in the placebo group had a stroke (41 [1.0%] vs 19 [0.5%] patients; 2.17, 1.26-3.74; p=0.0053). INTERPRETATION: Our results highlight the risk in assuming a perioperative beta-blocker regimen has benefit without substantial harm, and the importance and need for large randomised trials in the perioperative setting. Patients are unlikely to accept the risks associated with perioperative extended-release metoprolol.
In the last year, two large randomized controlled trials of metoprolol (MIAMI, almost 6,000 patients) and atenolol (ISIS 1, over 16,000 patients) given intravenously within 12 hours of the onset of acute myocardial infarction reduced mortality by about 15% in low-risk subjects. The reduction was significant for atenolol (2P = 0.04) but not for metoprolol, probably because of the smaller size of that trial. The reduction in mortality in both trials was nearly all in the first 36 hours, a finding that reduced the fears that the treatment might produce irreversible failure, shock, or heart block. Tolerance in these relatively low-risk subjects (control mortality about 5%) was good. Inotropes were used in 1-2% more subjects in the beta-blocked group but were effective in reversing the side effects without increasing mortality. No clear subgroups (age, sex, site, time from onset, initial blood pressure or heart rate) were found in which treatment was more beneficial. In the ISIS study, patients with higher heart rates were more likely to need inotropes after beta blockade and patients with long PR intervals at entry were more likely to develop block. Neither of these complications resulted in excess mortality in the blocked group, which suggests that these adverse effects were largely reversible.
Beta-blockers are among the most widely used antihypertensive drugs. They differ from each other in regard to several factors such as: beta-agonist activity, beta 1-selectivity and solubility. Aim of this work was to evaluate the influence of obesity on the kinetics and the antihypertensive effect of two Beta-blockers with different solubility such as: the water-soluble, atenolol and the liposoluble, metoprolol. The study was carried out according to an open randomized cross-over design. Eight obese hypertensive patients, after a two week washout period, were randomly allocated to a four week treatment. After a two week intermediate washout period, each patient switched to the other treatment for an additional four week period. On the first and the last day of each treatment the subjects were hospitalized to collect blood samples for the assay of the two drugs and to measure cardiovascular parameters. Obesity does not exert any effect on the kinetics of the water-soluble beta-blocker, atenolol, while markedly interferes with that of the liposoluble, without any apparent influence on its anti-hypertensive effect. These findings extend to obese hypertensives the concept that the plasma concentrations of beta-blocking agents are not reliable predictors of their therapeutic effect.
Cardiovascular diseases and their treatment pose a great challenge. Many instances of cardiovascular disease occur in the early morning hours. Hence, the objective of this study was to develop a time-controlled release formulation of metoprolol succinate based on a pulsatile multiparticulate (pellets) drug delivery system. The formulation was intended to be administered in the evening at 22:00 hours to evaluate symptoms of cardiovascular disease that are experienced in the early morning hours (from 04:00 to 06:00). Drug layering followed by a swelling layer and finally by an insoluble coat application was done using a Sanmour fluid bed processor. Metoprolol succinate layered on sugar pellets (74% w/w) layered with 20% (w/w) ion doshion resin P-547 and coated with 15% (w/w) ethocel with the addition of 20% castor oil showed a lag time of 4 h and was then followed a sigmoidal release pattern with more than 95% drug having been released by the 10(th) h.
1 A new osmotic pressure mediated delivery system for metoprolol (Lopresor Oros) has been evaluated by measuring the haemodynamic effects and pharmacokinetics after single and multiple oral dosing in young healthy volunteers. 2 Similar studies have been carried out in the same group using equivalent single and multiple oral doses of the commercial slow-release preparation (Slow Lopresor). 3 The new osmotic delivery system produces a more uniform haemodynamic response: a plateau metoprolol concentration in plasma is reached about 6 h after dosing and is maintained for 10 h.
The concentration of the beta-adrenergic blocking agent metoprolol was determined in the blood plasma and aqueous humor after oral administration of the compound. One group (10 cases) was receiving their prescribed continuous therapy and the other group (20 cases) received a single dose of metoprolol. The concentration of metoprolol was usually higher in aqueous than in plasma after continuous administration. This differs significantly from administration of a single dose where the concentration of metoprolol was higher in plasma. The result indicates an ocular accumulation of the drug in chronic systemic treatment.
An acute oral administration of 50 mg metoprolol (a selective beta-1-receptor antagonist) to 18 healthy volunteers induced a significant increase in the peripheral platelet concentration lasting more than 4 h. It is suggested that this increment in the platelet count originates from the exchangeable splenic platelet pool. The mechanism by which metoprolol exerts its effect remains to be established.
In contrast to widely held perceptions regarding tolerability of beta-blockers in heart failure, it is clear that initiation and uptitration is not as complex as perceived. In particular, there is no increased risk of intolerance and/or worsening of heart failure symptoms with initiation of beta-blocker therapy (at least as demonstrated by carvedilol in COPERNICUS). Furthermore, the perceived delay in beneficial effects on outcomes is perhaps challenged by the COPERNICUS study. Interestingly, all of the above observations appear to hold true in patients with advanced disease. Because of the unique history of beta-blockers in systolic heart failure, physicians have needed particular reassurance regarding the tolerability of these agents. Reassurance regarding tolerability has now been definitively provided.
Felodipine, a new antihypertensive calcium antagonist, was compared with metoprolol, a beta-blocker, and hydrochlorothiazide, a diuretic, with respect to glucose tolerance in a randomized double-blind cross-over study consisting of 11 patients, of age range 50-70 years, who had developed diabetes during antihypertensive treatment. Each treatment period lasted for 10 weeks. The blood pressure was similar irrespective of treatment. Serum glucose levels during the oral glucose tolerance test were significantly lower when the patients were treated with felodipine than when they were taking hydrochlorothiazide. Serum insulin levels appeared to decrease at an earlier stage of the test when the patients were treated with felodipine, the calcium antagonist, than with the other two antihypertensive substances, which suggests that glucose tolerance is impaired to a lesser extent during treatment with the calcium antagonist. Glucose tolerance was never completely normalized with any of the drugs tested.
Beta-blockers are frequently administered in therapy of arterial hypertension and coronary heart disease. They mostly lead to an asymptomatic increase of peripheral and coronary resistance. Three patients in whom there were indications of a deterioration of myocardial blood flow under beta-blockade were observed within a few weeks. After discontinuation of the beta-blockers and instituting a therapy with calcium antagonists, both a reduction of ischemia in the exercise ECG and a reduction of symptoms could be observed. The possibility that beta-blockers trigger coronary spasms and thus give rise to unfavorable effects on myocardial blood flow must be considered in the context of therapy monitoring, especially in patients with coronary heart disease.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to compare the complication of Antihypertensive drug; in pregnant women with chronic hypertension. METHOD: This retrospective cohort study was performed on 300 pregnant women  with chronic hypertension. Results:  a relative risk of preeclampsia among methyldopa group was 3.45 times higher than the metoprolol, the relative risk of preterm labor was not significantly between methyldopa and metoprolol group, LBW, and IUGR in methyldopa and amlodipine groups . CONCLUSION: Methyldopa and amlodipine are associated with the least side effects in pregnant women treated for chronic hypertension.the incidence of preeclampsia was greater in methyldopa group.
Ten men reported vasospastic symptoms in their hands during metoprolol treatment. They had no signs of occlusive arterial disease. The temperature reaction to local cooling was measured and no improvement was found after changing to pindolol. Vasospastic symptoms during beta-receptor blockade may arise in predisposed individuals irrespective of the type of beta-receptor antagonist used.
In a randomized cross-over trial the antihypertensive effect of metoprolol given once daily was compared with its effects after twice-daily dosage. Metoprolol given as a single morning dose had a useful antihypertensive effect for 24 hr and may be given in this way for the treatment of hypertension.
Insulin resistance is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Therapies to lower blood pressure should not decrease insulin sensitivity, especially among high-risk patients such as diabetics. This study examined the effect of the beta1-selective adrenergic receptor-blocking agent extended-release metoprolol succinate (ER metoprolol) on insulin sensitivity in type 2 diabetic patients with suboptimal blood pressure control. Diabetic patients with average blood pressure levels >130/85 mm Hg despite antihypertensive therapy had insulin sensitivity quantified by insulin clamp. ER metoprolol was then added to their ongoing therapy. Following 12 weeks of ER metoprolol plus other therapy, the insulin clamp study was repeated. There were no significant changes in measures of insulin sensitivity, plasma lipids, or hemoglobin A1c with use of ER metoprolol. When beta-blocker therapy is considered, it appears that this agent can be used to treat hypertension without adverse effects on insulin sensitivity in patients with type 2 diabetes, at least over the period of time treated.
The antiarrhythmic effect of the cardioselective beta-adrenoreceptor blocking agent metoprolol, given intravenously, was studied in 20 patients with acute supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, including patients with congestive heart failure, acute myocardial infarction and complete bundle branch block. Six patients out of 9 with atrial fibrillation reverted to sinus rhythm. In all patients with atrial tachycardia and 3 out of 4 patients with atrial flutter restoration of sinus rhythm occurred. The drug was well tolerated and is of clinical value for the treatment of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias even in an elderly patient group.
Twenty one patients with either paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (group A), atrial flutter (group B), or atrial fibrillation (group C) were treated with intravenous metoprolol in the dose range 2--20 mg. Sinus rhythm was restored in 3 out of 6 patients in group A, 3 out of 7 patients in group B and one out of 8 patients in group C. In patients who did not convert to sinus rhythm a remarkable decrease in ventricular rate occurred in 3 patients with atrial flutter and 4 patients with atrial fibrillation. In patients with systolic blood pressure greater than 100 mm Hg but without an acute myocardial infarction the risk of hypotension necessitating treatment was small. Metoprolol appears to be an effective and safe drug in the treatment of supraventricular tachycardia.
