Despite major progress in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced emesis, nearly one third of patients undergoing cisplatin-based regimens still experience emesis within the first 24 hours of chemotherapy. An adequate treatment of delayed and anticipatory emesis remains to be determined. For highly emetogenic chemotherapy, the combination of ondansetron and dexamethasone is superior to dexamethasone alone and protects most patients. For moderately emetogenic regimens, the high level of complete control that can be achieved with the use of standard antiemetics is comparable to that obtained with ondansetron. This would suggest that, to reduce the cost of antiemetic therapy, ondansetron can be limited in case of failure of standard therapy. Delayed emesis remains poorly controlled with no difference between metoclopramide, dexamethasone, ondansetron, and placebo. Although some data suggest an improved efficacy when combining ondansetron with dexamethasone, convincing confirmatory studies are needed.
An objective and validated index of nausea and vomiting such as the Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) and HyperEmesis Level Prediction (HELP) tools can be used to classify the severity of NVP and HG. [Grade C] Ketonuria is not an indicator of dehydration and should not be used to assess severity. [Grade A] There are safety and efficacy data for first line antiemetics such as anti (H1) histamines, phenothiazines and doxylamine/pyridoxine (Xonvea(R)) and they should be prescribed initially when required for NVP and HG (Appendix III). [Grade A] There is evidence that ondansetron is safe and effective. Its use as a second line antiemetic should not be discouraged if first line antiemetics are ineffective. Women can be reassured regarding a very small increase in the absolute risk of orofacial clefting with ondansetron use in the first trimester, which should be balanced with the risks of poorly managed HG. [Grade B] Metoclopramide is safe and effective and can be used alone or in combination with other antiemetics. [Grade B] Because of the risk of extrapyramidal effects metoclopramide should be used as second-line therapy. Intravenous doses should be administered by slow bolus injection over at least 3 minutes to help minimise these. [Grade C] Women should be asked about previous adverse reactions to antiemetic therapies. If adverse reactions occur, there should be prompt cessation of the medications. [GPP] Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) with additional potassium chloride in each bag, with administration guided by daily monitoring of electrolytes, is the most appropriate intravenous hydration. [Grade C] Combinations of different drugs should be used in women who do not respond to a single antiemetic. Suggested antiemetics for UK use are given in Appendix III. [GPP] Thiamine supplementation (either oral 100 mg tds or intravenous as part of vitamin B complex (Pabrinex(R))) should be given to all women admitted with vomiting, or severely reduced dietary intake, especially before administration of dextrose or parenteral nutrition. [Grade D] All therapeutic measures should have been tried before considering termination of pregnancy. [Grade C].
Metoclopramide has wide applications in both clinical and experimental medicine. It is useful in the management of gastro-oesophageal reflux and gastric stasis. It is being used increasingly in the management of nausea and vomiting, and at high doses will significantly relieve the emesis that is induced by cytotoxic agents. Metoclopramide also has an important place in the investigation of the role of dopamine in physiological and pathological processes.
Intranasal metoclopramide is a new formulation of an established and effective antiemetic drug. Absorption after intranasal administration was lower than after oral or intravenous administration; otherwise the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic profiles of the intranasal and parenteral formulations were similar. Intranasal and intramuscular metoclopramide showed similar efficacy in the control of acute emesis induced by moderately emetogenic chemotherapy in 12 patients. Intranasal metoclopramide 80mg significantly reduced the frequency of acute vomiting in 43 patients receiving highly emetogenic chemotherapy. A pilot study suggested that intranasal metoclopramide, with or without dexamethasone, may reduce cisplatin-induced delayed emesis. In a randomised crossover trial in 40 patients, intranasal metoclopramide or oral metoclopramide, both with dexamethasone, were equally effective in the control of delayed emesis induced by moderately-emetogenic chemotherapy. One 30 patient study suggests that intranasal metoclopramide has similar efficacy to oral metoclopramide in the treatment of functional dyspepsia. A non-significant trend to reducing postoperative nausea and vomiting has been seen in two trials of intranasal metoclopramide. Intranasal metoclopramide caused minor irritation of the nasal membrane and unpleasant taste in some patients, but was otherwise well tolerated. None of the more serious extrapyramidal effects sometimes associated with metoclopramide were reported.
Since metoclopramide was first described (in 1964) there have been several attempts to develop compounds which retained gastrointestinal prokinetic activity (via 5-HT(4) receptor activation) but without the limiting side effects associated with dopamine D(2) receptor antagonism. Early compounds (mosapride, cisapride, renzapride, tegaserod) were identified before several of the 5-HT receptors were even described (including 5-HT(4) and 5-HT(2B)), whereas prucalopride came later. Several compounds were hampered by non-selectivity, introducing cardiac liability (cisapride: activity at human Ether-a-go-go Related Gene) or potentially, a reduced intestinal prokinetic activity caused by activity at a second 5-HT receptor (renzapride: antagonism at the 5-HT(3) receptor; tegaserod: antagonism at the 5-HT(2B) receptor). Poor intrinsic activity at gastrointestinal 5-HT(4) receptors has also been an issue (mosapride, tegaserod). Perhaps prucalopride has now achieved the profile of good selectivity of action and high intrinsic activity at intestinal 5-HT(4) receptors, without clinically-meaningful actions on 5-HT(4) receptors in the heart. The progress of this compound for treatment of chronic constipation, as well as competitor molecules such as ATI-7505 and TD-5108, will now be followed with interest as each attempts to differentiate themselves from each other. Perhaps at last, 5-HT(4) receptor agonists are being given the chance to show what they can do.
In this review we have looked at the evidence for the pharmacological treatment of lactation deficiency. Five RCTs (n = 166) of metoclopramide found no effect on lactation and two RCTs (n = 26) of older date and lesser quality found significant effect. One RCT (n = 51) of syntocinon found no effect on lactation and two older RCTs (n = 60) of lesser quality found significant effect. Three RCTs (n = 105) found significant effect of domperidone on lactation. Education on breastfeeding is important to avoid the need for pharmacological treatment.
Based on a review of the literature, the authors present the indications for Primperan in paediatrics. The anti-emetic and motor properties of Primperan can be useful in the treatment of gastro-intestinal disorders in infants and children, gastro-duodenal dyskinesia and gastro-oesophageal reflux, but it is also useful for the radiological or endoscopic diagnosis of these conditions and in anaesthetics.
Among drugs recently introduced into Canada for treatment of gastrointestinal disease are carbenoxolone sodium (used in treating gastric ulcer) and metoclopramide hydrochloride (which modifies upper gastrointestinal tract motility). A third drug, lactulose (useful in treating hepatic encephalopathy), will soon be available. Clinical experience with these drugs has been most extensive in Europe. In a new class of agents are histamine H2-receptor antagonists, which are currently under clinical trial. These drugs are the most potent inhibitors of gastric acid secretion yet investigated, and are potentially the most exciting agents to appear in many years. Part I of this paper is a review of the actions, clinical use, side effects, and dosage and administration of these new drugs.
The prokinetic cisapride, an important therapeutic option in functional gastrointestinal (GI) disorders, was withdrawn from the market 15 years ago due to rare severe side effects. Likewise in 2014, the use of metoclopramide (MCP) and domperidone in functional GI disorders (FGID) was restricted, consequently leaving a therapeutic gap in clinical practice. A systematic review revealed that the herbal medicinal product (HMP) STW 5 presents a therapeutic option equivalent to MCP and cisapride. STW 5 is the only HMP for which efficacy has been shown in randomized controlled clinical trials (RCTs) in functional dyspepsia and irritable bowel syndrome, based on its multitarget effect on numerous etiological factors. Due to an outstanding favorable safety profile, STW 5 allows an effective and safe use in FGID without a limitation of the duration of the treatment.
Prokinetic drugs--preparations that stimulate gastro-intestinal motility--constitute a relatively new concept in medical therapy, chiefly represented by the products cisapride and metoclopramide. This review consists in an account of the physiological regulation of motility in the upper gastro-intestinal tract where prokinetic drugs are considered to exert their most significant effect, and the therapeutic effects demonstrable in treatment with these drugs.
Metaclopramide has been observed to induce dramatic relief of intractable hiccup in 14 patients with diverse serious illnesses. When given orally or parenterally the effect was observed within 30 minutes, the relief lasting up to 8 hours, indicating a direct relation to the duration of action of the drug. This drug is recommended for symptomatic relief of hiccup associated even with serious organic illnesses, without any fear of undesirable effects.
Intravenous 5-hydroxytryptamine3 (5-HT3) receptor antagonists are now established antiemetics in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced emesis. For optimal convenience and acceptability, oral therapy is desirable. Retrospective comparisons indicate that oral granisetron may have an efficacy comparable with that of intravenous granisetron. Recent new data are available on the use of granisetron in the prophylaxis of acute emesis in randomized, double-masked trials. After moderately emetogenic chemotherapy, the optimal regimen appears to be 1 mg twice daily, although 2 mg once daily is equally effective. Oral granisetron is significantly superior to oral prochlorperazine. After high-dose cisplatin chemotherapy, oral granisetron is as effective as metoclopramide plus dexamethasone; the addition of dexamethasone further enhances its efficacy. Oral granisetron was well tolerated in all these trials. Headache and constipation were the most common adverse events, as has been reported for other 5-HT3 receptor antagonists. No randomized trials of oral-only tropisetron or dolasetron have yet been published.
Eleven cases of tardive dyskinesia associated with metoclopramide have been reported to the Swedish Adverse Drug Reactions Advisory Committee from 1977 to 1981, 10 of which developed during the past three years. All patients were women, with a mean age of 76 years. Median duration of treatment before the onset of symptoms was 14 months. Calculated from total drug sales and prescription statistics the incidence of tardive dyskinesia during treatment with metoclopramide was estimated to be one in 2000-2800 treatment years. Extrapolation of data on long term treatment (more than six months) of patients aged 70 years or more, from a survey based on individual prescriptions yielded an incidence of more than one in a 1000 patients. Long term treatment with metoclopramide is accompanied by a substantial risk of developing tardive dyskinesia especially among elderly people.
The use of prokinetic agents by pediatric patients, geriatric patients, and patients taking other drugs that may affect or be affected by the prokinetic agent is reviewed. The use of such agents to treat motility disorders has expanded over the past few years. These agents may be administered to patients who have special physiologic considerations, have other diseases, or require concomitant drug therapy. The appropriate use of prokinetic agents in these groups requires an understanding of the unique dosage considerations that may be necessary to ensure safe, effective therapy.
The effect of food and metoclopramide on the pharmacokinetics of bromocriptine was investigated in 7 healthy subjects. Plasma concentrations of bromocriptine were measured by radioimmunoassay after a single oral dose of 7.5 mg bromocriptine. Maximal plasma concentrations of bromocriptine were slightly lower when the drug was given after breakfast. Bioavailability of the drug was not significantly reduced by food nor by metoclopramide pre-treatment. Side effects of bromocriptine were considerably reduced by metoclopramide pre-treatment (0.5 mg/kg); the decrease was about 83% as estimated from Table II.
Five patients with tardive dyskinesia (average age, 64 years) were treated with a central dopamine blocking agent, metoclopramide hydrochloride. The duration of symptoms ranged from four to 30 months. A pretreatment disability score was graded (0 to 4) for buccolingual, extremity, and truncal movements and for duration of tongue protrusion. A 59% improvement was achieved in total disability scores. Tongue protrusion demonstrated the most noticeable improvement. The average daily dosage ranged from a minimum of 20 mg to a maximum of 80 mg given in divided doses. Duration of follow-up ranged from three to eight months. Preliminary data suggest that metoclopramide may be effective in the treatment of tardive dyskinesia.
To address the economic issues posed by the introduction of 5-hydroxytryptamine3 receptor antagonist (5-HT3 RA), we performed a cost-effectiveness analysis based on clinical trial data published in the recent literature. Cost calculations include initial treatment and a second-line salvage treatment. The average cost and incremental cost were established. Incremental cost corresponds to the extra cost involved in achieving total control of emesis in 1% extra patients. If 5-HT3 RA is not part of the initial treatment, salvage treatment with ondansetron is not cost-effective. Moreover, starting with the combination of ondansetron plus dexamethasone saves more money than starting with ondansetron alone. However, if the difference in emesis control is only minimal, treatment with the 5-HT3 RA remains more expensive.
Our laboratory, in collaboration with Oxigene Inc, has been involved in identifying commercially feasible clinical applications of measurement or modulation of ADP-ribosylation as a core technology. For this purpose a pivotal regulatory role for ADP-ribosylation in the repair of DNA lesions leading to cytotoxic as well as mutagenic events has been hypothesized. A new class of DNA repair inhibitors, the N-substituted benzamides, has been identified which can react with radiation to produce reactive intermediates that oxidize thiol amino acids. Their proposed mechanisms of action are two-fold: ie they can interact with radiation: i) to directly enhance DNA damage; and ii) to react with thiols in the zinc finger DNA binding domain of poly ADP-ribosyl transferase to inhibit DNA repair and thereby increase DNA damage. Sensamide, a clinically relevant formulation of metoclopramide which is an N-substituted benzamide, has indicated enhancement of tumor response and survival in patients with inoperable squamous cell carcinoma of the lung when it was administered as a radiosensitizer in a phase I/II trial and compared to historical controls. A mechanism of endogenous regulation of human mononuclear leucocyte ADP-ribosylation has been identified to be HOCl/N-chloramine production via the oxidative burst of phagocytes. HOCl/N-chloramines are potent oxidants of thiol-containing proteins. Quantitative estimation of N-chloramine sensitive plasma thiols has been identified as an effective surrogate measure of leucocyte poly ADPRT.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Introduction: Gastroparesis is a chronic disorder of the stomach characterized by delayed gastric emptying without mechanical obstruction. Diabetes is the most commonly known cause of gastroparesis. Management of diabetic gastroparesis involves lifestyle modifications, glycemic control, pharmacological drugs, and for refractory cases surgical treatments. Metoclopramide remains the only drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration for diabetic gastroparesis. The aim of this article is to provide a concise review of the pharmacology, clinical efficacy and tolerability of metoclopramide. Areas covered: We searched PubMed using the key words 'metoclopramide', 'diabetic gastroparesis', and 'gastric emptying'. The relevant articles and their bibliography were reviewed. Metoclopramide acts on several different receptors; primarily as a dopamine receptor antagonist, both peripherally improving gastric emptying, and centrally resulting in an anti-emetic effect. Metoclopramide side effects, mostly related to its ability to cross the blood-brain barrier, include drowsiness, restlessness, hyperprolactinemia, and tardive dyskinesia (TD), a movement disorder that may be irreversible. Expert opinion: Metoclopramide carries a black box warning for use >12 weeks due to the risk of TD. However, gastroparesis patients experience chronic symptoms often requiring prolonged treatments. Physicians and patients look forward to FDA approval of new agents for gastroparesis with better efficacy and safety profile.
BACKGROUND: Metoclopramide is primarily a dopamine receptor antagonist, with 5HT(3) receptor antagonist and 5HT(4) receptor agonist activity, and used as an antiemetic and gastroprokinetic since almost 50 years. Regulatory authorities issued restrictions and recommendations regarding long-term use of the drug at oral doses exceeding 10 mg 3-4 times daily because of the risk for development of tardive dyskinesia. The aim of our study was to review mechanism(s) of action and pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic properties of metoclopramide, as well as the risk of metoclopramide-induced tardive dyskinesia, factors that may change drug exposure in humans, and to summarize the clinical context for appropriate use of the drug. METHODS: A PubMed, Google Scholar, and Cross Reference search was done using the key words and combined searches: drug-drug interaction, gastroparesis, metoclopramide, natural history, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, drug-drug interaction, outcome, risk factors, tardive dyskinesia. KEY RESULTS: Data show that the risk of tardive dyskinesia from metoclopramide is low, in the range of 0.1% per 1000 patient years. This is far below a previously estimated 1%-10% risk suggested in treatment guidelines by regulatory authorities. High-risk groups are elderly females, diabetics, patients with liver or kidney failure, and patients with concomitant antipsychotic drug therapy, which reduces the threshold for neurological complications. CONCLUSIONS & INFERENCES: The risk of tardive dyskinesia due to metoclopramide is far below approximated numbers in treatment guidelines. This risk and the influence of known risk factors should be considered when starting a course of metoclopramide for treatment of gastroparesis.
