BACKGROUND AND AIMS: To examine the decongestive effect of the sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor dapagliflozin compared to the thiazide-like diuretic metolazone in patients hospitalized for heart failure and resistant to treatment with intravenous furosemide. METHODS AND RESULTS: A multi-centre, open-label, randomized, and active-comparator trial. Patients were randomized to dapagliflozin 10 mg once daily or metolazone 5-10 mg once daily for a 3-day treatment period, with follow-up for primary and secondary endpoints until day 5 (96 h). The primary endpoint was a diuretic effect, assessed by change in weight (kg). Secondary endpoints included a change in pulmonary congestion (lung ultrasound), loop diuretic efficiency (weight change per 40 mg of furosemide), and a volume assessment score. 61 patients were randomized. The mean (+/-standard deviation) cumulative dose of furosemide at 96 h was 977 (+/-492) mg in the dapagliflozin group and 704 (+/-428) mg in patients assigned to metolazone. The mean (+/-standard deviation) decrease in weight at 96 h was 3.0 (2.5) kg with dapagliflozin compared to 3.6 (2.0) kg with metolazone [mean difference 0.65, 95% confidence interval (CI) -0.12,1.41 kg; P = 0.11]. Loop diuretic efficiency was less with dapagliflozin than with metolazone [mean 0.15 (0.12) vs. 0.25 (0.19); difference -0.08, 95% CI -0.17,0.01 kg; P = 0.10]. Changes in pulmonary congestion and volume assessment score were similar between treatments. Decreases in plasma sodium and potassium and increases in urea and creatinine were smaller with dapagliflozin than with metolazone. Serious adverse events were similar between treatments. CONCLUSION: In patients with heart failure and loop diuretic resistance, dapagliflozin was not more effective at relieving congestion than metolazone. Patients assigned to dapagliflozin received a larger cumulative dose of furosemide but experienced less biochemical upset than those assigned to metolazone. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04860011.
OBJECTIVES: This study compared combination diuretic strategies in acute heart failure (AHF) complicated by diuretic resistance (DR). BACKGROUND: Combination diuretic regimens to overcome loop DR are commonly used but with limited evidence. METHODS: This study was a randomized, double-blinded trial in 60 patients hospitalized with AHF and intravenous (IV) loop DR. Patients were randomized to oral metolazone, IV chlorothiazide, or tolvaptan therapy. All patients received concomitant high-dose IV infusions of furosemide. The primary outcome was 48-h weight loss. RESULTS: The cohort exhibited DR prior to enrollment, producing 1,188 +/- 476 ml of urine in 12 h during high-dose loop diuretic therapy (IV furosemide: 612 +/- 439 mg/day). All 3 interventions significantly improved diuretic efficacy (p < 0.001). Compared to metolazone (4.6 +/- 2.7 kg), neither IV chlorothiazide (5.8 +/- 2.7 kg; 1.2 kg [95% confidence interval (CI)]: -2.9 to 0.6; p = 0.292) nor tolvaptan (4.1 +/- 3.3 kg; 0.5 kg [95% CI: -1.5 to 2.4; p = 0.456) resulted in more weight loss at 48 h. Median (interquartile range [IQR]) cumulative urine output increased significantly and did not differ among those receiving metolazone (7.78 [IQR: 6.59 to 10.10] l) and chlorothiazide (8.77 [IQR: 7.37 to 10.86] l; p = 0.245) or tolvaptan (9.70 [IQR: 6.36 to 13.81] l; p = 0.160). Serum sodium decreased less with tolvaptan than with metolazone (+4 +/- 5 vs. -1 +/- 3 mEq/l; p = 0.001), but 48-h spot urine sodium was lower with tolvaptan (58 +/- 25 mmol/l) than with metolazone (104 +/- 16 mmol/l; p = 0.002) and with chlorothiazide (117 +/- 14 mmol/l; p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In this moderately sized DR trial, weight loss was excellent with the addition of metolazone, IV chlorothiazide, or tolvaptan to loop diuretics, without a detectable between-group difference. (Comparison of Oral or Intravenous Thiazides vs. tolvaptan in Diuretic Resistant Decompensated Heart Failure [3T]; NCT02606253).
A 62-year-old woman with chronic kidney disease stage 4, sleep apnoea on continuous positive airway pressure and recent admission for acute-on-chronic diastolic heart failure presented to emergency room with weakness. She was hypotensive and had symptomatic bradycardia in the 30 s secondary to hyperkalaemia and beta-blockers, raising concern for BRASH syndrome. Antihypertensives were immediately held. Potassium-lowering agents (with calcium gluconate for cardiac stability) were begun, as were fluids and dopamine for vasopressor support. The patient was admitted to intensive care unit and electrophysiology was consulted. Over the next 2 days, the patient clinically improved: she remained off dopamine for over 24 hours; potassium levels and renal function improved; and heart rate stabilised in 60 s. The patient was eventually discharged and advised to avoid metolazone, bumetanide and carvedilol, with primary care provider and cardiology follow-up.
Widely prevalent in the general population, chronic kidney disease (CKD) is frequently complicated with hypertension. Control of hypertension in this high-risk population is a major modifiable cardiovascular and renal risk factor but often requires multiple medications. Although thiazides are an attractive agent, guidelines have previously recommended against thiazide use in stage 4 CKD. We review the updated guidelines on thiazide use in advanced CKD, the antihypertensive mechanism of thiazides, and the clinical studies of thiazides in CKD. Older uncontrolled studies have shown that metolazone reduces blood pressure in CKD, but more recently small randomized controlled trials of hydrochlorothiazide in CKD have shown significant improvement in mean arterial pressure of 15 mmHg. Two recent uncontrolled studies of chlorthalidone including one that used ambulatory blood pressure monitoring found significant improvements in blood pressure. These findings all suggest that thiazides may be efficacious even in advanced CKD; however, electrolyte abnormalities were common in the studies reviewed so close monitoring is necessary during use. Adequately powered randomized trials are now needed before the routine use of thiazide diuretics in advanced CKD can be recommended.
OBJECTIVE: Up to 50% of patients hospitalized for acute heart failure (AHF) show resistance to diuretics. This condition contributes to a prolonged hospital length of stay and a higher risk of death. This review aimed to investigate whether a diuretic therapeutic approach more effective than furosemide alone exists for patients with diuretic-resistant AHF. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We identified all randomized controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating diuretic therapy in patients with diuretic-resistant AHF. We searched Pubmed, BioMed Central, and Cochrane CENTRAL databases. RESULTS: Six RCTs were identified, involving a total of 845 patients. The P-score ranges from 0.6663 for furosemide to 0.2294 for the tolvaptan-furosemide. We found no significant differences in efficacy for any drug comparison. CONCLUSIONS: None of the diuretics considered in RCTs performed to date (tolvaptan, metolazone, hydrochlorothiazide, indapamide) appear to be more effective than furosemide therapy alone for the treatment of patients with diuretic-resistant AHF.
Recent information about drugs implicated in causing pancreatitis is summarized. Although the frequency of drug-induced acute pancreatitis is generally low, the disease is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality, which makes timely identification of the offending agent important. Mechanisms suggested for drug-induced pancreatitis include pancreatic duct constriction; immunosuppression; cytotoxic, osmotic, pressure, or metabolic effects; arteriolar thrombosis; direct cellular toxicity; and hepatic involvement. Agents reported to have a definite association with pancreatitis are asparaginase, azathioprine, didanosine, estrogens, furosemide, mercaptopurine, pentamidine, sulfonamides, sulindac, tetracyclines, thiazides, and valproic acid. Agents reported to have a probable association with pancreatitis include cimetidine, clozapine, corticosteroids, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography contrast media, methyldopa, metronidazole, salicylates, and zalcitabine. Agents reported to have a questionable association with pancreatitis include acetaminophen, cyclosporine, cytarabine, erythromycin and roxithromycin, ketoprofen, metolazone, and octreotide. When ethanol abuse and biliary disease are ruled out as etiologies for pancreatitis, the possibility of drug-induced disease should be investigated.
INTRODUCTION: Premenstrual symptoms occur in 95% of women of reproductive age. Severe, debilitating symptoms (PMS) occur in about 5% of those women. There is no consensus on how symptom severity should be assessed, which has led to a wide variety of symptoms scales, making it difficult to synthesise data on treatment efficacy. The cyclical nature of the condition also makes it difficult to conduct RCTs. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical questions: What are the effects of drug treatments; hormonal treatments; psychological interventions; physical therapies; dietary supplements; and surgical treatments in women with premenstrual syndrome? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library and other important databases up to November 2006 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 52 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: acupuncture, alprazolam, bright light therapy, buspirone, chiropractic manipulation, clomipramine, cognitive behavioural therapy, danazol, endometrial ablation, evening primrose oil, exercise, gonadorelin analogues, hysterectomy, laparoscopic bilateral oophorectomy, magnesium supplements, metolazone, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, oestrogens, oral contraceptives, progesterone, progestogens, pyridoxine, reflexology, relaxation, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, spironolactone, tibolone.
BACKGROUND: Limited evidence exists regarding efficacy and safety of diuretic regimens in ambulatory, congestion-refractory, chronic heart failure (CHF) patients. OBJECTIVES: The authors sought to compare the potency and safety of commonly used diuretic regimens in CHF patients. METHODS: A prospective, randomized, open-label, crossover study conducted in NYHA functional class II to IV CHF patients, treated in an ambulatory day-care unit. Each patient received 3 different diuretic regimens: intravenous (IV) furosemide 250 mg; IV furosemide 250 mg plus oral metolazone 5 mg; and IV furosemide 250 mg plus IV acetazolamide 500 mg. Treatments were administered once a week, in 1 of 6 randomized sequences. The primary endpoint was total sodium excretion, and the secondary was total urinary volume excreted, both measured for 6 hours post-treatment initiation. RESULTS: A total of 42 patients were recruited. Administration of furosemide plus metolazone resulted in the highest weight of sodium excreted, 4,691 mg (95% CI: 4,153-5,229 mg) compared with furosemide alone, 3,835 mg (95% CI: 3,279-4,392 mg; P = 0.015) and to furosemide plus acetazolamide 3,584 mg (95% CI: 3,020-4,148 mg; P = 0.001). Furosemide plus metolazone resulted in 1.84 L of urine (95% CI: 1.63-2.05 L), compared with 1.58 L (95% CI: 1.37-1.8); P = 0.039 collected following administration of furosemide plus acetazolamide and 1.71 L (95% CI: 1.49-1.93 L) following furosemide alone. The incidence of worsening renal function was significantly higher when adding metolazone (39%) to furosemide compared with furosemide alone (16%) and to furosemide plus acetazolamide (2.6%) (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In ambulatory CHF patients, furosemide plus metolazone resulted in a significantly higher natriuresis compared with IV furosemide alone or furosemide plus acetazolamide.
Congestive heart failure (CHF) is a condition characterized by a number of hormonal and renal adaptations which together conspire to salt and water retention. Diuretic therapy has been, and continues to be, a cornerstone to therapy for CHF. The rational use of diuretics, or diuretic combination such as metolazone-furosemide, can both effectively administer to the congestive symptoms seen in heart failure as well as temper many of the complications of this therapeutic modality.
Hyponatremia can complicate thiazide use in a minority of susceptible individuals and can result in significant morbidity and even mortality. Risk factors for thiazide-associated hyponatremia include age, female sex, and possibly low body mass. A genetic susceptibility has recently been uncovered. Although frequently developing early after thiazide treatment initiation, many cases of hyponatremia present after months or years of use. Many cases are asymptomatic or have mild symptoms, but seizures and/or coma may develop, especially in those with acute onset. The pathophysiology is incompletely understood and includes some combination of excessive fluid intake, cation (sodium and potassium) depletion, osmotic inactivation of sodium, and reduced ability to excrete free water. Reduced distal delivery of filtrate, reduced solute load (urea), direct inhibition of the sodium-chloride cotransporter, and increased collecting duct permeability to water mediated by some combination of antidiuretic hormone, prostaglandins, and thiazides themselves may contribute to this diluting defect. The predominant pathophysiologic mechanism(s) varies from patient to patient. The cornerstone of therapy is cessation of thiazide use, cation repletion, and oral fluid restriction. If severely symptomatic, 3% saline solution may be indicated. Overly rapid correction of chronic hyponatremia must be avoided in all cases.
Metolazone is a modified quinazolinesulphonamide and in a dose of between 4 and 7.5 mg is an effective diuretic in man with normal renal function. Fourteen patients with non-oedematous stable chronic renal failure (creatinine clearance ranging from 1.2 to 12 ml/min) were given metolazone in doses ranging from 20-150 mg. A noticeable increase in urine flow and sodium excretion occurred, free water clearance increased, and there was a small but significant increase in potassium excretion. No side effects were noted.
The pathogenesis and diagnosis of cirrhotic ascites are reviewed, and the treatment options are described, focusing on pharmacologic management. The major theories on the pathogenesis of cirrhotic ascites are the underfill and overflow theories. The underfill theory states that ascites formation results in decreased plasma volume leading to renal sodium and water retention. The overflow theory states that the initial event in ascites formation is renal sodium retention. Evidence suggests that the formation of ascites is a continuum involving both overflow (early) and underfill (late) mechanisms. Although the most frequent cause of ascites is hepatic cirrhosis, analysis of the ascitic fluid is important to exclude other causes (e.g., neoplasm, peritonitis, pancreatitis). Patients who do not respond to treatment with sodium restriction and bed rest require diuretic therapy. Spironolactone is the agent of choice for treatment of the nonazotemic patient with cirrhotic ascites. Combination therapy with spironolactone and furosemide or spironolactone and metolazone may be used in those patients who do not respond to spironolactone. Patients with impaired renal function should not be treated with spironolactone because of the risk of hyperkalemia. Paracentesis with albumin replacement has been used successfully for treatment of patients with tense cirrhotic ascites. Initial management of cirrhotic ascites is conservative, with sodium restriction and bed rest. Spironolactone is a good first-choice drug for treatment of ascites. Daily weight, serum electrolytes, and renal function should be monitored to assess the effectiveness and potential adverse effects of diuretic therapy.
Metolazone is commonly administered in conjunction with a loop diuretic to manage volume overload in patients otherwise resistant to loop diuretic therapy alone. Metolazone is a thiazide-type diuretic that is characterized by slow and sometimes erratic absorption when administered as the Zaroxylyn product. This absorptive profile together with the large volume of distribution and high degree of renal clearance for metolazone provide the pharmacologic basis for a favorable diuretic combination effect. Zaroxylyn should always be administered cautiously and only with a means of surveillance allowing the patient's weight to be carefully monitored so as to avoid excessive diuresis. If an excessive diuresis occurs with a metolazone and loop diuretic combination both drugs should be stopped temporarily. The temptation should be avoided to simply reduce the doses of either metolazone or the loop diuretic as a means to controlling an active diuresis.
To ascertain whether diuretics have an antihypertensive effect independent of natriuresis, 12 stable patients on maintenance hemodialysis underwent a crossover evaluation with hydrochlorothiazide, 50 mg daily, metolazone, 5 mg daily, or placebo in 4-wk treatment periods for 6 mo. Compliance was assured by pill counts and serum drug concentrations. All patients had daily urine less than 100 ml. Pre- and postdialysis blood pressure, body weight, plasma volume, and plasma renin activity were monitored. Over the 6-mo study period there were no statistically significant changes in any parameter related to diuretic therapy. It is concluded that a functioning kidney with the ability to respond to diuretics with a natriuresis is necessary for the antihypertensive action of diuretics. Direct vascular effects of diuretics to lower peripheral resistance could not be demonstrated in this unique patient population.
Preeclampsia is a disorder that continues to exact a significant toll with respect to maternal morbidity and mortality as well as fetal wastage. Furthermore, the treatment of this disorder has not changed significantly in 50 years and is unsatisfactory. The use of diuretics in this syndrome is controversial because there is a concern related to potential baleful effects of volume contraction leading to a possible further decrement in the perfusion of the maternal-fetal unit. Metolazone is a diuretic/antihypertensive agent, which has a therapeutic effect on blood pressure (BP) in human essential hypertension without causing a natriuresis. We administered the drug in nondiuretic doses in a rat model of preeclampsia previously developed in this laboratory. The drug reduced BP without an accompanying natriuresis. Although there was a trend toward an improvement in intrauterine growth restriction, as determined by litter size and the number of pups demonstrating malformations, the values did not reach statistical significance. We conclude that metolazone, in low dosage, is an effective antihypertensive in this rat model. These studies have implications for the treatment of the human disorder.
Treatment of volume overload in the setting of acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) is typically achieved through the use of loop diuretics. While they are highly effective, some patients may develop loop diuretic resistance. One strategy to overcome this scenario includes sequential nephron blockade with a thiazide-type diuretic; however, it is unknown which thiazide-type diuretic used in this setting is most effective. A systematic review and meta-analysis were performed to compare the efficacy and safety of chlorothiazide with metolazone as add-on therapy in the setting of loop diuretic resistance for the treatment of ADHF. Literature searches were conducted through PubMed, Google Scholar, and Science Direct from inception through February 2020 using the following search terms alone or in combination: metolazone, chlorothiazide, acute decompensated heart failure, loop diuretic, and urine output. All English-language prospective and retrospective trials and abstracts comparing metolazone to chlorothiazide for the treatment of ADHF were evaluated. Studies were included if they analyzed urine output for at least 24 hours in patients with ADHF. Meta-analysis was conducted to evaluate pooled effect size by using a random-effect model. Primary outcomes included net and total urine output. Secondary outcomes included commonly reported safety outcomes. Four studies comparing the use of metolazone to chlorothiazide as an adjunct to loop diuretics to treat ADHF were included in the evaluation. Metolazone was as effective as chlorothiazide to augment loop diuretic therapy in ADHF in most studies with no pooled difference in net or total urine output. However, there were notable differences in baseline loop diuretic dosing, ejection fraction, renal function, race, and endpoint timing across studies. Adverse effects were commonly observed and included electrolyte abnormalities, change in renal function, and hypotension but were comparable between groups. Metolazone is as effective as chlorothiazide as add-on to loop diuretics in treating ADHF without an increase in safety concerns.
BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) is one of the leading reasons for emergency department (ED) visits and hospitalization. However, externally validated risk algorithms for acute prognostication of heart failure patients are not available. Thus, many low-risk patients are hospitalized and some high-risk patients are discharged home, which, in some cases, may lead to death. OBJECTIVES: The first objective of the ACUTE study is to perform a prospective validation of the Emergency Heart failure Mortality Risk Grade (EHMRG), which is a risk score derived to predict 7-day mortality in the ED setting. The second objective is to independently validate the 30-day model extension of the risk score (EHMRG30-ST) in the same cohort. STUDY DESIGN: Patients with HF presenting to the ED will be recruited with a waiver of informed consent as a minimal risk study. The ED physician will calculate the EHMRG 7-day risk score, but treatment decisions will not be influenced by the predictive models. Follow-up will be obtained using probabilistic linkage with the Registered Persons Database of vital statistics, whereby deaths will be ascertained. We will examine mortality rates according to EHMRG and EHMRG30-ST algorithms. We will also compare physician-judged risk estimates, based on clinical judgment alone, with the EHMRG score. CONCLUSION: The ACUTE study will determine if a retrospectively derived algorithm for simultaneous estimation of 7-day and 30-day mortality risk can accurately identify low- and high-risk patients with acute HF and improve upon physician-judged risk estimation.
Recent therapeutic trials regarding the management of acute heart failure (AHF) failed to demonstrate the efficacy of newer therapeutic modalities and agents. Low- versus high-dose and continuous administration of furosemide were shown not to matter. Ultrafiltration was not found to be more efficacious than sophisticated diuretic therapy including dose-adjusted intravenous furosemide and metolazone. Dopamine and nesiritide were not shown to be superior to current therapy. Tezosentan and tovalptan had no effect on mortality. The development of rolofylline was terminated due to adverse effect (seizures). Lastly, preliminary experience with serelaxin indicates a mortality improvement at six months that remains to be confirmed. The disappointing findings of these recent trials may reflect the lack of efficacy of newer therapeutic modalities and agents. Alternatively the disappointing findings of these recent trials may be in part due to methodological issues. The AHF syndrome is complex with many clinical phenotypes. Failure to match clinical phenotypes and therapeutic modalities is likely to be partly responsible for the disappointing findings of recent AHF trials.
