Metronidazole is a highly effective therapy for anaerobic infections and a variety of protozoal and parasitic diseases. Its pharmacokinetics, toxicities, and unique mode of action are reviewed in detail. Indications for use and respective dosages are suggested.
Metronidazole, a nitroimidazole, remains a front-line choice for treatment of infections related to inflammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract including colitis linked to Clostridium difficile. Despite >60 years of research, the metabolism of metronidazole and associated cytotoxicity is not definitively characterized. Nitroimidazoles are prodrugs that are reductively activated (the nitro group is reduced) under low oxygen tension, leading to imidazole fragmentation and cytotoxicity. It remains unclear if nitroimidazole reduction (activation) contributes to the cytotoxicity profile, or whether subsequent fragmentation of the imidazole ring and formed metabolites alone mediate cytotoxicity. A molecular mechanism underpinning high level (>256 mg/L) bacterial resistance to metronidazole also remains elusive. Considering the widespread use of metronidazole and other nitroimidazoles, this review was undertaken to emphasize the structure-cytotoxicity profile of the numerous metabolites of metronidazole in human and murine models and to examine conflicting reports regarding metabolite-DNA interactions. An alternative hypothesis, that DNA synthesis and repair of existing DNA is indirectly inhibited by metronidazole is proposed. Prokaryotic metabolism of metronidazole is detailed to discuss new resistance mechanisms. Additionally, the review contextualizes the history and current use of metronidazole, rates of metronidazole resistance including metronidazole MDR as well as the biosynthesis of azomycin, the natural precursor of metronidazole. Changes in the gastrointestinal microbiome and the host after metronidazole administration are also reviewed. Finally, novel nitroimidazoles and new antibiotic strategies are discussed.
Clostridium difficile-associated illness is an increasingly prevalent and morbid condition. The elderly population is at a disproportionate risk of developing symptomatic disease and associated complications, including progression to severe or fulminant disease, and development of recurrent infections. This article analyzes the factors that influence C difficile disease propensity and severity, with particular attention directed toward features relevant to the rapidly aging population.
BACKGROUND: When combined with ceftazidime, the novel non-beta-lactam beta-lactamase inhibitor avibactam provides a carbapenem alternative against multidrug-resistant infections. Efficacy and safety of ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole were compared with meropenem in 1066 men and women with complicated intra-abdominal infections from 2 identical, randomized, double-blind phase 3 studies (NCT01499290 and NCT01500239). METHODS: The primary end point was clinical cure at test-of-cure visit 28-35 days after randomization, assessed by noninferiority of ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole to meropenem in the microbiologically modified intention-to-treat (mMITT) population (in accordance with US Food and Drug Administration guidance), and the modified intention-to-treat and clinically evaluable populations (European Medicines Agency guidance). Noninferiority was considered met if the lower limit of the 95% confidence interval for between-group difference was greater than the prespecified noninferiority margin of -12.5%. RESULTS: Ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole was noninferior to meropenem across all primary analysis populations. Clinical cure rates with ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole and meropenem, respectively, were as follows: mMITT population, 81.6% and 85.1% (between-group difference, -3.5%; 95% confidence interval -8.64 to 1.58); modified intention-to-treat, 82.5% and 84.9% (-2.4%; -6.90 to 2.10); and clinically evaluable, 91.7% and 92.5% (-0.8%; -4.61 to 2.89). The clinical cure rate with ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole for ceftazidime-resistant infections was comparable to that with meropenem (mMITT population, 83.0% and 85.9%, respectively) and similar to the regimen's own efficacy against ceftazidime-susceptible infections (82.0%). Adverse events were similar between groups. CONCLUSIONS: Ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole was noninferior to meropenem in the treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections. Efficacy was similar against infections caused by ceftazidime-susceptible and ceftazidime-resistant pathogens. The safety profile of ceftazidime-avibactam plus metronidazole was consistent with that previously observed with ceftazidime alone. CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: NCT01499290 and NCT01500239.
An increasing number of options are available for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease; the selection depends on the extent and severity of the disease. Experience with sulfasalazine and corticosteroids has led to a proliferation of 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) compounds and experimentation with alternative corticosteroid preparations. Given rectally 5-ASA is particularly effective in the treatment of distal ulcerative colitis, and experience is accumulating with several oral formulations. Metronidazole is useful in some cases, and immunosuppressive agents have a role in some patients with chronic refractory disease. A variety of measures, such as nutritional therapy, surgery and psychosocial support, are important elements of therapy. Further therapeutic innovations are expected as the etiology and pathogenesis are clarified.
A double-blind trial in twenty-nine patients with rosacea showed that, after 6 weeks' treatment, metronidazole was therapeutically superior to a placebo (P less than 0-02). It was particularly effective against papules and pustules. The mode of action of metronidazole and other antibiotics in rosacea is not known.
Metronidazole is a synthetic nitroimidazole derivative with antimicrobial and antiinflammatory properties. It was the first topical therapy approved solely for rosacea and remains a cornerstone of rosacea management. This article reviews the optimal use of topical metronidazole in the treatment of rosacea and other innovative but off-label dermatologic uses reported in the literature.
Metronidazole is a bactericidal antibiotic with strong activity against most anaerobes and certain parasites. The drug has excellent bioavailability and good penetration in most tissues, including the cerebrospinal fluid and brain abscess contents. It is usually well tolerated with few side effects. With a few exceptions, the percentage of anaerobes, including B. fragilis group, that are resistant to metronidazole remains low. Metronidazole has been used extensively in clinical practice for years, and its uses have expanded. Its exact role in the management of Crohn's disease and entities related to H. pylori is evolving.
Clostridium difficile infection is associated with broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy and is the most common cause of infectious diarrhea in hospital patients. Pathogenic strains of C. difficile produce two protein exotoxins, toxin A and toxin B, which cause colonic mucosal injury and inflammation. Infection may be asymptomatic, cause mild diarrhea, or result in severe pseudomembranous colitis. Diagnosis depends on the demonstration of C. difficile toxins in the stool. The first step in management is to discontinue the antibiotic that caused diarrhea. If diarrhea and colitis are severe or persistent, oral metronidazole is the treatment of choice. Oral vancomycin is also effective, but it is more expensive than metronidazole and its widespread use may encourage the proliferation of vancomycin-resistant nosocomial bacteria. Diarrhea and colitis usually improve within three days after a patient starts taking metronidazole or vancomycin, but 20% suffer a relapse of diarrhea when these agents are discontinued.
Metronidazole (MTZ, 1-[2-hydroxyethyl]-2-methyl-5-nitroimidazole), an antiparasitic and antibacterial compound, is one of the world's most used drugs. MTZ is potentially carcinogenic to humans due to the following facts: it is a proven mutagen in bacterial systems, it is genotoxic to human cells and also, it is carcinogenic to animals. However, due to inadequate epidemiological evidence, it is not considered as a risk factor for cancer in humans. As it will be discussed here, the existing population studies are deficient since they have not included sufficient sample size, the follow-up time has not been long enough, and the individual sensitivity to the drug might have been acting as a confounding factor. Due to the increasing use of this drug, more and improved studies are needed to elucidate its mechanism of genotoxicity and its carcinogenic potential.
Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS syndrome) in a severe cutaneous drug reaction, which can be life threatening. Levofloxacin has not been reported in literature as a causative drug. We are presenting an exceptional case of levofloxacin-induced DRESS without eosinophilia and with positive patch-tests to levofloxacin.
This article discusses the ability of metronidazole to improve periodontal health. Review of the drug's pharmacology and potential side effects indicate that it poses little threat to humans of inducing acute toxicity, mutagenesis, or cancer if used according to recommended dosing regimens. Studies addressing metronidazole utilization in a variety of clinical conditions demonstrate that its routine use does not enhance root planing. However, adjunctive antibiotic therapy may be advantageous in the treatment of sites where effective root planing is precluded due to deep pockets or when anaerobic periodontal infections do not respond to conventional therapy.
Secnidazole is a next-generation 5-nitroimidazole approved for more than three decades in Europe, Asia, South America and Africa and recently in the USA as a single-dose (2 g) treatment of bacterial vaginosis (BV). Secnidazole is characterized by potent in vitro antimicrobial activity against BV-associated pathogens, as well as prolonged terminal elimination half-life and systemic exposure. These characteristics form the basis of effective and safe treatment of BV with a 2-g single-dose secnidazole regimen, which was recently confirmed in double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials conducted in the USA. The option to treat BV with single-dose secnidazole not only cures the primary infection but also may diminish risks of serious sequelae of untreated or undertreated infection.
Oral treatment for trichomonas vaginalis infection is now well established. In a previous paper, we established the value of a high single dose regimen of metronidazole for this condition by demonstrating its efficacy in a double-blind controlled study. Tinidazole is another accepted trichomonacide. By means of a single-blind controlled trial, we demonstrate that a 2 g single dose of tinidazole is as effective as a 2 g single dose metronidazole in the treatment of vaginal trichomoniasis. The cure rate for tinidazole was 95% and for metronidazole it was 97.5%. No side-effects were reported with either regimen.
INTRODUCTION: Blastocystis hominis (B. hominis) is a protozoan commonly found in the gastrointestinal tract. There are doubts about its clinical significance. Metronidazole (MTZ) is the recommended first-line treatment. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective review was carried out between 2011 and 2012. A total of 151 samples were randomly selected from 383 samples positive for B. hominis. Inclusion criteria were: suggestive symptoms, treatment indication and microbiological follow-up. A systematic review was performed of all studies that evaluated the effect of MTZ on B. hominis infection. RESULTS: Forty-six patients met the inclusion criteria (64% women; age, 44.2+/-2 years). MTZ was used in 39 patients, 31 of whom obtained a clinical response (79.5%) but only 15 a microbiological response (48.4%). No dose-effect relationship was observed. Twenty patients with no initial microbiological response received a second round of treatment (MTZ, cotrimoxazole, paramomycin, others), with a microbiological response in 70%. Overall, B. hominis was cured in 72% (95% CI: 57%-83%). Of 54 treatments associated with a clinical response, a microbiological response occurred in 31 (57%), while in the remaining 12 with no clinical response, microbiological cure was observed in only 2 (17%) (P=.022). The eradication rate in the systematic review varied between 0% and 100%. CONCLUSIONS: There seems to be a relationship between the clinical and microbiological response to B. hominis treatment. The microbiological response to MTZ treatment is insufficient in our geographical setting. The systematic review shows that the response to MTZ is very variable.
The efficacy of metronidazole in the treatment of Crohn's disease remains unproven. It has not been superior to a placebo in three small studies. Uncontrolled reports suggest it may be of benefit in selected patients who have not responded to previous medical or surgical therapy. Metronidazole therapy can lead to complete healing of perineal fistulas. Persistent concerns over side-effects, carcinogenicity, and bacterial resistance suggest that drug should be prescribed with caution for long-term use.
Recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a growing problem that poses significant management challenges. There is no strong evidence to support a particular treatment strategy for recurrent CDI, especially those with multiple recurrences. However, a key strategy for reducing recurrent CDI is prompt diagnosis and treatment, facilitated by early recognition of patients at risk for recurrence.
Metronidazole is currently approved for use against Trichomonas infection and amebiasis. It is also effective against giardiasis, "nonspecific vaginitis," and anaerobic infections and bactericidal against almost all obligately anaerobic organisms; Actinomyces, Arachnia, and Propionibacterium are exceptions. Metronidazole diffuses well into all tissues and penetrates the central nervous system well. It normally has only a relatively minor impact on the colonic flora. The drug is well tolerated. Adverse reactions include reversible neutropenia, peripheral neuropathy, and disulfiram-like reaction when taken with alcohol. Of more concern are its mutagenicity and carcinogenicity in some, but not all, animals. These are considered low risks, and follow-up studies of patients treated to date do not reveal an increased incidence of cancer, but physicians and patients must decide whether the benefit from therapy outweighs the potential risk. Metronidazole should only be used for approved indications, except in the research setting, and should not be used prophylactically, although it is effective.
Antibiotics are often used in neonates despite the absence of relevant dosing information in drug labels. For neonatal dosing, clinicians must extrapolate data from studies for adults and older children, who have strikingly different physiologies. As a result, dosing extrapolation can lead to increased toxicity or efficacy failures in neonates. Driven by these differences and recent legislation mandating the study of drugs in children and neonates, an increasing number of pharmacokinetic studies of antibiotics are being performed in neonates. These studies have led to new dosing recommendations with particular consideration for neonate body size and maturation. Herein, we highlight the available pharmacokinetic data for commonly used systemic antibiotics in neonates.
OBJECTIVE: To report a case of a possible hypersensitivity reaction induced by metronidazole. CASE SUMMARY: An Asian woman with a history of recurrent vaginitis had previously developed localized erythema while on intravaginal metronidazole and nystatin. While receiving oral metronidazole for treatment of a current bacterial vaginosis, she developed chills, fever, generalized erythema, and a rash within 60 minutes of the first dose. Treatment with diphenhydramine was instituted. The following day while in the hospital, the patient's condition worsened; she experienced shortness of breath and increased edema of the extremities. Methylprednisolone was administered with diphenhydramine and her condition improved over the next 5 days. The patient's vaginitis was treated with gentian violet and she was discharged on a tapering dosage of prednisone. DISCUSSION: Metronidazole-induced cutaneous reactions and systemic hypersensitivity reactions are reviewed. Alternatives to metronidazole and other potential cross-reactive drugs are suggested for the treatment of recurrent vaginitis. CONCLUSIONS: Although the patient's initial reaction to metronidazole represented a rare event, written documentation and communication in the patient's native language may have prevented the subsequent severe hypersensitivity reaction.
