Coccidioidomycosis has been recognized as a common systemic disease since the late 1930's. The occurrence of ocular lesions associated with the systemic infection is uncommon. The anterior segment manifestations appear to be a mild hypersensitivity response; the disease may present as a chronic granulomatous iridocyclitis. In the posterior eye, the manifestations may range from asymptomatic focal chorioretinitis (somewhat similar to the peripheral atrophic lesions of the ocular histoplasmosis syndrome) to a fulminating granulomatous process involving the entire eye. The ocular lesions can occur in the asymptomatic form of systemic coccidioidomycosis. Diagnosis may be confirmed by skin tests and serologic tests. Amphotericin B is usually the drug of choice when treatment is required; however, its adverse effects may be severe, and other drugs, notably Miconazole and Ketoconazole, are being investigated as potential alternatives.
Aspergillus and Candida spp are the most frequently isolated fungi in patients with otomycosis. The diagnosis of otitis externa relies on the patient's history, otoscopic examination under microscopic control, and imaging studies. Direct preparation of the specimens, particularly with optical brighteners, mycologic culture, and histologic examination, is very important and strongly recommended for the correct diagnosis. Patients with noninvasive fungal otitis externa should be treated with intense debridement and cleansing, and topical antifungals. Topical antifungals, such as clotrimazole, miconazole, bifonazole, ciclopiroxolamine, and tolnaftate, are potentially safe choices for the treatment of otomycosis, especially in patients with a perforated eardrum. The oral triazole drugs, itraconazole, voriconazole, and posaconazole are effective against Candida and Aspergillus, with good penetration of bone and the central nervous system. These drugs are essential in the treatment of patients with malignant fungal otitis externa complicated by mastoiditis and meningitis.
Thrombocytosis is generally defined as platelet counts greater than 400,000/mm3. Thrombocytosis can be either primary or secondary. Adrenalin was one of the first drugs noticed to cause platelet elevations, probably due to demargination of platelets in the pulmonary vasculature. Vinca alkaloids have the most convincing data to show that they can induce thrombocytosis through their thrombocyte-stimulating properties. Miconazole has been implicated in causing thrombocytosis and has a documented case validated by drug rechallenge. Iron, predictably, can cause a transient thrombocytosis. The beta-lactam antibiotic data are very difficult to interpret due to the possibility of an acute-phase reaction in an infected patient being the cause of the thrombocytosis.
The newer antifungal agents, clotrimazole, miconazole and haloprogin are considered for their efficacy and acceptability, and are compared with other topical agents used for the treatment of dermatophyte infections of the skin.
The epidemiology of Coccidioides immitis is described with respect to annual infection rates and differing ethnic susceptibilities to the infection. A trial of miconazole in infected mice produced 100% survival in conditions which normally kill 100% of animals, probably by drastically reducing the rate of fungal multiplication in the lung. The fungal endospore, the form of the dimorphic fungus found predominantly in host tissue is more sensitive to miconazole than is the mycelial form. Data are presented from 14 human patients, some moribund and comatose, all of whom had failed to respond to existing therapy. There was objective evidence of improvement in eight, and a subjective impression of improvement in the majority. One patient failed to respond and three have equivocal results.
BACKGROUND: Candidiasis is one of the most common opportunistic oral infections that presents different acute and chronic clinical presentations with diverse diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. The present study carries out a bibliographic review on the therapeutic tools available against oral candidiasis and their usefulness in each clinical situation. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Recent studies on treatment of oral candidiasis were retrieved from PubMed and Cochrane Library. RESULTS: Nystatin and miconazole are the most commonly used topical antifungal drugs. Both antifungal drugs are very effective but need a long time of use to eradicate the infection. The pharmacological presentations of miconazole are more comfortable for patients but this drug may interact with other drugs and this fact should be assessed before use. Other topical alternatives for oral candidiasis, such as amphotericin B or clotrimazole, are not available in many countries. Oral fluconazole is effective in treating oral candidiasis that does not respond to topical treatment. Other systemic treatment alternatives, oral or intravenous, less used are itraconazole, voriconazole or posaconazole. Available novelties include echinocandins (anidulafungin, caspofungin) and isavuconazole. Echinocandins can only be used intravenously. Isavuconazole is available for oral and intravenous use. Other hopeful alternatives are new drugs, such as ibrexafungerp, or the use of antibodies, cytokines and antimicrobial peptides. CONCLUSIONS: Nystatin, miconazole, and fluconazole are very effective for treating oral candidiasis. There are systemic alternatives for treating recalcitrant infections, such as the new triazoles, echinocandins, or lipidic presentations of amphotericin B.
Cutaneous candidiasis is a common skin disease, and several treatments have been investigated within the last fifty years. Yet, systematic reviews are lacking, and evidence-based topical and systemic treatment strategies remain unclear. Thus, the aim of this review was to summarize efficacy and adverse effects of topical and oral therapies for cutaneous candidiasis in all age groups. Two individual researchers searched PubMed and EMBASE for 'cutaneous candidiasis' and 'cutaneous candidiasis treatment', 'intertrigo', 'diaper dermatitis' and 'cheilitis'. Searches were limited to 'English language', 'clinical trials' and 'human subjects', and prospective clinical trials published in abstracts or articles were included. In total, 149 studies were identified, of which 44 were eligible, comprising 41 studies of 19 topical therapies and four studies of three systemic therapies for cutaneous candidiasis. Topical therapies were investigated in infants, children, adolescents, adults and elderly, while studies of systemic therapies were limited to adolescents and adults. Clotrimazole, nystatin and miconazole were the most studied topical drugs and demonstrated similar efficacy with complete cure rates of 73%-100%. Single-drug therapy was as effective as combinations of antifungal, antibacterial and topical corticosteroid. Four studies investigated systemic therapy, and oral fluconazole demonstrated similar efficacy to oral ketoconazole and topical clotrimazole. Limitations to this review were mainly that heterogeneity of studies hindered meta-analyses. In conclusions, clotrimazole, nystatin and miconazole were the most studied topical drugs and demonstrated equal good efficacy and mild adverse effects similar to combinations of antifungal, antibacterial and topical corticosteroids. Oral fluconazole was as effective as topical clotrimazole and is the only commercially available evidence-based option for systemic treatment of cutaneous candidiasis.
Miconazole is an imidazole that has been successfully used for over 30 years for the treatment of superficial and cutaneous disease. This agent is distinguished from other azoles by possessing two mechanisms of action. The first mechanism is shared with other azoles and involves the inhibition of ergosterol synthesis. Another mechanism involves inhibition of peroxidases, which results in the accumulation of peroxide within the cell resulting in cell death. Susceptibility patterns for miconazole demonstrate that yeast fungi remain largely susceptible even in light of repeated exposures. Despite the release of newer azoles and other classes of antifungals, miconazole remains a highly prescribed treatment for vaginal candidiasis.
INTRODUCTION: Candida is a fungus present in the mouths of up to 60% of healthy people, but overt infection is associated with immunosuppression, diabetes, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and corticosteroid use. In most people, untreated candidiasis persists for months or years unless associated risk factors are treated or eliminated. In neonates, spontaneous cure of oropharyngeal candidiasis usually occurs after 3 to 8 weeks. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical questions: What are the effects of interventions to prevent and treat oropharyngeal candidiasis in: adults undergoing treatments that cause immunosuppression; infants and children; people with dentures; and people with HIV infection? Which antifungal treatments reduce the risk of acquiring resistance to antifungal drugs? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to July 2013 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the European Medicines Agency (EMA), and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 47 RCTs or systematic reviews of RCTs that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: antifungals (absorbed, partially or topically absorbed, or non-absorbed; for example, imidazole [ketoconazole, clotrimazole, toiconazole, miconazole], polyene [amphotericin B, nystatin], triazole [fluconazole, itraconazole], melaleuca and posaconazole), intermittent or continuous prophylaxis, or treatment, and denture hygiene.
Tinea nigra is a clinically distinctive superficial mycosis of the palms, and occasionally the soles, caused by Phaeoannellomyces werneckii. A patient, resident in the United Kingdom, is described who acquired the infection in Thailand. The condition cleared after treatment with topical miconazole cream 2%.
We designed and synthesized miconazole analogues containing a substituted imidazolium moiety. The structural modification of the miconazole led to a compound with high potency to prevent the formation and disrupt bacterial biofilms, as a result of accumulation in the biofilm matrix, permeabilization of the bacterial membrane and generation of reactive oxygen species in the cytoplasm.
Oropharyngeal candidiasis (OPC) is among the most common opportunistic infections observed in persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus. A once-daily miconazole 50 mg mucoadhesive buccal tablet (MBT) is a novel delivery system with potent in vitro activity against many Candida species, including some that may be resistant to other azoles. MBT, although more expensive, offers an effective, safe, and well-tolerated topical treatment option for OPC that is administered as a convenient once-daily dose.
The occurrence and recurrence of mucosal biofilm-related Candida infections, such as oral and vulvovaginal candidiasis, are serious clinical issues. Vaginal infections caused by Candida spp., for example, affect 70 to 75% of women at least once during their lives. Miconazole (MCZ) is the preferred topical treatment against these fungal infections, yet it has only moderate antibiofilm activity. Through screening of a drug-repurposing library, we identified the quaternary ammonium compound domiphen bromide (DB) as an MCZ potentiator against Candida biofilms. DB displayed synergistic anti-Candida albicans biofilm activity with MCZ, reducing the number of viable biofilm cells 1,000-fold. In addition, the MCZ-DB combination also resulted in significant killing of biofilm cells of azole-resistant C. albicans, C. glabrata, and C. auris isolates. In vivo, the MCZ-DB combination had significantly improved activity in a vulvovaginal candidiasis rat model compared to that of single-compound treatments. Data from an artificial evolution experiment indicated that the development of resistance against the combination did not occur, highlighting the potential of MCZ-DB combination therapy to treat Candida biofilm-related infections.
Intraocular infection due to Blastomyces dermatitidis is rare, and only 10 cases have previously been reported. Manifestations of ocular blastomycosis can range from keratitis to panophthalmitis, and it is often difficult to diagnose ocular blastomycosis early. We report the case of a 45-year-old man who had disseminated blastomycosis that involved the lungs, skin, and ocular uvea and who was successfully treated with systemic and local antifungal therapy. We also review the literature describing the spectrum of clinical findings due to intraocular blastomycosis.
The increased use of antibacterial and antifungal agents in recent years has resulted in the development of resistance to these drugs. The significant clinical implication of resistance has led to heightened interest in the study of antimicrobial resistance from different angles. Areas addressed include mechanisms underlying this resistance, improved methods to detect resistance when it occurs, alternate options for the treatment of infections caused by resistant organisms, and strategies to prevent and control the emergence and spread of resistance. In this review, the mode of action of antifungals and their mechanisms of resistance are discussed. Additionally, an attempt is made to discuss the correlation between fungal and bacterial resistance. Antifungals can be grouped into three classes based on their site of action: azoles, which inhibit the synthesis of ergosterol (the main fungal sterol); polyenes, which interact with fungal membrane sterols physicochemically; and 5-fluorocytosine, which inhibits macromolecular synthesis. Many different types of mechanisms contribute to the development of resistance to antifungals. These mechanisms include alteration in drug target, alteration in sterol biosynthesis, reduction in the intercellular concentration of target enzyme, and overexpression of the antifungal drug target. Although the comparison between the mechanisms of resistance to antifungals and antibacterials is necessarily limited by several factors defined in the review, a correlation between the two exists. For example, modification of enzymes which serve as targets for antimicrobial action and the involvement of membrane pumps in the extrusion of drugs are well characterized in both the eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells.
Various agents are available for the treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis. Imidazole agents (clotrimazole, miconazole, butoconazole, and terconazole) are preferred because of their greater efficacy, shorter treatment regimens, and ease of administration. Although the various imidazole compounds are equally efficacious, different treatment schedules are recommended depending on clinical situations. Additionally, different formulations are available that provide clinicians and patients with the opportunity to select the most appropriate agent.
Fungal infections of the gastrointestinal tract have risen to higher levels of prevalence in the past decade. Major factors accounting for this increase are social changes, such as the increased ease and frequency of travel, which exposes the individual to environmental conditions that may result in fungal infection; increasing use of antibiotic and hormonal medications by otherwise healthy persons; and improved therapy for other diseases, such as polychemotherapy of cancer with its immunosuppressive effects. Both noninvasive and invasive fungal disease of the intestinal tract in otherwise healthy individuals can be successfully treated. The invasive fungal infections in patients with severe prior underlying disease are often first diagnosed postmortem, but improvement in serologic techniques now offers a possibility of earlier diagnosis and therapeutic intervention.
A man in his 70s on warfarin attended the emergency department three times over a 24-hour period, complaining of a sore throat, neck swelling and difficulty swallowing. He was initially diagnosed with pharyngitis, given antibiotics and discharged home, which was reconfirmed on the second attendance after an episode of haemoptysis. On the third, he was diagnosed with a pharyngeal haematoma causing partial airway obstruction and admitted to critical care. His international normalised ratio (INR) was reported initially as unreadable by the laboratory, then eventually came back as >20. After a thorough medication history, he said that he had recently been prescribed topical miconazole oromucosal gel by his dentist for oral candidiasis, which had interacted with the warfarin to cause this life-threatening haematoma.
In the past 40 years imidazoles have been used extensively in medicine for their antifungal properties. All members of the azole antifungal family inhibit ergosterol biosynthesis. However, the discovery of an additional fungicidal mode of action for miconazole has drawn renewed attention to this compound. In this article we review recent evidence of mechanistic efficacy, as well as clinical trial results of miconazole in new topical formulations.
Xeroderma Pigmentosum protein C (XPC) is involved in recognition and repair of bulky DNA damage such as lesions induced by Ultra Violet (UV) radiation. XPC-mutated cells are, therefore, photosensitive and accumulate UVB-induced pyrimidine dimers leading to increased cancer incidence. Here, we performed a high-throughput screen to identify chemicals capable of normalizing the XP-C phenotype (hyper-photosensitivity and accumulation of photoproducts). Fibroblasts from XP-C patients were treated with a library of approved chemical drugs. Out of 1280 tested chemicals, 16 showed >/=25% photo-resistance with RZscore above 2.6 and two drugs were able to favor repair of 6-4 pyrimidine pyrimidone photoproducts (6-4PP). Among these two compounds, Isoconazole could partially inhibit apoptosis of the irradiated cells especially when cells were post-treated directly after UV irradiation while Clemizole Hydrochloride-mediated increase in viability was dependent on both pre and post treatment. No synergistic effect was recorded following combined drug treatment and the compounds exerted no effect on the proliferative capacity of the cells post UV exposure. Amelioration of XP-C phenotype is a pave way towards understanding the accelerated skin cancer initiation in XP-C patients. Further examination is required to decipher the molecular mechanisms targeted by these two chemicals.
