BACKGROUND: Androgenetic alopecia (AGA) is the most common cause of hair loss, often challenging to treat. While oral finasteride (1 mg/d) is an FDA-approved treatment for male AGA, oral minoxidil and oral dutasteride are not approved yet. However, clinicians have been increasingly using these two drugs off-label for hair loss. Recently, Japan and South Korea have approved oral dutasteride (0.5 mg/d) for male AGA. EFFICACY AND SAFETY: A probable efficacy ranking, in decreasing order, is - dutasteride 0.5 mg/d, finasteride 5 mg/d, minoxidil 5 mg/d, finasteride 1 mg/d, followed by minoxidil 0.25 mg/d. Oral minoxidil predominantly causes hypertrichosis and cardiovascular system (CVS) symptoms/signs in a dose-dependent manner, whereas oral finasteride and dutasteride are associated with sexual dysfunction and neuropsychiatric side effects. PHARMACOKINETICS AND PHARMACODYNAMICS: The average plasma half-lives of minoxidil, finasteride, and dutasteride are  approximately 4 h,  approximately 4.5 h, and  approximately 5 weeks, respectively. Minoxidil acts through multiple pathways to promote hair growth. It has been shown as a vasodilator, an anti-inflammatory agent, a Wnt/beta-catenin signaling inducer, and an antiandrogen. Finasteride inhibits 5alpha-reductase (5AR) type II isoenzyme, while dutasteride inhibits both type I and type II. Thus, dutasteride suppresses DHT levels more than finasteride in the serum and scalp.
BACKGROUND: Although topical minoxidil is an effective treatment option for hair loss, many patients are poorly compliant because of the necessity to apply the medication twice a day, undesirable hair texture, and scalp irritation. OBJECTIVE: In recent years, oral minoxidil at low dose has been proposed as a safe alternative. This study reviewed articles in which oral minoxidil was used to treat hair loss to determine its efficacy and safety as an alternative to topical minoxidil. METHODS: PubMed searches were performed to identify articles discussing oral minoxidil as the primary form of treatment for hair loss published up to April 2020. RESULTS: A total of 17 studies with 634 patients were found discussing the use of oral minoxidil as the primary treatment modality for hair loss. Androgenetic alopecia was the most studied condition, but other conditions included telogen effluvium, lichen planopilaris, loose anagen hair syndrome, monilethrix, alopecia areata, and permanent chemotherapy-induced alopecia. LIMITATIONS: Larger randomized studies comparing the efficacy/safety of different doses with standardized objective measurements will be needed to clarify the best treatment protocol. CONCLUSION: Oral minoxidil was found to be an effective and well-tolerated treatment alternative for healthy patients having difficulty with topical formulations.
Minoxidil was first introduced as an antihypertensive medication and the discovery of its common adverse event, hypertrichosis, led to the development of a topical formulation for promoting hair growth. To date, topical minoxidil is the mainstay treatment for androgenetic alopecia and is used as an off-label treatment for other hair loss conditions. Despite its widespread application, the exact mechanism of action of minoxidil is still not fully understood. In this article, we aim to review and update current information on the pharmacology, mechanism of action, clinical efficacy, and adverse events of topical minoxidil.
Androgenetic alopecia is a common type of hair loss, which is generally influenced by genetic factors and systemic androgens resulting in follicular miniaturization.1 It can cause cosmetic problems leading to psychological distress among affected men and women. Effective standard medical treatments available are topical minoxidil 2 to 5%, oral finasteride, oral dutasteride, and hair transplantation.1 However, some patients do not achieve favorable results with standard treatments. For these reasons, other novel treatments have been developed, including new medications, regenerative medicines (autologous platelet-rich plasma, adipose-derived stem cells, micrograft generation, and exosome), and low-level laser therapy.
Female androgenetic alopecia or female-pattern hair loss (FPHL) is highly prevalent and has a great impact on the quality of life. The treatment is a routine challenge in dermatological practice, as many therapeutic options have a limited level of evidence and often do not meet patients expectations. Lack of knowledge of the pathogenesis of the hair miniaturization process and the factors that regulate follicular morphogenesis restricts the prospect of innovative therapies. There is also a lack of randomized, controlled studies with longitudinal follow-up, using objective outcomes and exploring the performance of the available treatments and their combinations. Topical minoxidil, which has been used to treat female pattern hair loss since the 1990s, is the only medication that has a high level of evidence and remains the first choice. However, about 40% of patients do not show improvement with this treatment. In this article, the authors critically discuss the main clinical and surgical therapeutic alternatives for FPHL, as well as present camouflage methods that can be used in more extensive or unresponsive cases.
Introduction: Androgenetic alopecia is a common hair loss disorder affecting up to 80% of males by the age of 80. It is characterized by androgen related progressive thinning of hair in a defined pattern. It results in diminished self-esteem, reduced confidence and distress in affected men, irrespective of age or stage of baldness. An effective treatment for hair baldness is needed.Areas covered: In androgenetic alopecia, hair follicles undergo progressive miniaturization. Genetic factors and androgens are key role-players in disease pathogenesis. Herein the authors review the pharmacologic treatment of androgenetic alopecia, which involves 5 alpha reductase inhibitors, minoxidil and prostaglandins. Non-pharmacologic approaches are also explored.Expert opinion: Androgenetic alopecia progresses over time and although the current available medical treatments like finasteride and minoxidil are effective in arresting the progression of the disease, they allow only partial regrowth of hair at its best. Early treatment achieves a more optimal outcome. Non-pharmacologic treatments like PRP can be considered in patients refractory to medical treatment.Abbreviations: MPHL: male pattern hair loss; AGA: androgenetic alopecia; DHT: dihydrotestosterone; 5AR: 5-alpha-reductase; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor; PG's: prostaglandins (PG's); PGD2R: prostaglandin D2 receptor; VPA: valproic aid; SR: Serenoa Repens; PRP: platelet-rich plasma; PDGF: platelet derived growth factor; TGF: transforming growth factor; ERK: extracellular signal-regulated kinase; PKB: protein kinase B; LLLT: low-level laser therapy; ROS: reactive oxygen species; RCT: randomized control trial; SFRP1: secreted frizzled related protein 1; DP: dermal papilla; PDE5: phosphodiesterase 5.
Minoxidil is an orally active vasodilator for treatment of severe hypertension. In combination with diuretics and beta-adrenergic blocking agents, it is effective treatment for more than 80% of patients whose blood pressure has been inadequately controlled with combinations of other been inadequately controlled with combinations of other antihypertensive drugs. Major adverse reactions include reflex activation of the adrenergic nervous system, renal sodium retention, and hypertrichosis. Despite the possibility of adverse reactions, minoxidil is indicated in patients whose blood pressure cannot be controlled with conventional therapy, in persons with major adverse reactions to other drugs, and in patients who are candidates for bilateral nephrectomy for control of hypertension.
Mesotherapy is a technique by which lower doses of therapeutic agents and bioactive substances are administered by intradermal injections to the skin. Through intradermal injections, mesotherapy can increase the residence time of therapeutic agents in the affected area, thus allowing for the use of lower doses and longer intervals between sessions which may in turn improve the treatment outcome and patient compliance. This systematic review aims to summarize the current literature that evaluates the efficacy of this technique for the treatment of hair loss and provides an overview of the results observed. Of the 416 records identified, 27 articles met the inclusion criteria. To date, mesotherapy using 6 classes of agents and their combinations have been studied; this includes dutasteride, minoxidil, growth factors or autologous suspension, botulinum toxin A, stem cells, and mesh solutions/multivitamins. While several studies report statistically significant improvements in hair growth after treatment, there is currently a lack of standardized regimens. The emergence of adverse effects after mesotherapy has been reported. Further large-scale and controlled clinical trials are warranted to evaluate the utility of mesotherapy for hair loss disorders.
Physicians should be careful not to underestimate the emotional impact of hair loss for some patients. Patients may present with focal patches of hair loss or more diffuse hair loss, which may include predominant hair thinning or increased hair shedding. Focal hair loss can be further broken down into scarring and nonscarring. Scarring alopecia is best evaluated by a dermatologist. The cause of focal hair loss may be diagnosed by the appearance of the patch and examination for fungal agents. A scalp biopsy may be necessary if the cause of hair loss is unclear. Alopecia areata presents with smooth hairless patches, which have a high spontaneous rate of resolution. Tinea capitis causes patches of alopecia that may be erythematous and scaly. Male and female pattern hair losses have recognizable patterns and can be treated with topical minoxidil, and also with finasteride in men. Sudden loss of hair is usually telogen effluvium, but can also be diffuse alopecia areata. In telogen effluvium, once the precipitating cause is removed, the hair will regrow.
Androgenetic alopecia (AGA) is the most common form of alopecia, affecting up to 80% of men and 50% of women in the course of their life. AGA is caused by a progressive reduction in the diameter, length and pigmentation of the hair. Hair thinning results from the effects of the testosterone metabolite dehydrotestosterone (DHT) on androgen-sensitive hair follicles. In women, AGA produces diffuse thinning of the crown region with maintenance of the frontal hairline (Ludwig pattern AGA). In premenopausal women, AGA can be a sign of hyperandrogenism, together with hirsutism and acnes. Male pattern is characterized by bitemporal recession of the frontal hairline, followed by diffuse thinning at the vertex. Today, scalp dermoscopy is used routinely in patients with androgenetic alopecia, as it facilitates the diagnosis and differential diagnosis with other diseases, allows staging of severity, and allows you to monitor the progress of the disease in time and response to treatment. AGA is a progressive disease that tends to worsen with time. Medical treatment of AGA includes topical minoxidil, antiandrogen agents, 5-alpha reductase inhibitors.
BACKGROUND: Androgenetic alopecia (AGA) is one of the most common chronic problems seen by dermatologists worldwide. It is characterized by progressive hair loss, especially of scalp hair, and has distinctive patterns of loss in women versus men, but in both genders the central scalp is most severely affected. It often begins around puberty and is known to effect self-esteem and the individual's quality of life. In contrast to the high prevalence of AGA, approved therapeutic options are limited. In addition to the scarce pharmacologic treatments, there are numerous nonprescription products claimed to be effective in restoring hair in androgenetic alopecia. OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this paper is to review published medical and non-medical treatments for male and female AGA using the American College of Physicians evidence assessment methods. MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane Library were searched for systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials, open studies, case reports and relevant studies of the treatment of male and female AGA. The relevant articles were classified according to grade and level of evidence. RESULTS: The medical treatments with the best level of evidence classification for efficacy and safety for male AGA are oral finasteride and topical minoxidil solution. For female AGA, topical minoxidil solution appears to be the most effective and safe treatment. The medical treatments corresponding to the next level of evidence quality are some commonly used therapeutic non-FDA-approved options including oral and topical anti-hormonal treatments. Surgical treatment of follicular unit hair transplantation is an option in cases that have failed medical treatment although there is high variation in outcomes. LIMITATIONS: Some articles, especially those concerning traditional herbs claimed to promote hair regrowth, were published in non-English, local journals. CONCLUSIONS: An assessment of the evidence quality of current publications indicates that oral finasteride (for men only) and topical minoxidil (for men and women) are the best treatments of AGA.
BACKGROUND: Topical minoxidil has been used for almost 40 years to treat alopecia. There is growing evidence supporting off-label use of low-dose oral minoxidil. OBJECTIVE: To conduct a systematic review evaluating the use of oral minoxidil for all types of alopecia. METHODS: A primary literature search was conducted using PubMed in May 2019, utilizing the search term "oral minoxidil AND (hair loss OR alopecia OR baldness)". Reviews, non-English studies, and articles concerning only topical minoxidil were excluded. RESULTS: Ten articles were included for review comprising a total 19,218 patients (215 women and 19,003 men). Oral minoxidil dose ranged from 0.25 to 5 mg daily to twice daily. The strongest evidence existed for androgenetic alopecia and alopecia areata (AA), with 61-100% and 18-82.4% of patients demonstrating objective clinical improvement. Successful treatment of female pattern hair loss, chronic telogen effluvium, monilethrix, and permanent chemotherapy-induced alopecia was also reported. The most common adverse effects with oral minoxidil included hypertrichosis and postural hypotension. CONCLUSION: Oral minoxidil is a safe and successful treatment of androgenic alopecia and AA. In addition to its therapeutic benefits, practical advantages over topical minoxidil stem from improved patient compliance.
Minoxidil, a vasodilator medication known for its ability to slow or stop hair loss and promote hair regrowth, was first introduced, exclusively as an oral drug, to treat high blood pressure. It was however discovered to have the important side-effect of increasing growth or darkening of fine body hairs; this led to the development of a topical formulation as a 2% concentration solution for the treatment of female androgenic alopecia or 5% for treating male androgenic alopecia. Measurable changes disappear within months after discontinuation of treatment. The mechanism by which it promotes hair growth is not fully understood. Minoxidil is a potassium channel opener, causing hyperpolarization of cell membranes and it is also a vasodilator, it is speculated that, by widening blood vessels and opening potassium channels, it allows more oxygen, blood and nutrients to the follicle. This can also cause follicles in the telogen phase to shed, usually soon to be replaced by new, thicker hairs in a new anagen phase. It needs to be applied regularly, once or twice daily, for hair gained to be maintained, and side effects are common. The most common adverse reactions of the topical formulation are limited to irritant and allergic contact dermatitis on the scalp. There have been cases of allergic reactions to the nonactive ingredient propylene glycol, which is found in some topical solution especially if they are galenic. Increased hair loss which can occur during Minoxidil use, is due to the synchronization of the hair cycle that the treatment induces. In this review, we described its mechanism of action, use in dermatology and some patents related to alternative treatment of allergic reactions due to its use.
Finasteride and minoxidil are medicaments commonly prescribed for treating benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPA), hypertension, and/or androgenetic alopecia (AGA). The mechanism of action of finasteride is based on the interference in androgenic pathways, which may lead to fertility-related disorders in men. Minoxidil, however, can act in multiple ways, and there is no consensus that its use can adversely affect male fertility. Since finasteride and minoxidil could be risk factors for male fertility, we aimed to compare their impact on the two reproductive organs testis and epididymis of adult murine models, besides testis/epididymis-related cells, and describe the mechanism of action involved. For such, we used the PRISMA guideline. We included 31 original studies from a structured search on PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, and Web of Science databases. For in vivo studies, the bias analysis and the quality of the studies were assessed as described by SYRCLE (Systematic Review Centre for Laboratory Animal Experimentation). We concluded that finasteride and minoxidil act as hormone disruptors, causing oxidative stress and morphological changes mainly in the testis. Our results also revealed that finasteride treatment could be more harmful to male reproductive health because it was more associated with reproductive injuries, including damage to the epididymis, erectile dysfunction, decreased libido, and reduced semen volume. Thus, this study contributes to the global understanding of the mechanisms by which medicaments used for alopecia might lead to male reproductive disorders. We hope that our critical analysis expedites clinical research and reduces methodological bias. The registration number on the Prospero platform is CRD42022313347.
IMPORTANCE: There has been increased interest in low-dose oral minoxidil for androgenetic alopecia (AGA) treatment. However, the efficacy of oral minoxidil for male AGA is yet to be evaluated in comparative therapeutic trials. OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of daily oral minoxidil, 5 mg, vs twice-daily topical minoxidil, 5%, for 24 weeks in the treatment of male AGA. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial was conducted at a single specialized clinic in Brazil. Eligible men with AGA aged 18 to 55 years classified using the Norwood-Hamilton scale as 3V, 4V, or 5V were included and randomized. Data were collected from January to December 2021, and data were analyzed from September 2022 to February 2023. INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomized 1:1 into 2 groups: oral minoxidil, 5 mg, daily and topical placebo solution; or 1 mL of topical minoxidil, 5%, twice daily and oral placebo for 24 weeks. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was change in terminal hair density on the frontal and vertex regions of the scalp. The secondary outcomes were change in total hair density and photographic evaluation. RESULTS: Among 90 enrolled participants, 68 completed the study; of these, the mean (SD) age was 36.6 (7.8) years. A total of 33 participants were enrolled in the oral minoxidil group and 35 in the topical treatment group. Both groups were homogenous in terms of demographic data and AGA severity. For the frontal area, the mean change from baseline to week 24 between groups was 3.1 hairs per cm2 (95% CI, -18.2 to 21.5; P = .27) for terminal hair density and 2.6 hairs per cm2 (95% CI, -10.3 to 15.8; P = .32) for total hair density. For the vertex area, the mean change from baseline to week 24 was 23.4 hairs per cm2 (95% CI, -0.3 to 43.0; P = .09) for terminal density and 5.5 hairs per cm2 (95% CI, -12.5 to 23.5; P = .32) for total hair density. According to the photographic analysis, oral minoxidil was superior to topical minoxidil on the vertex (24%; 95% CI, 0 to 48; P = .04) but not on the frontal scalp (12%; 95% CI, -12 to 36; P = .24). The most common adverse effects in the oral minoxidil group were hypertrichosis (22 of 45 [49%]) and headache (6 of 45 [14%]). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this study, oral minoxidil, 5 mg, once per day for 24 weeks did not demonstrate superiority over topical minoxidil, 5%, twice per day in men with AGA. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Brazilian Registry of Clinical Trials Identifier: RBR-252w9r.
Alopecia areata (AA) lifetime incidence is around 2%, with many patients first experiencing symptoms during childhood. However, ritlecitinib is the only FDA-approved treatment for pediatric patients 12 years and older. This review outlines reported topical, injectable, and oral treatment options for pediatric patients with AA. Clinical studies were obtained via a PubMed search using the following search terms: alopecia areata, areata, universalis, or totalis and medication, therapy, treatment, drug, or management. Only studies with pediatric patients were included in this review. Commonly used therapies, including corticosteroids, methotrexate, and minoxidil, newer promising medications, such as Janus kinase inhibitors, and less frequently used topical and systemic treatments are included. A summary of the drug development pipeline and ongoing interventional clinical trials with pediatric patients is provided. Treatments demonstrate variable efficacy, and many patients require combination therapy for maximal response. More robust clinical data is needed for many of the medications reviewed in order to provide better care for these patients.
Male androgenetic alopecia is a common condition and represents a major concern for patients who experience this condition. While there are different treatments to stop hair loss and improve hair density, the 5-alpha reductase inhibitors have demonstrated to be effective in improving androgenetic alopecia in men and can maintain a positive response for many years. Oral finasteride 1 mg is a US FDA-approved option, but dutasteride 0.5 mg has been proven to induce better responses, especially in the frontal area. Both have been shown to be safe in clinical trials but there is widespread concern about sexual adverse effects among patients. The use of topical finasteride has increased during the last few years as a useful option to avoid systemic therapy. The efficacy of topical finasteride 0.25% daily has been demonstrated in clinical trials, with a less marked decrease in serum dihydrotestosterone levels than with oral intake. Mesotherapy with dutasteride has also become more widespread recently, although evidence of its effectiveness is limited to retrospective studies in real clinical practice. The use of oral minoxidil in androgenetic alopecia has not been approved by the FDA, however several clinical studies have shown that it is an effective treatment option. The initial dose recommended to treat male hair loss is 2.5 mg daily, although the dose is frequently increased to 5 mg daily. The main adverse effect of oral minoxidil is hypertrichosis, followed by dizziness or lower limb edema, which are much less common. Platelet-rich plasma is a non-pharmacological option to treat male androgenetic alopecia, with some clinical trials demonstrating an improvement in hair count after several months. Among the published studies, the main limitation to compare its efficacy is the heterogeneity of the procedure. The most frequent regimens propose treatment every 4 weeks for 3 months initially to assess the individual response. Another treatment alternative is the use of light devices with wavelengths of between 630 and 660 nm, known as low-level laser therapy. These devices can be used at home every day for 15-30 min. Their efficacy has been shown in a limited number of clinical trials; however, there is a lack of evidence about the efficacy of these devices compared with other medical options or as a complementary therapy in hair loss. The pipeline of potential new treatments for male androgenetic alopecia is strong. Pyrilutamide and GT20029 are being studied as topical antagonists of the androgen receptor, while cetirizine is another topical option with some initial promising results. Furthermore, according to isolated studies with heterogeneous treatment schemes, the use of botulinum toxin in the scalp might improve androgenetic alopecia, and lastly, scalp threading might increase the total hair count as growth factors are released during implantation.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanism of minoxidil in treating androgenetic alopecia (AGA). METHODS: The mechanism of action of minoxidil on AGA was first systematically investigated from the viewpoint of network pharmacology, including minoxidil-AGA target prediction, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis, molecular docking and enrichment analysis of targets related to minoxidil and AGA, and dermal papilla cell assays to confirm the viability of prediction. RESULTS: The combined analysis revealed that minoxidil treatment of AGA not only acts on androgenic receptors (AR) but also on 2 new targets, steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase (CYP17A1) and aromatase (CYP19A1). The biological processes linked to these targets were concentrated on several pathways, including enzymes and hormones. Further experiments have revealed that minoxidil suppresses the expression of AR and CYP17A1, boosts the activity of CYP19A1, decreases the formation and binding of dihydrotestosterone, and enhances the production of estradiol. Through these changes, minoxidil acts as a treatment for AGA. CONCLUSION: Minoxidil may act by altering hormonal and enzymatic pathways. Our study finds two new targets (CYP17A1, CYP19A1) of minoxidil and demonstrates that minoxidil inhibits AR. These targets may provide new ideas for drug research.
Topical minoxidil is a well-known and often-utilized drug in dermatological practice for the treatment of alopecia. It was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia in 1988. Since its approval, minoxidil has been used off-label for the treatment of many other types of alopecia, with minimal formal evidence of efficacy. Conditions for which the use of topical minoxidil has been reported include telogen effluvium, alopecia areata (AA), scarring alopecia, eyebrow hypotrichosis, monilethrix, and chemotherapy-induced alopecia (CIA). The evidence for the use of minoxidil in each condition is derived from a variety of studies, including clinical trials, case series, and case reports. A comprehensive review of the literature indicates that while minoxidil is routinely used in the management of many alopecic conditions, there is mixed evidence for its efficacy. For certain conditions, including AA and most scarring alopecias, the evidence seems to be inconclusive. For others, such as eyebrow hypotrichosis, monilethrix, early traction alopecia, and CIA, there is more support for the efficacy of minoxidil. Although the favorable safety profile of minoxidil is established in adults, its use in the treatment of pediatric alopecia may require heightened monitoring and patient education.
BACKGROUND: Microneedling has shown to have positive therapeutic effects in treatment of androgenetic alopecia (AGA); however, the best microneedling protocol is still controversial. AIMS: Investigating effect of microneedling with 2 different depths of penetration on promoting hair growth in patients with AGA. METHODS: Sixty patients, in the age of 18-45 years old with moderate and severe AGA, were allocated into 3 groups of control: treatment with minoxidil 5% lotion; group A: treatment with minoxidil 5% lotion and biweekly microneedling with a depth of 1.2 mm and group B: treatment with minoxidil 5% lotion and biweekly microneedling with a depth of 0.6 mm during 12 weeks. Efficacy parameters including change of hair count and hair thickness from baseline and assessment of hair growth by patient and investigator were evaluated. RESULTS: Compared with the baseline, a significant increase in hair count and hair thickness was observed in all three groups after completion of the treatment course (P < .05). The mean rise in hair count (P = .017) and hair thickness (P = .007) was significantly greater in group B compared with control group. Investigator's evaluation of hair regrowth was significantly greater in group A (P = .04) and group B (P = .007) compared with control group. CONCLUSION: Microneedling with a depth of 0.6 mm in combination with minoxidil is more effective than minoxidil monotherapy in patients with AGA in terms of hair count and hair thickness. This depth of penetration tended to be more beneficial than depth of 1.2 mm.
