Oral contraceptives containing a high dose of oestrogen reduce the sebum excretion rate (SER) and improve acne vulgaris, but more progestogenic preparations may exacerbate acne. The effect on the SER of several oral contraceptives with varying progestogenic potencies was studied in 81 women. The predominantly progestogenic pills (Eugynon 30, Gynovlar) produced no significant change in SER, whereas the rate in women taking a more oestrogenic pill (Minovlar) was significantly reduced compared with the rate in controls. Progestogens therefore do not exacerbate acne by inducing seborrhoea, but in the doses we studied they nullified the inhibitory effect of oestrogens on the sebaceous glands. Acne-prone women who require an oral contraceptive should be given a predominantly oestrogenic preparation.
A total of 167 264 symptoms were recorded in numerical shorthand during a ten years period in a general practice. Computer analysis yielded 1535 adverse reactions with the drug prescribed. Especially prominent were reactions from three antibiotics (13% of all reported reactions), most of which were alimentary symptoms. Ampicillin also induced rashes reported at a rate of 5.2 per thousand prescriptions. Reactions to an oral contraceptive (Minovlar) were the most frequent to a single named drug, being 25.9% of prescriptions for that drug. A worldwide total of around one trillion symptoms seems likely before AD 2000. Computers could be used to detect the unpredictable side effects, as with practolol. Various 'costs' involved are noted, together with wider questions.
Ninety female patients with acne were allocated randomly to one of three groups and treated either with Diane, a high dose cyproterone acetate (CPA) regime with ethinyloestradiol, or Minovlar. The same dose of oestrogen was common to all three treatment groups. Patients were assessed every 2 months for 6 months, by grading for severity of the acne, lesion counts and photography, and subjectively using a visual analogue scale. In addition, bacteriological sampling and sebum excretion rate (SER) measurements were performed. The results showed a clinical improvement in all three treatment groups, but a more rapid and complete response was seen in those groups who received CPA. There was also a consistent trend suggesting a more favourable response in those in the high dose CPA group. Although there was a marked reduction in SER in the groups treated with CPA, there was no correlation between reduction in SER and clinical improvement in individuals, nor could a reduction in the surface bacterial population be shown to be a primary event in the success of anti-androgen therapy. We have shown that the addition of CPA to oestrogen adds significantly to the therapeutic effect in acne and that anti-androgen and oestrogen combinations are more effective than standard oestrogen and progestagen contraceptive pills.
A single dose of Minovlar (50 microgram ethynylestradiol (EE) and 1 mg norethindrone acetate) was given to seven women during treatment with rifampicin (450-600 mg/day) and again one month after stopping rifampicin. Blood samples were taken at intervals over a 24-hour period. The area under the plasma EE versus time curve increased significantly on stopping rifampicin from 1014 +/- 317 pg/ml x h (mean +/- SE) to 1747 +/- 218 pg/ml x h (p less than 0.01). The terminal plasma half-life increased from 2.9 +/- 0.8 h to 6.3 +/- 1.4 h (p less than 0.005). The sex hormone binding globulin (S.H.B.G.) capacity was also reduced from 213.4 +/- 11.5 nmoles to 129.0 +/- 7.7 nmoles/1 after stopping rifampicin. In one patient starting rifampicin who was taking Minovlar as a long-term oral contraceptive, a fall in the plasma EE concentration was associated with a rise in the plasma follicle stimulating hormone concentration. These effects of rifampicin on EE pharmacokinetics are consistent with induction of the microsomal enzymes that metabolise EE.
The effect that synthetic steroid components of different oral contraceptives have on the assay system for measurement of sex hormones binding globulin (SHBG)-binding capacity, has been examined. Interference with the assay was not demonstrable at therapeutic levels of the drugs. d-Norgestrel was the only steroid studied which bound to SHBG with an affinity comparable to the endogenous sex hormones; it also tended to decrease SHBG-finding capacity, whereas preparations containing low levels of norethisterone increased the binding capacity. We suggest that measurement of changes in SHBG-binding capacity in subjects taking oral contraceptives may prove useful in indicating changes in sex hormone balance, particularly in view of the well-recognised side-effect of these drugs.
1 Thirteen women taking long term oral contraceptive steroids were studied while taking ampicillin (500 mg three times daily) and compared to a control cycle while not taking ampicillin. 2 There were no significant changes in the plasma concentrations of ethinyloestradiol, levonorgestrel, follicle stimulating hormone or progesterone, although lower concentrations of ethinyloestradiol were noted in two women. 3 We conclude that most patients taking oral contraceptive steroids do not need to take alternative contraceptive precautions while taking ampicillin.
A case of cerebral embolism is described in which paradoxical features have been proved clinically, and which may explain some hitherto unaccountable reported cases, and suggests the value of prospective studies. A successful outcome of such a proved case, associated with oral contraceptives, does not appear to have been reported previously.
A prospective clinical trial was conducted in three centres to assess the effects of the type and dose of progestogen, the dose of estrogen and the progestogen-to-estrogen ratio of oral contraceptives on lipid metabolism. The preparations selected contained levonorgestrel 250 micrograms + ethinyl estradiol 50 micrograms (Neogynon), levonorgestrel 250 micrograms + ethinyl estradiol 30 micrograms (Eugynon 30), levonorgestrel 150 micrograms + ethinyl estradiol 30 micrograms (Microgynon) or norethisterone acetate 1 mg + ethinyl estradiol 50 micrograms (Minovlar). Four-hundred-and-seven premenopausal women were randomly assigned to one of the four pill groups and compared to a control group of 119 users of a CuT220c intrauterine device. Total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol and total triglycerides were monitored and the analysis includes the data of those who were followed over 48 weeks, 241 OC users and 87 IUD users. 250 micrograms of levonorgestrel were found to induce more unfavourable lipid changes in terms of atherosclerotic risk than 1mg of norethisterone acetate. Levonorgestrel was found to have a dose-effect on HDL-cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol serum levels, while ethinyl estradiol had a dose-effect on serum triglycerides. HDL-cholesterol was related to the progestogen-to-estrogen ratio. Most of these findings were consistent across centres. Finally, some comments are made on the implications of the study results on the design of future lipid studies.
