Extending from the triple wave epidemic of opioid-related overdose deaths, a fourth wave of high mortality involving methamphetamine and cocaine use has been gathering force. This article provides a review of the published literature on stimulants including epidemiology, pharmacology, neurobiology, medical and psychiatric consequences, withdrawal management, and medical and behavioral treatments.
BACKGROUND: Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a prevalent and disabling disorder. Evidence that PTSD is characterised by specific psychobiological dysfunctions has contributed to a growing interest in the use of medication in its treatment. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of medication for reducing PTSD symptoms in adults with PTSD. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; Issue 11, November 2020); MEDLINE (1946-), Embase (1974-), PsycINFO (1967-) and PTSDPubs (all available years) either directly or via the Cochrane Common Mental Disorders Controlled Trials Register (CCMDCTR). We also searched international trial registers. The date of the latest search was 13 November 2020. SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of pharmacotherapy for adults with PTSD. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three review authors (TW, JI, and NP) independently assessed RCTs for inclusion in the review, collated trial data, and assessed trial quality. We contacted investigators to obtain missing data. We stratified summary statistics by medication class, and by medication agent for all medications. We calculated dichotomous and continuous measures using a random-effects model, and assessed heterogeneity. MAIN RESULTS: We include 66 RCTs in the review (range: 13 days to 28 weeks; 7442 participants; age range 18 to 85 years) and 54 in the meta-analysis.  For the primary outcome of treatment response, we found evidence of beneficial effect for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) compared with placebo (risk ratio (RR) 0.66, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.59 to 0.74; 8 studies, 1078 participants), which improved PTSD symptoms in 58% of SSRI participants compared with 35% of placebo participants, based on moderate-certainty evidence.  For this outcome we also found evidence of beneficial effect for the noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant (NaSSA) mirtazapine: (RR 0.45, 95% CI 0.22 to 0.94; 1 study, 26 participants) in 65% of people on mirtazapine compared with 22% of placebo participants, and for the tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) amitriptyline (RR 0.60, 95% CI 0.38 to 0.96; 1 study, 40 participants) in 50% of amitriptyline participants compared with 17% of placebo participants, which improved PTSD symptoms. These outcomes are based on low-certainty evidence. There was however no evidence of beneficial effect for the number of participants who improved with the antipsychotics (RR 0.51, 95% CI 0.16 to 1.67; 2 studies, 43 participants) compared to placebo, based on very low-certainty evidence. For the outcome of treatment withdrawal, we found evidence of a harm for the individual SSRI agents compared with placebo (RR 1.41, 95% CI 1.07 to 1.87; 14 studies, 2399 participants). Withdrawals were also higher for the separate SSRI paroxetine group compared to the placebo group (RR 1.55, 95% CI 1.05 to 2.29; 5 studies, 1101 participants). Nonetheless, the absolute proportion of individuals dropping out from treatment due to adverse events in the SSRI groups was low (9%), based on moderate-certainty evidence. For the rest of the medications compared to placebo, we did not find evidence of harm for individuals dropping out from treatment due to adverse events. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this review support the conclusion that SSRIs improve PTSD symptoms; they are first-line agents for the pharmacotherapy of PTSD, based on moderate-certainty evidence. The NaSSA mirtazapine and the TCA amitriptyline may also improve PTSD symptoms, but this is based on low-certainty evidence. In addition, we found no evidence of benefit for the number of participants who improved following treatment with the antipsychotic group compared to placebo, based on very low-certainty evidence. There remain important gaps in the evidence base, and a continued need for more effective agents in the management of PTSD.
BACKGROUND: Depression is the single largest contributor to non-fatal health loss worldwide. Second-generation antidepressants are the first-line option for pharmacological management of depression. Optimising their use is crucial in reducing the burden of depression; however, debate about their dose dependency and their optimal target dose is ongoing. We have aimed to summarise the currently available best evidence to inform this clinical question. METHODS: We did a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of double-blind, randomised controlled trials that examined fixed doses of five selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and sertraline), venlafaxine, or mirtazapine in the acute treatment of adults (aged 18 years or older) with major depression, identified from the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, CINAHL, Embase, LILACS, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, AMED, PSYNDEX, websites of drug licensing agencies and pharmaceutical companies, and trial registries. We imposed no language restrictions, and the search was updated until Jan 8, 2016. Doses of SSRIs were converted to fluoxetine equivalents. Trials of antidepressants for patients with depression and a serious concomitant physical illness were excluded. The main outcomes were efficacy (treatment response defined as 50% or greater reduction in depression severity), tolerability (dropouts due to adverse effects), and acceptability (dropouts for any reasons), all after a median of 8 weeks of treatment (range 4-12 weeks). We used a random-effects, dose-response meta-analysis model with flexible splines for SSRIs, venlafaxine, and mirtazapine. FINDINGS: 28 554 records were identified through our search (24 524 published and 4030 unpublished records). 561 published and 121 unpublished full-text records were assessed for eligibility, and 77 studies were included (19 364 participants; mean age 42.5 years, SD 11.0; 7156 [60.9%] of 11 749 reported were women). For SSRIs (99 treatment groups), the dose-efficacy curve showed a gradual increase up to doses between 20 mg and 40 mg fluoxetine equivalents, and a flat to decreasing trend through the higher licensed doses up to 80 mg fluoxetine equivalents. Dropouts due to adverse effects increased steeply through the examined range. The relationship between the dose and dropouts for any reason indicated optimal acceptability for the SSRIs in the lower licensed range between 20 mg and 40 mg fluoxetine equivalents. Venlafaxine (16 treatment groups) had an initially increasing dose-efficacy relationship up to around 75-150 mg, followed by a more modest increase, whereas for mirtazapine (11 treatment groups) efficacy increased up to a dose of about 30 mg and then decreased. Both venlafaxine and mirtazapine showed optimal acceptability in the lower range of their licensed dose. These results were robust to several sensitivity analyses. INTERPRETATION: For the most commonly used second-generation antidepressants, the lower range of the licensed dose achieves the optimal balance between efficacy, tolerability, and acceptability in the acute treatment of major depression. FUNDING: Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Swiss National Science Foundation, and National Institute for Health Research.
A systematic review and random-effects model network meta-analysis were conducted to compare the efficacy, acceptability, tolerability, and safety of antidepressants to treat adults with major depressive disorder (MDD) in the maintenance phase. This study searched the PubMed, Cochrane Library, and Embase databases and included only double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trials with an enrichment design: patients were stabilized on the antidepressant of interest during the open-label study and then randomized to receive the same antidepressant or placebo. The outcomes were the 6-month relapse rate (primary outcome, efficacy), all-cause discontinuation (acceptability), discontinuation due to adverse events (tolerability), and the incidence of individual adverse events. The risk ratio with a 95% credible interval was calculated. The meta-analysis comprised 34 studies (n = 9384, mean age = 43.80 years, and %females = 68.10%) on 20 antidepressants (agomelatine, amitriptyline, bupropion, citalopram, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, levomilnacipran, milnacipran, mirtazapine, nefazodone, paroxetine, reboxetine, sertraline, tianeptine, venlafaxine, vilazodone, and vortioxetine) and a placebo. In terms of the 6-month relapse rate, amitriptyline, citalopram, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, mirtazapine, nefazodone, paroxetine, reboxetine, sertraline, tianeptine, venlafaxine, and vortioxetine outperformed placebo. Compared to placebo, desvenlafaxine, paroxetine, sertraline, venlafaxine, and vortioxetine had lower all-cause discontinuation; however, sertraline had a higher discontinuation rate due to adverse events. Compared to placebo, venlafaxine was associated with a lower incidence of dizziness, while desvenlafaxine, sertraline, and vortioxetine were associated with a higher incidence of nausea/vomiting. In conclusion, desvenlafaxine, paroxetine, venlafaxine, and vortioxetine had reasonable efficacy, acceptability, and tolerability in the treatment of adults with stable MDD.
The novel antidepressant mirtazapine has a dual mode of action. It is a noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant (NaSSA) that acts by antagonizing the adrenergic alpha2-autoreceptors and alpha2-heteroreceptors as well as by blocking 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors. It enhances, therefore, the release of norepinephrine and 5-HT1A-mediated serotonergic transmission. This dual mode of action may conceivably be responsible for mirtazapine's rapid onset of action. Mirtazapine is extensively metabolized in the liver. The cytochrome (CYP) P450 isoenzymes CYP1A2, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4 are mainly responsible for its metabolism. Using once daily dosing, steady-state concentrations are reached after 4 days in adults and 6 days in the elderly. In vitro studies suggest that mirtazapine is unlikely to cause clinically significant drug-drug interactions. Dry mouth, sedation, and increases in appetite and body weight are the most common adverse effects. In contrast to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), mirtazapine has no sexual side effects. The antidepressant efficacy of mirtazapine was established in several placebo-controlled trials. In major depression, its efficacy is comparable to that of amitriptyline, clomipramine, doxepin, fluoxetine, paroxetine, citalopram, or venlafaxine. Mirtazapine also appears to be useful in patients suffering from depression comorbid with anxiety symptoms and sleep disturbance. It seems to be safe and effective during long-term use.
OBJECTIVE: This nonsystematic review describes risk of bleeding in treatment with serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) and provide recommendations for the management of patients at risk of bleeding. DATA SOURCES: Articles were identified by English-language MEDLINE search published prior to June 2018 using the terms SRI, serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, OR antidepressive agents, AND hemorrhage OR stroke. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Meta-analyses were utilized to identify information regarding risk of bleeding with antidepressants. Individual studies were included if they had information regarding bleeding risk with specific SRIs, timing of risk, or risk with medications of interest. DATA SYNTHESIS: SRIs increase risk of bleeding by 1.16- to 2.36-fold. The risk is synergistic between SRIs and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; odds ratio [OR] range between studies 3.17-10.9). Acid-reducing medications may mitigate risk of gastrointestinal bleeds in chronic NSAIDs and SRI users (OR range between studies 0.98-1.1). Antidepressants with low or no affinity for the serotonin transporter, such as bupropion or mirtazapine, may be appropriate alternatives for patients at risk of bleeding. Relevance to Patient Care and Clinical Practice: This review includes data regarding bleeding risk for specific antidepressants, concomitant medications, and risk related to duration of SRI use. Considerations and evidence-based recommendations are provided for management of SRI users at high bleeding risk. CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians must be aware of the risk of bleeding with SRI use, especially for patients taking NSAIDs. Patient education is prudent for those prescribed NSAIDs and SRIs concurrently.
BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorders have a significant impact on children and adolescents, including on educational and vocational outcomes, interpersonal relationships, and physical and mental health and well-being. There is an association between major depressive disorder and suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and suicide. Antidepressant medication is used in moderate to severe depression; there is now a range of newer generations of these medications. OBJECTIVES: To investigate, via network meta-analysis (NMA), the comparative effectiveness and safety of different newer generation antidepressants in children and adolescents with a diagnosed major depressive disorder (MDD) in terms of depression, functioning, suicide-related outcomes and other adverse outcomes. The impact of age, treatment duration, baseline severity, and pharmaceutical industry funding was investigated on clinician-rated depression (CDRS-R) and suicide-related outcomes. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Common Mental Disorders Specialised Register, the Cochrane Library (Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) and Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR)), together with Ovid Embase, MEDLINE and PsycINFO till March 2020. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised trials of six to 18 year olds of either sex and any ethnicity with clinically diagnosed major depressive disorder were included. Trials that compared the effectiveness of newer generation antidepressants with each other or with a placebo were included. Newer generation antidepressants included: selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs); norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors; norepinephrine dopamine reuptake inhibitors; norepinephrine dopamine disinhibitors (NDDIs); and tetracyclic antidepressants (TeCAs). DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently screened titles/abstracts and full texts, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias. We analysed dichotomous data as Odds Ratios (ORs), and continuous data as Mean Difference (MD) for the following outcomes: depression symptom severity (clinician rated), response or remission of depression symptoms, depression symptom severity (self-rated), functioning, suicide related outcomes and overall adverse outcomes. Random-effects network meta-analyses were conducted in a frequentist framework using multivariate meta-analysis. Certainty of evidence was assessed using Confidence in Network Meta-analysis (CINeMA). We used "informative statements" to standardise the interpretation and description of the results. MAIN RESULTS: Twenty-six studies were included. There were no data for the two primary outcomes (depressive disorder established via clinical diagnostic interview and suicide), therefore, the results comprise only secondary outcomes. Most antidepressants may be associated with a "small and unimportant" reduction in depression symptoms on the CDRS-R scale (range 17 to 113) compared with placebo (high certainty evidence: paroxetine: MD -1.43, 95% CI -3.90, 1.04; vilazodone: MD -0.84, 95% CI -3.03, 1.35; desvenlafaxine MD -0.07, 95% CI -3.51, 3.36; moderate certainty evidence: sertraline: MD -3.51, 95% CI -6.99, -0.04; fluoxetine: MD -2.84, 95% CI -4.12, -1.56; escitalopram: MD -2.62, 95% CI -5.29, 0.04; low certainty evidence: duloxetine: MD -2.70, 95% CI -5.03, -0.37; vortioxetine: MD 0.60, 95% CI -2.52, 3.72; very low certainty evidence for comparisons between other antidepressants and placebo). There were "small and unimportant" differences between most antidepressants in reduction of depression symptoms (high- or moderate-certainty evidence). Results were similar across other outcomes of benefit. In most studies risk of self-harm or suicide was an exclusion criterion for the study. Proportions of suicide-related outcomes were low for most included studies and 95% confidence intervals were wide for all comparisons. The evidence is very uncertain about the effects of mirtazapine (OR 0.50, 95% CI 0.03, 8.04), duloxetine (OR 1.15, 95% CI 0.72, 1.82), vilazodone (OR 1.01, 95% CI 0.68, 1.48), desvenlafaxine (OR 0.94, 95% CI 0.59, 1.52), citalopram (OR 1.72, 95% CI 0.76, 3.87) or vortioxetine (OR 1.58, 95% CI 0.29, 8.60) on suicide-related outcomes compared with placebo. There is low certainty evidence that escitalopram may "at least slightly" reduce odds of suicide-related outcomes compared with placebo (OR 0.89, 95% CI 0.43, 1.84). There is low certainty evidence that fluoxetine (OR 1.27, 95% CI 0.87, 1.86), paroxetine (OR 1.81, 95% CI 0.85, 3.86), sertraline (OR 3.03, 95% CI 0.60, 15.22), and venlafaxine (OR 13.84, 95% CI 1.79, 106.90) may "at least slightly" increase odds of suicide-related outcomes compared with placebo. There is moderate certainty evidence that venlafaxine probably results in an "at least slightly" increased odds of suicide-related outcomes compared with desvenlafaxine (OR 0.07, 95% CI 0.01, 0.56) and escitalopram (OR 0.06, 95% CI 0.01, 0.56). There was very low certainty evidence regarding other comparisons between antidepressants. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Overall, methodological shortcomings of the randomised trials make it difficult to interpret the findings with regard to the efficacy and safety of newer antidepressant medications. Findings suggest that most newer antidepressants may reduce depression symptoms in a small and unimportant way compared with placebo. Furthermore, there are likely to be small and unimportant differences in the reduction of depression symptoms between the majority of antidepressants. However, our findings reflect the average effects of the antidepressants, and given depression is a heterogeneous condition, some individuals may experience a greater response. Guideline developers and others making recommendations might therefore consider whether a recommendation for the use of newer generation antidepressants is warranted for some individuals in some circumstances. Our findings suggest sertraline, escitalopram, duloxetine, as well as fluoxetine (which is currently the only treatment recommended for first-line prescribing) could be considered as a first option. Children and adolescents considered at risk of suicide were frequently excluded from trials, so that we cannot be confident about the effects of these medications for these individuals. If an antidepressant is being considered for an individual, this should be done in consultation with the child/adolescent and their family/caregivers and it remains critical to ensure close monitoring of treatment effects and suicide-related outcomes (combined suicidal ideation and suicide attempt) in those treated with newer generation antidepressants, given findings that some of these medications may be associated with greater odds of these events. Consideration of psychotherapy, particularly cognitive behavioural therapy, as per guideline recommendations, remains important.
BACKGROUND: Hospitalized patients are subject to acute illness and stress which may impact appetite or weight. Loss of appetite may lead to increased morbidity or mortality. Medications such as dronabinol, megestrol, and mirtazapine are used for weight gain in the outpatient setting; however, there is limited information about safety or effectiveness when initiated inpatient. OBJECTIVES: To analyze the effectiveness and safety of appetite-stimulating medications in hospitalized patients. METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study of hospitalized patients initiated on dronabinol, megestrol, or mirtazapine for appetite. The primary outcome was change in meal intake between drug initiation and discontinuation. Secondary outcomes included documented improvement in appetite, change in weight and various laboratory parameters, and incidence of adverse effects. RESULTS: A total of 38 patients met inclusion criteria, and mirtazapine was most commonly used (42%). There was no significant difference between groups of appetite-stimulating medications with regard to mean change in meal intake, weight, albumin, or documented improvement in diet. Within groups, each agent showed numerical improvement in percentage meal intake, with a mean change from initiation to discontinuation of 17.12%. Almost half (48%) of the patients experienced improvement in diet after the start of medications. No serious adverse effects were observed. Conclusion and Relevance: In inpatients, there was no difference in change in meal intake or weight between dronabinol, megestrol, or mirtazapine, but they may show numerical improvements in meal intake. To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate the use of dronabinol, megestrol, and mirtazapine initiated in the inpatient setting.
IMPORTANCE: Antipsychotic-induced akathisia (AIA) occurs in 14% to 35% of patients treated with antipsychotics and is associated with increased suicide and decreased adherence in patients with schizophrenia. However, no comprehensive review and network meta-analysis has been conducted to compare the efficacy of treatments for AIA. OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy associated with AIA treatments. DATA SOURCES: Three databases (MEDLINE, Web of Science, and Google Scholar) were systematically searched by multiple researchers for double-blind randomized clinical trials (RCTs) comparing active drugs for the treatment of AIA with placebo or another treatment between May 30 and June 18, 2023. STUDY SELECTION: Selected studies were RCTs that compared adjunctive drugs for AIA vs placebo or adjunctive treatment in patients treated with antipsychotics fulfilling the criteria for akathisia, RCTs with sample size of 10 patients or more, only trials in which no additional drugs were administered during the study, and RCTs that used a validated akathisia score. Trials with missing data for the main outcome (akathisia score at the end points) were excluded. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Data extraction and synthesis were performed, estimating standardized mean differences (SMDs) through pairwise and network meta-analysis with a random-effects model. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guideline was followed. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was the severity of akathisia measured by a validated scale at the last available end point. RESULTS: Fifteen trials involving 492 participants compared 10 treatments with placebo. Mirtazapine (15 mg/d for >/=5 days; SMD, -1.20; 95% CI, -1.83 to -0.58), biperiden (6 mg/d for >/=14 days; SMD, -1.01; 95% CI, -1.69 to -0.34), vitamin B6 (600-1200 mg/d for >/=5 days; SMD, -0.92; 95% CI, -1.57 to -0.26), trazodone (50 mg/d for >/=5 days; SMD, -0.84; 95% CI, -1.54 to -0.14), mianserin (15 mg/d for >/=5 days; SMD, -0.81; 95% CI, -1.44 to -0.19), and propranolol (20 mg/d for >/=6 days; SMD, -0.78; 95% CI, -1.35 to -0.22) were associated with greater efficacy than placebo, with low to moderate heterogeneity (I2 = 34.6%; 95% CI, 0.0%-71.1%). Cyproheptadine, clonazepam, zolmitriptan, and valproate did not yield significant effects. Eight trials were rated as having low risk of bias; 2, moderate risk; and 5, high risk. Sensitivity analyses generally confirmed the results for all drugs except for cyproheptadine and propranolol. No association between effect sizes and psychotic severity was found. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this systematic review and network meta-analysis, mirtazapine, biperiden, and vitamin B6 were associated with the greatest efficacy for AIA, with vitamin B6 having the best efficacy and tolerance profile. Trazodone, mianserin, and propranolol appeared as effective alternatives with slightly less favorable efficacy and tolerance profiles. These findings should assist prescribers in selecting an appropriate medication for treating AIA.
CONTEXT: Few pharmacological interventions are available for cancer-associated anorexia and cachexia. Mirtazapine has been suggested for use in cancer-associated anorexia and cachexia. OBJECTIVES: This study was conducted to assess the efficacy and tolerability of mirtazapine in cancer-associated anorexia and cachexia. METHODS: A double-blind placebo-controlled randomized trial. The study included 120 incurable solid tumour patients with anorexia (appetite loss >/=4 on 0 - 10 scale, 10 = maximum appetite loss), cachexia (>5% body weight loss over 6 months or >2% plus body mass index <20) and depression score </=3 on 0-6 scale (6 = extreme feelings of depression). Patients were 1:1 randomized to receive mirtazapine 15mg daily at night for 8 weeks or placebo. The primary endpoint was change in appetite from baseline to day 28. Other outcomes included changes in quality-of-life, fatigue, depressive symptoms, body weight, lean body mass, handgrip strength, inflammatory markers, adverse events and survival. RESULTS: 48 (80%) patients in the mirtazapine arm and 52 (87%) in the placebo were assessable for the 1ry endpoint. Appetite score increased significantly with mirtazapine as well as with placebo (P < 0.0001 each). The increase in appetite score did not differ significantly between the two arms in the per-protocol and intention-to-treat analysis (P = 0.472 and 0.462, respectively). Mirtazapine was associated with significantly less increase in depressive symptoms and higher prevalence of somnolence. The change in other outcomes did not differ significantly between mirtazapine and placebo. CONCLUSION: Mirtazapine 15mg at night for 28 days is no better than placebo in improving the appetite of incurable solid tumor patients with cancer-associated anorexia and cachexia.
We report the case of a 40-year-old patient followed for post-traumatic stress disorder. A re-evaluation of its pharmacological treatment with the introduction of mirtazapine (30 mg/day) was associated with a rhabdomyolysis (CK> 20,000 IU/L at day 3). The diagnosis of mirtazapine induced rhabdomyolysis was made. After withdrawal of this drug combined with a symptomatic treatment (hydratation), the patient recovered well and was discharged without any nephrological sequelae. This article is intended to underline the diagnostic approach to elevated CK activity and the potential role of the "medical biologist" as a consultant for the relevant use of biological examinations. A physiopathological mechanism of this rhabdomyolysis is also proposed.
Mirtazapine (MTZ) is an antidepressant drug with an exceptional pharmacological profile. It also has an excellent safety and tolerability profile. The present review provides a pharmacological update on MTZ and summarizes the research findings of MTZ's effects on different diseases. MTZ is hypothesized to have antidepressant effects because of the synergy between noradrenergic and serotonergic actions and is effective in treating major depressive disorder and depression associated with epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, stroke, cardiovascular disease, and respiratory disease. In cancer patients, MTZ significantly reduced sadness, nausea, sleep disruption, and pain and improved quality of life. Also, it has promising effects on Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia, dysthymia, social anxiety disorder, alcohol dependency, posttraumatic stress disorder, panic disorder, pain syndromes, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and sleep disorders. Additionally, MTZ is potentially therapeutic in different situations associated with depression, such as liver, kidney, cardiovascular, respiratory, infertility, heavy metal-induced neurotoxicity, and pruritus. Potent antioxidative, anti-inflammatory, and anti-apoptotic bioactivities mediate these promising effects. These positive outcomes of the scientific investigations motivate more and more clinical trials for a golden exceptional antidepressant in different conditions.
BACKGROUND: Hyponatremia (hypoNa) is a potentially serious adverse event of antidepressant treatment. Previous research suggests the risk of drug-induced hyponatremia differs between antidepressants. This meta-analysis sought to determine the risk of antidepressant-induced hypoNa, stratified by different compounds and classes. METHODS: A PRISMA-compliant systematic search of Web of Science and PubMed databases was performed from inception until Jan 5, 2023, for original studies reporting incidences or risks of hypoNa in adults using antidepressants. We modelled random-effects meta-analyses to compute overall event rates and odds ratios of any and clinically relevant hypoNa for each compound and class, and ran head-to-head comparisons based on hypoNa event rates. We conducted subgroup analyses for geriatric populations and sodium cut-off value. The study is registered with PROSPERO, CRD42021269801. RESULTS: We included 39 studies (n = 8,175,111). Exposure to antidepressants was associated with significantly increased odds of hypoNa (k = 7 studies, OR = 3.160 (95%CI 1.911-5.225)). The highest event rates were found for SNRIs (7.44%), SSRIs (5.59%), and TCAs (2.66%); the lowest for mirtazapine (1.02%) and trazodone (0.89%). Compared to SSRIs, SNRIs were significantly more likely (k = 10, OR = 1.292 (1.120 - 1.491), p < 0.001) and mirtazapine significantly less likely (k = 9, OR = 0.607 (0.385 - 0.957), p = 0.032) to be associated with hypoNa. CONCLUSION: Our meta-analysis demonstrated that, while no antidepressant can be considered completely risk-free, for hypoNa-prone patients mirtazapine should be considered the treatment of choice and SNRIs should be prescribed more cautiously than SSRIs and TCAs.
IMPORTANCE: Currently there is no standard therapy to improve cancer-related anorexia, hampering survival. Mirtazapine has been suggested as a feasible option in this context. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effect of mirtazapine on appetite and energy consumption in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial including adults was performed in a tertiary cancer care center from August 2018 to May 2022 with a follow-up of 8 weeks. Overall, 134 patients were screened; 114 were assessed for eligibility and 28 were excluded. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive mirtazapine, 15 mg, or placebo for 2 weeks followed by a dose escalation to 30 mg until week 8 or placebo. Both groups received nutritional assessment and dietary advice. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Appetite was assessed by the Anorexia Cachexia Scale and energy intake. Dietary parameters were evaluated at baseline, 4 weeks, and 8 weeks, with a 24-hour dietary recall, and energy quantification based on the Mexican system of nutritional equivalents. RESULTS: A total of 86 patients met the inclusion criteria and were randomized to the placebo (n = 43) or the mirtazapine group (n = 43). The mean (SD) age was 63.5 (11.2) years, 41 were women (57.7%) and had adenocarcinoma, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status scale score of 1, stage IV NSCLC, and were receiving first-line treatment. Baseline characteristics were similar between groups. There was no difference in appetite scores in patients who received mirtazapine or placebo after 4 and 8 weeks. After 4 weeks, mirtazapine significantly increased energy intake (379.3 kcal; 95% CI, 1382.6-576.1; P < .001) including proteins (22.5 g; 95% CI, 11.5-33.4; P = .001), carbohydrates (43.4 g; 95% CI, 13.1-73.8; P = .006), and fats (13.2 g; 95% CI, 6.0-20.4; P = .006). Fats intake was significantly higher in patients in the mirtazapine group (14.5 g vs 0.7 g; P = .02) after 8 weeks. The mirtazapine group significantly decreased the proportion of patients with sarcopenia (82.8% vs 57.1%, P = .03) at 8 weeks. Patients on mirtazapine tolerated the treatment well, but reported a higher perception of nightmares at 2 weeks based on a 10 cm VAS score (0 [25th-75th percentile, 0-1] vs 0 [25th-75th percentile, 0-0] in the control group; P = .009) but this finding was nonsignificant after 4 and 8 weeks. CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial of patients with advanced NSCLC, there was no difference in appetite scores in all patients who received mirtazapine or placebo, but the mirtazapine group had a significant increase in energy intake through the 4- and 8-week follow-up, mainly in fat intake, which is a better and crucial source of energy. The addition of mirtazapine in the treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC and anorexia may help these patients achieve their energy requirements and improve health-related quality of life, specifically emotional and cognitive functioning. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04748523.
BACKGROUND: Major depression and other depressive conditions are common in people with cancer. These conditions are not easily detectable in clinical practice, due to the overlap between medical and psychiatric symptoms, as described by diagnostic manuals such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) and International Classification of Diseases (ICD). Moreover, it is particularly challenging to distinguish between pathological and normal reactions to such a severe illness. Depressive symptoms, even in subthreshold manifestations, have a negative impact in terms of quality of life, compliance with anticancer treatment, suicide risk and possibly the mortality rate for the cancer itself. Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) on the efficacy, tolerability and acceptability of antidepressants in this population are few and often report conflicting results. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy, tolerability and acceptability of antidepressants for treating depressive symptoms in adults (aged 18 years or older) with cancer (any site and stage). SEARCH METHODS: We used standard, extensive Cochrane search methods. The latest search date was November 2022. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs comparing antidepressants versus placebo, or antidepressants versus other antidepressants, in adults (aged 18 years or above) with any primary diagnosis of cancer and depression (including major depressive disorder, adjustment disorder, dysthymic disorder or depressive symptoms in the absence of a formal diagnosis). DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard Cochrane methods. Our primary outcome was 1. efficacy as a continuous outcome. Our secondary outcomes were 2. efficacy as a dichotomous outcome, 3. Social adjustment, 4. health-related quality of life and 5. dropouts. We used GRADE to assess certainty of evidence for each outcome. MAIN RESULTS: We identified 14 studies (1364 participants), 10 of which contributed to the meta-analysis for the primary outcome. Six of these compared antidepressants and placebo, three compared two antidepressants, and one three-armed study compared two antidepressants and placebo. In this update, we included four additional studies, three of which contributed data for the primary outcome. For acute-phase treatment response (six to 12 weeks), antidepressants may reduce depressive symptoms when compared with placebo, even though the evidence is very uncertain. This was true when depressive symptoms were measured as a continuous outcome (standardised mean difference (SMD) -0.52, 95% confidence interval (CI) -0.92 to -0.12; 7 studies, 511 participants; very low-certainty evidence) and when measured as a proportion of people who had depression at the end of the study (risk ratio (RR) 0.74, 95% CI 0.57 to 0.96; 5 studies, 662 participants; very low-certainty evidence). No studies reported data on follow-up response (more than 12 weeks). In head-to-head comparisons, we retrieved data for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) versus tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and for mirtazapine versus TCAs. There was no difference between the various classes of antidepressants (continuous outcome: SSRI versus TCA: SMD -0.08, 95% CI -0.34 to 0.18; 3 studies, 237 participants; very low-certainty evidence; mirtazapine versus TCA: SMD -4.80, 95% CI -9.70 to 0.10; 1 study, 25 participants). There was a potential beneficial effect of antidepressants versus placebo for the secondary efficacy outcomes (continuous outcome, response at one to four weeks; very low-certainty evidence). There were no differences for these outcomes when comparing two different classes of antidepressants, even though the evidence was very uncertain. In terms of dropouts due to any cause, we found no difference between antidepressants compared with placebo (RR 0.85, 95% CI 0.52 to 1.38; 9 studies, 889 participants; very low-certainty evidence), and between SSRIs and TCAs (RR 0.83, 95% CI 0.53 to 1.22; 3 studies, 237 participants). We downgraded the certainty of the evidence because of the heterogeneous quality of the studies, imprecision arising from small sample sizes and wide CIs, and inconsistency due to statistical or clinical heterogeneity. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Despite the impact of depression on people with cancer, the available studies were few and of low quality. This review found a potential beneficial effect of antidepressants against placebo in depressed participants with cancer. However, the certainty of evidence is very low and, on the basis of these results, it is difficult to draw clear implications for practice. The use of antidepressants in people with cancer should be considered on an individual basis and, considering the lack of head-to-head data, the choice of which drug to prescribe may be based on the data on antidepressant efficacy in the general population of people with major depression, also taking into account that data on people with other serious medical conditions suggest a positive safety profile for the SSRIs. Furthermore, this update shows that the usage of the newly US Food and Drug Administration-approved antidepressant esketamine in its intravenous formulation might represent a potential treatment for this specific population of people, since it can be used both as an anaesthetic and an antidepressant. However, data are too inconclusive and further studies are needed. We conclude that to better inform clinical practice, there is an urgent need for large, simple, randomised, pragmatic trials comparing commonly used antidepressants versus placebo in people with cancer who have depressive symptoms, with or without a formal diagnosis of a depressive disorder.
BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and circulating cell-free mitochondrial DNA (ccf-mtDNA) have attracted interest as biological markers of affective disorders. In response to stress, it is known that miRNAs in mitochondria diffuse out of the cytoplasm alongside mtDNA; however, this process has not yet been identified. We hypothesized that miRNAs derived from specific cell nuclei cause mitochondrial damage and mtDNA fragmentation under MDD-associated stress conditions. METHODS: A comprehensive analysis of the plasma miRNA levels and quantification of the plasma ccf-mtDNA copy number were performed in 69 patients with depression to determine correlations and identify genes and pathways interacting with miRNAs. The patients were randomly assigned to receive either selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) or mirtazapine. Their therapeutic efficacy over four weeks was evaluated in relation to miRNAs correlated with ccf-mtDNA copy number. RESULTS: The expression levels of the five miRNAs showed a significant positive correlation with the ccf-mtDNA copy number after correcting for multiple testing. These miRNAs are involved in gene expression related to thyroid hormone synthesis, the Hippo signaling pathway, vasopressin-regulated water reabsorption, and lysine degradation. Of these five miRNAs, miR-6068 and miR-4708-3p were significantly associated with the SSRI and mirtazapine treatment outcomes, respectively. LIMITATIONS: This study did not show comparison with a healthy group. CONCLUSIONS: The expression levels of specific miRNAs were associated with ccf-mtDNA copy number in untreated depressed patients; moreover, these miRNAs were linked to antidepressant treatment outcomes. These findings are expected to lead to the elucidation of new pathological mechanism of depression.
The pharmacological properties and clinical value of mirtazapine has been presented, based on a literature review. It is concluded that mirtazapine has syndromolytic anti-depressive actions towards syndromes of various clinical picture and intensity. It is particularly highly recommended in the treatment of depressive disorders with insomnia, anxiety and body-weight reduction. It is a safe drug, which can be used, in long-term supportive treatment.
BACKGROUND: Agitation is common in people with dementia and negatively affects the quality of life of both people with dementia and carers. Non-drug patient-centred care is the first-line treatment, but there is a need for other treatment when this care is not effective. Current evidence is sparse on safer and effective alternatives to antipsychotics. We assessed the efficacy and safety of mirtazapine, an antidepressant prescribed for agitation in dementia. METHODS: This parallel-group, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial-the Study of Mirtazapine for Agitated Behaviours in Dementia trial (SYMBAD)-was done in 26 UK centres. Participants had probable or possible Alzheimer's disease, agitation unresponsive to non-drug treatment, and a Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) score of 45 or more. They were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive either mirtazapine (titrated to 45 mg) or placebo. The primary outcome was reduction in CMAI score at 12 weeks. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03031184, and ISRCTN17411897. FINDINGS: Between Jan 26, 2017, and March 6, 2020, 204 participants were recruited and randomised. Mean CMAI scores at 12 weeks were not significantly different between participants receiving mirtazapine and participants receiving placebo (adjusted mean difference -1.74, 95% CI -7.17 to 3.69; p=0.53). The number of controls with adverse events (65 [64%] of 102 controls) was similar to that in the mirtazapine group (67 [66%] of 102 participants receiving mirtazapine). However, there were more deaths in the mirtazapine group (n=7) by week 16 than in the control group (n=1), with post-hoc analysis suggesting this difference was of marginal statistical significance (p=0.065). INTERPRETATION: This trial found no benefit of mirtazapine compared with placebo, and we observed a potentially higher mortality with use of mirtazapine. The data from this study do not support using mirtazapine as a treatment for agitation in dementia. FUNDING: UK National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment Programme.
Ivgy-May N. Residual daytime effects of esmirtazapine. J Clin Sleep Med. 2021;17(4):865.
OBJECTIVE: To integrate all evidence derived from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of both pharmacological and nonpharmacological augmentation interventions for clozapine-resistant schizophrenia (CRS). METHODS: Six major electronic databases were systematically searched for RCTs published until July 10, 2021. The primary outcome was change in overall symptoms, and the secondary outcomes were positive and negative symptoms and acceptability. We performed random-effects network meta-analysis. Normalized entropy was calculated to examine the uncertainty of treatment ranking. RESULTS: We identified 35 RCTs (1472 patients with 23 active augmentation treatments) with a mean daily clozapine dose of 440.80 (91.27) mg for 1168.22 (710.28) days. Network meta-analysis of overall symptoms (reported as standardized mean difference; 95 % confidence interval) with consistent results indicated that mirtazapine (-4.41; -5.61, -3.21), electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) (-4.32; -5.43, -3.21), and memantine (-2.02; -3.14, -0.91) were ranked as the best three treatments. For positive symptoms, ECT (-5.18; -5.86, -4.49) was ranked the best with less uncertainty. For negative symptoms, memantine (-3.38; -4.50, -2.26), duloxetine (-3.27; -4.25, -2.29), and mirtazapine (-1.73; -2.71, -0.74) were ranked the best three treatments with less uncertainty. All antipsychotics, N-methyl d-aspartate receptor agonists, and antiepileptics were not associated with more efficacy than placebo. Compared to placebo, only amisulpride had statistically significant lower discontinuation rate (risk ratio: 0.21; 95 % CI: 0.05, 0.93). CONCLUSION: Add-on mirtazapine, ECT, and memantine were the most efficacious augmentation options for CRS. Data on other important outcomes such as cognitive functioning or quality of life were rarely reported, making further large-scale, well-designed RCTs necessary. (PROSPERO number, CRD42021262197.).
