'Smart drugs' (also known as 'nootropics' and 'cognitive enhancers' [CEs]) are being used by healthy subjects (i.e. students and workers) typically to improve memory, attention, learning, executive functions and vigilance, hence the reference to a 'pharmaceutical cognitive doping behaviour'. While the efficacy of known CEs in individuals with memory or learning deficits is well known, their effect on non-impaired brains is still to be fully assessed. This paper aims to provide an overview on the prevalence of use; putative neuroenhancement benefits and possible harms relating to the intake of the most popular CEs (e.g. amphetamine-type stimulants, methylphenidate, donepezil, selegiline, modafinil, piracetam, benzodiazepine inverse agonists, and unifiram analogues) in healthy individuals. CEs are generally perceived by the users as effective, with related enthusiastic anecdotal reports; however, their efficacy in healthy individuals is uncertain and any reported improvement temporary. Conversely, since most CEs are stimulants, the related modulation of central noradrenaline, glutamate, and dopamine levels may lead to cardiovascular, neurological and psychopathological complications. Furthermore, use of CEs can be associated with paradoxical short- and long-term cognitive decline; decreased potential for plastic learning; and addictive behaviour. Finally, the non-medical use of any potent psychotropic raises serious ethical and legal issues, with nootropics having the potential to become a major public health concern. Further studies investigating CE-associated social, psychological, and biological outcomes are urgently needed to allow firm conclusions to be drawn on the appropriateness of CE use in healthy individuals.
Modafinil (Mo) is increasingly being used as an enhancement drug rather than for its therapeutic effects. The effects of this drug have been examined in attention deficit disorders, depression, mental fatigue, and in enhancing concentration. The drug possesses wakefulness-promoting properties which are mediated through the interaction of orexinergic system with the activated sympathetic nervous system. Mo exerts a synergistic effect on the orexin system, controls energy expenditure and strengthens the ability of the individual to exercise. Some view Mo as a drug that enhances sports performance, since it induces a prolonged wakefulness and decreasing the sense of fatigue. These characteristics being similar to conventional stimulants have allowed Mo to emerge as a novel stimulant requiring medico-legal considerations. However, more studies are needed to better understand the mid and long-term effects of the drug on user/abuser.
Identification of idiopathic hypersomnia dates back 20 years only. It typically consists of prolonged nocturnal sleep, great difficulty waking up in the morning or at the end of a nap, and constant or recurrent excessive daytime sleepiness. Complete and incomplete forms are encountered. Twenty-three subjects fulfilling ICSD criteria are reported with clinical, polysomnographic and immunogenetic data. Considering differential diagnosis is an important step in the diagnosis of idiopathic hypersomnia. Idiopathic hypersomnia is much less frequent than narcolepsy. A strong genetic component is suggested by the high proportion of familial cases. No association with HLA has been evidenced to date.
BACKGROUND: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) affects approximately 3% of adults globally. Many pharmacologic treatments options exist, yet the comparative benefits and harms of individual treatments are largely unknown. We performed a systematic review and network meta-analysis to assess the relative effects of individual pharmacologic treatments for adults with ADHD. METHODS: We searched English-language published and grey literature sources for randomized clinical trials (RCTs) involving pharmacologic treatment of ADHD in adults (December 2018). The primary outcome was clinical response; secondary outcomes were quality of life, executive function, driving behaviour, withdrawals due to adverse events, treatment discontinuation, serious adverse events, hospitalization, cardiovascular adverse events, and emergency department visits. Data were pooled via pair-wise meta-analyses and Bayesian network meta-analyses. Risk of bias was assessed by use of Cochrane's Risk of Bias tool, and the certainty of the evidence was assessed by use of the GRADE framework. RESULTS: Eighty-one unique trials that reported at least one outcome of interest were included, most of which were at high or unclear risk of at least one important source of bias. Notably, only 5 RCTs were deemed at overall low risk of bias. Included pharmacotherapies were methylphenidate, atomoxetine, dexamfetamine, lisdexamfetamine, guanfacine, bupropion, mixed amphetamine salts, and modafinil. As a class, ADHD pharmacotherapy improved patient- and clinician-reported clinical response compared with placebo (range: 4 to 15 RCTs per outcome); however, these findings were not conserved when the analyses were restricted to studies at low risk of bias, and the certainty of the finding is very low. There were few differences among individual medications, although atomoxetine was associated with improved patient-reported clinical response and quality of life compared with placebo. There was no significant difference in the risk of serious adverse events or treatment discontinuation between ADHD pharmacotherapies and placebo; however, the proportion of participants who withdrew due to adverse events was significantly higher among participants who received any ADHD pharmacotherapy. Few RCTs reported on the occurrence of adverse events over a long treatment duration. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, despite a class effect of improving clinical response relative to placebo, there were few differences among the individual ADHD pharmacotherapies, and most studies were at risk of at least one important source of bias. Furthermore, the certainty of the evidence was very low to low for all outcomes, and there was limited reporting of long-term adverse events. As such, the choice between ADHD pharmacotherapies may depend on individual patient considerations, and future studies should assess the long-term effects of individual pharmacotherapies on patient-important outcomes, including quality of life, in robust blinded RCTs. REGISTRATION: PROSPERO no. CRD 42015026049.
Idiopathic hypersomnia (IH) is characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness despite normal or prolonged sleep. IH is distinguished from narcolepsy by the female predominance, severe morning inertia, continuous drowsiness (rather than sleep attacks), unrefreshing naps, absence of cataplexy, sleep onset in REM periods, and hypocretin deficiency. In IH, the multiple sleep latency test demonstrates low sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility, compared with prolonged sleep monitoring. In some IH cases, an endogenous hypnotic peptide stimulating GABA receptors during wakefulness is suspected, which are improved by anti-GABA drugs. The benefits of modafinil, sodium oxybate, mazindol, and pitolisant were found in mostly retrospective studies.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Narcolepsy is an uncommon hypothalamic disorder of presumed autoimmune origin that usually requires lifelong treatment. This paper aims to provide evidence-based guidelines for the management of narcolepsy in both adults and children. METHODS: The European Academy of Neurology (EAN), European Sleep Research Society (ESRS), and European Narcolepsy Network (EU-NN) nominated a task force of 18 narcolepsy specialists. According to the EAN recommendations, 10 relevant clinical questions were formulated in PICO format. Following a systematic review of the literature (performed in Fall 2018 and updated in July 2020) recommendations were developed according to the GRADE approach. RESULTS: A total of 10,247 references were evaluated, 308 studies were assessed and 155 finally included. The main recommendations can be summarized as follows: (i) excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) in adults-scheduled naps, modafinil, pitolisant, sodium oxybate (SXB), solriamfetol (all strong); methylphenidate, amphetamine derivatives (both weak); (ii) cataplexy in adults-SXB, venlafaxine, clomipramine (all strong) and pitolisant (weak); (iii) EDS in children-scheduled naps, SXB (both strong), modafinil, methylphenidate, pitolisant, amphetamine derivatives (all weak); (iv) cataplexy in children-SXB (strong), antidepressants (weak). Treatment choices should be tailored to each patient's symptoms, comorbidities, tolerance and risk of potential drug interactions. CONCLUSION: The management of narcolepsy involves non-pharmacological and pharmacological approaches with an increasing number of symptomatic treatment options for adults and children that have been studied in some detail.
Treatment of narcolepsy is based on the need to regulate life rhythms. Psychostimulants such as modafinil, methylphenidate-immediate release, and pemoline are used to treat hypersomnia. A psychosocial approach is considered the mainstay of treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and medication is used to treat moderate or severe ADHD symptoms. Two of the four drugs approved in Japan for ADHD therapy (osmotic-release oral system methylphenidate and lisdexamfetamine dimesylate) are psychostimulants, which are administered via the ADHD proper distribution management system.
This case report recounts the details of a patient diagnosed with narcolepsy and cataplexy whose headaches improved once treatment with armodafinil began. The clinical significance of this report lies in the fact that armodafinil is known to cause headaches, at least initially. But perhaps through a reduced need for caffeine and/or a regulation of sleep/wake, armodafinil may reduce headache frequency and severity. CITATION: Barone DA. Headache improves with armodafinil. J Clin Sleep Med. 2024;20(3):469-470.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the efficacy and safety of pharmacologic neurostimulants after neurological injuries such as ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke and traumatic brain injury (TBI), critically evaluate the available literature, and make recommendations regarding which neurostimulants should be considered for use in clinical practice. DATA SOURCES: A literature search of PubMed was performed (1953 to October 2020) to identify relevant articles. Search terms included the following: "neurostimulant, neurorehabilitation" AND "traumatic brain injury, cerebrovascular accident, or stroke." This review is limited to prospective studies and observational trials. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Relevant English-language studies conducted in humans were considered. DATA SYNTHESIS: Cognitive and motor deficits caused by stroke and TBI account for high rates of long-term disability. Although not well-established, pharmacologic agents, broadly characterized as neurostimulants, may be prescribed after brain injury to treat these deficits. When prescribing these medications, it is imperative to be aware of the supporting evidence in order to accurately gauge the risk-benefit profile of each agent. RELEVANCE TO PATIENT CARE AND CLINICAL PRACTICE: The following presents a literature review critically evaluating clinical studies that investigate neurostimulant use after brain injury. The intent of this review is to serve as an evidence-based guide for clinicians. CONCLUSIONS: The pharmacologic agent with the most supporting literature is amantadine used for cognitive improvement after TBI. Other neurostimulants with positive, despite more limited, evidence include methylphenidate, modafinil, levodopa, and citalopram. Caution is warranted with other neurostimulants given higher rates of adverse effects or lack of benefit observed in clinical trials.
We found Moulton et al's(1) illustrative case series of 10 patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and chronic fatigue, all presenting with depression, particularly interesting. (1) Among the patients, 8 previously had undergone treatment with multiple psychotropic medications, and 2 had active IBD as indicated by increased fecal calprotectin levels. Remarkably, all 10 patients responded positively to open-label treatment with modafinil, a central nervous system stimulant that blocks dopamine reuptake transport, which resulted in an impressive improvement in their fatigue symptoms. At baseline, the self-reported mean fatigue score was 16, measured on the IBD Fatigue Assessment Scale (IBD-FAS), which ranges up to 20, and with levels higher than 11 indicating severe fatigue. After 6 months of modafinil treatment, the mean fatigue score was 6.7.(1).
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) medication is increasingly being used during pregnancy. Concerns have been raised as to whether ADHD medication has long-term adverse effects on the offspring. The authors investigated whether in utero exposure to ADHD medication was associated with adverse long-term neurodevelopmental and growth outcomes in offspring. The population-based cohort study in the Danish national registers included 1,068,073 liveborn singletons from 1998 to 2015 followed until any developmental diagnosis, death, emigration, or December 31, 2018. Children of mothers who continued ADHD medication (methylphenidate, amphetamine, dexamphetamine, lisdexamphetamine, modafinil, atomoxetine, clonidine) during pregnancy and children of mothers who discontinued ADHD medication before pregnancy were compared using Cox regression. Main outcomes were neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders, impairments in vision or hearing, epilepsy, seizures, or growth impairment during childhood or adolescence. In total, 898 children were exposed to ADHD medication during pregnancy compared to 1270 children whose mothers discontinued ADHD medication before pregnancy. After adjustment for demographic and psychiatric characteristics of the mother, no increased risk of any offspring developmental disorders was found combined (aHR 0.97, 95% CI 0.81 to 1.17) or for separate subcategories. Similarly, no increased risk was found for any sub-categories of outcomes in the negative control or sibling controlled analyses. Neurodevelopment and growth in offspring do not differ based on antenatal exposure to ADHD medication. These findings provide reassurance for women with ADHD who depend on ADHD medication for daily functioning and who consider continuing medication in pregnancy.
RATIONAL: At all times humans have made attempts to improve their cognitive abilities by different means, among others, with the use of stimulants. Widely available stimulants such as caffeine, but also prescription substances such as methylphenidate and modafinil, are being used by healthy individuals to enhance cognitive performance. OBJECTIVES: There is a lack of knowledge on the effects of prescription stimulants when taken by healthy individuals (as compared with patients) and especially on the effects of different substances across different cognitive domains. METHODS: We conducted a pilot study with three arms in which male participants received placebo and one of three stimulants (caffeine, methylphenidate, modafinil) and assessed cognitive performance with a test battery that captures various cognitive domains. RESULTS: Our study showed some moderate effects of the three stimulants tested. Methylphenidate had positive effects on self-reported fatigue as well as on declarative memory 24 hours after learning; caffeine had a positive effect on sustained attention; there was no significant effect of modafinil in any of the instruments of our test battery. All stimulants were well tolerated, and no trade-off negative effects on other cognitive domains were found. CONCLUSIONS: The few observed significant positive effects of the tested stimulants were domain-specific and of rather low magnitude. The results can inform the use of stimulants for cognitive enhancement purposes as well as direct further research to investigate the effects of stimulants on specific cognitive domains that seem most promising, possibly by using tasks that are more demanding.
BACKGROUND: Methylphenidate, modafinil, and amantadine are commonly prescribed medications for alleviating fatigue in multiple sclerosis; however, the evidence supporting their efficacy is sparse and conflicting. Our goal was to compare the efficacy of these three medications with each other and placebo in patients with multiple sclerosis fatigue. METHODS: In this randomised, placebo-controlled, four-sequence, four-period, crossover, double-blind trial, patients with multiple sclerosis who reported fatigue and had a Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS) score of more than 33 were recruited at two academic multiple sclerosis centres in the USA. Participants received oral amantadine (up to 100 mg twice daily), modafinil (up to 100 mg twice daily), methylphenidate (up to 10 mg twice daily), or placebo, each given for up to 6 weeks. All patients were intended to receive all four study medications, in turn, in one of four different sequences with 2-week washout periods between medications. A biostatistician prepared a concealed allocation schedule, stratified by site, randomly assigning a sequence of medications in approximately a 1:1:1:1 ratio, in blocks of eight, to a consecutive series of numbers. The statistician and pharmacists had no role in assessing the participants or collecting data, and the participants, caregivers, and assessors were masked to allocation. The primary outcome measure was the MFIS measured while taking the highest tolerated dose at week 5 of each medication period, analysed by use of a linear mixed-effect regression model. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03185065 and is closed. FINDINGS: Between Oct 4, 2017, and Feb 27, 2019, of 169 patients screened, 141 patients were enrolled and randomly assigned to one of four medication administration sequences: 35 (25%) patients to the amantadine, placebo, modafinil, and methylphenidate sequence; 34 (24%) patients to the placebo, methylphenidate, amantadine, and modafinil sequence; 35 (25%) patients to the modafinil, amantadine, methylphenidate, and placebo sequence; and 37 (26%) patients to the methylphenidate, modafinil, placebo, and amantadine sequence. Data from 136 participants were available for the intention-to-treat analysis of the primary outcome. The estimated mean values of MFIS total scores at baseline and the maximal tolerated dose were as follows: 51.3 (95% CI 49.0-53.6) at baseline, 40.6 (38.2-43.1) with placebo, 41.3 (38.8-43.7) with amantadine, 39.0 (36.6-41.4) with modafinil, and 38.6 (36.2-41.0) with methylphenidate (p=0.20 for the overall medication effect in the linear mixed-effect regression model). As compared with placebo (38 [31%] of 124 patients), higher proportions of participants reported adverse events while taking amantadine (49 [39%] of 127 patients), modafinil (50 [40%] of 125 patients), and methylphenidate (51 [40%] of 129 patients). Three serious adverse events occurred during the study (pulmonary embolism and myocarditis while taking amantadine, and a multiple sclerosis exacerbation requiring hospital admission while taking modafinil). INTERPRETATION: Amantadine, modafinil, and methylphenidate were not superior to placebo in improving multiple sclerosis fatigue and caused more frequent adverse events. The results of this study do not support an indiscriminate use of amantadine, modafinil, or methylphenidate for the treatment of fatigue in multiple sclerosis. FUNDING: Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute.
A systematic review of the literature on modafinil as adjunctive treatment to antidepressants in patients with major depression and residual symptoms of fatigue and drowsiness is presented. Several open-labelled studies have shown good results on treatment with modafinil. However, only a few randomised controlled clinical trials exist. These have methodological weaknesses and their results are contradictory. If modafinil is used in highly selected patients with severe fatigue its potential interactions with antidepressants must be borne in mind. Furthermore, discontinuation of the drug should be tried after a couple of months, as one study suggests that the effect wears off. In addition, the drug is rather expensive.
BACKGROUND: Narcolepsy is characterised by excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) and cataplexy. Histamine neurons are crucial to maintain wakefulness. We assessed the safety and efficacy of pitolisant (previously called BF2.649), a selective histamine H3 receptor inverse agonist that activates these neurons, in patients with narcolepsy. METHODS: For this double-blind, randomised, parallel-group controlled trial, we recruited patients with narcolepsy from 32 sleep disorder centres in five European countries. Patients were eligible if they were aged 18 years or older, had not taken psychostimulants for at least 14 days, and had EDS (defined as an Epworth Sleepiness Scale [ESS] score of at least 14). Using a computer-generated randomisation sequence, we randomly allocated patients to receive pitolisant, modafinil, or placebo (1:1:1). Treatment lasted 8 weeks: 3 weeks of flexible dosing according to investigator's judgment (10 mg, 20 mg, or 40 mg a day of pitolisant; 100 mg, 200 mg or 400 mg a day of modafinil) followed by 5 weeks of stable dosing. Patients took four tablets a day in a double-dummy design to ensure masking. For the primary analysis, assessed in the intention-to-treat population, we assessed the superiority of pitolisant versus placebo, and the non-inferiority of pitolisant versus modafinil. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01067222. FINDINGS: Between May 26, 2009, and June 30, 2010, we screened 110 patients, 95 of whom were eligible and randomly assigned to treatment: 30 to placebo, 32 to pitolisant, and 33 to modafinil. Over the 8-week treatment period, mean ESS score reductions were -3.4 (SD 4.2) in the placebo group, -5.8 (6.2) in the pitolisant group, and -6.9 (6.2) in the modafinil group. Our primary analysis of between-group differences in mean ESS score at endpoint (adjusted for baseline) showed pitolisant to be superior to placebo (difference -3.0, 95% CI -5.6 to -0.4; p=0.024), but not non-inferior to modafinil (difference 0.12, 95% CI -2.5 to 2.7; p=0.250). We recorded 22 adverse events with pitolisant, 26 with modafinil, and ten with placebo. Six severe adverse events were treatment-related: one with pitolisant (abdominal discomfort) and five with modafinil (abdominal pain, abnormal behaviour, amphetamine-like withdrawal symptoms, lymphoadenopathy, and inner ear disorders). INTERPRETATION: Pitolisant at doses up to 40 mg was efficacious on EDS compared with placebo and well tolerated compared with modafinil. If these findings are substantiated in further studies, pitolisant could offer a new treatment option for patients with narcolepsy. FUNDING: Bioprojet, France.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Sleep deprivation compromises learning and memory in both humans and animals, and can be reversed by administration of modafinil, a drug promoting wakefulness. Dysfunctional autophagy increases activation of apoptotic cascades, ultimately leading to increased neuronal death, which can be alleviated by autophagy inhibitors. This study aimed to investigate the alleviative effect and mechanism of modafinil on the excessive autophagy occurring in the hippocampus of mice with deficiency of learning and memory induced by sleep deprivation. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The Morris water maze was used to assess the effects of modafinil on male C57BL/6Slac mice after 48-hr sleep deprivation. The HT-22 hippocampal neuronal cell line was also used. Nissl staining, transmission electron microscope, immunofluorescence, Western blot, transient transfection, and autophagy inducer were used to study the effect and mechanism of modafinil on hippocampal neurons with excessive autophagy and apoptosis. KEY RESULTS: Modafinil improved learning and memory in sleep-deprived mice, associated with the inhibition of excessive autophage and apoptosis and an enhanced activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR/P70S6K signalling pathway in hippocampal neurons. These effects of modafinil were abolished by rapamycin. In addition, modafinil suppressed the aberrant autophagy and apoptosis induced by rapamycin and reactivated PI3K/Akt/mTOR/P70S6K signals in HT-22 cells. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These results suggested that modafinil alleviated impaired learning and memory of sleep-deprived mice potentially by suppressing excessive autophagy and apoptosis of hippocampal neurons. This novel mechanism may add to our knowledge of modafinil in the clinical treatment of impaired memory caused by sleep loss.
The understanding of the neuropharmacologic reciprocal interactions between the sleep and wake cycles has progressed significantly in the past decade. It was also recently appreciated that sleep disruption or deprivation can have adverse metabolic consequences. Multiple medications have a direct or indirect impact on sleep and the waking state. This article reviews how commonly prescribed medications can significantly affect the sleep-wake cycle.
BACKGROUND: Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) is common among patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). The comparative effectiveness of pharmacologic agents is unknown. PURPOSE: To compare the effectiveness of drugs for EDS in OSA using network meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE, CENTRAL, EMBASE, and ClinicalTrials.gov to 7 November 2022. STUDY SELECTION: Reviewers identified randomized trials that enrolled patients with EDS-associated OSA on or eligible for conventional therapy assigned to any pharmacologic intervention. DATA EXTRACTION: Paired reviewers independently extracted data addressing effects of drugs on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), Maintenance of Wakefulness Test (MWT), and adverse events at the longest reported follow-up. The certainty of evidence was assessed using the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) approach. DATA SYNTHESIS: Fourteen trials (3085 patients) were eligible. At 4 weeks, compared with placebo, solriamfetol improves ESS scores (mean difference [MD], -3.85 [95% CI, -5.24 to -2.50]; high certainty), and armodafinil-modafinil (MD, -2.25 [CI, -2.85 to -1.64]; moderate certainty) and pitolisant-H3-autoreceptor blockers (MD, -2.78 [CI, -4.03 to -1.51]; moderate certainty) probably improve ESS scores. At 4 weeks, compared with placebo, solriamfetol (standardized mean difference [SMD], 0.9 [CI, 0.64 to 1.17]) and armodafinil-modafinil (SMD, 0.41 [CI, 0.27 to 0.55]) improve MWT (both high certainty), whereas pitolisant-H3-autoreceptor blockers probably do not (moderate certainty). At 4 weeks, armodafinil-modafinil probably increases the risk for discontinuation due to adverse events (relative risk [RR], 2.01 [CI, 1.14 to 3.51]; moderate certainty); solriamfetol may increase the risk for discontinuation due to adverse events (RR, 2.07 [CI, 0.67 to 6.25]; low certainty). Low certainty evidence suggests these interventions may not increase the risk for serious adverse events. LIMITATIONS: There is limited evidence on long term or effectiveness among patients nonadherent or with mixed adherence to conventional OSA therapies. CONCLUSION: Solriamfetol, armodafinil-modafinil, and pitolisant reduce daytime sleepiness for patients with OSA already on conventional therapy, with solriamfetol likely superior. Adverse events probably increase the risk for discontinuation of armodafinil-modafinil and may increase the risk for discontinuation with solriamfetol. PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: None.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: Narcolepsy is an uncommon hypothalamic disorder of presumed autoimmune origin that usually requires lifelong treatment. This paper aims to provide evidence-based guidelines for the management of narcolepsy in both adults and children. METHODS: The European Academy of Neurology (EAN), European Sleep Research Society (ESRS) and European Narcolepsy Network (EU-NN) nominated a task force of 18 narcolepsy specialists. According to the EAN recommendations, 10 relevant clinical questions were formulated in PICO format. Following a systematic review of the literature (performed in Fall 2018 and updated in July 2020) recommendations were developed according to the GRADE approach. RESULTS: A total of 10,247 references were evaluated, 308 studies were assessed and 155 finally included. The main recommendations can be summarized as follows: (i) excessive daytime sleepiness in adults-scheduled naps, modafinil, pitolisant, sodium oxybate (SXB), solriamfetol (all strong), methylphenidate, amphetamine derivates (both weak); (ii) cataplexy in adults-SXB, venlafaxine, clomipramine (all strong) and pitolisant (weak); (iii) excessive daytime sleepiness in children-scheduled naps, SXB (both strong), modafinil, methylphenidate, pitolisant, amphetamine derivates (all weak); (iv) cataplexy in children-SXB (strong), antidepressants (weak). Treatment choices should be tailored to each patient's symptoms, comorbidities, tolerance and risk of potential drug interactions. CONCLUSION: The management of narcolepsy involves non-pharmacological and pharmacological approaches with an increasing number of symptomatic treatment options for adults and children that have been studied in some detail.
Stimulants like methylphenidate, modafinil, and caffeine have repeatedly shown to enhance cognitive processes such as attention and memory. However, brain-functional mechanisms underlying such cognitive enhancing effects of stimulants are still poorly characterized. Here, we utilized behavioral and resting-state fMRI data from a double-blind randomized placebocontrolled study of methylphenidate, modafinil, and caffeine in 48 healthy male adults. The results show that performance in different memory tasks is enhanced, and functional connectivity (FC) specifically between the frontoparietal network (FPN) and default mode network (DMN) is modulated by the stimulants in comparison to placebo. Decreased negative connectivity between right prefrontal and medial parietal but also between medial temporal lobe and visual brain regions predicted stimulant-induced latent memory enhancement. We discuss dopamine's role in attention and memory as well as its ability to modulate FC between large-scale neural networks (e.g., FPN and DMN) as a potential cognitive enhancement mechanism.
