Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors today are the standard therapy of patients with myocardial infarction and heart failure due to their proven beneficial effects in left ventricular remodeling and left ventricular function. ACE inhibitors have also been demonstrated to lead to regression of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). It is believed that the mechanism of action of LVH regression with ACE inhibitors arises from more than simple blood pressure reduction. LVH is an important risk factor for cardiovascular disease morbidity and mortality independent of blood pressure. Moexipril hydrochloride is a long-acting, non-sulfhydryl ACE inhibitor that can be taken once daily for the treatment of hypertension. Moexipril has now also been demonstrated to have beneficial effects on LVH and can lead to LVH regression.
Studies have shown that angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) are superior in primary and secondary prevention for cardiac mortality and morbidity to angiotensin receptor blocker (ARBs). One of the common side effects from ACEI is dry cough. The aims of this systematic review, and network meta-analysis are to rank the risk of cough induced by different ACEIs and between ACEI and placebo, ARB or calcium channel blockers (CCB). We performed a systematic review, and network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials to rank the risk of cough induced by each ACEI and between ACEI and placebo, ARB or CCB. A total of 135 RCTs with 45,420 patients treated with eleven ACEIs were included in the analyses. The pooled estimated relative risk (RR) between ACEI and placebo was 2.21 (95% CI: 2.05-2.39). ACEI had more incidences of cough than ARB (RR 3.2; 95% CI: 2.91, 3.51), and pooled estimated of RR between ACEI and CCB was 5.30 (95% CI: 4.32-6.50) Moexipril ranked as number one for inducing cough (SUCRA 80.4%) and spirapril ranked the least (SUCRA 12.3%). The order for the rest of the ACEIs are as follows: ramipril (SUCRA 76.4%), fosinopril (SUCRA 72.5%), lisinopril (SUCRA 64.7%), benazepril (SUCRA 58.6%), quinapril (SUCRA 56.5%), perindopril (SUCRA 54.1%), enalapril (SUCRA 49.7%), trandolapril (SUCRA 44.6%) and, captopril (SUCRA 13.7%). All ACEI has the similar risk of developing a cough. ACEI should be avoided in patients who have risk of developing cough, and an ARB or CCB is an alternative based on the patient's comorbidity.
Data on efficacy and safety of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor moexipril in the treatment of arterial hypertension are reviewed. Such advantages of this preparation as 24-hour duration of action, lack of loss of hypotensive effect during long term administration, metabolic neutrality, and low rate of side effects are discussed. Antihypertensive action of moexipril is compared with other medicines. Special attention is devoted to various aspects of the use of moexipril in women in postmenopause, including positive effect on metabolism of bones and combination with hormonal replacement therapy.
Blockade of angiotensin II synthesis attenuates hepatic fibrosis in different experimental models of chronic liver injury. We evaluated the safety and efficacy of moexipril, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) who have had a suboptimal response to ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). Twenty PBC patients on UDCA (13-15 mg/kg/day) therapy with an elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase at least twice the upper limit of normal were treated with oral moexipril 15 mg/day for one year. No significant changes in serum alkaline phosphatase (379 +/- 32 vs. 379 +/- 51), bilirubin (0.8 +/- 0.1 vs. 0.9 +/- 0.1), aspartate aminotransferase (60 +/- 8 vs. 63 +/- 9), and Mayo risk score (3.55 +/- 0.2 vs. 3.62 +/- 0.2) was associated with the treatment. Fatigue and health-related quality of life scores during treatment demonstrated a trend toward improvement. Moexipril was not clinically beneficial to PBC patients responding suboptimally to UDCA.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are effective and safe antihypertensive drugs, with the exception of the rare occasion of angioedema. These drugs have demonstrated additional cardiovascular protective effects to their blood pressure lowering, and their combination with the diuretic hydrochlorothiazide potentiates their antihypertensive effectiveness. Moexipril is a long-acting ACE inhibitor suitable for once-daily administration, and like some ACE inhibitors, moexipril is a prodrug and needs to be hydrolyzed in the liver into its active carboxylic metabolite, moexiprilat, to become effective. Moexipril alone and in combination with low-dose hydrochlorothiazide has been shown in clinical trials to be effective in lowering blood pressure and be well tolerated and safe given in single daily doses. In this review, the pharmacological profile of this drug and its clinical usefulness are discussed.
Moexipril is a prodrug which is hydrolysed after oral administration to its active metabolite moexiprilat, an inhibitor of the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE). Once daily administration of moexipril 7.5 or 15 mg effectively reduces blood pressure in patients with essential hypertension (including the elderly and postmenopausal women with this condition). In double-blind randomised comparative studies, moexipril 7.5 to 15 mg once daily showed similar efficacy to other antihypertensive agents, including captopril, hydrochlorothiazide, atenolol, metoprolol, sustained release verapamil and nitrendipine. Combined therapy with hydrochlorothiazide and moexipril had a significantly greater antihypertensive effect than either agent alone. Moexipril is well tolerated by the majority of patients and compares well in this respect with other antihypertensive agents. Its tolerability profile appears to be characteristic of ACE inhibitors as a class (the most common adverse events being headache, symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection and cough). Moexipril generally had no clinically significant effect on lipid, glucose or electrolyte metabolism or haematological parameters, and, in particular, it was not associated with any significant changes in lipid or glucose metabolism in postmenopausal women (with or without hormone replacement therapy). CONCLUSIONS: Once daily moexipril is a useful agent for the treatment of essential hypertension, which compares well with currently available options in terms of clinical efficacy and tolerability. In addition, clinical experience to date supports its use in postmenopausal women.
When first introduced in 1981, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors were indicated only for treatment of refractory hypertension. Since then, they have been shown to reduce morbidity or mortality in congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction, diabetes mellitus, chronic renal insufficiency, and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Pathologies underlying these conditions are, in part, attributable to the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Angiotensin II contributes to endothelial dysfunction. altered renal hemodynamics, and vascular and cardiac hypertrophy. ACE inhibitors attenuate these effects. Clinical outcomes of ACE inhibition include decreases in myocardial infarction (fatal and nonfatal), reinfarction, angina, stroke, end-stage renal disease, and morbidity and mortality associated with heart failure. ACE inhibitors are generally well tolerated and have few contraindications. (Am Fam Physician 2002;66:473.)
ACE inhibitors induce metabolic changes and exert cardioprotective and vasoprotective properties, some of which cannot be attributed to their antihypertensive effect per se. Moexipril is an ACE inhibitor with a lipophilicity in the same range as quinapril, benazepril or ramipril, and so can readily penetrate lipid membranes and thus target tissue ACE in addition to plasma ACE. Evidence from animal studies shows similar and significant (p < 0.05) reductions in tissue ACE activity for moexipril and quinapril. Moexipril may improve endothelial dysfunction; moexiprilat and ramiprilat have demonstrated greater activity than captopril, enalaprilat and quinaprilat in isolated endothelium-denuded segments of the rabbit jugular vein where bradykinin elicits a constrictor response, mediated by activation of the bradykinin B(2) receptor. ACE inhibitors, including moexipril, may exert neuroprotective effects. Moexipril promoted neuronal survival in vitro and it is thought that this neuroprotective effect is due to free radical scavenging properties of the drug. ACE inhibitors can also decrease progression of renal insufficiency in patients with various underlying renal diseases. Moexipril may also have a renoprotective effect as it increased the ultrafiltration coefficient and normalized urinary protein excretion in rat models. Preclinical studies indicate that the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system may play a role in the regulation of bone resorption and moexipril had no adverse effects on bone metabolism in animal models and the drug did not hamper the osteoprotective effects of estrogen. Reduction in left ventricular mass with moexipril in patients with hypertension was similar in magnitude to the effect of other ACE inhibitors. When investigated in hypertensive patients with an elevated cardiovascular risk, moexipril increased arterial distensibility and demonstrated antioxidative properties in addition to efficiently controlling blood pressure. Moexipril does not adversely affect serum levels of uric acid, lipids, blood glucose levels and plasma insulin levels and can be co-administered with hormone replacement therapy. Moreover, quality-of-life data suggest favorable effects of moexipril treatment in a patient population at high cardiovascular risk.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are effective and safe antihypertensive drugs with the exception of the rare occurrence of angioedema. These drugs have demonstrated additional cardiovascular protective effects to their blood pressure lowering and their combination with the diuretic hydrochlorothiazide potentiates their antihypertensive effectiveness. Moexipril (Univasc, Bayer) is a long-acting ACE inhibitor suitable for once-daily administration and, like enalapril, is a prodrug and needs to be hydrolyzed in the liver into its active carboxylic metabolite, moexiprilat, in order to become effective. Moexipril alone and in combination with low-dose hydrochlorothiazide has been shown in clinical trials to be effective in lowering blood pressure and to be well-tolerated and safe given in single daily doses. In this review, the pharmacological profile of this drug and its clinical usefulness will be discussed.
The potential effect of moexipril, a new converting enzyme inhibitor, on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a single dose of warfarin has been investigated. Ten healthy male volunteers received in a randomised crossover fashion a single oral dose of 50 mg warfarin sodium alone and together with the first dose of 6 days of oral treatment with moexipril 15 mg o.d. Mean oral plasma clearance of (R)-warfarin was 175 ml.h-1 in the absence and 181 ml.h-1 in the presence of moexipril, and the corresponding values for (S)-warfarin were 248 ml.h-1 and 249 ml.h-1. Apparent volume of distribution, peak plasma concentration, time to reach peak concentration and area under the plasma concentration-time curve both of (R)- and (S)-warfarin were not significantly affected. Moexipril did not alter the maximum prothrombin time (20.3 versus 20.1 s, respectively in the absence and presence of moexipril), time to maximum response (48.0 versus 50 h) and area under the prothrombin time versus time curve. The results suggest that a clinically important interaction between moexipril and warfarin is unlikely to occur in patients treated with both drugs.
The angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are widely used in the management of essential hypertension, stable chronic heart failure, myocardial infarction (MI) and diabetic nephropathy. There is an increasing number of new agents to add to the nine ACE inhibitors (benazepril, cilazapril, delapril, fosinopril, lisinopril, pentopril, perindopril, quinapril and ramipril) reviewed in this journal in 1990. The pharmacokinetic properties of five newer ACE inhibitors (trandolapril, moexipril, spirapril, temocapril and imidapril) are reviewed in this update. All of these new agents are characterised by having a carboxyl functional groups and requiring hepatic activation to form pharmacologically active metabolites. They achieve peak plasma concentrations at similar times (t(max)) to those of established agents. Three of these agents (trandolapril, moexipril and imidapril) require dosage reductions in patients with renal impairment. Dosage reductions of moexipril and temocapril are recommended for elderly patients, and dosages of moexipril should be lower in patients who are hepatically impaired. Moexipril should be taken 1 hour before meals, whereas other ACE inhibitors can be taken without regard to meals. The pharmacokinetics of warfarin are not altered by concomitant administration with trandolapril or moexipril. Although imidapril and spirapril have no effect on digoxin pharmacokinetics, the area under the concentration-time curve of imidapril and the peak plasma concentration of the active metabolite imidaprilat are decreased when imidapril is given together with digoxin. Although six ACE inhibitors (captopril, enalapril, fosinopril, lisinopril, quinapril and ramipril) have been approved for use in heart failure by the US Food and Drug Administration, an overview of 32 clinical trials of ACE inhibitors in heart failure showed that no significant heterogeneity in mortality was found among enalapril, ramipril, quinapril, captopril, lisinopril, benazepril, perindopril and cilazapril. Initiation of therapy with captopril, ramipril, and trandolapril at least 3 days after an acute MI resulted in all-cause mortality risk reductions of 18 to 27%. Captopril has been shown to have similar morbidity and mortality benefits to those of diuretics and beta-blockers in hypertensive patients. Captopril has been shown to delay the progression of diabetic nephropathy, and enalapril and lisinopril prevent the development of nephropathy in normoalbuminuric patients with diabetes. ACE inhibitors are generally characterised by flat dose-response curves. Lisinopril is the only ACE inhibitor that exhibits a linear dose-response curve. Despite the fact that most ACE inhibitors are recommended for once-daily administration, only fosinopril, ramipril, and trandolapril have trough-to-peak effect ratios in excess of 50%.
The aim of the study was to determine the effect of carboxylesterase 1 (CES1) genetic variation on the activation of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) prodrugs. In vitro incubation study of human liver, intestine and kidney s9 fractions demonstrated that the ACEI prodrugs enalapril, ramipril, perindopril, moexipril and fosinopril are selectively activated by CES1 in the liver. The impact of CES1/CES1VAR and CES1P1/CES1P1VAR genotypes and diplotypes on CES1 expression and activity on enalapril activation was investigated in 102 normal human liver samples. Neither the genotypes nor the diplotypes affected hepatic CES1 expression and activity. Moreover, among several CES1 nonsynonymous variants studied in transfected cell lines, the G143E (rs71647871) was a loss-of-function variant for the activation of all ACEIs tested. The CES1 activity on enalapril activation in human livers with the 143G/E genotype was approximately one-third of that carrying the 143G/G. Thus, some functional CES1 genetic variants (for example, G143E) may impair ACEI activation, and consequently affect therapeutic outcomes of ACEI prodrugs.
According to some clinical observations, the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) may be associated with an increased risk of cancer. The aim of the present study was to screen for the potential carcinogenicity, mutagenicity and genotoxicity of these drugs using in silico methodology. Delapril, enalapril, imidapril, lisinopril, moexipril, perindopril, ramipril, trandolapril, spirapril were thereby analyzed. In parallel, the corresponding degradation impurities, the diketopiperazine (DKP) derivatives, were also investigated. (Q)SAR computer software (VEGA-GUI and Lazar), available in the public domain, was employed. The obtained predictions suggested that none of the compounds tested (from the group of ACE-Is and DKPs) was mutagenic. Moreover, none of the ACE-Is was carcinogenic. The reliability of these predictions was high to moderate. In contrast, in the DKP group, ramipril-DKP and trandolapril-DKP were found to be potentially carcinogenic, but the reliability of this prediction was low. As for the genotoxicity screening, all compounds tested (ACE-I and DKP) were predicted to be active and genotoxic, with moexipril, ramipril, spirapril, and all DKP derivatives within the highest risk group. They were prioritized for experimental verification studies to confirm or exclude their toxic activity. On the other hand, the lowest risk of carcinogenicity was assigned to imidapril and its DKP. Then, a follow-up in vitro micronucleus assay for ramipril was performed. It showed that this drug was genotoxic via aneugenic activity, but only at concentrations exceeding real-life levels. At concentrations found in human blood after standard dose, ramipril was not genotoxic in vitro. Therefore, ramipril was considered safe for human use with a standard dosing regimen. The other compounds of concern (spirapril, moexipril and all DKP derivatives) should be subjected to analogous in vitro studies. We also concluded that the adopted in silico software was applicable for ACE-I toxicity prediction.
Co-administration of antihypertensive drug therapy and hormonal replacement therapy (HRT) is frequent in postmenopausal women but it is not known whether HRT interacts with concomitant antihypertensive therapy. The present study was designed to investigate efficacy and safety of the ACE inhibitor moexipril in comparison to placebo in hypertensive, postmenopausal women on HRT. After a 4-week placebo run-in phase, 95 postmenopausal women (35-74 years of age) who had a sitting diastolic blood pressure (BP) of 95-114 mm Hg and were treated with HRT were randomised to a 12-week treatment with moexipril 15 mg or placebo. Efficacy and safety were assessed by measuring changes in sitting BP and metabolic parameters associated with cardiovascular disease including triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, total cholesterol/HDL ratio and glucose. Adverse events were recorded continuously. After 12 weeks of treatment, moexipril 15 mg was significantly more effective in reducing sitting systolic and diastolic BP from baseline than placebo (-12.2/-9.9 mm Hg vs -1.6/-4.3 mm Hg, P < 0.001). Metabolic parameters were not affected by treatment with moexipril: mean levels of triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, total cholesterol/HDL ratio and glucose remained unchanged throughout the study. Fibrinogen, an independent cardiovascular risk factor, increased after placebo (+35.0 mg/dl) and decreased after treatment with moexipril (-33.6 mg/dl), the difference, however, was not statistically significant. Moexipril was well-tolerated by postmenopausal women using HRT. The most frequent adverse events included headache (21.3%), cough (12.8%) and rhinitis (10.6%) and there were no significant differences in the number and severity of adverse events between the moexipril and placebo groups. This study indicates that moexipril is effective and well tolerated in the treatment of hypertensive, postmenopausal women and can safely be co-administered to HRT.
We conducted comparative analysis of clinico-economical efficacy of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors as components of combination therapy of patients with arterial hypertension and ischemic heart disease. Clinical efficacy of fosinopril, moexipril, perindopril, and ramipril was comparable: in compared groups statistically significant lowering of arterial pressure was achieved by day 6 of treatment and this lowering persisted up to day 36 of therapy with ramipril. All studied drugs were well tolerated. Ramipril was notable for highest economical efficacy determined by the method of \"minimization of expenditures\". Technology of assessment of clinico-economical effectiveness of preparations from the same pharmacological group can be used in compilation of standards of drug therapy of various diseases, basing on which a physician administers a concrete drug to a concrete patient.
Gender-specific differences in the incidence of cardiovascular disease have long been known, and estrogens have been considered to be responsible for this dissimilarity. Recently, the steep increase in cardiovascular risk in the no longer fertile woman has become evident. The postmenopausal metabolic syndrome is very frequent, with obesity, insulin resistance, and hyperinsulinemia, which convey increased sodium reabsorption, stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system, and smooth muscle growth. The clinical corollary of these overall changes is hypertension. Gender differences in components of the renin-angiotensin system have been shown to exist, and may play a central role in blood pressure control. In normotensive populations, plasma renin activity is significantly higher in men than in women, and is higher in postmenopausal versus premenopausal women. Two angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, ramipril and moexipril, have undergone trials aimed specifically at older people with cardiovascular risk and with postmenopausal hypertension, and could be the first therapeutic choice. However, a comprehensive treatment should include nonpharmacologic measures with strong emphasis on weight normalization and regular physical activity, prevention of osteoporosis, as well as decisions on the use of estrogen replacement therapy and treatment of the menopausal metabolic syndrome. Finally, education of both patients and physicians on the nature and prognosis of untreated hypertension is crucial.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are a heterogeneous group of agents, and important pharmacologic, pharmacokinetic, and therapeutic differences among them must be understood to obtain optimal therapy. For patients with severe liver disease, lisinopril and captopril are not prodrugs (e.g., do not require hepatic activation), and lisinopril has almost solely renal elimination. Enalaprilat, the intravenous formulation of enalapril, is the only intravenously available ACE inhibitor and can be given to patients with severe liver dysfunction as it is also not a prodrug. Fosinopril is the only drug with compensatory dual routes of elimination, and it does not require dosage adjustment in patients with reduced renal function, as other ACE inhibitors do. Captopril and moexipril have potential drug-food interactions and are the only agents that should be spaced from meals. The ACE inhibitors also differ in their dialyzability, half-life, lipophilicity, trough:peak ratios, approved indications, and therapeutic information available for many indications.
This double-blind study was conducted to investigate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of three dose levels of moexipril in comparison to placebo as add-on therapy to hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) in patients with moderate to severe hypertension. Two hundred patients who did not respond adequately to a 4-week monotherapy with HCTZ-sitting diastolic blood pressure between 95 and 114 mm Hg- entered the 8-week double-blind period. Patients were randomized to once daily placebo or moexipril 3.75, 7.5 or 15 mg as add-on therapy to open-label HCTZ 25 mg. At biweekly visits, blood pressure and heart rate measurements were obtained and the occurrence of adverse experiences was documented. At the 8-week endpoint, adjusted mean reductions from baseline were significantly (p = 0.003) greater in patients receiving moexipril 3.75, 7.5 and 15 mg compared to placebo (-8.4, -8.8 and -8.9 vs. -4.6 mm Hg). No significant differences between the three dose levels of moexipril could be observed. Moexipril was generally well tolerated. The most frequently reported adverse events for moexipril and placebo were headache, flu syndrome and dizziness (6, 7, 5 vs. 4, 0, 4%). The results indicate that the combination of moexipril and HCTZ is a clinically valuable combination in the treatment of patients with moderate to severe hypertension.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy and tolerability of the new angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor moexipril and the calcium antagonist nitrendipine in postmenopausal women with mild to moderate hypertension. METHODS: After a 4-week placebo run-in period, 93 postmenopausal women (age range 44-70 years) with primary hypertension were randomized to receive moexipril 15 mg once daily or nitrendipine 20 mg once daily for 8 weeks. The mean sitting systolic (SSBP) and sitting diastolic blood pressures (SDBP) at baseline were 161.3/103.0 mmHg in the moexipril group, and 162.2/102.3 mmHg in the nitrendipine group. RESULTS: After the 8 weeks of treatment, the SSBP/SDBP reductions were -21.2/-15.2 mmHg in the moexipril group and -18.2/-13.6 mmHg in the nitrendipine group. Blood pressure responses were adequate in 82.2% of the moexipril-treated patients and in 80.9% in the nitrendipine-treated group. Adverse events were more frequent with nitrendipine than with moexipril. The most common adverse events in the nitrendipine group were headache (23.4%), flushing (21.3%) and ankle oedema (14.9%). In the moexipril group the most common adverse event was cough (8.9%). CONCLUSION: The results of the study suggest that moexipril and nitrendipine are equieffective in the given dosages. In the patient population of postmenopausal women, the ACE inhibitor moexipril appears to have an advantage over the calcium antagonist nitrendipine with regard to tolerability.
