Superficial fungal infections are among the most commonly managed skin problems by general practitioners. Although evidence shows combination antifungal/corticosteroid topicals are more expensive and less effective than single-agent antifungals, practitioners continue to prescribe combination agents. We examined current prescription trends of 2 combination antifungal/corticosteroid medications, Lotrisone and Mycolog-II.
Ethylenediamine would be an infrequent sensitizer if it were not present in a widely prescribed topical corticosteroid preparation that is applied to inflamed skin. Occupational allergic contact dermatitis to ethylenediamine is not common. The educational efforts of American dermatologists such as Dr. Alex Fisher have helped lead to the deletion of ethylenediamine from Mycolog cream. It is unfortunate that the same pharmaceutical company continues to use ethylenediamine in its products in other countries, as the continued popularity of these creams may allow ethylenediamine to remain a common sensitizer in some areas, particularly where inflammatory skin conditions are treated predominantly by nondermatologists.
Mycolog contact allergy is due primarily to its ethylenediamine and fragrance components. In the evaluation of Mycolog-sensitive patients, the major constituents, including the perfume at 5% or 10% in petrolatum, should be tested.
A patient with a history of allergic reaction to an antibiotic cream (Mycolog [mixture of nystatin, neomycin sulfate, gramicidin, and triamcinolone acetonide]) was treated with aminophylline. A generalized exfoliative dermatitis resulted. The reaction was attributable to ethylenediamine hydrochloride, which is a component of both agents. Recognition of the potential for systemic medications to induce similar reactions in patients who are allergic to related topical preparations is important when prescribing systemic agents.
Sensitivity to alpha-amylcinnamic aldehyde (alpha-AcAld) is apparently uncommon, but, like allergy to alpha-amylcinnamic alcohol (alpha-AcAlc), it often accompanies allergy to the perfume in Mycolog cream. Although alpha-AcAlc is a known ingredient, alpha-AcAld is not. However, gas-liquid chromatographic analysis shows alpha-AcAld to be present. Of fourteen persons sensitive to either chemical, ten reacted to both. Of these, one man and three women were markedly sensitive, and all three women had chronic recalcitrant vulvar eczema. That condition might have been the cause as well as the result of sensitization, but reexposure to a suspected product reproduced the eruption in both persons tested. Its use with other potent sensitizers, e.g., ethylenediamine, to treat irritations and chronic eczemas in an area of high absorption may partly explain development of allergy to a relatively weak sensitizer.
Generic Myco-Triacet II Cream would seem to be analogous to Mycolog II Cream. However, Myco-Triacet II Cream still contains the common and potent sensitizer, ethylenediamine hydrochloride, which is no longer present in Mycolog II Cream. This is another instance in which a rose by an other name does not smell as sweet.
Sensitivity to ethylenediamine and to epoxy resin hardeners was found in three patients with long standing contact dermatitis. In one patient, a young man, the sensitivity was elicited by occupational contact with epoxy resin hardeners and subsequently sustained by use of Mycolog cream. In two patients, both elderly women, the condition was only due to use of Mycolog cream. These case histories and test results indicate that use of Mycolog cream can result in occupational disease viz. contact dermatitis from epoxy hardeners.
A study population of 1,158 paid adult volunteers was obtained. Prior to patch testing, a history of previous exposure to four allergens also was obtained. Prevalence of positive reactions to patch tests was nickel, 5.8%; neomycin, 1.1%; ethylenediamine, 0.43%; and benzocaine, 0.17%. Nine percent of women reacted to nickel compared with 0.9% of men. There was a strong correlation of nickel sensitivity with a history of pierced ears, earlobe rash, and jewelry rash. Ten of 12 neomycin-positive subjects used neomycin for one week or longer on an inflammatory dermatosis, compared with six of 36 age-, race-, and sex-matched controls. By history, 85% were exposed to benzocaine, 48% to neomycin, and 15% to Mycolog (ethylenediamine). Of 127 patients referred to clinics for evaluation of contact dermatitis, 11% yielded positive tests to nickel, 6.3% to neomycin, 3.1% to ethylenediamine, and 1.6% to benzocaine. Data obtained from testing contact dermatitis patients are not applicable to the general population.
A case of a 22-month-old child with acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE) is reported. At five months of age, the patient experienced generalized oral and cutaneous candidiasis for which she was treated with nystatin and iodochlorhydroxyquin-hydrocortisone. She then had to be treated for secondary infection of the lesions. After three months, the cycle repeated, and the patient was treated with topical clotrimazole, Mycolog (nystatin, gramicidin, neomycin sulfate, triamcinolone acetonide) and oral nystatin. After a worsening of her condition, she was admitted to a hospital where she was treated initially with procaine penicillin G, then methicillin sodium and gentamicin sulfate. Treatment with zinc sulfate, 50 mg t.i.d., was initiated when laboratory studies showed a serum zinc level of 60 microgram/dl. Skin lesions were 99% resolved and serum zinc increased to 118 microgram/dl after 17 days of zinc sulfate therapy. Previous case reports and studies of the clinical features, treatment and pathogenesis of AE are reviewed.
