Pseudoporphyria is a photosensitive bullous disease, which resembles porphyria cutanea tarda. Normal porphyrin levels in urine, stool and blood define pseudoporphyria. Pseudoporphyria is associated with chronic renal failure, haemodialysis, a variety of drugs (e.g. naproxen, nabumetone, furosemide, ciprofloxacin, voriconazole, acitretin), tanning beds and UVA exposure. Treatment consists of UV protection and cessation of suspected agents. Patients in haemodialysis can benefit from treatment with N-acetylcysteine or glutathione.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are a group of heterogeneous compounds extensively used in both human and veterinary medicine for their antipyretic, anti-inflammation, and analgesic properties. NSAIDs consist of a wide range of pharmacologically active agents with different chemical structures, with similar therapeutic and adverse effects. The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center received 22,206 NSAID incidents in dogs and cats (3% of total cases; dogs [15,823] and cats [1244]) during 2005 to 2010. This is roughly equivalent to 4% NSAID incidents reported in humans. The most common NSAID involved was ibuprofen, followed by aspirin, naproxen, deracoxib, meloxicam, diclofenac, piroxicam, indomethacin, nabumetone, and etodolac. This article provides a brief overview of classification, mechanism of action, pharmacologic and toxicologic properties, and treatment information involving frequently encountered human and veterinary NSAIDs in dogs and cats.
Nabumetone is a nonacidic nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) that is effective and appears to cause minimal NSAID gastropathy. The lack of significant untoward gastrointestinal (GI) effects has been demonstrated in large and longterm clinical experiences. The United States Food and Drug Administration reports an annual ulcer incidence of 2 to 4% with chronic NSAID use. The ulcer incidence after therapy with nabumetone, however, is far below the reported range. Only 1 (0.1%) ulcer in 930 patients was determined clinically in United States short term (6-week to 6-month) double blind studies. Additionally, in the long-term (8-year), open label study, only 16 (0.95%) ulcers occurred in 1677 patients. Endoscopically determined ulcers, on the other hand, occur in about 20% of chronic NSAID users. In our short term (3-month) and longterm (5-year) endoscopically controlled study, a 5% (1 of 19 patients) ulcer incidence was determined. Overall, these results suggest a significantly reduced rate of ulcer development.
Pseudoporphyria with formation of bullae and vulnerability of skin exposed to light, particularly the backs of the hands, may be provoked medicinally by nalidixinic acid, tetracyclin, nabumeton, pyridoxine, dapsone and high-dosage furosemide and by excessive use of solaria. The present article demonstrates that the condition may also be precipitated by quinidine and ibuprophen.
BACKGROUND: This is an updated version of the original Cochrane overview published in Issue 9, 2011. That overview considered both efficacy and adverse events, but adverse events are now dealt with in a separate overview.Thirty-nine Cochrane reviews of randomised trials have examined the analgesic efficacy of individual drug interventions in acute postoperative pain. This overview brings together the results of those individual reviews and assesses the reliability of available data. OBJECTIVES: To summarise the efficacy of pharmaceutical interventions for acute pain in adults with at least moderate pain following surgery who have been given a single dose of oral analgesic. METHODS: We identified systematic reviews in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews in The Cochrane Library through a simple search strategy. All reviews were overseen by a single review group, had a standard title, and had as their primary outcome the number of participants with at least 50% pain relief over four to six hours compared with placebo. For individual reviews, we extracted the number needed to treat for an additional beneficial outcome (NNT) for this outcome for each drug/dose combination, and also the percentage of participants achieving at least 50% maximum pain relief, the mean of mean or median time to remedication, and the percentage of participants remedicating by six, eight, 12, or 24 hours. Where there was adequate information for pairs of drug and dose (at least 200 participants, in at least two studies), we defined the addition of four comparisons of typical size (400 participants in total) with zero effect as making the result potentially subject to publication bias and therefore unreliable. MAIN RESULTS: The overview included 39 separate Cochrane Reviews with 41 analyses of single dose oral analgesics tested in acute postoperative pain models, with results from about 50,000 participants in approximately 460 individual studies. The individual reviews included only high-quality trials of standardised design, methods, and efficacy outcome reporting. No statistical comparison was undertaken.Reliable results (high quality information) were obtained for 53 pairs of drug and dose in painful postsurgical conditions; these included various fixed dose combinations, and fast acting formulations of some analgesics. NNTs varied from about 1.5 to 20 for at least 50% maximum pain relief over four to six hours compared with placebo. The proportion of participants achieving this level of benefit varied from about 30% to over 70%, and the time to remedication varied from two hours (placebo) to over 20 hours. Good (low) NNTs were obtained with ibuprofen 200 mg plus paracetamol (acetaminophen) 500 mg (NNT compared with placebo 1.6; 95% confidence interval 1.5 to 1.8), ibuprofen fast acting 200 mg (2.1; 1.9 to 2.3); ibuprofen 200 mg plus caffeine 100 mg (2.1; 1.9 to 3.1), diclofenac potassium 50 mg (2.1; 1.9 to 2.5), and etoricoxib 120 mg (1.8; 1.7 to 2.0). For comparison, ibuprofen acid 400 mg had an NNT of 2.5 (2.4 to 2.6). Not all participants had good pain relief and, for many pairs of drug and dose, 50% or more did not achieve at least 50% maximum pain relief over four to six hours.Long duration of action (eight hours or greater) was found for etoricoxib 120 mg, diflunisal 500 mg, paracetamol 650 mg plus oxycodone 10 mg, naproxen 500/550 mg, celecoxib 400 mg, and ibuprofen 400 mg plus paracetamol 1000 mg.There was no evidence of analgesic effect for aceclofenac 150 mg, aspirin 500 mg, and oxycodone 5 mg (low quality evidence). No trial data were available in reviews of acemetacin, meloxicam, nabumetone, nefopam, sulindac, tenoxicam, and tiaprofenic acid. Inadequate amounts of data were available for nine drugs and doses, and data potentially susceptible to publication bias for 13 drugs and doses (very low quality evidence). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is a wealth of reliable evidence on the analgesic efficacy of single dose oral analgesics. Fast acting formulations and fixed dose combinations of analgesics can produce good and often long-lasting analgesia at relatively low doses. There is also important information on drugs for which there are no data, inadequate data, or where results are unreliable due to susceptibility to publication bias. This should inform choices by professionals and consumers.
Rofecoxib selectively inhibits cyclo-oxygenase-2 in a dose-dependent manner in humans. No significant inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase-1 is observed with rofecoxib up to doses of 1000 mg. In 4 large double-blind randomised trials performed in patients with osteoarthritis, rofecoxib 12.5 and 25 mg/day significantly improved physical functioning, assessed using the Western Ontario and McMasters Universities Osteoarthritis Index and patient or investigator global assessment, compared with placebo. In addition, rofecoxib showed similar clinical efficacy to that observed with diclofenac 50 mg 3 times daily, ibuprofen 800 mg 3 times daily and nabumetone 1500 mg once daily. Rofecoxib is also an effective analgesic in patients with primary dysmenorrhoea or postoperative dental pain and demonstrates similar analgesic efficacy to that of naproxen sodium and ibuprofen. Rofecoxib is generally well tolerated. The most common adverse events associated with rofecoxib are diarrhoea, headache, nausea and upper respiratory tract infection. There was a significantly lower incidence of upper-gastrointestinal adverse events (perforations, ulcers and bleeds) in patients with osteoarthritis receiving rofecoxib 12.5, 25 or 50 mg/day than in those receiving ibuprofen, diclofenac or nabumetone.
Nabumetone is a new, nonacidic, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug. At least 80% of nabumetone is absorbed, and food, milk, and aluminum antacids increase the rate, but not the extent, of absorption. It is rapidly metabolized in the liver to 6-methoxy-2-naphthylacetic acid (6MNA), the major circulating active metabolite. At steady state, the time to maximum plasma concentration for 6MNA is 1 to 4 h. 6MNA has a very low clearance rate and long half-life (about 24 h). In general, steady state plasma concentrations of 6MNA increase in proportion with increases in the dose of nabumetone administered. Steady state plasma concentrations of 6MNA in the elderly are slightly higher than in healthy volunteers; however, this does not appear to be clinically significant. Preliminary studies in patients with impaired renal function indicate that the pharmacokinetics are not altered in patients with mild to moderate disease.
Severe gastro-intestinal complications are a major cause of NSAID-induced deaths in cases of rheumatoid arthritis. We measured COX selectivity by using an intact cell assay system, and found that NS-398 is a highly COX-2-selective inhibitor. Meloxicam, etodolac and diclofenac also showed high COX-2 selectivity. Zaltoprofen, loxoprofen-SRS (active metabolite of loxoprofen), 6-MNA (active metabolite of nabumetone) and ibuprofen showed intermediate COX-2 selectivity. The lowest COX-2 selectivities, which means the highest COX-1 selectivities, were observed in indomethacin, aspirin, and oxaprozin. There appears to be a good relationship between our data and some clinical data of severe gastro-intestinal toxicity. The more a given NSAID is selective for COX-2, the safer it is for clinical use. In conclusion, to anticipate the safety of NSAIDs, we find that an intact cell assay system, using human cells for measurement of COX selectivity, may be more useful than using direct enzyme assay systems.
An extensive literature search on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-induced gastropathy in rheumatic conditions has been carried out. A reduced incidence of gastropathy has been observed among newly developed NSAIDs such as etodolac and the non-acidic nabumetone. An alternative prophylactic therapy to avoid NSAID-induced gastroduodenal mucosal damage which has been successfully tested in several trials is co-medication with the prostaglandin analogue misoprostol. The cytoprotective agent sucralfate also appears to be effective. Recent observations of Campylobacter pylori infections in NSAID-induced gastropathy introduces the question as to whether simultaneous antibacterial medication should be routinely administered during NSAID therapy. At present the invasive technique of endoscopy is used to ascertain gastroduodenal mucosal damage. However, a new technique which merely requires blood sampling is being investigated. This involves measurement of serum levels of the precursor molecules for the gastric enzyme pepsin, pepsinogen I and II. In future this assay could constitute a non-invasive method for detecting gastroduodenal mucosal damage.
Naphthalene, a cytotoxic moiety, is an extensively explored aromatic conjugated system with applications in various pathophysiological conditions viz. anticancer, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antiviral, antitubercular, antihypertensive, antidiabetic, anti-neurodegenerative, antipsychotic, anticonvulsant, antidepressant. Naphthalene epoxides and naphthoquinones are most reactive metabolites of naphthalene and are responsible for the covalent interaction with cysteine amino acid of cellular proteins for cytotoxic nature. Many naphthalene derived bioactive phytoconstituents are present in nature including podophyllotoxins (Etoposide, teniposide), bis-ANS 82, Rifampicin, Justiprocumin A, B, Patentiflorin A. The naphthalene-based molecules, viz. Naphyrone, tolnaftate, naftifine, nafcillin, terbinafine, propranolol, nabumetone, nafimidone, naproxen, duloxetine, lasofoxifene, bedaquiline etc. have also been approved by FDA and are being marketed as therapeutics. Thus, the naphthalene scaffold emerges as an important building block in drug discovery owing to its broad spectrum of biological activities through varying structural modifications. This review incorporates the pharmacological aspects of different types of chemically modified naphthalene-based molecules along with their activity profile. This compiled information may serve as a benchmark for the alteration of existing ligands to design novel potent molecules with lesser side effects.
The antitumor activity of certain anti-inflammatory drugs is often attributed to an indirect effect based on the inhibition of COX enzymes. In the case of anti-inflammatory prodrugs, this property could be attributed to the parent molecules with mechanism other than COX inhibition, particularly through formulations capable of slowing down their metabolic conversion. In this work, a pilot docking study aimed at comparing the interaction of two prodrugs, nabumetone (NB) and its tricyclic analog 7-methoxy-2,3-dihydro-1H-cyclopenta[b]naphthalen-1-one (MC), and their common active metabolite 6-methoxy-2-naphthylacetic acid (MNA) with the COX binding site, was carried out. Cytotoxicity, cytofluorimetry, and protein expression assays on prodrugs were also performed to assess their potential as antiproliferative agents that could help hypothesize an effective use as anticancer therapeutics. Encouraging results suggest that the studied compounds could act not only as precursors of the anti-inflammatory metabolite, but also as direct antiproliferative agents.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have superseded Helicobacter pylori infection as the most important cause of peptic ulcer bleeding. Eradication of H. pylori in NSAID users will not affect ulcer healing. In high-risk patients with a history of ulcer bleeding, curing H. pylori infection alone without acid suppression has substantially reduced the risk of rebleeding caused by low-dose aspirin but not nonaspirin NSAIDs. In a study comparing the safety profile of misoprostol in combination with NSAID against nabumetone in high-risk patients with a history of ulcer bleeding, both strategies were unable to confer significant protection against the risk of rebleeding.
Nabumetone is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory prodrug, which exerts its pharmacological effects via the metabolite 6-methoxy-2-naphthylacetic acid (6-MNA). Nabumetone itself is non-acidic and, following absorption, it undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism to form the main circulating active metabolite (6-MNA) which is a much more potent inhibitor of preferentially cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2. The three major metabolic pathways of nabumetone are O-demethylation, reduction of the ketone to an alcohol, and an oxidative cleavage of the side-chain occurs to yield acetic acid derivatives. Essentially no unchanged nabumetone and < 1% of the major 6-MNA metabolite are excreted unchanged in the urine from which 80% of the dose can be recovered and another 10% in faeces. Nabumetone is clinically used mainly for the management of patients with osteoarthritis (OA) or rheumatoid arthritis (RA) to reduce pain and inflammation. The clinical efficacy of nabumetone has also been evaluated in patients with ankylosing spondylitis, soft tissue injuries and juvenile RA. The optimum oral dosage of nabumetone for OA patients is 1 g once daily, which is well tolerated. The therapeutic response is superior to placebo and similar to nonselective COX inhibitors. In RA patients, nabumetone 1 g at bedtime is optimal, but an additional 0.5-1 g can be administered in the morning for patients with persistent symptoms. In RA, nabumetone has shown a comparable clinical efficacy to aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid), diclofenac, piroxicam, ibuprofen and naproxen. Clinical trials and a decade of worldwide safety data and long-term postmarketing surveillance studies show that nabumetone is generally well tolerated. The most frequent adverse effects are those commonly seen with COX inhibitors, which include diarrhoea, dyspepsia, headache, abdominal pain and nausea. In common with other COX inhibitors, nabumetone may increase the risk of GI perforations, ulcerations and bleedings (PUBs). However, several studies show a low incidence of PUBs, and on a par with the numbers reported from studies with COX-2 selective inhibitors and considerably lower than for nonselective COX inhibitors. This has been attributed mainly to the non-acidic chemical properties of nabumetone but also to its COX-1/COX-2 inhibitor profile. Through its metabolite 6-MNA, nabumetone has a dose-related effect on platelet aggregation, but no effect on bleeding time in clinical studies. Furthermore, several short-term studies have shown little to no effect on renal function. Compared with COX-2 selective inhibitors, nabumetone exhibits similar anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties in patients with arthritis and there is no evidence of excess GI or other forms of complications to date.
A need remains for the development of more effective therapies for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (both NSAIDs and DMARDs). The NSAIDs remain the cornerstone of symptomatic therapy, but concern remains about their safety, potential for the delay in commencing definitive therapy and theoretical pro-inflammatory effects. Each of the NSAIDs reviewed here do provide an advantage over therapies previously available and should prove to be useful additions to the rheumatologists' therapeutic armament.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can affect renal function in a variety of ways. The most important clinical effects are decreased sodium excretion, decreased potassium excretion, and declines in renal perfusion. Decreased sodium excretion can result in weight gain, peripheral edema, attenuation of the effects of antihypertensive agents, and rarely precipitation of chronic heart failure. Hyperkalemia can occur to a degree sufficient to cause cardiac arrhythmias. Renal function can decline sufficiently enough to cause acute renal failure. Risk factors for all of these effects have been identified, allowing prospective identification of patients at risk with institution of appropriate precautionary measure. All NSAIDs seem to share these adverse effects. Preliminary data from cyclooxygenase-2-selective inhibitors suggest that they also affect renal prostaglandins. Therefore, the same cautions should be exercised with their use as with traditional NSAIDs.
PURPOSE: To report an unusual case of hydroxychloroquine toxicity after short-term therapy. METHODS: Observational case report. RESULTS: A 56-year-old woman presented to the Ophthalmology Clinic at Walter Reed Army Medical Center (WRAMC) with a 6-month history of gradually decreasing vision in both eyes. The patient had been taking hydroxychloroquine for the preceding 48 months for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Examination of the posterior segment revealed bilateral "bull's eye" macular lesions. Fundus autofluorescence revealed hyperfluorescence of well-defined bull's eye lesions in both eyes. Optical coherence tomography revealed corresponding parafoveal atrophy with a loss of the retinal inner segment/outer segment junction. Humphrey visual field 10-2 white showed significant central and paracentral defects with a generalized depression. The patient was on a standard dose of 400 mg daily, which was above her ideal dose. The patient had no history of kidney or liver dysfunction. There were no known risk factors but there were several possible confounding factors. The patient was started on high-dose nabumetone, a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug, at the same time she was started on hydroxychloroquine. She also reported taking occasional ibuprofen. CONCLUSION: Retinal toxicity from chloroquine has been recognized for decades with later reports showing retinopathy from long-term hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil) use for the treatment of antiinflammatory diseases. Hydroxychloroquine is now widely used and retinal toxicity is relatively uncommon. However, it can cause serious vision loss and is usually irreversible. The risk of hydroxychloroquine toxicity rises to nearly 1% with a total cumulative dose of 1,000 g, which is  approximately 5 years to 7 years of normal use. Toxicity is rare under this dose. For this reason, the American Academy of Ophthalmology has revised its recommendations such that annual screenings begin 5 years after therapy with hydroxychloroquine has begun unless there are known risk factors. This case report confirms the need for a baseline examination and annual ophthalmologic screening for patients taking hydroxychloroquine at a dose higher than the recommended dosage. It is also reasonable to consider annual examinations in patients taking high-dose nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs from the initiation of the medication.
Arylalkane-derived prodrugs of arylacetic acids are a small group of substances that have long been known for their anti-inflammatory action. Despite their ease of synthesis and good potential for the development of new potent and safe anti-inflammatory agents, this group of substances has not received much attention from researchers so far. Therefore, representative arylalkane derivatives were investigated through molecular docking techniques to verify the possible hepatic activation mode toward active metabolites by CYP1A2. In this regard, arylalkanoic acid prodrugs were docked with a crystallographic structure of human CYP1A2, in which the enzyme is co-crystallized with the selective competitive inhibitor alpha-naphthoflavone BHF. Of note, all the examined compounds proved capable of interacting with the enzyme active site in a manner similar to Nabumetone, thus confirming that a productive metabolic transformation is feasible. On the basis of these findings, it is possible to argue that subtle differences in the way CYP1A2 accommodates the ligands depend on the fine details of their molecular structures. Overall, these data suggest that compounds simply formed by an aromatic moiety bearing an appropriate alkane-derived chain could lead to innovative anti-inflammatory agents.
BACKGROUND: Editor's note: The anti-inflammatory drug rofecoxib (Vioxx) was withdrawn from the market at the end of September 2004 after it was shown that long-term use (greater than 18 months) could increase the risk of heart attack and stroke. Further information is available at www.vioxx.com. Osteoarthritis is a chronic disease of the joints, characterised by joint pain, stiffness and loss of physical function. Its onset is age-related and occurs usually between the ages of 50 and 60. It is the commonest cause of disability in those aged over 65, with OA of the knee and/or hip affecting over 20 per cent of the elderly population. OBJECTIVES: To establish the efficacy and safety of rofecoxib in the management of OA by systematic review of available evidence. SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the following databases up to August 2004: MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Controlled Trials Register, National Research Register, NHS Economic Evaluation Database, Health Technology Assessment Database. The bibliographies of retrieved papers and content experts were consulted for additional references. SELECTION CRITERIA: All eligible randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were included. No unpublished RCTs were included in this edition of the review. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Data were abstracted independently by two reviewers. A validated checklist was used to score the quality of the RCTs. Comparable trials were pooled using fixed effects model. MAIN RESULTS: Twenty-six RCTs were included. The comparators were placebo, diclofenac, ibuprofen, naproxen, nimesulide, nabumetone, paracetamol, celecoxib and Arthrotec. The evidence reviewed indicated that rofecoxib was more effective than placebo (patient global response RR 1.75 95% CI: 1.35, 2.26) but was associated with more adverse events (RR 1.32 95% CI 1.11, 1.56). There were no consistent differences in efficacy between rofecoxib and any of the active comparators at equivalent doses. Endoscopic studies indicated that compared to ibuprofen 800 mg three times a day, rofecoxib caused fewer erosions and gastric ulcers at doses of 25mg and 50mg; the difference in duodenal ulcers was evident only at a dose of 25mg. Rofecoxib 50mg also caused more endoscopically observed ulcers greater than rofecoxib 25mg (RR 2.48 CI: 1.21, 5.11). Very few of the trials reported overall rates of GI adverse events although rofecoxib was found to cause fewer GI events than naproxen. Only one of the nine trials comparing rofecoxib to celecoxib reported on the overall rates of GI events and this was a comparison of the higher recommended dose of rofecoxib with the lower recommended dose of celecoxib. Similarly, the three trials in older hypertensive patients that examined the cardiovascular safety of rofecoxib and celecoxib used non-comparable doses; the results of these studies indicated that rofecoxib caused more patients to have oedema and a clinically significant increase in systolic blood pressure. This difference between rofecoxib and celecoxib was not evident in studies conducted in more general populations. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Rofecoxib was voluntarily withdrawn from global markets in October 2004 therefore there are no implications for practice concerning its use. There remains a number of questions over both the benefits and risks associated with Cox II selective agents and further work is ongoing.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have long been used as therapy for arthritis patients. However, in some patients these drugs can cause gastrointestinal hemorrhage, perforation, or ulcer through direct topical effects, enterohepatic recirculation, and systemic effects. In an effort to address this problem, new NSAIDs have been developed. Nabumetone, which belongs to a new class of NSAID, is a nonacidic agent that has been associated with a low incidence of peptic ulcer. This article examines available clinical data on nabumetone, including studies on gastrointestinal safety and effectiveness in osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis patients, and data that may provide an explanation for nabumetone's low incidence of ulceration.
The nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been repeatedly associated with photosensitivity reactions. The underlying mechanism however is not known, and the clinical features are not always consistent with either a phototoxic or a photoallergic mechanism. In this study, four NSAIDs were investigated for their phototoxicity potential in human volunteers using an oral dosing protocol. Phototoxicity, consisting of wheal-and-flare reactions following exposure to ultraviolet radiation, was demonstrated following the administration of naproxen and nabumetone, but was not seen in volunteers who received piroxicam, a drug reported to cause photosensitivity. Thus, although certain NSAIDs are potentially capable of producing phototoxicity reactions, others can presumably provoke clinical photosensitivity through other mechanisms.
