The triptans are a class of tryptamine-based drugs indicated for in the treatment of migraine headaches. The triptans act as serotonin (5-hydroxytriptamine) (5-HT) agonists by binding to various serotonin receptors, causing vasoconstriction and neuronal inhibition to alleviate migraines. There are 7 types of triptans currently available on the U.S. market: almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan and zolmitriptan. The objective of this study was to examine the use and effects of triptans in pregnancy. Although three of the triptans have pregnancy registries maintained by the manufacturer, triptan use in pregnancy has not been extensively studied. Information on the use of sumatriptan during pregnancy is relatively more abundant, because it has been on the market longer than the other triptans and may also have a higher percentage of the market share. There are no data to suggest teratogenicity for any of the triptans, although preterm birth rates appear to be elevated.
There are many options for acute migraine attack treatment, but none is ideal for all patients. This study aims to review current medical office-based acute migraine therapy in adults and provides readers with an organized approach to this important facet of migraine treatment. A general literature review includes a review of several recent published guidelines. Acetaminophen, 4 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (ibuprofen, acetylsalicylic acid [ASA], naproxen sodium, and diclofenac potassium), and 7 triptans (almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan, and zolmitriptan) have good evidence for efficacy and form the core of acute migraine treatment. NSAID-triptan combinations, dihydroergotamine, non-opioid combination analgesics (acetaminophen, ASA, and caffeine), and several anti-emetics (metoclopramide, domperidone, and prochlorperazine) are additional evidence-based options. Opioid containing combination analgesics may be helpful in specific patients, but should not be used routinely. Clinical features to be considered when choosing an acute migraine medication include usual headache intensity, usual rapidity of pain intensity increase, nausea, vomiting, degree of disability, patient response to previously used medications, history of headache recurrence with previous attacks, and the presence of contraindications to specific acute medications. Available acute medications can be organized into 4 treatment strategies, including a strategy for attacks of mild to moderate severity (strategy one: acetaminophen and/or NSAIDs), a triptan strategy for patients with severe attacks and for attacks not responding to strategy one, a refractory attack strategy, and a strategy for patients with contraindications to vasoconstricting drugs. Acute treatment of migraine attacks during pregnancy, lactation, and for patients with chronic migraine is also discussed. In chronic migraine, it is particularly important that medication overuse is eliminated or avoided. Migraine treatment is complex, and treatment must be individualized and tailored to the patient's clinical features. Clinicians should make full use of available medications and formulations in an organized approach.
OBJECTIVE: A review of treatment options for menstrual migraine. BACKGROUND: Migraine affects  approximately 30 million people in the US. A subset of female migraineurs have migraines that are mainly associated with menstruation. Menstrual migraine (MM) is divided into pure MM and menstrually related migraine. Pure MM attacks occur only with menstruation and have a prevalence of 1%. Menstrually related migraine has a prevalence of 6-7%, and occurs both during menstruation as well as during the rest of the cycle. MM is usually without aura and is more severe, longer lasting, and more resistant to treatment due to the effects of ovarian hormones, specifically estrogen. MM treatment is divided into acute, short-term prophylaxis, and daily prevention. The best-studied acute treatments are triptans. For short-term prophylaxis, triptans, non-triptans, or combinations are used. Some preventive medications may be used daily to prevent MM. Many anti-epileptic medications used in migraine prevention can affect the efficacy of oral contraceptives and hormonal treatments, so caution is indicated when these are used. METHODS: PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane, and Embase were searched for MM and treatments. RESULTS: Many randomized, placebo-controlled, prospective studies have evaluated the efficacy of sumatriptan, rizatriptan, naratriptan, zolmitriptan, and almotriptan in MM. Reviewing numerous studies with statistically significant results, rizatriptan has the best overall evidence for acute treatment of MM, ranging from pain-free responses of 33-73% at 2 hours. Sumatriptan and rizatriptan have shown similar efficacies of 61-63% in terms of 2 hour pain freedom. Rizatriptan showed sustained pain relief between 2 and 24 hours with an efficacy of 63% and sustained pain freedom for MM between 2 and 24 hours with an efficacy of 32%. For short-term prevention of MM, there were four randomized controlled trials for frovatriptan taken twice daily, one trial for zolmitriptan taken three times daily, and two studies for naratriptan taken twice daily, all of which showed statistically significant results. Among studies on non-triptans for short-term prevention of MM, magnesium, estrogen, naproxen sodium, and dihydroergotamine all had statistically significant results. Many antiepileptic medications taken for prevention of MM can cause enzyme induction affecting oral contraceptives (OCs) and hormonal treatments to different degrees. Topiramate has the least effect on OCs at doses below 200 mg/day. Lamotrigine noticeably decreases oral contraceptive levels; however, the evidence for it as a preventive medication is not strong. CONCLUSION: MM can be very difficult to treat. For acute treatments, rizatriptan has the best overall evidence. For short-term prevention, frovatriptan, zolmitriptan, or naratriptan, as well as magnesium, estrogen, naproxen sodium, or dihydroergotamine may be useful.
The study aims to provide an updated assessment of the evidence for individual pharmacological therapies for acute migraine treatment. Pharmacological therapy is frequently required for acutely treating migraine attacks. The American Academy of Neurology Guidelines published in 2000 summarized the available evidence relating to the efficacy of acute migraine medications. This review, conducted by the members of the Guidelines Section of the American Headache Society, is an updated assessment of evidence for the migraine acute medications. A standardized literature search was performed to identify articles related to acute migraine treatment that were published between 1998 and 2013. The American Academy of Neurology Guidelines Development procedures were followed. Two authors reviewed each abstract resulting from the search and determined whether the full manuscript qualified for review. Two reviewers studied each qualifying full manuscript for its level of evidence. Level A evidence requires at least 2 Class I studies, and Level B evidence requires 1 Class I or 2 Class II studies. The specific medications - triptans (almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan [oral, nasal spray, injectable, transcutaneous patch], zolmitriptan [oral and nasal spray]) and dihydroergotamine (nasal spray, inhaler) are effective (Level A). Ergotamine and other forms of dihydroergotamine are probably effective (Level B). Effective nonspecific medications include acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin, diclofenac, ibuprofen, and naproxen), opioids (butorphanol nasal spray), sumatriptan/naproxen, and the combination of acetaminophen/aspirin/caffeine (Level A). Ketoprofen, intravenous and intramuscular ketorolac, flurbiprofen, intravenous magnesium (in migraine with aura), and the combination of isometheptene compounds, codeine/acetaminophen and tramadol/acetaminophen are probably effective (Level B). The antiemetics prochlorperazine, droperidol, chlorpromazine, and metoclopramide are probably effective (Level B). There is inadequate evidence for butalbital and butalbital combinations, phenazone, intravenous tramadol, methadone, butorphanol or meperidine injections, intranasal lidocaine, and corticosteroids, including dexamethasone (Level C). Octreotide is probably not effective (Level B). There is inadequate evidence to refute the efficacy of ketorolac nasal spray, intravenous acetaminophen, chlorpromazine injection, and intravenous granisetron (Level C). There are many acute migraine treatments for which evidence supports efficacy. Clinicians must consider medication efficacy, potential side effects, and potential medication-related adverse events when prescribing acute medications for migraine. Although opioids, such as butorphanol, codeine/acetaminophen, and tramadol/acetaminophen, are probably effective, they are not recommended for regular use.
Menstrual migraine (MM) is either pure, if attacks are limited solely during the perimenstrual window (PMW), or menstrually related (MRM), if two of three PMWs are associated with attacks with additional migraine events outside the PMW. Acute migraine specific therapy is equally effective in MM and non-MM. Although the International Classification of Headache Disorders-II classifies MM without aura, data suggest this needs revision. The studies on extended-cycle oral contraceptives suggest benefits for headache-prone individuals. Triptan mini-prophylaxis outcomes are positive, but a conclusion of "minimal net benefit compared to placebo" is not entirely unwarranted. In a 2008 evidence-based review, grade B recommendations exist for sumatriptan (50 and 100 mg), mefenamic acid (500 mg), and riza-triptan (10 mg) for the acute treatment of MRM. For the preventive mini-prophylactic treatment of MRM, grade B recommendations are provided for transcutaneous estrogen (1.5 mg), frovatriptan (2.5 mg twice daily), and naratriptan (1 mg twice daily).
Pfizer has developed and launched eletriptan, a 5-HT1B/1D agonist, for the potential treatment of migraine with and without aura. Eletriptan has 6-fold greater affinity for the 5-HT1D receptor than sumatriptan, and a 3-fold greater affinity for the 5-HT1B receptor [249570]. Eletriptan pharmacology has also been evaluated in vitro in comparison with zolmitriptan (AstraZeneca plc) and naratriptan (GlaxoSmithKline plc) [290116].
The clinical efficacy in migraine was compared for oral and subcutaneous sumatriptan and naratriptan. Doses of the two administration forms were chosen as resulting in comparable blood concentrations. Subcutaneous administrations of the drugs were superior for efficacy than the oral forms. This most likely due to a quicker rise in blood concentrations after subcutaneous injections.. In designing new therapies for migraine one should aim at a quick absorption of the drug, which will probably result in an increased efficacy.
OBJECTIVE: To compare all licensed drug interventions as oral monotherapy for the acute treatment of migraine episodes in adults. DESIGN: Systematic review and network meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES: Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Medline, Embase, ClinicalTrials.gov, EU Clinical Trials Register, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, as well as websites of regulatory agencies and pharmaceutical companies without language restrictions until 24 June 2023. METHODS: Screening, data extraction, coding, and risk of bias assessment were performed independently and in duplicate. Random effects network meta-analyses were conducted for the primary analyses. The primary outcomes were the proportion of participants who were pain-free at two hours post-dose and the proportion of participants with sustained pain freedom from two to 24 hours post-dose, both without the use of rescue drugs. Certainty of the evidence was graded using the confidence in network meta-analysis (CINeMA) online tool. Vitruvian plots were used to summarise findings. An international panel of clinicians and people with lived experience of migraine co-designed the study and interpreted the findings. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR SELECTING STUDIES: Double blind randomised trials of adults (>/=18 years) with a diagnosis of migraine according to the International Classification of Headache Disorders. RESULTS: 137 randomised controlled trials comprising 89 445 participants allocated to one of 17 active interventions or placebo were included. All active interventions showed superior efficacy compared with placebo for pain freedom at two hours (odds ratios from 1.73 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.27 to 2.34) for naratriptan to 5.19 (4.25 to 6.33) for eletriptan), and most of them also for sustained pain freedom to 24 hours (odds ratios from 1.71 (1.07 to 2.74) for celecoxib to 7.58 (2.58 to 22.27) for ibuprofen). In head-to-head comparisons between active interventions, eletriptan was the most effective drug for pain freedom at two hours (odds ratios from 1.46 (1.18 to 1.81) to 3.01 (2.13 to 4.25)), followed by rizatriptan (1.59 (1.18 to 2.17) to 2.44 (1.75 to 3.45)), sumatriptan (1.35 (1.03 to 1.75) to 2.04 (1.49 to 2.86)), and zolmitriptan (1.47 (1.04 to 2.08) to 1.96 (1.39 to 2.86)). For sustained pain freedom, the most efficacious interventions were eletriptan and ibuprofen (odds ratios from 1.41 (1.02 to 1.93) to 4.82 (1.31 to 17.67)). Confidence in accordance with CINeMA ranged from high to very low. Sensitivity analyses on Food and Drug Administration licensed doses only, high versus low doses, risk of bias, and moderate to severe headache at baseline confirmed the main findings for both primary and secondary outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, eletriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan, and zolmitriptan had the best profiles and they were more efficacious than the recently marketed drugs lasmiditan, rimegepant, and ubrogepant. Although cost effectiveness analyses are warranted and careful consideration should be given to patients with a high risk cardiovascular profile, the most effective triptans should be considered as preferred acute treatment for migraine and included in the WHO List of Essential Medicines to promote global accessibility and uniform standards of care. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: Open Science Framework https://osf.io/kq3ys/.
Naratriptan is a selective 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonist, with a high affinity at the 5-HT(1B), 5-HT(1D) and 5-HT(1F) receptor subtypes. Naratriptan contracts a number of large isolated cerebral arteries from several species, and has little contractile effect on peripheral blood vessels. It has an inhibitory effect on the cranial neurogenic inflammation model. The clinically recommended dose is 2.5 mg. It was found significantly superior to placebo on headache relief and pain free at 2 and 4 hours, and in relieving nausea, photophobia and phonophobia. It also has a good within-patient consistency, and a low recurrence rate. The side-effect profile is that of the triptan class, wih an incidence no different from placebo at the 25 mg dose. The contraindications are similar to any triptan, including coronary disease. Naratriptan is unlikely to affect metabolism of other drugs. In comparison sumatriptan 100 mg, naratriptan 2.5 mg has a slower onset of action and a lower response rate at 4 h, but it has a lower recurrence rate, and is better tolerated.
Pierre Fabre is developing donitriptan, a piperazide 5-HT1D agonist, as a potential treatment for migraine [175854]. In January 2001, donitriptan had completed phase I trials for migraine and was scheduled to enter phase II development [396027]. This compound has an increased potency and, importantly, markedly higher intrinsic activity in comparison to the well described tryptamine derivatives, naratriptan, zolmitriptan and sumatriptan [295769].
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article provides a systematic, evidence-based approach to acute medication choices for the patient with migraine. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent clinical trials, meta-analyses, and practice guidelines have confirmed that four nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) with randomized controlled trial evidence for efficacy in migraine (ibuprofen, naproxen sodium, diclofenac potassium, and acetylsalicylic acid) and seven triptans (sumatriptan, rizatriptan, eletriptan, zolmitriptan, almotriptan, frovatriptan, and naratriptan) are appropriate medications for acute migraine treatment. Dihydroergotamine (DHE) is also suitable for selected patients. SUMMARY: NSAIDs and triptans are the mainstays of acute migraine therapy, and antiemetic drugs can be added as necessary. Opioids and combination analgesics containing opioids should not be used routinely. Patient-specific clinical features should help guide the selection of an acute medication for an individual patient. Acute medications can be organized into four treatment strategies for use in various clinical settings. The acetaminophen-NSAID strategy is suitable for patients with attacks of mild to moderate severity. The triptan strategy is suitable for patients with severe attacks and for those with attacks of moderate severity who do not respond well to NSAIDs. The refractory migraine strategies may be useful for patients who do not respond well to the NSAIDs or triptans alone and include using triptans and NSAIDs simultaneously in combination, DHE, and rescue medications (eg, dopamine antagonists, combination analgesics, and corticosteroids) when the patient's usual medications fail. Strategies for patients with contraindications to vasoconstricting drugs include use of NSAIDs, combination analgesics, and dopamine antagonists.Acetaminophen is the safest acute migraine drug during pregnancy, and acetaminophen with codeine is also an option. Sumatriptan may be an option during pregnancy for selected patients and is compatible with breast-feeding.
Eletriptan is a selective, high affinity serotonin 5-HT(1B/1D)-receptor agonist which is rapidly absorbed and has a long half-life in plasma. Eletriptan has been shown to be effective and well tolerated in randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled acute migraine trials and long-term open-label trials. Eletriptan maintains a consistency of response across three attacks and patients continue to respond to eletriptan for at least up to 1 year. Eletriptan has been compared with sumatriptan, zolmitriptan, naratriptan and ergotamine/caffeine in placebo-controlled, randomised, head-to-head trials, and has shown better efficacy with similar adverse events. In a large triptan meta-analysis, including 53 trials and > 24,000 patients, eletriptan 80 mg showed better efficacy, similar consistency but lower tolerability compared with sumatriptan 100 mg. Eletriptan has also shown efficacy in difficult-to-treat patients who were dissatisfied with their previous treatment with sumatriptan, rizatriptan, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or Excedrin.
Recent studies of the pathophysiology of migraine provide evidence that the headache phase is associated with multiple physiologic actions. These actions include the release of vasoactive neuropeptides by the trigeminovascular system, vasodilation of intracranial extracerebral vessels, and increased nociceptive neurotransmission within the central trigeminocervical complex. The 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonists, collectively known as triptans, are a major advance in the treatment of migraine. The beneficial effects of the triptans in patients with migraine are related to their multiple mechanisms of action at sites implicated in the pathophysiology of migraine. These mechanisms are mediated by 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors and include vasoconstriction of painfully dilated cerebral blood vessels, inhibition of the release of vasoactive neuropeptides by trigeminal nerves, and inhibition of nociceptive neurotransmission. The high affinity of the triptans for 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors and their favorable pharmacologic properties contribute to the beneficial effects of these drugs, including rapid onset of action, effective relief of headache and associated symptoms, and low incidence of adverse effects.
Migraine is a paroxysmal disorder characterized by attacks of headache, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, and malaise. This review summarizes new treatment options for therapy of the acute attack. Mild or moderate migraine attacks are treated with antiemetics followed by analgesics such as aspirin, paracetamol, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or antiemetics combined with ergotamine or dihydroergotamine. Sumatriptan, a specific serotonin (5-HT)1B/D agonist is used when attacks do not respond to ergotamine, or when intolerable side effects occur. The new migraine drugs zolmitriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, and eletriptan differ slightly in their pharmacological profiles, which translates into minor differences in efficacy, headache recurrence, and side effects. New drugs in migraine prophylaxis include cyclandelate, valproic acid and magnesium.
Two new intranasal migraine medications, sumatriptan and dihydroergotamine mesylate, may offer specific advantages for patients who are seeking alternatives to various oral or parenteral migraine abortive therapies. Placebo-controlled clinical studies demonstrate that both intranasal forms are effective in relieving migraine headache pain, but published clinical trial information comparing these two intranasal medications with current abortive therapies is lacking. Both agents are generally well tolerated by patients, with the exception of mild, local adverse reactions of the nose and throat.
In randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of oral drug treatment of migraine attacks, efficacy is evaluated after 2 hours. The effect of oral naratriptan 2.5 mg with a maximum blood concentration (T(max) ) at 2 hours increases from 2 to 4 hours in RCTs. To check whether such a delayed effect is also present for other oral antimigraine drugs, we hand-searched the literature for publications on RCTs reporting efficacy. Two triptans, 3 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), a triptan combined with an NSAID and a calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonist were evaluated for their therapeutic gain with determination of time to maximum effect (E(max) ). E(max) was compared with known T(max) from pharmacokinetic studies to estimate the delay to pain-free. The delay in therapeutic gain varied from 1-2 hours for zolmitriptan 5 mg to 7 hours for naproxen 500 mg. An increase in effect from 2 to 4 hours was observed after eletriptan 40 mg, frovatriptan 2.5 mg and lasmiditan 200 mg, and after rizatriptan 10 mg (T(max)  = 1 h) from 1 to 2 hours. This strongly indicates a general delay of effect in oral antimigraine drugs. A review of 5 possible effects of triptans on the trigemino-vascular system did not yield a simple explanation for the delay. In addition, E(max) for triptans probably depends partly on the rise in plasma levels and not only on its maximum. The most likely explanation for the delay in effect is that a complex antimigraine system with more than 1 site of action is involved.
The basic CNS neuropharmacology of naratriptan is reviewed here. Naratriptan is a second-generation triptan antimigraine drug, developed at a time when CNS activity was thought not to be relevant to its therapeutic effect in migraine. It was, however, developed to be a more lipid-soluble, more readily absorbed and less readily metabolized variant on preexisting triptans and these variations conferred on it a higher CNS profile. Naratriptan is a 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonist with a highly selective action on migraine pain and nausea, without significant effect on other pain or even other trigeminal pain. Probable sites of therapeutic action of naratriptan include any or all of: the cranial vasculature; the peripheral terminations of trigeminovascular sensory nerves; the first-order synapses of the trigeminovascular sensory system; the descending pain control system; and the nuclei of the thalamus. Naratriptan may prevent painful dilatation of intracranial vessels or reverse such painful dilatation. Naratriptan can prevent the release of sensory peptides and inhibit painful neurogenic vasodilatation of intracranial blood vessels. At the first order synapse of the trigeminal sensory system, naratriptan can selectively suppress neurotransmission from sensory fibers from dural and vascular tissue, while sparing transmission from other trigeminal fibers, probably through inhibition of neuropeptide transmitter release. In the periaqueductal gray matter and in the nucleus raphe magnus, naratriptan selectively activates inhibitory neurons which project to the trigeminal nucleus and spinal cord and which exert inhibitory influences on trigeminovascular sensory input. Naratriptan has also a therapeutic effect on the nausea of migraine, possibly exerting its action at the level of the nucleus tractus solitarius via the same mechanisms by which it inhibits trigeminovascular nociceptive input. The incidence of naratriptan-induced adverse effects in the CNS is low and it is not an analgesic for pain other than that of vascular headache. In patients receiving selective serotonin uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) naratriptan may cause serotonin syndrome-like behavioral side effects. The mechanism of action involved in the production of behavioral and other CNS side effects of naratriptan is unknown.
The new 5-HT1B/1D agonist naratriptan, introduced in many countries in 1997 and 1998 for the acute treatment of migraine, was designed to complement the sumatriptan portfolio of offerings (including the injection, the tablets, the nasal spray, and in some countries, the suppository) by offering patients excellent tolerability and a sustained duration of action. Clinical studies on naratriptan, including more than 4000 patients treating more than 15,000 migraine attacks, show that naratriptan tablets 2.5 mg are distinguished from other 5-HT1B/1D agonists for migraine on the basis of their excellent tolerability profile, which does not differ from that of placebo. In addition to its tolerability, naratriptan tablets 2.5 mg possess a long duration of action with a low incidence of headache recurrence (17-28% in phase II and III clinical trials). With its tolerability profile and long duration of action, naratriptan tablets 2.5 mg may be particularly appropriate as a single-dose alternative to NSAIDs and analgesics, which often are not effective in migraine but are used because of tolerability considerations.
One of the outstanding therapeutic revolutions of this last decade has been the introduction of selective serotonin agonists in the acute treatment of migraine. After sumatriptan, introduced in Belgium in 1992, other "triptans" are emerging. The efficacy and the pharmacoeconomic profile of zolmitriptan, the second "triptan" now available in Belgium, are reviewed and the arrival of a third triptan, naratriptan is announced.
Migraine is a paroxysmal disorder with attacks of headache, nausea, vomiting, photo- and phonophobia and malaise. This review summarises new treatment options both for the therapy of the acute attack as well as for migraine prophylaxis. Analgesics like aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are effective in treating migraine attacks. Few controlled trials were performed for the use of ergotamine or dihydroergotamine. These trials indicate inferior efficacy compared to serotonin (5-HT)1B/D-agonists (further on called "triptans"). The triptans (almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan and zolmitriptan) are highly effective. They improve headache as well as nausea, photo- and phonophobia. The different triptans have minor differences in efficacy, headache recurrence and adverse effects. The knowledge of their different pharmacological profile allows a more specific treatment of the individual migraine characteristics. Migraine prophylaxis is recommended, when more than 3 attacks occur per month, if attacks do not respond to acute treatment or if side effects of acute treatment are severe. Substances with proven efficacy include the beta-blockers metoprolol and propranolol, the calcium channel blocker flunarizine, several 5-HT antagonists and amitriptyline. Recently antiepileptic drugs (valproic acid, gabapentin, topiramate) were evaluated for the prophylaxis of migraine. The use of botulinum-toxin is under investigation.
