The psychopharmacology of depression is a field that has evolved rapidly in just under 5 decades. Early antidepressant medications--tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)--were discovered through astute clinical observations. These first-generation medications were effective because they enhanced serotonergic or noradrenergic mechanisms or both. Unfortunately, the TCAs also blocked histaminic, cholinergic, and alpha1-adrenergic receptor sites, and this action brought about unwanted side effects such as weight gain, dry mouth, constipation, drowsiness, and dizziness. MAOIs can interact with tyramine to cause potentially lethal hypertension and present potentially dangerous interactions with a number of medications and over-the-counter drugs. The newest generation of antidepressants, including the single-receptor selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and multiple-receptor antidepressants venlafaxine, mirtazapine, bupropion, trazodone, and nefazodone, target one or more specific brain receptor sites without, in most cases, activating unwanted sites such as histamine and acetylcholine. This paper discusses the new antidepressants, particularly with regard to mechanism of action, and looks at future developments in the treatment of depression.
This review covers mechanisms of action, efficacy, side effects, and toxicity of various classes of antidepressants: tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, second-generation antidepressants including the selective inhibitors of serotonin reuptake, and novel drugs such as mirtazapine, nefazodone, and venlafaxine.
A systematic review and random-effects model network meta-analysis were conducted to compare the efficacy, acceptability, tolerability, and safety of antidepressants to treat adults with major depressive disorder (MDD) in the maintenance phase. This study searched the PubMed, Cochrane Library, and Embase databases and included only double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trials with an enrichment design: patients were stabilized on the antidepressant of interest during the open-label study and then randomized to receive the same antidepressant or placebo. The outcomes were the 6-month relapse rate (primary outcome, efficacy), all-cause discontinuation (acceptability), discontinuation due to adverse events (tolerability), and the incidence of individual adverse events. The risk ratio with a 95% credible interval was calculated. The meta-analysis comprised 34 studies (n = 9384, mean age = 43.80 years, and %females = 68.10%) on 20 antidepressants (agomelatine, amitriptyline, bupropion, citalopram, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, levomilnacipran, milnacipran, mirtazapine, nefazodone, paroxetine, reboxetine, sertraline, tianeptine, venlafaxine, vilazodone, and vortioxetine) and a placebo. In terms of the 6-month relapse rate, amitriptyline, citalopram, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, mirtazapine, nefazodone, paroxetine, reboxetine, sertraline, tianeptine, venlafaxine, and vortioxetine outperformed placebo. Compared to placebo, desvenlafaxine, paroxetine, sertraline, venlafaxine, and vortioxetine had lower all-cause discontinuation; however, sertraline had a higher discontinuation rate due to adverse events. Compared to placebo, venlafaxine was associated with a lower incidence of dizziness, while desvenlafaxine, sertraline, and vortioxetine were associated with a higher incidence of nausea/vomiting. In conclusion, desvenlafaxine, paroxetine, venlafaxine, and vortioxetine had reasonable efficacy, acceptability, and tolerability in the treatment of adults with stable MDD.
Most of the antidepressants approved for use in the United States, with the possible exceptions of bupropion and nefazodone, have been associated with drug-induced anorgasmia. Common strategies to overcome this drug side effect include waiting for tolerance to develop, dose reduction, change of dosing regimen, substitution of an alternative antidepressant, and coadministration of another drug. Current evidence suggests that antidepressant-induced anorgasmia may be mediated by 5HT2 antagonism of adrenergic mechanisms that underlie normal orgasm.
Antidepressants are commonly prescribed and used in the management of depression, anxiety disorders, and other psychiatric illnesses. Antidepressants used in therapeutic dosing ranges are associated with causing several adverse drug reactions including hepatotoxicity. Paroxetine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, citalopram, mirtazapine and venlafaxine are associated with reversible liver injury upon discontinuation of the agent. Patient cases of hepatotoxicity involving the use of nefazodone, trazodone, duloxetine, bupropion, and sertraline are linked to causing death in its users. Due to the idiosyncratic nature of hepatotoxicity, monitoring of liver function tests and immediate discontinuation upon abnormal lab findings or signs and symptoms of liver dysfunction are crucial since most cases of hepatic damage are reversible when detected early. Onset of antidepressant-associated hepatotoxicity varies from 5 days to 3 years. Antidepressant-induced liver injury can occur in the absence of identifiable, underlying risk factors such as cirrhosis and hepatitis infection; only a few cases of hepatic injury involve patients with chronic hepatitis infection. Some of these cases involve possible drug interactions between antidepressants and concomitant agents that increase the risk for liver injury. Understanding druginduced liver injury associated with antidepressants and the importance of safety monitoring is essential to optimize outcomes for antidepressant treatment.
Weight gain during antidepressant treatment can be either a sign of improvement in patients who have weight loss as a symptom of depression or a residual symptom in patients who overeat when depressed. However, significant weight gain during the acute phase of treatment or weight gain that continues despite achieving full remission of depressive symptoms is likely to be a side effect of antidepressant treatment. Weight gain is a relatively common problem during both acute and long-term treatment with antidepressants, and it is an important contributing factor to noncompliance. This article will review the literature with regard to the relative risk for weight gain of antidepressants. It appears that tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and perhaps monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) may be more likely to cause weight gain than the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or the newer antidepressants, with the exception of mirtazapine, which may be placed between the SSRIs and the TCAs in terms of relative risk for weight gain. Paroxetine may be more likely to cause weight gain than the other SSRIs during long-term treatment, and bupropion and nefazodone may be less likely to cause weight gain than the SSRIs in the long term, although more studies are necessary to confirm these impressions.
BACKGROUND: Sexual dysfunction (SD) is an important underestimated adverse effect of antidepressant drugs. Patients, in fact, if not directly questioned, tend to scarcely report them. The aim of the present meta-analysis was to quantify SD caused by antidepressants on the basis of studies where sexual functioning was purposely investigated through direct inquiry and specific questionnaires. METHODS: A literature search was conducted using MEDLINE, ISI Web of Knowledge, and references of selected articles. Selected studies performed on patients without previous SD were entered in the Cochrane Collaboration Review Manager (RevMan version 4.2). Our primary outcome measure was the rate of total treatment-emergent SD. Our secondary outcome measures were the rates of treatment-emergent desire, arousal, and orgasm dysfunction. RESULTS: Our analyses indicated a significantly higher rate of total and specific treatment-emergent SD and specific phases of dysfunction compared with placebo for the following drugs in decreasing order of impact: sertraline, venlafaxine, citalopram, paroxetine, fluoxetine, imipramine, phenelzine, duloxetine, escitalopram, and fluvoxamine, with SD ranging from 25.8% to 80.3% of patients. No significant difference with placebo was found for the following antidepressants: agomelatine, amineptine, bupropion, moclobemide, mirtazapine, and nefazodone. DISCUSSION: Treatment-emergent SD caused by antidepressants is a considerable issue with a large variation across compounds. Some assumptions, such as the inclusion of open-label studies or differences in scales used to assess SD, could reduce the significance of our findings. However, treatment-emergent SD is a frequent adverse effect that should be considered in clinical activity for the choice of the prescribed drug.
Depression is a chronic, severe and increasingly prevalent illness associated with substantial morbidity, mortality and healthcare costs. Antidepressant drugs, the cornerstone of depression treatment, are not devoid of adverse effects, including hepatotoxicity. To review the risk of liver toxicity related to major antidepressants, the authors have followed structural criteria focusing on the underlying mechanism presumably involved and the role of particular chemical structures. The clinicopathological expression goes from transient increases in liver enzymes to fulminant liver failure. Classical antidepressants such as monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) or tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) seem to have the highest potential to induce liver damage compared with the newer drugs such as selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs). The potential for severe hepatotoxicity associated with nefazodone is stressed. Guidelines for therapy and prevention of antidepressant-induced hepatotoxicity are also discussed.
This article reviews current evidence regarding sexual side effects of antidepressant drugs. Controlled studies have demonstrated that some antidepressant drugs have adverse effects on orgasm and libido. Orgasmic dysfunction and ejaculatory delay appear to be common sexual side effects of the serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). A variety of treatment options are available if a patient experiences antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction. Often, modification of the pharmacologic regimen will restore sexual function while maintaining antidepressant activity. The frequency of sexual side effects reported with the SSRIs mandates that the clinician inquire about sexual function if these agents are used. Bupropion and nefazodone appear to have an unusually low incidence of sexual side effects.
Restless legs syndrome is commonly co-morbid with medical conditions that are treated with antidepressant medications, such as depression, anxiety, fibromyalgia, and chronic insomnia disorder. Evidence from case reports and cross-sectional studies suggests that antidepressants may induce or worsen restless legs syndrome and increase periodic limb movements. We undertook a systematic review of the literature to identify and collate all prospective studies that measured restless legs syndrome symptoms and/or periodic limb movements following the introduction of an antidepressant. Eighteen studies were eligible for inclusion. Current data indicate that onset or exacerbation of restless legs syndrome and rise in frequency of periodic limb movements are uncommon following the initiation of an antidepressant. Among the various antidepressants, mirtazapine may be associated with higher rates of restless legs syndrome and periodic limb movements. One small study of normal volunteers suggested that venlafaxine may be associated with an increase in restless legs syndrome symptoms and periodic limb movements. Sertraline, fluoxetine, and amitriptyline appear to increase periodic limb movements that do not disrupt sleep and are thus unlikely to be clinically significant. On the other hand, bupropion may reduce restless legs syndrome symptoms, at least in the short term. Sedating antidepressants such as trazodone, nefazodone, and doxepin do not seem to aggravate periodic limb movements. The current evidence is limited by poor study design, inadequate use of standardized questionnaires, and heterogeneous populations studied for variable lengths of time. Future research should attempt to remedy these shortcomings.
Prazosin is recommended for treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)-associated nightmares. Level A. Image Rehearsal Therapy (IRT) is recommended for treatment of nightmare disorder. Level A. Systematic Desensitization and Progressive Deep Muscle Relaxation training are suggested for treatment of idiopathic nightmares. Level B. Venlafaxine is not suggested for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares. Level B. Clonidine may be considered for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares. Level C. The following medications may be considered for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares, but the data are low grade and sparse: trazodone, atypical antipsychotic medications, topiramate, low dose cortisol, fluvoxamine, triazolam and nitrazepam, phenelzine, gabapentin, cyproheptadine, and tricyclic antidepressants. Nefazodone is not recommended as first line therapy for nightmare disorder because of the increased risk of hepatotoxicity. Level C. The following behavioral therapies may be considered for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares based on low-grade evidence: Exposure, Relaxation, and Rescripting Therapy (ERRT); Sleep Dynamic Therapy; Hypnosis; Eye-Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR); and the Testimony Method. Level C. The following behavioral therapies may be considered for treatment of nightmare disorder based on low-grade evidence: Lucid Dreaming Therapy and Self-Exposure Therapy. Level C No recommendation is made regarding clonazepam and individual psychotherapy because of sparse data.
BACKGROUND: Hydroxymethyl glutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (Statins) are used to treat dyslipidemia. Generally, the statins are the substrates of CYP enzymes, P-glycoprotein (P-gp), and organic anion transporting polypeptides transporters (OATP1B1). OBJECTIVE: This review article focuses on the clinical significance of statins, and their interactions in real practice. METHODS: The databases like Medline/PubMed Central/PubMed, Google Scholar, Science Direct, Cochrane Library, Directory of open access journals (DOAJ), and reference lists were searched to identify relevant articles. RESULTS: Most of the drug interactions of statins result in elevated plasma concentrations and toxicity of statins due to the inhibition of CYP3A4, P-gp and/or OATP1B1 transporters. The toxicity of statins includes myopathy, rhabdomyolysis, elevated liver enzymes, acute kidney injury, and diabetes. The statins like simvastatin, lovastatin, and atorvastatin are substrates of CYP3A4 enzyme and P-glycoprotein and their concomitant use with the drugs inhibiting or inducing them would result in changes in plasma concentrations and toxicity/efficacy. However, the statins like pravastatin, rosuvastatin and pitavastatin are not substrates of CYP enzymes and hence the concomitant use of CYP inhibitors or inducers does not affect them. Almost all the statins are the substrates of OATP1B1 transporter, and the co-prescription of inhibitors of OATP1B1 elevates the plasma concentrations and muscle toxicity of statins. CONCLUSION: Understanding the interacting potential of each statin will enable the prescribers, pharmacists, and other health care professionals to use statins effectively without compromising patient safety.
The newer serotonergic antidepressants have become popular particularly because of improved tolerability and safety. The evidence supporting this belief is reviewed. The factors that contribute to the development of somatic symptoms are examined, including the depression itself and the drugs used for treatment. The rates for individual side effects with the serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors, nefazodone, and venlafaxine are presented and compared with the adverse event experience for mirtazapine.
AIM: With this article, we intend to corroborate the assumed association between mirtazapine and arthralgia by presentation of eight case reports, and we describe a possible mechanism of action. METHODS AND RESULTS: The Netherlands Pharmacovigilance Centre Lareb received eight case reports on arthralgia associated with use of mirtazapine. These case reports are presented in short. We also present worldwide data on this association. CONCLUSIONS: The Lareb reports support the association between mirtazapine and arthralgia. A comparison is made between mirtazapine, mianserin and nefazodone, as these antidepressants show similarities in their mode of action and are all associated with arthralgia. We suggest that this adverse drug reaction may be induced by enhanced 5HT1-mediated neurotransmission.
Sleep disturbances are among the most commonly endorsed symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Treatment modalities that are effective for the waking symptoms of PTSD may have limited efficacy for post-traumatic sleep problems. The aim of this review is to summarize the evidence for empirically supported and/or utilized psychotherapeutic and pharmacological treatments for post-traumatic nightmares and insomnia. While there are few controlled studies of the applicability of general sleep-focused interventions to the management of the sleep disturbances in PTSD, evidence is growing to support several psychotherapeutic and pharmacological treatments. Future investigations should include trials that combine treatments focused on sleep with treatments effective in managing the waking symptoms of PTSD.
This review summarizes current findings regarding effects of antidepressant compounds on sleep architecture and interprets their clinical relevance. Effects of the major classes of antidepressant drugs on sleep properties are presented, with the antidepressant compounds organized into categories based primarily on their putative mechanism of action. The majority of antidepressant compounds, across several different categories, exhibit robust suppression of REM sleep. Others, such as bupropion and nefazodone, lack REM suppressant effects. Such findings support the idea that critical neurochemical mechanisms involved in the regulation of discrete sleep stages can be elucidated by means of polysomnographic investigations utilizing pharmacologically targeted agents. Clinicians have appreciated the importance of antidepressant drug effects on sleep when considering therapeutic options for patients. While such decisions in the past were based on empirical observations, an increasing amount of information regarding specific effects of different antidepressant drugs on sleep continuity and sleep architecture is available. Thus, clinicians may choose to consider profiles of sleep effects for different antidepressant drugs in the initial selection of an antidepressant compound.
A case is presented of painful priapism of the clitoris lasting 3 days, with a strong temporal association with the administration of nefazodone hydrochloride. Priapism has been described as a rare side-effect of drugs with high alpha1-adrenergic blocking potential. However, the alpha1-adrenergic blocking potential of nefazodone is moderate. Drug-induced clitoral priapism has been described for citalopram, bromocriptine, fluoxetine and trazodone combined with fluoxetine. To our knowledge, this is the first report in the literature about priapism of the clitoris associated with nefazodone.
With an increasing number of older drivers who are prescribed antidepressants, the potential consequences of antidepressant use on driving skills in an aging population are becoming a pressing issue. We conducted a systematic review using MEDLINE, targeting articles specifically pertaining to antidepressants and driving in a population or subgroup of older adults (>/= 55 years of age). The search yielded 267 references, nine of which pertained to the effects of antidepressants on driving in older adults. The single experimental study found imipramine to have detrimental effects on highway driving, whereas nefazodone did not. Seven of eight population-based studies reported a significant increased risk of involvement in a collision associated with antidepressant use. Although the studies indicated a negative effect of antidepressants on driving, the epidemiological designs cannot exclude the possibility that the underlying illness, generally major depression, is the culprit.
BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder is one of the most common mental disorders in children and adolescents. However, whether to use pharmacological interventions in this population and which drug should be preferred are still matters of controversy. Consequently, we aimed to compare and rank antidepressants and placebo for major depressive disorder in young people. METHODS: We did a network meta-analysis to identify both direct and indirect evidence from relevant trials. We searched PubMed, the Cochrane Library, Web of Science, Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, LiLACS, regulatory agencies' websites, and international registers for published and unpublished, double-blind randomised controlled trials up to May 31, 2015, for the acute treatment of major depressive disorder in children and adolescents. We included trials of amitriptyline, citalopram, clomipramine, desipramine, duloxetine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, imipramine, mirtazapine, nefazodone, nortriptyline, paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine. Trials recruiting participants with treatment-resistant depression, treatment duration of less than 4 weeks, or an overall sample size of less than ten patients were excluded. We extracted the relevant information from the published reports with a predefined data extraction sheet, and assessed the risk of bias with the Cochrane risk of bias tool. The primary outcomes were efficacy (change in depressive symptoms) and tolerability (discontinuations due to adverse events). We did pair-wise meta-analyses using the random-effects model and then did a random-effects network meta-analysis within a Bayesian framework. We assessed the quality of evidence contributing to each network estimate using the GRADE framework. This study is registered with PROSPERO, number CRD42015016023. FINDINGS: We deemed 34 trials eligible, including 5260 participants and 14 antidepressant treatments. The quality of evidence was rated as very low in most comparisons. For efficacy, only fluoxetine was statistically significantly more effective than placebo (standardised mean difference -0.51, 95% credible interval [CrI] -0.99 to -0.03). In terms of tolerability, fluoxetine was also better than duloxetine (odds ratio [OR] 0.31, 95% CrI 0.13 to 0.95) and imipramine (0.23, 0.04 to 0.78). Patients given imipramine, venlafaxine, and duloxetine had more discontinuations due to adverse events than did those given placebo (5.49, 1.96 to 20.86; 3.19, 1.01 to 18.70; and 2.80, 1.20 to 9.42, respectively). In terms of heterogeneity, the global I(2) values were 33.21% for efficacy and 0% for tolerability. INTERPRETATION: When considering the risk-benefit profile of antidepressants in the acute treatment of major depressive disorder, these drugs do not seem to offer a clear advantage for children and adolescents. Fluoxetine is probably the best option to consider when a pharmacological treatment is indicated. FUNDING: National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program).
Pharmacology, clinical efficacy and tolerability of serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors(SNRIs) are overviewed. They include milnacipran, venlafaxine, duloxetine, MCI-225 and nefazodone, however, only milnacipran is currently used in Japan. Pharmacology of SNRIs is characterized by inhibition of both serotonin and noradrenaline at the presynaptic membrane and by weak affinity with receptors at the postsynaptic membrane, which expects the same efficacy on major depressive disorder(MDD) as tricyclic antidepressant drugs(TCAs) with less adverse effects in clinical use. Currently available evidences show that SNRIs possess antidepressant effects on MDD at least similar potencies to TCAs with more potencies than selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. SNRIs are well tolerated in general and safer than TCAs. SNRIs can be considered to be first-line antidepressant drugs.
