Pellagra is a disorder characterized by dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia and eventually death, resulting from a deficiency of niacin or its precursor tryptophan. Ethionamide (a second-line antituberculosis agent)-induced pellagra is rarely encountered in clinical practice. Prompt diagnosis and treatment with nicotinamide can prevent life-threatening complications. To date, only three cases have been reported. We report a 13-year-old girl presenting with ethionamide-induced pellagra that resolved after the administration of niacin.
Niacin is the third vitamin to be discovered and, therefore. is known as vitamin B3. It has a long history of medicinal use-nutritionally and as a skin tone brightening agent in skin care. Recent studies have suggested that niacin could be useful as an adjunctive treatment for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and mitigating the damaging effect of blue light to the skin. Niacin, also known as nicotinic acid, nicotinamide, and niacinamide, is a physiologically active form of vitamin B3. Medicinal benefits of niacin were observed in 1902, when for the first time, patients with pellagra were treated with yeast that contained vitamin B3. Niacin has a variety of uses, particularly in treating various skin conditions, including topically as an anti-acne treatment, promoting epidermal sphingolipid synthesis, moderating photoimmunosuppression, and reducing hyperpigmentation. Niacinamide could be beneficial as an adjunctive treatment for COVID-19 and for decreasing stress if the skin is excessively exposed to blue light.
Nicotinic acid and nicotinamide, collectively referred to as niacin, are nutritional precursors of the bioactive molecules nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP). NAD and NADP are important cofactors for most cellular redox reactions, and as such are essential to maintain cellular metabolism and respiration. NAD also serves as a cosubstrate for a large number of ADP-ribosylation enzymes with varied functions. Among the NAD-consuming enzymes identified to date are important genetic and epigenetic regulators, e.g., poly(ADP-ribose)polymerases and sirtuins. There is rapidly growing knowledge of the close connection between dietary niacin intake, NAD(P) availability, and the activity of NAD(P)-dependent epigenetic regulator enzymes. It points to an exciting role of dietary niacin intake as a central regulator of physiological processes, e.g., maintenance of genetic stability, and of epigenetic control mechanisms modulating metabolism and aging. Insight into the role of niacin and various NAD-related diseases ranging from cancer, aging, and metabolic diseases to cardiovascular problems has shifted our view of niacin as a vitamin to current views that explore its potential as a therapeutic.
Since the discovery in the 1970s that plasma levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) are inversely associated with cardiovascular outcome, it has been postulated that HDL is anti-atherogenic and that increasing HDL-C levels is a promising therapeutic strategy. However, the recent failure of three orally active, HDL-C-raising agents has introduced considerable controversy, prompting the question of whether increasing the cholesterol cargo of HDL in a non-selective manner is an effective pharmacological approach for the translation of its atheroprotective and vasculoprotective activities. The interrelationships between HDL-C concentration, HDL particle number and levels of diverse HDL particle subpopulations of defined composition are complex, as are their relationships with reverse cholesterol transport and other anti-atherogenic functions. Such complexity highlights the incompleteness of our understanding of the biology of HDL particles. This article examines the HDL hypothesis in molecular and mechanistic terms, focusing on features that have been addressed, those that remain to be tested, and potential new targets for future pharmacological interventions.
Abnormal blood lipids are the major modifiable risk factor underlying the development of cardiovascular disease. Niacin has a profound ability to reduce low-density lipoprotein-C, very low-density lipoprotein-C and triglycerides and is the most effective pharmacological agent to increase high-density lipoprotein-C. Recently, the receptor for niacin, GPR109A, was discovered. GPR109A in the adipocyte mediates a niacin-induced inhibition of lipolysis, which could play a crucial part in its role as a lipid-modifying drug. GPR109A in epidermal Langerhans cells mediates flushing, an unwanted side effect of niacin therapy. For the past decade, the functions of GPR109A have been studied and full or partial agonists have been developed in an attempt to achieve the beneficial effects of niacin while avoiding the unwanted flushing side effect. This review presents what is known to date about GPR109A biology and function and the future of GPR109A as a pharmacological target.
Niacin (also known as "vitamin B(3)" or "vitamin PP") includes two vitamers (nicotinic acid and nicotinamide) giving rise to the coenzymatic forms nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP). The two coenzymes are required for oxidative reactions crucial for energy production, but they are also substrates for enzymes involved in non-redox signaling pathways, thus regulating biological functions, including gene expression, cell cycle progression, DNA repair and cell death. In the central nervous system, vitamin B(3) has long been recognized as a key mediator of neuronal development and survival. Here, we will overview available literature data on the neuroprotective role of niacin and its derivatives, especially focusing especially on its involvement in neurodegenerative diseases (Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases), as well as in other neuropathological conditions (ischemic and traumatic injuries, headache and psychiatric disorders).
Niacin is defined collectively as nicotinamide and nicotinic acid, both of which fulfill the vitamin functions of niacin carried out by the bioactive forms NAD(P). In the last few decades numerous new enzymes that consume NAD(P) as substrates have been identified. The functions of these enzymes are emerging as exciting paradigm shifts, even though they are in early stages of discovery. The recent identification of the nicotinic acid receptor has allowed distinction of the drug-like roles of nicotinic acid from its vitamin functions, specifically in modulating blood lipid levels and undesirable side effects such as skin vasodilation and the more rare hepatic toxicities. This information has led to a new strategy for drug delivery for niacin, which, if successful, could have a major impact on human health through decreasing risk for cardiovascular disease. Understanding the many other effects of niacin has much broader potential for disease intervention and treatment in numerous diseases including cancer.
Niacin (nicotinic acid) is a potent lipid-lowering agent that has been used for prevention of coronary heart disease. Niacin activates the HCAR2 receptor found on adipocytes, macrophages and various immune cells throughout the body. Activation of the HCAR2 receptor by niacin results in beneficial anti-inflammatory effects that are independent of lipid lowering. This review summarizes the use of niacin in treatment of dyslipidemia, the pharmacogenetics of niacin response and the potential role of HCAR2 signaling in the treatment of a variety of inflammatory and metabolic diseases.
Through its involvement in over 400 NAD(P)-dependent reactions, niacin status has the potential to influence every area of metabolism. Niacin deficiency has been linked to genomic instability largely through impaired function of the poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) family of enzymes. In various models, niacin deficiency has been found to cause impaired cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, delayed DNA excision repair, accumulation of single and double strand breaks, chromosomal breakage, telomere erosion and cancer development. Rat models suggest that most aspects of genomic instability are minimized by the recommended levels of niacin found in AIN-93 formulations; however, some beneficial responses do occur in the range from adequate up to pharmacological niacin intakes. Mouse models show a wide range of protection against UV-induced skin cancer well into pharmacological levels of niacin intake. It is currently a challenge to compare animal and human data to estimate the role of niacin status in the risk of genomic instability in human populations. It seems fairly certain that some portion of even affluent populations will benefit from niacin supplementation, and some subpopulations are likely well below an optimal intake of this vitamin. With exposure to stressors, like chemotherapy or excess sunlight, suraphysiological doses of niacin may be beneficial.
INTRODUCTION: Niacin is one of the oldest drugs used in the treatment of dyslipidemia. Previously its use has been limited because of excessive flushing. Now an agent laropiprant (LRP) has been developed, which blocks the flushing pathway. Therefore, it is time to collate available information to assess the safety and tolerability of combining niacin with LRP. AREAS COVERED: The authors searched PubMed and MEDLINE for literature published between January 2006 and July 2011, for safety and tolerability reports of extended-release niacin (ERN) with LRP. EXPERT OPINION: The addition of LRP to ERN, by reducing the side effect 'flushing', may enable lipidologists and physicians to use niacin more widely as part of lipid modification therapy, especially since the combination can be safely added to statins. However, it has to be accepted that the addition of LRP does not completely abolish flushing. The favorable safety profile supports the use of LRP to achieve higher therapeutic dosing of niacin.
Niacin was the first hypolipidemic drug to significantly reduce both major cardiovascular events and mortality in patients with cardiovascular disease. Niacin favorably influences all lipoprotein classes, including lipoprotein[a],and belongs to the most potent hypolipidemic drugs for increasing HDL-C. Moreover, niacin causes favorable changes to the qualitative composition of lipoprotein HDL. In addition to its pronounced hypolipidemic action, niacin exerts many other, non-hypolipidemic effects (e.g., antioxidative, anti-inflammatory, antithrombotic), which favorably influence the development and progression of atherosclerosis. These effects are dependent on activation of the specific receptor HCA2. Recent results published by the two large clinical studies, AIM-HIGH and HPS2-THRIVE, have led to the impugnation of niacin's role in future clinical practice. However, due to several methodological flaws in the AIM-HIGH and HPS2-THRIVE studies, the pleiotropic effects of niacin now deserve thorough evaluation. This review summarizes the present and possible future use of niacin in clinical practice in light of its newly recognized pleiotropic effects.
There are many factors that increase the risk of cardiovascular disease, and a prominent factor among these is dyslipidemia. The following literature review focuses on the use of niacin therapy in order to treat dyslipidemia and how to control the associated "niacin flush." The associated studies gathered are reviews and randomized control trials. They were obtained by using electronic searches. Certain keywords took precedence, and articles focusing on niacin therapy were chosen. Recent research has found promising insight into more effective prevention of the niacin-mediated flush through a selective antagonist for the prostaglandin D2 receptor, laropiprant. Aspirin (or NSAIDs) also provide some prevention for flushing, although recent studies have shown that it is not as effective as laropiprant. There is a need for further research in order to come to a clear conclusion regarding combined therapies of aspirin and laropiprant pretreatment, as well as exact dosage requirements.
Nicotinic acid is the oldest hypolipidemic agent in use, since 1955. It possesses broad-spectrum lipidmodifying properties including reduction of total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and triglycerides. In addition, nicotinic acid is the most potent available hypolipidemic agent for increasing plasma high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and decreasing lipoprotein (a) levels. Clinical trials have demonstrated that nicotinic acid can decrease cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. However, nicotinic acid is underused in the clinical setting due to its high rate of side effects, including flushing, gastrointestinal disorders, rash, hyperglycemia and hyperuricemia. The nicotinic acid-associated side effects and their management are the focus of this review.
Niacin is a lipid-modifying therapy with proven efficacy for reducing cardiovascular events as monotherapy and when used in combination with other lipid-modifying medications impacts rates of atherosclerotic disease progression. Large outcome trials using niacin against a background of statin therapy with optimal control of atherogenic lipoprotein burden in serum were unable to demonstrate incremental benefit of niacin beyond statin therapy. We address 2 key questions: (1) Can the results from randomized clinical trials performed in stable ischemic heart disease populations (AIM-HIGH and HPS2-THRIVE) be applied to patients who sustain an acute coronary syndrome or myocardial infarction? (2) Are patients with very low baseline levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (<30 mg/dL) at particularly high risk for subsequent cardiac events?
Nicotinic acid has complex effects on lipoprotein metabolism; it increases HDL cholesterol, decreases triglycerides and LDL cholesterol. It also reduces lipoprotein(a) levels by about 25% and exerts certain effects that may be antiatherogenic. Studies performed in the pre-statin era demonstrated a good effectiveness of nicotinic acid on the development of atherosclerotic lesions and on the morbidity and mortality due to cardiovascular diseases. Because of its HDL cholesterol raising properties, nicotinic acid appears to be an ideal companion to statins since low HDL cholesterol concentration has been shown to negatively influence statin-treated patients even when ideal LDL cholesterol concentrations have been reached. In the AIM-HIGH study nicotinic acid did not lead to an improvement in the cardiovascular event rate compared to placebo; however this study has been criticized because of several drawbacks. The results of a large study testing the effect of nicotinic acid in high-risk statin-treated patients are expected to be published in 2013. At present, nicotinic acid can be administered in addition to a statin to patients with a combined hyperlipidemia when the target value of LDL cholesterol has not been reached, and alone to patients suffering from a statin intolerance. An elevation of lipoprotein(a) is not officially recognized as an indication to start a therapy with nicotinic acid. The combination of modified-release nicotinic acid with laropiprant is much better tolerated than previous formulations. New drugs which act on the receptor involved in the action of nicotinic acid are in development.
Scientific evidence continues to accumulate regarding fasting serum triglycerides as an independent risk factor for coronary heart disease. In response, the National Cholesterol Education Program has revised the acceptable level of fasting triglycerides from <200 mg/dL to <150 mg/dL. A significant percentage of Americans suffer from hypertriglyceridemia, and considering the expanding numbers of individuals who are physically inactive, overweight, and suffering from the metabolic syndrome, it is expected that these numbers will continue to rise over the next decade. Fortunately, nutraceutical and lifestyle options have been shown to substantially and consistently reduce this risk factor. This review will focus on management options for the hypertriglyceridemic patient with an emphasis on nicotinic acid, pantethine, fish oils (eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids), and modified carbohydrate diets.
Niacin (nicotinic acid) has been used for decades as a lipid-lowering drug. The clinical use of niacin to treat dyslipidemic conditions is limited by its side effects. Niacin, along with fibrates, are the only approved drugs which elevate high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDLc) along with its effects on low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDLc) and triglycerides. Whether niacin has a beneficial role in lowering cardiovascular risk on the background of well-controlled LDLc has not been established. In fact, it remains unclear whether niacin, either in the setting of well-controlled LDLc or in combination with other lipid-lowering agents, confers any therapeutic benefit and if so, by which mechanism. The results of recent trials reject the hypothesis that simply raising HDLc is cardioprotective. However, in the case of the clinical trials, structural limitations of trial design complicate their interpretation. This is also true of the most recent Heart Protection Study 2-Treatment of HDLc to Reduce the Incidence of Vascular Events (HPS2-THRIVE) trial in which niacin is combined with an antagonist of the D prostanoid (DP) receptor. Human genetic studies have also questioned the relationship between cardiovascular benefit and HDLc. It remains to be determined whether niacin may have clinical utility in particular subgroups, such as statin intolerant patients with hypercholesterolemia or those who cannot achieve a sufficient reduction in LDLc. It also is unclear whether a potentially beneficial effect of niacin is confounded by DP antagonism in HPS2-THRIVE.
Although low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) lowering represents the mainstay of current lipid treatment, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) has generated increasing interest as a secondary therapeutic target because of strong evidence that serum HDL-C concentration is inversely associated with coronary heart disease risk. Niacin is a lipid-altering drug that has been used to lower cholesterol since the 1950s. In addition to its LDL-C-lowering effects, niacin is the most effective agent currently available for raising HDL-C. Despite its long history as a lipid-altering drug, only limited data are available regarding its clinical benefit alone and in combination with other agents, and the majority of studies investigating its impact on clinical outcomes are from the pre-statin area. Several studies have demonstrated a beneficial effect of treatment with niacin in combination with statin therapy on surrogate cardiovascular markers (e.g. carotid intima-media thickness). However, the clinical significance of these surrogate markers has been questioned. Two large randomized trials will address whether niacin-statin combination therapy is an appropriate therapeutic alternative to statin monotherapy.
Niacin is available in a number of different formulations according to the speed of drug release. The nomenclature is not standardized, and many names are used interchangeably, creating confusion. Formulations that differ in time of release may have different lipid effects and vary in their adverse reaction profiles. Studies comparing immediate-release with various time-release formulations illustrate these variations. Studies have found immediate-release and the intermediate, or extended-release, once-a-day, prescription form of niacin (i.e., Niaspan), to be essentially equivalent with respect to their efficacy in reducing triglycerides and increasing high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C). However, there are fewer side effects and better compliance associated with the latter form.
