Sublingual, as opposed to oral, administration of Nifedipine (Adalat) has gained wide popularity as the method of choice when the most rapid onset of anti-hypertensive action is required. However recent research indicates that this delivery method may be without scientific validation, and may in fact delay the attainment of peak plasma concentrations of the drug. Peak Nifedipine serum concentrations have been shown to be less following sublingual administration than following oral administration, and the time to peak concentration has been shown to be longer following sublingual administration than with the oral dose. The lack of a standardised technique for the administration of sublingual Nifedipine means that in many cases the patient may be receiving sub-therapeutic doses of the drug.
Amlodipine is a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist which can be used once daily in hypertension. The pharmacokinetics of the molecule mean that effective blood levels and hence good control of blood pressure are maintained throughout the dosing interval. Dose-ranging studies have shown the most appropriate starting dose is 5 mg once daily, with simple adjustment to 10 mg if necessary. Comparative studies with other agents have shown amlodipine to have antihypertensive efficacy superior to verapamil and comparable with atenolol, hydrochlorothiazide, captopril or nitrendipine. When used in combination with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, beta-blockers or thiazide diuretics, amlodipine can produce important additional antihypertensive effects. Studies involving long-term use of amlodipine in hypertension indicate that no tolerance appears, and that amlodipine is a well tolerated drug.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate maternal and neonatal outcomes by type of antihypertensive used in participants of the CHAP (Chronic Hypertension in Pregnancy) trial. METHODS: We conducted a planned secondary analysis of CHAP, an open-label, multicenter, randomized trial of antihypertensive treatment compared with standard care (no treatment unless severe hypertension developed) in pregnant patients with mild chronic hypertension (blood pressure 140-159/90-104 mm Hg before 20 weeks of gestation) and singleton pregnancies. We performed three comparisons based on medications prescribed at enrollment: labetalol compared with standard care, nifedipine compared with standard care, and labetalol compared with nifedipine. Although active compared with standard care groups were randomized, medication assignment within the active treatment group was not random but based on clinician or patient preference. The primary outcome was the occurrence of superimposed preeclampsia with severe features, preterm birth before 35 weeks of gestation, placental abruption, or fetal or neonatal death. The key secondary outcome was small for gestational age (SGA) neonates. We also compared medication adverse effects between groups. Relative risks (RRs) and 95% CIs were estimated with log binomial regression to adjust for confounding. RESULTS: Of 2,292 participants analyzed, 720 (31.4%) received labetalol, 417 (18.2%) received nifedipine, and 1,155 (50.4%) received no treatment. The mean gestational age at enrollment was 10.5+/-3.7 weeks; nearly half of participants (47.5%) identified as non-Hispanic Black; and 44.5% used aspirin. The primary outcome occurred in 217 (30.1%), 130 (31.2%), and 427 (37.0%) in the labetalol, nifedipine, and standard care groups, respectively. Risk of the primary outcome was lower among those receiving treatment (labetalol use vs standard adjusted RR 0.82, 95% CI, 0.72-0.94; nifedipine use vs standard adjusted RR 0.84, 95% CI, 0.71-0.99), but there was no significant difference in risk when labetalol was compared with nifedipine (adjusted RR 0.98, 95% CI, 0.82-1.18). There were no significant differences in SGA or serious adverse events between participants receiving labetalol and those receiving nifedipine. CONCLUSION: No significant differences in predetermined maternal or neonatal outcomes were detected on the basis of the use of labetalol or nifedipine for treatment of chronic hypertension in pregnancy. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02299414.
Felodipine, a selective arteriolar dilator, was given to 13 hypertensive patients to assess its hypotensive effects and duration of action. Nine patients were treated with 5 mg three times a day and 4 with 10 mg three times a day. Mean blood pressures fell with both treatment regimens: 5 mg placebo 170/103 mmHg; 5 mg felodipine 148/91 mmHg; 10 mg placebo 154/93 mmHg; 10 mg felodipine 137/82 mmHg. Heart rates increased as blood pressures fell with both treatments. However, in the patients given 5 mg three times a day this effect was less noticeable after successive doses. Plasma concentrations of noradrenaline, both resting and tilted, increased after felodipine. There was a negative correlation between the fall in blood pressure and the increase in noradrenaline, suggesting that those patients with good baroreceptor reflexes were better able to counteract the effects of vasodilatation. Four of the nine patients treated with 5 mg felodipine three times a day experienced mild and transient adverse effects. Of the four patients treated with 10 mg three times a day, three experienced moderate to severe headache, and for this reason recruitment into this group was stopped. Felodipine at a divided daily dose of 15 mg effectively lowered blood pressure.
Although there is much circumstantial and some direct clinical evidence suggesting that a high consumption of salt predisposes patients to the development of essential hypertension, the mechanism by which such consumption causes high blood pressure is not clear. It has been suggested that due to an inherited abnormality in renal sodium excretion, high salt intake triggers an increase in the levels of sodium transport inhibitor. Although this may help to restore sodium balance, it may also increase the concentration of intracellular sodium in arteriolar smooth muscle and, thereby, stimulate smooth muscle reactivity. It has been shown that intra-arterial infusion of calcium channel blockers into the forearm produces an enhancement of forearm blood flow that is proportional to the degree of hypertension. Other studies have demonstrated a linear relationship between the degree of hypertension and the magnitude of blood pressure reduction following treatment with a calcium channel blocker. These clinical findings, combined with evidence from studies in animals, suggest that a functionally abnormal response of smooth muscle cells to calcium channel blockers occurs as blood pressure increases. Whether this functional abnormality is related to an increased level of intracellular calcium and/or inhibition of the sodium pump is not known. The short-term blood pressure lowering effect of nifedipine appears to be enhanced when sodium intake is increased.
Nifedipine and nicardipine are both calcium channel inhibitors, used off-label as tocolytics in preterm labour. Their use is related to their relaxing effects on uterin muscle by L-type voltage dependent calcium channels blockade. This article describes pharmacological effects, pharmacokinetics properties and tolerance of these drugs. It also discusses serious adverse effects, such as pulmonary edema, reported with both nifedipine and nicardipine in preterm labour.
Bamidipine is an antihypertensive drug belonging to the dihydropyridine (DHP) group of calcium antagonists. It is available in a modified-release formulation which has a gradual onset of action and is effective in a single daily oral dose of 10 to 20 mg. Bamidipine has selective action against cardiovascular calcium antagonist receptors and its antihypertensive action is related to the reduction of peripheral vascular resistance secondary to its vasodilatory action. The clinical antihypertensive efficacy of barnidipine is similar to that of other DHP calcium antagonists such as nitrendipine and amlodipine, and antihypertensives belonging to other drug classes such as atenolol and enalapril. Barnidipine has been found to be as efficacious and well tolerated as hydrochlorothiazide in the management of hypertension in elderly patients. Barnidipine is generally well tolerated. As with other DHP calcium antagonists, vasodilator adverse events such as headache, flushing and peripheral oedema account for most of the adverse events reported with its use and are usually transient. Oedema is less frequent than with amlodipine and nitrendipine. Its use is not associated with reflex tachycardia.
Unfamiliarity of physicians with chilblains (perniosis) gives rise to unnecessary hospital admissions with expensive laboratory and radiologic evaluations and, at times, hazardous therapy. Seven cases of chilblains were seen in San Francisco from November 1986 through January 1987. The patients presented with pruritic, at times painful, purple acral patches or plaques on the fingers, toes, and nose after exposure to a cool or a cold, damp environment. Histologic examination in two cases revealed a perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate with endothelial swelling of the subcutaneous fat and of the upper and lower dermal plexus.
The role of calcium in the cardiovascular system, and the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, and studies evaluating the clinical use of three calcium-channel blocking agents--verapamil hydrochloride, nifedipine, and diltiazem hydrochloride--are reviewed. Inhibition of calcium conductance and alteration of calcium availability cause profound changes in: slow inward current of the cardiac action potential, myocardial contractility and metabolism, blood pressure regulation, and smooth-muscle activity. Calcium-channel blocking agents affect the movement of calcium through these channels in smooth and cardiac muscle; the specific agents in this class differ markedly in their inhibitory effects. Verapamil hydrochloride is useful intravenously for treating supraventricular rhythm disturbances. It is absorbed well when taken orally, but there is an extensive first-pass effect, so that about 20% enters the systemic circulation. The incidence of side effects in patients receiving verapamil is 9-10%; about 1% require discontinuation of therapy. Verapamil is contraindicated in patients with sinus-node disease, unstable atrioventricular block, and shock. Nifedipine has proven useful for hypertension, coronary-artery spasm, and exertional angina; it has little negative inotropic effect. Approximately 90% of an oral dose is absorbed, and 65-70% reaches the systemic circulation after first-pass metabolism. Protein binding of nifedipine ranges from 92 to 98%. Side effects of nifedipine, usually associated with the peripheral vasodilatory action, occur in approximately 15% of patients, requiring discontinuance in 2-5%. Diltiazem hydrochloride has been shown effective in the treatment of coronary-artery spasm; limited studies indicate it may be useful in treating exertional angina, hypertension, and possibly arrhythmias. Diltiazem's oral bioavailability is good (90% reaches systemic circulation), but there is significant interindividual variability between administered dose and resulting plasma concentration. Geriatric patients have delayed absorption and reduced clearance of diltiazem given in sustained-release tablets. Studies of diltiazem are limited at this time. The exact role of calcium-channel blocking agents has not yet been elucidated. However, their ability to influence the calcium channel greatly expands the therapeutic armamentarium for cardiovascular disease and other disorders.
By comparison with other calcium antagonist drugs, amlodipine has unique pharmacokinetic properties that are probably attributable to its chemical structure and positive ionic charge at physiological pH. Thus, amlodipine undergoes gradual absorption from the gastro-intestinal tract and is widely distributed throughout body tissues. It is cleared only slowly by metabolism in the liver and so has a long elimination half-life, which makes it suitable for single daily dosing. During steady-state administration there are only small peak-to-trough variations in plasma drug levels and in clinical use these pharmacokinetic properties appear to be associated with a smoother pharmacodynamic effect and a reduced incidence of (early) vasodilator side effects.
This randomised, double-blind, crossover study investigated the haemodynamic effects of a beta-blocker (atenolol 50mg) and a calcium antagonist (sustained release nifedipine 20mg) given either separately or in combination in 3 groups of patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension. Each treatment was administered twice daily. The fixed combination given twice daily for 4 weeks produced reductions in blood pressure which lasted for at least 12 hours after administration of the final dose. The control of blood pressure by the combination was superior to that achieved by its individual components. Side effects normally associated with nifedipine therapy were less frequent when it was administered with atenolol. Compliance with treatment was good, but it was best when the drugs were given together rather than separately. A fixed combination of atenolol and nifedipine may prove useful in treating hypertensive patients inadequately controlled on beta-blocker therapy alone.
Contents of a 10 mg nifedipine capsule (0.33 ml) were withdrawn by syringe and administered subcutaneously to a patient with hypertensive urgency due to misinterpretation of a physician's order. The drug apparently had its desired hypotensive effect and no adverse effects were noted. The literature on use of nifedipine in hypertensive urgency is reviewed. Subcutaneous administration is not recommended because of a lack of suitable controlled studies and the potential for adverse effects.
The calcium antagonist, nifedipine, was given orally to 21 women with acute episodes of severe hypertension during pregnancy or in the puerperium. A rapid and significant fall in blood pressure by an average of 26/20 mmHg was seen at 20 min after administration. The hypotensive effect was not significantly enhanced in those women already taking medication to lower the blood pressure. The principal side effects were headache and cutaneous flushing. No adverse fetal effects were detected. This is the first study of the use of this drug to control hypertension in pregnancy. The apparent efficacy of nifedipine justifies its further investigation in controlled trials.
Comparing modified-release formulations can be difficult using current bioequivalence criteria. Two 60-mg-once-daily nifedipine formulations are deemed bioequivalent in Canada. This study examined the validity of the assumption that these interchangeable, but different, delivery technologies are therapeutically equivalent in maintaining systolic blood pressure (SBP) control throughout the entire dosing interval. We used 24-h Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring to objectively examine whether formulation switches changed population SBP >2 mmHg (reflecting 6% increased stroke mortality) and in what proportion of patients SBP changed >/=6 mmHg (risking unnecessary therapeutic alterations). When 20 patients, previously receiving 60-mg-once-daily Nifedipine-GITS, were switched to Mylan-Nifedipine-XL, population-mean +/- SE 24-h SBP increased 3 +/- 1.1 mmHg (P = 0.0173) and 8-h nocturnal SBP increased 4 +/- 1.6 mmHg (P = 0.0098). Thus, interchange of nifedipine formulations can affect therapeutic consistency. These data support existing calls to improve criteria for establishing bioequivalence between formulations employing differing modified-release technologies.
Felodipine, a new dihydropyridine derivative with a selective action on vascular smooth muscle, was investigated in 2 short term studies in hypertensive patients. In the first study, oral administration of felodipine 12.5 mg three times daily in a preliminary tablet formulation for 3 days significantly reduced supine and upright blood pressure with only a slight increase in heart rate and no clinically relevant signs of sodium and water retention. By increasing each dose to 25 and 50 mg three times daily, there was a further, but quite moderate, decrease in blood pressure; however, this was accompanied by an increase in heart rate and a tendency towards a reduction of creatinine clearance and urinary sodium output. In the second study, a new oral formulation containing 10 mg felodipine, administered twice daily for 7 days, was effective in lowering blood pressure without a clinically relevant tachycardia. Following the first dose of felodipine, urinary sodium excretion was slightly increased while potassium excretion showed only minor changes. The new calcium antagonist, felodipine, lowers blood pressure without the clinically relevant adverse reactions commonly related to other direct vasodilator antihypertensive drugs.
Pharmacokinetics of nisoldipine and the drug's effects on blood pressure and heart rate were investigated in healthy young (20 to 23 years of age), middle-aged (49 to 57 years of age), and elderly (75 to 84 years of age) subjects after single-dose and short-term multiple-dose oral administration (10 mg twice daily). No age-dependent differences in pharmacokinetic parameters were observed. Decreases in blood pressure were comparable in the three groups, but reflex tachycardia was less pronounced in the elderly subjects. Side effects mainly occurred on the first day of drug administration. Dose adaptation of nisoldipine does not seem to be necessary in elderly subjects.
AIM: To compare efficacy and safety of nifedipin-retard (cordaflex-retard, Egis, Hungary) used in monotherapy and in combination with metoprolol (egilok, Egis, Hungary) in patients with arterial hypertension (AH). MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study included 20 patients with AH stage I-II (12 males, 8 females, mean age 57.3 years, mean duration of the disease 8.6 years). Nifedipin-retard was given in a daily dose 40 mg/day (20 mg twice a day) in monotherapy and 20 mg/day in combination with metoprolol which was administered 50 mg twice a day (a daily dose 100 mg/day). The control examination consisted of a physical examination, measurement of arterial pressure (AP) by Korotkov, registration of heart rate, ECG, 24-h AP monitoring, echocardiography. RESULTS: By 24-h AP monitoring, a 4-week treatment with nifedipin-retard alone resulted in lowering of systolic arterial pressure. The combined treatment produced a more pronounced fall both in systolic and diastolic pressure. Diastolic left-ventricular function improved in combined therapy. Side effects observed in nifedipin-retard monotherapy got much more weaker when this drug combined with metoprolol. CONCLUSION: Combination of nifedipin-retard with metoprolol provides better clinical response and tolerance than monotherapy with nifedipin-retard.
Innovative drug delivery systems have been developed for nifedipine and clonidine that prolong the pharmacologic activity of the medications, allowing once daily dosing. The nifedipine-GITS (gastrointestinal therapeutic system) tablet formulation and the clonidine-TTS (transcutaneous delivery system) patch may also reduce side effects in patients while preserving the therapeutic efficacy of the origin drug formulations (nifedipie capsule, clonidine tablet).
1. The trans-hepatic extraction of nifedipine during steady state infusion was studied in six patients undergoing cardiac catheterisation for suspected coronary disease. 2. Mean extraction ratio across the liver was 0.64 but hepatic clearance accounted for a mean of only 65% of total body clearance. 3. These results are consistent with the liver as the major site of metabolism of nifedipine, but also suggest that significant metabolism occurs outside the liver.
Nifedipine was initially developed as an anti-anginal drug, and it was Professor Murakami who first reported its usefulness in the management of hypertension. However, rapid decrease in blood pressure with immediate-release formulations of nifedipine led to simultaneous increases in heart rate, presumably because of reflex sympathetic activation, and a meta-analysis in the mid-1990s suggested an increased incidence of serious adverse events (AEs) with short-acting Ca2+ channel antagonists. Although subsequent reviews of the literature found little scientific basis for increased serious AEs with short-acting Ca2+ channel antagonists, this controversy led to the accelerated development of long-acting preparations. Recent clinical research has found improved outcomes in hypertensive patients receiving long-acting Ca2+ channel antagonist preparations and reconfirmed the role of nifedipine as a first-line agent.
