PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to summarize the most up-to-date literature on bath-related headache, a rare disorder. RECENT FINDINGS: Initially described in middle-aged Asian women, it is now reported in a wider demographic. More information is available about the pathophysiology of bath-related headache, including its classification as a subtype of reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS). Nimodipine can be effective in patients both with and without vasospasm. Bath-related headache is a rare form of thunderclap headache. Although its mechanism is still unclear, it is associated with vasospasm and RCVS. Controlled trials investigating the use of nimodipine and other agents may be useful in furthering our understanding of and treatment of this phenomenon.
Nimodipine is a dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonist that blocks the flux of extracellular calcium through L-type, voltage-gated calcium channels. While nimodipine is FDAapproved for the prevention and treatment of neurological deficits in patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH), it affects myriad cell types throughout the body, and thus, likely has more complex mechanisms of action than simple inhibition of cerebral vasoconstriction. Newer understanding of the pathophysiology of delayed ischemic injury after a variety of acute neurologic injuries including aSAH, traumatic brain injury (TBI) and ischemic stroke, coupled with advances in the drug delivery method for nimodipine, have reignited interest in refining its potential therapeutic use. In this context, this review seeks to establish a firm understanding of current data on nimodipine's role in the mechanisms of delayed injury in aSAH, TBI, and ischemic stroke, and assess the extensive clinical data evaluating its use in these conditions. In addition, we will review pivotal trials using locally administered, sustained release nimodipine and discuss why such an approach has evaded demonstration of efficacy, while seemingly having the potential to significantly improve clinical care.
INTRODUCTION: Nimodipine is a calcium channel blocker that has been used to treat hypertension and vasospasm. Emerging evidence in the literature suggests that it is neuroprotective by reducing cellular apoptosis after neuronal injury and promoting axonal sprouting at the nodes of Ranvier. OBJECTIVES: To conduct a systematic review of the usage of nimodipine in cranial nerve injury and to perform a meta-analysis to estimate the efficacy of nimodipine on functional recovery of the injured cranial nerves. METHODS: Literature search was performed in eight databases using preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Human studies that used nimodipine as a monotherapy for treating cranial nerve injury were included for review. Cranial nerve function recovery was the primary outcome measure. RESULTS: 672 records were screened and 58 full texts in English were assessed. Nine studies were included in the final review. 5 of these, including 110 participants who received nimodipine for either recurrent laryngeal nerve or facial nerve injury and 556 controls, were used for meta-analysis. Nimodipine significantly increased the odds of vocal fold motion recovery (odds ratio [OR] 13.73, 95% confidence interval [CI] 6.21, 30.38, P < .01), and the odds of facial motion recovery (OR 2.78, 95% CI 1.20, 6.44, P = .02). Overall, nimodipine-treated patients had significantly higher odds of recovering vocal fold or facial motion compared with controls (OR 6.09, 95% CI 3.41, 10.87, P < .01). CONCLUSION: Existing evidence supports the positive effect of nimodipine on vocal fold and facial motion recovery after injury. Future research should focus on randomized clinical trials comparing recovery rates between nimodipine- and placebo-treated groups. Laryngoscope, 129:943-951, 2019.
BACKGROUND: Acute spinal cord injury is a devastating condition typically affecting young people, mostly males. Steroid treatment in the early hours after the injury is aimed at reducing the extent of permanent paralysis during the rest of the patient's life. OBJECTIVES: To review randomized trials of steroids for human acute spinal cord injury. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Injuries Group Specialised Register (searched 02 Aug 2011), The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 2011, issue 3 (The Cochrane Library), MEDLINE (Ovid) 1948 to July Week 3 2011, EMBASE (Ovid) 1974 to 2011 week 17, ISI Web of Science: Science Citation Index Expanded (SCI-EXPANDED) 1970 to Aug 2011, ISI Web of Science: Conference Proceedings Citation Index- Science (CPCI-S) 1990 to Aug 2011 and PubMed [www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez/] (searched 04 Aug 2011) for records added to PubMed in the last 90 days). Files of the National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study (NASCIS) were reviewed (NASCIS was founded in 1977 and has tracked trials in this area since that date). We also searched the reference lists of relevant studies and previously published reviews. SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomized controlled trials of steroid treatment for acute spinal cord injury in any language. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: One review author extracted data from trial reports. Japanese and French studies were found through NASCIS and additional data (e.g. SDs) were obtained from the original study authors. MAIN RESULTS: Eight trials are included in this review, seven used methylprednisolone. Methylprednisolone sodium succinate has been shown to improve neurologic outcome up to one year post-injury if administered within eight hours of injury and in a dose regimen of: bolus 30mg/kg over 15 minutes, with maintenance infusion of 5.4 mg/kg per hour infused for 23 hours. The initial North American trial results were replicated in a Japanese trial but not in the one from France. Data was obtained from the latter studies to permit appropriate meta-analysis of all three trials. This indicated significant recovery in motor function after methylprednisolone therapy, when administration commenced within eight hours of injury. A more recent trial indicates that, if methylprednisolone therapy is given for an additional 24 hours (a total of 48 hours), additional improvement in motor neurologic function and functional status are observed. This is particularly observed if treatment cannot be started until between three to eight hours after injury. The same methylprednisolone therapy has been found effective in whiplash injuries. A modified regimen was found to improve recovery after surgery for lumbar disc disease. The risk of bias was low in the largest methyprednisolne trials. Overall, there was no evidence of significantly increased complications or mortality from the 23 or 48 hour therapy. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: High-dose methylprednisolone steroid therapy is the only pharmacologic therapy shown to have efficacy in a phase three randomized trial when administered within eight hours of injury. One trial indicates additional benefit by extending the maintenance dose from 24 to 48 hours, if start of treatment must be delayed to between three and eight hours after injury. There is an urgent need for more randomized trials of pharmacologic therapy for acute spinal cord injury.
Nimodipine is a lipophilic dihydropyridine calcium antagonist which is used to reduce the incidence and severity of delayed cerebral ischaemia in patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage. This article reviews its mechanism of action, pharmacology and indications for use.
Neuronal plasticity is a key issue in neuroscience. It is defined as the capability of the neuron to adapt to a changing internal or external environment, to previous experience or to trauma. It appears that during all phases of the individual life span in the nervous system, changes take place that relate to development, degeneration, and regeneration. Growth cones are a focus of neuronal plasticity, and current views emphasize the importance of local intracellular [Ca2+] to the control of their function. Hence, outgrowth of neurites from neurons in culture may be manipulated by drugs that affect intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis. In the adult nervous system, much research deals with synaptic plasticity, especially with the activity-dependent changes seen after long-term potentation of hippocampal synapses. As in the growth cone, such changes involve Ca(2+)-dependent pre- and postsynaptic processes, among which is the activation of protein kinase C. During aging, Ca2+ homeostasis may be slightly disturbed over a long period of time that could result in loss of function seen after a short, toxic high level of intracellular [Ca2+]. In this respect, the beneficial effects of chronic treatment with the L-channel Ca(2+)-blocker nimodipine on sensorimotor function of aged rats is discussed.
Lacidipine, a dihydropyridine-based calcium antagonist (DHP), has already been demonstrated to possess antioxidant activity and to reduce the intracellular production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). To verify if this effect is a peculiarity of this molecule, or belongs to other DHPs, the activity of lacidipine was compared with those of amlodipine, lercanidipine, nimodipine, and nifedipine. The DHPs were incorporated in bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAECs). Cu(2+)-oxidized LDL (ox-LDL, 5 microM) was incubated with BAECs for 5 min. 2',7'-Dichlorofluorescein (DCF) as expression of intracellular ROS production was measured by flow cytometry. Ox-LDL induced a strong increase in intracellular ROS formation (p<0.001) that was significantly reduced only with lacidipine and lercanidipine (p from <0.05 to <0.01); the effect of lacidipine, however, resulted in being much more evident than lercanidipine (p<0.01); amlodipine, nimodopine, and nifedipine had no effect on ROS formation. The lowest IC50s, i.e. the concentrations determining the 50% reduction of ROS, were obtained with lacidipine (p<0.01). The inhibitory effect of lacidipine on ox-LDL-induced ROS production in endothelial cells is a peculiarity of this molecule through its antioxidant activity.
The efficacy of nimodipine in decreasing mortality and morbidity of subarachnoid haemorrhage (HSA) is evaluated in 51 patients admitted to the Neurological and Neurosurgery Departments of the Santa Maria Hospital. Reductions of 2 x (0.65, 6.39) of the incidence of ischemia in the total group and of 2.1 x (0.58, 7.79) of mortality in the sub-group with initial severity of less than 4 points of the Hunt score were observed relatively to a comparable group of patients previously admitted who did not receive nimodipine. Randomized clinical trials that tested the effect of nimodipine in the context of HSA are reviewed.
This Commentary highlights recent advances in research on cerebral malaria.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) remains a condition with suboptimal functional outcomes, especially in the young population. Pharmacotherapy has an accepted role in several aspects of the disease and an emerging role in several others. No preventive pharmacologic interventions for SAH currently exist. Antiplatelet medications as well as anticoagulation have been used to prevent thromboembolic events after endovascular coiling. However, the main focus of pharmacologic treatment of SAH is the prevention of delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI). Currently the only evidence-based medical intervention is nimodipine. Other calcium channel blockers have been evaluated without convincing efficacy. Anti-inflammatory drugs such as statins have demonstrated early potential; however, they failed to provide significant evidence for the use in preventing DCI. Similar findings have been reported for magnesium, which showed potential in experimental studies and a phase 2 trial. Clazosentane, a potent endothelin receptor antagonist, did not translate to improve functional outcomes. Various other neuroprotective agents have been used to prevent DCI; however, the results have been, at best inconclusive. The prevention of DCI and improvement in functional outcome remain the goals of pharmacotherapy after the culprit lesion has been treated in aneurysmal SAH. Therefore, further research to elucidate the exact mechanisms by which DCI is propagated is clearly needed. In this article, we review the current pharmacologic approaches that have been evaluated in SAH and highlight the areas in which further research is needed.
Over the years, it has become apparent that many cytotoxic events employ a common pathway in destroying cells, namely the disruption of calcium homeostasis. Further studies show that the aging process is also accompanied, perhaps even partly caused, by changes in cellular calcium regulation. Finally, initial evidence has appeared in the literature showing that the Alzheimer beta-amyloid protein also interferes with calcium homeostasis. In these situations, the use of calcium antagonists, such as nimodipine, is expected to prevent part of the damage resulting from disrupted calcium regulation. Indeed, studies with nimodipine show that the compound reduces neuronal degeneration in a variety of toxic conditions. In addition, the compound has a functional effect in that it increases spontaneous neuronal firing of aged neurons, presumably by reducing the age-dependently increased afterhyperpolarization. Nimodipine also reduces age-related perivascular anomalies and increases cerebral blood flow. A combination of these effects is probably why the substance is found to improve cognition in aged animals and in aged humans with impaired brain function.
BACKGROUND: The sudden loss of blood supply in ischemic stroke is associated with an increase of calcium ions within neurons. Inhibiting this increase could protect neurons and might reduce neurological impairment, disability, and handicap after stroke. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of calcium antagonists for reducing the risk of death or dependency after acute ischemic stroke. We investigated the influence of different drugs, dosages, routes of administration, time intervals after stroke, and trial design on the outcomes. SEARCH METHODS: The evidence is current to 6 February 2018. We searched the Cochrane Stroke Group Trials Register (6 February 2018), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; 2018, Issue 2), MEDLINE Ovid (1950 to 6 February 2018), Embase Ovid (1980 to 6 February 2018), and four Chinese databases (6 February 2018): Chinese Biological Medicine Database (CBM-disc), China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), Chinese Scientific Periodical Database of VIP information, and Wanfang Data. We also searched the following trials registers: ClinicalTrials.gov, EU Clinical Trials Register, Stroke Trials Registry, ISRCTN registry, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, and Chinese Clinical Trial Registry, and we contacted trialists and researchers. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized controlled trials comparing a calcium antagonist versus control in people with acute ischemic stroke. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently selected trials, extracted data, assessed risk of bias, and applied the GRADE approach to assess the quality of the evidence. We used death or dependency at the end of long-term follow-up (at least three months) in activities of daily living as the primary outcome. We used standard Cochrane methodological procedures. MAIN RESULTS: We included 34 trials involving 7731 participants. All the participants were in the acute stage of ischemic stroke, and their age ranged from 18 to 85 years, with the average age ranging from 52.3 to 74.6 years across different trials. There were more men than women in most trials. Twenty-six trials tested nimodipine, and three trials assessed flunarizine. One trial each used isradipine, nicardipine, PY108-608, fasudil, and lifarizine. More than half of these trials followed participants for at least three months. Calcium antagonists showed no effects on the primary outcome (risk ratio (RR) 1.05; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.98 to 1.13; 22 trials; 22 studies; 6684 participants; moderate-quality evidence) or on death at the end of follow-up (RR 1.07, 95% CI 0.98 to 1.17; 31 trials; 7483 participants; moderate-quality evidence). Thirteen trials reported adverse events, finding no significant differences between groups. Most trials did not report the allocation process or how they managed missing data, so we considered these at high risk of selection and attrition bias. Most trials reported double-blind methods but did not state who was blinded, and none of the trial protocols were available. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence to support the use of calcium antagonists in people with acute ischemic stroke.
The reactivation of a memory through retrieval can render it subject to disruption or modification through the process of memory reconsolidation. In both humans and rodents, briefly reactivating a fear memory results in effective erasure by subsequent extinction training. Here we show that a similar strategy is equally effective in the disruption of appetitive pavlovian cue-food memories. However, systemic administration of the NMDA receptor partial agonist D-cycloserine, under the same behavioural conditions, did not potentiate appetitive memory extinction, suggesting that reactivation does not enhance subsequent extinction learning. To confirm that reactivation followed by extinction reflects a behavioural analogue of memory reconsolidation, we show that prevention of contextual fear memory reactivation by the L-type voltage-gated calcium channel blocker nimodipine interferes with the amnestic outcome. Therefore, the reconsolidation process can be manipulated behaviourally to disrupt both aversive and appetitive memories.
The effect of the calcium channel blocker, nimodipine, in acute alcohol withdrawal was investigated in a randomized, placebo controlled, double blind study. Thirty-two male patients with a history of alcohol dependence according to DSM-III criteria, but no other substance abuse, were included. A new rating instrument which fulfilled theoretical test criteria was applied to determine the severity of the alcohol withdrawal state. The patients received nimodipine or a placebo on four separate occasions (4 x 60 mg) and, in addition, clomethiazole, according to a standardized procedure. Our investigation has shown that, in the first 48-72 h of alcohol withdrawal, both groups consumed similar amounts of additional clomethiazole medication. Thus, no significant effect of nimodipine on the acute alcohol withdrawal state could be demonstrated. There was some tendency for nimodipine to ameliorate psychosensory dysfunction.
PURPOSE: The uses of nimodipine for otolaryngic indications are reviewed, and recommendations for its use in clinical practice are provided. SUMMARY: Nimodipine is currently indicated for the improvement of neurologic outcomes in adult patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH). However, other oral and i.v. calcium channel blockers have not exhibited the same beneficial effects in patients with aSAH, leading clinicians to believe that nimodipine possesses unique neuroprotective effects in addition to its calcium channel-blocking and vasodilatory properties. Consequently, clinical investigations of nimodipine have been conducted for cochlear and facial nerve preservation after vestibular schwannoma (VS) surgery, symptomatic management of Meniere's disease and peripheral vertigo, and recovery of vocal cord paralysis after laryngeal nerve injury. Three prospective randomized studies have investigated nimodipine for hearing and/or nerve preservation in patients undergoing VS resection, the results of which have suggested a potential benefit of initiating nimodipine during the perioperative period. Several studies of Meniere's disease and/or peripheral vertigo have reported improved symptom control with nimodipine. For vocal fold paralysis associated with recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) injury, nimodipine may increase the recovery rate based on the results of 1 nonrandomized prospective study that used nimodipine in a protocolized manner. One small pilot study found that nimodipine improved facial nerve function after maxillofacial surgery. CONCLUSION: Due to its proposed vasoactive and neuroprotective effects, nimodipine may play a role in the treatment of a number of otolaryngic pathologies including VS, Meniere's disease, peripheral vertigo, RLN injury, and facial weakness after maxillofacial surgery. Small studies have shown improved symptom control and recovery after surgery. Since all of the aforementioned indications are still considered off label, clinicians and patients should collaboratively assess the risks and benefits before initiating treatment.
Reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS) is a rare and understudied transfusion reaction most commonly seen in adult females after correction of chronic, severe anemia. Transfusion-associated RCVS (TA-RCVS) typically presents with thunderclap headaches and one or more systemic (hypertension, nausea/vomiting) or neurologic (seizure, stroke, visual changes) symptoms within a week after red blood cell transfusion. Treatment of RCVS is based on blood pressure control; a recent study suggested that early use of nimodipine could shorten the disease course.
BACKGROUND: Causes of morbidity and mortality following aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH) include early brain injury and delayed neurologic deterioration, which may result from delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI). Complex pathophysiological mechanisms underlie DCI, which often includes angiographic vasospasm (aVSP) of cerebral arteries. METHODS: Despite the study of many pharmacological therapies for the prevention of DCI in aSAH, nimodipine-a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker-remains the only drug recommended universally in this patient population. A common theme in the research of preventative therapies is the use of promising drugs that have been shown to reduce the occurrence of aVSP but ultimately did not improve functional outcomes in large, randomized studies. An example of this is the endothelin antagonist clazosentan, although this agent was recently approved in Japan. RESULTS: The use of the only approved drug, nimodipine, is limited in practice by hypotension. The administration of nimodipine and its counterpart nicardipine by alternative routes, such as intrathecally or formulated as prolonged release implants, continues to be a rational area of study. Additional agents approved in other parts of the world include fasudil and tirilazad. CONCLUSIONS: We provide a brief overview of agents currently being studied for prevention of aVSP and DCI after aSAH. Future studies may need to identify subpopulations of patients who can benefit from these drugs and perhaps redefine acceptable outcomes to demonstrate impact.
A cerebral aneurysm is an outpouching of a weakened arterial wall, usually at a bifurcation of one of the larger vessels of the Circle of Willis. When the outpouching ruptures, arterial pressure forces blood into the subarachnoid space. The annual incidence of aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage is 8 to 10 per 100 000 in the United States. The outcome varies for this patient population. New management strategies have emerged; some practices are evidence based, whereas others are based on anecdotal experiences. This variation has resulted in a number of unresolved issues in caring for patients with an aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. This article discusses some of these unresolved issues, including the use of medications such as nimodipine, antifibrinolytics, statins, and magnesium; coiling or clipping for aneurysm securement; and the prevention and treatment of potential complications. Critical care nurses must conduct detailed assessments and provide complex care to optimize patient outcomes.
We investigated the effect of nimodipine (30 mg qid) in 16 de novo patients with essential tremor in a double-blind placebo-controlled study in which we assessed tremor by clinical scorings, tremorgraphic recordings, and patient self-evaluation. Of the 15 patients who completed the study, eight improved. We conclude that nimodipine is effective in some patients with essential tremor.
Nimodipine has been shown to improve outcomes following aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. Guidelines recommend that all patients receive a fixed dose of oral nimodipine for 21 days. However, pharmacokinetic studies have suggested variability of nimodipine pharmacokinetics in subarachnoid hemorrhage and in other patient populations. The clinical relevance of such variability is unknown. Therefore, the objective of the present review is, first, to conduct a literature review and summarize nimodipine pharmacokinetic data and sources of variability in various patient groups. Second, to determine if there is any evidence reporting an association between nimodipine exposure and clinical outcomes in patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage. A systematic literature search was performed in MEDLINE and EMBASE. The following keywords were used: ("nimodipine" OR "nymalize" OR "nimotop") AND ("pharmacokinetic*", OR "PK"). The search results were limited to English language and human studies. A large interpatient variability in nimodipine pharmacokinetics has been reported. Patient-specific factors that had an influence on pharmacokinetic parameters are age, comorbidities, variabilities in metabolism due to genetic polymorphism and co-administered medications, as well as nimodipine administration technique. The association between nimodipine exposure and clinical outcomes remains unclear and data available are too scarce to reach a firm conclusion. Here, we present a narrative review with a systematic literature search discussing nimodipine pharmacokinetic variability in various patient populations. It is not clear if minimal or lack of systemic exposure to nimodipine denies its benefit and contributes to worsening outcomes in patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage. Further studies are needed to determine if such an association exists.
