CONTEXT: Calcium channel blocker poisoning is a common and sometimes life-threatening ingestion. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the reported effects of treatments for calcium channel blocker poisoning. The primary outcomes of interest were mortality and hemodynamic parameters. The secondary outcomes included length of stay in hospital, length of stay in intensive care unit, duration of vasopressor use, functional outcomes, and serum calcium channel blocker concentrations. METHODS: Medline/Ovid, PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, TOXLINE, International pharmaceutical abstracts, Google Scholar, and the gray literature up to December 31, 2013 were searched without time restriction to identify all types of studies that examined effects of various treatments for calcium channel blocker poisoning for the outcomes of interest. The search strategy included the following Keywords: [calcium channel blockers OR calcium channel antagonist OR calcium channel blocking agent OR (amlodipine or bencyclane or bepridil or cinnarizine or felodipine or fendiline or flunarizine or gallopamil or isradipine or lidoflazine or mibefradil or nicardipine or nifedipine or nimodipine or nisoldipine or nitrendipine or prenylamine or verapamil or diltiazem)] AND [overdose OR medication errors OR poisoning OR intoxication OR toxicity OR adverse effect]. Two reviewers independently selected studies and a group of reviewers abstracted all relevant data using a pilot-tested form. A second group analyzed the risk of bias and overall quality using the STROBE (STrengthening the Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemiology) checklist and the Thomas tool for observational studies, the Institute of Health Economics tool for Quality of Case Series, the ARRIVE (Animal Research: Reporting In Vivo Experiments) guidelines, and the modified NRCNA (National Research Council for the National Academies) list for animal studies. Qualitative synthesis was used to summarize the evidence. Of 15,577 citations identified in the initial search, 216 were selected for analysis, including 117 case reports. The kappa on the quality analysis tools was greater than 0.80 for all study types. RESULTS: The only observational study in humans examined high-dose insulin and extracorporeal life support. The risk of bias across studies was high for all interventions and moderate to high for extracorporeal life support. High-dose insulin. High-dose insulin (bolus of 1 unit/kg followed by an infusion of 0.5-2.0 units/kg/h) was associated with improved hemodynamic parameters and lower mortality, at the risks of hypoglycemia and hypokalemia (low quality of evidence). Extracorporeal life support. Extracorporeal life support was associated with improved survival in patients with severe shock or cardiac arrest at the cost of limb ischemia, thrombosis, and bleeding (low quality of evidence). Calcium, dopamine, and norepinephrine. These agents improved hemodynamic parameters and survival without documented severe side effects (very low quality of evidence). 4-Aminopyridine. Use of 4-aminopyridine was associated with improved hemodynamic parameters and survival in animal studies, at the risk of seizures. Lipid emulsion therapy. Lipid emulsion was associated with improved hemodynamic parameters and survival in animal models of intravenous verapamil poisoning, but not in models of oral verapamil poisoning. Other studies. Studies on decontamination, atropine, glucagon, pacemakers, levosimendan, and plasma exchange reported variable results, and the methodologies used limit their interpretation. No trial was documented in humans poisoned with calcium channel blockers for Bay K8644, CGP 28932, digoxin, cyclodextrin, liposomes, bicarbonate, carnitine, fructose 1,6-diphosphate, PK 11195, or triiodothyronine. Case reports were only found for charcoal hemoperfusion, dialysis, intra-aortic balloon pump, Impella device and methylene blue. CONCLUSIONS: The treatment for calcium channel blocker poisoning is supported by low-quality evidence drawn from a heterogeneous and heavily biased literature. High-dose insulin and extracorporeal life support were the interventions supported by the strongest evidence, although the evidence is of low quality.
Second-generation agents include new dihydropyridines, such as amlodipine, felodipine, isradipine, nicardipine, nimodipine, nisoldipine, and nitrendipine. Verapamil-like agents include tiapamil, gallopamil, and anipamil. Among the diphenylalkylamines, bepridil is of special interest. New preparations of existing agents include slow-release formulations of nifedipine, verapamil, and diltiazem. From all these agents will be selected those that are longer-acting and provide higher vascular selectivity.
Nisoldipine is a new calcium-channel blocker of the dihydropyridine subclass, with a chemical structure similar to nifedipine. It has been used in clinical trials to assess its efficacy and safety in patients with hypertension, angina pectoris, and congestive heart failure. Similar to other dihydropyridines, nisoldipine is a potent peripheral and coronary dilator. The most optimal dosage regimen has not been established in clinical trials. The drug appears to have a favorable side-effect profile.
The use of calcium antagonists in patients with severe dysfunction is controversial because agents like verapamil, diltiazem and nifedipine have been shown to worsen or precipitate congestive heart failure. However, successive improvements in our understanding of the clinical pharmacology of these drugs, of their pharmacokinetics and of their action on several neuro-humoral regulatory mechanisms have led to a continuous improvement of the molecules available. Promising results have been obtained with nisoldipine in patients with ischaemic left ventricular dysfunction (improved exercise tolerance, improved diastolic filling probably related to a relative improvement of chronically ischaemic areas) and other studies are exploring the effects of the combination of nisoldipine with an ACE-inhibitor. Soon, these trials should tell us if there is a real clinical benefit in the use of this agent not only to improve symptoms but also to slow down progression of the ventricular dysfunction.
SARM1 regulates axonal degeneration through its NAD-metabolizing activity and is a drug target for neurodegenerative disorders. We designed and synthesized fluorescent conjugates of styryl derivative with pyridine to serve as substrates of SARM1, which exhibited large red shifts after conversion. With the conjugates, SARM1 activation was visualized in live cells following elevation of endogenous NMN or treatment with a cell-permeant NMN-analog. In neurons, imaging documented mouse SARM1 activation preceded vincristine-induced axonal degeneration by hours. Library screening identified a derivative of nisoldipine (NSDP) as a covalent inhibitor of SARM1 that reacted with the cysteines, especially Cys311 in its ARM domain and blocked its NMN-activation, protecting axons from degeneration. The Cryo-EM structure showed that SARM1 was locked into an inactive conformation by the inhibitor, uncovering a potential neuroprotective mechanism of dihydropyridines.
Platelet-activating factor, 5-hydroxytryptamine, thromboxane A2, adenosine diphosphate and thrombin are known to activate platelets by stimulating calcium entry, but the nature of the entry pathways is unknown. We present the identification of single divalent cation channels from thrombin-activated human platelets. Membrane vesicles from unstimulated and thrombin-stimulated human platelets were incorporated in planar bilayers and unitary currents through single channels were measured. Divalent cation selective channels could only be demonstrated in thrombin-stimulated preparations. These channels share a number of properties in common with voltage-dependent calcium channels--a high degree of selectivity for divalent cations, a single channel conductance of about 10 pS (in 150 mM Ba2+) and sensitivity to blockade by inorganic calcium channel blockers such as Ni2+. In other respects, these channels are different as they are not voltage-dependent and are not blocked by 1,4-dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonists.
Nisoldipine coat-core is an extended-release once-daily formulation of a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist effective in the treatment of chronic stable angina pectoris. With immediate-release formulations of nisoldipine, plasma drug concentrations that produce therapeutic effects result rapidly, but are not sustained and do not maintain the effects throughout a 12-hour dosage interval. In contrast, with nisoldipine coat-core, a gradual increase in plasma nisoldipine concentrations occurs over 12 hours and therapeutic concentrations are then maintained for the duration of a 24-hour dosage interval. In dosages of 10 to 60 mg once daily, nisoldipine coat-core controls symptoms of angina and improves exercise-induced signs of ischaemia in patients with stable angina. Compared with placebo, daily nisoldipine coat-core doses of > or = 20 mg provide statistically significant increases in total exercise time and time to produce angina and a trend towards an increase in the time to produce 1 mm ST segment depression, in exercise tests conducted approximately 23 hours postdose. When administered in 20 and 40 mg daily doses, nisoldipine coat-core produces improvements in exercise test parameters that are similar to those seen with amlodipine 5 or 10 mg/day or regular-release or sustained-release (SR) diltiazem 240 mg/day. The frequency of daily angina attacks and consumption of short-acting nitrates are also reduced by nisoldipine to a similar extent to that observed with these other agents. After longer term (1 year) administration of 10 to 60 mg daily, improvements in exercise test parameters are maintained, with equivalent anti-ischaemic efficacy seen in patients receiving nisoldipine coat-core alone or with background nitrate or beta-blocker therapy. Adverse events associated with nisoldipine coat-core are typical of the dihydropyridine class of calcium antagonists, with peripheral oedema and headache being most common. Nisoldipine coat-core appears to be associated with fewer deaths than placebo, notably in the DEFIANT-II (Doppler Flow and Echocardiography in Functional Cardiac Insufficiency: Assessment of Nisoldipine Therapy II) study, where only 1 death occurred with nisoldipine compared with 7 in the placebo group. Nisoldipine should not be taken during phenytoin therapy. In addition, grapefruit juice should be avoided during nisoldipine therapy and nisoldipine should not be taken concurrently with high-fat meals. Thus, the coat-core formulation of nisoldipine appears to have overcome the limitations of the shorter duration of action of immediate-release nisoldipine. Nisoldipine coat-core is well tolerated and once-daily administration produces a long duration of effective anti-ischaemic relief in patients with chronic stable angina pectoris.
Members of the 1,4 dihydropyridine category of the calcium channel antagonists, including nitrendipine, have defined structure-activity relations that involve both their specificity and their sites of action. Other categories of calcium channel antagonists, such as D600, verapamil and diltiazem, differ from the 1,4 dihydropyridines in a number of aspects, including lower potency. All of the calcium channel antagonists share the ability to inhibit calcium currents passing through a voltage-dependent calcium channel. The 1,4 dihydropyridines are relatively selective for vascular smooth muscle. Because of this selectivity, nitrendipine has potent action as an antihypertensive drug. Although biochemical radioligand binding studies have shown that the same type of high affinity binding sites occur in cardiac muscle as in vascular smooth muscle, it is not fully established why the 1,4 dihydropyridines are not as potent in cardiac as in vascular muscle. Other members of the very large 1,4 dihydropyridine category of calcium channel antagonists include nifedipine, nimodipine and nisoldipine. The 1,4 dihydropyridines also include recently discovered calcium channel activators, including the compound Bay K 8644. These calcium channel activators are diametrically opposed in properties to nifedipine and nitrendipine. Thus, this single structural category of compounds has a complete spectrum of pharmacologic activity at Ca++ channels, from turning on to turning off.
Nisoldipine is a calcium antagonist that specifically blocks the slow or voltage-dependent calcium channel up to the highest concentrations. This mode of action has been confirmed in pharmacological studies on isolated organs, electrophysiological and binding studies, and by the measurement of transmembrane calcium transport. As with other dihydropyridine calcium antagonists, an interaction with intracellular calcium reservoirs and calmodulin seems to be of minor importance. The drug exhibits higher potency, longer duration of action, and a higher binding affinity in vitro and in vivo than nifedipine. In contrast to its vasodilating and spasmolytic activity, its negative inotropic effect occurs in vitro only after higher concentrations than after nifedipine. In whole animals a secondary positive inotropic effect occurs regularly owing to sympathetic counter-regulation. The influence of nisoldipine on cardiac stimulus formation and conduction is also very slight in anesthetized animals, and is completely eliminated in awake animals and humans by counter-regulation up to very high doses. The cardiac anti-ischemic action of nisoldipine has been demonstrated in various ischemia models and is probably based predominantly on its afterload-reducing properties in addition to its spasmolytic effect on the coronary arteries. Various other suspected effects, for which there are isolated indications, e.g., inhibition of thromboxane synthesis, preload reduction, interaction with the transport of adenosine, and normalization of the sarcolemmal Na+, K(+)-ATPase activity, are probably of subordinate importance. Its antihypertensive effect is explained primarily by lowering of the peripheral resistance. There are, however, some indications that nisoldipine exerts certain effects over and above pure vasodilation. The prevention of postischemic calcium overloading in the renal tubule epithelium and the natriuretic effect are probably of importance in the therapeutic action. Clinically, nisoldipine was found more potent and prolonged in its action in comparison with nifedipine. In comparative studies, nisoldipine, 10 mg once a day, was found equieffective with nifedipine 10 mg three times or 20 mg twice a day in angina or hypertension, respectively.
AIM: To compare the vascular effects of lacidipine with those of other calcium antagonists. METHODS: A review of published studies. RESULTS: Experimental studies have shown that for a similar fall in blood pressure, lacidipine increased cardiac contractility while verapamil decreased cardiac contractility. In the rat aorta, the dose of lacidipine required to reduce a calcium-induced contraction by 50% was lower than that of all other calcium antagonists tested except nisoldipine. In human studies, especially, there are inherent limitations in the techniques available to measure regional blood flows under physiological conditions, making it difficult to compare the effects of different antihypertensive drugs. A recent study showed that renal blood flow was increased by lacidipine without any reduction in renal function. As in animals, vital organ perfusion was either preserved or increased. Further, maximal coronary vasodilation was associated with lower coronary resistance values during lacidipine treatment compared with pretreatment values. Another lacidipine study showed increased brachial artery compliance, while a study on the radial artery showed that lacidipine increased the compliance of this artery also. CONCLUSIONS: Lacidipine has vascular selectivity. Although regional blood flows are difficult to measure, due to inherent limitations in the techniques available, the evidence suggests that lacidipine produces vasodilation in essential hypertensive subjects while maintaining or even increasing vital organ perfusion. This appears to be due to a regression of the structural changes that characterize hypertension.
It is well known fact that the strengths of drug interactions with grapefruit juice (GFJ) differ greatly depending on the 1,4-dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonist (DHP) used. However, there are no available data on the relationship between interactions with GFJ and its physicochemical attributes. Therefore we endeavored to study the correlation between calculated logP values, indicating lipophilicity, from chemical structures of DHPs as well as water diffusion, molecular volume, molecular polarization, molecular density, refractive index, topologic polar surface area, and calculated molar refractivity. Thirteen forms of DHP, amlodipine, azelnidipine, benidipine, cilnidipine, efonidipine, felodipine, manidipine, nicardipine, nifedipine, nimodipine, nisoldipine, nitrendipine, and pranidipine were analyzed due to clinical trials performed with GFJ and these agents. The pharmacokinetic interaction strengths were defined in common logarithmic values of increasing ratios of area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) with GFJ intake compared with controls. Physicochemical properties including three categories of predicted logP values were calculated from the structures of DHPs and their estimated relationship with the interactions. As a result, the logP values indicated significant positive correlations with the interaction strengths. This finding suggests that lipophilicity is an important factor in the strengths of pharmacokinetic interactions of DHPs with GFJ intake.
BACKGROUND: Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and diabetes are both associated with a high risk of ischemic events, but the role of intensive blood pressure control in PAD has not been established. METHODS AND RESULTS: The Appropriate Blood Pressure Control in Diabetes study followed 950 subjects with type 2 diabetes for 5 years; 480 of the subjects were normotensive (baseline diastolic blood pressure of 80 to 89 mm Hg). Patients randomized to placebo (moderate blood pressure control) had a mean blood pressure of 137+/-0.7/81+/-0.3 mm Hg over the last 4 years of treatment. In contrast, patients randomized to intensive treatment with enalapril or nisoldipine had a mean 4-year blood pressure of 128+/-0.8/75+/-0.3 mm Hg (P<0.0001 compared with moderate control). PAD, which is defined as an ankle-brachial index <0.90 at the baseline visit, was diagnosed in 53 patients. In patients with PAD, there were 3 cardiovascular events (13.6%) on intensive treatment compared with 12 events (38.7%) on moderate treatment (P=0.046). After adjustment for multiple cardiovascular risk factors, an inverse relationship between ankle-brachial index and cardiovascular events was observed with moderate treatment (P=0.009), but not with intensive treatment (P=0.91). Thus, with intensive blood pressure control, the risk of an event was not increased, even at the lowest ankle-brachial index values, and was the same as in a patient without PAD. CONCLUSIONS: In PAD patients with diabetes, intensive blood pressure lowering to a mean of 128/75 mm Hg resulted in a marked reduction in cardiovascular events.
Unlike chyloperitoneum associated with clinical conditions including cancer, cirrhosis, and traumatic surgery, calcium channel blocker (CCB)-associated chyloperitoneum is rarely discussed in comprehensive studies on chyloperitoneum. We aimed to investigate the prevalence and characteristics of CCB-associated chyloperitoneum in peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients. The MEDLINE, Embase, CENTRAL, CiNii, and RISS databases were systematically searched for clinical studies on CCB-associated chyloperitoneum in PD patients published up to 31 July 2018. A total of 17 studies (four cohort studies, one case series, and 12 case reports) were selected. Eight CCBs, namely amlodipine, benidipine, diltiazem, lercanidipine, manidipine, nifedipine, nisoldipine, and verapamil, were reported to be associated with chyloperitoneum; manidipine and lercanidipine were the most frequently reported. The average prevalence of chyloperitoneum for lercanidipine was 25.97% in three cohort studies, two of which had a moderate or high risk of bias. Most of the studies revealed chyloperitoneum development within 4 days of initiation of CCB therapy and chyloperitoneum disappearance within 24 h of CCB withdrawal. The results of this study emphasise on the need for awareness among healthcare professionals regarding CCB-associated chyloperitoneum in PD patients. Further studies elucidating the causality and clinical implication of CCB-associated chyloperitoneum are needed.
The issue of drug-drug interactions is particularly relevant for geriatric patients with epilepsy because they are often treated with multiple medications for concurrent diseases such as cardiovascular disease and psychiatric disorders (e.g., dementia and depression). The antidepressants with the least potential for altering antiepileptic drug (AED) metabolism are citalopram, escitalopram, venlafaxine, duloxetine, and mirtazapine. The use of established AEDs with enzyme-inducing properties, such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbital, may be associated with reductions in the levels of drugs such as donepezil, galantamine, and particularly warfarin. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbital have been reported to decrease prothrombin time in patients taking oral anticoagulants, although with phenytoin, an increase in prothrombin time has also been reported. Drugs associated with increased risk of bleeding in patients taking oral anticoagulants include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (especially fluoxetine), gemfibrozil, fluvastatin, and lovastatin. Other drugs affected by enzyme inducers include cytochrome P450 3A4 substrates, such as calcium channel blockers (e.g., nimodipine, nilvadipine, nisoldipine, and felodipine) and the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors atorvastatin, lovastatin, and simvastatin. Although there have been no reports of AEDs altering ticlopidine metabolism, ticlopidine coadministration can result in carbamazepine and phenytoin toxicity. Also, there is a significant risk of elevated levels of carbamazepine when diltiazem and verapamil are administered. In addition, there are case reports of phenytoin toxicity when administered with diltiazem. Drugs with a lower potential for metabolic drug interactions include (1) cholinesterase inhibitors (although the theoretical possibility of a reduction in donepezil and galantamine levels by enzyme-inducing AEDs should be considered) and the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist memantine and (2) antihypertensives such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, hydrophilic beta-blockers, and thiazide diuretics. There is a moderate risk that enzyme-inducing AEDs will decrease levels of lipophilic beta-blockers. Newer AEDs have a lower potential for drug interactions. In particular, levetiracetam and gabapentin have not been reported to alter enzyme activity. In summary, there is a significant potential for drug interactions between AEDs and drugs commonly prescribed in geriatric patients with epilepsy.
OBJECTIVE: Comorbidity between epilepsy and heart diseases is frequent. METHODS: All drugs classified within the group of drugs for cardiovascular system according to the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system were reviewed for their effects on seizures or epilepsy. RESULTS: Several agents showed antiseizure properties in animal models of seizures and/or in patients with epilepsy and only few were proconvulsant. Drugs with anticonvulsant effects include mecamylamine and guanfacine (antihypertensive drugs), indapamide, amiloride, furosemide and bumetanide (diuretics), fasudil (peripheral vasodilator), bioflavonoids (vasoprotective drug), propranolol (beta blocking agent), isradipine, nimodipine, verapamil and diltiazem (calcium channel blockers: CCBs), fosinopril and zofenopril (agents acting on the renin-angiotensin system), several statins, and fenofibrate (lipid-modifying agents). Drugs with proconvulsant properties in experimental models or in patients include reserpine, buflomedil, naftidrofuryl, and clonidine and propranolol at high doses. Drug-drug interactions (DDI) between antiseizure medications (ASMs) and drugs for cardiovascular system were also searched in two leading publicly accessible drug compendia. The most important DDIs occur between enzyme-inducing (EI) ASMs and ivabradine, ranolazine, macitenan and between EI-ASMs and the CCBs felodipine, nicardipine, nisoldipine, and verapamil. Simvastatin and atorvastatin are the lipid-modifying agents with more DDIs with EI-ASMs. Several pharmacodynamic interactions have been also documented. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: Available data show that the treatment of patients with epilepsy and vascular comorbidities is challenging and requires the appropriate knowledge of pharmacological properties of drugs and drug interactions.
Inhibition of platelet aggregation was observed after 4 days of oral dosing with the calcium antagonists, verapamil (160 mg) or nisoldipine (20 mg) but not following acute dosing. These effects were observed at plasma concentrations that had no effect on platelet aggregation when investigated in vitro. Verapamil added in vitro inhibited adrenaline-induced platelet aggregation at relatively low concentrations (IC50 16 microM) but only inhibited aggregation to adenosine diphosphate at very high concentrations (IC50 700 microM). Nisoldipine, a dihydropyridine, added in vitro had no effect on platelet aggregation induced by adenosine diphosphate but inhibited by 67%, the secondary phase of platelet aggregation induced by adrenaline. Verapamil but not nisoldipine displaced [3H]-yohimbine from the specific binding sites on human platelets, suggesting an interaction with alpha 2-adrenoceptors. Inhibition of adrenaline-induced aggregation by verapamil in vitro may be a result of antagonism of alpha 2-adrenoceptors but long term treatment with both verapamil and nisoldipine also inhibits platelet aggregation mechanisms other than by alpha 2-adrenoceptor blockade.
Nisoldipine is a second-generation dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (CCB). It is the most vascular selective of the currently available CCBs, and thus has the capacity to lower blood pressure without affecting the functioning of the myocardium and skeletal muscle, and without producing any negative inotropic effects. Nisoldipine coat core (CC) is an extended-release formulation that allows nisoldipine to be released gradually over 24 hours, minimizing fluctuations in plasma concentration and providing a good trough/peak ratio. It has a slow onset and long duration of action, and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring has demonstrated that its antihypertensive effect is maintained over 24 hours with no evidence of reflex tachycardia, hypotension, or sympathetic neurohormonal activation and no effects on circadian variation. Studies in patients with hypertension have shown that nisoldipine CC provides reductions in blood pressure that are at least equivalent to those seen with diuretics, beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and other CCBs, without deleterious effects on metabolic parameters. In particular, it has been found to be effective in elderly patients and in black patients with severe hypertension. The DEFIANT studies have demonstrated that nisoldipine CC improves cardiac function and exercise tolerance in patients recovering from acute myocardial infarction, without increasing the risk of mortality compared with placebo. It also improves exercise performance in patients with stable angina pectoris. Nisoldipine CC is well tolerated in all groups of patients, with the most frequently reported side effects being headache and peripheral edema, which are usually mild and transient.
The human ether-a-go-go-related gene (herg) encodes a K+ current (I(HERG)) which plays a fundamental role in heart excitability and in neurons by contributing to action potential repolarization and to spike-frequency adaptation, respectively. In this paper we show that I(HERG), recorded in neuroblastoma cells and guinea-pig ventricular myocytes, was reversibly inhibited by the K(ATP) channel blocker glibenclamide (IC50 = 74 microM). The voltage and use dependence of glibenclamide blockade were also evaluated. Another sulfonylurea, glimepiride, had less effective results in blocking I(HERG). The findings of this study are relevant to the interpretation of glibenclamide effects on cellular electrophysiology and suggest that oral antidiabetic therapy with sulfonylureas may contribute to iatrogenic QT prolongation and related arrhythmias.
Pharmacokinetics of nisoldipine and the drug's effects on blood pressure and heart rate were investigated in healthy young (20 to 23 years of age), middle-aged (49 to 57 years of age), and elderly (75 to 84 years of age) subjects after single-dose and short-term multiple-dose oral administration (10 mg twice daily). No age-dependent differences in pharmacokinetic parameters were observed. Decreases in blood pressure were comparable in the three groups, but reflex tachycardia was less pronounced in the elderly subjects. Side effects mainly occurred on the first day of drug administration. Dose adaptation of nisoldipine does not seem to be necessary in elderly subjects.
1. The 1,4-dihydropyridine nucleus serves as the scaffold for important cardiovascular drugs-calcium antagonists-including nifedipine, nitrendipine, amlodipine, and nisoldipine, which exert their antihypertensive and antianginal actions through actions at voltage-gated calcium channels of the CaV1 (L-type) class. 2. These drugs act at a specific receptor site for which defined structure-activity relationships exist, including stereoselectivity. 3. Despite the widespread occurrence of the CaV1 class of channel, the calcium antagonists exhibit significant selectivity of action in the cardiovascular system. This selectivity arises from a number of factors including subtype of channel, state-dependent interactions. pharmacokinetics, and mode of calcium mobilization. 4. The 1,4-dihydropyridine nucleus is also a privileged structure or scaffold that can, when appropriately decorated substituents, interact at diverse receptors and ion channels, including potassium and sodium channels and receptors of the G-protein class.
