Prazosin is recommended for treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)-associated nightmares. Level A. Image Rehearsal Therapy (IRT) is recommended for treatment of nightmare disorder. Level A. Systematic Desensitization and Progressive Deep Muscle Relaxation training are suggested for treatment of idiopathic nightmares. Level B. Venlafaxine is not suggested for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares. Level B. Clonidine may be considered for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares. Level C. The following medications may be considered for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares, but the data are low grade and sparse: trazodone, atypical antipsychotic medications, topiramate, low dose cortisol, fluvoxamine, triazolam and nitrazepam, phenelzine, gabapentin, cyproheptadine, and tricyclic antidepressants. Nefazodone is not recommended as first line therapy for nightmare disorder because of the increased risk of hepatotoxicity. Level C. The following behavioral therapies may be considered for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares based on low-grade evidence: Exposure, Relaxation, and Rescripting Therapy (ERRT); Sleep Dynamic Therapy; Hypnosis; Eye-Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR); and the Testimony Method. Level C. The following behavioral therapies may be considered for treatment of nightmare disorder based on low-grade evidence: Lucid Dreaming Therapy and Self-Exposure Therapy. Level C No recommendation is made regarding clonazepam and individual psychotherapy because of sparse data.
In 27 patients nitrazepam (Mogadon) taken in acute overdosage produced no untoward effects except drowsiness, even when 80 tablets were consumed. A double-blind trial in patients in general medical wards established that nitrazepam was as effective as butobarbitone as a hypnotic. It is concluded that nitrazepam is a safe and effective hypnotic.
In an unrandomised uncontrolled study on boats and trains, capsules of flurazepam (30 mg) and temazepam (20 mg), when chewed, but not when swallowed whole (even with the ends pricked), gave a better night's sleep than 'Mandrax' (methaqualone 250 mg/diphenhydramine 50 mg) and a better night's sleep than nitrazepam 7.5 mg.
The definition, prevalence, characteristics, genetics, and causes of febrile seizures are discussed in this article. Acute management is outlined, including indications for lumbar puncture and treatment of the febrile child who is continuing to seize. The usefulness and limitations of the EEG are noted. Factors influencing the likelihood of further febrile seizures and the risk of later epilepsy are reviewed. The pros and cons of continuous and intermittent drug therapies for febrile seizure prophylaxis are summarized. A new double-blind randomized study of intermittent oral diazepam for the prevention of febrile seizure recurrences is described.
Benzodiazepines are a group of drugs which have been extensively used for their activities as an anti-anxiety, sedative, muscle relaxant and anti-convulsant. Benzodiazepines at present are the most commonly prescribed drugs. Some of these drugs are teratogenic and also carcinogenic in experimental animals. The wide human exposure to this group of drugs throughout the world is of great concern for human health. In the present review, we have attempted to evaluate and update the mutagenic and genotoxic effects of four of the most commonly used benzodiazepines, i.e., chlordiazepoxide (CDZ), diazepam (DZ), nitrazepam (NZ) and oxazepam (OZ) based on available literature.
Knowledge of the pharmacokinetic properties of the benzodiazepines is playing an increasingly important role in their use during pregnancy, labour and lactation. All of the benzodiazepine derivatives are lipophilic, undissociated agents which readily penetrate membranes. Thus, they exhibit rapid placental transfer with significant fetal uptake of the drug. In the first trimester of pregnancy there is seldom a clear indication for the use of benzodiazepines. In late pregnancy and at parturition there may be more clear indications for their use. During delivery, the lowest effective dose should be used, since after high doses the so-called 'floppy infant syndrome' may occur, and the slow elimination of these agents by the newborn should be considered. Oxazepam, lorazepam, nitrazepam and, especially, flunitrazepam, appear to penetrate the human placenta more slowly than diazepam, but the clinical significance of this phenomenon remains uncertain. All of these derivatives appear in human milk, but only high clinical doses might be expected to exert a possible effect on the nursing newborn.
Myoclonus in childhood may be a primary condition, or it may be associated with a number of identifiable conditions. Successful therapy is dependent on diagnosis of underlying conditions and subsequent choice of appropriate drugs.
This article outlines some of the new developments in the field of insomnia. To obtain a better understanding of insomnia and avoid the diversities of impractical diagnosis, the medical profession must universally agree on the classification of insomnia. This knowledge has to be available to all levels of the medical community, especially general practitioners. The article reviews some new data about classification, diagnosis, and treatment of insomnia. It discusses the definition of insomnia and sets up the accepted criteria for the severity of its various forms. The policy of using hypnotics in Norway is fairly restrictive. Only three hypnotics are available, two benzodiazepins (nitrazepam and flunitrazepam) and the newly introduced cyclopyrrolone (zopiclone). The mechanisms of action of various hypnotics on the gamma-aminobutyric acid system are briefly discussed, and guidelines are given for use and choice of hypnotics, their indications and contraindications. In any modern society like Norway, there should be a clear awareness of the impact of insomnia on the quality of life and the seriousness of the effects it can have on the everyday activities of subjects suffering from this disorder.
1 A double-blind randomized trial to compare the relative efficacy of the 1,5-benzodiazepine, clobazam, the 1,4-benzodiazepine nitrazepam, and placebo as hypnotics was carried out. 2 A preference technique was used and the analyses were performed sequentially. 3. The results confirmed that nitrazepam was superior to placebo as a hypnotic but failed to show that clobazam was superior to either placebo or nitrazepam in a ratio of 2:1. Thus, it seems likely that the hypnotic properties of clobazam are minimal. 4 Clobazam is not suitable for use as a hypnotic in hospitalized patients.
This case report describes two cases of lethal poisoning caused by a combination of advanced chronic disease and an overdose of nitrazepam. In both cases, a relatively small blood concentration of nitrazepam was found postmortem.
Zopiclone (RP 27 267) is an hypnotic with a chemical structure different from that of the benzodiazepines (BZD) or barbiturates. Studies of zopiclone in classical psychopharmacological tests, in comparison with BZD and barbiturates, have shown that it exhibits the five main types of activity considered as characteristic of the pharmacological profile of BZD and partly of that of barbiturates (anticonvulsant, myorelaxant, antiaggressive, sedative-hypnotic and 'anticonflict'). However, like BZD, zopiclone differs from barbiturates by a high safety margin. Electrophysiological studies performed in cats have shown that zopiclone induces modifications in sleep-wakefulness pattern which are close to those observed with BZD, specially with nitrazepam. Moreover, zopiclone increases the threshold for arousal by reticular formation stimulation, rather more than nitrazepam, but with a shorter duration of action. The short duration of action of zopiclone has been demonstrated in other species using different tests.
Twelve patients acted successfully as subjects to study what effect if any the benzodiazepines nitrazepam, diazepam, oxazepam, and chlordiazepoxide might have on steady-state plasma levels of nortriptyline and amitriptyline. No significant detectable effect was discovered. In view of the known interaction effects of other alternative tranquillizing drugs and hypnotics it seems reasonable to choose benzodiazepines wherever possible when anxiolytics or hypnotics need to be added during treatment of depression with tricyclic antidepressants.
Xenobiotic metabolism involves the biochemical modification of drugs and phytochemicals in living organisms, including humans and other animals. In the intestine, the gut microbiota catalyzes the conversion of hydrophilic drugs into absorbable, hydrophobic compounds through hydroxyzation and reduction. Drugs and phytochemicals are transformed into bioactive (sulfasalazine, lovastatin, and ginsenoside Rb1), bioinactive (chloramphenicol, ranitidine, and metronidazole), and toxic metabolites (nitrazepam), thus affecting the pharmacokinetics of the original compounds. Antibiotics suppress the activities of drug-metabolizing enzymes by inhibiting the proliferation of gut microbiota. Antibiotic treatment might influence xenobiotic metabolisms more extensively and potently than previously recognized and reduce gut microbiota-mediated transformation of orally administered drugs, thereby altering the systemic concentrations of intact drugs, their metabolites, or both. This review describes the effects of antibiotics on the metabolism of drugs and phytochemicals by the gut microbiota.
Triazolam 0.25 mg was compared with nitrazepam 5 mg as a hypnotic for 26 geriatric inpatients in a double-blind cross-over study. Sleep quantity and quality and psychomotor performance were studied. The sleep quantity and quality were similar for both drugs. There were no statistically significant differences between the two drugs in the psychomotor tests. The results are in contrast to results from other studies and might be explained by the composition of the patient material in the present study.
In epilepsy benzodiazepines are mainly used to stop ongoing attacks. In hospitals intravenous diazepam is the drug of choice for status epilepticus. Outside of hospitals buccal midazolam is in the process of replacing rectal diazepam. Clonazepam, clobazam and nitrazepam (to children) are partially used as additional medication to prevent seizures.
Using a high-performance liquid chromatography method, we measured seven commonly prescribed benzodiazepines (chlordiazepoxide, nitrazepam, nordiazepam, oxazepam, lorazepam, temazepam and diazepam) in 100 urine samples obtained from patients attending the Leeds Addiction Unit. All of the urines selected for investigation were positive for benzodiazepines using an EMIT (Enzyme Immunoassay) screen. Forty-four of the urines contained a range of benzodiazepines, none of which had been prescribed. Nitrazepam was detected most frequently (61 urine samples), but had not been prescribed to any of the patients in this study. Chlordiazepoxide was detected in 49 urine samples, although it had been prescribed to only five patients. Temazepam was detected in 28 urine samples. Fourteen patients providing 21 urine samples had been prescribed temazepam for treatment. However, temazepam was detected in only 14 of these samples. Multiple benzodiazepine abuse was evident from the high rate of detection of unrelated benzodiazepines.
INTRODUCTION: Up to 40% of adults have insomnia, with difficulty getting to sleep, early waking, or feeling unrefreshed on waking. The prevalence of insomnia increases with age. Other risk factors include psychological factors, stress, daytime napping, and hyperarousal. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical questions: What are the effects of non-drug treatments for insomnia in elderly people? What are the effects of drug treatments for insomnia in elderly people? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library and other important databases up to October 2006 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 28 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: benzodiazepines (brotizolam, flurazepam, loprazolam, midazolam, nitrazepam, quazepam, temazepam, and triazolam), cognitive behavioural therapy, diphenhydramine, exercise programmes, timed exposure to bright light, zaleplon, zolpidem, and zopiclone.
Clinical and medication data from 2,878 admissions to a Department for Care of the Elderly were examined retrospectively to determine the association between the administration of hypnotics/benzodiazepines and the incidence of falls. Only lorazepam prescribed to females and nitrazepam prescribed to males were associated with a significantly increased incidence of falls. Women fell significantly more frequently than men, and 7.5% of falls resulted in fractures. Stroke was the most common major diagnosis in fall-cases, followed by infection, Parkinsonism and confusion.
Patients in general practice complaining of insomnia of recent origin have been studied in order to ascertain which factors may be of value in the detection of those more susceptible to drug dependence. The type of sleep disturbance was found to be of importance and a personal disturbance scale was found useful as a screening test in two-thirds of the patients. No difference was found in the development of dependence on amylobarbitone and nitrazepam. One of the most important factors in the prevention of drug dependence seems to be frequent review by the doctor after the first prescription and his cautionary advice to the patient.
The influence on memory of 7.5 mg zopiclone, given in single and repeated doses was compared with that of 2 mg flunitrazepam, 5 mg nitrazepam and placebo. Compared with placebo, all three drugs induced some impairment of memory especially after the first day of administration. Effects were more pronounced for the two benzodiazepines and more marked for flunitrazepam. There was one report of an anterograde amnestic episode after flunitrazepam.
