The organic nitrates are the most widely used agents in the management of patients with angina pectoris. When initially administered by the oral route, the nitrates produce profound changes in systemic hemodynamics and significant and prolonged improvement in exercise duration. It has been shown that during short periods of regular oral nitrate administration, the hemodynamic, antiischemic and antianginal effects of the nitrates are greatly reduced. Thus, when initially administered, oral isosorbide dinitrate prolongs exercise duration for a period of several hours, but during sustained 4-times-daily therapy, exercise tolerance is improved for only 2 hours after administration. Studies with transdermal preparations of isosorbide dinitrate and nitroglycerin also show improvement during short-term administration for up to 8 hours, but after several days of once-daily therapy, the effects of these agents are similar to placebo. It is apparent that nitrate tolerance is a clinically relevant problem. Although tolerance develops rapidly during nitrate therapy, it is reversed promptly during nitrate-free periods. Oral nitrates maintain their antianginal effects when given 2 or 3 times daily with provision of a nitrate-free period. Studies are currently underway to investigate the effects of intermittent administration schedules with transdermal nitrate preparations.
Nitroglycerin (NTG) (glyceryl trinitrate) was synthesized by the Italian chemist Ascanio Sobrero in Paris in 1846. A very unstable explosive, Alfred Nobel while working on explosives, combined it with Kiselguhr and patented it as dynamite in 1867. NTG was introduced in 1879 in medicine in the treatment of angina pectoris by the English doctor William Murrell. NTG-induced headache was quickly recognized as an important adverse event both in the industrial use of NTG, where it was used to produce dynamite, as well as in the use of NTG as drug. This review traces the evolution of our understanding of NTG headache.
Nitroglycerin is a volatile substance which evaporates from tablets if strict precautions are not taken. The tablets kept in small, amber, tightly capped glass bottles in a refrigerator maintain their potency for three to five months if bottles are opened once a week. After five months the unused tablets should be discarded. Tablets kept in a pill box and carried with the patient will deteriorate in a week and should be discarded thereafter. Cotton, plastic or paper stuffed in the bottle and frequent opening will reduce the potency of NG tablets considerably. Physicians, pharmacists and drug manufacturers should supply full instructions to patients on how to prevent rapid deterioration of their supply.
Surgical sphincterotomy reduces anal tone and sphincter spasm and promotes ulcer healing. Because the surgery is associated with the side effect of faecal incontinence, pharmacological agents to treat chronic anal fissure have been explored recently. Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) ointment (0.2%) has an efficacy of up to 68% in healing chronic anal fissure, but it is associated with headache as the major and most common side effect. Though botulinum toxin injected into the anal sphincter healed over 80% of chronic anal fissures, it is more invasive and expensive than GTN therapy. Diltiazem ointment achieved healing of chronic anal fissure comparable to 0.2% GTN ointment but was associated with fewer side effects. Other drugs that have been tried are lidocaine, the alpha-adrenergic antagonist indoramin, and the potassium channel opener minoxidil.
BACKGROUND: Chronic anal fissure is a common and painful condition associated with internal anal sphincter hypertonia. Reduction of this hypertonia improves the local blood supply, encouraging fissure healing. Surgical sphincterotomy is very successful at healing these fissures but requires an operation with associated morbidity. Temporary reduction in sphincter tone can be achieved on an outpatient basis by applying a topical nitric oxide donor (for example, glyceryl trinitrate) or injecting botulinum toxin into the anal sphincter. METHODS: A Medline database was used to perform a literature search for articles relating to the non-surgical treatment of chronic anal fissure. RESULTS: Review of the literature shows botulinum toxin injection to be more effective at healing chronic anal fissures than topical glyceryl trinitrate. Topical isosorbide dinitrate has not been directly compared with either of these two agents but has a healing rate approaching that of botulinum toxin injection. The main side effect of botulinum toxin injection is temporary faecal incontinence in approximately 2% of cases, whereas topical nitrates cause headaches in 20%-100% of cases. No long term side effects were identified with any of the medical treatments. CONCLUSION: Chemical sphincterotomy is an effective treatment for chronic anal fissure and has the advantages over surgical treatment of avoiding long term complications (notably incontinence) and not requiring hospitalisation.
Skin absorption of glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) has been recognized for a long time. The effect of GTN and a placebo ointment in prevention of chest pain has been assessed and compared by studying the exercise capacity in 17 patients with angina pectoris. The placebo cream was ineffective but the GTN ointment was found to have beneficial effect in relief of pain in 16 cases. This was established by the patients' capacity to exercise on a bicycle ergometer without chest pain. The beneficial effect was sustained for up to 3 hr in 12 patients. This preparation appears to act as a long-acting nitrate and may be valuable for patients in whom beta-blocking agents are ineffective or contra-indicated, and surgery is not feasible.
OBJECTIVE: A literature review of agents used to induce chemical sphincterotomy after hemorrhoidectomy. METHODS: Electronic databases were searched from January 1935 to August 2010. RESULTS: Two randomized controlled trials compared calcium channel blockers (Ca2) with placebo. Pain appeared to be less for up to 7 days, and its side-effect profile was comparable to the control group. Four randomized controlled trials examined the role of glyceryl trinitrate (GTN). GTN may be used up to 6 weeks to aid healing. Pain may be slightly less during its use and potentially offers less pain during defecation in the first 48 h. Its side-effect profile including headache appears comparable to placebo. Three randomized controlled trials investigated botulinum toxin A (BTX). BTX may be used to aid healing after hemorrhoidectomy. Pain may be less for up to a week after surgery. Its side-effect profile including incontinence to flatus appears comparable to placebo. It would be especially useful in cases where poor patient compliance is envisaged. Only one paper was found comparing BTX with GTN. BTX may be preferred over GTN due to better pain control and fewer side effects. CONCLUSION: BTX, Ca2, and GTN may give effective pain relief for a week after hemorrhoidectomy. Their side-effect profiles are comparable to placebo.
The pharmacokinetics of glyceryl trinitrate are still not completely understood. The substance disappears rapidly from plasma largely by extrahepatic mechanisms. It is converted in glyceryl dinitrates and glyceryl mononitrates. After transdermal application of a controlled delivery system, plasma concentrations of glyceryl trinitrate can be maintained over the time period of application but, as for other routes, there are important intra- and inter-individual variations and fluctuations. Isosorbide dinitrate disappears less rapidly from the body; it is converted to the isosorbide mononitrates. Plasma concentrations of isosorbide dinitrate and mononitrates are quite predictable in different circumstances, e.g. on application of oral sustained release formulations. Measurement of the plasma concentrations of nitrates has been used to characterize different preparations and routes of administration. However, these plasma concentrations cannot be used to predict the effect, probably because of the important counter-regulation and tolerance which develop rapidly after administration of the drugs.
Although contact dermatitis is cited among the side effects of topical application of nitroglycerin, in the majority of cases the reactions are caused by an irritant mechanism, and it is only rarely due to an allergic mechanism. We present two patients with allergic contact dermatitis and review the existing bibliography.
INTRODUCTION: Infusion of glyceryl trinitrate (GTN), a donor of nitric oxide, induces immediate headache in humans that in migraineurs is followed by a delayed migraine attack. In order to achieve increased knowledge of mechanisms activated during GTN-infusion this present study aims to investigate transcriptional responses to GTN-infusion in the rat trigeminal ganglia. METHODS: Rats were infused with GTN or vehicle and trigeminal ganglia were isolated either 30 or 90 minutes post infusion. RNA sequencing was used to investigate transcriptomic changes in response to the treatment. Furthermore, we developed a novel method for Gene Set Analysis Of Variance (GSANOVA) to identify gene sets associated with transcriptional changes across time. RESULTS: 15 genes displayed significant changes in transcription levels in response to GTN-infusion. Ten of these genes showed either sustained up- or down-regulation in the 90-minute period after infusion. The GSANOVA analysis demonstrate enrichment of pathways pointing towards an increase in immune response, signal transduction, and neuroplasticity in response to GTN-infusion. Future functional in-depth studies of these mechanisms are expected to increase our understanding of migraine pathogenesis.
This article reviews the author's published experimental studies on the pharmacodynamic and clinical effects of different glyceryl trinitrate formulations in man.
Short-acting nitrates are beneficial in acute myocardial ischemia. However, many unresolved questions remain about the use of long-acting nitrates in stable ischemic heart disease. The use of long-acting nitrates is weakened by the development of endothelial dysfunction and tolerance. Also, we currently ignore whether lower doses of transdermal nitroglycerin would be better than those presently used. Multivariate analysis data from large nonrandomized studies suggested that long-acting nitrates increase the incidence of acute coronary syndromes, while data from another multivariate study indicate that they have positive effects. Because of methodological differences and open questions, the two studies cannot be compared. A study in Japanese patients with vasospastic angina has shown that, when compared with calcium antagonists, long-acting nitrates do not improve long-term prognosis and that the risk for cardiac adverse events increases with the combined therapy. We have many unanswered questions.
Fifty-five patients who underwent elective aortic aneurysmorrhaphy were studied intraoperatively to assess ventricular function responses to volume loading and nitroglycerine/inotrope mini-infusions. Assessments of preoperative cardiac reserve and risk of perioperative myocardial infarction were based on ejection fraction (EF); an algorithm was developed to direct differential preanesthetic loading to maximize ventricular performance in normal (EF, greater than 60%), moderate-risk (EF, 35% to 60%), and high-risk (EF, less than 35%) patients. Sixty percent of the patients in the series were at significant risk of myocardial infarction, including 25 with an EF from 35% to 60% and seven with an EF less than 35%; the perioperative myocardial infarction rate was zero. Nitroglycerine-induced volume loading in this series allowed aortic aneurysmorrhaphy without any decrease in ventricular function at the critical points of anesthetic induction, aortic cross clamping, or declamping; such optimization of myocardial performance appears to prevent perioperative myocardial infarction, even in high-risk patients.
Penile erection follows relaxation of the corpus cavernosum in which nitric oxide (NO) released during sexual stimulation from non-adrenergic non-cholinergic nerve endings and from endothelial cells of the corpus cavernosum plays a crucial role. Sildenafil (VIAGRA) selectively inhibited phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) activity in the human corpus cavernosum and increased cGMP concentrations in the rabbit cavernosum in the presence of NO. Sildenafil enhanced the NO-dependent relaxation of the isolated human corpus cavernosum and the intracavernosal pressure in the anesthetized dog without affecting systemic blood pressure and heart rate. In the patients with erectile dysfunction, an orally administered sildenafil enhanced the penile rigidity during visual sexual stimulation. Sildenafil did not affect the phenylephrine-induced contraction of the isolated rabbit aorta, but enhanced the relaxant effect of glyceryl trinitrate. The pharmacodynamic interaction with glyceryl trinitrate was also observed in human studies where sildenafil potentiated the hypotensive effect of the nitrate. These results indicate that sildenafil, which enhances the physiological process of penile erection during sexual arousal, is a novel orally effective treatment for erectile dysfunction. It should be noted, however, that sildenafil enhanced the hypotensive effect of glyceryl trinitrate, as a result of inhibition of PDE5 in vascular smooth muscle. Therefore, administration of sildenafil to patients who are using nitrates and NO donors is contraindicated.
BACKGROUND: Anal fissure unresponsive to conservative measures such as stool softeners frequently requires surgical intervention. The present study describes the use of glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) in the treatment of acute and chronic anal fissure. METHODS: Eighteen consecutive patients with anal fissure were treated with 0.5% GTN paste in soft white paraffin applied twice daily to the anus. These patients were followed at regular intervals to assess symptom control, rate of healing, adverse effects and recurrence rate. RESULTS: Two patients were lost to follow-up. Twelve of the remaining 16 were cured. Of these, symptomatic relief was obtained for most within 2 days, and for all within 1 week. No patient required cessation of treatment due to adverse effects. Treatment failed in four of 16 patients. Two of these patients subsequently underwent successful surgical procedures, and two patients (while not completely cured) had sufficient symptomatic relief to decide against surgery. CONCLUSIONS: The use of GTN paste in the treatment of acute and chronic anal fissure may be a safe and effective modality that can be considered as first-line treatment for this condition.
Nitrates have been used for the last 130 years to treat and control the symptoms of angina pectoris. Within the last 15 years, nitrates also have been shown to limit infarct size and to be beneficial in the treatment of patients with severe intractable heart failure, cardiogenic shock, severe mitral and aortic regurgitation, hypertensive episodes, and portal hypertension. The adequate use of nitrates to treat these disorders requires the ability to document a hemodynamic response and to closely monitor the adverse consequences of this therapy. Nitrates work by directly relaxing smooth muscle in resistance and capacitance vessels, thereby causing generalized dilation. Nitrates reduce preload and, at higher doses, reduce systemic vascular resistance and afterload. This chapter reviews the physiologic mechanisms that underlie nitrate therapy, the appropriate indications for nitrate use, the usefulness of specific agents, and their appropriate nursing implications.
Migraine with aura and migraine without aura have the same pain phase, thus indicating that migraine with aura and migraine without aura share a common pathway of nociception. In recent years, increasing evidence has suggested that the messenger molecule nitric oxide (NO) is involved in pain mechanisms of migraine without aura. In order to clarify whether the same is true for migraine with aura, in the present study we examined the headache response to intravenous infusion of glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) (0.5 microg/kg/min for 20 min) in 12 sufferers of migraine with aura. The specific aim was to elucidate whether an aura and/or an attack of migraine without aura could be induced. Fourteen healthy subjects served as controls. Aura symptoms were not elicited in any subject. Headache was more severe in migraineurs than in the controls during and immediately after GTN infusion (p=0.037) as well as during the following 11 h (p = 0.008). In the controls, the GTN-induced headache gradually disappeared, whereas in migraineurs peak headache intensity occurred at a mean time of 240 min post-infusion. At this time the induced headache in 6 of 12 migraineurs fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for migraine without aura of the International Headache Society. The results therefore suggest that NO is involved in the pain mechanisms of migraine with aura. Since cortical spreading depression has been shown to liberate NO in animals, this finding may help our understanding of the coupling between cortical spreading depression and headache in migraine with aura.
INTRODUCTION: Anal fissure is an ischemic ulcer caused by combination of spasm of internal anal sphincter and poor blood supply to the posterior midline of anal canal. This study aimed to assess the efficacy of Glyceryl Trinitrate and Nifedipine in the treatment of chronic anal fissure. METHODS: Ninety patients with symptomatic anal fissure in Kathmandu Medical College Teaching Hospital are allocated for study in two groups of 45 each from March 2013 to April 2014. The patients are assigned alternatively to GTN group and Nifedipine group. All patients were assessed every week till 8 weeks in regards to headache, compliance, healing and recurrence. The patients who had complete healing in 8 weeks were further followed up for 6 weeks to detect recurrence. RESULTS: Patients in the two groups were comparable in regard to demographic data (age and sex) as well as clinical factors. Headache was main complaint of patients using GTN in high percentage (16.6%) than complained by patients using topical Nifedipine (6.9%). This factor led to poor compliance with GTN compared with Nifedipine. Nifedipine showed better healing rate 82.5% compared with GTN 60%. Recurrence was comparable among the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Nifedipine ointment showed better results than GTN ointment in chronic anal fissure regarding headache, compliance, healing and recurrence in 6 weeks of follow up period after complete healing of fissure in 8 weeks.
Ruboxistaurin is a selective protein kinase C beta inhibitor undergoing clinical investigation for treatment of diabetic microvascular complications. This study assessed a possible blood pressure (BP) interaction between ruboxistaurin and the exogenous nitric oxide donor, glyceryl trinitrate (GTN). Subjects (N=22) with chronic stable angina received placebo or ruboxistaurin 96 mg/day orally to steady state in a crossover design. Graded GTN (0, 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, and 120 microg/min) or 5% dextrose solution was then infused intravenously and BP was measured following each dose. Ruboxistaurin did not alter the slope of change in standing systolic BP (DeltasSBP/1n[GTN dose]) curve (P=0.272 analysis of covariance) or affect the DeltasSBP at the estimated GTN dose producing a 10-mm Hg reduction in sSBP from baseline on placebo (mean difference -0.9 mm Hg; 95% confidence of interval, -3.3-1.5). In conclusion, ruboxistaurin does not potentiate the acute BP-lowering effects of GTN.
BACKGROUND: Does Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) administered during rewarming on cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) impact: time to completion of rewarming prior to separation from CPB circuit, early post-op patient peripheral - core temperature gradient, time to maintenance of normothermia (core temperature > 36.5  degrees C) for minimum of 2 h in the initial post-op period, and plasma lactate concentrations initially post-CPB. METHODS: Single centre prospective randomized trial conducted in the Mater Misericordiae University teaching hospital in Dublin Ireland. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ISRCTN registry, ISRCTN10480871 , registered 16th of August 2017. 82 patients enrolled. Patients randomised to low dose GTN infusion (0.01 mcg/kg/min) or higher dose GTN infusion (0.5 mcg/kg/min) during rewarming on CPB. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: There was no significant difference between the treatment arms for the total time to being rewarmed, U = 759.0, p = 0.84. There were also no differences between the treatment arms for the time to achieve core temperature greater than 36.5 after two hours, U = 714.0, p = 0.52, the time to achieve plateau core skin temperature, U = 688.0, p = 0.37, and the post-intervention protamine lactate, U = 721.0, p = 0.56. CONCLUSIONS: Higher dose GTN infusion during rewarming on CPB does not improve peripheral-core temperature gradient post operatively and has no effect on post-operative lactate concentrations.
