Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) is a common, yet underrecognized, problem. Its prevalence is unknown because SIBO requires diagnostic testing. Although abdominal bloating, gas, distension, and diarrhea are common symptoms, they do not predict positive diagnosis. Predisposing factors include proton-pump inhibitors, opioids, gastric bypass, colectomy, and dysmotility. Small bowel aspirate/culture with growth of 10-10 cfu/mL is generally accepted as the "best diagnostic method," but it is invasive. Glucose or lactulose breath testing is noninvasive but an indirect method that requires further standardization and validation for SIBO. Treatment, usually with antibiotics, aims to provide symptom relief through eradication of bacteria in the small intestine. Limited numbers of controlled studies have shown systemic antibiotics (norfloxacin and metronidazole) to be efficacious. However, 15 studies have shown rifaximin, a nonsystemic antibiotic, to be effective against SIBO and well tolerated. Through improved awareness and scientific rigor, the SIBO landscape is poised for transformation.
The fluoroquinolones represent an important advance in antimicrobial therapy. Commercially available products in the United States now include norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, enoxacin, and lomefloxacin. Although they share a common mechanism of action, they differ significantly in their antimicrobial spectrum of activity, their pharmacokinetic characteristics, and, to a lesser degree, their safety profiles. These compounds are generally highly effective against aerobic gram-negative and many gram-positive isolates; their activity is more limited against anaerobic bacteria. Quinolone-resistant bacteria have been isolated, but most do not appear to pose a clinically significant problem at this time. The agents are effective in the treatment of a wide range of infections. Although some, such as ciprofloxacin and enoxacin, have been associated with clinically significant interactions with theophylline derivatives, others such as ofloxacin and lomefloxacin appear to have a limited propensity for such interactions.
Three fluoroquinolone antimicrobials (norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin) could be used to prevent or treat infections in intensive care unit patients. All of these fluoroquinolones are particularly active against Gram-negative, aerobic bacteria. However, the pharmacokinetic properties of each fluoroquinolone are unique. Furthermore, only ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin are available for intravenous administration. Based on current, available information: a) fluoroquinolones are not endorsed for inclusion in selective decontamination protocols; b) fluoroquinolones are endorsed for empiric therapy of suspected Gram-negative bacterial infections based on local microorganism susceptibility patterns; and c) fluoroquinolones are endorsed for treatment of microbiologically documented infections based on their distribution properties, low rate of toxicity, and rapid bactericidal effect.
The fluoroquinolones are a new class of antimicrobial agents structurally related to nalidixic acid. They have a broad spectrum of activity against pathogens, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa, other multiresistant gram-negative bacteria, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus but not anaerobes. They are well absorbed after oral administration, and some achieve serum and tissue levels well exceeding the minimal inhibitory concentrations for susceptible bacteria. Adverse reactions are rare, and when they occur they are usually mild. Use of quinolones should be avoided in children because of possible damage to developing cartilage. These agents should prove useful in the treatment of urinary tract infections caused by bacteria resistant to other oral agents, bacterial gastroenteritis, and gonococcal infections. The use of quinolones may potentially reduce the cost of treatment of certain systemic infections caused by multiantimicrobial resistant organisms because outpatient oral therapy is possible.
The pharmacokinetic properties of the new fluoroquinolones are characterized by a high volume of distribution, long biological half-life, low serum protein binding, elimination by renal and extrarenal mechanisms with high total and renal clearances, limited biotransformation and moderate to excellent bioavailability after oral administration. However, each quinolone derivative (ciprofloxacin, enoxacin, fleroxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin and pefloxacin) possesses individual pharmacokinetic parameters, which should be considered in the treatment of patients, especially when liver or renal dysfunction exists.
Twelve elderly diabetic patients with Pseudomonas otitis externa malignum were successfully treated with norfloxacin as monotherapy for 2-5 weeks, using 400 mg b.i.d. Patients tolerated the courses with no side effects, except some drowsiness in two patients, and all completed the course. The bacteriological and clinical cure rate was 100%, without resorting to surgery.
Reactions of the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous system are the most often observed adverse effects during therapy with fluoroquinolones. Pathogenesis of the neurotoxic effects of fluoroquinolones could be related to the activation of the NMDA receptor. Animal experiments as well as clinical experience show that the cardiotoxic potentials of sparfloxacin and grepafloxacin are higher than those of the other fluoroquinolones: they cause QT prolongation at rather low doses thus increasing the risk for severe arrhythmia (torsades de pointes). Phototoxicity has been described for all quinolones, but derivatives with a halogen atom at position 8 show the highest potential for such reactions (e.g. clinafloxacin). Chondrotoxicity of quinolones can affect the articular cartilage and the epiphyseal growth plate in immature animals; the use of these drugs in pediatrics should be restricted to carefully selected indications (such as the use of ciprofloxacin in cystic fibrosis). Tendinitis and tendon ruptures can also be induced by quinolones. Overall, quinolones are as well tolerated as most other anti-microbial agents. However, their specific toxic potentials have to be considered when they are chosen for treatment of bacterial infections.
During the last few years the impact of the newer 4-quinolones, ciprofloxacin, enoxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin and pefloxacin, on the human microflora has been studied by several investigators. This review article summarizes the published data concerning these studies. The results show that the oropharyngeal flora is affected only slightly or not at all by the 4-quinolones. All the newer 4-quinolones have a similar effect on the normal intestinal flora. The gram-negative aerobic flora is strongly suppressed during administration of 4-quinolones, while the gram-positive flora is only slightly affected. The anaerobic microflora is hardly affected at all. The emergence of resistant bacterial strains is uncommon, although one study shows increased MIC-values for anaerobes during ciprofloxacin administration. Replacement by yeasts or other inherently resistant microorganisms does not often seem to be a problem. High concentrations of the 4-quinolones are reached in faeces, values between 100-2,200 mg/kg being reported. Since the 4-quinolones do not cause marked ecological disturbances in the intestinal microflora, they may be suitable for selective decontamination in immunocompromised patients, for prophylaxis of urinary tract infections and for treatment of bacterial intestinal infections.
A review of worldwide clinical trials with norfloxacin in the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract infections (UTIs), as well as our personal experience with 215 assessable patients, is presented. Almost all patients received 400 mg b.i.d. for 3-15 days. Bacteriological eradication (10(4) CFU/ml of urine or less) was achieved in more than 90% of patients. Short-term therapy (3 days) with norfloxacin proved to be as effective and tolerable as a 10- to 14-day conventional therapeutic schedule in the treatment of lower uncomplicated UTIs. Overall incidence of drug-related adverse experiences was 2.3%.
We evaluated the benefits of prolonging norfloxacin therapy from 12 to 24 weeks for complicated urinary tract infection in a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study. During the second 12 weeks, norfloxacin was superior to placebo (P less than 0.05) in suppressing bacteriuria. Adverse effects were common but mostly confined to the initial 12 weeks.
Natural products represent a rich source of antibiotics that address versatile cellular targets. The deconvolution of their targets via chemical proteomics is often challenged by the introduction of large photocrosslinkers. Here we applied elegaphenone, a largely uncharacterized natural product antibiotic bearing a native benzophenone core scaffold, for affinity-based protein profiling (AfBPP) in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. This study utilizes the alkynylated natural product scaffold as a probe to uncover intriguing biological interactions with the transcriptional regulator AlgP. Furthermore, proteome profiling of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgP transposon mutant provided unique insights into the mode of action. Elegaphenone enhanced the elimination of intracellular P. aeruginosa in macrophages exposed to sub-inhibitory concentrations of the fluoroquinolone antibiotic norfloxacin.
Improvements in antimicrobial activity and pharmacokinetics have moved the 4-quinolones into the forefront of antibiotic research. The 4-quinolones are analogues of nalidixic acid, and there are presently at least six agents in this group under investigation in the United States. It is difficult to generalize their clinical usefulness, since these agents exhibit different pharmacokinetic profiles, antimicrobial activity (with varied minimum inhibitory concentrations among similar organisms), and dosage regimens. The 4-quinolones are potential therapeutic alternatives for infections caused by a variety of organisms. They include: Neisseria gonorrhoeae; Pseudomonas aeruginosa; Haemophilus influenzae; Staphylococcus aureus; common enteric pathogens (salmonella, shigella, campylobacter, etc); and intracellular bacteria (legionella, chlamydia, mycobacteria, etc). Clinical efficacy has been demonstrated in urinary tract infections, respiratory tract infections, and sexually transmitted diseases. Future studies will undoubtedly demonstrate effectiveness in numerous additional infectious processes. The purpose of this article is to compare the 4-quinolones in regards to pharmacokinetics and spectrum of activity and review the clinical studies involving these agents.
At the Eastern Section Meeting of the Triological Society January 26, 1990, Levinson et al reported outstanding success with ciprofloxacin in the treatment of malignant otitis externa. Moreover, several of the individuals so managed had been refractory to conventional therapy with semisynthetic penicillin and aminoglycoside protocols. This new class of antibiotics may result in a profound change in our management of patients with otologic, neurotologic, and skull base infections.
The purpose of the research was to ascertain the comparative differences of quinolone antibiotics on theophylline pharmacokinetics. Eight healthy male volunteers were randomly assigned to four treatments. Each was administered norfloxacin (NOR) 800 mg/d, ciprofloxacin (C) 1 g/d, nalidixic acid (NAL) 2 g/d and placebo (P) for 7 days. On the seventh day of each treatment, theophylline (5 mg/kg) iv was administered. The elimination half-life (T 1/2), total body clearance (CL) and volume of distribution at steady state (Vss) of theophylline were calculated using model-independent methods. ANOVA for repeated measures was used for data comparisons. The mean (SD) theophylline results were: CL l/kg/h--NOR .038 (.006), C .033 (.006), NAL .045 (.008), P .044 (.007); T 1/2 h--NOR 9.2 (1.8), C 10.6 (1.8), NAL 8.3 (1.8), P 7.5 (1.4). Theophylline Vss differences by treatment were not significant. NOR and C significantly decreased theophylline's clearance and the clearance change can be of clinical significance.
The aim of this bicentric study was to assess the intraocular penetration of topical Norfloxacin. Herein, are only reported the results from one center. Topically applied Norfloxacin 0.3% was given to patients who underwent cataract surgery. The first group received 5 drops between 7.55 A.M. to 8 A.M. and after each hour until cataract surgery. The second one received one drop each quarter from 7 A.M. until the surgery. Aqueous and sera samples were dosed using HPLC. In the first group, the aqueous average was 0.066 mg/l and 0.112 mg/l in the second group. Using a T test and Mann Whitney test, we could not find a significant difference between the two groups.
Hen's egg lysozyme (HEL) activity was measured in vitro with gentamicin and norfloxacin by a turbidimetric technique. Gentamicin at the concentration of 10(-3) M inhibited HEL activity by 39%, while 10(-3) M norfloxacin did not affect HEL activity. However, an in vivo study in healthy persons did not show any significant statistical difference in tear lysozyme activity when 0.3% gentamicin or 0.3% norfloxacin were topically applied.
Allergic nephropathy associated with quinolone antibiotics has been reported in an increasing number of cases. The mechanism might be a hypersensitivity reaction. Norfloxacin has been incriminated previously as a cause once only, with acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) as the histopathological finding. Ciprofloxacin-associated nephropathy has been reported in 28 cases, with AIN as the main histopathological finding. This report describes a second case of AIN associated with norfloxacin treatment and another ciprofloxacin-associated renal interstitial drug adverse reaction. Clinicians should be aware of quinolone-associated AIN, which is a rare but potentially dangerous renal complication.
The fluorination of piperazinyl substituted quinolones has led to an interesting development of a series of new broad spectrum antibacterial agents that may be administered orally as well as parenterally and are well tolerated. Norfloxacin was an early compound, later followed by ciprofloxacin, enoxacin, ofloxacin and pefloxacin. In this overview the emphasis will be on the most extensively studied compound including comparisons, where data are available, with norfloxacin and ofloxacin. Enoxacin and pefloxacin will be omitted due to their pattern of side effects, which at present curtail their therapeutic use. More recent substances such as fleroxacin and defloxacin have not been sufficiently investigated to be considered in this context.
The effects of orally administered drugs on rheologic properties of nasal mucus were investigated in adult chronic sinusitis patients. The elastic modulus G' and the dynamic viscosity eta' of nasal mucus were determined by an oscillating sphere magnetic rheometer. Both G' and eta' values of the mucus before drug administration were much higher than optimal viscoelasticity for mucociliary transport. Norfloxacin, an antibacterial agent, reduced the G' but not the eta' of nasal mucus. Serratiopeptidase, a proteolytic enzyme, reduced eta' but did not reduce G'. S-carboxymethylcysteine, a blocked thiol derivative of cysteine, did not change either G' or eta'. L-cysteine ethyl ester hydrochloride, a sulfhydryl type of agent, reduced both G' and eta'. The results indicate that some of the orally administered mucokinetic agents can improve the abnormal rheologic properties of nasal mucus in chronic sinusitis.
