An intrauterine contraceptive device releasing 20 micrograms levonorgestrel daily has been studied for 15 years. The international clinical experience covers over 8000 woman years. Main characteristics of the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device are its great effectiveness in preventing unplanned pregnancies and a reduction in menstrual bleeding and pain as well as a low infection rate.
Biotransformation, pharmacologic, and pharmacokinetic studies of norgestimate and its metabolites indicate that 17-deacetyl norgestimate, along with the parent drug, contributes to the biologic response. The postulated metabolic pathway, which is based on the identification of urinary products had indicated that three metabolites of norgestimate, 17-deacetyl norgestimate, 3-keto norgestimate, and levonorgestrel, might participate in the response. The pharmacologic evaluation of these metabolites demonstrates that only 17-deacetyl norgestimate has a pharmacologic profile consistent with that of norgestimate, and significant concentrations of this metabolite have been measured in the serum of women after the administration of norgestimate. These studies indicate that 17-deacetyl norgestimate contributes to the pharmacologic response to norgestimate.
INTRODUCTION: Norgestimate (NGM) is a testosterone derivative with peculiar receptor activities. AREAS COVERED: This is a narrative review of the available data on the pharmacotherapy of NGM in combined hormonal contraceptives (CHCs) in terms of contraceptive efficacy, venous thromboembolism (VTE) risk, safety, tolerability and bleeding patterns. A comprehensive literature review was conducted in August 2020 using PubMed with the keyword 'norgestimate'. EXPERT OPINION: NGM shows a mild estrogenic activity associated with anti-mineralocorticoid and anti-androgenic properties, largely responsible for the cardiovascular safety profile. The anti-androgenic property depends on the androgen receptor (AR) nuclear translocation (AR trafficking and its subnuclear distribution), the inhibition of 5alpha-reductase activity (it possesses higher activity compared to other available progestins), and the increase on sexual hormone binding globulin (SHBG) levels if combined with an estrogenic counterpart. NGM is one of the molecules that best modulates the power of ethinyl-estradiol on the thromboembolic risk, being associated with the lowest VTE risk between different CHCs. NGM has the advantage of retaining peripheral anti-androgenic activity, demonstrated by the impact on lipid and glucose metabolism, and it should be preferred if compared with other similar progestins of the same class of risk which are much more androgenic, such as levonorgestrel.
We report the case of a 30-year-old patient who had impetigo herpetiformis during hormonal contraception and during two successive pregnancies. The diagnostic features of impetigo herpetiformis are reviewed. An association with HLA-Cw 6 is recognized. A large post-traumatic spleen cyst probably influenced the course of the disease. Postpartum therapy with oral glucocorticosteroids and etretinate was successful.
This article presents a review of advances made in hormonal contraception over the past 15 years. It looks at the different routes of administration that have been developed, at newer formulations of conventional methods, and at novel contraceptive agents that are in the process of approval. The article provides a short description of each of these contraceptive methods, information about compliance, side effects, and efficacy, and an update on that particular method.
Evra is a transdermal patch releasing 20 micrograms of ethinylestradiol and 150 micrograms of norelgestromin/day during one week. The circulating levels of steroids attained are of similar amplitude though steadier than after intake of an oral combined low-dose estrogen-progestin pill. The transdermal method is user-friendly and is abided by a high degree of acceptability, and a low level of skin irritability. Its contraceptive effectiveness is similar to that conferred by oral contraceptives except if the treated woman is over 90 kg, in which case Evra should not be prescribed. Cycle control is excellent and similar to that of triphasic pills. Adverse effects and tolerance are comparable to those described with low-dose oral contraceptives with a slight estrogen dominance. Lipid and glucose metabolism as well as coagulation are influenced in the same way. Gastrointestinal disturbances (nausea, vomiting) do not prevent the efficacy of the transdermal patch. Compliance with Evra is significantly higher than with oral combined contraceptives--a major point for an effective contraception. Accordingly, Evra constitutes an useful addition to the current array of contraceptive methods.
Today, clinicians are challenged to address a woman's contraceptive needs during her reproductive and perimenopausal years and then provide her with a menopausal therapeutic option. This option should offer optimal symptom relief, noncontraceptive health benefits, and a good tolerability profile. The benefits of hormone replacement therapy include control of vasomotor symptoms, reduction of vulvovaginal atrophy, and protection against osteoporosis. Research also points to emerging hormone replacement therapy benefits such as protection against cardiovascular disease, colon cancer, and Alzheimer's disease. One of the primary considerations in the transition from oral contraceptive use to hormone replacement therapy is the tolerability profile of the progestin component of the hormone replacement therapy. Because progestin-related side effects are among the main reasons for discontinuation of hormone replacement therapy, the selection of a formulation that contains the same well-tolerated progestin as in the woman's oral contraceptive can be particularly important to successful use of hormone replacement therapy. Currently in the United States continuous combined hormone replacement therapy is available in 3 formulations and 1 continuous estrogen/intermittent progestin formulation. Although direct comparative trials are lacking, available data suggest that the new, continuous 17beta-estradiol/intermittent norgestimate hormone replacement therapy formulation may offer advantages over regimens that contain older progestins with metabolic disadvantages.
This manuscript serves as a review of Mirena, the levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG IUS) as a very successful drug delivery system. The LNG IUS has a very high contraceptive efficacy rate, and low rates of patient discontinuation. In addition to its contraceptive benefits, most users experience a decrease in menstrual bleeding over the 5 years of use. LNG IUS has also been used for management of menorrhagia, dysmenorrhea, adenomyosis, and endometrial hyperplasia in some cases. The LNG IUS provides long term efficacy, high rates of compliance, rapid return to fertility, and minimal adverse effects during use.
OBJECTIVE: To report a case of successful use of a transdermal contraceptive in a patient with hereditary angioedema. DESIGN: Case report. SETTING: University medical center. PATIENT(S): A patient who had used oral contraceptives contracted SC and submucosal tumefaction every 1 or 2 months. She was diagnosed with type I hereditary angioedema. It was determined that she was complement C4 deficient and C1-inhibitor quantitative deficient but functional C1-inhibitor normal. After she was diagnosed, the use of oral contraceptives was contraindicated. INTERVENTION(S): Oral contraceptives were suspended, and a hormonal transdermal contraceptive was started. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The absence of symptoms after 26 months using a transdermal contraceptive. RESULT(S): After 26 months of using this treatment, the patient has not experienced any symptoms of the hereditary angioedema. CONCLUSION(S): The use of hormonal contraceptives transdermally can be an alternative in patients with hereditary angioedema.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to assess the change in serum ethinyl estradiol (EE2) and norelgestromin (NGMN) levels over 12 weeks of continuous contraceptive patch use. STUDY DESIGN: We asked participants (n=30) to apply consecutive patches to be worn continuously (without a patch-free interval) for 12 weeks. We collected blood samples at the end of each patch week and two times during weeks 4, 8, and 12 (with the additional blood draw occurring mid-week). Liquid chromatography-tandem triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was utilized to assess EE2 and NGMN levels. RESULTS: Twenty-seven women completed the study; 26 were compliant with patch use. Ethinyl estradiol levels ranged from 0 to 193 pg/mL over the period. We observed an accumulation over the 12-week time at an estimated rate of 2.15 pg/mL per week (95% confidence interval 0.95-3.35, p<.001). The change in NGMN levels ranged from 0 to 2.52 ng/mL over the 12 weeks (95% confidence interval 0.021-0.019, p=.915). The most common side effects reported were vaginal spotting, breast tenderness and abdominal pain/cramping. There were no serious adverse events reported. CONCLUSION: While the range of weekly EE2 values was quite wide, the absolute values remain low and generally within the expected range described in product labeling. Providers may consider prescribing continuous use of the patch, but given the slow accumulation of EE2 over time, 12 weeks should not be exceeded in the absence of safety data.
Transdermal drug delivery systems have been available in the United States for >20 years. Since the introduction of the first transdermal patch (scopolamine) for the treatment of motion sickness, >35 transdermal patch products have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for a variety of indications that include hormone replacement therapy, nicotine replacement therapy, chronic pain (fentanyl), angina (nitroglycerin), hypertension (clonidine), and more recently, overactive bladder (oxybutynin), and contraception (ethinyl estradiol/norelgestromin). Clinical data demonstrated the efficacy and safety of the contraceptive patch; however, concerns regarding estrogen levels and reports of venous thromboembolism led to the development of 2 epidemiologic studies and, subsequently, revised product labeling. Despite this, the contraceptive patch may be an appropriate option for some patients.
Twenty-one women used a levonorgestrel-releasing intracervical contraceptive device, which was designed to release 20 microgram/ay. The devices were inserted after cessation of menstrual bleeding. Patterns of bleeding and clinical performance wer evaluated and plasma concentrations of levonorgestrel, estradiol and progesterone in selected subjects were measured by radioimmunoassay. The results of the initial 90-day treatment are presented. Levonorgestrel was detected in peripheral plasma by 30 minutes after insertion of the device. Considerable variation of plasma levonorgestrel concentrations was observed between subjects, but within each subject, the plasma level of levonorgestrel was very stable with time. Of 24 cycles monitored by blood sampling, 19 were ovulatory. One subject did not ovulate at all. During the first 30-day period of treatment, frequent intermenstrual bleeding or spotting periods occurred. Two spontaneous expulsions occurred 9 and 22 days after insertion. Both of these subjects were nulligravidas. Side-effects were few and no pregnancies occurred during the study period.
Experience with the progestogen-only pill (POP) in a family planning clinic is presented. From the clinic records, 408 women were identified who had opted to use a POP. Of these, 50 women had used the POP during lactation and these were excluded from the analysis. The remaining 358 women used the POP for up to 150 months, giving a total of 18,125 women-months of use. Three pregnancies occurred, giving a Pearl Index of 0.2 per 100 women-years. Non-menstrual side effects were minor and were reported by 77 women. For the women who discontinued the POP, the main reason was menstrual irregularity (47.5%). However, despite the long-term use by most of the women, almost 40% maintained a mostly regular menstrual pattern. Our findings suggest that the POP provides a very acceptable method of oral contraception for many women and that it should be more actively promoted.
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) effectively relieves vasomotor and other symptoms associated with menopause, yet is underutilised by the majority of menopausal women. Current HRT regimens combine continuous oestrogen with continuous or sequential progestogen in order to achieve the beneficial effects of oestrogen while avoiding the potential for increased risk of endometrial cancer. Uterine bleeding and other adverse progestogenic effects are major reasons for patient noncompliance and early discontinuation of combination HRT, which can ultimately limit the achievement of long-term oestrogenic benefits. A novel constant 17beta-oestradiol, intermittent norgestimate regimen has been developed based on theoretical hormone receptor dynamics in an attempt to minimise the hormonal doses needed, thereby potentially reducing the occurrence of adverse effects associated with higher oestrogen and progestogen doses. Clinical trial data with this novel low-dose HRT regimen demonstrate effective relief of vasomotor symptoms in postmenopausal women, acceptable bleeding rates, no endometrial hyperplasia, beneficial effects on lipids, and excellent tolerability. This regimen has the potential to increase long-term use resulting in important clinical benefits.
Six hundred and eight women were treated with 200 microgram of ethinylestradiol and 2 mg of dl-norgestrel, administered in two divided doses, as a postcoital contraceptive. Criteria for entry into the study included definite unprotected coital exposure within the previous 72 hours and the absence of any contraindications to the use of estrogen/progestin-containing compounds. Women with coital exposures outside of the 72-hours-to-treatment time frame were excluded. Four hundred and sixty-four of the patients were cycling regularly and, of these, 152 were exposed at midcycle. Only one patient became pregnant as a result of probable method failure as compared with the minimal estimated number of 12 to 30 pregnancies.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to assess the long-term safety of Seasonale, 91-day extended-cycle oral contraceptive (OC). STUDY DESIGN: Following completion of a 1-year Phase 3 multicenter trial, patients from selected centers were invited to participate in this 2-year extension trial. In this open-label study all participants received the 91-day extended-regimen OC, Seasonale. RESULTS: There were 189 study participants enrolled from 27 sites. Patient exposure included 1130 completed 91-day cycles. Overall rates of study discontinuation and the incidence of adverse events were similar to the earlier Phase 3 clinical trial. Seasonale was well tolerated and the number of reported bleeding and/or spotting days reported diminished during the course of the study. CONCLUSION: This study confirms the findings from the previous clinical trial and demonstrates that Seasonale is a safe and effective therapy for long-term use.
