BACKGROUND: The benefits and risks of augmenting or switching antidepressants in older adults with treatment-resistant depression have not been extensively studied. METHODS: We conducted a two-step, open-label trial involving adults 60 years of age or older with treatment-resistant depression. In step 1, patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio to augmentation of existing antidepressant medication with aripiprazole, augmentation with bupropion, or a switch from existing antidepressant medication to bupropion. Patients who did not benefit from or were ineligible for step 1 were randomly assigned in step 2 in a 1:1 ratio to augmentation with lithium or a switch to nortriptyline. Each step lasted approximately 10 weeks. The primary outcome was the change from baseline in psychological well-being, assessed with the National Institutes of Health Toolbox Positive Affect and General Life Satisfaction subscales (population mean, 50; higher scores indicate greater well-being). A secondary outcome was remission of depression. RESULTS: In step 1, a total of 619 patients were enrolled; 211 were assigned to aripiprazole augmentation, 206 to bupropion augmentation, and 202 to a switch to bupropion. Well-being scores improved by 4.83 points, 4.33 points, and 2.04 points, respectively. The difference between the aripiprazole-augmentation group and the switch-to-bupropion group was 2.79 points (95% CI, 0.56 to 5.02; P = 0.014, with a prespecified threshold P value of 0.017); the between-group differences were not significant for aripiprazole augmentation versus bupropion augmentation or for bupropion augmentation versus a switch to bupropion. Remission occurred in 28.9% of patients in the aripiprazole-augmentation group, 28.2% in the bupropion-augmentation group, and 19.3% in the switch-to-bupropion group. The rate of falls was highest with bupropion augmentation. In step 2, a total of 248 patients were enrolled; 127 were assigned to lithium augmentation and 121 to a switch to nortriptyline. Well-being scores improved by 3.17 points and 2.18 points, respectively (difference, 0.99; 95% CI, -1.92 to 3.91). Remission occurred in 18.9% of patients in the lithium-augmentation group and 21.5% in the switch-to-nortriptyline group; rates of falling were similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: In older adults with treatment-resistant depression, augmentation of existing antidepressants with aripiprazole improved well-being significantly more over 10 weeks than a switch to bupropion and was associated with a numerically higher incidence of remission. Among patients in whom augmentation or a switch to bupropion failed, changes in well-being and the occurrence of remission with lithium augmentation or a switch to nortriptyline were similar. (Funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute; OPTIMUM ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02960763.).
BACKGROUND: Tobacco smoking is the leading preventable cause of death and disease worldwide. Stopping smoking can reduce this harm and many people would like to stop. There are a number of medicines licenced to help people quit globally, and e-cigarettes are used for this purpose in many countries. Typically treatments work by reducing cravings to smoke, thus aiding initial abstinence and preventing relapse. More information on comparative effects of these treatments is needed to inform treatment decisions and policies. OBJECTIVES: To investigate the comparative benefits, harms and tolerability of different smoking cessation pharmacotherapies and e-cigarettes, when used to help people stop smoking tobacco. SEARCH METHODS: We identified studies from recent updates of Cochrane Reviews investigating our interventions of interest. We updated the searches for each review using the Cochrane Tobacco Addiction Group (TAG) specialised register to 29 April 2022. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs), cluster-RCTs and factorial RCTs, which measured smoking cessation at six months or longer, recruited adults who smoked combustible cigarettes at enrolment (excluding pregnant people) and randomised them to approved pharmacotherapies and technologies used for smoking cessation worldwide (varenicline, cytisine, nortriptyline, bupropion, nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) and e-cigarettes) versus no pharmacological intervention, placebo (control) or another approved pharmacotherapy. Studies providing co-interventions (e.g. behavioural support) were eligible if the co-intervention was provided equally to study arms. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We followed standard Cochrane methods for screening, data extraction and risk of bias (RoB) assessment (using the RoB 1 tool). Primary outcome measures were smoking cessation at six months or longer, and the number of people reporting serious adverse events (SAEs). We also measured withdrawals due to treatment. We used Bayesian component network meta-analyses (cNMA) to examine intervention type, delivery mode, dose, duration, timing in relation to quit day and tapering of nicotine dose, using odds ratios (OR) and 95% credibility intervals (CrIs). We calculated an effect estimate for combination NRT using an additive model. We evaluated the influence of population and study characteristics, provision of behavioural support and control arm rates using meta-regression. We evaluated certainty using GRADE. MAIN RESULTS: Of our 332 eligible RCTs, 319 (835 study arms, 157,179 participants) provided sufficient data to be included in our cNMA. Of these, we judged 51 to be at low risk of bias overall, 104 at high risk and 164 at unclear risk, and 118 reported pharmaceutical or e-cigarette/tobacco industry funding. Removing studies at high risk of bias did not change our interpretation of the results. Benefits We found high-certainty evidence that nicotine e-cigarettes (OR 2.37, 95% CrI 1.73 to 3.24; 16 RCTs, 3828 participants), varenicline (OR 2.33, 95% CrI 2.02 to 2.68; 67 RCTs, 16,430 participants) and cytisine (OR 2.21, 95% CrI 1.66 to 2.97; 7 RCTs, 3848 participants) were associated with higher quit rates than control. In absolute terms, this might lead to an additional eight (95% CrI 4 to 13), eight (95% CrI 6 to 10) and seven additional quitters per 100 (95% CrI 4 to 12), respectively. These interventions appeared to be more effective than the other interventions apart from combination NRT (patch and a fast-acting form of NRT), which had a lower point estimate (calculated additive effect) but overlapping 95% CrIs (OR 1.93, 95% CrI 1.61 to 2.34). There was also high-certainty evidence that nicotine patch alone (OR 1.37, 95% CrI 1.20 to 1.56; 105 RCTs, 37,319 participants), fast-acting NRT alone (OR 1.41, 95% CrI 1.29 to 1.55; 120 RCTs, 31,756 participants) and bupropion (OR 1.43, 95% CrI 1.26 to 1.62; 71 RCTs, 14,759 participants) were more effective than control, resulting in two (95% CrI 1 to 3), three (95% CrI 2 to 3) and three (95% CrI 2 to 4) additional quitters per 100 respectively. Nortriptyline is probably associated with higher quit rates than control (OR 1.35, 95% CrI 1.02 to 1.81; 10 RCTs, 1290 participants; moderate-certainty evidence), resulting in two (CrI 0 to 5) additional quitters per 100. Non-nicotine/placebo e-cigarettes (OR 1.16, 95% CrI 0.74 to 1.80; 8 RCTs, 1094 participants; low-certainty evidence), equating to one additional quitter (95% CrI -2 to 5), had point estimates favouring the intervention over control, but CrIs encompassed the potential for no difference and harm. There was low-certainty evidence that tapering the dose of NRT prior to stopping treatment may improve effectiveness; however, 95% CrIs also incorporated the null (OR 1.14, 95% CrI 1.00 to 1.29; 111 RCTs, 33,156 participants). This might lead to an additional one quitter per 100 (95% CrI 0 to 2). Harms There were insufficient data to include nortriptyline and non-nicotine EC in the final SAE model. Overall rates of SAEs for the remaining treatments were low (average 3%). Low-certainty evidence did not show a clear difference in the number of people reporting SAEs for nicotine e-cigarettes, varenicline, cytisine or NRT when compared to no pharmacotherapy/e-cigarettes or placebo. Bupropion may slightly increase rates of SAEs, although the CrI also incorporated no difference (moderate certainty). In absolute terms bupropion may cause one more person in 100 to experience an SAE (95% CrI 0 to 2). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The most effective interventions were nicotine e-cigarettes, varenicline and cytisine (all high certainty), as well as combination NRT (additive effect, certainty not rated). There was also high-certainty evidence for the effectiveness of nicotine patch, fast-acting NRT and bupropion. Less certain evidence of benefit was present for nortriptyline (moderate certainty), non-nicotine e-cigarettes and tapering of nicotine dose (both low certainty). There was moderate-certainty evidence that bupropion may slightly increase the frequency of SAEs, although there was also the possibility of no increased risk. There was no clear evidence that any other tested interventions increased SAEs. Overall, SAE data were sparse with very low numbers of SAEs, and so further evidence may change our interpretation and certainty. Future studies should report SAEs to strengthen certainty in this outcome. More head-to-head comparisons of the most effective interventions are needed, as are tests of combinations of these. Future work should unify data from behavioural and pharmacological interventions to inform approaches to combined support for smoking cessation.
A patient with progressive neurological deterioration characterized by cognitive impairment, myoclonus, Parkinson's syndrome, an abnormal electroencephalogram and fasciculations was considered for brain biopsy for suspected Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Complete clinical recovery followed discontinuation of lithium and nortriptyline. Awareness of this unusual drug-induced Creutzfeldt-Jakob like syndrome can avoid costly, invasive and unnecessary investigative procedures.
Sigma-1 receptors (S1Rs) are strongly correlated to neuropathic pain (NP), since their inactivation may decrease allodynia or dysesthesia, promoting analgesic effects. In the recent patent landscape, S1R antagonists endowed with nanomolar S1Rs affinity emerged as potent antinociceptive agents. So far, three patented compounds have been proposed for counteracting NP. Particularly PV-752 and AV1066, disclosed by the University of Pavia (Italy) and Anavex, respectively, showed good analgesic activity in preclinical studies. Moreover, E-52862 developed by Esteve (Spain) has been proved to be effective, both in preclinical and Phase II clinical trials, against several symptoms of NP. These patents ascertain S1R antagonists as potential drugs, alone or in combination with other analgesic drugs, for managing NP in humans.
The tricyclic antidepressants have long been a tool in the physician's armament for numerous indications, the most prominent of which being depression. Although their efficacy and side effects have been well documented, less known is their abuse. Prior literature has discussed this more for the tertiary amines such as amitriptyline, but currently, there are no documented cases of abuse with the secondary amine nortriptyline. This article reviews the prior literature in regard to tricyclic antidepressants and anticholinergics as substances of abuse, the proposed mechanisms of this, and susceptible populations, as well as a case review of a patient who admitted to using nortriptyline for its "buzz."
The pharmacokinetics of TCAs are reviewed with particular emphasis on nortriptyline, the agent most extensively studied. The clinical uses of TCA plasma level-response studies are discussed in relationship to rational dosage adjustment to increase response rates and avoid iatrogenic toxicity. Other important topics discussed include the issue of active metabolites, single-dose prediction studies, and special considerations in treating the elderly and the medically ill.
IMPORTANCE: Evidence of the clinical benefit of pharmacogenetics-informed treatment (PIT) with antidepressants is still limited. Especially for tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), pharmacogenetics may be of interest because therapeutic plasma concentrations are well defined, identification of optimal dosing can be time consuming, and treatment is frequently accompanied by adverse effects. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether PIT results in faster attainment of therapeutic TCA plasma concentrations compared with usual treatment in patients with unipolar major depressive disorder (MDD). DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This randomized clinical trial compared PIT with usual treatment among 111 patients at 4 centers in the Netherlands. Patients were treated with the TCAs nortriptyline, clomipramine, or imipramine, with clinical follow-up of 7 weeks. Patients were enrolled from June 1, 2018, to January 1, 2022. At inclusion, patients had unipolar nonpsychotic MDD (with a score of >/=19 on the 17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression [HAMD-17]), were aged 18 to 65 years, and were eligible for TCA treatment. Main exclusion criteria were a bipolar or psychotic disorder, substance use disorder, pregnancy, interacting comedications, and concurrent use of psychotropic medications. INTERVENTION: In the PIT group, the initial TCA dosage was based on CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 genotypes. The control group received usual treatment, which comprised the standard initial TCA dosage. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was days until attainment of a therapeutic TCA plasma concentration. Secondary outcomes were severity of depressive symptoms (measured by HAMD-17 scores) and frequency and severity of adverse effects (measured by Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of Side Effects Rating scores). RESULTS: Of 125 patients randomized, 111 (mean [SD] age, 41.7 [13.3] years; 69 [62.2%] female) were included in the analysis; of those, 56 were in the PIT group and 55 were in the control group. The PIT group reached therapeutic concentrations faster than the control group (mean [SD], 17.3 [11.2] vs 22.0 [10.2] days; Kaplan-Meier chi21 = 4.30; P = .04). No significant difference in reduction of depressive symptoms was observed. Linear mixed-model analyses showed that the interaction between group and time differed for the frequency (F6,125 = 4.03; P = .001), severity (F6,114 = 3.10; P = .008), and burden (F6,112 = 2.56; P = .02) of adverse effects, suggesting that adverse effects decreased relatively more for those receiving PIT. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial, PIT resulted in faster attainment of therapeutic TCA concentrations, with potentially fewer and less severe adverse effects. No effect on depressive symptoms was observed. These findings indicate that pharmacogenetics-informed dosing of TCAs can be safely applied and may be useful in personalizing treatment for patients with MDD. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03548675.
After 3 weeks' nortriptyline (NT) treatment the mean plasma concentration of its 10-hydroxy metabolite (10-OH-NT) (599 +/- 207 nmol l-1) was higher than that of the parent drug (433 +/- 199 nmol l-1) in 25 depressed patients. Also in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) the mean level of 10-OH-NT (67 +/- 20 nmol l-1) was higher than that of NT (39 +/- 23 nmol l-1). There was a strong correlation (P less than 0.001) between the CSF and plasma concentration of both NT (r = 0.92) and 10-OH-NT (r = 0.77). The interindividual variation in the CSF/plasma ratio of both compounds was small, compared to the variation in plasma levels. These results show that 10-OH-NT passes the blood-brain barrier as it is present in concentrations higher than those of NT in the CSF. 10-OH-NT has previously been shown to be a potent blocker of noradrenaline uptake and to have much less affinity for muscarinic receptors than NT itself. This active metabolite might therefore be a potential antidepressant with less disturbing anticholinergic side-effects.
Variability in the response to drugs is due to three principal components-the disease, the responsiveness of tissues, and the concentration of the drug at its site of action (as reflected by its plasma concentration). The relative contributions of these components will differ not only for different drugs but also for different effects of the same drug. Rational drug therapy depends on knowledge of all three factors.
In this article, studies on the disposition of amitriptyline after administration of a single dose, as well as following long term administration are reviewed. While long term studies showed bias towards a higher mean apparent oral clearance, studies in normal subjects nevertheless indicated a higher apparent oral clearance than that calculated from steady-state concentrations in depressed patients. Methodological issues could account for some of the discrepancies in mean values of the pharmacokinetic parameters of amitriptyline. Broad individual variability in the elimination rate of amitriptyline has been confirmed but could not be attributed to the clinical characteristics of the subjects.
The pharmacokinetics of amitryptyline (AMI) have been evaluated in six healthy elderly volunteers (72-83 years of age) after a single dose of 125 mg of AMI-HCl. AMI was absorbed rather slowly (mean peak time 10.4 +/- 1.6 hrs) but very efficiently (F: 0.59-0.75). The rate of formation of nortriptyline (NT) as well as the appearance clearance values (0.18-0.45 l/h/kg) of AMI were significantly lower than those previously described for younger subjects. Reversible alterating ECG were observed in 5 cases concomitantly with AMI peak plasma concentrations. The results indicate the desirability of reduced and/or divided daily doses of AMI in the elderly.
Strong evidence has been found for the assumption that NT inhibits its own antidepressive effect at high, but non toxic plasma levels in patients suffering from endogenous depression. Based on three investigations we will recommend an optimal therapeutic plasma range for NT between 50 and 150 ng NT/ml.
This article reviews the literature concerning obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and its treatment with drugs. We survey the differential diagnosis of OCD and the problems involved in evaluating its severity in a research setting. Pharmacological treatment of OCD has usually involved antidepressants, especially clomipramine, with equivocal but nevertheless encouraging success. Anxiolytic and neuroleptics have also been tried, but the results are inconsistent. We discuss the implications of these findings for treatment of patients with OCD and for future research.
Plasma concentrations of nortriptyline (NT) and of unconjugated E-10-hydroxynortriptyline (E-10-OH-NT) were measured under steady-state conditions in elderly (60 yr and older) and young adult (40 yr and younger) patients treated with NT. The two groups received equivalent doses of NT. Plasma NT concentrations of the two groups did not differ, but plasma E-10-OH-NT concentrations were higher in the elderly. The plasma E-10-OH-NT/NT ratios were twice as high in the elderly group. Plasma E-10-OH-NT/NT ratios varied 2000% between individuals in the elderly group but were stable within individuals. Plasma E-10-OH-NT/NT ratios correlated positively but weakly with serum creatinine concentrations.
In the past decade, various investigators have attempted to find new pharmacological agents for the treatment of obsessive disorders. Of these, the drug which has attracted attention and has been most promising is clomipramine. This paper attempts to review the usefulness of clomipramine in the treatment of obsessive disorder. Accidentally, it was discovered that clomipramine was effective in alleviating obsessive symptoms in depressed patients by a Spanish psychiatrist, Lopez-Ibor. Initial studies carried out mainly on patients with major depression reported that obsessive symptomatology benefited with clomipramine therapy. A number of uncontrolled and controlled studies confirmed the efficacy of this drug in obsessive neurosis. The drug improves the obsessive symptoms. Discontinuation of the drug is followed by a relapse. The efficacy, dosage, duration and side effects of treatment with clomipramine are discussed in this paper.
1. The range of tricyclic antidepressant plasma levels (or doses) needed for therapeutic response remains largely unresolved, since quantal plasma concentration (or dose)--response relationships have not been clearly defined for either therapeutic or nontherapeutic effects. 2. The fact that certain patients apparently became more depressed at higher plasma levels must be balanced against the facts that "depression" is a mixture of disorders as yet poorly distinguishable and that tricyclic antidepressants have multiple pharmacologic effects. 3. There is presently no justification for routinely monitoring tricyclic antidepressant plasma levels, even though, as for any drug, such determinations are justifiable in patients who are unresponsive or show signs of toxicity. 4. Plasma level determinations can never replace sound clinical judgment and dosage adjustment for individual patients.
The first-pass equation based on the dose, hepatic blood flow, and total area under the plasma level-time curve after oral administration was used retrospectively to predict the bioavailability of nortriptyline after oral administration of 1 mg/kg-single oral doses to monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs. The predicted values of bioavailability ranged from 45 to 85%, consistent with experimentally derived estimates of nortriptyline availability.
Monitoring the plasma levels of certain antidepressant and antipsychotic drugs can be clinically helpful for certain patients. The authors discuss the particular drugs, patients, and technical conditions for effective plasma level monitoring.
A 61-year-old man with end-stage renal disease developed severe hyperventilation following nortriptyline hydrochloride usage for depression. He required mechanical ventilation and paralysis to correct severe respiratory alkalosis. To our knowledge, nortriptyline usage has not been previously associated with hyperventilation.
Unintentional aspiration of medication capsules is a rare event. A case report of a neurologically impaired 23-year-old woman who aspirated a 50-mg nortriptyline capsule is presented. This resulted in progressive respiratory distress necessitating ventilatory support. Bronchoscopy showed severe airway inflammation and edema.
