Diagnosed and reported Legionella pneumonias are slightly increasing during recent years. This might at least partially be due to more frequently used diagnostic tests.In severe pneumonia, nucleic acid amplification based methods should supplement the L. pneumophila serogroup-1 urinary antigen test because of their improved spectrum and sensitivity.Recent in vitro data suggest enhanced efficacy of levofloxacin when compared to macrolides. This complements recent clinical cohort data. Thus levofloxacin (750-1000 mg/d) is regarded the treatment of choice for confirmed legionellosis. Second line options are azithromycin or moxifloxacin. Treatment duration of 7 days should be sufficient in most cases.Development of resistance is rare and no routine resistance testing is necessary.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to assess whether there is a difference between ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin as prophylaxis in hematopoietic stem cell transplant (SCT) recipients. METHODS: This is a prospective, randomized trial in patients receiving SCT at Henry Ford Health in the United States of America. We randomly assigned patients (1:1) to receive ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin. The primary outcome was incidence of bloodstream bacterial infections (BSI) up to day 60 after SCT. RESULTS: Between June 4, 2018, and May 23, 2022, we randomly assigned 308 consecutive patients to receive ciprofloxacin (154 patients) or levofloxacin (154 patients). BSI was similar in both the ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin groups (18 [11.7%] vs 18 [11.7%]). Pneumonia was more frequent in the ciprofloxacin group compared to the levofloxacin group (18 [18%] vs 7 [23%]; relative risk 2.57, 95% CI 1.11-5.98; p = 0.028). There were no differences in neutrophil engraftment, fever, Clostridium difficile infection, relapse incidence, overall survival, nonrelapse mortality, length of stay post-SCT, or intensive care unit admission. CONCLUSION: Although both prophylaxis regimens demonstrated the same efficacy in SCT recipients, levofloxacin prophylaxis led to less pneumonia in the first 60 days post-SCT. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study is registered on ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03850379.
Levofloxacin (DR-3355, Daiichi) is a new fluoroquinolone antibiotic which is the active isomer of ofloxacin (DL-8280, Daiichi). By removing the inactive isomer, the in vitro activity of levofloxacin is 8-128 times higher than that of ofloxacin. This means that bacterial species, which have borderline susceptibility to ofloxacin and other first generation fluoroquinolones (e.g., pneumococci and organisms causing atypical pneumonia), are considerably more sensitive to levofloxacin. The pharmacokinetics of levofloxacin, which is available for both oral and i.v. administration, are characterised by a very high bioavailability, low (30-40%) protein binding, high tissue concentrations and elimination via the kidneys with minimal liver metabolism. As a consequence of the low degree of metabolism, levofloxacin does not interact with other drugs to any major extent. The safety and efficacy of levofloxacin are well documented in lower respiratory tract infections, skin and soft tissue infections, and urinary tract infections. The safety profile seems advantageous and the risks of phototoxicity, CNS toxicity and cardiac reactions (prolongation of QT-time) are low. Serious liver toxicity, leading to the recent withdrawal of trovafloxacin, has not been a problem in levofloxacin studies. Levofloxacin is a valuable addition to the group of fluoroquinolone antibiotics.
A potent third-generation antimicrobial fluoroquinolone drug, levofloxacin was introduced into human clinical practice in 1993. Levofloxacin is also used in veterinary medicine, however its use is limited: it is completely banned for veterinary use in the EU, and used extralabel in only companion animals in the USA. Since its introduction to clinical practice, many studies have been published on levofloxacin in animal species, including pharmacokinetic studies, tissue drug depletion, efficacy, and animal microbial isolate susceptibility to levofloxacin. This literature overview highlights the most clinically relevant and scientifically important levofloxacin studies linked to the field of veterinary medicine.
BACKGROUND: Thrombocytopenia following drug administration is commonly found in clinical practice. Recognition of this condition is important for further management of the patients. Many drugs were reported to be the cause of drug induced thrombocytopenia but levofloxacin was rarely reported. CASE REPORT: We present a seventy-eight-year-old male patient who developed severe thrombocytopenia with hemoptysis after taking levofloxacin for 4 days due to infected bronchiectasis. His platelet count was gradually recovered to normal value after the discontinuation of levofloxacin. CONCLUSION: Levofloxacin can cause severe thrombocytopenia. Specific antibody to platelet surface glycoproteins caused by levofloxacin should be further studied to confirm the association.
Measuring a change in the existence of disease symptoms before and after a treatment is examined for statistical significance by means of the McNemar test. When comparing two treatments, Feuer and Kessler (1989) proposed a two-sample McNemar test. In this article, we show that this test usually inflates the type I error in the hypothesis testing, and propose a new two-sample McNemar test that is superior in terms of preserving type I error. We also make the connection between the two-sample McNemar test and the test statistic for the equal residual effects in a 2 x 2 crossover design. The limitations of the two-sample McNemar test are also discussed.
According to some series, 0.3-1.5% of all cases of acute pancreatitis are drug induced. Acute pancreatitis due to levofloxacin is included in its safety data sheet as an adverse effect.
INTRODUCTION: The chronic airway infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) is a risk factor for rapid disease progression in various chronic pulmonary diseases including cystic fibrosis or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Inhaled antibiotics are able to treat effectively such chronic airway infections, and MP-376 is currently in late-stage clinical development for such an indication. AREAS COVERED: Review of the existing preclinical and clinical data on MP-376, with a focus on the efficacy and safety of the compound on chronic airways infections due to PA. EXPERT OPINION: Chronic airways infection with PA represents a therapeutic challenge because of its own complex mechanisms of defense, because of the rapid development of antibiotic resistance and by the fact that systemic antibiotics are not always able to achieve appropriate concentrations at lung level. Inhaled antibiotics (tobramycin, aztreonam, etc.) represent optimal alternatives to their systemic homologs due to their better penetrability in the lungs and due to the lower systemic exposure. Inhaled levofloxacin which is currently investigated for chronic airways infection might be another possible antipseudomonal inhaled therapy.
Ten years after introduction in therapeutic handbook, levofloxacin still plays a main role in treating bacterial infections. In particular, the deeper knowledge of kinetic-dynamic characteristics has allowed to highlight that high dosage approach in short term therapy might reveal as extremely interesting in a setting of critical patients. In addition, the good tissue diffusion, documented by pharmacokinetic studies performed in different districts, including the ones protected by anatomic barriers, lets to assume a good efficacy in the treatment of infection localized in deep tissues, as observed in different animal models, and successively confirmed by clinical studies. Use of levofloxacin for infections localized at particular body sites, such as bones and joints, has allowed to evidence a good tolerability profile in the long term tolerability, as well.
A 64-year-old woman with no previous mental illness took a single 500 mg tablet of levofloxacin for cystitis. Two hours later, she developed psychosis with involuntary movement and severe hyperventilation with respiratory alkalosis. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging findings were unremarkable, and an electroencephalogram revealed no epileptiform discharge. Her symptoms improved on the third day after levofloxacin was discontinued. Levofloxacin-associated encephalopathy with psychotic features is a rare adverse event. Disturbance of gamma-aminobutyric acid-ergic (GABAergic) interneurons by levofloxacin may lead to hyperventilation via dysfunction of the brainstem respiratory network. Physicians should be aware of hyperventilation as an additional serious symptom of levofloxacin-associated encephalopathy in acute settings.
Results from this large, multicenter study suggest that patients with a confirmed ciprofloxacin, moxifloxacin, or levofloxacin hypersensitivity reaction are likely to tolerate other fluoroquinolones. Avoiding different fluoroquinolones in patients labeled with a ciprofloxacin, moxifloxacin, or levofloxacin allergy may not always be mandatory. This was a study of patients with a ciprofloxacin, moxifloxacin, or levofloxacin hypersensitivity reaction and a documented electronic medical record administration of a different fluoroquinolone. Numerically, the most common reaction risk occurred with a challenge to moxifloxacin (2/19; 9.5%), followed by ciprofloxacin (6/89; 6.3%), and levofloxacin (1/44; 2.2%).
Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS syndrome) in a severe cutaneous drug reaction, which can be life threatening. Levofloxacin has not been reported in literature as a causative drug. We are presenting an exceptional case of levofloxacin-induced DRESS without eosinophilia and with positive patch-tests to levofloxacin.
Anaphylactoid and/or anaphylactic reactions to fluoroquinolones are estimated to occur in 0.46-1.2/100,000 patients. A 49-year-old woman with a history of asthma was admitted for a presumed asthma exacerbation related to an infectious process. She was given levofloxacin and standard management for an acute exacerbation. On two occasions the patient's respiratory distress worsened, requiring intubation. The second reaction occurred immediately after levofloxacin administration and was accompanied by a marked cutaneous reaction. Levofloxacin was discontinued, and supportive care was provided. No further symptoms occurred. The patient later was found to have been started on levofloxacin before admission for a suspected upper respiratory infection.
This article reviews the characteristics of the main fluoroquinolones used in dentistry (ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin and moxifloxacin), including pharmacokinetic/ pharmacodynamic parameters, susceptibility profiles of oral bacteria and clinical trials on their efficacy in dental practice. It seems that some of these antibiotics might represent a safe alternative in patients with allergy, intolerance, or lack of response to beta-lactams.
Limited data on fluoroquinolone pharmacokinetics and cardiac effects in children exist. Among 22 children receiving drug-resistant tuberculosis prophylaxis or treatment, serum concentrations following oral doses of levofloxacin (15 mg/kg of body weight) and ofloxacin (20 mg/kg) were lower than those expected from existing pediatric data, possibly due to differences in the formulations (crushed tablets). Drug exposures were lower than those in adults following standard doses and below the proposed pharmacodynamic targets, likely due to more rapid elimination in children. No QT prolongation was observed.
Fluoroquinolone treatments induce dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota, resulting in loss of resistance to colonization by exogenous bacteria such as Clostridioides difficile that may cause severe diarrhea in humans and lethal infection in hamsters. We show here that DAV131A, a charcoal-based adsorbent, decreases the intestinal levels of the fluoroquinolone antibiotics levofloxacin and ciprofloxacin in hamsters, protects their intestinal microbiota, and prevents lethal infection by C. difficile.
Delivering novel antimycobacterial agents through the pulmonary route using nanoparticle-based systems shows promise for treating diseases like tuberculosis. However, creating dry powder inhaler (DPI) with suitable aerodynamic characteristics while preserving nanostructure integrity and maintaining bioactivity until the active ingredient travels deeply into the lungs is a difficult challenge. We developed DPI formulations containing levofloxacin-loaded solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) via spray-drying technique with tailored aerosolization characteristics for effective inhalation therapy. A range of biophysical techniques, including transmission electron microscopy, confocal microscopy, and scanning electron microscopy were used to measure the morphologies and sizes of the spray-dried microparticles that explored both the geometric and aerodynamic properties. Spray drying substantially reduced the particle sizes of the SLNs while preserving their nanostructural integrity and enhancing aerosol dispersion with efficient mucus penetration. Despite a slower uptake rate compared to plain SLNs, the polyethylene glycol modified formulations exhibited enhanced cellular uptake in both A549 and NR8383 cell lines. The percent viability of Mycobacterium bovis had dropped to nearly 0 % by day 5 for both types of SLNs. Interestingly, the levofloxacin-loaded SLNs demonstrated a lower minimum bactericidal concentration (0.25 microg/mL) compared with pure levofloxacin (1 microg/mL), which indicated the formulations have potential as effective treatments for tuberculosis.
BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyolysis secondary to quinolones is not frequent. There are scarce reports in the literature associating rhabdomyolysis to levofloxacin. We describe a case of levofloxacin-induced rhabdomyolysis. CASE PRESENTATION: A 52-year-old African-American man presented with muscle tightness after taking three doses of levofloxacin. He had elevated creatine kinase without acute kidney injury. His symptoms resolved after discontinuation of levofloxacin and supportive care. CONCLUSIONS: It is fascinating that our patient has a prior history of rhabdomyolysis, likely from levofloxacin. Our case highlights the need to be mindful of this potentially life-threatening complication of levofloxacin.
The use of levofloxacin in critically ill patients has progressively increased since commercial marketing of the drug in 1999, despite the fact that few studies have been designed to assess the use of levofloxacin in this population. Pharmacological characteristics, broad spectrum of activity, and tolerability account for the high interest in the drug for the treatment of different infectious diseases, including ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), and the recommendation of levofloxacin in guidelines developed by a number of scientific societies. According to pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic data, it seems reasonable to assume that an increase in activity follows from a larger dose, so that 500 mg/12 h is adequate in patients with VAP. In critically ill patients with VAP, levofloxacin monotherapy is indicated for empirical treatment of patients with early onset pneumonia without risk factors for multiresistant pathogens, and in combination therapy for late onset VAP or for patients at risk for multiresistant pathogens. The use of levofloxacin in combination therapy is supported by multiple reasons, including: increased empirical coverage in infections with suspected intracellular pathogens; substitution for more toxic antimicrobial agents (e.g., aminoglycosides) in patients with renal dysfunction and in those at risk for renal insufficiency; and severity of systemic response to infection (septic shock) that justifies multiple treatment with better tolerated antibiotics. The availability of the oral formulation allows sequential therapy, switching from the intravenous route to the oral route. Levofloxacin is well tolerated by critically ill patients, with few adverse events of mild to moderate severity.
