INTRODUCTION: Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) block the gastric H/K-ATPase, therefore inhibiting acid gastric secretion, leading to an increased pH (>4). They account for an extremely high number of prescriptions worldwide. Numerous drug-drug interactions have been described with PPIs, but all the described interactions do not have clinical significance. AREAS COVERED: This review will discuss the latest updates on drug-drug interactions with PPIs, focusing on the last 10-year publications in the following areas: anti-infective agents, anticancer drugs, antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants, and antidiabetics. EXPERT OPINION: Although pharmacokinetic interactions of PPIs have been described with many drugs, their clinical relevance remains controversial. However, given the extremely high number of people being treated with PPIs, clinicians should remain vigilant for interactions that may be clinically significant and require dose adjustment or therapeutic monitoring. Interestingly, not all PPIs have the same pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile, with some having a strong potential to inhibit CYP2C19, such as omeprazole, esomeprazole, and lansoprazole, while others, pantoprazole, rabeprazole, and dexlansoprazole, are weak CYP2C19 inhibitors. These may be preferred depending on co-prescribed treatments.In addition, new formulations have been developed to prevent some of the gastric pH-dependent drug interactions and should be evaluated in further large-scale prospective comparative studies.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are an antacid drug often used in acid-related disorders. They decrease acid secretion in the stomach by blocking an enzyme called H+/K+ ATPase which controls acid production. Introduced to the market in 1989, their use has increased rapidly worldwide and they are now among the top 10 most prescribed drugs in the United States. As of 2015, the FDA has already approved six drugs of this class (omeprazole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole, dexlansoprazole, pantoprazole and rabeprazole). Recently, the risks and benefits of long-term PPI use were questioned and many studies indicated that their use should be carefully considered, especially in young patients, whose treatment with these drugs could last many years. Even greater concerns have been raised about a potential positive association between PPIs and osteoporotic fracture risk including the hip, spine and wrist. Although based on observational studies, there is substantial evidence associating the long-term use of PPIs and fracture. This relationship is only partially admitted due to the lack of consistent effects of PPIs on bone mineral density loss. Therefore, this narrative review aimed to discuss the recent findings pertaining to the risk of osteoporotic fracture associated with PPIs, in particular prolonged use, and to call for further research to elucidate the mechanisms associated with this bone fragility.
A man in his 60s presented with a widespread erythematous rash and associated chills, paraesthesia and haematuria. He had recently commenced naproxen/esomeprazole. Blood tests showed hypereosinophilia (0.73x10(9)/L) and moderate acute kidney injury. Histology revealed parakeratosis, mild spongiosis with eosinophils. He developed acute coronary syndrome with rapid atrial fibrillation. Coronary angiogram was non-obstructive. Cardiac MRI (CMR) revealed acute myocarditis secondary to Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS). Naproxen/esomeprazole was discontinued, and he was supported with oral corticosteroids. A repeat CMR 3 months later showed resolution of myocarditis. Naproxen/esomeprazole is not a common offending drug. DRESS is a rare drug-induced hypersensitivity reaction with a mortality rate of 10%. The objective of this case report is to highlight the significant but rare cardiac complications that can ensue from DRESS, which warrant prompt recognition and withdrawal of the causative drug.
This study aims to evaluate the effectiveness and tolerability of esomeprazole and omeprazole in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Electronic searches on PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, and ClinicalTrials.gov databases were carried out for reports up to February 28, 2015. Ten eligible studies from 8 articles were found that enrolled a total of 10,286 patients for meta-analysis. These results revealed a significant difference between esomeprazole vs. omeprazole (RR=1.06, 95% CI [1.01, 1.10], I2=72%, p=0.01) by subgroup according to dosage by random effects model, and a significant difference between esomeprazole 40 mg vs. omeprazole 20 mg (RR=1.07, 95% CI [1.004, 1.14], I2=78%, p=0.04) based on healing rate as determined by endoscopy, using a random effects model. A significant difference between esomeprazole 20 mg and omeprazole 40 mg (RR=0.68, 95% CI [0.47, 0.97], I2=not applicable, p=0.03) was also found in comparing relief of symptoms by random effects model. There were no significant differences in outcomes between other subgroups, including tolerability. Based on these results, a high dose of esomeprazole is recommended for GERD treatment and control in adults.
The fixed-dose acetylsalicylic acid (ASA)/esomeprazole capsule combines the cardiovascular (CV) protective effects of low-dose ASA with the gastroprotective effects of the proton pump inhibitor esomeprazole. It is approved for use as a convenient once-daily regimen in the prevention of CV and cerebrovascular events in patients requiring continuous low-dose ASA who are at risk of developing gastric and/or duodenal (peptic) ulcers. In two large, 26-week, randomized, double-blind, multinational, phase III trials (ASTERIX and OBERON) in patients who were receiving low-dose ASA for the prevention of CV events and who had an increased risk of ulcer development, the incidence of endoscopy-proven peptic ulcers (primary endpoint) was significantly lower with the addition of esomeprazole 20 mg/day versus placebo. Moreover, patient-reported dyspeptic symptoms (epigastric pain and epigastric burning) were reported in significantly fewer patients in the low-dose ASA plus esomeprazole group than in the low-dose ASA plus placebo group. Low-dose ASA plus esomeprazole treatment was generally well tolerated, with a similar adverse event profile to that seen with low-dose ASA plus placebo.
Intravenous (IV) administration of a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) is a faster way to achieve gastric acid suppression than oral administration of the same agent. Peak suppression after IV administration occurs within hours, compared with several days later after oral administration. Thus the IV route of administration offers a faster onset of gastric suppression, achievement of intragastric pH closer to neutrality, and better bioavailability. The PPIs that have IV formulations in the United States (esomeprazole, lansoprazole, and pantoprazole) are approved for different indications; the key differences among them relate to their ability to reach specific gastric pH, time to maintain a specific gastric pH, and ease of use of the IV formulation (eg, reconstitution, requirement of inline filters, infusion times).
There are no published case reports of esomeprazole-induced photoallergic dermatitis. We report here a 58-year-old lady with prior history of propylthiouracil and carbimazole-induced photoallergy, who presented with heartburn and dysphagia. She was diagnosed to have erosive esophagitis and was treated with esomeprazole, following which she developed photoallergic dermatitis. It improved on cessation of the drug and did not recur on subsequent treatment with ranitidine. Naranjo score for this adverse drug event was 8, thereby making it a probable adverse drug reaction. This reaction may be due to sulphur moiety, which is common to all these drugs. Physicians must be aware of this possible side-effect, especially in patients with prior history of photoallergy to other drugs.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) represent one of the most widely used drug classes. However, many patients complain of dyspeptic symptoms impairing their quality of life: ~ 20% of patients taking NSAIDs show endoscopic ulcers with or without symptoms, and up to 2% of chronic NSAID users will develop serious complications each year, such as bleeding or perforation, which are the cause of death in many patients. Coprescription of a proton pump inhibitor is one established option for the healing and prevention of NSAID-associated lesions of the upper gastrointestinal tract in patients at risk. Recent studies evaluated the clinical efficacy of esomeprazole in the management of gastrointestinal problems associated with the intake of selective and non-selective NSAIDs and aspirin.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are the most potent inhibitors of gastric acid secretion available, and they are effective for treating all acid-related disorders. Esomeprazole is one of several most recent PPIs that became available to the market in 2001. Esomeprazole is indicated for the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease in adults and children, risk reduction of NSAIDs-associated gastric ulcer, Helicobacter pylori eradication and control of pathological hypersecretory conditions associated with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Esomeprazole is available in both oral and intravenous formulations. A number of studies have compared esomeprazole with other PPIs. While differences supporting esomeprazole have been reported, the magnitude of differences has been variable and of uncertain clinical importance. Cost plays a major role in prescribing patterns of PPIs.
The introduction of acid inhibition in clinical practice has revolutionized the management of acid-related diseases, leading to the virtual abolition of elective surgery for ulcer disease and relegating antireflux surgery to patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) not adequately managed by medical therapy. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are the antisecretory drugs of choice for the treatment of reflux disease. However, these drugs still leave some unmet clinical needs in GERD. PPI-refractoriness is common, and persistent symptoms are observed in up to 40-55% of daily PPI users. Potassium-competitive acid blockers (P-CABs) clearly overcome many of the drawbacks and limitations of PPIs, achieving rapid, potent, and prolonged acid suppression, offering the opportunity to address many of the unmet needs. In recent years, it has been increasingly recognized that impaired mucosal integrity is involved in the pathogenesis of GERD. As a consequence, esophageal mucosal protection has emerged as a new, promising therapeutic avenue. When P-CABS are used as add-on medications to standard treatment, a growing body of evidence suggests a significant additional benefit, especially in the relief of symptoms not responding to PPI therapy. On the contrary, reflux inhibitors are considered a promise unfulfilled, and prokinetic agents should only be used on a case-by-case basis.
Esomeprazole, a new proton pump inhibitor, is the S-isomer of omeprazole and is the first such inhibitor to be developed as a single isomer. Esomeprazole provided better control of intragastric pH than omeprazole, lansoprazole and pantoprazole in trials conducted in patients with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) or healthy volunteers (n = 20 to 115). In 2 large randomised, double-blind multicentre trials esomeprazole 20 and/or 40mg for 8 weeks produced higher healing rates of erosive oesophagitis and better symptom control than omeprazole 20 mg in patients with GORD. Esomeprazole 10, 20 or 40mg once daily for 6 months maintained healing versus placebo (p < 0.001) in patients with endoscopically confirmed healed erosive oesophagitis in 2 large randomised, double-blind multicentre trials. Similarly, symptom-driven on-demand use of esomeprazole effectively controlled symptoms of GORD (heartburn) for 6 months in 2 large placebo-controlled trials. Esomeprazole-based triple therapy for 7 days was as effective for eradication of Helicobacter pylori as longer omeprazole-based therapy in 2 randomised double-blind trials including about 450 patients each. Endoscopically confirmed ulcer healing 4 weeks after treatment initiation was reported in about 90% of patients with active duodenal ulcer in both treatment groups. Esomeprazole-based triple therapy for 10 days was more effective than esomeprazole plus clarithromycin for eradication of H. pylori in 233 patients.
The clinical response to antisecretory treatment correlates directly with the degree of inhibition of acid secretion achieved. Acid inhibition able to maintain the intragastric pH at a value greater than 4 for at least 16 h/day seems to heal even the most refractory acid-related diseases. It has also been shown that the degree of inhibition of acid secretion in response to antisecretory treatment depends on the genetic characteristics of the patient and on the presence of Helicobacter pylori infection. A possible definition of potent (or profound) acid inhibition is, therefore, the achievement of the aforementioned level of control of acid secretion regardless of patient characteristics or of the presence of H. pylori infection. Antisecretory drugs differ in their ability to reach potent acid inhibition. As far as the comparative efficacy of different drugs for inhibiting acid secretion is concerned, proton pump inhibitors are more efficient in inhibiting gastric acid secretion than histamine (H2) receptor antagonists. Among the different proton pump inhibitors, esomeprazole 40 mg/day exhibits greater antisecretory potency than the others at standard doses. Rabeprazole 20 mg/day and lansoprazole 30 mg/day exhibit a more rapid onset of action than omeprazole 20 mg/day or pantoprazole 40 mg/day.
INTRODUCTION: Increasing the effectiveness of eradication therapy is an important task in gastroenterology. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of postbiotic containing inactivated (nonviable) Limosilactobacillus (Lactobacillus) reuteri DSM 17648 (Pylopass) as adjuvant treatment of Helicobacter pylori eradication in patients with functional dyspepsia (FD). METHODS: This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter, parallel study included H. pylori -positive patients with FD. The postbiotic group received Pylopass 200 mg bid for 14 days in combination with eradication therapy (esomeprazole 20 mg bid + amoxicillin 1,000 mg bid + clarithromycin 500 mg bid for 14 days) and another 14 days after the completion of eradication therapy. The study was registered in the ISRCTN registry (ISRCTN20716052). RESULTS: Eradication efficiency was 96.7% for the postbiotic group vs 86.0% for the placebo group ( P = 0.039). Both groups showed significant improvements in quality of life and reduction of most gastrointestinal symptoms with no significant differences between groups. The overall number of digestive adverse effects in the postbiotic group was lower than in the placebo group. Serious adverse effects were not registered. DISCUSSION: The postbiotic containing inactivated L. reuteri DSM 17648 significantly improves the effectiveness of H. pylori eradication therapy in FD and decreases overall number of digestive adverse effects of this therapy.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are one of the most frequently prescribed medications across the globe. Esomeprazole is the S-isomer of omeprazole, and it is currently the most widely prescribed PPI. The safety profile of esomeprazole is extremely favorable with only minor side effects, like headache and diarrhea, that are encountered in day to day practice. We report a case of a young female with symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease who developed galactorrhea after starting esomeprazole therapy. Resolution of galactorrhea after stopping the drug and self-rechallenge by the patient herself with reappearance of galactorrhea confirmed the culprit to be esomeprazole only. We postulate that esomeprazole may have a mild inhibitory effect on CYP3A4, which leads to decreased metabolism of estrogen, thereby increasing serum estrogen levels. Estrogen causes stimulation and production of prolactin release, which results in development of galactorrhea. This is the first case of esomeprazole induced galactorrhea, to the best of our knowledge.
INTRODUCTION: A national survey in the general population showed that gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is highly prevalent in Mexico. OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of two isomers, dexrabeprazole (10 mg) vs. esomeprazole (20 mg), in the treatment of GERD for four weeks. METHODS: Randomized, multicenter, prospective, double-blind phase III clinical trial in two groups that included 230 patients. RESULTS: A statistically significant decrease in the severity of GERD symptoms (heartburn, regurgitation, epigastric pain and dysphagia), evaluated using a visual analogue scale, was observed with both treatments. Mean score for dexrabeprazole on Carlsson-Dent questionnaire at 28 days was 2.12, and for esomeprazole, 3.02. Both treatments were effective, with no statistically significant difference being recorded (p < 0.05). On SF-36 health questionnaire, both were observed to improve the quality-of-life score, with no significant difference being identified. Both drugs were well tolerated, and the adverse event incidence profile was low. CONCLUSIONS: In the treatment of non-erosive GERD, the use of dexrabeprazole at 10 mg/day is as effective as esomeprazole 20 mg/day, with the advantage that the dose is lower with an appropriate safety profile.
Proton pump inhibitors are among the most commonly used drugs worldwide. They are considered to be largely safe and cause little side-effects. We report a 69-year-old woman who suffered from erythematous plaques 2 months after initiating therapy with esomeprazole. The diagnosis of subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus was based on the clinical picture together with characteristic histological features of a skin biopsy specimen and the detection of anti-Ro/SSA antibodies. In particular, the temporal relationship with the onset of proton pump inhibitor therapy led to the high-level suspicion of a drug-induced pathogenesis. Strengthening the initially suspected diagnosis, the characteristic skin lesions resolved almost completely without specific therapy after discontinuation of the medication. If typical skin lesions occur in light-exposed areas in connection with the administration of PPI, the possibility of a drug-induced cutaneous lupus erythematosus should always be considered. Due to the frequent recurrence rate after renewed exposure, a new therapy with PPI should be avoided.
BACKGROUND: Current guidelines recommend bismuth-containing quadruple therapy for patients newly diagnosed with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection. We aimed to compare the efficacy and safety of tetracycline administered three times daily versus four times daily in bismuth-containing quadruple therapy for first-line treatment of H. pylori infection. METHODS: This multicenter, noninferiority, randomized controlled study, conducted in China, recruited treatment-naive adults with H. pylori infection, randomized 1:1 into two treatment groups to receive either of the following bismuth-containing quadruple therapies: esomeprazole 20 mg twice-daily; bismuth 220 mg twice-daily; amoxicillin 1000 mg twice-daily; and tetracycline 500 mg three times daily (TET-T) versus 500 mg four times daily (TET-F). At least 6 weeks post-treatment, a (13)C-urea breath test was performed to evaluate H. pylori eradication. RESULTS: In total, 406 patients were randomly assigned to the two treatment groups. Intention-to-treat eradication rates were 91.63% (186/203; 95% confidence interval [CI] 87.82%-95.44%) versus 90.15% (183/203; 95% CI 86.05%-94.25%) (p = 0.0005) and per-protocol eradication rates were 95.34% (184/193; 95% CI 92.36%-98.31%) versus 95.72% (179/187; 95% CI 92.82%-98.62%) (p = 0.0002) for the TET-T and TET-F group, respectively. TET-T-treated patients had a lower incidence of adverse effects than TET-F-treated patients (21.61% vs. 31.63%, p = 0.024), with no significant differences in compliance to treatment between the groups. CONCLUSION: As a first-line therapy for H. pylori infection, the eradication rate of the TET-T therapy was noninferior to that of the TET-F therapy while significantly reducing the incidence of adverse reactions. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT05431075.
INTRODUCTION: Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are widely used for the treatment of acid-related diseases such as gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). They are recommended by the American College of Gastroenterology for healing erosive esophagitis (EO) and as long-term treatment in patients with healed EO. The available PPIs differ somewhat in their pharmacokinetics and clinical properties, but whether these differences are of clinical relevance is a matter of debate. Some safety concerns have been raised with the use of PPIs, mostly an increased incidence of infectious diseases such as community-acquired pneumonia or Clostridium difficile diarrhea. AREAS COVERED: This article explores the results of clinical studies on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of esomeprazole , as well as on its clinical efficacy to manage patients with GERD. EXPERT OPINION: GERD is a public health concern as its worldwide incidence and associated complications are increasing alongside the exponentially increasing problem of obesity. PPIs are the first pharmacological option because of their efficacy and overall positive risk-to-benefit ratio. Improved efficacy with the use of stereospecific isomers of PPIs, such as esomeprazole, has not yet been convincingly demonstrated. Nevertheless, because of individual experience with former treatment, some patients may report better symptom control when treated with a specific PPI rather than with others.
Magnesium homeostasis is essential for many intracellular processes and depends on dynamic interplay of intestinal absorption, exchange with the bone reservoir, and renal excretion. Hypomagnesaemia may arise from various disorders. We review the case of a 59 year-old man whose only complaint was irritability with a routine analysis showing hypomagnesaemia and hypokalemia while using esomeprazole, a proton pump inhibitor (PPI). Fractional magnesium excretion was low, excluding excessive renal loss. Potassium excretion was 80 mEq/24 Hr in the presence of hypokalemia suggesting hypomagnesaemia-induced kaliuresis as its cause. Hypomagnesaemia partially resolved after oral magnesium supplementation. Esomeprazol suppression corrected hypomagnesaemia. A causal relationship with esomeprazol use was supported by the recurrence of hypomagnesaemia after rechallenge. We review the literature on hypomagnesaemia due to the use of proton pump inhibitors. In the past decade our understanding of transcellular magnesium transport was enhanced by the discovery of the magnesium channel, transient receptor potential (TR PM) 6 and 7 and other proteins that play an important role in its transport. In this light we discuss the possible etiology of proton pump inhibitor related hypomagnesaemia/hypokalemia.
Esomeprazole, the S-isomer of omeprazole, is a new proton pump inhibitor. Esomeprazole provides better control of intragastric pH than omeprazole. It is more effective in treating erosive esophagitis in patients with GERD than omeprazole. Esomeprazole can maintain the healing of erosive esophagitis when used daily or on demand. It is also effective for the eradication of Helicobacter pylori infections. The incidence and type of adverse events associated with esomeprazole therapy are infrequent and likely to be similar to omeprazole.
