Ondansetron is a potent and highly selective serotonin 5-HT3-receptor antagonist which has demonstrated important antiemetic activity and good tolerability in the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Ondansetron is completely and rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration, and does not accumulate with repeated oral administration. Owing to hepatic first-pass metabolism, its bioavailability is only about 60% compared with ondansetron administered by infusion over 15 minutes. Bioavailability is slightly increased when administered after a standard meal, and is not influenced by coadministration of antacids; a slightly enhanced bioavailability has been observed in patients with cancer. Since the time to reach peak concentration is 0.5 to 2 hours after oral ingestion, the drug should be administered at least 30 minutes before chemotherapy. Possible alternative ways of administration of ondansetron include intramuscular, subcutaneous and rectal administration, and oral controlled-release formulations. Ondansetron is widely distributed (volume of distribution approximately 160L) and binds moderately (70 to 76%) to plasma proteins; the elimination half-life averages approximately 3.8 +/- 1 hours. Clearance occurs by hepatic metabolism (95%) rather than renal excretion. Metabolites do not play a role in the activity of the drug, and there is no evidence of genetic polymorphic metabolism. Although aging is associated with decreased clearance and increased bioavailability, dosage adjustments are not required for the elderly, and may be necessary only in patients with severe hepatic impairment. Chemotherapeutic agents do not seem to modify the pharmacokinetics of ondansetron. There remains the question of whether control of emesis is related to systemic availability of ondansetron and, in consequence, the optimal dose and schedule of ondansetron is still to be identified with certainty.
An objective and validated index of nausea and vomiting such as the Pregnancy-Unique Quantification of Emesis (PUQE) and HyperEmesis Level Prediction (HELP) tools can be used to classify the severity of NVP and HG. [Grade C] Ketonuria is not an indicator of dehydration and should not be used to assess severity. [Grade A] There are safety and efficacy data for first line antiemetics such as anti (H1) histamines, phenothiazines and doxylamine/pyridoxine (Xonvea(R)) and they should be prescribed initially when required for NVP and HG (Appendix III). [Grade A] There is evidence that ondansetron is safe and effective. Its use as a second line antiemetic should not be discouraged if first line antiemetics are ineffective. Women can be reassured regarding a very small increase in the absolute risk of orofacial clefting with ondansetron use in the first trimester, which should be balanced with the risks of poorly managed HG. [Grade B] Metoclopramide is safe and effective and can be used alone or in combination with other antiemetics. [Grade B] Because of the risk of extrapyramidal effects metoclopramide should be used as second-line therapy. Intravenous doses should be administered by slow bolus injection over at least 3 minutes to help minimise these. [Grade C] Women should be asked about previous adverse reactions to antiemetic therapies. If adverse reactions occur, there should be prompt cessation of the medications. [GPP] Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) with additional potassium chloride in each bag, with administration guided by daily monitoring of electrolytes, is the most appropriate intravenous hydration. [Grade C] Combinations of different drugs should be used in women who do not respond to a single antiemetic. Suggested antiemetics for UK use are given in Appendix III. [GPP] Thiamine supplementation (either oral 100 mg tds or intravenous as part of vitamin B complex (Pabrinex(R))) should be given to all women admitted with vomiting, or severely reduced dietary intake, especially before administration of dextrose or parenteral nutrition. [Grade D] All therapeutic measures should have been tried before considering termination of pregnancy. [Grade C].
KEY POINTS: In hemodialysis, ondansetron initiation versus initiation of lesser QT-prolonging antiemetics associated with higher 10-day sudden cardiac death risk. Analyses considering additional cardiac outcomes had consistent findings. BACKGROUND: Individuals receiving hemodialysis have a high incidence of sudden cardiac death and are susceptible to QT interval-prolonging medication-related cardiac complications. Ondansetron, an antiemetic with known QT-prolonging potential, is associated with fatal arrhythmias in the general population when administered intravenously. The cardiac safety of ondansetron in the hemodialysis population is unknown. METHODS: We conducted a new-user, active-comparator, cohort study using United States Renal Data System data (2012-2019) to examine the association between the initiation of oral ondansetron versus antiemetics with lesser QT-prolonging potential (promethazine, metoclopramide, or prochlorperazine) and the 10-day risk of sudden cardiac death among individuals receiving hemodialysis. We used inverse probability of treatment-weighted survival models to estimate adjusted hazard ratios, risk differences, and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). We used an intention-to-treat approach in which non-sudden cardiac death was considered a competing event. We examined additional cardiac outcomes in secondary analyses. RESULTS: Of 119,254 study patients, 64,978 (55%) initiated ondansetron and 54,276 (45%) initiated a comparator antiemetic. Initiation of ondansetron versus a comparator antiemetic was associated with higher relative and absolute 10-day risks of sudden cardiac death (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.44 [95% CI, 1.08 to 1.93]; adjusted risk difference, 0.06% [95% CI, 0.01% to 0.11%]). The number needed to harm was 1688. Analyses of additional cardiac outcomes yielded similar findings. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with initiation of antiemetics with lesser QT-prolonging potential, initiation of ondansetron was associated with higher short-term cardiac risks among people receiving hemodialysis.
Ondansetron is widely used in general practice for nausea and vomiting due to any cause. We report a rare side effect, life-threatening hypokalaemia following intravenous Ondansetron injection. It may be judicious to restrict the use of Odansetron to patients with severe vomiting due to chemotherapy or in post-operative state. Life-threatening hypokalemia can occur without any warning and may be difficult to manage in a primary set up.
Ondansetron is the first selective antagonist of the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptors (type 3) marketed for the prevention of emesis induced by antineoplastic agents. Ondansetron has been shown to be more active and less toxic than high-dose metoclopramide in patients submitted to cisplatin chemotherapy. Furthermore, when dexamethasone was added to ondansetron, its antiemetic efficacy increased significantly. In the prevention of emesis induced by a high single dose of cisplatin or by repeated low doses, ondansetron combined with dexamethasone has been shown to be the more efficacious and less toxic antiemetic treatment. However, in the prevention of delayed emesis from cisplatin, its role is still to be defined. In patients submitted to moderately emetogenic chemotherapeutic agents, ondansetron has shown an efficacy superior or equal to standard doses of metoclopramide, but is less toxic. Moreover, when compared with dexamethasone, its antiemetic efficacy and tolerability is similar; in this group of patients ondansetron should be used only when steroids fail. Ondansetron toxicity is generally mild; in particular, it does not induce extrapyramidal reactions. The most frequent side-effects are headache and constipation.
Cesarean sections under spinal anesthesia are now a daily occurrence in most tertiary hospitals. We report the first published case of inadvertent spinal injection of ondansetron without any neurological sequelae in a patient undergoing elective Cesarean section under spinal anesthesia. She did not experience any permanent neurological sequelae, and also did not exhibit any central neuraxial opioid side effects-nausea, vomiting or pruritus. Vigilance is essential to reduce the risk of wrong route delivery of drugs, especially when presented in very similar-looking 2 mL ampules as in our institution.
Nausea and vomiting are major complications associated with the administration of cytotoxic drugs. Ondansetron (Zofran, Glaxo, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC), a 5-hydroxy tryptamine (5-HT3) serotonin antagonist, has shown efficacy in managing chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting without extrapyramidal side effects. The author provides an overview of recent studies and manufacturer's administration recommendations, as well as guidelines for nursing care and patient teaching.
This pharmacoepidemiology study uses Medicaid data to estimate associations between first-trimester use of intravenous ondansetron and risk of cardiac malformations and oral cleft in children of exposed mothers.
To address the economic issues posed by the introduction of 5-hydroxytryptamine3 receptor antagonist (5-HT3 RA), we performed a cost-effectiveness analysis based on clinical trial data published in the recent literature. Cost calculations include initial treatment and a second-line salvage treatment. The average cost and incremental cost were established. Incremental cost corresponds to the extra cost involved in achieving total control of emesis in 1% extra patients. If 5-HT3 RA is not part of the initial treatment, salvage treatment with ondansetron is not cost-effective. Moreover, starting with the combination of ondansetron plus dexamethasone saves more money than starting with ondansetron alone. However, if the difference in emesis control is only minimal, treatment with the 5-HT3 RA remains more expensive.
Experimental studies suggest that 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptors play a role in epileptogenesis and seizure propagation. Ondansetron, a 5-HT(3) receptor antagonist, has been reported to have proconvulsant and anticonvulsant effects in animals. We describe three patients who developed seizures after receiving ondansetron. There were two females and one male. Ages ranged from 38-56 years. None had a previous or family history of seizures. Four milligrams (mg) of ondansetron was given intravenously for severe nausea and vomiting in association with migraine, gastritis, and diabetic ketoacidosis. A generalized tonic-clonic seizure occurred in each patient--12, 15, and 22 min after injection. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalography (EEG) were normal in all patients. Although no antiepileptic drugs were given, none had seizure recurrence subsequently. The temporal relationship between ondansetron administration and seizures, lack of EEG or MRI abnormalities, and absence of seizure recurrence suggest that the seizures were causally related to ondansetron in our patients.
Ondansetron is a novel 5-HT3 receptor antagonist used for the treatment of cytotoxic-induced emesis and postoperative nausea and vomiting. Safety data from volunteer studies, non-emesis development studies, studies in the treatment of cytotoxic-induced emesis and postoperative nausea and vomiting, and spontaneous case reports, all indicate that ondansetron is well tolerated and has an excellent safety profile. There are no known interactions of ondansetron with other drugs, and no interference with postoperative recovery.
Extended-release formulations of buprenorphine offer less frequent dosing, provide consistent medication delivery, and improve adherence for treatment of opioid use disorder (OUD). Although buprenorphine is a partial agonist with seemingly less precipitated withdrawal and easier initiation than full opioid agonists used for OUD, its use is not benign and understanding of the different extended-release formulations is necessary. We report a case of a patient that received a long-acting buprenorphine formulation (Sublocade(R)) administered subcutaneously that presented to the emergency department with tachycardia, hyperglycemia, elevated anion gap, and sustained nausea and vomiting refractory to pharmacotherapy requiring surgical removal of the buprenorphine depot for resolution of nausea and vomiting symptoms.
The authors performed a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial to assess the efficacy and safety of ondansetron (20 microg/day and 100 microg/ day) in treating cognitive decline in 185 patients with Alzheimer disease. Although ondansetron was well tolerated without any serious drug-related side effects, the study failed to demonstrate any significant cognitive improvement.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacological approaches to opiate addiction have for the most part been limited to a role in detoxification. A high percentage of patients who complete detoxification programmes relapse. METHOD: In the present study, we used a simple laboratory method to investigate suggestions from preclinical studies that 5-(hydroxytryptamine) HT3 receptor antagonists have a role in the treatment of addiction. RESULTS: We showed that addicts stably maintained on methadone experienced significant craving, dysphoria, and withdrawal-like symptoms when exposed to a video containing drug-related cues. The craving was not lessened by treatment with the 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, ondansetron (4 mg orally). CONCLUSION: Our current findings do not support a role for 5-HT3 receptor agonists in the reduction of craving in opiate addicts.
Ondansetron is a competitive serotonin 5-HT3 receptor blocker that has proved useful in the prevention of emesis due to cisplatin and other cancer chemotherapeutic agents. In a randomized, open-label, crossover study in 24 healthy male subjects, the relative bioavailability of a single 8-mg tablet was compared with that of an 8-mg solution using the two one-sided t-tests. The tablet and solution formulations were bioequivalent, as confirmed by similarities in mean Cmax (26.3 vs 27.7 ng/mL), Tmax (1.79 vs 1.70 h), and AUC (166.0 vs 167.3 ng.h/mL) values. In another randomized, open-label, crossover study in 12 healthy male subjects, the bioavailability of an 8-mg ondansetron tablet administered 5 min after a standard meal was slightly but significantly greater than in fasted subjects, as indicated by comparative mean AUC values [201.4 ng.h/mL (fed) vs 172.5 ng.h/mL (fasted)]. Coadministration of a magnesium hydroxide/aluminum hydroxide antacid did not affect the bioavailability of the ondansetron tablet.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: To explore the risk of cardiac arrhythmias associated with ondansetron administration in the context of recent recommendations for identification of high-risk individuals. METHODS: We conducted a postmarketing analysis and systematically reviewed the published literature, grey literature, manufacturer's database, Food and Drug Administration Adverse Events Reporting System, and the World Health Organization Individual Safety Case Reports Database (VigiBase). Eligible cases described a documented (or perceived) arrhythmia within 24 hours of ondansetron administration. The primary outcome was arrhythmia occurrence temporally associated with the administration of a single, oral ondansetron dose. Secondary objectives included identifying all cases associating ondansetron administration (any dose, frequency, or route) to an arrhythmia. RESULTS: Primary: No reports describing an arrhythmia associated with single oral ondansetron dose administration were identified. Secondary: Sixty unique reports were identified. Route of administration was predominantly intravenous (80%). A significant medical history (67%) or concomitant use of a QT-prolonging medication (67%) was identified in 83% of reports. Approximately one third occurred in patients receiving chemotherapeutic agents, many of which are known to prolong the QT interval. An additional third involved administration to prevent postoperative vomiting. CONCLUSION: Current evidence does not support routine ECG and electrolyte screening before single oral ondansetron dose administration to individuals without known risk factors. Screening should be targeted to high-risk patients and those receiving ondansetron intravenously.
We treated a patient who developed transient multifocal encephalopathy with extrapyramidal symptoms (oromandibular dystonia, oculogyric crisis, and limb dystonia) in temporal proximity to ondansetron administration on emergence from general anesthesia. No other medications known to cause extrapyramidal reactions were administered. Although these symptoms resolved fully, the presentation was dramatic and resembled the symptoms of structural brain injury. Ondansetron is used frequently as an antiemetic agent in many clinical settings and is not limited to surgical patients. Therefore, the entire medical community should be cognizant of this potential adverse reaction.
This paper described an outline of pharmacological studies of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists, mainly on ondansetron, which control nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy. Administration of cytotoxic drugs is known to increase serotonin (5-HT) concentrations, and when released, 5-HT provokes the emetic responses via two routes; 1) 5-HT acts as an intrinsic transmitter substance and stimulates the emetic response via 5-HT3 receptors on vagal afferent terminals; 2) 5-HT transmits impulses to the vomiting center via 5-HT3 receptors on the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the area postrema of the central nervous system. 5-HT3 receptor antagonists are thought to exert an antiemetic action by specifically and competitively blocking 5-HT3 receptors.
QUESTION: A recent Motherisk article showed that initiating antinauseants even before symptoms start could prevent recurrence of severe morning sickness. In the study described, however, different physicians used different drugs. How can one be sure which drugs work? ANSWER: The study of 26 women who had had severe morning sickness during previous pregnancies showed that using antiemetics before symptoms of morning sickness started appeared to prevent recurrence of severe morning sickness in subsequent pregnancies. Physicians in the United States used various antinauseant drugs. Physicians in Canada administered only one drug, the combination of doxylamine-pyridoxine (Diclectin), to 12 women. Subanalysis of these 12 women revealed that pre-emptive use of doxylamine-pyridoxine significantly decreased the likelihood that severe morning sickness would recur.
Ondansetron orally disintegrating tablet reduces postdischarge nausea and vomiting and improves patient satisfaction with postoperative nausea and vomiting management.
