Skeletal muscle relaxants are a heterogeneous group of medications used to treat two different types of underlying conditions: spasticity from upper motor neuron syndromes and muscular pain or spasms from peripheral musculoskeletal conditions. Although widely used for these indications, there appear to be gaps in our understanding of the comparative efficacy and safety of different skeletal muscle relaxants. This systematic review summarizes and assesses the evidence for the comparative efficacy and safety of skeletal muscle relaxants for spasticity and musculoskeletal conditions. Randomized trials (for comparative efficacy and adverse events) and observational studies (for adverse events only) that included oral medications classified as skeletal muscle relaxants by the FDA were sought using electronic databases, reference lists, and pharmaceutical company submissions. Searches were performed through January 2003. The validity of each included study was assessed using a data abstraction form and predefined criteria. An overall grade was allocated for the body of evidence for each key question. A total of 101 randomized trials were included in this review. No randomized trial was rated good quality, and there was little evidence of rigorous adverse event assessment in included trials or observational studies. There is fair evidence that baclofen, tizanidine, and dantrolene are effective compared to placebo in patients with spasticity (primarily multiple sclerosis). There is fair evidence that baclofen and tizanidine are roughly equivalent for efficacy in patients with spasticity, but insufficient evidence to determine the efficacy of dantrolene compared to baclofen or tizanidine. There is fair evidence that although the overall rate of adverse effects between tizanidine and baclofen is similar, tizanidine is associated with more dry mouth and baclofen with more weakness. There is fair evidence that cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, and tizanidine are effective compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions (primarily acute back or neck pain). Cyclobenzaprine has been evaluated in the most clinical trials and has consistently been found to be effective. There is very limited or inconsistent data regarding the effectiveness of metaxalone, methocarbamol, chlorzoxazone, baclofen, or dantrolene compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions. There is insufficient evidence to determine the relative efficacy or safety of cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, tizanidine, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and chlorzoxazone. Dantrolene, and to a lesser degree chlorzoxazone, have been associated with rare serious hepatotoxicity.
BACKGROUND: Chlorpromazine is the only drug approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of hiccups; however, many other pharmacologic treatments have been proposed for intractable and persistent hiccups. Currently, there is little evidence to support the use of one agent over another. OBJECTIVE: This review aims to identify literature concerning the use of pharmacologic treatments for intractable and persistent hiccups with the goal of evaluating therapies in terms of their level of evidence, mechanism of action, efficacy, dosing, onset of action, and adverse effects. METHODS: A systematic literature search of PubMed, Embase, the Cochrane Library, and the New York Academy of Medicine was performed to find articles where a pharmacologic agent was used to treat intractable or persistent hiccups between the years 1966 and 2016. The GRADE method was used to assess the level of evidence for the studies included in this review. RESULTS: This review identified 26 articles involving 10 pharmacologic treatment options that met our inclusion criteria. Amitriptyline, baclofen, gabapentin, haloperidol, metoclopramide, midazolam, nifedipine, nimodipine, orphenadrine, and valproic acid were found in the literature to be successful in treating hiccups. CONCLUSION: Baclofen, gabapentin, and metoclopramide were the only agents that were studied in a prospective manner, while only baclofen and metoclopramide were studied in randomized controlled trials. No specific recommendations can be made for treating intractable and persistent hiccups with the evidence currently available in the literature. Therapy selection should be specific to individual patients, their underlying comorbidities, etiology of hiccups, and take into account the individual properties of the drugs.
As the population ages, spine-related pain is increasingly common in older adults. While medications play an important role in pain management, their use has limitations in geriatric patients due to reduced liver and renal function, comorbid medical problems, and polypharmacy. This review will assess the evidence basis for medications used for spine-related pain in older adults, with a focus on drug metabolism and adverse drug reactions. A PubMed/OVID search crossing common spine, neck, and back pain terms with key words for older adults and geriatrics was combined with common drug classes and common drug names and limited to clinical trials and age over 65 years. The results were then reviewed with identification of commonly used drugs and drug categories: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, corticosteroids, gabapentin and pregabalin, antispastic and antispasmodic muscle relaxants, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tramadol, and opioids. Collectively, 138 double-blind, placebo-controlled trials were the focus of the review. The review found a variable contribution of high-quality studies examining the efficacy of medications for spine pain primarily in the geriatric population. There was strong evidence for NSAID use with adjustments for gastrointestinal and renal risk factors. Gabapentin and pregabalin had mixed evidence for neuropathic pain. SNRIs had good evidence for neuropathic pain and a more favorable safety profile than TCAs. Tramadol had some evidence in older patients, but more so in persons aged < 65 years. Rational therapeutic choices based on geriatric spine pain diagnosis are helpful, such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen for arthritic and myofascial-based pain, gabapentinoids or duloxetine for neuropathic and radicular pain, antispastic agents for myofascial-based pain, and combination therapy for mixed etiologies. Tramadol can be well tolerated in older patients, but has risks of cognitive and classic opioid side effects. Otherwise, opioids are typically avoided in the treatment of spine-related pain in older adults due to their morbidity and mortality risk and are reserved for refractory severe pain. Whenever possible, beneficial geriatric spine pain pharmacotherapy should employ the lowest therapeutic doses with consideration of polypharmacy, potentially decreased renal and hepatic metabolism, and co-morbid medical disorders.
A critical examination of the literature on centrally acting, orally administered skeletal muscle relaxants (SMRs) is presented. The available comparative clinical studies are reviewed, and the pharmacology, metabolism and adverse effects of the oral SMRs are discussed briefly. The drugs covered are carisoprodol, chlorphenesin carbamate, chlorzoxazone, cyclobenzaprine hydrochloride, diazepam, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and orphenadrine citrate. The mechanism of action of these agents is not well defined, and their effects are measured mainly by subjective responses. Thus, acceptable evidence of efficacy is difficult to obtain, especially if clinical studies continue to be designed inadequately. There are inadequate data to support the superiority of any one drug. Further, unique clinical efficacy of any oral SMR in comparison to nonspecific sedation has not been established. Based on subjective responses, all agents, except diazepam, have been shown to be superior to placebo in acute disorders; cyclobenzaprine has not been evaluated in acute conditions. SMRs are less effective in chronic disorders. Combination muscle relaxant-analgesic products appear to be superior to their individual components, but the relative efficacy of these combination products in comparison to combined use of individual sedative and analgesic agents is unknown.
In Parkinson's disease, the tonic inhibition by basal ganglia output structures may be exacerbated by the action of the subthalamic nucleus. As expected, the reduction of excitatory impact from this structure has been shown to reduce akinesia in monkeys with experimental parkinsonism. The findings of receptor binding studies supporting an increased neuronal activity of efferents of the subthalamic nucleus in patients with Parkinson's disease, suggest that subthalamic nucleotomy or pallidotomy may be effective lesions in the neurosurgical treatment of Parkinson's disease. Systemic administration of glutamate antagonists has been shown to have anti-akinetic effects in animal models of Parkinson's disease. Other observations in monkeys indicate that excitatory amino acids such as glutamate are involved in the pathophysiological cascade of MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine)-induced neuronal cell death. The neuroprotective effects of competitive and non-competitive NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor antagonists against MPTP toxicity support the hypothesis that NMDA receptor-mediated events are involved in the neurotoxicity of MPTP. Glutamate antagonists may therefore be able to retard the progression and to improve the symptomatology of Parkinson's disease. Several compounds with anti-parkinsonian effects such as amantadine, memantine, budipine and orphenadrine have been shown to be non-competitive NMDA receptor antagonists and are candidates for clinical trials on the neuroprotective efficacy of NMDA receptor antagonism. Furthermore, glutamate antagonists are useful in the treatment of the akinetic parkinsonian crisis, a severe form of clinical deterioration in patients with Parkinson's disease.
A study was conducted on 66 psychiatric inpatients who took major tranquilizers for periods of four to 16 years. The frequency of signs of Parkinsonism and the effects of orphenadrine on these were studied in a double-blind crossover method. Sixty-one per cent of the patients showed signs of Parkinsonism. Female patients and those with organic brain pathology more frequently exhibited Parkinsonism (although the difference was not statistically significant). No correlation was found between duration of treatment and extrapyramidal effects. Of the 40 patients who developed Parkinsonism, 25 responded favourably to orphenadrine, while six (15%) had more marked manifestations on orphenadrine than on placebo.
The presence of acute or chronic muscle pain and muscle spasm is a common finding in the treatment of craniomandibular disorders. A review of the literature on the centrally acting oral skeletal muscle relaxants is presented to assist the practitioner in treating CMD. The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, adverse reactions and available dosage forms of the skeletal muscle relaxants are discussed. The agents reviewed are carisoprodol, methocarbamol, chlorphenesin carbamate, metaxalone, chloroxazone, orphenadrine citrate, diazepam, and cyclobenzaprine. Their mechanisms are not well defined. Most act via selective inhibition of polysynaptic pathways in the central nervous system. Most evidence for their efficacy is based on subjective responses and there is question as to the adequacy of the clinical studies to date. Based on the data all of the relaxants (possibly excepting diazepam) are better than placebo based on subjective analyses. Although combinations with analgesics provide better symptom relief, no superiority over analgesics exists. No skeletal relaxant has been shown to be superior over any other oral relaxant. Based on recent clinical suspicions, further study of multiple pharmacologic effects of newer agents is indicated.
Acute dystonia is a common adverse effect following anti-psychotic medication, which mainly appears shortly after beginning treatment or increasing the dosage. Laryngeal dysfunction may carely occur as part of the picture of acute dystonia and, if so, usually with dyspnoea. We describe a case of acute dystonia with atypical onset without relation to changes in dosage and with laryngeal involvement with aphonia, but without dyspnoea.
Eight cases of Orphenadrine intoxication were treated in the Resuscitation Centre of Rome's University Medical School. All these cases arrived in coma, after taking an overdose of Orphenadrine in an attempt at suicide. The clinical signs and therapy are reported in detail; the cardiovascular side-effects, in particular those involving arrhythmias are dangerous and life threatening. From the clinical data it is believed that these changes in rhythm are mostly due to the autonomic nervous system (A.N.S.). In fact all the 8 patients survived, without treatment never having been treated with cardiokinetic or antiarrhythmic drugs, but a few were given Diazepam as well as respiratory assistance, cardiovascular assistance, and forced diuresis.
Effects of the histamine H(1) receptor (H1R) antagonists (antihistamines), promethazine (PMZ), orphenadrine (ORP), chlorpheniramine (CLP), pyrilamine (PYR), diphenhydramine (DPH), citerizine (CTZ), and triprolidine (TRP) on the functional properties of the cloned alpha7 subunit of the human nicotinic acetylcholine receptor expressed in Xenopus oocytes were investigated. Antihistamines inhibited the alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in the order PYR>CLP>TRP>PMZ>ORP>/=DPH>/=CTZ. Among the antihistamines, PYR showed the highest reversible inhibition of acetylcholine (100 microM)-induced responses with IC(5)(0) of 6.2 microM. PYR-induced inhibition was independent of the membrane potential and could not be reversed by increasing the concentration of acetylcholine. Specific binding of [(1)(2)(5)I] alpha-bungarotoxin, a selective antagonist for alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, was not changed in the presence of PYR suggesting a non-competitive inhibition of nicotinic receptors. In line with functional experiments, docking studies indicated that PYR can potentially bind allosterically with the alpha7 transmembrane domain. Our results indicate that the H(2)-H(4) receptor antagonists tested in this study (10 microM) showed negligible inhibition of alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. On the other hand, H(1) receptor antagonists inhibited the function of human alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, with varying potencies. These results emphasize the importance of alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor for future pharmacological/toxicological profiling.
The literature provides considerable evidence indicating that several, but not all antihistaminics, are indeed analgesic agents and some are analgesic adjuvants as well. Those for which effectiveness is reported includes diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, orphenadrine, pyrilamine, phenyltoloxamine, promethazine, methdilazine, and tripelennamine. The proposed mechanisms of analgesic action of antihistaminics are reviewed and discussed. The literature suggests that more than one mechanism of action exists for them. There is considerable evidence suggesting that histaminergic and serotoninergic central pathways are involved in nociception and that antihistaminic drugs can modulate their responses (1). The evidence for a role for norepinephrine and dopamine and the effects of antihistaminics on them are less well established. Still other pathways have been proposed. A greater understanding of pain mechanisms will aid in elucidating the role of antihistaminics in analgesia.
The treatment of Parkinson's disease today is complex, time-consuming, but rewarding. The introduction of levodopa has not cured the disease, but has provided the most powerful therapy available yet. Its use is limited by side effects and careful titration to optimum dosage, often in combination with other drugs, is required. Despite best therapy, some patients never respond, and others begin to lose benefit after some years of therapy. New problems, such as the "on-off" effect have appeared with long-term treatment, and require careful adjustment of dosage. As with any replacement therapy, a balance between sub-optimal benefit and side effects has to be discovered and maintained by careful and frequent review. New approaches to treatment may offer further improvement in the near future.
This ex vivo human percutaneous absorption study evaluated a set of six model drugs (ketamine hydrochloride, bupivacaine hydrochloride, diclofenac sodium, gabapentin, orphenadrine citrate, pentoxifylline) from two popular formulations for topically applied compounding preparations. The compounded preparations used in this study were Versatile cream and a reference cream. Each formulation was applied to human trunk skin mounted on Franz Diffusion Cells, 50 mg/chamber (or 28.2 mg/cm2). Serial dermal receiver solutions were collected for 48 hours. Analysis of the resultant data supports the concept that the Versatile base formulation provides improved characteristics relative to the reference base. This is of key importance where the patient does not show clinical improvement when a conventional topical delivery vehicle is used in the formulation. From the results, it is reasonable to anticipate that, relative to the reference formulation, the Versatile formulation provides enhanced transdermal delivery of some analgesic medications.
The high prevalence of dorsalgia and dorsopathy among the adult population makes a significant contribution to the structure of the financial burden of health care systems. The use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as the basis for the pharmacotherapy of dorsopathy is recommended by most international clinical guidelines. The pharmacodynamic effects of NSAIDs underlie the clinical efficacy of this group of drugs in patients with pain of musculoskeletal origin, while monotherapy is not always accompanied by the rapid development of a persistent analgesic effect. An urgent direction in the therapy of dorsopathies may include combination of NSAIDs with analgesic drugs of other pharmacological groups capable of additive action. The fixed combination of diclofenac, 75 mg, and orphenadrine, 50 mg, allows achieving an effective analgesic effect in patients with lower back pain of various etiologies. It was demonstrated in a series of clinical cases that included 4 patients with dorsopathy who were treated at the City Clinical Hospital No. 24, Moscow in 2020.
Multimodal pain management combines analgesics to improve analgesia and reduce side effects. This study investigates the fixed combination of diclophenac and orphenadrin (Neodolpasse((R)) Infusion Solution) in patients after unilateral total hip arthroplasty (THA). This prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-centre clinical study enrolled 120 patients receiving patient-controlled analgesia (PCA). Isotonic saline was infused as placebo. The primary efficacy goal was defined as reduction of PCA analgesics used over the first 24 h post-surgery. The study used a three-stage group sequential test design with two interim analyses. Analgesia was monitored by visual analogue scale and verbal rating. Infusion of the Neodolpasse((R)) Infusion Solution resulted in a significant reduction in the PCA analgesic requirements by approximately 30% (38.7 +/- 21.3 mg vs. 55.9 +/- 31.1 mg; p = 0.0004) while maintaining adequate analgesia and patient safety. This study demonstrates that Neodolpasse((R)) Infusion Solution significantly reduces PCA analgesic requirements without compromising analgesic effectiveness and safety in THA patients.
10 long-term schizophrenic patients with tardive dyskinesia were studied over 14 weeks and maintained on their usual neuroleptic medications while anticholinergic antiparkinson drugs were employed and then discontinued, and the cycle then repeated. Discontinuation of anticholinergic medications resulted in improvement in dyskinetic movements and vice versa. Estimation of haloperidol equivalents in serum at four times suggested that changes in severity of tardive dyskinesia were not caused by changes in blood levels of neuroleptics. Levels of pituitary hormones were also estimated at four times. Prolactin levels tended to diminish in men over the course of the experiment. Growth hormone and thyrotropin values were mainly stable. However, the growth hormone levels peaked during the final 'off anticholinergic' condition and thyrotropin levels were consistently elevated.
There is a lack of data regarding the abuse liability of centrally acting non-opioid analgesics (NOA) and muscle relaxants (MR). A comparison of data retrieved from a German pharmacovigilance database (BfArM; accessed May 2013) and data from the literature concerning the abuse liability of NOA and MR approved in Germany was performed. The BfArM-database demonstrated cases of abuse only for clonidine and paracetamol, whereas the literature suggests evidence for an abuse potential of baclofen, clonidine, ketamine, metamizole, methocarbamol, orphenadrine, paracetamol, propyphenazone, and tizanidine. The low number of detected cases in the BfArM-database could be a result of under-reporting.
A trial involving patients receiving fluphenazine decanoate was designed to compare the effects of orphenadrine hydrochloride (Disipal) and its major metabolite, tofenacin hydrochloride (Elamol) on the Parkinsonian side-effects and depression occurring during fluphenazine decanoate therapy. The trial was a double-blind one, with crossover. It was found that both drugs exerted an adequate control on the Parkinsonian side-effects, but there was no significant difference between their effects. Ophenadrine, however, was shown to be significantly superior (p less than 0-05) in the control of the depressive side-effects.
Ten healthy volunteers received a single 50-mg dose of diphenhydramine (DP) hydrochloride intravenously and orally on two separate occasions. Kinetics of DP and a major demethylated metabolite (DMDP) were determined from multiple plasma samples drawn during a 24- to 48-hour period after dosage. Modification of a gas chromatographic (GC) technique allowed simultaneous quantitation of DP and DMDP. Mean kinetic variables for DP after intravenous (IV) dosage were: volume of distribution, 4.5 L/kg; elimination half-life, 8.4 hours; clearance, 6.2 mL/min/kg. After oral DP administration, a peak plasma level of 66 ng/mL was reached 2.3 hours after dosage. Systemic availability was 72%, nearly identical to the predicted estimate (71%) based on clearance of IV DP relative to hepatic blood flow. Appearance of the metabolite, DMDP, mirrored disappearance of DP; the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) for DMDP was highly correlated (r = .79, P less than .05) with a clearance of IV DP. However, metabolite AUC was significantly higher after oral as opposed to IV DP (218 vs 145 hr-ng/mL, P less than .05). Because DP and DMDP elute nearly identically on standard GC systems, methodologic modifications are needed to resolve them. Coelution of the two compounds could bias kinetic data based on plasma concentration presumed to be specific for intact DP.
The side-effects of prochlorperazine (CompazineR StemetilR) were traced in thirty-six children up to the age of sixteen years and compared with those collected from literature. These side-effects appeared to be predominantly neurological and were independent of the dosage. Impaired consciousness, dyskinesia, pyramidal signs and hypertonus were the main neurological manifestations. Dyskinesia was the most frequent sign. These side-effects disappear spontaneously after discontinuation of the drug. Instant cure can be acquired by intra-muscular administration of orphenadrine (DisipalR).
