Personalization of ICU nutrition is essential to future of critical care. Recommendations from American/European guidelines and practice suggestions incorporating recent literature are presented. Low-dose enteral nutrition (EN) or parenteral nutrition (PN) can be started within 48 h of admission. While EN is preferred route of delivery, new data highlight PN can be given safely without increased risk; thus, when early EN is not feasible, provision of isocaloric PN is effective and results in similar outcomes. Indirect calorimetry (IC) measurement of energy expenditure (EE) is recommended by both European/American guidelines after stabilization post-ICU admission. Below-measured EE (~ 70%) targets should be used during early phase and increased to match EE later in stay. Low-dose protein delivery can be used early (~ D1-2) (< 0.8 g/kg/d) and progressed to >/= 1.2 g/kg/d as patients stabilize, with consideration of avoiding higher protein in unstable patients and in acute kidney injury not on CRRT. Intermittent-feeding schedules hold promise for further research. Clinicians must be aware of delivered energy/protein and what percentage of targets delivered nutrition represents. Computerized nutrition monitoring systems/platforms have become widely available. In patients at risk of micronutrient/vitamin losses (i.e., CRRT), evaluation of micronutrient levels should be considered post-ICU days 5-7 with repletion of deficiencies where indicated. In future, we hope use of muscle monitors such as ultrasound, CT scan, and/or BIA will be utilized to assess nutrition risk and monitor response to nutrition. Use of specialized anabolic nutrients such as HMB, creatine, and leucine to improve strength/muscle mass is promising in other populations and deserves future study. In post-ICU setting, continued use of IC measurement and other muscle measures should be considered to guide nutrition. Research on using rehabilitation interventions such as cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) to guide post-ICU exercise/rehabilitation prescription and using anabolic agents such as testosterone/oxandrolone to promote post-ICU recovery is needed.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Nutrition therapy is a cornerstone of burn care from the early resuscitation phase until the end of rehabilitation. While several aspects of nutrition therapy are similar in major burns and other critical care conditions, the patho-physiology of burn injury with its major endocrine, inflammatory, metabolic and immune alterations requires some specific nutritional interventions. The present text developed by the French speaking societies, is updated to provide evidenced-based recommendations for clinical practice. METHODS: A group of burn specialists used the GRADE methodology (Grade of Recommendation, Assessment, Development and Evaluation) to evaluate human burn clinical trials between 1979 and 2011. The resulting recommendations, strong suggestions or suggestions were then rated by the non-burn specialized experts according to their agreement (strong, moderate or weak). RESULTS: Eight major recommendations were made. Strong recommendations were made regarding, 1) early enteral feeding, 2) the elevated protein requirements (1.5-2 g/kg in adults, 3 g/kg in children), 3) the limitation of glucose delivery to a maximum of 55% of energy and 5 mg/kg/h associated with moderate blood glucose (target </= 8 mmol/l) control by means of continuous infusion, 4) to associated trace element and vitamin substitution early on, and 5) to use non-nutritional strategies to attenuate hypermetabolism by pharmacological (propranolol, oxandrolone) and physical tools (early surgery and thermo-neutral room) during the first weeks after injury. Suggestion were made in absence of indirect calorimetry, to use of the Toronto equation (Schoffield in children) for energy requirement determination (risk of overfeeding), and to maintain fat administration </= 30% of total energy delivery. CONCLUSION: The nutritional therapy in major burns has evidence-based specificities that contribute to improve clinical outcome.
Critical illnesses, including sepsis, cancer cachexia, and burn injury, invoke a milieu of systemic metabolic and inflammatory derangements that ultimately results in increased energy expenditure leading to fat and lean mass catabolism. Burn injuries present a unique clinical challenge given the magnitude and duration of the hypermetabolic response compared with other forms of critical illness, which drastically increase the risk of morbidity and mortality. Skeletal muscle metabolism is particularly altered as a consequence of burn-induced hypermetabolism, as it primarily provides a main source of fuel in support of wound healing. Interestingly, muscle catabolism is sustained long after the wound has healed, indicating that additional mechanisms beyond wound healing are involved. In this review, we discuss the distinctive pathophysiological response to burn injury with a focus on skeletal muscle function and metabolism. We first examine the diverse consequences on skeletal muscle dysfunction between thermal, electrical, and chemical burns. We then provide a comprehensive overview of the known mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle dysfunction that may be attributed to hypermetabolism. Finally, we review the most promising current treatment options to mitigate muscle catabolism, and by extension improve morbidity and mortality, and end with future directions that have the potential to significantly improve patient care.
Low-dose hydrocortisone reduces the dose of vasopressors and hospital length of stay; it may also decrease the rate of hospital-acquired pneumonia and time on ventilator. No major side effect was reported, but glycemia and natremia should be monitored. Progesterone did not enhance outcome of trauma patients. A meta-analysis suggested that oxandrolone was associated with shorter length of stay and reduced weight loss. Erythropoietin did not enhance neurologic outcome of traumatic brain-injured patients; such treatment, however, could reduce the mortality in subgroups of patients. This review focuses mainly on glucocorticoids, which are the most extensively investigated treatments in hormone therapy.
A significant proportion of the mortality and morbidity of severe burns is attributable to the ensuing hypermetabolic response. This response can last for as long as 1 year after injury and is associated with impaired wound healing, increased infection risks, erosion of lean body mass, hampered rehabilitation, and delayed reintegration of burn survivors into society. Pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic strategies may be used to reverse the catabolic effect of thermal injury. Nonpharmacologic strategies include early excision and wound closure of burn wound, aggressive treatment of sepsis, elevation of the environmental temperature to thermal neutrality (31.5 +/- 0.7 degrees C), high carbohydrate, high protein continuous enteral feeding, and early institution of resistive exercise programs. Pharmacologic modulators of the postburn hypermetabolic response may be achieved through the administration of recombinant human growth hormone, low-dose insulin infusion, use of the synthetic testosterone analog, oxandrolone, and beta blockade with propranolol. This review article discusses these modulators of postburn metabolism.
There has recently been renewed interest in novel clinical applications of the anabolic-androgenic steroid (AAS) testosterone and its synthetic derivatives, particularly given with the rising popularity of testosterone supplementation therapy (TST) for the treatment of male hypogonadism. In this manuscript, we provide a brief review of the history of AAS and discuss clinical applications of two of the more well-known AAS: nandrolone and oxandrolone. Both agents exhibit favorable myotrophic/androgenic ratios and have been investigated for effectiveness in numerous disease states. We also provide a brief synopsis of selective androgen receptor modulators (SARMs) and postulate how these orally active, non-aromatizing, tissue-selective agents might be used in contemporary andrology. Currently, the applications of testosterone alternatives in hypogonadism are limited. However, it is tempting to speculate that these agents may one day become accepted as alternatives, or adjuncts, to the treatment of male hypogonadism.
Turner syndrome (TS) is the most common sex-chromosome abnormality in females. Short stature and hypogonadism are the classical clinical findings. The spontaneous final height (FH) ranges between 139 and 147 cm, representing a growth deficit of about 20 cm with respect to the unaffected population. GH therapy improves FH and should be started during childhood at a high dose of about 1 IU/kg/week (range 0.6-2 IU/kg/week). Some authors advocate combined therapy with an anabolic steroid at various doses (e.g. oxandrolone 0.05-0.1 mg/kg/day). This treatment results in a significantly increased FH, a large proportion of treated girls reaching a FH of more than 150 cm. Gonadal function is compromised during adolescence in about 80% of girls with TS, whilst in about 20% pubertal development occurs spontaneously. Oestrogen therapy should be started at the age of 13-14 years in hypogonadic patients; early onset of treatment (before 12 years) seems to compromise FH. Other concerns in these patients are fertility and osteopenia.
Persistent Inflammation, Immunosuppression, and Catabolism Syndrome (PICS) is a clinical endotype of chronic critical illness. PICS consists of a self-perpetuating cycle of ongoing organ dysfunction, inflammation, and catabolism resulting in sarcopenia, immunosuppression leading to recurrent infections, metabolic derangements, and changes in bone marrow function. There is heterogeneity regarding the definition of PICS. Currently, there are no licensed treatments specifically for PICS. However, findings can be extrapolated from studies in other conditions with similar features to repurpose drugs, and in animal models. Drugs that can restore immune homeostasis by stimulating lymphocyte production could have potential efficacy. Another treatment could be modifying myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC) activation after day 14 when they are immunosuppressive. Drugs such as interleukin (IL)-1 and IL-6 receptor antagonists might reduce persistent inflammation, although they need to be given at specific time points to avoid adverse effects. Antioxidants could treat the oxidative stress caused by mitochondrial dysfunction in PICS. Possible anti-catabolic agents include testosterone, oxandrolone, IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1), bortezomib, and MURF1 (muscle RING-finger protein-1) inhibitors. Nutritional support strategies that could slow PICS progression include ketogenic feeding and probiotics. The field would benefit from a consensus definition of PICS using biologically based cut-off values. Future research should focus on expanding knowledge on underlying pathophysiological mechanisms of PICS to identify and validate other potential endotypes of chronic critical illness and subsequent treatable traits. There is unlikely to be a universal treatment for PICS, and a multimodal, timely, and personalised therapeutic strategy will be needed to improve outcomes for this growing cohort of patients.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review aims to report the most recent (2020-2022) experimental scientific studies conducted on animal models, in order to highlight the relevant findings on the adverse effects related to androgen administration. RECENT FINDINGS: Forty-one studies published between January 2020 and July 2022 were selected. The majority of studies investigated the effects of one androgen, whereas only four studies analyzed the effects of two drugs. Nandrolone decanoate was the most investigated drug (20 articles), boldenone was tested in 8 articles, testosterone and stanozolol were used in 7 articles each, 17b-trenbolone, metandienone, and oxandrolone were tested in 1 article each. The articles clarify the adverse effects of androgen administration on the heart, brain, kidney, liver, reproductive and musculoskeletal systems. SUMMARY: The main findings of this review highlight that androgen administration increases inflammatory mediators, altering different biochemical parameters. The results concerning the reversibility of the adverse effects are controversial: on the one hand, several studies suggested that by stopping the androgen administration, the organs return to their initial state; on the other hand, the alteration of different biochemical parameters could generate irreversible organ damage. Moreover, this review highlights the importance of animal studies that should be better organized in order to clarify several important aspects related to androgen abuse to fill the gap in our knowledge in this research field.
Septic shock remains the major cause of childhood morbidity and mortality worldwide. Although early sepsis recognition, fluid resuscitation, timely administration of antimicrobials, and vasoactive-inotropic drug infusions are all key to achieving good sepsis outcomes, therapy using various steroid drug classes remains an attractive adjunctive intervention to minimize the duration of septic shock and transition to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. All steroid drug classes possess biological plausibility to affect a beneficial clinical effect among children with septic shock, but none has undergone rigorous, prospective assessment in a large, high-quality pediatric interventional trial.
This presentation discusses recent investigations into testosterone's effects on muscle protein metabolism. Protein synthesis is the principal end point, but protein breakdown and the availability of an amino acid pool are important to the process of net muscle protein synthesis. The effects of other hormones--including growth hormone, oxoandrolone (a synthetically derived testosterone), and androstenedione--on muscle protein synthesis also are discussed. Effects in both normal and elderly men are considered.
OBJECTIVE: The pathophysiological response to burn injury disturbs the balance between skeletal muscle protein synthesis and breakdown, resulting in severe muscle wasting. Muscle loss after burn injury is related to increased mortality and morbidity. Consequently, mitigation of this catabolic response has become a focus in the management of these patients. The aim of this review is to discuss the literature pertaining to pharmacological interventions aimed at attenuating skeletal muscle catabolism in severely burned patients. DATA SELECTION: Review of the literature related to skeletal muscle protein metabolism following burn injury was conducted. Emphasis was on studies utilizing stable isotope tracer kinetics to assess the impact of pharmacological interventions on muscle protein metabolism in severely burned patients. CONCLUSION: Data support the efficacy of testosterone, oxandrolone, human recombinant growth hormone, insulin, metformin, and propranolol in improving skeletal muscle protein net balance in patients with severe burns. The mechanisms underlying the improvement of protein net balance differ between types and dosages of drugs, but their main effect is on protein synthesis. Finally, the majority of studies have been conducted during the acute hypermetabolic phase of the injury. Except for oxandrolone, the effects of drugs on muscle protein kinetics following discharge from the hospital are largely unknown.
There is no established treatment that improves, arrests, or slows the progression of inclusion-body myositis (IBM). Many anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressant, or immunomodulating agents have been administered to patients with IBM but the design of clinical trials was such that it can only be concluded that none produced rapid improvement. The natural history of the disease is for stabilization or improvement in a third of patients for 6 months or more. Thus some agents that did not produce dramatic benefit may have been prematurely abandoned. However, because high-dose prednisone worsens strength while decreasing inflammation but increases amyloid accumulation, alternative targets for intervention and novel treatment strategies are needed.
This mini review summarizes papers presented in a Joint Symposium between the Bone, Growth Plate and Turner Syndrome Working Groups of the European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology (ESPE) that was held on September 9, 2009, in New York.The program had been composed to give an update on hormones and genes of importance in bone physiology and their influence on bone mineralization and growth in Turner syndrome. This paper summarizes the data and highlights the main topics and discussions related to each presentation.
The induction of puberty is physically and emotionally disturbing. For that reason, low doses of medication need to be introduced and increased slowly, regardless of the age at which treatment is started. In boys with growth delay, the growth spurt may be induced earlier in the sequence of pubertal developmental by using oxandrolone, but puberty itself is induced by slowly increasing doses of testosterone. For girls with ovarian failure, oestradiol should be introduced from the age of 8 or 9 years, but doses should be very cautiously increased in order to allow time for cosmetic development of breasts and growth of the uterus.
The treatment of growth failure in children with documented GH deficiency remains the only noncontroversial indication for GH therapy. There are increasing data suggesting that GH may be useful in treating some children with Turner's syndrome and with NVSS. Further studies, however, are necessary to evaluate the long-term efficacy and safety of GH therapy in these children. The treatment of non-GH deficient children whose heights are within two standard deviations of the mean height for age is clearly inappropriate and should be avoided, despite parental protests.
Alcoholic hepatitis is a frequent reason for admission and a common consultation request for hepatologists and gastroenterologists. Although it seems to occur acutely, it is usually subacute and often superimposed on underlying alcoholic cirrhosis. Typically patients have a background of drinking on a daily basis, but, in response to a life crisis, patients have started drinking massively.
Short stature is the single most common physical abnormality in Turner syndrome (TS) with adult stature averaging 20 cm shorter than that of the general population. Randomized, placebo-controlled studies to final adult height have proven that GH therapy is effective in increasing stature in TS. Recently, randomized, controlled studies have demonstrated that adjunctive therapies with low-dose estrogen or low-dose oxandrolone enhance stature further. These therapies may provide benefits beyond height augmentation.
The therapeutic management of female delayed puberty depends more on the objectives than on the underlying cause. We will have to consider the development of sex characteristics, the occurrence of menarche and the promotion of growth. In this paper, we will review how girls with delayed puberty of different etiologies can benefit from the following therapeutic alternatives: follow-up without hormonal therapy; administration of growth hormone, anabolic steroids (e.g. oxandrolone) or estrogens and progestogens, and psychological support.
