Oxaprozin, a propionic acid derivative, is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) with analgesic and antipyretic properties. Its spectrum of anti-inflammatory activity has been demonstrated in both in vitro and in vivo models.1 The majority of published clinical trials have focused on the use of oxaprozin (from Searle) in the treatment of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Drug-induced pseudoporphyria is commonly linked to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as naproxen, oxaprozin, ketoprofen, and ibuprofen. The NSAID meloxicam is not a commonly reported inciting agent. We report a case of meloxicam-induced pseudoporphyria in a 55-year-old woman with a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and osteoarthritis. She presented to the clinic with tense and denuded bullae on her dorsal feet, which was diagnosed as pseudoporphyria after further workup. Upon evaluating the patient's medication history, meloxicam was identified as the most likely inciting agent. The patient's condition resolved with the discontinuation of this medication. Our findings can help dermatologists effectively diagnose and treat meloxicam-induced pseudoporphyria in patients with similar cases.
Severe gastro-intestinal complications are a major cause of NSAID-induced deaths in cases of rheumatoid arthritis. We measured COX selectivity by using an intact cell assay system, and found that NS-398 is a highly COX-2-selective inhibitor. Meloxicam, etodolac and diclofenac also showed high COX-2 selectivity. Zaltoprofen, loxoprofen-SRS (active metabolite of loxoprofen), 6-MNA (active metabolite of nabumetone) and ibuprofen showed intermediate COX-2 selectivity. The lowest COX-2 selectivities, which means the highest COX-1 selectivities, were observed in indomethacin, aspirin, and oxaprozin. There appears to be a good relationship between our data and some clinical data of severe gastro-intestinal toxicity. The more a given NSAID is selective for COX-2, the safer it is for clinical use. In conclusion, to anticipate the safety of NSAIDs, we find that an intact cell assay system, using human cells for measurement of COX selectivity, may be more useful than using direct enzyme assay systems.
Oxaprozin is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug which reaches peak plasma concentrations 2 to 6 hours after oral administration. Oxaprozin binds extensively, in a concentration-dependent manner, to plasma albumin. The area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of oxaprozin is linearly proportional to the dose for oral doses up to 1200 mg. At doses greater than 1200 mg there is an increase in the unbound fraction of drug, leading to an increased clearance and volume of distribution (Vd) of total oxaprozin. Accumulation of the drug at steady state is between 40 and 58% lower than predicted by single dose data. After administration of multiple doses, the apparent oral clearance (CL/F) and Vd of total oxaprozin increased while those of the unbound drug decreased significantly. Substantial concentrations of oxaprozin are attained in synovial fluid, which is a proposed site of action for nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Relationships between total plasma, unbound plasma and synovial concentrations, and therapeutic and toxicological effects have yet to be established. Oxaprozin is eliminated following biotransformation to glucuroconjugated metabolites which are excreted in urine and bile, with little drug being eliminated unchanged. Two hydroxylated metabolites have been shown to possess anti-inflammatory activity. Hepatic disease and rheumatoid arthritis do not significantly alter the disposition of oxaprozin. Patients with renal impairment demonstrate an increase in unbound plasma concentrations of oxaprozin. A significant drug interaction has been demonstrated between oxaprozin and aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid).
Oxaprozin is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug characterised by a propionic acid-based structure. It is able to diffuse easily into inflamed synovial tissues after oral administration. Although discovered > 20 years ago, it is now under intensive investigation because of its unusual pharmacodynamic properties. Other than being a nonselective cyclooxygenase inhibitor, the drug is capable of inhibiting both anandamide hydrolase in neurons (median inhibitory concentration [IC50] = 85 micromol/l), with consequent potent analgesic activity, and NF-kappaB activation in inflammatory cells (IC50 = 50 micromol/l). Moreover, oxaprozin induces apoptosis of activated monocytes in a dose-dependent manner, with the effect being detectable at a concentration of 5 micromol/l and reaching the maximum activity at 50 micromol/l. As monocyte-macrophages and NF-kappaB pathways are crucial for synthesis of proinflammatory and histotoxic mediators in inflamed joints, oxaprozin appears to be endowed with pharmacodynamic properties exceeding those presently assumed as markers of classical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may interfere with the anti-platelet activity of aspirin at the level of the platelet cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) enzyme. In order to examine the interference of common NSAIDs with the anti-platelet activity of aspirin the human platelet rich plasma from voluntary donors was used for arachidonic acid-induced aggregation and determination of thromboxane synthesis. Further, docking studies were used to explain the molecular basis of the NSAID/aspirin interaction. The experimental results showed that celecoxib, dipyrone (active metabolite), ibuprofen, flufenamic acid, naproxen, nimesulide, oxaprozin, and piroxicam significantly interfere with the anti-platelet activity of aspirin, while diclofenac, ketorolac and acetaminophen do not. Docking studies suggested that NSAIDs forming hydrogen bonds with Ser530, Arg120, Tyr385 and other amino acids of the COX-1 hydrophobic channel interfere with antiplatelet activity of aspirin while non interfering NSAIDs do not form relevant hydrogen bond interactions within the aspirin binding site. In conclusion, docking analysis of NSAID interactions at the COX-1 active site appears useful to predict their interference with the anti-platelet activity of aspirin. The results, demonstrate that some NSAIDs do not interfere with the antiplatelet action of aspirin while many others do and provide a basis for understanding the observed differences among individual non-aspirin NSAIDs.
The kinetics of a single 1200 mg oral dose of oxaprozin, a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agent of the propionic acid class, was studied in 22 healthy female volunteers aged 21 to 64 years. Eleven subjects had been taking a conjugated estrogen preparation for at least 3 months; the other 11 subjects served as control women who were not taking conjugated estrogens. Mean pharmacokinetic variables in control and conjugated estrogen groups were: volume of distribution, 15.1 vs 14.1 l; elimination half-life, 59.8 vs 54.2 h; clearance, 3.2 vs 3.1 ml/min; peak plasma concentration, 84.8 vs 90.7 micrograms/ml, respectively. None of the differences were significant. However, the time of peak concentration (8.9 vs 4.0 h) was significantly longer in the control group than in the conjugated estrogen group, respectively (p less than 0.05). Oxaprozin clearance, accomplished by a combination of oxidation and conjugation, is unimpaired by coadministration of conjugated estrogens.
Oxaprozin, an anti-inflammatory agent with a half-life of 50 hours, was compared in regard to efficacy and tolerance with sulindac in a 12-week double-blind parallel treatment trial of rheumatoid arthritis. Oxaprozin was given as a single morning daily dose of 1200 mg, sulindac was given as 200 mg twice daily. Analysis of the results from the 20 patients (10 in each group) who completed the trial indicated that both drugs produced statistically significant improvement in morning stiffness, walking speed and the Ritchie index, but only sulindac produced significant improvement in hand function. Neither drug was associated with significant side-effects.
The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, adverse effects, and dosage of oxaprozin are reviewed. Oxaprozin, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) under consideration for approval by the Food and Drug Administration, is characterized as a propionic acid. By inhibiting cyclo-oxygenase, oxaprozin decreases the formation of prostaglandin (PG) precursors from arachidonic acid, resulting in decreased PG biosynthesis and reduced pain and inflammatory responses. Oxaprozin is well absorbed after oral administration, and peak plasma concentration is reached in three to six hours. Oxaprozin is primarily eliminated by urinary excretion of the unchanged drug. It has a long elimination half-life and persists in synovial fluid. In clinical studies, oxaprozin was equally or more effective than aspirin and as effective as naproxen in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. For treatment of osteoarthritis, oxaprozin was as effective as naproxen and more effective than aspirin or piroxicam. Studies have also shown oxaprozin to be effective therapy for juvenile rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis. Oxaprozin, like other NSAIDs, can cause gastrointestinal adverse effects. Other possible adverse effects include allergic reactions, analgesic nephropathy, hepatotoxicity, and increased bleeding times. For adults, the anticipated daily dosage is 600-1200 mg given as a single dose for rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, and analgesia. In children, oxaprozin 10-20 mg/kg/day has been used to treat juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Oxaprozin is as effective as other NSAIDs and offers once-daily dosing; however, it does not offer any therapeutic advantage over other currently available NSAIDs.
Oxaprozin is a newer non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug advocated for use in painful rheumatic and inflammatory conditions. As is the case with some other newer non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, oxaprozin offers the convenience of once-daily administration. Published data suggest that oxaprozin 1200 mg once daily is comparable in effectiveness with usual dosages of aspirin, ibuprofen, indomethacin, naproxen, piroxicam and sulindac in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. More controlled clinical trials in adequate numbers of patients are necessary to evaluate its potential in other rheumatic and inflammatory conditions. Oxaprozin produced fewer gastrointestinal side effects than aspirin, and the short term tolerability of oxaprozin was similar to that of other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. If further definition of its efficacy and tolerability compared with other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs during long term therapy confirms these initially favourable results, then oxaprozin would appear to offer a useful and convenient alternative in the treatment of painful rheumatic and inflammatory conditions.
Nuclear receptor related 1 (Nurr1, NR4A2) is a ligand-sensing transcription factor with neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory roles widely distributed in the CNS. Pharmacological Nurr1 modulation is considered a promising experimental strategy in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease but target validation is incomplete. While significant progress has been made in Nurr1 agonist development, inverse agonists blocking the receptor's constitutive activity are lacking. Here we report comprehensive structure-activity relationship elucidation of oxaprozin which acts as moderately potent and nonselective inverse Nurr1 agonist and RXR agonist. We identified structural determinants selectively driving RXR agonism or inverse Nurr1 agonism of the scaffold enabling the development of selective inverse Nurr1 agonists with enhanced potency and strong efficacy.
Development of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) with a goal of improved efficacy and lower toxicity has continued, resulting in the introduction of etodolac, ketorolac, nabumetone and oxaprozin on the market. Each of these agents appears to be as effective as other commonly used NSAIDs in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis. Studies of nabumetone and etodolac show a lower incidence of serious gastrointestinal toxicity with both drugs, but additional large clinical trials are necessary to confirm these findings. Although ketorolac, which is now available in oral form, is an effective analgesic, its long-term use is limited by a high incidence of gastrointestinal toxicity. Oxaprozin is an effective, long-acting anti-inflammatory analgesic, but its comparative advantages remain undefined.
We evaluated the potential hepatic toxicity of ibuprofen, aspirin, and oxaprozin in 1468 patients with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis by slightly modifying an algorithm that was developed to evaluate the drug relatedness of renal toxicity associated with therapeutic doses of these agents in the same population. Ibuprofen proved to be the safest of these nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; it was associated with no AST elevation that was considered probably drug related as determined by application of the algorithm to laboratory values and information from case report forms. The frequency of probably drug-related AST elevations was highest (5%) with aspirin; with oxaprozin, an investigational nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug, the incidence (3%) fell between that for the other two agents. Thus our findings on the hepatic safety of ibuprofen are consistent with those in the medical literature.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-1/2 (SARS-CoV-1/2) macrodomain 3 (Mac3) is critical for replication and transcription of the viral genome and is therefore a potential therapeutic target. Here, we solved the crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 Mac3, which reveals a small-molecule binding pocket. Two low-molecular-weight drugs, oxaprozin and meclomen, induced different patterns of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) chemical shift perturbations (CSPs). Meclomen binds to site I of SARS-CoV-2 Mac3 with binding pose determined by NMR CSP and transferred paramagnetic relaxation enhancement, while oxaprozin binds to site II as revealed by the crystal structure. Interestingly, oxaprozin and meclomen both perturb residues in site I of SARS-CoV Mac3. Fluorescence polarization experiments further demonstrated that oxaprozin and meclomen inhibited the binding of DNA-G4s to SARS-CoV-2 Mac3. Our work identified two adjacent ligand-binding sites of SARS-CoV-2 Mac3 that shall facilitate structure-guided fragment linking of these compounds for more potent inhibitors.
Oxaprozin (4,5-diphenyl-2-oxazolepropionic acid) is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) which is effective in models of inflammation, pain and pyrexia. It is effective and well tolerated in the clinical management of adult rheumatoid arthritis (RA), osteoarthritis (OA), ankylosing spondylitis, soft tissue disorders and post operative dental pain. Oxaprozin has a high oral bioavailability (95%), with peak plasma concentrations at 3 to 5 hours after dosing. It is metabolised in the liver by oxidative and conjugative pathways and readily eliminated by the renal and faecal routes. Oxaprozin's strong analgesic qualities are particularly useful in painful musculoskeletal conditions such as periarthritis of the shoulder, since it exhibits actions such as inhibition of COX-1 and COX-2 isoenzymes, inhibition of nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB and of metalloproteases, and modulates the endogenous cannabinoid system. This editorial addresses the accompanying paper by Barbara Heller and Rosanna Tarricone on the management of shoulder periarthritis pain, in which they studied the efficacy and safety of oxaprozin compared to the comparator drug diclofenac over a 15 day period. Both oxaprozin and diclofenac compared well in the primary study endpoint of reduction in shoulder pain. Oxaprozin and diclofenac were well tolerated and oxaprozin showed better improvement in shoulder function and in the mental health item of the SF-36 quality of life component. The study by Heller and Tarricone is an addition to the large number of clinical trials which demonstrate that oxaprozin has equal efficacy in comparison with standard doses of commonly used anti-rheumatic agents such as aspirin, diclofenac, ibuprofen, indomethacin etc. in several different painful musculoskeletal conditions.
OBJECTIVE: To describe patients with NSAID-DILI, including genetic factors associated with idiosyncratic DILI. METHODS: In DILIN, subjects with presumed DILI are enrolled and followed for at least 6 months. Causality is adjudicated by a Delphic approach. HLA sequencing of multiethnic NSAID-DILI patients and HLA allele imputation of matching population controls were performed following overall, class and drug-based association analysis. Significant results were tested in a non-Hispanic White (NHW) case-control replication cohort. RESULTS: Between September 2004 and March 2022, causality was adjudicated in 2498, and 55 (41 [75%] women) were assessed as likely due to NSAIDs. Median age at onset was 55 y (range 22-83 y). Diclofenac was the causative drug in 29, celecoxib in 7, ibuprofen in 5, etodolac and meloxicam each in 4. Except for meloxicam and oxaprozin (n = 2), the liver injury was hepatocellular with median R 15-25. HLA-DRB1*04:03 and HLA-B*35:03 were significantly more frequent in NSAID-DILI patients than in non-NSAID DILI controls. Interestingly, 85% of the HLA-DRB1*04:03 carriers developed DILI due to the use of acetic acid derivative NSAIDs, supporting the hypothesis that HLA-DRB1*04:03 could be a drug and/or class risk factor. HLA-B*35:03 but not HLA-DRB1*04:03 association was confirmed in the independent NHW replication cohort, which was largely driven by diclofenac. CONCLUSIONS: Despite prevalent use, NSAID-DILI is infrequent in the United States. Diclofenac is the most commonly implicated, and adherence to warnings of risk and close observation are recommended. The increased frequency of HLA-B*35:03 and DRB1*04:03, driven by diclofenac, suggests the importance of immune-mediated responses.
PURPOSE: Nanostructured Lipid Carriers (NLCs) loading oxaprozin were developed to address an effective drug packaging and targeted delivery, improving the drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics properties and avoiding the local gastric side-effects. Macrophages actively phagocyte particles with sizes larger than 200 nm and, when activated, over-express folate beta receptors - features that in the case of this work constitute the basis for passive and active targeting strategies. METHODS: Two formulations containing oxaprozin were developed: NLCs with and without folate functionalization. In order to target the macrophages folate receptors, a DSPE-PEG2000-FA conjugate was synthesized and added to the NLCs. RESULTS: These formulations presented a relatively low polydispersity index (approximately 0.2) with mean diameters greater than 200 nm and zeta potential inferior to -40 mV. The encapsulation efficiency of the particles was superior to 95% and the loading capacity was of 9%, approximately. The formulations retained the oxaprozin release in simulated gastric fluid (only around 10%) promoting its release on simulated intestinal fluid. MTT and LDH assays revealed that the formulations only presented cytotoxicity in Caco-2 cells for oxaprozin concentrations superior to 100 muM. Permeability studies in Caco-2 cells shown that oxaprozin encapsulation did not interfered with oxaprozin permeability (around 0.8 x 10(-5) cm/s in simulated intestinal fluid and about 1.45 x 10(-5) cm/s in PBS). Moreover, in RAW 264.7 cells NLCs functionalization promoted an increased uptake over time mainly mediated by a caveolae uptake mechanism. CONCLUSIONS: The developed nanoparticles enclose a great potential for oxaprozin oral administration with significant less gastric side-effects.
The nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the most frequently used medications worldwide for the treatment of a variety of common chronic and acute inflammatory conditions. The association between NSAIDs and liver disease is poorly documented, the exceptions being sulindac and, to a lesser degree, diclofenac. The incidence of liver disease is very low and is relatively unimportant compared with the risk of peptic ulcer disease and gastrointestinal bleeding. Reports of hepatic injury range from insignificant and transient liver enzyme elevation to severe and fulminant hepatitis.
OBJECTIVE: To report oxaprozin-induced fulminant hepatic failure. CASE SUMMARY: A 56-year-old woman was admitted with fulminant hepatic failure. Work-up for potential etiologies was negative except for the use of oxaprozin for the preceding two months. Results of premortem liver biopsy were consistent with drug-induced hepatic injury similar to that previously reported with diclofenac. DISCUSSION: Although the literature describes elevation in hepatic transaminase concentrations associated with oxaprozin, fulminant hepatic failure has not been described previously. CONCLUSIONS: Elevations in hepatic transaminase concentrations and now fulminant hepatic failure have been shown to occur with oxaprozin, as previously seen with other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Transaminitis is a known adverse effect of NSAID use, but is usually mild and reversible with discontinuation of drug. Transaminitis may be more likely to occur in the elderly, in patients receiving concurrent potentially hepatotoxic medications, and possibly with the newer long-acting NSAIDs. The existence of fulminant hepatitis, although rare, supports the need for monitoring liver function enzymes during NSAID therapy.
