BACKGROUND: Benzodiazepine dependency can occur as a result of treatment for anxiety disorders or sleep disturbance. While benzodiazepine withdrawal can be challenging, cessation of use can be even more difficult if there are other comorbidities such as oestrogen deficiency with vasomotor symptoms and anxiety disorders. OBJECTIVE: This article provides practical information for general practitioners in the management of patients with benzodiazepine dependence. DISCUSSION: Some patients may have common medical presentations and coexisting drug dependence. It is often difficult to separate these two issues. In the case of benzodiazepine dependence, gradual withdrawal over time and nonpharmacological treatment of the symptoms of withdrawal such as anxiety or insomnia is effective. Better outcomes are achieved where the GP discusses and plans strategies well in advance with the patient. Treatment often involves multiple interventions from various health professionals. General practitioners are ideally placed to coordinate such treatment.
Benzodiazepines ameliorate or prevent the symptoms and complications of moderate to severe alcohol withdrawal, which can include autonomic hyperactivity, agitation, combativeness, hallucinations, seizures, delirium, and death. The benzodiazepines most commonly used for this purpose are lorazepam, chlordiazepoxide, oxazepam, and diazepam. It is widely asserted that no member of this group is superior to the others for treatment of alcohol withdrawal. However, of these, diazepam has the shortest time to peak effect, which facilitates both rapid control of symptoms and accurate titration to avoid over-sedation. Furthermore, diazepam and its active metabolite, desmethyldiazepam, have the longest elimination half-lives, so their levels decrease in a gradual, self-tapering manner, resulting in a smoother withdrawal, i.e., a lower incidence and severity of both breakthrough symptoms and rebound phenomena, including a possibly decreased seizure risk. Importantly, the fear of increased risk of over-sedation with diazepam compared with other benzodiazepines is based on a misunderstanding of its pharmacokinetics and is unfounded. Similarly, the notion that diazepam should be avoided in patients with liver disease and elderly patients to avoid prolonged over-sedation is based on no more than conjecture. In fact, there is clinical evidence that diazepam is safe for the treatment of alcohol withdrawal in these patients when administered using a simple symptom-based approach. There is one instance in which diazepam should not be used: when intramuscular administration is the only option, the lipophilicity of diazepam can result in slow absorption-either lorazepam or, when rapid control of symptoms is required, midazolam should be used. The comparative pharmacokinetics of the benzodiazepines used in the treatment of alcohol withdrawal together with a comprehensive review of the literature on their use strongly suggest that diazepam should be the preferred benzodiazepine for the treatment of patients experiencing moderate to severe alcohol withdrawal under most circumstances.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: There have been few head-to-head clinical trials of pharmacotherapies for alcohol withdrawal (AW). We, therefore, aimed to evaluate the comparative performance of pharmacotherapies for AW. METHODS: Six databases were searched for randomized clinical trials through November 2021. Trials were included after a blinded review by two independent reviewers. Outcomes included incident seizures, delirium tremens, AW severity scores, adverse events, dropouts, dropouts from adverse events, length of hospital stay, use of additional medications, total benzodiazepine requirements, and death. Effect sizes were pooled using frequentist random-effects network meta-analysis models to generate summary ORs and Cohen's d standardized mean differences (SMDs). RESULTS: Across the 149 trials, there were 10 692 participants (76% male, median 43.5 years old). AW severity spanned mild (n = 32), moderate (n = 51), and severe (n = 66). Fixed-schedule chlormethiazole (OR, 0.16; 95% CI, 0.04-0.65), fixed-schedule diazepam (OR, 0.16; 95% CI, 0.04-0.59), fixed-schedule lorazepam (OR = 0.19; 95% CI, 0.08-0.45), fixed-schedule chlordiazepoxide (OR = 0.21; 95% CI, 0.08-0.53), and divalproex (OR = 0.22; 95% CI, 0.05-0.86) were superior to placebo at reducing incident AW seizures. However, only fixed-schedule diazepam (OR, 0.19; 95% CI, 0.05-0.76) reduced incident delirium tremens. Oxcarbazepine (d = -3.69; 95% CI, -6.21 to -1.17), carbamazepine (d = -2.76; 95% CI, -4.13 to -1.40), fixed-schedule oxazepam (d = -2.55; 95% CI, -4.26 to -0.83), and gamma-hydroxybutyrate (d = -1.80; 95% CI, -3.35 to -0.26) improved endpoint Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol-Revised scores over placebo. Promazine and carbamazepine were the only agents significantly associated with greater dropouts because of adverse events. The quality of evidence was downgraded because of the substantial risk of bias, heterogeneity, inconsistency, and imprecision. CONCLUSIONS: Although some pharmacotherapeutic modalities, particularly benzodiazepines, appear to be safe and efficacious for reducing some measures of alcohol withdrawal, methodological issues and a high risk of bias prevent a consistent estimate of their comparative performance.
BACKGROUND: Anxiety in relation to surgery is a well-known problem. Melatonin offers an alternative treatment to benzodiazepines for ameliorating this condition in the preoperative and postoperative periods. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of melatonin on preoperative and postoperative anxiety compared to placebo or benzodiazepines. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases on 10 July 2020: CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, and Web of Science. For ongoing trials and protocols, we searched clinicaltrials.gov and the World Health Organization (WHO) International Clinical Trials Registry Platform. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomized, placebo-controlled or standard treatment-controlled (or both) studies that evaluated the effects of preoperatively administered melatonin on preoperative or postoperative anxiety. We included adult patients of both sexes (15 to 90 years of age) undergoing any kind of surgical procedure for which it was necessary to use general, regional, or topical anaesthesia. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: One review author conducted data extraction in duplicate. Data extracted included information about study design, country of origin, number of participants and demographic details, type of surgery, type of anaesthesia, intervention and dosing regimens, preoperative anxiety outcome measures, and postoperative anxiety outcome measures. MAIN RESULTS: We included 27 randomized controlled trials (RCTs), involving 2319 participants, that assessed melatonin for treating preoperative anxiety, postoperative anxiety, or both. Twenty-four studies compared melatonin with placebo. Eleven studies compared melatonin to a benzodiazepine (seven studies with midazolam, three studies with alprazolam, and one study with oxazepam). Other comparators in a small number of studies were gabapentin, clonidine, and pregabalin. No studies were judged to be at low risk of bias for all domains. Most studies were judged to be at unclear risk of bias overall. Eight studies were judged to be at high risk of bias in one or more domain, and thus, to be at high risk of bias overall. Melatonin versus placebo Melatonin probably results in a reduction in preoperative anxiety measured by a visual analogue scale (VAS, 0 to 100 mm) compared to placebo (mean difference (MD) -11.69, 95% confidence interval (CI) -13.80 to -9.59; 18 studies, 1264 participants; moderate-certainty evidence), based on a meta-analysis of 18 studies. Melatonin may reduce immediate postoperative anxiety measured on a 0 to 100 mm VAS compared to placebo (MD -5.04, 95% CI -9.52 to -0.55; 7 studies, 524 participants; low-certainty evidence), and may reduce delayed postoperative anxiety measured six hours after surgery using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) (MD -5.31, 95% CI -8.78 to -1.84; 2 studies; 73 participants; low-certainty evidence). Melatonin versus benzodiazepines (midazolam and alprazolam) Melatonin probably results in little or no difference in preoperative anxiety measured on a 0 to 100 mm VAS (MD 0.78, 95% CI -2.02 to 3.58; 7 studies, 409 participants; moderate-certainty evidence) and there may be little or no difference in immediate postoperative anxiety (MD -2.12, 95% CI -4.61 to 0.36; 3 studies, 176 participants; low-certainty evidence). Adverse events Fourteen studies did not report on adverse events. Six studies specifically reported that no side effects were observed, and the remaining seven studies reported cases of nausea, sleepiness, dizziness, and headache; however, no serious adverse events were reported. Eleven studies measured psychomotor and cognitive function, or both, and in general, these studies found that benzodiazepines impaired psychomotor and cognitive function more than placebo and melatonin. Fourteen studies evaluated sedation and generally found that benzodiazepine caused the highest degree of sedation, but melatonin also showed sedative properties compared to placebo. Several studies did not report on adverse events; therefore, it is not possible to conclude with certainty, from the data on adverse effects collected in this review, that melatonin is better tolerated than benzodiazepines. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: When compared with placebo, melatonin given as premedication (as tablets or sublingually) probably reduces preoperative anxiety in adults (measured 50 to 120 minutes after administration), which is potentially clinically relevant. The effect of melatonin on postoperative anxiety compared to placebo (measured in the recovery room and six hours after surgery) was also evident but was much smaller, and the clinical relevance of this finding is uncertain. There was little or no difference in anxiety when melatonin was compared with benzodiazepines. Thus, melatonin may have a similar effect to benzodiazepines in reducing preoperative and postoperative anxiety in adults.
In this case report we describe a life-threatening episode of delirium in a 51-year-old man. The condition was triggered by an abrupt withdrawal of benzodiazepines. The patient had been taking multiple sedatives for several years but a large proportion of the drugs were not available in Denmark. His general practitioner substituted and prescribed oxazepam and zolpidem for ten days. Afterwards the patient did not have access to benzodiazepines and developed a severe benzodiazepine withdrawal delirium. He was treated with diazepam and olanzapine with gradual dose reduction.
PURPOSE: To compare the efficacy and safety of non-benzodiazepines (non-BZDs) to benzodiazepines (BZDs) in the treatment of alcohol withdrawal syndrome (AWS). METHODS: For relevant literature, Google Scholar, PubMed, Embase, OVID MEDLINE, EBSCO, Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled Trials, Web of Science, and Scopus were searched. Randomized control trials (RCTs) were included, omitted were nonblinded trials, blinded trials that were not randomized, and open-label studies. The Effective Public Health Practice Project Quality Assessment was used to assess the trial's quality. A meta-analysis and a narrative synthesis were carried out. RESULTS: Twenty non-BZDs and five BZDs were investigated in thirty RCTs. Meta-analysis favored gabapentin over chlordiazepoxide and lorazepam (d = 0.563, p < 0.001) and carbamazepine over oxazepam and lorazepam (d = 0.376, p = 0.029), for reducing Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol-Revised (CIWA-Ar) scale scores. Eleven non-BZDs fared better than BZDs for reducing CIWA-Ar, Total Severity Assessment, Selective Severity Assessment, Borg and Weinholdt, and Gross Rating Scale for Alcohol Withdrawal scores. Eight non-BZDs outmatched BZDs regarding autonomic, motor, awareness, and psychiatric symptoms. Sedation and fatigue were prevalent in BZDs, while seizures were prevalent in non-BZDs. CONCLUSION: For AWS treatments, non-BZDs are superior to or equally effective as BZDs. Non-BZD adverse events warrant further investigation. Agents that inhibit gated ion channels are promising candidates. PROTOCOL REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42022384875.
Benzodiazepines are a group of drugs which have been extensively used for their activities as an anti-anxiety, sedative, muscle relaxant and anti-convulsant. Benzodiazepines at present are the most commonly prescribed drugs. Some of these drugs are teratogenic and also carcinogenic in experimental animals. The wide human exposure to this group of drugs throughout the world is of great concern for human health. In the present review, we have attempted to evaluate and update the mutagenic and genotoxic effects of four of the most commonly used benzodiazepines, i.e., chlordiazepoxide (CDZ), diazepam (DZ), nitrazepam (NZ) and oxazepam (OZ) based on available literature.
Outpatient detoxification of patients with alcohol or other drug addiction is being increasingly undertaken. This type of management is appropriate for patients in stage I or stage II of withdrawal who have no significant comorbid conditions and have a support person willing to monitor their progress. Adequate dosages of appropriate substitute medications are important for successful detoxification. In addition, comorbid psychiatric, personality and medical disorders must be managed, and social and environmental concerns need to be addressed. By providing supportive, nonjudgmental, yet assertive care, the family physician can facilitate the best possible chance for a patient's successful recovery.
As with most psychotropic sedative drugs, the potential for withdrawal reactions is present with the benzodiazepines (19). Signs suggesting the potential for withdrawal reactions can be gleaned from the clinical course of events such as the development of tolerance anc psychological and physiological dependence. If high doses are reached, the risk of withdrawal reactions increases with the length of treatment and the abruptness of cessation. The long-acting benzodiazepines have a built-in mechanism against withdrawal reactions through their active metabolites. Abrupt cessation of drug therapy in high-dose patients should be avoided to reduce the risk of withdrawal reactions.
Four pharmacologic differences among the benzodiazepines, which are the drugs of choice to conduct alcohol withdrawal, guide selection of the appropriate one: chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, oxazepam, or chlorazepate. Bases for selection include: (1) availability of other than oral dosage forms; (2) differences in additive effect with alcohol in producing central nervous system depression; (3) differences in anticonvulsant effect; and (4) differences in duration of effect in the body (ie, half-life). Decreasing dosage schedules are preferred to a steady dosage. Illustrative dosage schedules for using chlordiazepoxide and diazepam to conduct alcohol withdrawal are given.
Knowledge of the pharmacokinetic properties of the benzodiazepines is playing an increasingly important role in their use during pregnancy, labour and lactation. All of the benzodiazepine derivatives are lipophilic, undissociated agents which readily penetrate membranes. Thus, they exhibit rapid placental transfer with significant fetal uptake of the drug. In the first trimester of pregnancy there is seldom a clear indication for the use of benzodiazepines. In late pregnancy and at parturition there may be more clear indications for their use. During delivery, the lowest effective dose should be used, since after high doses the so-called 'floppy infant syndrome' may occur, and the slow elimination of these agents by the newborn should be considered. Oxazepam, lorazepam, nitrazepam and, especially, flunitrazepam, appear to penetrate the human placenta more slowly than diazepam, but the clinical significance of this phenomenon remains uncertain. All of these derivatives appear in human milk, but only high clinical doses might be expected to exert a possible effect on the nursing newborn.
A large number of benzodiazepines have been studied for use as sedatives and for their anxiolytic potential as premedicants for outpatient surgery. Potent, new, orally-administered drugs with short half-lives, rapid onset, and minimal residual effects have been developed. Dose-dependent amnesia is also produced by some of these agents. Advances in understanding receptor physiology have shed light on specific pharmacologic activities and aided the discovery of benzodiazepine antagonists with antidote properties. While these drugs have relatively low toxicity, dose-related oversedation remains a risk in susceptible patients, especially when combined with other sedatives.
OBJECTIVE: Passionflower (Passiflora incarnata) is a folk remedy for anxiety. A double-blind randomized trial compared the efficacy of Passiflora incarnata extract with oxazepam in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. METHODS: The study was performed on 36 out-patients diagnosed with GAD using DSM IV criteria. Patients were allocated in a random fashion: 18 to the Passiflora extract 45 drops/day plus placebo tablet group, and 18 to oxazepam 30 mg/day plus placebo drops for a 4-week trial. RESULTS: Passiflora extract and oxazepam were effective in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. No significant difference was observed between the two protocols at the end of trial. Oxazepam showed a rapid onset of action. On the other hand, significantly more problems relating to impairment of job performance were encountered with subjects on oxazepam. CONCLUSION: The results suggest that Passiflora extract is an effective drug for the management of generalized anxiety disorder, and the low incidence of impairment of job performance with Passiflora extract compared to oxazepam is an advantage. A large-scale trial is justified.
1. Twenty-nine patients with anxiety neurosis who had completed a one week placebo, three week active drug study on either halazepam or oxazepam were observed for eight weeks for withdrawal effects. Half of the patients received a placebo for the first two weeks of the withdrawal study and half had all medication abruptly stopped. 2. There was no significant difference in the pattern of withdrawal between halazepam, an intermediate range benzodiazepine, and oxazepam, a short acting benzodiazepine. 3. Withdrawal symptoms were apparent, maximally between week 1 and 2 together with possible rebound effects. 4. Patients who received placebo had significantly less severe withdrawal symptoms than those who had their medication abruptly discontinued.
1 The pharmacokinetic characteristics of the six benzodiazepine anxiolytic drugs available in the United States are reviewed. 2 Concern over the abuse potential of the benzodiazepine class of drugs is discussed.
Twelve patients acted successfully as subjects to study what effect if any the benzodiazepines nitrazepam, diazepam, oxazepam, and chlordiazepoxide might have on steady-state plasma levels of nortriptyline and amitriptyline. No significant detectable effect was discovered. In view of the known interaction effects of other alternative tranquillizing drugs and hypnotics it seems reasonable to choose benzodiazepines wherever possible when anxiolytics or hypnotics need to be added during treatment of depression with tricyclic antidepressants.
In a multicentre, double-blind, parallel study performed in 78 hospitalized patients who complained of mild, moderate or severe insomnia, the efficacy and safety of 15 mg midazolam were compared with those of 15 mg oxazepam, both orally administered. The results showed statistically significant better results in the onset of sleep in the patients treated with midazolam. Other sleep parameters, such as quality and duration of sleep as well as the condition of the patients on morning awakenings, were also improved in more patients treated with midazolam. Safety (clinical and biological) was very good in both groups of patients.
Pharmacokinetic research has shown that clear differences exist among benzodiazepines in rate and route of elimination and in the presence or absence of pharmacologically active metabolites. These findings and other results of pharmacokinetic research have clinical implications in terms of dosage schedules, drug accumulation during long-term therapy, antianxiety therapy in the elderly, drug interactions, pharmacotherapy in specific disease states, and the influence of route of administration on drug action.
We examined the results of 1.3 million drug tests performed on patients being monitored for compliance with pain medications and substance abuse rehabilitation to determine if the 2016 CDC prescribing guidelines had any impact on opiate benzodiazepine use. We observed that the combination of the opiate drugs morphine, oxycodone, and hydrocodone with the benzodiazepine metabolites oxazepam, alphahydroxyalprazolam, and 7-aminoclonazepam showed many patients were on a combination of these drugs. This ranged from approximately 9 to 16%. There was considerable variability between opiate drug pairs, but there was a general trend to fewer patients on the combination of opiate-benzodiazepine over the 2016 to 2019 time frame.
Although scientists have been investigating the neurobiology of psychomotor stimulant reward for many decades, there is still no FDA-approved treatment for cocaine or methamphetamine abuse. Research in our laboratory has focused on the relationship between stress, the subsequent activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, and psychomotor stimulant reinforcement for almost 30 years. This research has led to the development of a combination of low doses of the cortisol synthesis inhibitor, metyrapone, and the benzodiazepine, oxazepam, as a potential pharmacological treatment for cocaine and other substance use disorders. In fact, we have conducted a pilot clinical trial that demonstrated that this combination can reduce cocaine craving and cocaine use. Our initial hypothesis underlying this effect was that the combination of metyrapone and oxazepam reduced cocaine seeking and taking by decreasing activity within the HPA axis. Even so, doses of the metyrapone and oxazepam combination that consistently reduced cocaine taking and seeking did not reliably alter plasma corticosterone (or cortisol in the pilot clinical trial). Furthermore, subsequent research has demonstrated that this drug combination is effective in adrenalectomized rats, suggesting that these effects must be mediated above the level of the adrenal gland. Our evolving hypothesis is that the combination of metyrapone and oxazepam produces its effects by increasing the levels of neuroactive steroids, most notably tetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone, in the medial prefrontal cortex and amygdala. Additional research will be necessary to confirm this hypothesis and may lead to the development of improved and specific pharmacotherapies for the treatment of psychomotor stimulant use.
