Hyponatremia induced by antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) has not received sufficient attention in patients with epilepsy. Areas covered: We reviewed articles between 1966 and 2015 about hyponatremia as an adverse effect of AEDs in patients with epilepsy. The incidence, clinical symptoms, onset times of AEDs-induced hyponatremia are discussed in detail, as are the risk factors associated with AEDs-induced hyponatremia and mechanisms underlying its development. We also briefly describe strategies for treating AED-induced hyponatremia. Expert opinion: Carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine are the most common AEDs which induce hyponatremia in patients with epilepsy. Recently, other AEDs, such as eslicarbazepine, sodium valproate, lamotrigine, levetiracetam and gabapentin have also been reported to cause hyponatremia. Understanding the risk associated with AED-induced hyponatremia and taking effective measures to combat serum sodium imbalance induced by AED therapy are necessary.
Trigeminal neuralgia is a very painful neurological condition with severe, stimulus-evoked, short-lasting stabbing pain attacks in the face. The past decade has offered new insights into trigeminal neuralgia symptomatology, pathophysiology, and treatment, leading to a change in the classification of the condition. An accurate diagnosis is crucial because neuroimaging interpretation and clinical management differ among the various forms of facial pain. MRI using specific sequences should be a part of the diagnostic workup to detect a possible neurovascular contact and exclude secondary causes. Demonstration of a neurovascular contact should not be used to confirm a diagnosis but rather to facilitate surgical decision making. Carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine are drugs of first choice for long-term treatment, whereas microvascular decompression is the first-line surgery in medically refractory patients. Advances in neuroimaging techniques and animal models will provide further insight into the causes of trigeminal neuralgia and its pathophysiology. Development of more efficacious treatment options is highly warranted.
Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is a highly disabling disorder characterised by very severe, brief and electric shock like recurrent episodes of facial pain. New diagnostic criteria, which subclassify TN on the basis of presence of trigeminal neurovascular conflict or an underlying neurological disorder, should be used as they allow better characterisation of patients and help in decision-making regarding medical and surgical treatments. MR imaging, including high-resolution trigeminal sequences, should be performed as part of the diagnostic work-up. Carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine are drugs of first choice. Lamotrigine, gabapentin, pregabalin, botulinum toxin type A and baclofen can be used either alone or as add-on therapy. Surgery should be considered if the pain is poorly controlled or the medical treatments are poorly tolerated. Trigeminal microvascular decompression is the first-line surgery in patients with trigeminal neurovascular conflict while neuroablative surgical treatments can be offered if MR imaging does not show any neurovascular contact or where patients are considered too frail for microvascular decompression or do not wish to take the risk.
The trigeminal nerve (V) is the fifth and largest of all cranial nerves, and it is responsible for detecting sensory stimuli that arise from the craniofacial area. The nerve is divided into three branches: ophthalmic (V1), maxillary (V2), and mandibular (V3); their cell bodies are located in the trigeminal ganglia and they make connections with second-order neurons in the trigeminal brainstem sensory nuclear complex. Ascending projections via the trigeminothalamic tract transmit information to the thalamus and other brain regions responsible for interpreting sensory information. One of the most common forms of craniofacial pain is trigeminal neuralgia. Trigeminal neuralgia is characterized by sudden, brief, and excruciating facial pain attacks in one or more of the V branches, leading to a severe reduction in the quality of life of affected patients. Trigeminal neuralgia etiology can be classified into idiopathic, classic, and secondary. Classic trigeminal neuralgia is associated with neurovascular compression in the trigeminal root entry zone, which can lead to demyelination and a dysregulation of voltage-gated sodium channel expression in the membrane. These alterations may be responsible for pain attacks in trigeminal neuralgia patients. The antiepileptic drugs carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine are the first-line pharmacological treatment for trigeminal neuralgia. Their mechanism of action is a modulation of voltage-gated sodium channels, leading to a decrease in neuronal activity. Although carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine are the first-line treatment, other drugs may be useful for pain control in trigeminal neuralgia. Among them, the anticonvulsants gabapentin, pregabalin, lamotrigine and phenytoin, baclofen, and botulinum toxin type A can be coadministered with carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine for a synergistic approach. New pharmacological alternatives are being explored such as the active metabolite of oxcarbazepine, eslicarbazepine, and the new Nav1.7 blocker vixotrigine. The pharmacological profiles of these drugs are addressed in this review.
Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is a facial pain disorder characterized by intense and paroxysmal pain that profoundly affects quality of life and presents complex challenges in diagnosis and treatment. TN can be categorized as classical, secondary and idiopathic. Epidemiological studies show variable incidence rates and an increased prevalence in women and in the elderly, with familial cases suggesting genetic factors. The pathophysiology of TN is multifactorial and involves genetic predisposition, anatomical changes, and neurophysiological factors, leading to hyperexcitable neuronal states, central sensitization and widespread neural plasticity changes. Neurovascular compression of the trigeminal root, which undergoes major morphological changes, and focal demyelination of primary trigeminal afferents are key aetiological factors in TN. Structural and functional brain imaging studies in patients with TN demonstrated abnormalities in brain regions responsible for pain modulation and emotional processing of pain. Treatment of TN involves a multifaceted approach that considers patient-specific factors, including the type of TN, with initial pharmacotherapy followed by surgical options if necessary. First-line pharmacological treatments include carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine. Surgical interventions, including microvascular decompression and percutaneous neuroablative procedures, can be considered at an early stage if pharmacotherapy is not sufficient for pain control or has intolerable adverse effects or contraindications.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is an extremely painful condition which can be difficult to diagnose and treat. In Europe, TN patients are managed by many different specialities. Therefore, there is a great need for comprehensive European guidelines for the management of TN. The European Academy of Neurology asked an expert panel to develop recommendations for a series of questions that are essential for daily clinical management of patients with TN. METHODS: A systematic review of the literature was performed and recommendations was developed based on GRADE, where feasible; if not, a good practice statement was given. RESULTS: The use of the most recent classification system is recommended, which diagnoses TN as primary TN, either classical or idiopathic depending on the degree of neurovascular contact, or as secondary TN caused by pathology other than neurovascular contact. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), using a combination of three high-resolution sequences, should be performed as part of the work-up in TN patients, because no clinical characteristics can exclude secondary TN. If MRI is not possible, trigeminal reflexes can be used. Neurovascular contact plays an important role in primary TN, but demonstration of a neurovascular contact should not be used to confirm the diagnosis of TN. Rather, it may help to decide if and when a patient should be referred for microvascular decompression. In acute exacerbations of pain, intravenous infusion of fosphenytoin or lidocaine can be used. For long-term treatment, carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine are recommended as drugs of first choice. Lamotrigine, gabapentin, botulinum toxin type A, pregabalin, baclofen and phenytoin may be used either alone or as add-on therapy. It is recommended that patients should be offered surgery if pain is not sufficiently controlled medically or if medical treatment is poorly tolerated. Microvascular decompression is recommended as first-line surgery in patients with classical TN. No recommendation can be given for choice between any neuroablative treatments or between them and microvascular decompression in patients with idiopathic TN. Neuroablative treatments should be the preferred choice if MRI does not demonstrate any neurovascular contact. Treatment for patients with secondary TN should in general follow the same principles as for primary TN. In addition to medical and surgical management, it is recommended that patients are offered psychological and nursing support. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with previous TN guidelines, there are important changes regarding diagnosis and imaging. These allow better characterization of patients and help in decision making regarding the planning of medical and surgical management. Recommendations on pharmacological and surgical management have been updated. There is a great need for future research on all aspects of TN, including pathophysiology and management.
BACKGROUND: Evidence for the comparative teratogenic risk of antiepileptic drugs is insufficient, particularly in relation to the dosage used. Therefore, we aimed to compare the occurrence of major congenital malformations following prenatal exposure to the eight most commonly used antiepileptic drugs in monotherapy. METHODS: We did a longitudinal, prospective cohort study based on the EURAP international registry. We included data from pregnancies in women who were exposed to antiepileptic drug monotherapy at conception, prospectively identified from 42 countries contributing to EURAP. Follow-up data were obtained after each trimester, at birth, and 1 year after birth. The primary objective was to compare the risk of major congenital malformations assessed at 1 year after birth in offspring exposed prenatally to one of eight commonly used antiepileptic drugs (carbamazepine, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, topiramate, and valproate) and, whenever a dose dependency was identified, to compare the risks at different dose ranges. Logistic regression was used to make direct comparisons between treatments after adjustment for potential confounders and prognostic factors. FINDINGS: Between June 20, 1999, and May 20, 2016, 7555 prospective pregnancies met the eligibility criteria. Of those eligible, 7355 pregnancies were exposed to one of the eight antiepileptic drugs for which the prevalence of major congenital malformations was 142 (10.3%) of 1381 pregnancies for valproate, 19 (6.5%) of 294 for phenobarbital, eight (6.4%) of 125 for phenytoin, 107 (5.5%) of 1957 for carbamazepine, six (3.9%) of 152 for topiramate, ten (3.0%) of 333 for oxcarbazepine, 74 (2.9%) of 2514 for lamotrigine, and 17 (2.8%) of 599 for levetiracetam. The prevalence of major congenital malformations increased with the dose at time of conception for carbamazepine (p=0.0140), lamotrigine (p=0.0145), phenobarbital (p=0.0390), and valproate (p<0.0001). After adjustment, multivariable analysis showed that the prevalence of major congenital malformations was significantly higher for all doses of carbamazepine and valproate as well as for phenobarbital at doses of more than 80 mg/day than for lamotrigine at doses of 325 mg/day or less. Valproate at doses of 650 mg/day or less was also associated with increased risk of major congenital malformations compared with levetiracetam at doses of 250-4000 mg/day (odds ratio [OR] 2.43, 95% CI 1.30-4.55; p=0.0069). Carbamazepine at doses of more than 700 mg/day was associated with increased risk of major congenital malformations compared with levetiracetam at doses of 250-4000 mg/day (OR 2.41, 95% CI 1.33-4.38; p=0.0055) and oxcarbazepine at doses of 75-4500 mg/day (2.37, 1.17-4.80; p=0.0169). INTERPRETATION: Different antiepileptic drugs and dosages have different teratogenic risks. Risks of major congenital malformation associated with lamotrigine, levetiracetam, and oxcarbazepine were within the range reported in the literature for offspring unexposed to antiepileptic drugs. These findings facilitate rational selection of these drugs, taking into account comparative risks associated with treatment alternatives. Data for topiramate and phenytoin should be interpreted cautiously because of the small number of exposures in this study. FUNDING: Bial, Eisai, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi-Aventis, UCB, the Netherlands Epilepsy Foundation, and Stockholm County Council.
Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders, affecting approximately 50 million people worldwide. Despite a dramatic increase in treatment options over the past 30 years, it still ranks fourth in the world's disease burden. There are now close to 30 antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), with more than two thirds introduced to the market after carbamazepine (CBZ) and one third after its derivative, oxcarbazepine (OXC). Following the introduction of these newer AEDs, the role of CBZ and OXC in the therapeutic armamentarium for seizure control and effective epilepsy management needs to be reviewed. The main guidelines list both CBZ and OXC as first-line options or second-line alternatives for the treatment of focal-onset epilepsy and primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures. While evidence suggests that overall AEDs have similar efficacy, some newer AEDs may be better tolerated than CBZ. In line with this, there have been changes in treatment patterns, with many variations across different countries. However, CBZ remains among the two or three most prescribed drugs for focal epilepsy in many countries, and is widely used across Europe, Africa, South America, and Asia, where it represents a good compromise between cost, availability, and effectiveness. OXC is among the first-choice options for the initial treatment of focal-onset seizures in several countries, including the US and China, where the oral suspension is commonly prescribed. This review provides guidance on the optimal use of these two drugs in clinical practice, including in children, the elderly, and in pregnancy.
INTRODUCTION: Trigeminal neuralgia is a rare condition that can be effectively treated by carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine but these older drugs are associated with dose-dependent and potentially treatment-limiting adverse effects. Third-generation anticonvulsants, new calcitonin gene-related peptide blockers for migraine, and older drugs such as ketamine and cannabinoids may be promising adjuvants or monotherapeutic options. AREAS COVERED: The new drugs, their presumed mechanisms of action, safety and efficacy are discussed herein. There is a paucity of robust clinical evidence in support of these drugs for trigeminal neuralgia. New migraine agents are considered as well although migraines and trigeminal neuralgia are distinct, albeit similar, conditions. No new drugs have been released to market in recent years with the specific indication of trigeminal neuralgia. EXPERT OPINION: In real-world clinical practice, about half of trigeminal neuralgia patients take more than one agent for prevention and combination therapy may be the optimal approach. Combination therapy might allow for lower doses of carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine, thus reducing the number and severity of potential adverse events but the potential for pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions must be considered. Drug therapy for trigeminal neuralgia involves acute or abortive treatments, often administered in hospital versus long-term preventive therapy, usually involving oral agents.
IMPORTANCE: Women with epilepsy (WWE) require treatment with antiseizure medications (ASMs) during pregnancy, which may be associated with an increased risk of major congenital malformations (MCMs) in their offspring. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of MCMs after prenatal exposure to 8 commonly used ASM monotherapies and changes in MCM prevalence over time. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a prospective, observational, longitudinal cohort study conducted from June 1999 to October 2022. Since 1999, physicians from more than 40 countries enrolled ASM-treated WWE before pregnancy outcome was known and followed up their offspring until 1 year after birth. Participants aged 14 to 55 years who were exposed to 8 of the most frequently used ASMs during pregnancy were included in this study. Data were analyzed from April to September 2023. EXPOSURE: Maternal use of ASMs at conception. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: MCMs were assessed 1 year after birth by a committee blinded to type of exposure. Teratogenic outcomes across exposures were compared by random-effects logistic regression adjusting for potential confounders and prognostic factors. RESULTS: A total of 10 121 prospective pregnancies exposed to ASM monotherapy met eligibility criteria. Of those, 9840 were exposed to the 8 most frequently used ASMs. The 9840 pregnancies occurred in 8483 women (mean [range] age, 30.1 [14.1-55.2] years). MCMs occurred in 153 of 1549 pregnancies for valproate (9.9%; 95% CI, 8.5%-11.5%), 9 of 142 for phenytoin (6.3%; 95% CI, 3.4%-11.6%), 21 of 338 for phenobarbital (6.2%; 95% CI, 4.1%-9.3%), 121 of 2255 for carbamazepine (5.4%; 95% CI, 4.5%-6.4%), 10 of 204 for topiramate (4.9%; 95% CI, 2.7%-8.8%), 110 of 3584 for lamotrigine (3.1%; 95% CI, 2.5%-3.7%), 13 of 443 for oxcarbazepine (2.9%; 95% CI, 1.7%-5.0%), and 33 of 1325 for levetiracetam (2.5%; 95% CI, 1.8%-3.5%). For valproate, phenobarbital, and carbamazepine, there was a significant increase in the prevalence of MCMs associated with increasing dose of the ASM. Overall prevalence of MCMs decreased from 6.1% (153 of 2505) during the period 1998 to 2004 to 3.7% (76 of 2054) during the period 2015 to 2022. This decrease over time was significant in univariable logistic analysis but not after adjustment for changes in ASM exposure pattern. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Of all ASMs with meaningful data, the lowest prevalence of MCMs was observed in offspring exposed to levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, and lamotrigine. Prevalence of MCMs was higher with phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine, and phenobarbital, and dose dependent for the latter 3 ASMs. The shift in exposure pattern over time with a declining exposure to valproate and carbamazepine and greater use of lamotrigine and levetiracetam was associated with a 39% decline in prevalence of MCMs, a finding that has major public health implications.
Background and Objectives: Hyponatremia is one of the most common adverse effects in patients treated with oxcarbazepine (OXC). Different risk factors for OXC-induced hyponatremia have been described as age, female gender, dosage, and combination with other drugs During our clinical practice, we noticed that a longer duration of treatment with OXC could be associated with a higher risk of hyponatremia, therefore, in this study, we aimed to evaluate factors that may increase the risk of OXC-induced hyponatremia. Materials and Methods: Data were retrospectively collected from our clinical database at the Department of Neurology of the Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences Kaunas Clinics. The sample was divided into three groups: OXC consumers (n = 31), other anti-seizure medications (ASMs) consumers (n = 43), and controls absent ASMs (n = 31). All groups were matched by age and gender. Hyponatremia was defined as <136 mmol/L. Results: The frequency of hyponatremia was significantly higher among OXC patients (61.3%) compared to other ASM patients (5.4%) and controls (3.2%). The mean serum sodium concentration in the OXC group was 133.1 +/- 5.1 mmol/L. The frequency of severe hyponatremia among OXC-treated patients was 19.4%; this subgroup was older than patients with moderate hyponatremia and normonatremia and had a longer OXC treatment duration compared to a subgroup of normonatremia. The average duration of OXC therapy was 8.7 +/- 5.5 years with a range from 1 to 21 years. Serum sodium concentration and duration of treatment with OXC demonstrated a significant negative correlation (r = -0,427, p = 0.017). Each year of therapy with OXC increased the risk of hyponatremia 1.3 times (OR = 1.326, 95% Cl 1.027-1.712, p = 0.031). Other factors (gender, age, polypharmacy, OXC dosage, and serum concentration) did not show a significant association with the development of hyponatremia. Conclusions: Longer duration of treatment with OXC is an important factor in the development and severity of hyponatremia.
IMPORTANCE: Prenatal antiseizure medication (ASM) exposure has been associated with adverse early neurodevelopment, but associations with a wider range of psychiatric end points have not been studied. OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between prenatal exposure to ASM with a spectrum of psychiatric disorders in childhood and adolescence in children of mothers with epilepsy. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This prospective, population-based register study assessed 4 546 605 singleton children born alive in Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden from January 1, 1996, to December 31, 2017. Of the 4 546 605 children, 54 953 with chromosomal disorders or uncertain birth characteristics were excluded, and 38 661 children of mothers with epilepsy were identified. Data analysis was performed from August 2021 to January 2023. EXPOSURES: Prenatal exposure to ASM was defined as maternal prescription fills from 30 days before the first day of the last menstrual period until birth. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The main outcome measure was diagnosis of psychiatric disorders (a combined end point and 13 individual disorders). Estimated adjusted hazard ratios (aHRs) using Cox proportional hazards regression and cumulative incidences with 95% CIs are reported. RESULTS: Among the 38 661 children of mothers with epilepsy (16 458 [42.6%] exposed to ASM; 19 582 [51.3%] male; mean [SD] age at the end of study, 7.5 [4.6] years), prenatal valproate exposure was associated with an increased risk of the combined psychiatric end point (aHR, 1.80 [95% CI, 1.60-2.03]; cumulative risk at 18 years in ASM-exposed children, 42.1% [95% CI, 38.2%-45.8%]; cumulative risk at 18 years in unexposed children, 31.3% [95% CI, 28.9%-33.6%]), which was driven mainly by disorders within the neurodevelopmental spectrum. Prenatal exposure to lamotrigine, carbamazepine, and oxcarbazepine was not associated with an increased risk of psychiatric disorders, whereas associations were found for prenatal exposure to topiramate with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (aHR, 2.38; 95% CI, 1.40-4.06) and exposure to levetiracetam with anxiety (aHR, 2.17; 95% CI, 1.26-3.72) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (aHR, 1.78; 95% CI, 1.03-3.07). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Findings from this explorative study strengthen the evidence for the warning against the use of valproate in pregnancy and raise concern of risks of specific psychiatric disorders associated with topiramate and levetiracetam. This study provides reassuring evidence that lamotrigine, carbamazepine, and oxcarbazepine are not associated with long-term behavioral or developmental disorders but cannot rule out risks with higher doses.
The success of carbamazepine (CBZ) as a broad-spectrum antiepileptic drug (AED) has led to its use as first-line therapy in children and adults for partial and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. The limitations of CBZ include toxicity in sensitive individuals, autoinduction, which requires dose adjustment when therapy is initiated, and chronic hepatic induction, producing drug interactions when CBZ is used with AEDs and other drugs that undergo hepatic metabolism. One of two main products of CBZ microsomal metabolism, CBZ-10,11-epoxide (formed by oxidation of the double bond between C-10 and C-11), appears to provide antiepileptic efficacy but contributes significantly to clinical toxicity. The most common adverse effects of CBZ are central nervous system (CNS) symptoms, followed by gastrointestinal, hepatic, endocrine disturbances, and teratogenic effects. Oxcarbazepine (OXC) was developed to provide a compound chemically similar enough to CBZ to mimic its efficacy and overall safety while improving its side-effect profile. Biotransformation of OXC does not involve formation of an epoxide metabolite. Compared with the parent compound, hepatic microsomal enzyme induction and autoinduction are greatly reduced. The clinical efficacy of OXC compares favorably with CBZ in clinical trials. Clinical development of OXC began in Europe. Results of Phase I trials started to appear in the early 1980s. Controlled clinical trials, reported in the mid- to late 1980s, led to approval of OXC in many European countries, and now in over 50 nations around the world. United States multicenter clinical trials have recently been completed, and at this writing the drug is awaiting approval by the FDA. This article reviews the pharmacology, animal data, outcomes of published controlled clinical trials, postmarketing data, adverse experiences, and current recommendations for clinical use of OXC.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Treatment of epilepsy starts with antiepileptic drug (AED) monotherapy. Knowledge of the spectrum of efficacy, clinical pharmacology, and modes of use for individual AEDs is essential for optimal treatment for epilepsy. This article addresses AEDs individually, focusing on key pharmacokinetic characteristics, indications, and modes of use. RECENT FINDINGS: Older-generation AEDs are effective but have tolerability and pharmacokinetic disadvantages. Several newer-generation AEDs have undergone comparative trials demonstrating efficacy equal to and tolerability at least equal to or better than older AEDs as first-line therapy. The list includes lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, levetiracetam, topiramate, and, more recently, zonisamide. Pregabalin was found to be less effective than lamotrigine. Lacosamide, pregabalin, and eslicarbazepine have undergone successful trials of conversion to monotherapy. Other newer-generation AEDs with a variety of mechanisms of action are suitable for adjunctive therapy. Rational AED combinations should avoid AEDs with unfavorable pharmacokinetic interactions or pharmacodynamic interactions related to mechanism of action. SUMMARY: Knowledge of AED pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and tolerability profiles facilitates the choice of appropriate AED therapy for patients with epilepsy.
Management of trigeminal neuralgia, a severe facial pain, remains difficult. All patients are initially treated with drugs. Since the seventeenth century more than 40 different preparations have been used; some of these, although effective, had toxic side effects. The most useful drugs at present are carbamazepine, phenytoin, baclofen, and clonazepam. A new drug, oxcarbazepine, is showing therapeutic promise. The most common reason for therapeutic failure with antineuralgic drugs is inadequate dosage. We review here the pharmacokinetics, side effects, possible drug interactions, plasma and serum therapeutic concentrations, and the available formulations of each drug. On the basis of these considerations and clinical reports describing the use of these drugs, we make dosage recommendations to enable the practitioner to individualize therapeutic regimens.
BACKGROUND: Most pregnant epilepsy patients need to continue using anti-seizure medications (ASMs) to control epileptic seizures. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the risk of early abortion in pregnant epilepsy patients exposed to anti-seizure monotherapy. METHODS AND MATERIAL: We prospectively followed up pregnant epilepsy patients treated with anti-seizure monotherapy in our epilepsy center between January 2010 and January 2020 under real-world conditions. Early abortion (spontaneous abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy) was the endpoint. RESULTS: Of 211 pregnancies exposed to monotherapy, including 40% (n = 85) to lamotrigine (LTG), 28% (n = 58) to oxcarbazepine (OXC), 15% (n = 32) to sodium valproate (VPA), 9% (n = 19) to levetiracetam, and 8% (n = 17) to carbamazepine, six ended in early abortion. The overall risk of early abortion in pregnant patients exposed to ASM monotherapy was 2.8% (n = 6) [95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.013-0.073]. The risk of early abortion was 2.4% (n = 2) (95% CI = 0.003-0.082) in women treated with LTG, 3.5% (n = 2) (95% CI = 0.004-0.115) in women treated with OXC, and 6.3% (n = 2) (95% CI = 0.008-0.208) in women treated with VPA. The relative risk of early abortion in the LTG, OXC, and VPA groups did not reach statistical significance. CONCLUSIONS: Although the sample size of our study was small, these results indicate that the use of anti-seizure monotherapy in pregnant epilepsy patients may not increase the risk of early miscarriage. Larger prospective studies are needed for sufficient statistical analysis.
IMPORTANCE: During pregnancy in women with epilepsy, lower blood concentrations of antiseizure medications can have adverse clinical consequences. OBJECTIVE: To characterize pregnancy-associated concentration changes for several antiseizure medications among women with epilepsy. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Enrollment in this prospective, observational cohort study, Maternal Outcomes and Neurodevelopmental Effects of Antiepileptic Drugs (MONEAD), occurred from December 19, 2012, to February 11, 2016, at 20 US sites. Enrolled cohorts included pregnant women with epilepsy and nonpregnant control participants with epilepsy. Inclusion criteria were women aged 14 to 45 years, an intelligence quotient greater than 70 points, and, for the cohort of pregnant women, a fetal gestational age younger than 20 weeks. A total of 1087 women were assessed for eligibility; 397 were excluded and 230 declined. Data were analyzed from May 1, 2014, to June 30, 2021. EXPOSURE: Medication plasma concentrations in women taking monotherapy or in combination with noninteracting medications. The cohort of pregnant women was monitored through 9 months post partum, with similar time points for control participants. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Dose-normalized concentrations were calculated as total or unbound plasma medication concentrations divided by total daily dose. Phlebotomy was performed during 4 pregnancy study visits and 3 postpartum visits for the pregnant women and 7 visits over 18 months for control participants. The primary hypothesis was to test pregnancy changes of dose-normalized concentrations from nonpregnant postpartum samples compared with those of control participants. RESULTS: Of the 351 pregnant women and 109 control participants enrolled in MONEAD, 326 pregnant women (median [range] age, 29 [19-43] years) and 104 control participants (median [range] age, 29 [16-43] years) met eligibility criteria for this analysis. Compared with postpartum values, dose-normalized concentrations during pregnancy were decreased by up to 56.1% for lamotrigine (15.60 mug/L/mg to 6.85 mug/L/mg; P < .001), 36.8% for levetiracetam (11.33 mug/L/mg to 7.16 mug/L/mg; P < .001), 17.3% for carbamazepine (11.56 mug/L/mg to 7.97 mug/L/mg; P = .03), 32.6% for oxcarbazepine (11.55 mug/L/mg to 7.79 mug/L/mg; P < .001), 30.6% for unbound oxcarbazepine (6.15 mug/L/mg to 4.27 mug/L/mg; P < .001), 39.9% for lacosamide (26.14 mug/L/mg to 15.71 mug/L/mg; P < .001), and 29.8% for zonisamide (40.12 mug/L/mg to 28.15 mug/L/mg; P < .001). No significant changes occurred for unbound carbamazepine, carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide, and topiramate, although a decrease was observed for topiramate (29.83 mug/L/mg to 13.77 mug/L/mg; P = .18). Additionally, compared with dose-normalized concentrations from control participants, pregnancy dose-normalized median (SE) concentrations decreased significantly by week of gestational age: carbamazepine, -0.14 (0.06) mug/L/mg (P = .02); carbamazepine unbound, -0.04 (0.01) mug/L/mg (P = .01); lacosamide, -0.23 (0.07) mug/L/mg (P < .001); lamotrigine, -0.20 (0.02) mug/L/mg (P < .001); levetiracetam, -0.06 (0.03) mug/L/mg (P = .01); oxcarbazepine, -0.14 (0.04) mug/L/mg (P < .001); oxcarbazepine unbound, -0.11 (0.03) mug/L/mg (P < .001); and zonisamide, -0.53 (0.14) mug/L/mg (P < .001) except for topiramate (-0.35 [0.20] mug/L/mg per week) and carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide (0.02 [0.01] mug/L/mg). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Study results suggest that therapeutic drug monitoring should begin early in pregnancy and that increasing doses of these anticonvulsants may be needed throughout the course of pregnancy.
Oxcarbazepine is one of the recently introduced anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) in the US. This drug has demonstrated efficacy as adjunctive therapy in adults and children, and as monotherapy in adults for the treatment of seizures of partial onset. There is also convincing evidence of its efficacy in patients with newly diagnosed and refractory trigeminal neuralgia. In addition, the initial efficacy results of oxcarbazepine in other neuropathic pain conditions and in bipolar disorders are encouraging. In this review, recommendations on the optimal clinical use of oxcarbazepine are given based on its pharmacokinetic profile, efficacy and tolerability in those various conditions.
Few controlled studies are available to guide the clinician in treating potentially assaultive elderly individuals with psychiatric disorders. Safety concerns limit the use of benzodiazepines and antipsychotic medications in the elderly individual, making anticonvulsants an attractive alternative. This paper reviews three specific anticonvulsants for this purpose: gabapentin, oxcarbazepine and topiramate, describing safety and efficacy in elderly patients with severe agitation from psychosis or dementia. Gabapentin, renally excreted, with a half-life of 6.5-10.5 h, may cause ataxia. Oxcarbazapine, hepatically reduced, may cause hyponatremia, and topiramate may cause significant cognitive impairment. Nonetheless, these are important medications to consider in the treatment of agitation.
AIM: To perform a clinical/economic comparison of monotherapy with antiepileptic drugs (AED) in patients with newly diagnosed focal epilepsy (FE) based on the results of previous studies. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The most common AEDs (carbamazepine (CBZ), oxcarbazepine (OXZ), lamotrigine (LTG), lacosamide (LCM)) were compared in patients, aged 16 years and over, with illness duration of five years. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: CBZ, OXZ and LCM can be used as monotherapy in patients with newly diagnosed FE. Monotherapy with LCM is associated with lowest costs for stopping focal seizures and the highest percentage of seizure-free patients. CBZ remains the most economical AED: the cost-effectiveness is minimal compared to all other AEDs used in the study. However, monotherapy with LCM is advisable if it is necessary to minimize side-effects in patients with newly diagnosed FE.
