Hyperhidrosis (HH) is defined as perspiration beyond the level required to maintain temperature regulation. HH affects nearly 4.8% of the population in the United States. It can have a great impact on patient&rsquo;s quality of life by disturbing daily activity, performance, confidence, social interactions, and mental health. In the majority of patients with HH (93%), the etiology of excess sweating is idiopathic, which classifies it as primary focal HH. Mild HH may be controlled with topical antiperspirants and lifestyle modifications. Based on the location of involvement, iontophoresis and botulinum toxin may be considered if the patient does not respond to topical therapies. Despite minimizing sweating, chronic use of systemic anticholinergics, in particular oxybutynin, may result in detrimental adverse effects such as dementia. Local surgery, radiofrequency, microwave, and lasers are other potential modalities for HH. Sympathectomy can be a last resort for the treatment of focal HH of the palmar, plantar, axillary, and craniofacial areas after failure of less invasive therapeutic options. In this review, we conducted a comprehensive search in the PubMed electronic database to summarize an algorithmic approach for the treatment of HH. This can help broaden options for managing this difficult disease. J Drugs Dermatol. 20(5): doi:10.36849/JDD.5774.
Hyperhidrosis continues to be undertreated in our view, despite its propensity to considerably impair quality of life. We shall break down therapeutic approaches to hyperhidrosis into several steps: (a) determine the physiological causes of excess sweating; (b) establish the type of hyperhidrosis involved and screen for causes of secondary hyperhidrosis before diagnosing essential hyperhidrosis; (c) evaluate the severity of the hyperhidrosis by means of a validated scale (HDSS score), Minor's starch-iodine test or gravimetric analysis; (d) select one of the medical therapies currently available, i.e. topical therapy (antiperspirants, iontophoresis or botulinum toxin injection), systemic therapy (oxybutynin) or surgery (thoracic sympathectomy).
A 5-year-old girl with previously unrecognized hyperopia of approximately +3.00 D developed esotropia while being treated with oxybutynin for enuresis. The esotropia disappeared with cessation of oxybutynin and correction of her hyperopia. When the hyperopic correction was removed, she had a small esophoria. The esotropia was presumably triggered by the anticholinergic effect of oxybutynin, which reduced the ability to accommodate. The increased accommodative effort for vision generated an esotropia as a result of the accommodative convergence/accommodation ratio.
Sepracor is developing (S)-oxybutynin, a single-isomer version of Alza's Ditropan (racemic oxybutynin), a muscarinic acetylcholine receptor antagonist, as a potential treatment for urinary incontinence.
Primary hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) commonly affects the axillae, palms, soles, scalp, face, and the groin. Patients may have multiple areas involved making localized therapy challenging. Systemic therapy may be necessary and can be used as monotherapy or combined with other hyperhidrosis treatments for optimal outcomes. Systemic therapy can also be used to treat secondary hyperhidrosis and compensatory hyperhidrosis. Patient selection and counseling are key, and monitoring for side effects is required throughout therapy.
Intravesical agents for overactive bladder have mostly been used in patients with neurogenic bladder disorders. The patients have usually had severe detrusor hyperreflexia (DH) plus a disorder of bladder emptying, and because of residual urine have been performing intermittent self-catheterization. Intravesical medication has therefore been appropriate. Strategies for treating DH have been either to lessen the parasympathetic efferent activity or to de-afferent the bladder. Two types of treatment have been used: intravesical medications that block pelvic nerve-detrusor smooth muscle cholinergic transmission, or agents that block the afferent arm of the reflex that causes detrusor contraction. Intravesical oxybutynin is thought to have some local anesthetic effect, although its main mode of action is to block cholinergic transmission. It has been demonstrated to be effective in resistant DH. Intravesical atropine has been demonstrated to increase bladder capacity but its usefulness in the clinical management of DH has yet to be demonstrated. Local anesthetics can increase bladder capacity, but the effect is short-lived. Longer-acting agents may have a selective neurotoxic effect on capsaicin-sensitive bladder afferents. Many patients worldwide have now been treated with intravesical capsaicin. Resiniferatoxin (RTX) is an ultrapotent capsaicin analog that has the significant advantage of being a nonirritant. Intravesical agents appear to be attractive alternatives to oral medication and hold the exciting possibility of selectively targeting end organs implicated in pathophysiologic responses.
Transdermal therapeutic systems (TTSs) are commonly used to treat many diverse medical conditions. There are several advantages to this form of drug delivery; however, adverse cutaneous reactions are common. This review article provides an update on skin reactions due to TTSs containing medications newly available in TTS form, including buprenorphine, diclofenac, lidocaine, oxybutynin, rotigotine, methylphenidate, rivastigmine, teriparatide, and nicardipine.
Tolterodine is the first muscarinic receptor antagonist that has been specifically developed for the treatment of overactive bladder. The objectives in the discovery program were to design a potent muscarinic receptor antagonist that is equipotent to oxybutynin in the bladder, but less potent in salivary glands, with the aim of improving tolerability (less dry mouth) in patients with overactive bladder. Tolterodine is non-selective with respect to the muscarinic M1-M5 receptor subtypes, but has a greater effect on the bladder than on salivary glands in vivo, in both animals and humans. Clinical results show that the efficacy and safety of tolterodine in overactive bladder is equal to that of oxybutynin, but that tolterodine is significantly better tolerated by the patients.
bladder based on a systematic review and network meta-analysis approach. METHODS: Pubmed, Embase, Web of Science, and the Cochrane Register of Clinical Trials databases were systematically searched. The search time frame was from database creation to June 2, 2022. Randomized controlled double-blind trials of oral medication for overactive bladder were screened against the protocol's entry criteria. Trials were evaluated for quality using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Assessment Tool, and data were statistically analyzed using Stata 16.0 software. RESULT: A total of 60 randomized controlled double-blind clinical trials were included involving 50,333 subjects. Solifenacin 10mg was the most effective in mean daily micturitions and incontinence episodes, solifenacin 5/10mg in mean daily urinary urgency episodes and nocturia episodes, fesoterodine 8mg in urgency incontinence episodes/d and oxybutynin 5mg in voided volume/micturition. In terms of safety, solifenacin 5mg, ER-tolterodine 4mg, mirabegron, vibegron and ER-oxybutynin 10mg all showed a better incidence of dry mouth, fesoterodine 4mg, ER-oxybutynin 10mg, tolterodine 2mg, and vibegron in the incidence of constipation. Compared to placebo, imidafenacin 0.1mg showed a significantly increased incidence in hypertension, solifenacin 10mg in urinary tract infection, fesoterodine 4/8mg and darifenacin 15mg in headache. CONCLUSION: Solifenacin showed better efficacy. For safety, most anticholinergic drugs were more likely to cause dry mouth and constipation, lower doses were better tolerated. The choice of drugs should be tailored to the patient's specific situation to find the best balance between efficacy and safety.
*Oxybutynin inhibits contraction of the detrusor muscle in the overactive bladder by binding to muscarinic M(3) receptors and blocking acetylcholinergic activation. *The transdermal oxybutynin system, applied twice weekly, delivers continuous oxybutynin over a 96-hour patch wear period. The transdermal route of administration avoids the extensive first-pass metabolism of oxybutynin to its active metabolite, N-desethyloxybutynin. *In two well designed trials in patients with overactive bladder, transdermal oxybutynin 3.9 mg/day decreased the number of incontinence episodes and increased average voided volume to a significantly greater extent than placebo. Urinary frequency was improved to a significantly greater extent with transdermal oxybutynin than with placebo in one trial but not the other. *There was no significant difference between transdermal oxybutynin and extended-release oral tolterodine for any of these endpoints. *Health-related quality-of-life improvements with transdermal oxybutynin were shown in patients with overactive bladder in the open-label MATRIX trial, as demonstrated by significant improvements in all domains of the King's Health Questionnaire. *Transdermal oxybutynin is generally well tolerated in patients with overactive bladder. The majority of patients who discontinued transdermal oxybutynin treatment in two pivotal trials did so because of application-site reactions. However, none discontinued treatment because of dry mouth.
Anticholinergic overactive bladder (OAB) medications have been studied in large observational studies to determine if they are associated with a greater risk of mortality (potentially because of their effects on the heart or the brain). Studies in different populations of old adults have shown that oxybutynin is associated with a significantly higher risk of mortality of 26-58% in comparison to other OAB anticholinergic medications or beta3 agonists. In general, anticholinergic OAB medications may increase the risk of mortality, and a single multicountry study showed that beta3 agonist users had a 20% lower risk of mortality compared to OAB anticholinergic users. PATIENT SUMMARY: Older adults who started using a traditional type of medication for overactive bladder (oxybutynin) had a higher risk of dying compared to people who used newer types of anticholinergic medications and to people who used overactive bladder medications that work in a different way.
Tolterodine is a competitive muscarinic receptor antagonist which has recently been launched for the treatment of overactive bladder. Tolterodine shows functional selectivity for the bladder over the salivary glands in vivo, which is not attributable to muscarinic receptor subtype selectivity. It is as potent as oxybutynin in inhibiting bladder contraction, but is much less potent in inhibiting salivation, suggesting that it may have less propensity to cause dry mouth in clinical use. In patients with overactive bladder, toleterodine significantly reduces the frequency of micturition and number of incontinence episodes, while increasing the average volume voided. The onset of pharmacological action of tolterodine is < 1 hour and therapeutic efficacy is maintained during long term treatment. In comparative trials, tolterodine and oxybutynin are equivalent in terms of efficacy. However, tolterodine is significantly better tolerated than oxybutynin, particularly with respect to the incidence and severity of dry mouth. No clinically relevant ECG changes have been noted with tolterodine.
Oxybutynin has less anticholinergic activity than propantheline bromide. Therefore, oxybutynin is often preferentially prescribed for patients at risk of morbid complications of atropine-like adverse effects. We report a case of oxybutynin-induced reflux esophagitis. This probably resulted from the anticholinergic action of oxybutynin, which decreased lower esophageal sphincter tone. We outline a management approach for patients who experience this adverse effect due to oxybutynin or other commonly prescribed medications.
Continued developments in the understanding of lower urinary tract function have led to improvements in the pharmacologic manipulation of bladder dysfunction. Drug delivery changes have produced drugs that provide better efficacy and tolerability, thus improving patient compliance. Improvements in drug delivery systems have altered drug bioavailability and pharmacokinetics. Active current investigation in new agents and delivery systems for intravesical delivery has yielded intriguing early results that may substantially add to the armamentarium for the management of the overactive bladder (urgency, frequency, urge incontinence). New developments in the understanding of the neuropharmacology of the bladder, peripheral pelvic nerves, and sacral cord may provide agents with entirely new drug effects, either as primary agents or agents to be used in combination with currently available drugs. We herein review newer agents and drug delivery systems.
Catheter-related bladder discomfort (CRBD) is an unrecognized clinical event. Symptoms of CRBD secondary to an indwelling urinary catheter mimic those of an overactive bladder, i.e. urinary frequency and urgency with or without urge incontinence. Stimulation of muscarinic receptors located in the bladder wall by the catheter is the triggering factor. Postoperative pain may be increased by the CRBD. Antimuscarinic drugs, as oxybutynin, are today the main treatment. Further studies are warranted to confirm efficacy of ketamine, tramadol and gabapentin in this situation.
Overactive bladder (OAB) is a prevalent and costly condition that can affect any age group. Typical symptoms include urinary urgency, frequency, incontinence and nocturia. OAB occurs as a result of abnormal contractions of the bladder detrusor muscle caused by the stimulation of certain muscarinic receptors. Therefore, antimuscarinic agents have long been considered the mainstay of pharmacologic treatment for OAB. Currently, there are five such agents approved for the management of OAB in the United States: oxybutynin, tolterodine, trospium, solifenacin and darifenacin. This article summarizes the efficacy, contraindications, precautions, dosing and common side effects of these agents. All available clinical trials on trospium, solifenacin and darifenacin were reviewed to determine its place in therapy.
Pediatric neuropathic bladder dysfunction can cause irreversible renal damage and urinary incontinence. Etiologically, it is usually the consequence of a congenital neural tube defect. The majority of affected children can be successfully managed with the standard medical treatment of clean intermittent catheterization and anticholinergic (typically oxybutynin) medication. A subset of patients experience severe side effects or insufficient suppression of detrusor overactivity on oral oxybutynin. Intravesical instillations offer an effective alternative; this Review considers their indications, administration, safety and efficacy.
The authors report a case of a 4-year-old child who developed hallucinations after hypospadias repair. He was brought to the emergency department the morning after outpatient surgery where the diagnosis of central anticholinergic syndrome was made. We review oxybutynin overdose and the importance of providing clear instruction to parents and caregivers about the administration of medications.
Hyperhidrosis is the excessive production of sweating, which can be primary and focal or secondary to various pathologies. The exact cause of primary focal hyperhidrosis is still unknown, although a genetic basis is recognized, and its prevalence varies from 1% to 2.8%. The most affected sites are the armpits, palms, soles and face. It causes much discomfort, affects the quality of life, and is estimated to be undervalued by health professionals. Many treatment options are proposed, both clinical and surgical. The aim of this review is to focus on the treatment of hyperhidrosis with oxybutynin, an anticholinergic drug originally used to control overactive bladder.
Oxybutynin has been widely prescribed in the United Kingdom for more than 5 years on a named patient basis. Complete knowledge of its side effects is therefore particularly important. The literature contains remarkably little data on this topic. We therefore reviewed 192 consecutive patients for whom the drug had been prescribed in a district general hospital; 57% derived benefit while 76% noted side effects, none of which was dangerous or irreversible. Oxybutynin obtained from the two principal suppliers did not appear to differ either in efficacy or side effects. We discuss the uncertain medicolegal implications of named patient prescriptions.
