AIM: Long acting injectable (LAI) antipsychotics are an alternative to oral antipsychotic (OAP) treatment and may be beneficial for patients in the early stages of schizophrenia. This study aims to provide a comprehensive review on the efficacy of first-generation and second-generation LAI antipsychotics in recent-onset, first-episode, and early psychosis patients. METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO, and Web of Science Core databases were used to search for studies that used LAIs in early psychosis patients. Studies published up to 06 Jun 2019 were included with no language restrictions applied. Inclusion criteria were a diagnosis of schizophrenia or related disorder, where patients were in their first episode or had a duration of illness </=5 years. RESULTS: 33 studies were included: 8 RCTs, 4 post-hoc analyses, 2 case reports, and 19 naturalistic studies. The majority of studies evaluated risperidone LAIs (N = 14) and paliperidone palmitate (N = 10), while the remainder investigated fluphenazine decanoate (N = 3), flupentixol decanoate (N = 2), and aripiprazole (N = 1). Two studies did not specify the LAI formulation used, and one cohort study compared the efficacy of multiple different LAI formulations. CONCLUSIONS: While the majority of data is based on naturalistic studies investigating risperidone LAIs or paliperidone palmitate, LAIs may be an effective treatment for early psychosis patients in terms of adherence, relapse reduction, and symptom improvements. There is still a need to conduct more high quality RCTs that investigate the efficacy of different LAI formulations in early psychosis patients.
OBJECTIVES: Paliperidone-associated motor tics. METHOD: Case report. RESULTS: We report a 30-year-old man with schizophrenia who developed motor tics (eye blinking) after treatment of paliperidone up to 15 mg daily. CONCLUSION: Tic-like symptoms, from simple eye blinking to complex Tourette-like syndrome, may occur during paliperidone treatment, especially with high dose.
It has been previously reported that among patients with schizophrenia that long-acting injectable (LAI) antipsychotic formulations can delay time to relapse longer when compared to their oral equivalents when patients discontinue therapy. Unanswered is whether this same pattern would be observed for patients with bipolar disorder receiving maintenance treatment. A systematic review was undertaken to identify relevant studies of LAI antipsychotics in maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder, employing a placebo-controlled randomized withdrawal design, and where equivalent studies using the corresponding oral formulation were also available. We found five studies [one aripiprazole monohydrate once monthly (AOM) study, one oral aripiprazole (OARI) study, two 2 weeks risperidone-LAI (RIS-LAI) studies, and one oral paliperidone (OPAL) study]. Numerically lower recurrence rates at 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 26 weeks were observed when AOM was discontinued when compared with discontinuation from OARI. Numerically lower recurrence rates at 2, 4, 6, 8, and 16 weeks were observed when RIS-LAI was discontinued when compared with discontinuation from OPAL. These results can be interpreted as a substantial delay in time to recurrence with a LAI antipsychotics formulation compared to the oral equivalent when medication is discontinued in patients with mania who had been stabilized on LAI antipsychotics or corresponding oral antipsychotics.
Early-onset schizophrenia (EOS) - onset before age 18 - is linked with great disease burden and disability. Decision-making for EOS pharmacological treatment may be challenging due to conflicting information from evidence and guidelines and unidentified care needs may remain unmet.We searched for systematic reviews, meta-analyses and umbrella reviews of EOS pharmacological treatment published in PubMed over the past 10 years and selected five clinical guidelines from Europe, North-America and Australia. Based on predefined outcomes, we critically compared the evidence supporting EOS-approved drugs in Europe and/or North-America with guidelines recommendations. We also evaluated the coverage of these outcomes to identify unmet needs.One systematic review, nine meta-analyses and two umbrella reviews (k=203 trials, N=81,289 participants, including duplicated samples across selected articles) were retrieved. Evidence supported the efficacy of aripiprazole, clozapine, haloperidol, lurasidone, molindone, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone and paliperidone in EOS, all of which obtained approval for EOS either in Europe and/or in North-America. Cognition, functioning and quality of life, suicidal behaviour and mortality and services utilisation and cost-effectiveness were poorly covered/uncovered.Among the antipsychotics approved for EOS, aripiprazole, lurasidone, molindone, risperidone, paliperidone and quetiapine emerged as efficacious and comparably safe options. Olanzapine is known for a high risk of weight gain and haloperidol for extrapyramidal side-effects. Treatment-resistant patients should be offered clozapine. Future long-term trials looking at cognition, functioning, quality of life, suicidal behaviour, mortality, services utilisation and cost-effectiveness are warranted. Closer multi-agency collaboration may bridge the gap between evidence, guidelines and approved drugs.
We report a case of unusual sexual symptoms in a 43-year-old female patient with schizophrenia (according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition), who was being treated with a depot formulation of paliperidone palmitate, an atypical antipsychotic medication. The symptoms included increased sexual desire, sexual preoccupation, constant drive for intercourse, and sexual arousal with unrelated stimuli such as urination. Potential neurochemical mechanisms have been elucidated for this symptomatology. Paliperidone palmitate has broad neuropharmacological effects, which might have contributed to the development of this rare clinical condition. (PsycINFO Database Record
Schizophrenia is a prevalent psychiatric illness, which causes significant financial and social burden on the population overall. The development of second generation antipsychotics, such as Aripiprazole, Risperidone, and Paliperidone, has changed treatment practice for many psychiatrists. Aripiprazole has extremely high binding affinity for the dopamine D2 receptor, which is the receptor thought to be responsible for the antipsychotic effect, although Aripiprazole is not the most potent of the second generation antipsychotics. In theory, Aripiprazole could displace or outcompete other, more potent antipsychotics, prompting decreased antipsychotic effect. We describe a proposed case of this phenomenon, Ms. A. We describe how Aripiprazole may have caused a worsening of psychiatric symptoms by blocking the antipsychotic effects of Paliperidone due to its strong binding affinity for the D2 receptor. Aripiprazole has a high affinity for the D2 receptor, but may have a lesser reduction of psychotic symptoms compared to other antipsychotics. Prescribers should be aware of this potential interaction and carefully consider initiating long-acting injectable forms of Aripiprazole to avoid this phenomenon.
A three-month injection of paliperidone palmitate (PP3M) has been gradually introduced in the market since 2015. Recently, and due to different reasons, there is an increase in the LAIAs prescription rates, including patients in early phases of psychotic disorders. Areas covered: The following article provides an overview of the antipsychotic market before providing the reader with an overview of the efficacy and tolerability data of the 3-month paliperidone palmitate formulation for the treatment of schizophrenia. The authors take into account the current state of knowledge, as well as the needs not covered by other therapeutic tools at our disposal at this time. Expert opinion: PP3M offers a substantially longer dosing interval than other options, which may be a potential advancement to reduce nonadherence in some patients. Future research, both from randomized controlled trials and large pragmatic studies in real-world settings, will identify which subpopulation and disease stages may obtain greater benefit from this new formulation.
BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS: Long-acting injectable antipsychotic drugs (LAIs) are mainly used for relapse prevention but could also be advantageous for acutely ill patients with schizophrenia. STUDY DESIGN: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized-controlled-trials (RCTs) comparing the second-generation long-acting injectable antipsychotics (SGA-LAIs) olanzapine, risperidone, paliperidone, and aripiprazole with placebo or their oral counterparts in acutely ill patients with schizophrenia. We analyzed 23 efficacy and tolerability outcomes, with the primary outcome being overall symptoms of schizophrenia. The results were obtained through random effects, pairwise meta-analyses, and subgroup tests. The study quality was assessed using the Cochrane-Risk-of-Bias-Tool version-1. STUDY RESULTS: Sixty-six studies with 16 457 participants were included in the analysis. Eleven studies compared second-generation long-acting injectable antipsychotics (SGA-LAIs) with a placebo, 54 compared second-generation oral antipsychotics (SGA-orals) with a placebo, and one compared an SGA-LAI (aripiprazole) with its oral formulation. All 4 SGA-LAIs reduced overall symptoms more than placebo, with mean standardized differences of -0.66 (95% CI: -0.90; -0.43) for olanzapine, -0.64 (-0.80; -0.48) for aripiprazole, -0.62 (-0.76; -0.48) for risperidone and -0.42 (-0.53; -0.31) for paliperidone. The side-effect profiles of the LAIs corresponded to the patterns known from the oral formulations. In subgroup tests compared to placebo, some side effects were less pronounced under LAIs than under their oral formulations. CONCLUSIONS: SGA-LAIs effectively treat acute schizophrenia. Some side effects may be less frequent than under oral drugs, but due to the indirect nature of the comparisons, this finding must be confirmed by RCTs comparing LAIs and orals head-to-head.
BACKGROUND: Eosinophilic pleural effusions are defined by an eosinophil count >/= 10% in pleural fluid and represent approximately 10% of exudative pleural effusions. They are associated with a large spectrum of etiologies, both benign and malignant. Drug-induced eosinophilic pleural effusions remain rarely described. OBJECTIVE AND METHODS: After ruling out other causes with a careful diagnostic assessment, we retain paliperidone as the etiology, given the disappearance of the pleural effusion after drug discontinuation. RESULTS: We report the first case of eosinophilic pleural effusion induced by paliperidone palmitate treatment. CONCLUSION: After considering other etiologies, drug-induced eosinophilic pleural effusion should be sought.
Rhabdomyolysis is defined by disintegration of skeletal muscle fibres. Clinical presentation varies and is mostly associated with myalgias as well as elevation of creatine kinase in the serum. Mechanical damage, toxic medicinal factors, and predisposing factors such as myopathies may trigger the condition. This report describes a case of rhabdomyolysis uncovered by chance after administration of paliperidonepalmitate as depot medication in a 45 years old schizophrenic male patient after having tolerated oral risperidone without any problems. Routine screening for clinical manifestations and serum-creatin kinase maybe essential in unravelling antipsychotic-induced rhabdomyolysis.
This systematic review of therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) identifies three long-acting injectable (LAI) risperidone formulations. Areas covered: Limited data is available on two formulations (RBP-7000 and in Situ Microparticle), but 20 TDM articles on the microsphere formulation were found. Risperidone TDM includes the serum concentrations of risperidone and its active metabolite, 9-hydroxyrisperidone, used for calculating: 1) the risperidone/9-hydroxyrisperidone (R/9-OH-R) ratio (a measure of CYP2D6; values >1 are indicative of a CYP2D6 poor metabolizer) and 2) the total risperidone concentration-to-dose (C/D) ratio (a measure of risperidone clearance with a normal value around 7 in oral risperidone). The weighted mean R/9-OH-R ratio was 0.48 (approximately twice that of oral risperidone TDM) in a combined analysis from 329 patients in 6 risperidone LAI studies without major confounders. The total C/D ratios from 297 patients in 6 risperidone LAI studies ranged from 7.4 to 9.7 ng/ml/mg/day with a weighted mean of 8.8 ng/ml/mg/day. Expert commentary: Clinicians using TDM for risperidone LAI microsphere formulation need to: 1) consider steady state to be reached >/= 6 weeks after the first injection, 2) pay attention to a) co-medications with inducers/inhibitors, b) severe inflammations/infections, and c) hepatic/renal impairment, and 3) use Castberg's recommendation to calculate risperidone dosing.
Paliperidone, the active metabolite of risperidone is a relatively recent introduction for the treatment of schizophrenia. There is paucity of data regarding the use of paliperidone in elderly patients. We have attempted to highlight the prominent aspects of the use of paliperidone in the geriatric population. The limited data indicate that paliperidone may be effective and safe in the treatment of schizophrenia in the elderly.
BACKGROUND: This double-blind (DB), randomized, parallel-group study was designed to evaluate efficacy and safety of paliperidone palmitate 6-month (PP6M) formulation relative to paliperidone palmitate 3-month (PP3M) formulation in patients with schizophrenia. METHODS: Following screening, patients entered an open-label (OL) maintenance phase and received 1 injection cycle of paliperidone palmitate 1-month (PP1M; 100 or 150 mg eq.) or PP3M (350 or 525 mg eq.). Clinically stable patients were randomized (2:1) to receive PP6M (700 or 1000 mg eq., gluteal injections) or PP3M (350 or 525 mg eq.) in a 12-month DB phase; 2 doses of PP6M (corresponding to doses of PP1M and PP3M) were chosen. RESULTS: Overall, 1036 patients were screened, 838 entered the OL phase, and 702 (mean age: 40.8 years) were randomized (PP6M: 478; PP3M: 224); 618 (88.0%) patients completed the DB phase (PP6M: 416 [87.0%]; PP3M: 202 [90.2%]). Relapse rates were PP6M, 7.5% (n = 36) and PP3M, 4.9% (n = 11). The Kaplan-Meier estimate of the difference (95% CI) between treatment groups (PP6M - PP3M) in the percentages of patients who remained relapse free was -2.9% (-6.8%, 1.1%), thus meeting noninferiority criteria (95% CI lower bound is larger than the pre-specified noninferiority margin of -10%). Secondary efficacy endpoints corroborated the primary analysis. Incidences of treatment-emergent adverse events were similar between PP6M (62.1%) and PP3M (58.5%). No new safety concerns emerged. CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy of a twice-yearly dosing regimen of PP6M was noninferior to that of PP3M in preventing relapse in patients with schizophrenia adequately treated with PP1M or PP3M. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical Trials.gov identifier: NCT03345342.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this paper is to present a case of paliperidone-induced Pisa syndrome and provide treatment experience. METHOD: The case report is combined with a review of the literature. RESULTS: A 37-year-old man had been diagnosed with paranoid-type schizophrenia for about 10 years. He received three-month treatment of paliperidone extended release (ER) at 6 mg per day, but showed a progressively Pisa-like physical position. We initially added an anticholinergic drug, but saw no improvement. The paliperidone ER was replaced by olanzapine at 10 mg per day, and the Pisa-like symptom improved after 1 month of the drug replacement. CONCLUSIONS: We propose olanzapine as a possible replacement choice for patients with paliperidone-related Pisa syndrome.
Poor adherence to antipsychotic treatment is a leading cause of relapse for patients suffering from psychotic disorders and the use of long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAI) may lead to improved clinical outcomes. This was a 1-year mirror-image study examining the clinical outcomes after monthly administration of paliperidone palmitate (PP1M). The primary outcome measure was the total days of psychiatric hospitalization in the 1-year before and 1-year after initiation of PP1M. Data from 158 patients were included in the study. Most of the patients suffered from schizophrenia. In the year after initiation of PP1M, the mean number of hospitalization days fell from 106.53 to 19.10 (p < 0.001). There were significant reductions in the mean number of hospitalizations and emergency room visits. The use of paliperidone palmitate is associated with significant reduction in both the number of admissions and days of psychiatric hospitalization.
AIM: This post hoc analysis of a double-blind (DB), randomized, placebo-controlled, relapse-prevention study evaluated the effects of paliperidone palmitate once-every-3-months (PP3M) in a subpopulation of adults with early illness schizophrenia (duration </=5 years) from a clinical trial. METHODS: Patients received either PP3M or placebo every 3 months in the DB phase. The primary efficacy variable was time from randomization to first relapse. Symptom severity, patient functioning, and safety were also assessed. RESULTS: A total of 119 patients who entered the DB phase met the criteria for early illness schizophrenia (PP3M, n = 62; placebo, n = 57). PP3M significantly delayed time to relapse vs placebo (P = .035; hazard ratio, 3.08; 95% CI, 1.08-8.80). Symptomatic control and patient functioning were maintained in the PP3M group but significantly worsened in the placebo group. There were no unexpected tolerability findings. CONCLUSIONS: PP3M reduced relapse risk and maintained symptomatic and functional improvements compared with placebo in patients with early illness schizophrenia.
AIM: We conducted a chart review to investigate the detailed outcomes of patients with schizophrenia who discontinued long-acting injectable second-generation antipsychotic (LAI-SGA) therapy due to adverse events (AEs). METHODS: The study included patients with schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders who commenced LAI-SGA therapy between January/1//2009 and March/31/2020 at Fujita Health University Hospital in Toyoake, Japan. RESULTS: We conducted a chart review of 157 patients with schizophrenia. At the time of this survey, 4 (6.9%), 5 (12.2%), and 10 (17.2%) of the patients in the aripiprazole once monthly, paliperidone palmitate, and risperidone-LAI groups, respectively, discontinued due to AEs since the start of LAI-SGA therapy. Three patients required hospitalization for AE treatment. CONCLUSION: The severity of these AEs in most patients is moderate (ie, no hospital treatment required). Due to the small sample size, a larger study is needed to confirm/replicate our study results.
PURPOSE: The efficacy, safety, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, drug-drug interactions, and administration of paliperidone for schizophrenia are reviewed. SUMMARY: Paliperidone is a benzisoxazole derivative and the principal active metabolite of risperidone. Representative of most oxidative metabolites, paliperidone is less lipophilic than risperidone. Like other atypical antipsychotics, paliperidone has a greater affinity for serotonin type 2A- receptor blockade relative to dopamine type 2-receptor blockade. Paliperidone's advanced-generation osmotic release delivery system allows for the avoidance of dosage adjustment when initiating therapy and may decrease the frequency of antido-paminergic effects that would occur with an immediate-release formulation. The pharmacologic actions of paliperidone are similar to other high potency atypical antipsychotics. The receptor-binding profile of paliperidone most closely resembles that of risperidone and ziprasidone. Paliperidone differs from risperidone and most other antipsychotics by its relatively low extent of enzymatic metabolism. A limited number of investigations have demonstrated the ability of paliperidone to produce significant improvements in psychopathology, functioning, and relapse in patients with schizophrenia when compared with placebo. Paliperidone appears to have a similar adverse-effect profile compared to risperidone, except for an increased rate of hyperprolactinemia. The recommended dose of paliperidone for the treatment of adults with schizophrenia is 6 mg every morning. CONCLUSION: Paliperidone does not offer any clear advantage over other atypical antipsychotics with a similar receptor-binding profile, such as risperidone and ziprasidone. Nevertheless, a few investigations have demonstrated the ability of paliperidone to produce significant improvements in psychopathology, functioning, and relapse when compared with placebo. Based on limited studies, the frequency of adverse effects, except for hyperprolactinemia, appears to favor paliperidone over risperidone.
In this prospective study, we assessed the effectiveness and acceptability of paliperidone palmitate 1-month (PP1M) and aripiprazole monohydrate (AM) over 1-year follow-up. We included 195 subjects (117 treated with PP1M and 78 with AM) with schizophrenia spectrum disorders from real-world settings. We estimated no differences in hospitalization (Odds Ratio=1.59; p = 0.12), symptoms improvement (p = 0.90 adjusted for baseline severity), and discontinuation (Hazard Ratio=0.72; p = 0.20) at study endpoint. Although current evidence suggests the possible superiority of AM over PP1M, our findings showed comparable effectiveness between these drugs. Additional studies in real-world settings with direct comparisons between these two LAIs are needed.
The aim of the present study is to test the efficacy of palmitate paliperidone long-acting injection for patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD). A total of 16 patients with BPD were treated with intramuscular paliperidone palmitate (IMPP) over 12 weeks. Effectiveness measures included the CGI-BPD, HARS, MADRS, BIS-11, and STAXI-2. Functional improvement was assessed using the Global Assessment of Functioning scale. A list of adverse events was provided to clinicians and patients. Treatment with IMPP was associated with a significant average reduction of 1.6 (95% confidence interval: 1192-2008; P>0.01) in CGI-BPD scores and an average increase of psychosocial functioning as scored by the Global Assessment of Functioning scale of 13.3 (95% confidence interval: 8.35-18.31; P>0.01) was obtained. The treatment decreased impulsive-disruptive behaviors and improved general functioning. An acceptable tolerance was observed. The average weight gain was clinically irrelevant despite being statistically significant. No other relevant adverse side effects were reported, with the exception of galactorrhea, which required suspension of treatment in three patients. IMPP seems to be a well-tolerated alternative to other second-generation antipsychotics in the treatment of BPD. More controlled studies replicating these results should be proposed in the future.
