BACKGROUND: Whether proton-pump inhibitors are beneficial or harmful for stress ulcer prophylaxis in critically ill patients undergoing invasive ventilation is unclear. METHODS: In this international, randomized trial, we assigned critically ill adults who were undergoing invasive ventilation to receive intravenous pantoprazole (at a dose of 40 mg daily) or matching placebo. The primary efficacy outcome was clinically important upper gastrointestinal bleeding in the intensive care unit (ICU) at 90 days, and the primary safety outcome was death from any cause at 90 days. Multiplicity-adjusted secondary outcomes included ventilator-associated pneumonia, Clostridioides difficile infection, and patient-important bleeding. RESULTS: A total of 4821 patients underwent randomization in 68 ICUs. Clinically important upper gastrointestinal bleeding occurred in 25 of 2385 patients (1.0%) receiving pantoprazole and in 84 of 2377 patients (3.5%) receiving placebo (hazard ratio, 0.30; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.19 to 0.47; P<0.001). At 90 days, death was reported in 696 of 2390 patients (29.1%) in the pantoprazole group and in 734 of 2379 patients (30.9%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.85 to 1.04; P = 0.25). Patient-important bleeding was reduced with pantoprazole; all other secondary outcomes were similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients undergoing invasive ventilation, pantoprazole resulted in a significantly lower risk of clinically important upper gastrointestinal bleeding than placebo, with no significant effect on mortality. (Funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and others; REVISE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03374800.).
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are an antacid drug often used in acid-related disorders. They decrease acid secretion in the stomach by blocking an enzyme called H+/K+ ATPase which controls acid production. Introduced to the market in 1989, their use has increased rapidly worldwide and they are now among the top 10 most prescribed drugs in the United States. As of 2015, the FDA has already approved six drugs of this class (omeprazole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole, dexlansoprazole, pantoprazole and rabeprazole). Recently, the risks and benefits of long-term PPI use were questioned and many studies indicated that their use should be carefully considered, especially in young patients, whose treatment with these drugs could last many years. Even greater concerns have been raised about a potential positive association between PPIs and osteoporotic fracture risk including the hip, spine and wrist. Although based on observational studies, there is substantial evidence associating the long-term use of PPIs and fracture. This relationship is only partially admitted due to the lack of consistent effects of PPIs on bone mineral density loss. Therefore, this narrative review aimed to discuss the recent findings pertaining to the risk of osteoporotic fracture associated with PPIs, in particular prolonged use, and to call for further research to elucidate the mechanisms associated with this bone fragility.
BACKGROUND: Prophylaxis for gastrointestinal stress ulceration is frequently given to patients in the intensive care unit (ICU), but its risks and benefits are unclear. METHODS: In this European, multicenter, parallel-group, blinded trial, we randomly assigned adults who had been admitted to the ICU for an acute condition (i.e., an unplanned admission) and who were at risk for gastrointestinal bleeding to receive 40 mg of intravenous pantoprazole (a proton-pump inhibitor) or placebo daily during the ICU stay. The primary outcome was death by 90 days after randomization. RESULTS: A total of 3298 patients were enrolled; 1645 were randomly assigned to the pantoprazole group and 1653 to the placebo group. Data on the primary outcome were available for 3282 patients (99.5%). At 90 days, 510 patients (31.1%) in the pantoprazole group and 499 (30.4%) in the placebo group had died (relative risk, 1.02; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.91 to 1.13; P=0.76). During the ICU stay, at least one clinically important event (a composite of clinically important gastrointestinal bleeding, pneumonia, Clostridium difficile infection, or myocardial ischemia) had occurred in 21.9% of patients assigned to pantoprazole and 22.6% of those assigned to placebo (relative risk, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.83 to 1.11). In the pantoprazole group, 2.5% of patients had clinically important gastrointestinal bleeding, as compared with 4.2% in the placebo group. The number of patients with infections or serious adverse reactions and the percentage of days alive without life support within 90 days were similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Among adult patients in the ICU who were at risk for gastrointestinal bleeding, mortality at 90 days and the number of clinically important events were similar in those assigned to pantoprazole and those assigned to placebo. (Funded by Innovation Fund Denmark and others; SUP-ICU ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02467621 .).
Intravenous (IV) administration of a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) is a faster way to achieve gastric acid suppression than oral administration of the same agent. Peak suppression after IV administration occurs within hours, compared with several days later after oral administration. Thus the IV route of administration offers a faster onset of gastric suppression, achievement of intragastric pH closer to neutrality, and better bioavailability. The PPIs that have IV formulations in the United States (esomeprazole, lansoprazole, and pantoprazole) are approved for different indications; the key differences among them relate to their ability to reach specific gastric pH, time to maintain a specific gastric pH, and ease of use of the IV formulation (eg, reconstitution, requirement of inline filters, infusion times).
BACKGROUND: Gastro-oesophageal reflux (GOR) is characterised by the regurgitation of gastric contents into the oesophagus. GOR is a common presentation in infancy, both in primary and secondary care, affecting approximately 50% of infants under three months old. The natural history of GOR in infancy is generally of a self-limiting condition that improves with age, but older children and children with co-existing medical conditions can have more protracted symptoms. The distinction between gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) and GOR is debated. Current National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines define GORD as GOR causing symptoms severe enough to merit treatment. This is an update of a review first published in 2014. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of pharmacological treatments for GOR in infants and children. SEARCH METHODS: For this update, we searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, and Web of Science up to 17 September 2022. We also searched for ongoing trials in clinical trials registries, contacted experts in the field, and searched the reference lists of trials and reviews for any additional trials. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that compared any currently-available pharmacological treatment for GOR in children with placebo or another medication. We excluded studies assessing dietary management of GORD and studies of thickened feeds. We included studies in infants and children up to 16 years old. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodology expected by Cochrane. MAIN RESULTS: We included 36 RCTs involving 2251 children and infants. We were able to extract summary data from 14 RCTs; the remaining trials had insufficient data for extraction. We were unable to pool results in a meta-analysis due to methodological differences in the included studies (including heterogeneous outcomes, study populations, and study design). We present the results in two groups by age: infants up to 12 months old, and children aged 12 months to 16 years old. Infants Omeprazole versus placebo: there is no clear effect on symptoms from omeprazole. One study (30 infants; very low-certainty evidence) showed cry/fuss time in infants aged three to 12 months had altered from 246 +/- 105 minutes/day at baseline (mean +/- standard deviation (SD)) to 191 +/- 120 minutes/day in the omeprazole group and from 287 +/- 132 minutes/day to 201 +/- 100 minutes/day in the placebo group (mean difference (MD) 10 minutes/day lower (95% confidence interval (CI) -89.1 to 69.1)). The reflux index changed in the omeprazole group from 9.9 +/- 5.8% in 24 hours to 1.0 +/- 1.3% and in the placebo group from 7.2 +/- 6.0% to 5.3 +/- 4.9% in 24 hours (MD 7% lower, 95% CI -4.7 to -9.3). Omeprazole versus ranitidine: one study (76 infants; very low-certainty evidence) showed omeprazole may or may not provide symptomatic benefit equivalent to ranitidine. Symptom scores in the omeprazole group changed from 51.9 +/- 5.4 to 2.4 +/- 1.2, and in the ranitidine group from 47 +/- 5.6 to 2.5 +/- 0.6 after two weeks: MD -4.97 (95% CI -7.33 to -2.61). Esomeprazole versus placebo: esomeprazole appeared to show no additional reduction in the number of GORD symptoms compared to placebo (1 study, 52 neonates; very low-certainty evidence): both the esomeprazole group (184.7 +/- 78.5 to 156.7 +/- 75.1) and placebo group (183.1 +/- 77.5 to 158.3 +/- 75.9) improved: MD -3.2 (95% CI -4.6 to -1.8). Children Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) at different doses may provide little to no symptomatic and endoscopic benefit. Rabeprazole given at different doses (0.5 mg/kg and 1 mg/kg) may provide similar symptom improvement (127 children in total; very low-certainty evidence). In the lower-dose group (0.5 mg/kg), symptom scores improved in both a low-weight group of children (< 15 kg) (mean -10.6 +/- SD 11.13) and a high-weight group of children (> 15 kg) (mean -13.6 +/- 13.1). In the higher-dose groups (1 mg/kg), scores improved in the low-weight (-9 +/- 11.2) and higher-weight groups (-8.3 +/- 9.2). For the higher-weight group, symptom score mean difference between the two different dosing regimens was 2.3 (95% CI -2 to 6.6), and for the lower-weight group, symptom score MD was 4.6 (95% CI -2.9 to 12). Pantoprazole: pantoprazole may or may not improve symptom scores at 0.3 mg/kg, 0.6 mg/kg, and 1.2 mg/kg pantoprazole in children aged one to five years by week eight, with no difference between 0.3 mg/kg and 1.2 mg/kg dosing (0.3 mg/kg mean -2.4 +/- 1.7; 1.2 mg/kg -1.7 +/- 1.2: MD 0.7 (95% CI -0.4 to 1.8)) (one study, 60 children; very low-certainty evidence). There were insufficient summary data to assess other medications. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is very low-certainty evidence about symptom improvements and changes in pH indices for infants. There are no summary data for endoscopic changes. Medications may or may not provide a benefit (based on very low-certainty evidence) for infants whose symptoms remain bothersome, despite nonmedical interventions or parental reassurance. If a medication is required, there is no clear evidence based on summary data for omeprazole, esomeprazole (in neonates), H(2)antagonists, and alginates for symptom improvements (very low-certainty evidence). Further studies with longer follow-up are needed. In older children with GORD, in studies with summary data extracted, there is very low-certainty evidence that PPIs (rabeprazole and pantoprazole) may or may not improve GORD outcomes. No robust data exist for other medications. Further RCT evidence is required in all areas, including subgroups (preterm babies and children with neurodisabilities).
BACKGROUND: The pharmacokinetics of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) may be affected by food intake. We aimed to evaluate the effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of omeprazole, rabeprazole, and pantoprazole. SETTING: The study population comprised 186 healthy volunteers participating in 6 bioequivalence clinical trials. METHOD: Subjects were evaluated to determine the effect of a high-fat breakfast on the pharmacokinetics of omeprazole (n = 36), rabeprazole (n = 69), and pantoprazole (n = 81). MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Drug plasma concentrations were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. RESULTS: Food affected the pharmacokinetics of omeprazole (increased T(max) and decreased AUC and C(max)), pantoprazole (increased T(max) and decreased AUC), and rabeprazole (increased T(max), C(max) and half-life). Food increased variability in T(max) for all 3 drugs, delaying absorption around 3 to 4 h and until 20 h in some subjects. CONCLUSION: As food delays the absorption of PPIs and increases their variability, it would be better to administer these drugs under fasting conditions. TRIAL REGISTRATION: European Union Drug Regulating Authorities Clinical Trials Database: EudraCT : 2004-003863-59 (registration date 05/MAR/2004), EudraCT 2006-001162-17 (registration date 17-MAR-2006), EudraCT: 2007-002489-37 (registration date 12-JUN-2007), EudraCT: 2007-002490-31 (registration date 12-JUN-2007), EudraCT: 2010-024029-19 (registration date 23-NOV-2010).
BACKGROUND/AIMS: Studies on the therapeutic efficacy of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) have been recently published. In most of these studies, comparison of only two PPIs have been made. There are few studies on the comparison of four or more PPIs. We aimed to compare the acid inhibitory effects of esomeprazole 40 mg, rabeprazole 20 mg, lansoprazole 30 mg, and pantoprazole 40 mg on days 1 and 5 of treatment in patients with GERD, who were extensive metabolizers in regard to the CYP2C19 genotype. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Helicobacter pylori-negative with typical symptoms of GERD patients were randomly divided into four treatment groups. Efficacy analysis on days 1 and 5 were performed on the four groups which comprised 10 (esomeprazole), 11 (rabeprazole), 10 (lansoprazole), and 10 (pantoprazole) patients. RESULTS: On day 1 of PPI treatment, the mean percentage of time with intragastric Ph>4 were 54%, 58%, 60%, and 35% for the groups, respectively, and on day 5, these values were 67%, 60%, 68%, and 59%, respectively. Esomeprazole, rabeprazole, and lansoprazole were found to be superior to pantoprazole on the first day of treatment. CONCLUSION: Pantoprazole is a less potent proton pump inhibitor than the other PPIs tested on the first day of treatment. When the time needed to raise the intragatric pH to over 4 was evaluated, esomeprazole was found to have the most rapid action, followed by lansoprazole and rabeprazole.
Only limited data are available regarding the treatment of critically ill patients with clopidogrel. This trial investigated the effects and the drug concentrations of the cytochrome P450 (CYP450) activated prodrug clopidogrel (n = 43) and the half-life of the similarly metabolized pantoprazole (n = 16) in critically ill patients. ADP-induced aggregometry in whole blood classified 74% (95% confidence intervals 59-87%) of critically ill patients as poor responders (n = 43), and 65% (49-79%) responded poorly according to the vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein phosphorylation (VASP-P) assay. Although the plasma levels of clopidogrel active metabolite normally exceed the inactive prodrug  approximately 30-fold, the parent drug levels even exceeded those of the metabolite 2-fold in critically ill patients. The half-life of pantoprazole was several-fold longer in these patients compared with reference populations. The inverse ratio of prodrug/active metabolite indicates insufficient metabolization of clopidogrel, which is independently confirmed by the  approximately 5-fold increase in half-life of pantoprazole. Thus, high-risk patients may benefit from treatment with alternative platelet inhibitors.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are widely used to treat arthritis but are associated with adverse gastrointestinal events. While the selective COX-2 inhibitors show fewer gastrointestinal complications than NSAIDs, they may not be suitable for all patients and one of them has been associated with serious thrombotic cardiovascular events. Furthermore, many arthritis patients are at high risk of coronary artery disease and take low-dose aspirin, which is also associated with adverse gastrointestinal events. Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy has been shown to be effective in reducing the risk of gastrointestinal complications in this patient population. Recent randomized clinical trials have also shown that pantoprazole therapy is effective in the healing of NSAID-induced gastrointestinal damage. Several studies have also demonstrated that pantoprazole is effective in preventing the development of gastrointestinal lesions in patients with continuous NSAID intake. The use of PPIs in combination with nonselective NSAIDs has also been found to be beneficial in patients at high risk for rebleeding and reduces the incidence of dyspepsia. Finally, the combination of a COX-2 inhibitor with a PPI has shown promise in patients with previous NSAID-related gastrointestinal complications who are at high risk for reinjury.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are effective at treating acid-related disorders. These drugs are well tolerated in the short term, but long-term treatment was associated with adverse events in observational studies. We aimed to confirm these findings in an adequately powered randomized trial. METHODS: We performed a 3 x 2 partial factorial double-blind trial of 17,598 participants with stable cardiovascular disease and peripheral artery disease randomly assigned to groups given pantoprazole (40 mg daily, n = 8791) or placebo (n = 8807). Participants were also randomly assigned to groups that received rivaroxaban (2.5 mg twice daily) with aspirin (100 mg once daily), rivaroxaban (5 mg twice daily), or aspirin (100 mg) alone. We collected data on development of pneumonia, Clostridium difficile infection, other enteric infections, fractures, gastric atrophy, chronic kidney disease, diabetes, chronic obstructive lung disease, dementia, cardiovascular disease, cancer, hospitalizations, and all-cause mortality every 6 months. Patients were followed up for a median of 3.01 years, with 53,152 patient-years of follow-up. RESULTS: There was no statistically significant difference between the pantoprazole and placebo groups in safety events except for enteric infections (1.4% vs 1.0% in the placebo group; odds ratio, 1.33; 95% confidence interval, 1.01-1.75). For all other safety outcomes, proportions were similar between groups except for C difficile infection, which was approximately twice as common in the pantoprazole vs the placebo group, although there were only 13 events, so this difference was not statistically significant. CONCLUSIONS: In a large placebo-controlled randomized trial, we found that pantoprazole is not associated with any adverse event when used for 3 years, with the possible exception of an increased risk of enteric infections. ClinicalTrials.gov Number: NCT01776424.
KEY POINTS: In this post hoc analysis of a randomized controlled trial, the proton pump inhibitor pantoprazole led to a faster rate of eGFR decline as compared with placebo. Additional studies are needed to determine the effect of proton pump inhibitors on those at higher risk of adverse kidney outcomes. BACKGROUND: Observational studies have found an association between proton pump inhibitor use and worsening kidney function. It is unclear whether these associations are causal. We conducted post hoc analyses to determine the effect of pantoprazole on kidney function using data from the Cardiovascular Outcomes for People Using Anticoagulation Strategies (COMPASS) trial, a 17,598-participant randomized trial comparing pantoprazole (8791) with placebo (8807). METHODS: The primary outcome was the rate of eGFR change. Rate of eGFR change was based on the two eGFR measures available: the eGFR at randomization and at the open-label extension study that enrolled at trial conclusion. Secondary outcomes included incident CKD (defined by eGFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m(2) at open-label extension or case report forms) as well as AKI, acute nephritis, and nephrotic syndrome. RESULTS: Eight thousand nine hundred ninety-one of the 17,598 participants randomized to pantoprazole/placebo (51%) had eGFR recorded at baseline and open-label extension enrollment and were included in the rate of eGFR change population (mean age 67 [SD 8] years, 22% female, mean baseline eGFR 75 [SD 17.5] ml/min per 1.73 m(2)). The mean duration between randomization and open-label extension eGFR was 3.3 (SD 0.8) years. The placebo rate of eGFR change was -1.41 (SD 4.45) ml/min per 1.73 m(2) per year. The pantoprazole rate of eGFR change was -1.64 (SD 4.47) ml/min per 1.73 m(2) per year. In adjusted analyses, pantoprazole had a 0.27 ml/min per 1.73 m(2) per year greater decline in eGFR (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.11 to 0.43). The odds ratio for the effect of pantoprazole on incident CKD was 1.11 (95% CI, 0.98 to 1.25) and on AKI was 0.89 (95% CI, 0.65 to 1.21). There were five nephrotic syndrome outcomes recorded and one event of acute nephritis. CONCLUSIONS: In this post hoc analysis of the COMPASS trial, pantoprazole resulted in a statistically significant greater rate of eGFR decline as compared with placebo. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRY NAME AND REGISTRATION NUMBER: Rivaroxaban for the Prevention of Major Cardiovascular Events in Coronary or Peripheral Artery Disease (COMPASS), NCT01776424.
The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, adverse effects, and dosage and administration of pantoprazole are reviewed. Pantoprazole is a gastric hydrogen-potassium adenosine triphosphatase (H+/K(+)-ATPase) inhibitor. It shares the same core structure as other currently available proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs). The FDA-labeled indication is the short-term treatment of erosive esophagitis. PPIs act by selectively inhibiting H+/K(+)-ATPase in the secretory canaliculus of the stimulated parietal cell. Understanding the pharmacodynamics of PPIs is more relevant than knowing their pharmacokinetics, since the duration of action depends on the rate of de novo proton-pump regeneration, not the duration of drug circulation in the body. Pantoprazole is well absorbed, undergoes little first-pass metabolism, and has an absolute bioavailability of approximately 77%. Pantoprazole has been evaluated in more than 100 clinical trials involving more than 11,000 patients. It is effective in treating erosive esophagitis and duodenal and gastric ulcers. It is also effective as adjunctive treatment with antimicrobials in patients infected with Helicobacter pylori. Pantoprazole has been shown to control acid production in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Pantoprazole is well tolerated. The most commonly reported adverse effects are headache, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. The recommended oral dosage for erosive esophagitis is 40 mg once a day for up to eight weeks. The recommended i.v. dose is 40 mg given over 15 minutes once a day in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease who are unable to take oral medication. Pantoprazole appears to be as safe and effective as other PPIs in acid-related disorders.
Pantoprazole is an extensively used proton pump inhibitor (PPI) for acid peptic disease. PPI rarely cause hypomagnesemia. Hypomagnesemia is commonly associated with hypokalemia and hypocalcemia. Severe hypomagnesemia and hypocalcemia can cause seizures. Here, we report a patient on long-term pantoprazole who presented with generalized tonic-clonic seizures and had severe hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia, hypokalemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism. When patients on long-term PPI present with seizures, hypomagnesemia/hypocalcemia has to be excluded.
IMPORTANCE: In arthroscopic knee and shoulder surgery, there is growing evidence that opioid-sparing protocols may reduce postoperative opioid consumption while adequately addressing patients' pain. However, there are a lack of prospective, comparative trials evaluating their effectiveness. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of a multimodal, opioid-sparing approach to postoperative pain management compared with the current standard of care in patients undergoing arthroscopic shoulder or knee surgery. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This randomized clinical trial was performed at 3 clinical sites in Ontario, Canada, and enrolled 200 patients from March 2021 to March 2022 with final follow-up completed in April 2022. Adult patients undergoing outpatient arthroscopic shoulder or knee surgery were followed up for 6 weeks postoperatively. INTERVENTIONS: The opioid-sparing group (100 participants randomized) received a prescription of naproxen, acetaminophen (paracetamol), and pantoprazole; a limited rescue prescription of hydromorphone; and a patient educational infographic. The control group (100 participants randomized) received the current standard of care determined by the treating surgeon, which consisted of an opioid analgesic. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was postoperative oral morphine equivalent (OME) consumption at 6 weeks after surgery. There were 5 secondary outcomes, including pain, patient satisfaction, opioid refills, quantity of OMEs prescribed at the time of hospital discharge, and adverse events at 6 weeks all reported at 6 weeks after surgery. RESULTS: Among the 200 patients who were randomized (mean age, 43 years; 73 women [38%]), 193 patients (97%) completed the trial; 98 of whom were randomized to receive standard care and 95 the opioid-sparing protocol. Patients in the opioid-sparing protocol consumed significantly fewer opioids (median, 0 mg; IQR, 0-8.0 mg) than patients in the control group (median, 40.0 mg; IQR, 7.5-105.0; z = -6.55; P < .001). Of the 5 prespecified secondary end points, 4 showed no significant difference. The mean amount of OMEs prescribed was 341.2 mg (95% CI, 310.2-372.2) in the standard care group and 40.4 mg (95% CI, 39.6-41.2) in the opioid-sparing group (mean difference, 300.8 mg; 95% CI, 269.4-332.3; P < .001). There was no significant difference in adverse events at 6 weeks (2 events [2.1%] in the standard care group vs 3 events [3.2%] in the opioid-sparing group), but more patients reported medication-related adverse effects in the standard care group (32% vs 19%, P = .048). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients who underwent arthroscopic knee or shoulder surgery, a multimodal opioid-sparing postoperative pain management protocol, compared with standard opioid prescribing, significantly reduced postoperative opioid consumption over 6 weeks. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04566250.
History | A 77-year-old woman was admitted with severe chest pain, heartburn, dysphagia and odynophagia. She had been on dabigatran for 13 months due to atrial fibrillation and arterial hypertension. Investigations and findings | Endoscopy of the esophagus revealed sloughing of mucosal casts, predominantly in the upper half of the organ. Treatment and course | The patient was placed on pantoprazol, local anaesthetic antacid and i. v. fluids. Dabigatran was discontinued. The symptoms disappeared within 3 days. Control endoscopy after 12 days showed complete healing of the esophageal mucosa. Conclusion | The intake of dabigatran was associated with exfoliative esophagitis, possibly due to caustic tissue damage by prolonged drug contact.
Childhood-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common chronic metabolic disease associated with life-threatening complications. Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is an acute complication of type 1 DM that has significant mortality mostly due to cerebral edema. Other putative complications of DKA include hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, hypoglycemia, intracerebral and peripheral venous thrombosis, rhabdomyolysis, acute pancreatitis, and acute kidney injury (AKI) (Murdoch IA et al., Acta Paediatr 1993; 82:498-500).
Therapeutic concentrations of voriconazole in invasive fungal infections (IFIs) are ensured using a drug monitoring approach, which relies on attainment of steady-state pharmacokinetics. For voriconazole, time to reach steady state can vary from 5-7 days, not optimal for critically ill patients. We developed a population pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model-based approach to predict doses that can maximize the net benefit (probability of efficacy-probability of adverse events) and ensure therapeutic concentrations, early on during treatment. The label-recommended 200 mg voriconazole dose resulted in attainment of targeted concentrations in >/=80% patients in the case of Candida spp. infections, as compared to only 40-50% patients, with net benefit ranging from 5.8-61.8%, in the case of Aspergillus spp. infections. Voriconazole doses of 300-600 mg were found to maximize the net benefit up to 51-66.7%, depending on the clinical phenotype (due to CYP2C19 status and pantoprazole use) of the patient and type of Aspergillus infection.
The incidence of brain metastasis (BM) is gradually increasing, and the prognosis and therapeutic effect are poor. The emergence of immunotherapy has brought hope for the development of BM treatments. This study revealed that compared with primary cancers, BMs have a colder and more acidic tumor microenvironment (TME), resulting in reduced protein levels of mesothelin (MSLN), a promising target for chimeric antigen receptor-T (CAR-T) cell therapy for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) with BMs. These factors could significantly decrease the efficiency of MSLN-CAR-T cells in TNBC BMs. Pantoprazole (PPZ) administration at the most commonly used dose in the clinic notably increased the pH of the TME, inhibited lysosomal activity, increased the membrane levels of the MSLN protein and improved the killing ability of MSLN-CAR-T cells both in vitro and in vivo. Similar results were obtained in non-small cell lung cancer BMs. Hence, when administered in combination with CAR-T cells, PPZ, which increases the protein levels of target antigens, may constitute a new immunotherapeutic strategy for treating solid tumors with BMs.
A 53-year-old lady with dysfunctional renal transplant and post-surgical hypoparathyroidism with phosphocalcic metabolism impairment was admitted to hospital because of long-lasting epigastric pain and nausea. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed, visualising a nodular lesion of 1 cm diameter with a depressed and ulcerated base. Microscopically the lesion was in relation with a metastatic calcinosis ulcer. Pantoprazole was initiated and serum phosphocalcic levels adjusted, achieving symptom remission. In the follow-up esophagogastroduodenoscopy, the lesion was healing with a fibrinous base and the histopathological report diagnosed superficial gastritis.
Methotrexate (MTX) is a cytotoxic agent prescribed at high dose in treatment of malignancy. Association of MTX to proton pump inhibitor (PPI) is not recommended if doses are more than 20 mg per weeks and only to take into account for smaller doses. Review relate some cases of delayed elimination of methotrexate in patients taking PPI, which increase risk of toxic event. However, currently there is no status quo on interaction between PPI and MTX according to available data. We report two clinical cases illustrating one more time a toxic event to MTX in presence of PPI. In absence of risk/benefit ratio set correctly, an assessment of appropriateness of PPI prescription before MTX therapy can limit an iatrogenic risk.
