Fatigue is recognized as one of the most disabling and common symptoms of MS. However, no universal consensus has been reached regarding a formal definition for fatigue, and its mechanisms and causes are not understood. This review summarizes important research in this field and recommends a multidisciplinary approach to managing MS patients with fatigue. Such an approach should include proven pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical treatments.
Treatment of narcolepsy is based on the need to regulate life rhythms. Psychostimulants such as modafinil, methylphenidate-immediate release, and pemoline are used to treat hypersomnia. A psychosocial approach is considered the mainstay of treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and medication is used to treat moderate or severe ADHD symptoms. Two of the four drugs approved in Japan for ADHD therapy (osmotic-release oral system methylphenidate and lisdexamfetamine dimesylate) are psychostimulants, which are administered via the ADHD proper distribution management system.
Cancer-related fatigue (CRF) is the most commonly reported symptom in patients with cancer with a prevalence up to 100%. It has a significant negative impact on quality of life. An effective management of CRF could significantly reduce the disease burden associated with cancer and its treatment. Unfortunately, the underlying pathophysiology is very complex and not uniform. This article reviews the possible therapy of contributing factors, nonpharmacological treatment, such as exercise and psychosocial interventions, and pharmacologic approaches in managing CRF. Numerous drugs, such as psychostimulants (methylphenidate, dexamphetamines, modafinil and pemoline), antidepressants, corticosteroids, L-carnitine, donepezil and guarana have been studied. Methylphenidate, modafinil and guarana show the most promising results so far. However, additional randomized, placebo-controlled trials are needed to determine the benefit of these and other drugs in the treatment of CRF.
Pemoline hepatotoxicity ranges from asymptomatic elevations in levels of serum aminotransferases to fulminant liver failure. We report five cases of pemoline hepatotoxicity in children (four boys, one girl), including the only reported case resulting in orthotopic liver transplantation. We conclude that pemoline causes toxic liver damage in children. The severity of the damage is highly variable, and its onset may be late in the course of treatment. Pemoline and methylphenidate may act synergistically to cause liver damage. The levels of serum aminotransferases should be monitored throughout treatment with these agents.
Fatigue is among the most common, yet least understood, symptoms of multiple sclerosis (MS) [1.]. It can profoundly disrupt the occupational and social functioning of patients, and is recognized as a criterion for MS disability by the Social Security Administration. Most approaches to fatigue assessment can be classified as either self-report scales or performance-based measures of motor or cognitive output. During the clinical management of fatigue, it is important to consider the role of other MS symptoms on fatigue, as well as that of non-MS-related medical conditions. Management of fatigue in MS often entails both pharmacologic and behavioral components. This article reviews recent developments in the assessment, treatment, and pathogenesis of MS fatigue.
Pemoline is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant approved for use as part of the comprehensive medical management of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). An increased risk of acute hepatic failure is believed to be associated with pemoline usage, raising concerns about its prescription. A descriptive meta-analysis of the existing scientific literature and drug reporting databases was undertaken to provide more accurate understanding of this possible risk. The analysis appears to indicate that current assumptions of the risk of acute hepatic failure posed by pemoline usage alone are overestimates. Several recommendations regarding hepatic monitoring in the setting of pemoline prescription are provided.
Among 100 cases of hepatic injury attributed to the administration of pemoline, 43 had sufficient accompanying information to permit analysis. All but two patients were less than 20 years old, and 80% were less than 12 years old. Males predominated the study. Injury appeared as early as 1 week or as late as greater than 1 year of taking the drug. The injury was uniformly hepatocellular as judged by the high values for aminotransferases and by death in massive necrosis in one patient. Mechanism was judged to be idiosyncratic, and the idiosyncrasy was probably metabolic rather than immunologic.
This article discusses the use of psychostimulants, such as dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate, and pemoline, in a variety of illnesses, including depression in the medically ill, cancer, HIV, and AIDS. The chemistry and pharmacology, side effects, drug interactions, dosing, and abuse potential also are reviewed.
Before the role of diet is considered a number of questions about the nature of hyperactivity are confronted. How common is the condition? What are the problems of diagnosis? How successful is drug treatment? The effectiveness of the Feingold diet in combatting hyperactivity and the importance of adverse reaction by children to items in the diet is emphasised.
Although first identified in children in the 19th century, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults was not described in the literature until 1976. The symptoms of adult ADHD resemble the symptoms of childhood ADHD, but symptom intensity, especially hyperactivity, may decrease over time. However, due to the challenges and responsibilities of adulthood, a normal day is extremely complicated for the ADHD adult. Molecular genetics and neuroimaging studies confirm that ADHD is a heterogeneous, neurobiological disorder, mainly of dopaminergic and noradrenergic pathways. Trials of pharmacologic treatments in adults with ADHD have produced mixed results due to considerable variability in diagnostic criteria, dosing, and response. This article reviews the history, neurobiology, and pharmacologic management of adult ADHD.
Medications can provide significant salutary effects for children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Due to their well-established safety and efficacy, psychostimulants are generally considered first-line pharmacotherapy for most young patients with ADHD. Since psychostimulant treatment often requires frequent dosing and may be associated with unacceptable side effects and risks, other classes of medication have been studied as possible treatment alternatives. The most extensively researched nonstimulant medications are the tricyclic antidepressants. In addition, alpha2 agonists have also been shown to reduce symptoms of ADHD. However, concerns regarding potential cardiotoxicity have tempered the enthusiasm for both of these classes of medication. Newer antidepressants such as bupropion and venlafaxine may hold promise as treatments for ADHD.
There is increasing scientific recognition that attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a heterogeneous disorder that carries a high risk of comorbidity, continues past childhood and adolescence into adulthood in many cases and may be underidentified in girls. The etiology of ADHD is unknown, although evidence from family studies of ADHD suggests a genetic origin for some forms of this disorder. A variety of pharmacologic agents are available in treating ADHD: stimulant medications remain the first-line treatment for noncomorbid ADHD, whereas tricyclic antidepressants and bupropion are recommended for stimulant nonresponders and patients with more than one psychiatric disorder. Complex cases of ADHD, however, may require rational use of combined pharmacotherapy.
Fatigue is a common symptom in patients with multiple sclerosis. Rapid exhaustion and reduced exercise tolerance leads to difficulties in maintaining a normal daily life for many patients. Regular resting and short breaks can help to compensate this to a certain degree. The pathophysiology of fatigue is currently unknown. Damage of specific neuroanatomic regions or a more generalized effect of inflammatory mediators in the central nervous system could be the causes of fatigue. Some drugs (e.g. amantadine) have proven effective in therapy of fatigue. Recent therapeutic approaches have begun using aminopyridines (4-aminopyridine, 3,4-diaminopyridine). These two substances are thought to improve nerve conduction, but there might be a central stimulatory effect as well. Overdosage leads to an elevated risk of epileptic seizures and confusion.
BACKGROUND: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic immune-mediated inflammatory disease. Fatigue is the most common symptom of MS patients, affecting >80% subjects. Medical treatment is an important method for managing fatigue. Currently, although many drugs have been tested in treatment of MS fatigue, the efficacy of these drugs remain largely unclear. METHODS: We researched available literatures in PubMed, Embase, Medline, Google Scholar, Cochrane Library (August 31, 2016). Search terms included multiple sclerosis, fatigue, medication treatments, amantadine, modafinil, aspirin, acetyl-l-carnitine, pemoline, 4-aminopyridine and randomized controlled trial (RCT). Two researchers were required to independently assess the quality of literatures, and finish data extraction. Meta-analysis was conducted using RevMan 5.3 software. FINDINGS: A total of 11 RCTs involving 723 patients were included. The therapeutic effects were quantified by different scales, such as Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS) or Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS). Here, meta-analysis suggested that amantadine, not modafinil, was effective for treating the fatigue in MS. Moreover, two studies implied that l-carnitine might have similar therapeutic effect with amantadine. However, the reliability of this finding was greatly weakened by the limited sample sizes. Additionally, current data could not answer whether treatment of MS fatigue using aspirin or 4-aminopyridine was beneficial. Finally, we found that all drugs except pemoline were relatively safe for treating MS fatigue. CONCLUSIONS: Current limited data suggest that amantadine may be the only drug that has relatively sufficient evidences in treatment of fatigue symptoms in MS. Further RCT studies recruiting larger samples sizes are required to validate the therapeutic effect of these candidate drugs.
A half century after the introduction of amphetamine sulfate (benzedrine), there remains active interest in the use of the major psychostimulants (ie, methylphenidate hydrochloride and pemoline) for the treatment of psychiatric disorders. In the absence of any recent review of the literature on the clinical uses of psychostimulants, we assessed the existing data on the adult psychiatric indications for these agents. Generally, the existing studies are old and inadequate. However, there is some evidence to support the judicious use of psychostimulants in selected clinical instances of several adult psychiatric syndromes.
Fatigue is a significant factor in the lives of many MS patients and the most commonly reported symptom in many studies. Fatigue is an important symptom to consider because it affects patients' social lives, occupations, and activities of daily living. Efforts to predict fatigue have been mixed, but it appears to be related to overall quality of life and mood. From a pathophysiologic perspective, fatigue in MS is multifactorial and complex,involving dysregulation of the immune system, changes in the nervous system related to the disease process, neuroendocrine and neurotransmitter changes, and other factors such as physical deconditioning, sleep disturbance, pain, and medication side effects. Various attempts to assess fatigue have been made, and many measures are now available for use in clinical practice and research. In clinical practice, these measures help guide treatment considerations. Recent research has provided valuable strategies to ameliorate fatigue in MS, and although many patients continue to experience fatigue despite interventions, many receive substantial relief.Nonpharmacologic approaches-considered the first step in treatment-include exercise programs, cooling, dietary considerations, and energy conservation strategies. For patients who continue to experience significant fatigue, several medications (although not specifically approved for use in the reduction of MS-related fatigue) have proved effective in this regard.The first-line agents include amantadine for mild fatigue and modafinil for more severe cases. Second-line agents include pemoline and antidepressant medications. Other pharmacologic agents have also shown some promise.
Addictive use of the stimulant drug pemoline caused a delusional disorder in a middle-aged man. Discontinuance of use of the drug promptly reversed the psychosis, which subsequently recurred when pemoline was again used. Pemoline seems to be an addictive drug and has an additional property that heretofore has been attributed mainly to amphetamines--precipitation of a paranoid psychosis.
A review is presented of the diagnosis and drug treatment of the more common psychiatric and developmental disorders in the pediatric population. Where applicable, DSM III (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Psychiatric Disorders, III) criteria are utilized to describe the behavioral syndromes. The indications for usage and appropriate dosages of antipsychotics, antidepressants, anxiolytics, stimulants, and lithium are described. Those disorders discussed are attention deficit disorder, conduct disorders, anxiety disorders, sleep disorders, schizophrenia, autism, Tourette's syndrome, mental retardation, depressive illness, manic depressive illness, eating disorders, and enuresis.
It is well established that stimulant medication improves classroom manageability and attention in terms of time on task, but does stimulant medication improve learning or long-term academic achievement in children with ADHD? There is no clear evidence that it does, but there are at least two reasons why beneficial effects may be obscured in research studies and clinical practice: (1) Higher-than-optimal doses may be prescribed if behavioral response (rather than cognitive response) is used to titrate the dose, and (2) treatment may be overinclusive if diagnostic groups are targeted in which a significant proportion of cases do not have favorable cognitive responses to medication. This article addresses these two issues and describes a large clinical series of patients who were evaluated using a double-blind medication assessment protocol designed to overcome some of the theoretical deficiencies suggested by these issues.
Narcolepsy is a commonly under diagnosed or misdiagnosed problem that results in severe daytime sleepiness. There is a strong genetic component with some immune system involvement. It may occur in combination with other sleep disorders such as sleep apnea complicating its treatment. An objective diagnosis requires a polysomnogram and Multiple Sleep Latency Test. Management depends on the careful use of stimulant medication to control the sleepiness and other medications to control the auxiiliary symptom of cataplexy.
