EDITORIAL NOTE: M.G. Showell, R. Mackenzie-Proctor, V. Jordan, and R.J. Hart, "Antioxidants for Female Subfertility," Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, no. 8 (2020): CD007807, https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD007807.pub4 This Editorial Note is for the above article, published online on August 27, 2020, in Cochrane Library (cochranelibrary.com), and has been issued by the Publisher, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, in agreement with Cochrane. The Editorial note has been agreed due to concerns discovered by the Cochrane managing editor regarding the retraction of six studies in the Review (Badawy et al. 2006, 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2006.02.097; El Refaeey et al. 2014, 10.1016/j.rbmo.2014.03.011; El Sharkwy & Abd El Aziz 2019a, https://doi.org/10.1002/ijgo.12902; Gerli et al. 2007, https://doi.org/10.26355/eurrev_202309_33752, full text: https://europepmc.org/article/MED/18074942; Ismail et al. 2014, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2014.06.008; Hashemi et al. 2017, https://doi.org/10.1080/14767058.2017.1372413). In addition, expressions of concern have been published for two studies (Jamilian et al. 2018, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12011-017-1236-3; Zadeh Modarres 2018, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12011-017-1148-2). The retracted studies will be moved to the Excluded Studies table, and their impact on the review findings will be investigated and acted on accordingly in a future update. Initial checks indicate that removal of the six retracted studies did not make an appreciable difference to the results. Likewise, the studies for which Expressions of Concern were issued will be moved to the Awaiting classification table; they did not report any review outcomes, so removal will have no impact on the review findings. BACKGROUND: A couple may be considered to have fertility problems if they have been trying to conceive for over a year with no success. This may affect up to a quarter of all couples planning a child. It is estimated that for 40% to 50% of couples, subfertility may result from factors affecting women. Antioxidants are thought to reduce the oxidative stress brought on by these conditions. Currently, limited evidence suggests that antioxidants improve fertility, and trials have explored this area with varied results. This review assesses the evidence for the effectiveness of different antioxidants in female subfertility. OBJECTIVES: To determine whether supplementary oral antioxidants compared with placebo, no treatment/standard treatment or another antioxidant improve fertility outcomes for subfertile women. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases (from their inception to September 2019), with no language or date restriction: Cochrane Gynaecology and Fertility Group (CGFG) specialised register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, CINAHL and AMED. We checked reference lists of relevant studies and searched the trial registers. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that compared any type, dose or combination of oral antioxidant supplement with placebo, no treatment or treatment with another antioxidant, among women attending a reproductive clinic. We excluded trials comparing antioxidants with fertility drugs alone and trials that only included fertile women attending a fertility clinic because of male partner infertility. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. The primary review outcome was live birth; secondary outcomes included clinical pregnancy rates and adverse events. MAIN RESULTS: We included 63 trials involving 7760 women. Investigators compared oral antioxidants, including: combinations of antioxidants, N-acetylcysteine, melatonin, L-arginine, myo-inositol, carnitine, selenium, vitamin E, vitamin B complex, vitamin C, vitamin D+calcium, CoQ10, and omega-3-polyunsaturated fatty acids versus placebo, no treatment/standard treatment or another antioxidant. Only 27 of the 63 included trials reported funding sources. Due to the very low-quality of the evidence we are uncertain whether antioxidants improve live birth rate compared with placebo or no treatment/standard treatment (odds ratio (OR) 1.81, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.36 to 2.43; P < 0.001, I(2) = 29%; 13 RCTs, 1227 women). This suggests that among subfertile women with an expected live birth rate of 19%, the rate among women using antioxidants would be between 24% and 36%. Low-quality evidence suggests that antioxidants may improve clinical pregnancy rate compared with placebo or no treatment/standard treatment (OR 1.65, 95% CI 1.43 to 1.89; P < 0.001, I(2) = 63%; 35 RCTs, 5165 women). This suggests that among subfertile women with an expected clinical pregnancy rate of 19%, the rate among women using antioxidants would be between 25% and 30%. Heterogeneity was moderately high. Overall 28 trials reported on various adverse events in the meta-analysis. The evidence suggests that the use of antioxidants makes no difference between the groups in rates of miscarriage (OR 1.13, 95% CI 0.82 to 1.55; P = 0.46, I(2) = 0%; 24 RCTs, 3229 women; low-quality evidence). There was also no evidence of a difference between the groups in rates of multiple pregnancy (OR 1.00, 95% CI 0.63 to 1.56; P = 0.99, I(2) = 0%; 9 RCTs, 1886 women; low-quality evidence). There was also no evidence of a difference between the groups in rates of gastrointestinal disturbances (OR 1.55, 95% CI 0.47 to 5.10; P = 0.47, I(2) = 0%; 3 RCTs, 343 women; low-quality evidence). Low-quality evidence showed that there was also no difference between the groups in rates of ectopic pregnancy (OR 1.40, 95% CI 0.27 to 7.20; P = 0.69, I(2) = 0%; 4 RCTs, 404 women). In the antioxidant versus antioxidant comparison, low-quality evidence shows no difference in a lower dose of melatonin being associated with an increased live-birth rate compared with higher-dose melatonin (OR 0.94, 95% CI 0.41 to 2.15; P = 0.89, I(2) = 0%; 2 RCTs, 140 women). This suggests that among subfertile women with an expected live-birth rate of 24%, the rate among women using a lower dose of melatonin compared to a higher dose would be between 12% and 40%. Similarly with clinical pregnancy, there was no evidence of a difference between the groups in rates between a lower and a higher dose of melatonin (OR 0.94, 95% CI 0.41 to 2.15; P = 0.89, I(2) = 0%; 2 RCTs, 140 women). Three trials reported on miscarriage in the antioxidant versus antioxidant comparison (two used doses of melatonin and one compared N-acetylcysteine versus L-carnitine). There were no miscarriages in either melatonin trial. Multiple pregnancy and gastrointestinal disturbances were not reported, and ectopic pregnancy was reported by only one trial, with no events. The study comparing N-acetylcysteine with L-carnitine did not report live birth rate. Very low-quality evidence shows no evidence of a difference in clinical pregnancy (OR 0.81, 95% CI 0.33 to 2.00; 1 RCT, 164 women; low-quality evidence). Low quality evidence shows no difference in miscarriage (OR 1.54, 95% CI 0.42 to 5.67; 1 RCT, 164 women; low-quality evidence). The study did not report multiple pregnancy, gastrointestinal disturbances or ectopic pregnancy. The overall quality of evidence was limited by serious risk of bias associated with poor reporting of methods, imprecision and inconsistency. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: In this review, there was low- to very low-quality evidence to show that taking an antioxidant may benefit subfertile women. Overall, there is no evidence of increased risk of miscarriage, multiple births, gastrointestinal effects or ectopic pregnancies, but evidence was of very low quality. At this time, there is limited evidence in support of supplemental oral antioxidants for subfertile women.
Radiation-induced fibrosis in the head and neck is a well-established pathophysiological process after radiotherapy. Recently pentoxifylline and tocopherol have been proposed as treatments to combat the late complications of radiation-induced fibrosis and a way of dealing with osteoradionecrosis. They both have a long history in the management of radiation-induced fibrosis at other anatomical sites. In this paper we review their use in sites other than the head and neck to illustrate the potential benefit that they offer to our patients.
In this review, potential benefits of pentoxifylline (PTX) on wound healing have been evaluated. All available experimental and clinical studies examined effects of PTX on wound healing have been included. No time limitation was considered and all studies up to writing the manuscript were included. Administration of oral or parenteral PTX showed beneficial effects on the healing of colorectal anastomosis, post burn scar, radiation-induced skin/soft tissue injury, venous ulcers, recurrent aphthous stomatitis and cutaneous/mucocutaneous leishmaniasis. Data regarding effect of PTX on skin flap survival are conflicting. Only few evidences support promising effects of PTX in pressure ulcer, skin developing injury and burn.
Pentoxifylline (oxpentifylline) is a methylxanthine derivative with potent hemorrheologic properties. In the United States it is marketed for the treatment of intermittent claudication. Human and animal studies have shown that pentoxifylline therapy results in a variety of physiological changes at the cellular level, which may be important in treating a diverse group of human afflictions. Immune modulation includes increased leukocyte deformability and chemotaxis, decreased endothelial leukocyte adhesion, decreased neutrophil degranulation and release of superoxides, decreased production of monocyte-derived tumor necrosis factor, decreased leukocyte responsiveness to interleukin 1 and tumor necrosis factor, inhibition of T and B lymphocyte activation, and decreased natural killer cell activity. Hypercoagulable states improve through decreased platelet aggregation and adhesion, increased plasminogen activator, increased plasmin, increased antithrombin III, decreased fibrinogen, decreased alpha 2-antiplasmin, decreased alpha 1-antitrypsin, and decreased alpha 2-macroglobulin. Wound healing and connective tissue disorders may respond to an increase in fibroblast collagenases and decreased collagen, fibronectin, and glycosaminoglycan production. Fibroblast responsiveness to tumor necrosis factor is also diminished. Potential medical uses of pentoxifylline are reviewed.
Data are presented covering various studies on the use of the phosphodiesterase inhibitor pentoxifylline (PF) in the sperm preparation for procedures in assisted reproduction. Significant improvements have been shown in the fertilization rate of oocytes along with a reduced risk of failed fertilization cycles utilizing oligo/asthenozoospermic semen samples. Fertilization is also improved for normozoospermic samples when the acrosome reaction is suboptimal. PF has proven effects on sperm motility, increasing the proportion of hyperactivated spermatozoa. It can also enhance the acrosome reaction and this may be the more relevant function for clinical prediction. There is a further action as a suppressor or scavenger of reactive oxygen species although higher concentrations than that in current clinical use may be required to optimize this effect. PF should be washed out of the sample used for insemination to avoid inhibiting the completion of oocyte maturation.
Radiation-induced skin damage is one of the most common complications of radiotherapy. In order to combat these side effects, patients often turn to alternative therapies, which often include antioxidants. Antioxidants such as those in the polyphenol chemical class, xanthine derivatives, tocepherol, sucralfate, and ascorbate have been studied for their use in either preventing or treating radiotherapy-induced skin damage. Apart from their known role as free radical scavengers, some of these antioxidants appear to alter cytokine release affecting cutaneous and systemic changes. We review the role of antioxidants in treating and preventing radiation-induced skin damage as well as the possible complications of using such therapy.
Methylxanthines have been used in clinical practice for over 100 years, and although understanding of their mechanisms of action is growing their effects are not fully understood. Nevertheless the knowledge to date has brought about a general upsurge of interest in methylxanthines and the development of novel derivatives. Methylxanthines are poised to escape the confines of their traditional role as these agents are applied in novel ways to surgical illnesses such as septic shock, the adult respiratory distress syndrome, cancer cachexia and functional neutrophil disorders. Methylxanthines, alone or in combination with other compounds, may well become part of the surgeon's future stock-in-trade.
Alcoholic hepatitis is an increasingly common reason for hospital admission which carries a high mortality. This review describes a clinical approach to the definition, assessment and management of this condition.
Application of nonspecific phosphodiesterases inhibitors, such as pentoxifylline (PTX), is a strategy utilised to aid sperm selection from immotile sperm samples prior to ICSI. No extensive studies have yet been performed to verify the safety of the clinical outcomes of ICSI after PTX administration. In this article, we summarise the data reported in the literature that assess the implication of in vitro usage of PTX on sperm parameters, as well as clinical outcomes during assisted male reproduction programme.
Pentoxifylline is methylxanthine derivative which is used in microcirculatory disorders as a vasoactive drug. Novel immunomodulatory properties of pentoxifylline have been reported including the down regulation of tumour necrosis factor-alpha synthesis and other inflammatory cytokines. Studies have shown that pentoxifylline might be efficacious in a wide spectrum of skin diseases. This article focuses on the use of pentoxifylline which is a safe and cheap drug in various dermatological disorders.
PTXF appears to be a promising adjunct to antibiotic therapy in neonatal sepsis. No adverse effects were noted in either study reported in the literature. However, there is a need for large randomized clinical trials to confirm or refute the role of PTXF in the treatment of sepsis in neonates. Clinically important comorbidities such as chronic lung disease, periventicular leukomalacia, duration of assisted ventilation, and NEC should be evaluated as a part of these studies. Comparison of PTXF with immunomodulatory agents such as colony-stimulating factors and intravenous immunoglobulins is suggested. Part II of this five-part series on immunomodulation will explore the use of colony-stimulating factors in neonates. Other topics will include the amino acid glutamine, intravenous immunoglobulins, and probiotics.
Chronic leg ulceration is a very common clinical problem in the elderly. Good management depends entirely on making an accurate diagnosis, and planning treatment after considering all aspects of patient well-being. All elderly patients with leg ulcers benefit from an assessment of their vascular status, since the effects of gravity influence treatment and healing irrespective of the diagnosis. The most common causes of ulceration are venous and arterial disease. Diabetes mellitus, pressure, vasculitis, metabolic abnormalities and skin cancer are all unusual causes of leg ulceration, but must be considered in the differential diagnosis. Almost all patients with ulcerated legs benefit from the use of compression bandaging at a level appropriate to their vascular status. In patients with venous ulcers, this can be achieved with a number of bandaging techniques; however, multilayer bandaging appears to be the most cost-effective means available, particularly when combined with community-based leg ulcer clinics. The effects of oral drug therapy for venous and arterial disease have been disappointing. Local dressings are important in ulcers that are not suitable for compression therapy. The choice of dressing depends on the nature of the ulcer and the tolerability of the dressing for the patient.
Although our understanding of the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis and peripheral vascular disease continues to grow, we have yet to discover a medication that can safely and efficaciously be given to most claudicants that will alleviate their symptoms to prevent disease progression. Many patients with intermittent claudication improve or remain stable without therapy if they attempt to alter their risk factors (e.g., control of diabetes, smoking cessation, lowering of cholesterol levels). However, many require concomitant drug therapy to alleviate symptoms of PVD, and some require surgical intervention. Even with the recent advances in therapeutic development and the promise of agents currently in clinical trials, the questions of who to treat, when treatment should begin, and which agent to use remain uncertain.
A 41-year-old woman presented with a 3-year history of purpuric lesions followed by superficial, painful ulcers and development of lesions on the lower legs and on the dorsa of the feet, particularly in the summer. The patient was asymptomatic during the winter months. On physical examination she had irregular, scleroatrophic, white-ivory, coalescent lesions on a livedoid basis, with purpuric and, in some lesions, pigmented borders with numerous telangiectatic capillaries. These lesions were localized on the medial sides of the lower legs and on the dorsa of the feet (Figure 1). Laboratory investigations were normal or negative, including complete blood cell count, platelets, coagulation indexes, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum immunoglobulins, antinuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA, anticardiolipin, antiphospholipids, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies, circulating immunocomplexes, complement fractions (C3, C4), cryoglobulins, rheumatoid factor, and Rose-Waaler reaction. The only laboratory abnormality was an elevated fibrinogen level (472 mg/dL). Doppler velocimetry excluded a chronic venous insufficiency. Thoracic x-ray and abdominal ultrasound were normal. A digital photoplethysmograph revealed functional Raynaud's phenomenon. A biopsy specimen taken from a purpuric lesion showed an atrophic epidermis with parakeratosis and focal spongiosis. An increased number of small-sized vessels were observed within a sclerotic dermis. Most of the vessels in the upper dermis were dilated and showed endothelial swelling; some were occluded due to amorphous hyaline microthrombi (Figure 2). There were fibrinoid deposits around the vessels with thickening of the vessel walls. Extravasated erythrocytes were found throughout the upper and mid-dermis. There was a sparse perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate but no vasculitis. Direct immunofluorescence showed a perivascular microgranular deposit of IgM (+), C3 (++), and fibrinogen/fibrin (+++). On the basis of clinical, serologic, histopathologic, and immunopathologic findings, a diagnosis of idiopathic atrophie blanche was made. The patient was treated with dapsone (50 mg p.o. q.d.) and pentoxifylline (400 mg p.o. t.i.d.) with pain relief and complete resolution of the ulcerations after 6 weeks of therapy.
Pentoxifylline (PTX) is a methylxanthine derivative with a variety of anti-inflammatory effects. Currently, PTX is approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of intermittent claudication, but studies have shown that it has a variety of physiological effects at the cellular level, which may be important in treating a diverse group of diseases.
ABOUT THE UPDATE: This article updates the June 2014 Living FRISBEE (Living FRISBEE: Living FRIendly Summary of the Body of Evidence using Epistemonikos). It incorporates a new systematic review identifying one study not included in previous reviews. The new evidence leads to substantial changes in the existing evidence. ASBTRACT: Pentoxifylline is an inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor, and has been proposed as treatment for alcoholic hepatitis. However, it is not clear if it is effective, or if it adds benefit to the treatment with corticosteroids. Searching in Epistemonikos database, which is maintained by screening 30 databases, we identified three systematic reviews including eight randomized controlled trials addressing the question of this article. We combined the evidence using meta-analysis and generated a summary of findings following the GRADE approach. We concluded pentoxifylline probably leads to little or no difference in mortality in alcoholic hepatitis.
Extreme deformability of human erythrocytes is a prerequisite for their ability to squeeze through narrow capillaries of the blood microcirculation system. Various drugs can modify this deformability and consequently provoke circulation problems. We demonstrate that microfluidic assemblies are very convenient platforms for in vitro study of the associated processes. Two types of microfluidic channels were designed to quantitatively investigate modifications of erythrocyte deformability induced by hydrogen peroxide, ethanol and pentoxifylline based on transit velocity measurements. With a high sensitivity our microfluidic assemblies show that hydrogen peroxide decreases erythrocyte deformability in a dose-dependent manner. Then, results on ethanol resolve a biphasic nature of this reactant on the deformability of single erythrocyte cells. Results on pentoxifylline provide evidence that, similar to ethanol, also this medical drug has a double-sided effect on the erythrocyte deformability, i.e. increasing the deformability at low concentrations, while decreasing it at higher ones. Taken together, our microfluidic designs propose a potent measurement method for the erythrocyte deformability, as well as providing a perspective to evaluate effects of drugs on it.
The primary aim of this study was to compare the effects of pentoxifylline (PTX) versus placebo on the histological features of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). In all, 55 adults with biopsy-confirmed NASH were randomized to receive PTX at a dose of 400 mg three times a day (n = 26) or placebo (n = 29) over 1 year. The primary efficacy endpoint was defined as improvement in histological features of NASH through reduction in steatosis, lobular inflammation, and/or hepatocellular ballooning as reflected by a decrease of >/= 2 points in the nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) activity score (NAS). After 1 year, intention-to-treat analysis showed a decrease of >/= 2 points in the NAS in 38.5% of patients on PTX versus 13.8% of those on placebo (P = 0.036). Per protocol analysis, a decrease of >/= 2 points in the NAS from baseline was observed in 50% of the patients on PTX versus 15.4% of those on placebo (P = 0.01). The mean change in NAS score from baseline was -1.6 in the PTX group, versus -0.1 in the placebo group (P < 0.001). PTX significantly improved steatosis (mean change in score -0.9 versus -0.04 with placebo, P < 0.001) and lobular inflammation (median change -1 versus 0 with placebo, P = 0.02). No significant effects in hepatocellular ballooning were observed. PTX also improved liver fibrosis (mean change in fibrosis score was -0.2 among those on PTX versus +0.4 among those on placebo, P = 0.038). Although not statistically significant (P = 0.17), improvement in fibrosis was observed in a greater proportion (35%) of patients in the PTX group compared to placebo (15%). Adverse effects were similar in both groups. CONCLUSION: PTX improved histological features of NASH compared to placebo. PTX was well tolerated in patients with NASH.
Pentoxifylline was first introduced in Germany twenty years ago. Today it is the best researched oral drug for intermittent claudication. A total of seventeen placebo-controlled trials could be retrieved from the world literature. The majority of these studies show that pentoxifylline will prolong the walking distance in a statistically significant way. Even though these trials are conducted with considerable scientific rigor, important flaws can be identified. Whether the symptomatic improvement is clinically relevant is difficult to say and may depend on the patient's individual situation. These collective data show that pentoxifylline prolongs the walking distance in patients with intermittent claudication.
1. Pentoxifylline (PTX), a derivative of the methylxanthine theobromine, has been used for many years in the treatment of peripheral vascular diseases. Increased red blood cell flexibility, reduction of blood viscosity, and decreased potential of platelet aggregation are the basic actions of PTX, resulting in therapeutic benefits due to improved microcirculation and tissue oxygenation. 2. PTX's generally accepted mechanism of action is the inhibition of phosphodiesterases, leading to increased intracellular levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). 3. A number of studies have shown PTX's effects on the cytokine network. The most relevant clinical results are the therapeutic benefits of PTX in attenuating the effects of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) in conditions such as septic shock. 4. PTX also has been found to exert antifibrogenic actions, using cultured fibroblasts or animal models of fibrosis, including liver fibrosis. 5. In hepatic stellate cell culture PTX has been shown to inhibit the basic reactions of liver fibrogenesis, being effective on cytokines and growth factors relevant in fibrogenesis of the liver, too. 6. Therefore, PTX might be an effective drug with few side effects in the treatment of liver fibrosis. Further clinical studies have to be done to establish the real therapeutic benefits of PTX in liver fibrosis and cirrhosis.
