Oral phenytoin is used widely for the treatment of convulsive disorders and about half the patients treated develop gingival overgrowth as a side effect. The apparent stimulatory effect has prompted its assessment in wound healing. Studies have shown topical phenytoin to promote healing of decubitus ulcers, venous stasis ulcers, diabetic ulcers, traumatic wounds, burns, and leprosy trophic ulcers. The mechanism of action has been postulated to be multifactorial. The present literature indicates that topical phenytoin deserves further investigation as a wound-healing agent in controlled dose-finding clinical trials.
This report presents a 30-year-old man who developed subacute phenytoin-induced cerebellar ataxia and parkinsonism that resolved after discontinuation of the phenytoin treatment. Phenytoin was started for seizure prophylaxis in another health institution where he was referred for bilateral intracerebral orbitofrontal haemorrhage due to a head trauma. To our knowledge, there has been only one other case report describing phenytoin-induced parkinsonism, which was also reversible. The issue of the development of parkinsonism due to the phenytoin toxicity in the case of bilateral orbitofrontal lesion is addressed.
The success of carbamazepine (CBZ) as a broad-spectrum antiepileptic drug (AED) has led to its use as first-line therapy in children and adults for partial and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. The limitations of CBZ include toxicity in sensitive individuals, autoinduction, which requires dose adjustment when therapy is initiated, and chronic hepatic induction, producing drug interactions when CBZ is used with AEDs and other drugs that undergo hepatic metabolism. One of two main products of CBZ microsomal metabolism, CBZ-10,11-epoxide (formed by oxidation of the double bond between C-10 and C-11), appears to provide antiepileptic efficacy but contributes significantly to clinical toxicity. The most common adverse effects of CBZ are central nervous system (CNS) symptoms, followed by gastrointestinal, hepatic, endocrine disturbances, and teratogenic effects. Oxcarbazepine (OXC) was developed to provide a compound chemically similar enough to CBZ to mimic its efficacy and overall safety while improving its side-effect profile. Biotransformation of OXC does not involve formation of an epoxide metabolite. Compared with the parent compound, hepatic microsomal enzyme induction and autoinduction are greatly reduced. The clinical efficacy of OXC compares favorably with CBZ in clinical trials. Clinical development of OXC began in Europe. Results of Phase I trials started to appear in the early 1980s. Controlled clinical trials, reported in the mid- to late 1980s, led to approval of OXC in many European countries, and now in over 50 nations around the world. United States multicenter clinical trials have recently been completed, and at this writing the drug is awaiting approval by the FDA. This article reviews the pharmacology, animal data, outcomes of published controlled clinical trials, postmarketing data, adverse experiences, and current recommendations for clinical use of OXC.
A 15-year-old boy developed thrombocytopenia and purpura two weeks after starting phenytoin therapy. The blood phenytoin level was in the toxic range. There was an increase in immature neutrophils but no abnormalities were present in other cell lines. Recovery was complete after drug therapy was discontinued. Thrombocytopenia is a rare isolated complication of phenytoin therapy. The probable autoimmune etiology distinguishes this syndrome from other phenytoin-induced blood dyscrasias.
We studied the clinical features of 85 cases of phenytoin toxicity in 76 patients treated at a general hospital. Serum levels of phenytoin on admission ranged from 30.3 to 95.0 micrograms/mL (median, 46.5). Iatrogenic causes of intoxication were common and included increased daily dosage and intravenous loading in the emergency room for single seizures in patients with subtherapeutic serum phenytoin levels. The most frequent neurologic findings were nystagmus (95%), ataxia (88%), lethargy (22%), and seizures (19%). Outcome was usually good, but three patients had serious complications.
PURPOSE: This study was designed to measure the brain penetration of phenytoin (PHT) after intravenous (i.v.) administration of either standard PHT or fosphenytoin (FPHT), a PHT prodrug. The study was formulated to answer the question whether the time required for FPHT to be converted to PHT in the bloodstream would delay the accumulation of PHT in brain. METHODS: Four rats were sampled at various times after intravenous infusion of 30 mg/kg PHT i.v. or 30 mg/kg PHT equivalents of FPHT i.v. PHT was measured in serum, protein-free ultrafiltrate, and in brain, by using high-performance liquid chromatography. RESULTS: Although the initial PHT-free fraction was significantly higher for FPHT-treated rats than it was for PHT-treated rats, brain PHT levels were significantly reduced after infusion of FPHT. CONCLUSIONS: When FPHT is used for treatment of generalized status epilepticus, it should be anticipated that lower initial brain PHT levels will be achieved than are typically found with standard PHT.
Phenytoin is a highly effective anticonvulsant medication that is considered to be the treatment of choice for generalized major motor and focal epileptic seizures. An understanding of the pharmacokinetic properties of phenytoin greatly facilitates the management of seizure patients. The judicious use of serum-monitoring techniques coupled with careful clinical evaluations enable one to obtain the optimal anticonvulsant effect, freedom from dose-related toxicity, and the avoidance of unnecessary polypharmacy.
This article defines and then delineates pre-eclampsia and eclampsia, reviewing the clinical features, neurologic manifestations, and underlying causes. There is a review of the pathophysiology including hypertension, coagulopathy, and cerebral pathology including newer findings involving immune system abnormalities. The diagnosis including laboratory studies, imaging, and electroencephalography.
In a double-blind crossover study, carbamazepine and phenytoin were compared as single anticonvulsants in 47 patients with focal and major generalized seizures. Each drug provided superior seizure control in about half the patients, but significantly fewer patients had objective side effects while taking carbamazepine. Neuropsychologic testing showed improved performance in cognitive function and emotional status of patients while and carbamazepine. No hematotoxic complications arose, but vigilant follow-up is advised. Mean serum level of carbamazepine was 9.3 microng per milliliter with a suggested therapeutic range of 8 to 12 microng per milliliter reached by eventual doses of 16 to 20 mg per kilogram. Carbamazepine offers an independent choice of improved seizure control with a possibility of fewer side effects.
Four cases of osteomalacia associated with the long term consumption of phenytoin (Dilantin) were admitted to a geriatric unit in a two-month period. No other cause for their disease was found. The diagnosis was made on biochemical data and no bone biopsy was obtained. Radiographic evidence was found in two cases only.
Drug reactions and systemic diseases often involve the skin. In particular, most drug-induced reactions and many infectious diseases present with dermatologic manifestations localized acrally, that is on distal portions of limbs (hand, foot) and head (ears, nose). A detailed review of all acral dermatologic signs of drug reactions and systemic diseases is beyond the scope of this paper, although some of these disorders will be discussed specifically here.
OBJECTIVE: To review information regarding the dual and interdependent drug-nutrient interaction between phenytoin and folic acid and other literature involving phenytoin and folic acid. DATA SOURCES: Information was retrieved from a MEDLINE search of English-language literature conducted from 1983 (time of the last review) to March 1995. Search terms included folic acid, phenytoin, and folic acid deficiency. Additional references were obtained from Current Contents and from the bibliographies of the retrieved references. STUDY SELECTION: All human studies examining the effects of phenytoin on serum folate concentrations and folic acid supplementation on serum phenytoin concentrations were selected. These included studies of patients with epilepsy and healthy volunteers as well as case reports. Case reports were included because of the extensive length of time needed to study this drug interaction. DATA EXTRACTION: Data extracted included gender, dosing, serum folate concentrations if available, pharmacokinetics, and adverse events. DATA SYNTHESIS: Serum folate decreases when phenytoin therapy is initiated alone with no folate supplementation. Folic acid supplementation in folate-deficient patients with epilepsy changes the pharmacokinetics of phenytoin, usually leading to lower serum phenytoin concentrations and possible seizure breakthrough. Folate is hypothesized to be a cofactor in phenytoin metabolism and may be responsible for the "pseudo-steady-state," which is a concentration where phenytoin appears to be at steady-state, but in reality, is not. Phenytoin and folic acid therapy initiated concomitantly prevents decreased folate and phenytoin obtains steady-state concentrations sooner. CONCLUSIONS: Folic acid supplementation should be initiated each time phenytoin therapy commences because of the hypothesized cofactor mechanism, decreased adverse effects associated with folate deficiency, and better seizure control with no perturbation of phenytoin pharmacokinetics.
There is an increasing number of medications associated with gingival overgrowth. These medications are used to treat a number of common conditions in the Australian population and as such dentists can expect to manage a number of patients with medication-related gingival overgrowth. This review highlights the clinical features and management of the common overgrowths associated with anticonvulsants, immunosuppressants and the calcium channel blockers.
Convulsive status epilepticus is a life-threatening disorder. Every emergency room that treats patients with this problem should have a treatment protocol prepared in advance to allow for prompt and appropriate therapy. The recommended treatment is an intravenous infusion of 20 mg/kg of phenytoin. Lorazepam or diazepam may be used to stop a convulsion in progress. If seizures persist, the second step may be an intravenous infusion of phenobarbital. If convulsions persist beyond the first hour and have not responded to the above, a barbiturate coma should be induced.
The clinical variability of teratogenic response to fetal drug exposure has been well documented. Metabolic differences in biotransformation have been shown to extend to multiple drugs and may involve many steps in drug metabolism with alterations of key intermediates. Although metabolic differences have been reported to be associated with complications of medication use, it has only recently been appreciated that such differences also may be associated in the unborn with the potential for the disruption of normal embryologic development and the production of congenital malformations. It has long been suspected that the teratogenicity of phenytoin may be mediated not only by the parent compound, but also by toxic intermediary metabolites that are produced during the biotransformation of the parent compound. Recent work elucidating differences in isoenzyme forms of cytochrome P-450 enzyme systems, glutathione, and microsomal epoxide hydrolase has provided increased interest in the multiple individual pharmacogenetic differences that may be significant factors affecting increased susceptibility to birth defects in individuals and families with fetal exposure to phenytoin.
We compared zonisamide monotherapy (12 weeks) to carbamazepine monotherapy (12 weeks) after phenytoin baseline monotherapy (8 weeks) in an open crossover pilot study of eight adults with uncontrolled partial seizures. Zonisamide had definite antiepileptic activity in five subjects. In two of these, response to zonisamide was superior to that to either phenytoin or carbamazepine. A third subject became seizure free on zonisamide, but had to be withdrawn after 18 days because of mild Stevens-Johnson syndrome. The other three subjects were withdrawn from the study because of drug toxicity, manifested mainly by impaired higher mental function and increased seizures. The best response to zonisamide was at doses approximating 6 mg/kg/day, with plasma levels of 20-30 mg/L. Plasma levels of greater than 30 mg/L usually were associated with toxicity. The pharmacokinetics of zonisamide are complex and nonlinear, with steady-state plasma levels being approximately three times higher than those predicted from a single-dose study.
A safe and effective therapy for epilepsy requires a drug delivery system that can penetrate the blood-brain barrier and subsequently release antiepileptic drugs rapidly to suppress neuronal discharges in a timely manner. We have developed electro-responsive hydrogel nanoparticles (ERHNPs) modified with angiopep-2 (ANG) to facilitate the delivery of the antiepileptic drug phenytoin sodium. The resulting ANG-ERHNPs had an average diameter of (102.3+/-16.8) nm and were electro-sensitive with regard to particle size and drug release in vitro. ANG-ERHNPs have the characteristics of penetrate the BBB easily, resulting in a higher distribution in the central system. The improved antiepileptic effects were investigated with the amygdala kindling model. The results demonstrate that the ANG-ERHNPs were able to transport antiepileptic drugs into the brain and release them under electroencephalograph epileptiform abnormalities to greatly improve the therapeutic index of existing drugs in clinical use.
A thorough understanding of the pharmacologic properties of lipid-soluble drugs is essential when using these agents to treat status epilepticus. In addition to physiologic factors, such as blood pressure and cerebral blood flow, pharmacokinetic principles, including half-life, distribution, elimination, and volume of distribution (with special regard to an agent's lipid-solubility rating), should be applied. These factors, in toto, will influence the choice of drug, its loading dose, and its therapeutic dose.
Phenytoin is commonly used an antiepileptic medication for seizure prophylaxis in patients with brain metastases. In these oncology patients group, phenytoin-induced severe adverse reactions may occur. Antiepileptic, particularly phenytoin-induced severe skin reactions including Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and bullous form of erythema multiforme have been reported in the patients treated with cranial irradiation due to brain metastasis. The acronym EMPACT (Erythema Multiforme associated with Phenytoin And Cranial radiation Therapy) was recently described as a clinical entity. Herein, we report a 36-year-old female with breast carcinoma, who developed EMPACT syndrome after treating with cranial radiation therapy for brain metastasis and phenytoin for seizure prophylaxis.
A case of diabetic ketoacidosis in a 64-year-old black woman with maturity-onset diabetes receiving phenytoin for a seizure disorder is reported. The woman was admitted to the hospital with a one-day history of polyuria and polydipsia. For the 10 months before admission, her diabetes was controlled with isophane insulin suspension 27 units daily. She also took phenytoin 100 mg orally three times a day. This was prescribed approximately six weeks earlier for right-sided focal seizures that were detected by electroencephalogram during a previous hospitalization for nonketotic hyperosmolar coma. No other medications were taken. The patient was treated with i.v. fluids and intermittent doses of i.v. insulin. Her condition rapidly improved and insulin zinc suspension 35 units daily was prescribed on discharge. Phenytoin was discontinued because the seizure disorder was considered secondary to the previous episode of hyperosmolar coma. A literature review of phenytoin-induced hyperglycemia is presented, including previous case reports, possible mechanisms of action, monitoring guidelines, and potential therapeutic uses. If hyperglycemia occurs in a patient taking phenytoin, especially after starting phenytoin therapy or increasing the dose, drug-induced hyperglycemia should be considered in the differential diagnosis.
