Atypical depressions are those characterized by high levels of phobic anxiety or by reversed vegetative symptoms such as hypersomnia and hyperphagia. Patients with such depressions may present overtly for treatment. However, they may also present within other diagnostic categories such as personality disorder or somatic complaints. The comparative roles of monoamine oxidase inhibitors, heterocyclic antidepressants, and other biologic treatments for atypical depressions are discussed.
Herbs are often administered in combination with therapeutic drugs, raising the potential of herb-drug interactions. An extensive review of the literature identified reported herb-drug interactions with clinical significance, many of which are from case reports and limited clinical observations. Cases have been published reporting enhanced anticoagulation and bleeding when patients on long-term warfarin therapy also took Salvia miltiorrhiza (danshen). Allium sativum (garlic) decreased the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) and maximum plasma concentration of saquinavir, but not ritonavir and paracetamol (acetaminophen), in volunteers. A. sativum increased the clotting time and international normalised ratio of warfarin and caused hypoglycaemia when taken with chlorpropamide. Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo) caused bleeding when combined with warfarin or aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid), raised blood pressure when combined with a thiazide diuretic and even caused coma when combined with trazodone in patients. Panax ginseng (ginseng) reduced the blood concentrations of alcohol (ethanol) and warfarin, and induced mania when used concomitantly with phenelzine, but ginseng increased the efficacy of influenza vaccination. Scutellaria baicalensis (huangqin) ameliorated irinotecan-induced gastrointestinal toxicity in cancer patients.Piper methysticum (kava) increased the 'off' periods in patients with parkinsonism taking levodopa and induced a semicomatose state when given concomitantly with alprazolam. Kava enhanced the hypnotic effect of alcohol in mice, but this was not observed in humans. Silybum marianum (milk thistle) decreased the trough concentrations of indinavir in humans. Piperine from black (Piper nigrum Linn) and long (P. longum Linn) peppers increased the AUC of phenytoin, propranolol and theophylline in healthy volunteers and plasma concentrations of rifamipicin (rifampin) in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis. Eleutheroccus senticosus (Siberian ginseng) increased the serum concentration of digoxin, but did not alter the pharmacokinetics of dextromethorphan and alprazolam in humans. Hypericum perforatum (hypericum; St John's wort) decreased the blood concentrations of ciclosporin (cyclosporin), midazolam, tacrolimus, amitriptyline, digoxin, indinavir, warfarin, phenprocoumon and theophylline, but did not alter the pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine, pravastatin, mycophenolate mofetil and dextromethorphan. Cases have been reported where decreased ciclosporin concentrations led to organ rejection. Hypericum also caused breakthrough bleeding and unplanned pregnancies when used concomitantly with oral contraceptives. It also caused serotonin syndrome when used in combination with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (e.g. sertraline and paroxetine). In conclusion, interactions between herbal medicines and prescribed drugs can occur and may lead to serious clinical consequences. There are other theoretical interactions indicated by preclinical data. Both pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic mechanisms have been considered to play a role in these interactions, although the underlying mechanisms for the altered drug effects and/or concentrations by concomitant herbal medicines are yet to be determined. The clinical importance of herb-drug interactions depends on many factors associated with the particular herb, drug and patient. Herbs should be appropriately labeled to alert consumers to potential interactions when concomitantly used with drugs, and to recommend a consultation with their general practitioners and other medical carers.
An 81 year old depressed female is described who developed catatonic-like behaviours while on the combination of the monoamine oxidase inhibitor phenelzine, and the neuroleptic haloperidol. Alternative etiologies, and the roles of the individual agents are discussed. It is suggested that whenever there is evidence of drug-induced catatonia, consideration should be given to stopping all medications.
BACKGROUND: Antidepressants-induced movement disorders are rare and imperfectly known adverse drug reactions. The risk may differ between different antidepressants and antidepressants' classes. The objective of this study was to assess the putative association of each antidepressant and antidepressants' classes with movement disorders. METHODS: Using VigiBase(R), the WHO Pharmacovigilance database, disproportionality of movement disorders' reporting was assessed among adverse drug reactions related to any antidepressant, from January 1967 to February 2017, through a case/non-case design. The association between nine subtypes of movement disorders (akathisia, bruxism, dystonia, myoclonus, parkinsonism, restless legs syndrome, tardive dyskinesia, tics, tremor) and antidepressants was estimated through the calculation first of crude Reporting Odds Ratio (ROR), then adjusted ROR on four potential confounding factors: age, sex, drugs described as able to induce movement disorders, and drugs used to treat movement disorders. RESULTS: Out of the 14,270,446 reports included in VigiBase(R), 1,027,405 (7.2%) contained at least one antidepressant, among whom 29,253 (2.8%) reported movement disorders. The female/male sex ratio was 2.15 and the mean age 50.9 +/- 18.0 years. We found a significant increased ROR for antidepressants in general for all subtypes of movement disorders, with the highest association with bruxism (ROR 10.37, 95% CI 9.62-11.17) and the lowest with tics (ROR 1.49, 95% CI 1.38-1.60). When comparing each of the classes of antidepressants with the others, a significant association was observed for all subtypes of movement disorders except restless legs syndrome with serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) only. Among antidepressants, mirtazapine, vortioxetine, amoxapine, phenelzine, tryptophan and fluvoxamine were associated with the highest level to movement disorders and citalopram, paroxetine, duloxetine and mirtazapine were the most frequently associated with movement disorders. An association was also found with eight other antidepressants. CONCLUSIONS: A potential harmful association was found between movement disorders and use of the antidepressants mirtazapine, vortioxetine, amoxapine, phenelzine, tryptophan, fluvoxamine, citalopram, paroxetine, duloxetine, bupropion, clomipramine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, mianserin, sertraline, venlafaxine and vilazodone. Clinicians should beware of these adverse effects and monitor early warning signs carefully. However, this observational study must be interpreted as an exploratory analysis, and these results should be refined by future epidemiological studies.
This review article features comprehensive discussions on the dietary restrictions issued to patients taking a classic monoamine oxidase inhibitor (phenelzine, tranylcypromine, isocarboxazid), or high-dose (oral or transdermal) selegiline. It equips doctors with the knowledge to explain to their patients which dietary precautions are necessary, and why that is so: MAOIs alter the capacity to metabolize certain monoamines, like tyramine, which causes dose-related blood pressure elevations. Modern food production and hygiene standards have resulted in large reductions of tyramine concentrations in most foodstuffs and beverages, including many cheeses. Thus, the risk of consequential blood pressure increases is considerably reduced-but some caution remains warranted. The effects of other relevant biogenic amines (histamine, dopamine), and of the amino acids L-dopa and L-tryptophan are also discussed. The tables of tyramine data usually presented in MAOI diet guides are by nature unhelpful and imprecise, because tyramine levels vary widely within foods of the same category. For this reason, it is vital that doctors understand the general principles outlined in this guide; that way, they can tailor their instructions and advice to the individual, to his/her lifestyle and situation. This is important because the pressor response is characterized by significant interpatient variability. When all factors are weighed and balanced, the conclusion is that the MAOI diet is not all that difficult. Minimizing the intake of the small number of risky foods is all that is required. Many patients may hardly need to change their diet at all.
Psychotropic drugs, especially antidepressants and antipsychotics, may give rise to some concern in clinical practice because of their known ability to reduce seizure threshold and to provoke epileptic seizures. Although the phenomenon has been described with almost all the available compounds, neither its real magnitude nor the seizurogenic potential of individual drugs have been clearly established so far. In large investigations, seizure incidence rates have been reported to range from approximately 0.1 to approximately 1.5% in patients treated with therapeutic doses of most commonly used antidepressants and antipsychotics (incidence of the first unprovoked seizure in the general population is 0.07 to 0.09%). In patients who have taken an overdose, the seizure risk rises markedly, achieving values of approximately 4 to approximately 30%. This large variability, probably due to methodological differences among studies, makes data confusing and difficult to interpret. Agreement, however, converges on the following: seizures triggered by psychotropic drugs are a dose-dependent adverse effect; maprotiline and clomipramine among antidepressants and chlorpromazine and clozapine among antipsychotics that have a relatively high seizurogenic potential; phenelzine, tranylcypromine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, venlafaxine and trazodone among antidepressants and fluphenazine, haloperidol, pimozide and risperidone among antipsychotics that exhibit a relatively low risk. Apart from drug-related factors, seizure precipitation during psychotropic drug medication is greatly influenced by the individual's inherited seizure threshold and, particularly, by the presence of seizurogenic conditions (such as history of epilepsy, brain damage, etc.). Pending identification of compounds with less or no effect on seizure threshold and formulation of definite therapeutic guidelines especially for patients at risk for seizures, the problem may be minimised through careful evaluation of the possible presence of seizurogenic conditions and simplification of the therapeutic scheme (low starting doses/slow dose escalation, maintenance of the minimal effective dose, avoidance of complex drug combinations, etc.). Although there is sufficient evidence that psychotropic drugs may lower seizure threshold, published literature data have also suggested that an appropriate psychotropic therapy may not only improve the mental state in patients with epilepsy, but also exert antiepileptic effects through a specific action. Further scientific research is warranted to clarify all aspects characterising the complex link between seizure threshold and psychotropic drugs.
BACKGROUND: Sexual dysfunction (SD) is an important underestimated adverse effect of antidepressant drugs. Patients, in fact, if not directly questioned, tend to scarcely report them. The aim of the present meta-analysis was to quantify SD caused by antidepressants on the basis of studies where sexual functioning was purposely investigated through direct inquiry and specific questionnaires. METHODS: A literature search was conducted using MEDLINE, ISI Web of Knowledge, and references of selected articles. Selected studies performed on patients without previous SD were entered in the Cochrane Collaboration Review Manager (RevMan version 4.2). Our primary outcome measure was the rate of total treatment-emergent SD. Our secondary outcome measures were the rates of treatment-emergent desire, arousal, and orgasm dysfunction. RESULTS: Our analyses indicated a significantly higher rate of total and specific treatment-emergent SD and specific phases of dysfunction compared with placebo for the following drugs in decreasing order of impact: sertraline, venlafaxine, citalopram, paroxetine, fluoxetine, imipramine, phenelzine, duloxetine, escitalopram, and fluvoxamine, with SD ranging from 25.8% to 80.3% of patients. No significant difference with placebo was found for the following antidepressants: agomelatine, amineptine, bupropion, moclobemide, mirtazapine, and nefazodone. DISCUSSION: Treatment-emergent SD caused by antidepressants is a considerable issue with a large variation across compounds. Some assumptions, such as the inclusion of open-label studies or differences in scales used to assess SD, could reduce the significance of our findings. However, treatment-emergent SD is a frequent adverse effect that should be considered in clinical activity for the choice of the prescribed drug.
The term atypical depression generally indicates either depression accompanied by severe anxiety (type A) or by atypical vegetative symptoms, ie, increased appetite, weight, sleep, or libido (type V). Early age at onset, predominance in women, outpatient status, mild intensity, rarity of attempted suicide, nonbipolarity, nonendogenicity, and minimal psychomotor change are common to both types. Some types of bipolar depression may be considered as atypical if accompanied by reversed vegetative change. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors are more effective than placebo in treating atypical depression, but their reported superiority to tricyclic antidepressants awaits confirmation, for which the development of appropriate operational criteria would be helpful. Atypical depression is a term that covers several types of depressive disorder and can, for the most part, be better defined using the standard nomenclature.
A 46-year-old female with severe phenelzine poisoning was managed successfully by alpha blockade and fluid loading, with the aid of invasive haemodynamic monitoring. The pathophysiology was documented, showing elevated plasma and urinary catecholamines, cardiovascular abnormalities and a contracted blood volume. Most of these changes were reversed following treatment.
Prazosin is recommended for treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)-associated nightmares. Level A. Image Rehearsal Therapy (IRT) is recommended for treatment of nightmare disorder. Level A. Systematic Desensitization and Progressive Deep Muscle Relaxation training are suggested for treatment of idiopathic nightmares. Level B. Venlafaxine is not suggested for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares. Level B. Clonidine may be considered for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares. Level C. The following medications may be considered for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares, but the data are low grade and sparse: trazodone, atypical antipsychotic medications, topiramate, low dose cortisol, fluvoxamine, triazolam and nitrazepam, phenelzine, gabapentin, cyproheptadine, and tricyclic antidepressants. Nefazodone is not recommended as first line therapy for nightmare disorder because of the increased risk of hepatotoxicity. Level C. The following behavioral therapies may be considered for treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares based on low-grade evidence: Exposure, Relaxation, and Rescripting Therapy (ERRT); Sleep Dynamic Therapy; Hypnosis; Eye-Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR); and the Testimony Method. Level C. The following behavioral therapies may be considered for treatment of nightmare disorder based on low-grade evidence: Lucid Dreaming Therapy and Self-Exposure Therapy. Level C No recommendation is made regarding clonazepam and individual psychotherapy because of sparse data.
Few studies on the pharmacokinetics and plasma drug levels of monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors have been performed, despite several decades of clinical use. Older MAO inhibitors such as tranylcypromine produce neuronal accumulation of neurotransmitter amines as a consequence of functionally irreversible MAO inhibition. Typically, these agents are cleared from the body rapidly, so plasma drug levels are not correlated with MAO inhibition. However, recent research has demonstrated that tranylcypromine can produce direct and reversible pharmacologic effects, as well as clinical mood effects, that appear more closely related to transient plasma tranylcypromine levels than to the degree of MAO inhibition. In addition, a new generation of reversible MAO inhibitors is now being introduced. The antidepressant actions of these latter agents will almost certainly be directly influenced by pharmacokinetic factors. This review summarizes the existing pharmacokinetic literature on tranylcypromine, phenelzine, moclobemide, and selegiline. These drugs and others like them promise to become increasingly important in modern psychopharmacologic practice.
Treatment-resistant depression (TRD) is a major health concern. More than 40% of patients treated for major depressive disorder with an appropriate antidepressant dose for an adequate duration fail to respond. Further, approximately half of adults with major depressive disorder fail to achieve sustained remission despite various medication trials. The utilization of monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) for the treatment of depression in clinical practice today is low due to their widely known adverse effects, some of which may be life threatening, and the risk for dietary and drug interactions. For these reasons, MAOIs are not recommended to be prescribed along with other antidepressants or certain prescription or nonprescription drugs. Pharmacologic options are limited for individuals with TRD, however, and there is a paucity of data on the efficacy of MAOIs in combination with other antidepressants for the management of TRD. We performed a search of the PubMed database (inception through January 25, 2015) to identify cases that illustrate the potential utility, as well as risks, of combination treatment with MAOIs and other antidepressants for the management of TRD; 18 articles met the criteria for our search. In addition, we performed a retrospective case series by reviewing the medical records of 29 adults treated for depression with an MAOI plus another psychotropic agent (an antidepressant or stimulant medication) between 2003 and 2012 at a large Midwestern teaching hospital. We compared the findings of the published experience with our local experience to allow for more informed decisions regarding pharmacotherapy in patients with TRD. We separated the local experience into two groups: 15 cases with the selective MAO type B inhibitor selegiline combined with medications presumed to increase the risk of serotonin syndrome and 14 cases with nonselective MAOIs (phenelzine and tranylcypromine) combined with other contraindicated medications. Although risks of combination treatment certainly exist with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, or clomipramine, the current literature supports cautious use of combining MAOIs with other antidepressants in patients with TRD who have failed multiple treatment modalities. In addition, the data from the 29 patients receiving combination therapy with an MAOI and another antidepressant or stimulant medication revealed that 21% improved significantly, with no complications. This case series and literature review suggest that when used under close supervision and under the care of an experienced clinician in psychiatry, combination therapy may be a consideration for the management of TRD in patients not responding to monotherapy or other combinations of antidepressants.
This article is a clinical guide which discusses the "state-of-the-art" usage of the classic monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) antidepressants (phenelzine, tranylcypromine, and isocarboxazid) in modern psychiatric practice. The guide is for all clinicians, including those who may not be experienced MAOI prescribers. It discusses indications, drug-drug interactions, side-effect management, and the safety of various augmentation strategies. There is a clear and broad consensus (more than 70 international expert endorsers), based on 6 decades of experience, for the recommendations herein exposited. They are based on empirical evidence and expert opinion-this guide is presented as a new specialist-consensus standard. The guide provides practical clinical advice, and is the basis for the rational use of these drugs, particularly because it improves and updates knowledge, and corrects the various misconceptions that have hitherto been prominent in the literature, partly due to insufficient knowledge of pharmacology. The guide suggests that MAOIs should always be considered in cases of treatment-resistant depression (including those melancholic in nature), and prior to electroconvulsive therapy-while taking into account of patient preference. In selected cases, they may be considered earlier in the treatment algorithm than has previously been customary, and should not be regarded as drugs of last resort; they may prove decisively effective when many other treatments have failed. The guide clarifies key points on the concomitant use of incorrectly proscribed drugs such as methylphenidate and some tricyclic antidepressants. It also illustrates the straightforward "bridging" methods that may be used to transition simply and safely from other antidepressants to MAOIs.
Six patients developed symptoms of pyridoxine deficiency while taking phenelzine. All had low pyridoxine levels, five being abnormally low. In all patients, symptoms responded to the addition of pyridoxine while continuing the antidepressant.
The importance of continuation and maintenance antidepressant therapy has been increasingly recognized, but usually focuses on tricyclic and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants. This review examines the evidence in support of classical monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) agents and the selective reversible monoamine oxidase type A inhibitor moclobemide in continuation and maintenance therapy. Phenelzine and tranylcypromine have demonstrated long-term efficacy but often cause intolerable side effects. Moclobemide is a well-tolerated alternative antidepressant, but there is a need for prospective controlled trials to evaluate its long-term efficacy.
Depression with atypical features was first recognized in a subset of patients with depression who preferentially responded to the monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) phenelzine, in contrast to patients with melancholic depression. This article reviews the history of approaches in treating depression with atypical features. Initial studies in the early 1980s focused on phenelzine, but an unfavorable adverse effect profile limits its clinical use. Despite such difficulties, phenelzine remains the gold standard in eliciting high response rates in nearly two thirds of patients with atypical depression. Searches for agents with improved safety profiles led to studies of tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), chromium, and cognitive therapy approaches. Of these, TCAs showed inferior efficacy to MAOIs but also had cumbersome adverse effects. SSRIs have reported efficacy, but a lack of direct comparative studies limits clinical decision making. Cognitive strategies have shown promise, but demonstrating efficacy in comparison with an MAOI and placebo is limited to a single study. Despite advances in agents for melancholic depression, treatment for atypical depression remains dependent upon older agents for the greatest efficacy.
The enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO) plays an important role in the inactivation of both dietary amines and also of neurotransmitter amines. A study of the properties of irreversible inhibitors of this enzyme suggests that the enzyme exists in two broad types--MAO-A and MAO-B. Although irreversible inhibitors of MAO were once widely used as antidepressant agents, they fell from favour because of adverse reactions after the ingestion of amine-containing foodstuffs ("the cheese reaction"). However, these inhibitors (phenelzine and tranylcypromine) are probably best for the treatment of atypical depression providing the patient is aware of dietary reactions. A new series of reversible, MAO-A selective inhibitors are being developed which do not exhibit serious dietary interactions. These reversible inhibitors show promise as rapidly acting antidepressant agents. An atypical irreversible MAO-B selective inhibitor, selegiline (deprenyl) does not exhibit an adverse reaction on the ingestion of amine-containing foods. This drug has been used as an adjuvant in the treatment of Parkinson's disease since it allows the dose of L-dopa to be reduced by approximately 25%. More important, selegiline may slow the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons that is characteristic of Parkinson's disease.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the comparative efficacy and tolerability of pharmacological treatment strategies for the treatment of acute bipolar depression. DATA SOURCES: A systematic review and network meta-analysis was conducted by searching eight registries for published and unpublished, double-blind, randomized controlled trials of pharmacotherapies for the acute treatment of bipolar depression. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: PRISMA guidelines were used for abstracting data, while the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool was used to assess data quality. Data extraction was done independently by two reviewers, with discrepancies resolved by consensus. Data were pooled using a random-effects model. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Primary outcomes were efficacy (response and remission rate) and acceptability (completion of treatment and dropouts due to adverse events). Summary odds ratios (ORs) were estimated using pairwise and network meta-analysis with random effects. RESULTS: Identified citations (4,404) included 50 trials comprising 11,448 participants. Escitalopram, phenelzine, moclobemide, carbamazepine, sertraline, lithium, paroxetine, aripiprazole, gabapentin and ziprasidone appear to be ineffective as compared to placebo in treatment of bipolar depression. Divalproex, olanzapine/fluoxetine, olanzapine, quetiapine, cariprazine, and lamotrigine, appear to be effective as compared to placebo in treatment of bipolar depression according to the network meta-analysis. Aripiprazole showed higher discontinuation rates versus placebo due to the appearance of any adverse event. Quetiapine was better than placebo at reducing treatment-emergent affective switches. For Bipolar I Disorder, cariprazine, fluoxetine, imipramine, lamotrigine, lurasidone, olanzapine-fluoxetine, and olanzapine were significantly better than placebo at response, while fluoxetine, imipramine, cariprazine, lurasidone, olanzapine-fluoxetine, and olanzapine were significantly better than placebo at remission. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These results could serve evidence-based practice and inform patients, physicians, guideline developers, and policymakers on the relative benefits of the different antidepressants, antipsychotics, and mood-stabilizing agents for the treatment of bipolar depression. REGISTRATION: PROSPERO (CRD42019122172).
Weight gain associated with antidepressant therapy is a common problem that often results in noncompliance. Some authors suggest that monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) are less likely to produce weight gain than tricyclic antidepressants. This paper addresses the relative potential for weight gain with the MAOI. Assessing the potential for antidepressant-induced weight gain necessitates separating the weight changes associated with alterations in mood disorders from those due to drug-induced alterations in appetite control. The mechanisms of appetite control are reviewed briefly followed by proposed mechanisms by which the MAOI may alter this control. A literature review suggests that phenelzine is the MAOI most likely to induce weight gain; reports of isocarboxazid-induced weight gain are less common. There are no cases of tranylcypromine-induced weight gain in the literature that are clearly associated with the drug. The MAOI probably have different effects on the mechanisms of appetite control.
Described is the clinical course of a 26-year-old woman who died following an overdose of the MAO inhibitor phenelzine. Signs and symptoms of toxicity were delayed in onset. Initial findings of excessive neuromuscular activity were followed by severe hyperthermia, coma, cardiovascular collapse, acute renal failure, hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. A review of the literature suggests that these features are not unusual following MAO inhibitor overdosage. The pathophysiology and management of MAO inhibitor poisoning are discussed.
