A modern approach to obesity acknowledges the multifactorial determinants of weight gain and the health benefits to be derived from weight loss. Foundational to any weight loss effort is lifestyle change, diet, and increased physical activity. The approach should be a high quality diet to which patients will adhere accompanied by an exercise prescription describing frequency, intensity, type, and time with a minimum of 150 min moderate weekly activity. For patients who struggle with weight loss and who would receive health benefit from weight loss, management of medications that are contributing to weight gain and use of approved medications for chronic weight management along with lifestyle changes are appropriate. Medications approved in the USA or European Union are orlistat, naltrexone/bupropion, and liraglutide; in the USA, lorcaserin and phentermine/topiramate are also available. Surgical management (gastric banding, sleeve gastrectomy, and Roux-en Y gastric bypass) can produce remarkable health improvement and reduce mortality for patients with severe obesity.
IMPORTANCE: Obesity affects approximately 19% of women and 14% of men worldwide and is associated with increased morbidity. Antiobesity medications (AOMs) modify biological processes that affect appetite and significantly improve outcomes, such as type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. OBSERVATIONS: AOMs should be administered in combination with lifestyle interventions and can be classified according to their mechanisms of action. Orlistat modifies digestive tract absorption and causes gastrointestinal adverse effects, such as oily fecal spotting and urgency, in more than 25% of patients. Centrally acting drugs, such as phentermine-topiramate and naltrexone-bupropion, regulate appetite in the brain and are associated with constipation in approximately 20% of patients, although the incidence of other adverse effects (eg, paresthesia, nausea) varies by medication. Nutrient-stimulated hormone-based medications, such as liraglutide, semaglutide, and tirzepatide, mimic the actions of enteropancreatic hormones that modify central appetite regulation and provide multiple cardiometabolic weight-loss benefits. Adverse effects of these drugs include nausea (28%-44%), diarrhea (21%-30%), and constipation (11%-24%). The relative potency of adult obesity medications has been studied in meta-analyses. Compared with placebo, orlistat was associated with 3.1% greater weight loss (52 randomized clinical trials [RCTs]; 16 964 participants), phentermine-topiramate was associated with 8.0% greater weight loss (5 RCTs; 3407 participants), naltrexone-bupropion was associated with 4.1% greater weight loss (6 RCTs; 9949 participants), liraglutide was associated with 4.7% greater weight loss (18 RCTs; 6321 participants), semaglutide was associated with 11.4% greater weight loss (5 RCTs; 4421 participants), and tirzepatide 15 mg was associated with 12.4% greater weight loss (6 RCTs; 1972 participants). CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: Obesity is associated with increased morbidity. Antiobesity medications are effective adjunctive therapy to lifestyle changes for improved weight loss and health outcomes.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Pharmacological management of obesity improves outcomes and decreases the risk of obesity-related complications. This American Gastroenterological Association guideline is intended to support practitioners in decisions about pharmacological interventions for overweight and obesity. METHODS: A multidisciplinary panel of content experts and guideline methodologists used the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation framework to prioritize clinical questions, identify patient-centered outcomes, and conduct an evidence synthesis of the following agents: semaglutide 2.4 mg, liraglutide 3.0 mg, phentermine-topiramate extended-release (ER), naltrexone-bupropion ER, orlistat, phentermine, diethylpropion, and Gelesis100 oral superabsorbent hydrogel. The guideline panel used the evidence-to-decision framework to develop recommendations for the pharmacological management of obesity and provided implementation considerations for clinical practice. RESULTS: The guideline panel made 9 recommendations. The panel strongly recommended the use of pharmacotherapy in addition to lifestyle intervention in adults with overweight and obesity (body mass index >/=30 kg/m(2), or >/=27 kg/m(2) with weight-related complications) who have an inadequate response to lifestyle interventions. The panel suggested the use of semaglutide 2.4 mg, liraglutide 3.0 mg, phentermine-topiramate ER, and naltrexone-bupropion ER (based on moderate certainty evidence), and phentermine and diethylpropion (based on low certainty evidence), for long-term management of overweight and obesity. The guideline panel suggested against the use of orlistat. The panel identified the use of Gelesis100 oral superabsorbent hydrogel as a knowledge gap. CONCLUSIONS: In adults with overweight and obesity who have an inadequate response to lifestyle interventions alone, long-term pharmacological therapy is recommended, with multiple effective and safe treatment options.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacotherapy provides an option for adults with overweight and obesity to reduce their bodyweight if lifestyle modifications fail. We summarised the latest evidence for the benefits and harms of weight-lowering drugs. METHODS: This systematic review and network meta-analysis included searches of PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Library (CENTRAL) from inception to March 23, 2021, for randomised controlled trials of weight-lowering drugs in adults with overweight and obesity. We performed frequentist random-effect network meta-analyses to summarise the evidence and applied the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation frameworks to rate the certainty of evidence, calculate the absolute effects, categorise interventions, and present the findings. The study was registered with PROSPERO, CRD 42021245678. FINDINGS: 14 605 citations were identified by our search, of which 143 eligible trials enrolled 49 810 participants. Except for levocarnitine, all drugs lowered bodyweight compared with lifestyle modification alone; all subsequent numbers refer to comparisons with lifestyle modification. High to moderate certainty evidence established phentermine-topiramate as the most effective in lowering weight (odds ratio [OR] of >/=5% weight reduction 8.02, 95% CI 5.24 to 12.27; mean difference [MD] of percentage bodyweight change -7.97, 95% CI -9.28 to -6.66) followed by GLP-1 receptor agonists (OR 6.33, 95% CI 5.00 to 8.00; MD -5.76, 95% CI -6.30 to -5.21). Naltrexone-bupropion (OR 2.69, 95% CI 2.11 to 3.43), phentermine-topiramate (2.40, 1.69 to 3.42), GLP-1 receptor agonists (2.17, 1.71 to 2.77), and orlistat (1.72, 1.44 to 2.05) were associated with increased adverse events leading to drug discontinuation. In a post-hoc analysis, semaglutide, a GLP-1 receptor agonist, showed substantially larger benefits than other drugs with a similar risk of adverse events as other drugs for both likelihood of weight loss of 5% or more (OR 9.82, 95% CI 7.09 to 13.61) and percentage bodyweight change (MD -11.41, 95% CI -12.54 to -10.27). INTERPRETATION: In adults with overweight and obesity, phentermine-topiramate and GLP-1 receptor agonists proved the best drugs in reducing weight; of the GLP-1 agonists, semaglutide might be the most effective. FUNDING: 1.3.5 Project for Disciplines of Excellence, West China Hospital, Sichuan University.
Obesity is a chronic disease, which similar to diabetes and hypertension, requires long-term treatment. The patient must be willing to make major changes in eating habits, lifestyle, and physical activity to achieve long-lasting results.
IMPORTANCE: Five medications have been approved for the management of obesity, but data on comparative effectiveness are limited. OBJECTIVE: To compare weight loss and adverse events among drug treatments for obesity using a systematic review and network meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of Science, Scopus, and Cochrane Central from inception to March 23, 2016; clinical trial registries. STUDY SELECTION: Randomized clinical trials conducted among overweight and obese adults treated with US Food and Drug Administration-approved long-term weight loss agents (orlistat, lorcaserin, naltrexone-bupropion, phentermine-topiramate, or liraglutide) for at least 1 year compared with another active agent or placebo. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Two investigators identified studies and independently abstracted data using a predefined protocol. A Bayesian network meta-analysis was performed and relative ranking of agents was assessed using surface under the cumulative ranking (SUCRA) probabilities. Quality of evidence was assessed using GRADE criteria. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Proportions of patients with at least 5% weight loss and at least 10% weight loss, magnitude of decrease in weight, and discontinuation of therapy because of adverse events at 1 year. RESULTS: Twenty-eight randomized clinical trials with 29 018 patients (median age, 46 years; 74% women; median baseline body weight, 100.5 kg; median baseline body mass index, 36.1) were included. A median 23% of placebo participants had at least 5% weight loss vs 75% of participants taking phentermine-topiramate (odds ratio [OR], 9.22; 95% credible interval [CrI], 6.63-12.85; SUCRA, 0.95), 63% of participants taking liraglutide (OR, 5.54; 95% CrI, 4.16-7.78; SUCRA, 0.83), 55% taking naltrexone-bupropion (OR, 3.96; 95% CrI, 3.03-5.11; SUCRA, 0.60), 49% taking lorcaserin (OR, 3.10; 95% CrI, 2.38-4.05; SUCRA, 0.39), and 44% taking orlistat (OR, 2.70; 95% CrI, 2.34-3.09; SUCRA, 0.22). All active agents were associated with significant excess weight loss compared with placebo at 1 year-phentermine-topiramate, 8.8 kg (95% CrI, -10.20 to -7.42 kg); liraglutide, 5.3 kg (95% CrI, -6.06 to -4.52 kg); naltrexone-bupropion, 5.0 kg (95% CrI, -5.94 to -3.96 kg); lorcaserin, 3.2 kg (95% CrI, -3.97 to -2.46 kg); and orlistat, 2.6 kg (95% CrI, -3.04 to -2.16 kg). Compared with placebo, liraglutide (OR, 2.95; 95% CrI, 2.11-4.23) and naltrexone-bupropion (OR, 2.64; 95% CrI, 2.10-3.35) were associated with the highest odds of adverse event-related treatment discontinuation. High attrition rates (30%-45% in all trials) were associated with lower confidence in estimates. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among overweight or obese adults, orlistat, lorcaserin, naltrexone-bupropion, phentermine-topiramate, and liraglutide, compared with placebo, were each associated with achieving at least 5% weight loss at 52 weeks. Phentermine-topiramate and liraglutide were associated with the highest odds of achieving at least 5% weight loss.
Older medications approved for chronic weight management (orlistat, naltrexone/bupropion, liraglutide 3 mg and, in the USA, phentermine/topiramate) have not been widely adopted by health care providers. Those medications produce only modest additional weight loss when used to augment lifestyle intervention. However, semaglutide 2.4 mg weekly has recently emerged and produces much more weight loss - on average 15% weight loss at 1 year. Semaglutide's enhanced efficacy and that its class (GLP-1 receptor analogs) is well-known may result in more clinicians adopting pharmacotherapy. Furthermore, the first dedicated cardiovascular outcome trial powered for superiority testing an anti-obesity medication (SELECT) is underway with semaglutide 2.4 mg. A positive outcome will further promote the concept that weight management should be a primary target for cardiometabolic disease control. In phase 3, tirzepatide and cagrilintide/semaglutide combination are showing promise for even greater weight loss efficacy. Another recently approved medication takes a personalized medicine approach; setmelanotide is approved as a therapy for those with some of the ultra-rare genetic diseases characterized by severe, early onset obesity. This chapter reviews the currently available and anticipated medications for chronic weight management as well as those approved for the genetic and syndromic obesities.
The objective of this review is to examine advances in the development of combination therapies for the treatment of obesity beyond diet or lifestyle interventions. Experimental combination pharmacotherapies include combinations of pramlintide and phentermine as well as amylin and bupropion-naltrexone. Incretin and pancreatic hormones generally inhibit upper gastrointestinal motor functions, and combinations showing efficacy in obesity are coadministration of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) with glucagon, a unimolecular dual incretin of PEGylated GLP-1/GIP coagonist, the combination of GLP-1 and PYY(3-36), and, in proof of concept studies, combined infusions of GLP-1, peptide YY, and oxyntomodulin. Among bariatric procedures, repeat intragastric balloon (IGB) treatments are more efficacious than IGB plus diet, and endoscopic intervention can enhance the effects of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass when weight regain occurs. A first trial has provided promising results with combination of IGB plus the GLP-1 analog, liraglutide, compared to the balloon alone. Thus, combination therapies for the treatment of obesity hold promise for introduction into clinical practice.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: As a chronic and relapsing disease, obesity impairs metabolism and causes cardiovascular diseases. Although behavioral modification is important for the treatment of obesity, it is difficult to achieve an ideal weight or sustain the process of long-term weight loss. Therefore, the obesity control guidelines strongly recommend lifestyle interventions along with medical treatment for patients who are overweight. There is sufficient evidence supporting that pharmacotherapy in combination with behavior-based interventions can result in significant weight loss and improved cardiometabolism. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent meta-analyses of new anti-obesity drugs and their weight-loss efficacy have shown that the overall placebo-subtracted weight reduction (%) for at least 12 months ranged from 2.9 to 6.8% for the following drugs: phentermine/topiramate (6.8%), liraglutide (5.4%), naltrexone/bupropion (4.0%), orlistat (2.9%), and lorcaserin (3.1%). However, very recently, on February 13, 2020, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) ordered the withdrawal of lorcaserin from markets, as a clinical trial to assess drug safety showed an increased risk of cancer. Currently, the anti-obesity medications that have been approved by the FDA for chronic weight management are orlistat, phentermine/topiramate, naltrexone/bupropion, and liraglutide. However, they are costly and may have adverse effects in some individuals. Therefore, drug therapy should be initiated in obese individuals after weighing its benefits and risks. One of the strategies for long-term obesity control is that anti-obesity medications should be tailored for specific patients depending on their chronic conditions, comorbidities, and preferences.
OBJECTIVE: Little is known about the predictors of response to obesity interventions. METHODS: In 450 participants with obesity, body composition, resting energy expenditure, satiety, satiation, eating behavior, affect, and physical activity were measured by validated studies and questionnaires. These variables were used to classify obesity phenotypes. Subsequently, in a 12-month, pragmatic, real-world trial performed in a weight management center, 312 patients were randomly assigned to phenotype-guided treatment or non-phenotype-guided treatment with antiobesity medications: phentermine, phentermine/topiramate, bupropion/naltrexone, lorcaserin, and liraglutide. The primary outcome was weight loss at 12 months. RESULTS: Four phenotypes of obesity were identified in 383 of 450 participants (85%): hungry brain (abnormal satiation), emotional hunger (hedonic eating), hungry gut (abnormal satiety), and slow burn (decreased metabolic rate). In 15% of participants, no phenotype was identified. Two or more phenotypes were identified in 27% of patients. In the pragmatic clinical trial, the phenotype-guided approach was associated with 1.75-fold greater weight loss after 12 months with mean weight loss of 15.9% compared with 9.0% in the non-phenotype-guided group (difference -6.9% [95% CI -9.4% to -4.5%], P < 0.001), and the proportion of patients who lost >10% at 12 months was 79% in the phenotype-guided group compared with 34% with non-phenotype-guided treatment group. CONCLUSIONS: Biological and behavioral phenotypes elucidate human obesity heterogeneity and can be targeted pharmacologically to enhance weight loss.
Obesity is among the leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide and its prevalence continues to increase globally. Because obesity is a chronic, complex, and heterogeneous disease influenced by genetic, developmental, biological, and environmental factors, it is necessary to approach obesity with an integrated and comprehensive treatment strategy. As it is difficult to achieve and sustain successful long-term weight loss in most patients with obesity through lifestyle modifications (e.g., diet, exercise, and behavioral therapy), pharmacological approaches to the treatment of obesity should be considered as an adjunct therapy. Currently, four drugs (orlistat, naltrexone extended-release [ER]/bupropion ER, phentermine/topiramate controlled-release, and liraglutide) can be used long-term (>12 weeks) to promote weight loss by suppressing appetite or decreasing fat absorption. Pharmacotherapy for obesity should be conducted according to a proper assessment of the clinical evidence and customized to individual patients considering the characteristics of each drug and comorbidities associated with obesity. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms of action, efficacy, and safety of these available long-term anti-obesity drugs and introduce other potential agents under investigation. Furthermore, we discuss the need for research on personalized obesity medicine.
Obesity is a chronic disease, and it requires chronic therapy. Hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes and cardiovascular diseases are leading causes of mortality in the modern world. All of them are strongly linked to obesity. While treating obesity, those conditions are also managed. Obese patients should always be treated through lifestyle interventions, though the results of such interventions are modest. Pharmacotherapy is a second step in the treatment of obesity, approved only when weight loss targets were not reached through lifestyle intervention. During the history of antiobesity drugs, many of them were withdrawn because of their side effects. Various guidelines recommend prescribing drug therapy for obesity through consideration of the potential benefits and limitations. Orlistat deactivates intestinal lipase and inhibits intestinal fat lipolysis. It is actually the only drug on the European market approved for the treatment of obesity. Orlistat therapy reduces weight to a modest extent, but it reduces the incidence of diabetes beyond the result achieved with lifestyle changes. Recently, some effective antiobesity drugs like sibutramine and rimonabant have been removed from the market due to their side effects. The new combination of topimarate and fentermine is approved in the US but not in Europe. The cost effectiveness of long-term pharmacotherapy of obesity is still an unresolved question.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The prevalence of obesity across the world continues to climb, bringing with it otherwise preventable obesity-related comorbidities including type 2 diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular disease. Weight loss is difficult to achieve and maintain through lifestyle interventions alone, leading to intense efforts to develop adjunctive pharmacological approaches. Herein, we examine recent advances in this field and limitations of currently available and emerging agents. RECENT FINDINGS: Liraglutide, lorcaserin and combination of phentermine-topiramate and bupropion-naltrexone have all been the subject of recent studies examining their efficacy as weight-loss agents. Although each effectively induces weight loss over and above placebo, significant concerns exist regarding side-effect profiles and safety, along with their ability to achieve sustained effects. Dropout rates in all examined studies were up to 50% or more, usually a result of intolerable side-effects. Recruitment of a high proportion of women of European descent also casts doubt on the generalizability of trial data. SUMMARY: Pharmacological interventions for weight loss remain limited, with side-effects often outweighing efficacy. Interestingly, substantial early weight loss was associated with sustained loss, suggesting a responsive phenotype and future trials might best be targeted in identifying responsive subpopulations.
Due to the diverse mechanisms of action of antiseizure drugs, there has been a rise in prescriptions of these drugs for non-epileptic pathologies. One drug that is now being used for a variety of conditions is topiramate. This is a narrative review that used PubMed, Google Scholar, MEDLINE, and ScienceDirect to review literature on the clinical and pharmacologic properties of topiramate. Topiramate is a commonly prescribed second-generation antiseizure drug. The drug works through multiple pathways to prevent seizures. In this regard, topiramate blocks sodium and calcium voltage-gated channels, inhibits glutamate receptors, enhances gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, and inhibits carbonic anhydrase. Topiramate is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for epilepsy treatment and migraine prophylaxis. Topiramate in combination with phentermine is also FDA-approved for weight loss in patients with a body mass index (BMI) > 30. The current target dosing for topiramate monotherapy is 400 mg/day and 100 mg/day to treat epilepsy and migraines, respectively. Commonly reported side effects include paresthesia, confusion, fatigue, dizziness, and change in taste. More uncommon and serious adverse effects can include acute glaucoma, metabolic acidosis, nephrolithiasis, hepatotoxicity, and teratogenicity. Related to a broad side effect profile, physicians prescribing this drug should routinely monitor for side effects and/or toxicity. The present investigation reviews various anti-seizure medications before summarizing indications of topiramate, off-label uses, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, adverse effects, and drug-drug interactions.
Although diet, physical activity, and behavioral modifications are the cornerstones of weight management, weight loss achieved by lifestyle modifications alone is often limited and difficult to maintain. Pharmacotherapy for obesity can be considered if patients have a body mass index (BMI) of 30 kg/m(2) or greater or BMI of 27 kg/m(2) or greater with weight-related comorbidities. The 6 most commonly used antiobesity medications are phentermine, orlistat, phentermine/topiramate extended release, lorcaserin, naltrexone sustained release (SR)/bupropion SR, and liraglutide 3.0 mg. Successful pharmacotherapy for obesity depends on tailoring treatment to patients' behaviors and comorbidities and monitoring of efficacy, safety, and tolerability.
IMPORTANCE: Antiobesity pharmacotherapy is recommended for adolescents ages 12 years and older with obesity. Several medications have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for adolescent use, but the most cost-effective medication remains unclear. OBJECTIVE: To estimate the cost-effectiveness of lifestyle counseling alone and as adjunct to liraglutide, mid-dose phentermine and topiramate (7.5 mg phentermine and 46 mg topiramate), top-dose phentermine and topiramate (15 mg phentermine and 92 mg topiramate), or semaglutide among adolescent patients with obesity. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This economic evaluation used a microsimulation model to project health and cost outcomes of lifestyle counseling alone and adjunct to liraglutide, mid-dose phentermine and topiramate, top-dose phentermine and topiramate, or semaglutide over 13 months, 2 years, and 5 years among a hypothetical cohort of 100 000 adolescents with obesity, defined as an initial body mass index (BMI; calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared) of 37. Model inputs were derived from clinical trials, published literature, and national sources. Data were analyzed from April 2022 to July 2023. EXPOSURES: Lifestyle counseling alone and as adjunct to liraglutide, mid-dose phentermine and topiramate, top-dose phentermine and topiramate, or semaglutide. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The main outcome was quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), costs (2022 US dollars), and incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs), with future costs and QALYs discounted 3.0% annually. A strategy was considered cost-effective if the ICER was less than $100 000 per QALY gained. The preferred strategy was determined as the strategy with the greatest increase in QALYs while being cost-effective. One-way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were used to assess parameter uncertainty. RESULTS: The model simulated 100 000 adolescents at age 15 with an initial BMI of 37, of whom 58 000 (58%) were female. At 13 months and 2 years, lifestyle counseling was estimated to be the preferred strategy. At 5 years, top-dose phentermine and topiramate was projected to be the preferred strategy with an ICER of $56 876 per QALY gained vs lifestyle counseling. Semaglutide was projected to yield the most QALYs, but with an unfavorable ICER of $1.1 million per QALY gained compared with top-dose phentermine and topiramate. Model results were most sensitive to utility of weight reduction and weight loss of lifestyle counseling and top-dose phentermine and topiramate. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this economic evaluation of pharmacotherapy for adolescents with obesity, top-dose phentermine and topiramate as adjunct to lifestyle counseling was estimated to be cost-effective after 5 years. Long-term clinical trials in adolescents are needed to fully evaluate the outcomes of pharmacotherapy, especially into adulthood.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacotherapy provides an option for adults with overweight and obesity to reduce their bodyweight if lifestyle modifications fail. We summarised the latest evidence for the benefits and harms of weight-lowering drugs. METHODS: This systematic review and network meta-analysis included searches of PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Library (CENTRAL) from inception to March 23, 2021, for randomised controlled trials of weight-lowering drugs in adults with overweight and obesity. We performed frequentist random-effect network meta-analyses to summarise the evidence and applied the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation frameworks to rate the certainty of evidence, calculate the absolute effects, categorise interventions, and present the findings. The study was registered with PROSPERO, CRD 42021245678. FINDINGS: 14 605 citations were identified by our search, of which 132 eligible trials enrolled 48 209 participants. All drugs lowered bodyweight compared with lifestyle modification alone; all subsequent numbers refer to comparisons with lifestyle modification. High to moderate certainty evidence established phentermine-topiramate as the most effective in lowering weight (odds ratio [OR] of >/=5% weight reduction 8.02, 95% CI 5.24 to 12.27; mean difference [MD] of percentage bodyweight change -7.98, 95% CI -9.27 to -6.69) followed by GLP-1 receptor agonists (OR 6.33, 95% CI 5.00 to 8.00; MD -5.79, 95% CI -6.34 to -5.25). Naltrexone-bupropion (OR 2.69, 95% CI 2.10 to 3.44), phentermine-topiramate (2.40, 1.68 to 3.44), GLP-1 receptor agonists (2.22, 1.74 to 2.84), and orlistat (1.71, 1.42 to 2.05) were associated with increased adverse events leading to drug discontinuation. In a post-hoc analysis, semaglutide, a GLP-1 receptor agonist, showed substantially larger benefits than other drugs with a similar risk of adverse events as other drugs for both likelihood of weight loss of 5% or more (OR 9.82, 95% CI 7.09 to 13.61) and percentage bodyweight change (MD -11.40, 95% CI -12.51 to -10.29). INTERPRETATION: In adults with overweight and obesity, phentermine-topiramate and GLP-1 receptor agonists proved the best drugs in reducing weight; of the GLP-1 agonists, semaglutide might be the most effective. FUNDING: 1.3.5 Project for Disciplines of Excellence, West China Hospital, Sichuan University.
The safety of obesity drugs has historically been poor. This and the stigmatisation of obesity in society ensured that a higher standard of safety for obesity drugs must be met. The authors review the safety disasters of obesity drugs that were withdrawn. The authors then review the safety of presently available drugs--benzphetamine, phendimetrazine, diethylpropion, phentermine, sibutramine and orlistat. The safety of rimonabant, a drug with a pending new drug application that has an independent effect on metabolic syndrome, is also reviewed. The authors compare the stage of obesity drug development to that of hypertension in the 1950s. As new and safer drugs with more downstream mechanisms are developed that have independent effects on the cardiovascular risks associated with obesity, third party reimbursement for obesity medicine is likely to improve. This may lead to obesity being treated like hypertension and other chronic diseases with long-term medication. With improved technological tools, the authors believe this process will be more rapid for obesity than it was for hypertension.
Obesity management requires a multidisciplinary approach, as there are many factors that contribute to the development of obesity, as well as the preservation of excess weight once it has been gained. Diet, exercise, and behavior modification are key components of treatment. In addition to lifestyle changes, weight gain secondary to medications is an important modifiable risk factor. Even after appropriate lifestyle modification, and medication adjustments (where possible) to avoid agents that can contribute to weight gain, many patients are still unable to achieve clinically meaningful weight loss. Pharmacotherapy for obesity management can fill an important role for these patients. This article will review medications that can lead to weight gain and potential alternatives, currently approved anti-obesity medications and best practices to individualize the selection process, and the use of testosterone in men with hypogonadism and obesity.
Anti-obesity medications (AOMs) are efficacious and well tolerated in randomized controlled trials, but findings may not be generalizable to routine clinical practice. This systematic literature review aimed to identify real-world (RW) evidence for AOMs to treat adults ( >/= 18 years) with obesity or overweight (BMI  >/=  27 kg/m(2) ). Searches conducted in MEDLINE, Embase, Health Technology Assessment (HTA) Database, National Health Service (NHS) Economic Evaluation Database, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials for studies of relevant FDA-approved AOMs yielded 41 publications. Weight loss (WL) was consistently observed, with 14% to 58.6% of patients achieving >/= 5% WL on orlistat, phentermine/topiramate, naltrexone/bupropion, phentermine, or liraglutide in studies of 3-6 months' duration where this was measured. When cardiometabolic risk factors were assessed, AOMs reduced or had no impact on blood pressure, lipids, or glycemia. RW data on the impact of AOMs on existing obesity-related comorbidities and mortality were generally lacking. AOMs were associated with various adverse events, but these were of mild to moderate severity and no unexpected safety signals were reported. A pattern of poor adherence and persistence with AOMs was observed across studies. Overall, the review confirmed the effectiveness of AOMs in RW settings but demonstrated large gaps in the evidence base.
