Five patients were treated with pindolol for various indications. The patients called attention to the appearance of fine tremors in their extremities 6-72 hr after starting treatment with the drug. The tremors disappeared 24-72 hr after stopping the drug. Beta-adrenoceptor-blockers are known to suppress different types of tremor and the paradoxical appearance of tremors during pindolol treatment is attributed to its powerful partial agonist activity. To the best of the authors' knowledge this side effect has not been previously described in the literature.
The circadian rhythm of blood pressure derived from continuous recordings of blood pressure in hypertensive subjects, provides an accurate and repeatable method of describing blood pressure on a temporal scale which can be used to evaluate the effects of anti-hypertensive drugs. It has been postulated that the rapid rise of pressure between 0600 and 1000 hr is due to intrinsic sympathetic activity mediated at the peripheral arteriole by alpha-adrenoreceptors. Drugs which block beta-adrenoreceptors do not appear to influence blood pressure at this time, no matter how frequently they are administered or how long-acting they may be. Meteroprolol and sotolol are beta-adrenoreceptor blocking drugs which appear to be different in that they produce a considerable fall in nocturnal blood pressure, which is similar to the effects of alpha-adrenoreceptor blocking agents. The physiological and clinical significance of these findings remains to be defined, but they emphasise the need for full and complete information on blood pressure changes before the most effective method of blood pressure reduction can be defined.
The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are the most frequently prescribed antidepressant drugs, because they are well tolerated and have no severe side effects. They rapidly block serotonin (5-HT) reuptake, yet the onset of their therapeutic action requires weeks of treatment. This delay is the result of presynaptic and postsynaptic adaptive mechanisms secondary to reuptake inhibition. The prevention of a negative feedback mechanism operating at the 5-HT autoreceptor level enhances the neurochemical and clinical effects of SSRIs. The blockade of 5-HT2A receptors also seems to improve the clinical effects of SSRIs. These receptors are located postsynaptically to 5-HT axons, mainly in the neocortex. Pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal cortex are particularly enriched in 5-HT2A receptors. Their blockade may affect the function of prefrontal-subcortical circuits, an effect that probably underlies the beneficial effects of the addition of atypical antipsychotic drugs, which are 5-HT2A receptor antagonists, to SSRIs in treatment-resistant patients.
Bopindolol is a nonselective beta-adrenoceptor antagonist [corrected] with partial agonist activity which is used in the treatment of hypertension. The drug is rapidly metabolised to an active hydrolysed form. The antihypertensive effects of bopindolol 0.5 to 4 mg are sustained for more than 24 hours after once daily dosing, and the drug appears similar in efficacy to propranolol, metoprolol, atenolol, pindolol and slow release nifedipine in the treatment of mild to moderate forms of this disease. In limited trials bopindolol has also successfully reduced symptoms in patients with angina pectoris, anxiety and essential tremor. Thus, bopindolol is an effective and well-tolerated beta-adrenoceptor antagonist.
Treatment-resistant depression is commonly encountered by mental health professionals. Strategies for the treatment of resistant depression, including augmentation strategies and switching antidepressants, are reviewed. The potential advantages and disadvantages of each of these strategies are discussed.
Serotonin (5-HT) selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and monoamine oxidase inhibitors are thought to have a delayed onset of antidepressant action attributable in part to the decrease in firing activity of 5-HT neurons they produce upon treatment initiation. As cell body 5-HT1A autoreceptors desensitize, 5-HT neuronal firing is restored. The agent pindolol, through its 5-HT1A receptor blocking property, has been shown to prevent the initial decrease in firing of rat 5-HT neurons associated with SSRI treatment. Four open-label studies put into evidence a significant acceleration of the antidepressant effect of SSRIs when combined with pindolol. Four of five placebo-controlled studies have confirmed this observation. Controlled trials indicate that a greater rate of response may be obtained by combining pindolol from the beginning of the SSRI treatment. The strategy of adding pindolol to the regimen of SSRI-resistant patients also appears to produce a therapeutic effect in a significant proportion of patients.
BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that treatment with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in combination with pindolol, a partial agonist at the 5-HT(1A) receptor, may produce a fast antidepressant response. However, inconsistent results have been obtained in clinical studies with combination of the two drugs. Some studies, most using paroxetine, show an acceleration of the antidepressant response, whereas studies with other SSRIs find no marked latency reduction. METHODS: The free SSRI concentration in patients either receiving the first dose, or in steady state treatment with the five different SSRIs citalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertraline was estimated using pharmacokinetic data for the individual drugs. RESULTS: Due to differences between the drugs regarding protein binding, distribution volume and affinity for the 5-HT transporter (5-HTT), the 5-HT uptake inhibition obtained with clinically relevant doses differs markedly among the SSRIs. CONCLUSIONS: A nearly complete blockade of the 5-HTT is obtained already after the first dose only with paroxetine, explaining why the latency reducing effect of pindolol preferentially is seen when pindolol is combined with paroxetine.
The non-selective beta-blocker bopindolol, which was developed as a pro-drug, possessed 50-60 times more potent long-acting hypotensive effects on the blood pressure than those of atenolol or propranolol. Because this drug has only a mild partial agonist activity, it did not cause the rapid decrease in heart rate observed with atenolol or propranolol or the increase in heart rate induced by pindolol. These hypotensive effects are due to beta 1-antagonistic effects, not effects on beta 2- or beta 3-adrenoceptors. In addition to these effects, benefits of this drug include the following: slow dissociation rate from beta-adrenoceptors in tissues, high affinity to 5-HT1A subtypes, less clinical effects on lipid metabolism and the inhibition of renin release. It is possible that this drug possesses different pharmacological characteristics from other beta-blockers.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are now commonly used in the treatment of major depression. In all patients starting treatment, the intent-to-treat response rate is about 50%. The other 50% will require some change in treatment, either augmentation or switch to a different agent. In this report, augmentation strategies are reviewed, with special attention to those strategies that have been used with the SSRIs. The data for switching antidepressants also are reviewed. Although there are no direct comparison studies of augmentation strategies versus switching that address the question of relative efficacy, the tactical issues that pertain to augmentation or switching are discussed.
The bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of 10 mg of mepindolol sulphate and of 25 mg of hydrochlorothiazide were compared in a cross-over design in five healthy volunteers after the administration of either the single drugs (Corindolan and Esidrix) or in combination (Tenesor). Maximum concentrations of mepindolol in the plasma of 25 ng ml-1 were achieved 1.6 h after both treatments and the half-life of disposition was calculated to be 4-5 h, being somewhat longer after the combination tablet. The amount of hydrochlorothiazide renally eliminated up to 48 h after drug intake was about 60 per cent of the dose. The half-life of renal excretion was 3 h. The two formulations of mepindolol sulphate and hydrochlorothiazide proved to be bioequivalent with a tendency to better mepindolol bioavailability in the combination form.
Clinical and hemodynamic investigations of the effects of the new beta-receptor blocking agent mepindolol were compared with those of pindolol in studies with seven male subjects 23-34 years old. Mepindolol was found to be more effective in lowering the resting and exercise heart rate at lower dose levels. A more pronounced increase in right ventricular and pulmonary artery pressure was observed on exercise, but there was no difference between the two drugs in the effect on cardiac output. Thus mepindolol seems to have a greater effect on chronotropic than on inotropic receptors. This means that the drug can be given to patients with exertional angina without increasing the risk of cardiac decompensation.
The introduction of the western diet and lifestyle to Japan has been associated with changes in body build, lipid levels, and disease pattern. An increased incidence of coronary heart disease parallels increased fat intake. Thiazide diuretics and beta blockers may have adverse effects on blood lipids in man leading to an increase in the risk of coronary heart disease; therefore, for many patients these drugs may not offer the optimum treatment strategy. Hence, prazosin, a drug that effectively lowers blood pressure without adversely affecting lipid metabolism, has been evaluated in nine studies within Japan. Prazosin showed adequate antihypertensive effects even at doses as low as 1 to 3 mg per day. Sustained constant blood pressure reductions were achieved with maintenance doses of 3 to 6 mg per day without significant side effects. Even when given in low doses, prazosin increased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol while inhibiting elevations of total cholesterol and decreasing triglycerides. In view of these findings, prazosin as a single agent can be considered for monotherapy of hypertension.
Several studies suggest that behavioral techniques such as meditation and relaxation may be associated with reduced end organ adrenergic receptor sensitivity. Thus far the evidence supporting this hypothesis has been indirect. We present preliminary findings showing reduced beta-adrenergic receptor sensitivity in a group of subjects practicing Transcendental Meditation. The meditation group (N = 10), compared to controls (N = 10), had a lower percentage of functional lymphocyte beta-adrenergic receptors (p = 0.009), but showed no difference in total receptor number or plasma catecholamines. There were no differences between the groups in Type A behavior, the Type A components, exercise, or family history of hypertension. The results provide some support for studies postulating that meditation is associated with reduced sympathetic adrenergic receptor sensitivity, and provide encouragement for the efficacy of receptor measurement in psychophysiology research.
An increasing number of dental patients are taking beta-adrenergic blockers for the treatment of hypertension or angina pectoris. If epinephrine-containing local anesthetics are administered to such patients, interactions between epinephrine and the beta-blocking agent may induce cardiovascular complications. We assessed in volunteers the effects of intraoral injection with 2% lidocaine containing 1:80,000 epinephrine (L-E) on cardiac function after pretreatment with the beta-blocking agent pindolol. M-Mode echocardiography was used for the assessment. The injection of L-E after administration of pindolol did not alter cardiac preload, whereas it reduced the stroke volume, due to an increase in afterload and a decrease in myocardial contractility. Reductions in stroke volume and heart rate led to a decrease in cardiac output. Because total peripheral vascular resistance increased markedly, blood pressure was elevated despite the reduced cardiac output. These results suggest that cardiac function of dental patients on beta-blocker therapy can be adversely affected by epinephrine-containing local anesthetics. Therefore, when such an anesthetic solution has to be used in patients on beta-blocker therapy, careful systemic monitoring is needed.
1 Pindolol and propranolol were administered orally in equipotent antihypertensive doses to 14 subjects with mild to moderate hypertension in an open cross-over study. 2 Pindolol caused a smaller decrease in plasma renin activity and heart rate than propranolol. 3 Glomerular filtration rate and effective renal plasma flow remained unchanged during therapy with either agent.
Using in vitro binding methods and autoradiographs, the authors showed that choroidal vessels specifically bind iodine 125 cyanopindolol, a nonselective blocker of beta-adrenergic receptors, in albino rabbits. In humans, the presence of beta-adrenergic receptors in choroidal vessels was confirmed by showing an increased choroidal vascular tone after systemic administration of timolol maleate, a nonselective beta-adrenergic blocker. Topically administered timolol maleate lowered the intraocular pressure but did not reach the choroidal receptors in sufficient quantity to produce a measurable effect on vascular tone.
The pharmacokinetics of the non-selective beta-adrenoceptor antagonist, bopindolol, have been studied in 18 hypertensive patients with varying degrees of renal impairment following single and multiple oral dosing. Bopindolol, which undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism, was found to accumulate in patients with chronic renal failure but the disposition in patients on regular haemodialysis did not differ significantly from patients with normal renal function. The mechanism underlying these changes in pharmacokinetics is not clear but suggests the presence of metabolic inhibitors in uraemic plasma which are removed by regular haemodialysis.
Beta-adrenoceptor blockade is responsible for the therapeutic action of beta-adrenoceptor-blocking drugs in the treatment of hypertension and angina pectoris. Many aspects of their effects can therefore be studied in relatively simple clinical pharmacologic experiments. Cardiac beta-adrenoceptor blockade can be measured in terms of the reduction of isoprenaline-induced and exercise-induced tachycardia. Based on these experimental procedures pindolol is, on a weight-for-weight basis, about 20 times more potent than propranolol. The duration of action of pindolol, measured by the reduction in exercise-induced tachycardia, is longer than that of many other beta-adrenoceptor-blocking drugs such as propranolol, alprenolol, and slow-release oxprenolol tested at equipotent beta-adrenoceptor-blocking doses. Pindolol is a beta-adrenoceptor-blocking drug with partial agonist activity (intrinsic sympathomimetic activity [ISA]). Drugs of this type are as effective in inhibiting beta-adrenoceptor stimulation as drugs devoid of this property, but unlike the latter they produce some stimulation of beta adrenoceptors. The ISA of pindolol is sufficient to counterbalance the diminution in resting sympathetic tone that results from beta-adrenoceptor blockade. In hemodynamic studies pindolol does not alter or only slightly reduces normal cardiac output. This is in contrast to drugs lacking ISA, which consistently depress cardiac output. In addition, propranolol has been shown to markedly reduce blood flow in the calf, whereas pindolol and placebo do not differ from one another in their effect on this parameter. A linear correlation exists between the logarithm of plasma concentrations of pindolol and cardiac beta-adrenoceptor blockade expressed as a reduction of exercise-induced tachycardia. The high systemic availability of pindolol after oral administration, due to good oral absorption and low first-pass effect, is revealed not only in pharmacokinetic studies but also in pharmacodynamic experiments; beta-adrenoceptor blockade 75 minutes after intravenous administration was equivalent to that observed 2 hours after the same doses given orally.
A randomized, double-blind, crossover trial was carried out in 17 hypertensive patients to evaluate the hypotensive efficacy and safety of verapamil. Verapamil in doses of 120 mg thrice daily was compared with pindolol in doses of 7.5 mg twice daily. A thiazide diuretic was given with both drugs. Blood pressure fell about 14/11 mm Hg during treatment with either drug compared to the placebo period, and neither drug caused significant side effects. Verapamil did not affect plasma renin concentration.
Pindolol, a strong beta-adrenergic blocking agent, instilled into the conjunctival sac of normal and glaucomatous eyes, produced a significant drop in intraocular pressure. This was not, at first, accompanied by any variation in outflow facility; only after prolonged treatment did an increase in facility appear, which accounted only for one-third of the tension-lowering effect. The drug was well tolerated, and did not affect either pupil motility or corneal sensitivity. It seems suitable for a trial use in the treatment of glaucoma.
