Pioglitazone belongs to the drugs primarily reducing insulin resistance. Currently, it is the only insulin sensitizer available. In addition to hypoglycaemic action, it has a number of other metabolically beneficial effects that are responsible for its positive effect on the vascular wall. The paper provides an overview of cardiovascular clinical trials with pioglitazone, its safety profile and practical recommendations for its administration.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are the only pharmacologic agents that specifically treat insulin resistance. The beneficial effects of TZDs on the cardiovascular risk factors associated with insulin resistance have been well documented. TZD use has been limited because of concern about safety issues and side effects. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies indicate that cardiovascular toxicity with rosiglitazone and increase in bladder cancer with pioglitazone are no longer significant issues. There are new data which show that pioglitazone treatment reduces myocardial infarctions and ischemic strokes. New data concerning TZD-mediated edema, congestive heart failure, and bone fractures improves the clinician's ability to select patients that will have minimal significant side effects. Thiazolidinediones are now generic and less costly than pharmaceutical company-promoted therapies. Better understanding of the side effects coupled with clear benefits on the components of the insulin resistance syndrome should promote TZD use in treating patients with type 2 diabetes.
Oncocrinology is the science which studies the complex bi-directional relationship between cancer and the endocrine system, including pathophysiological links, clinical presentation and the impact of cancer treatment and endocrine therapy. This review describes the vast spectrum of the complex, multifacted relationship between the endocrine system and malignancy. It also includes the endocrine aspects of anti-cancer treatment, and the need for oncovigilance with endocrine therapy.
Type 2 diabetes individuals are at high risk for macrovascular complications: myocardial infarction, stroke and cardiovascular mortality. Recent cardiovascular outcome trials have demonstrated that agents in two antidiabetic classes (SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists) reduce major adverse cardiovascular events. However, there is strong evidence that an older and now generically available medication, the thiazolidinedione, pioglitazone, can retard the atherosclerotic process (PERISCOPE and Chicago) and reduce cardiovascular events in large randomized prospective cardiovascular outcome trials (IRIS and PROactive). Pioglitazone is a potent insulin sensitizer, preserves beta-cell function, causes durable reduction in HbA1c, corrects multiple components of metabolic syndrome and improves nonalcoholic fatty liver disease/nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Adverse effects (weight gain, fluid retention, fractures) must be considered, but are diminished with lower doses and are arguably outweighed by these multiple benefits. With healthcare expenses attributable to diabetes increasing rapidly, this cost-effective drug requires reconsideration in the therapeutic armamentarium for the disease.
INTRODUCTION: Multiple parallel factors are implicated in the pathogenesis and progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)/non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Currently recommended therapies for NASH include vitamin E and pioglitazone, besides dietary and lifestyle changes. AREAS COVERED: This review focuses on the clinical development of several emerging drugs for the treatment of NASH and the impact of these drugs on current treatment standards. EXPERT OPINION: Four drug classes (FXR agonists, CCR2/CCR5 antagonists, ASK1 inhibitors, and PPARalpha/delta agonists) have moved into phase 3 trials for their investigation as NASH treatments. Results from phase 2 trials of other therapeutic agents with other pharmacological actions are also expected. The importance of combinational therapies with synergistic benefits engaging different targets, is now understood. Furthermore, studies have determined that the Mediterranean diet is beneficial for patients with NAFLD, while the traditional Okinawan diet is also considered useful. In the future, it will be important to establish new biomarkers to assess NAFLD activity, furthermore non-invasive diagnostic methods will promote the development of new drugs for NASH.
IMPORTANCE: Diabetic nephropathy and diabetic retinopathy share many similarities in pathophysiological processes. Preclinical studies have shown that sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2is) have a protective role in the risk of diabetic retinopathy. OBJECTIVE: To compare the risk of sight-threatening retinopathy associated with SGLT2is and other second-line glucose-lowering medications (including pioglitazone, sulfonylureas, and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors [DPP-4is]) in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D). DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cohort study in Taiwan applied a new-user and active-comparator design. Patient demographic and clinical data were obtained from the National Health Insurance Research Database. Adult patients with newly diagnosed T2D from January 1, 2009, to December 31, 2019, were recruited and followed up until December 31, 2020. Propensity score matching was used to identify pairs of patients treated with SGLT2i vs DPP-4i, SGLT2i vs pioglitazone, and SGLT2i vs sulfonylurea from January 1, 2016, to December 31, 2019. Data were analyzed between August 18, 2022, and May 5, 2023. EXPOSURES: Treatment with SGLT2i, DPP-4i, pioglitazone, and sulfonylureas starting on January 1, 2016. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The main outcome was sight-threatening retinopathy in participants. Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to assess relative hazards of sight-threatening retinopathy between the matched case and control groups. RESULTS: A total of 3 544 383 patients with newly diagnosed T2D were identified. After 1:1 propensity score matching, 65 930 pairs of patients treated with SGLT2i vs DPP-4i, 93 760 pairs treated with SGLT2i vs pioglitazone, and 42 121 pairs treated with SGLT2i vs sulfonylurea were identified. These matched patients included 236 574 males (58.6%), with a mean (SD) age of 56.9 (11.8) years. In the matched cohorts, SGLT2i had a significantly lower risk of sight-threatening retinopathy than DPP-4i (adjusted hazard ratio [AHR], 0.57; 95% CI, 0.51-0.63), pioglitazone (AHR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.69-0.81), and sulfonylureas (AHR, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.53-0.71). The Kaplan-Meier curves showed that SGLT2i was associated with a significantly lower cumulative incidence of sight-threatening retinopathy than DPP-4i (3.52 vs 6.13; P < .001), pioglitazone (4.32 vs 5.76; P < .001), and sulfonylureas (2.94 vs 4.67; P < .001). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This cohort study found that SGLT2i was associated with a lower risk of sight-threatening retinopathy compared with DPP-4i, pioglitazone, and sulfonylureas. This finding suggests that SGLT2i may play a role not only in reduced risk of diabetic nephropathy but also in the slow progression of diabetic retinopathy in patients with T2D.
Pioglitazone and metformin have both proven safe and efficacious in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Their combination into a single tablet seems logical. This article reviews the data that are available for this combination. Because the tablets are not currently widely available, the review examines some aspects of the effects of both agents separately and in the few trials where they have been administered concurrently, though not as a single pharmaceutical preparation. Based on this evidence, the combination appears therapeutically efficacious and clinically safe. The side effects are not multiplicative and reflect those predictable from monotherapy with either agent.
BACKGROUND: Western-style diets arouse neuroinflammation and impair emotional and cognitive behavior in humans and animals. Our previous study showed that a high-fructose diet caused the hippocampal neuroinflammatory response and neuronal loss in animals, but the underlying mechanisms remained elusive. Here, alterations in the gut microbiota and intestinal epithelial barrier were investigated as the causes of hippocampal neuroinflammation induced by high-fructose diet. RESULTS: A high-fructose diet caused the hippocampal neuroinflammatory response, reactive gliosis, and neuronal loss in C57BL/6N mice. Depletion of the gut microbiota using broad-spectrum antibiotics suppressed the hippocampal neuroinflammatory response in fructose-fed mice, but these animals still exhibited neuronal loss. Gut microbiota compositional alteration, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) reduction, intestinal epithelial barrier impairment, NOD-like receptor family pyrin domain-containing 6 (NLRP6) inflammasome dysfunction, high levels of serum endotoxin, and FITC-dextran were observed in fructose-fed mice. Of note, SCFAs, as well as pioglitazone (a selective peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-gamma) agonist), shaped the gut microbiota and ameliorated intestinal epithelial barrier impairment and NLRP6 inflammasome dysfunction in fructose-fed mice. Moreover, SCFAs-mediated NLRP6 inflammasome activation was inhibited by histamine (a bacterial metabolite) in ex vivo colonic explants and suppressed in murine CT26 colon carcinoma cells transfected with NLRP6 siRNA. However, pioglitazone and GW9662 (a PPAR-gamma antagonist) exerted no impact on SCFAs-mediated NLRP6 inflammasome activation in ex vivo colonic explants, suggesting that SCFAs may stimulate NLRP6 inflammasome independently of PPAR-gamma activation. SCFAs and pioglitazone prevented fructose-induced hippocampal neuroinflammatory response and neuronal loss in mice. Additionally, SCFAs activated colonic NLRP6 inflammasome and increased DCX(+) newborn neurons in the hippocampal DG of control mice. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reveal that gut dysbiosis is a critical factor for a high-fructose diet-induced hippocampal neuroinflammation in C57BL/6N mice possibly mediated by impairing intestinal epithelial barrier. Mechanistically, the defective colonic NLRP6 inflammasome is responsible for intestinal epithelial barrier impairment. SCFAs can stimulate NLRP6 inflammasome and ameliorate the impairment of intestinal epithelial barrier, resulting in the protection against a high-fructose diet-induced hippocampal neuroinflammation and neuronal loss. This study addresses a gap in the understanding of neuronal injury associated with Western-style diets. A new intervention strategy for reducing the risk of neurodegenerative diseases through SCFAs supplementation or dietary fiber consumption is emphasized.
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is a chronic, progressive disease, that can advance to fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Despite being a leading cause of liver transplantation, there are no approved pharmacological treatments. Our aim was to identify literature on management options in NASH. Our structured review of interventions treating NASH patients from English language publications between 1 January 2007 and 25 September 2017 elicited 48 eligible references. Lifestyle management was identified as the mainstay of NASH therapy. Vitamin E and pioglitazone reported reductions in steatosis; however, although recommended for some, no therapies are indicated in NASH. Multiple investigational treatments reported efficacy in mild-to-moderate fibrosis in Phase II/III NASH trials. Lifestyle management, although the focus of clinical guidelines, is insufficient for patients progressing to advanced fibrosis. With no clear guidelines for patients requiring interventions beyond lifestyle modification, long-term outcomes data are needed, particularly in patients with moderate-to-severe fibrosis.
AIMS: The objective of this umbrella review and meta-analysis was to evaluate the effect of diabetes on risk of dementia, as well as the mitigating effect of antidiabetic treatments. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted a systematic umbrella review on diabetes and its treatment, and a meta-analysis focusing on treatment. We searched MEDLINE/PubMed, Embase, PsycINFO, CINAHL and the Cochrane Library for systematic reviews and meta-analyses assessing the risk of cognitive decline/dementia in individuals with diabetes until 2 July 2023. We conducted random-effects meta-analyses to obtain risk ratios and 95% confidence intervals estimating the association of metformin, thiazolidinediones, pioglitazone, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, meglitinides, insulin, sulphonylureas, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP1RAs) and sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2is) with risk of dementia from cohort/case-control studies. The subgroups analysed included country and world region. Risk of bias was assessed with the AMSTAR tool and Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. RESULTS: We included 100 reviews and 27 cohort/case-control studies (N = 3 046 661). Metformin, thiazolidinediones, pioglitazone, GLP1RAs and SGLT2is were associated with significant reduction in risk of dementia. When studies examining metformin were divided by country, the only significant effect was for the United States. Moreover, the effect of metformin was significant in Western but not Eastern populations. No significant effect was observed for dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, or insulin, while meglitinides and sulphonylureas were associated with increased risk. CONCLUSIONS: Metformin, thiazolidinediones, pioglitazone, GLP1RAs and SGLT2is were associated with reduced risk of dementia. More longitudinal studies aimed at determining their relative benefit in different populations should be conducted.
INTRODUCTION: There is an unmet medical need for an effective anti-fibrotic treatment for NASH with advanced fibrosis. AREAS COVERED: The authors review the current and novel agents for the treatment of NASH with fibrosis. They also consider the potential future strategies of combination therapies. EXPERT OPINION: Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) agonist (obeticholic acid [OCA]) significantly ameliorated hepatic fibrosis in NASH stage 2/3 fibrosis in an interim analysis of phase 3 trial. Because OCA has several drawbacks such as itching and elevated low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C), non-bile acid FXR agonists are now under development. Selonsertib (apoptosis signaling kinase 1 inhibitor), emricasan (an irreversible pan-caspase inhibitor), and simtsuzumab (a monoclonal antibody against lysyl oxidase-like 2) were discontinued because of no efficacy over placebo. Peroxisome proliferator-activator receptor alpha/delta agonists, C-C motif chemokine receptor-2/5 antagonists, and thyroid beta receptor agonist are ongoing in phase 3 trials. A variety of agents including fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-21 and FGF-19 agonists, as well as acetyl-CoA carboxylase inhibitors, are also expected. Among antidiabetic agents, semaglutide, a novel GLP-1 RA, is ongoing for NASH stage 1-3 fibrosis in a phase 2 trial. Furthermore, the combination of GLP-RA/glucagon receptor agonist and GLP-RA/gastrointestinal peptide agonist are promising future options.
BACKGROUND: Enhanced angiogenesis can promote diabetic wound healing. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)-derived exosomes, which are cell-free therapeutics, are promising candidates for the treatment of diabetic wound healing. The present study aimed to investigate the effect of exosomes derived from MSCs pretreated with pioglitazone (PGZ-Exos) on diabetic wound healing. RESULTS: We isolated PGZ-Exos from the supernatants of pioglitazone-treated BMSCs and found that PGZ-Exos significantly promote the cell viability and proliferation of Human Umbilical Vein Vascular Endothelial Cells (HUVECs) injured by high glucose (HG). PGZ-Exos enhanced the biological functions of HUVECs, including migration, tube formation, wound repair and VEGF expression in vitro. In addition, PGZ-Exos promoted the protein expression of p-AKT, p-PI3K and p-eNOS and suppressed that of PTEN. LY294002 inhibited the biological function of HUVECs through inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/eNOS pathway. In vivo modeling in diabetic rat wounds showed that pioglitazone pretreatment enhanced the therapeutic efficacy of MSCs-derived exosomes and accelerated diabetic wound healing via enhanced angiogenesis. In addition, PGZ-Exos promoted collagen deposition, ECM remodeling and VEGF and CD31 expression, indicating adequate angiogenesis in diabetic wound healing. CONCLUSIONS: PGZ-Exos accelerated diabetic wound healing by promoting the angiogenic function of HUVECs through activation of the PI3K/AKT/eNOS pathway. This offers a promising novel cell-free therapy for treating diabetic wound healing.
The antidiabetic drug pioglitazone ameliorates insulin resistance by activating the transcription factor PPARgamma. In addition to its blood glucose-lowering action, pioglitazone exerts pleiotropic effects including amelioration of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)/nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). The mechanism by which pioglitazone achieves this latter effect has remained unclear, however. We here show that pioglitazone administration increases the amount of linoleic acid (LA) metabolites in adipose tissue of KK-Ay mice. These metabolites are produced by lactic acid bacteria in the gut, and pioglitazone also increased the fraction of Lactobacillus in the gut microbiota. Administration of the LA metabolite HYA (10-hydroxy-cis-12-octadecenoic acid) to C57BL/6 J mice fed a high-fat diet improved liver histology including steatosis, inflammatory cell infiltration, and fibrosis. Gene ontology analysis of RNA-sequencing data for the liver revealed that the top category for genes downregulated by HYA treatment was related to extracellular matrix, and the expression of individual genes related to fibrosis was confirmed to be attenuated by HYA treatment. Mechanistically, HYA suppressed TGF-beta-induced Smad3 phosphorylation and fibrosis-related gene expression in human hepatic stellate cells (LX-2). Our results implicate LA metabolites in the mechanism by which pioglitazone ameliorates liver fibrosis, and they suggest that HYA is a potential therapeutic for NAFLD/NASH.
AIMS: Thiazolidinediones administration is assumed to be related with an improvement of endothelial dysfunction (ED); nevertheless, previous studies have been inconsistent. For this reason, the present meta-analysis was directed to estimate if thiazolidinediones were related to endothelial dysfunction improvement by using flow-mediated dilation (FMD) measurement. METHODS: Literature search of the PubMed, the Cochrane Library, the Web of Science, and the Scopus databases was performed covering the period until July 01, 2015, for randomized clinical trials that investigated an influence of thiazolidinediones on FMD. For the calculation of the pooled overall effect, a random effect model was used. Meta-regression and subgroup analyses were performed to evaluate the impact of study characteristics on the effect of thiazolidinediones administration on FMD. RESULTS: This meta-analysis included 16 studies with 812 subjects. The obtained results demonstrated an improvement of endothelial dysfunction measured with FMD (16 studies, 812 subjects; WMD: 2.4 %, 95 % CI = 1.1 to 3.69 %; p = 0.0003). The significant heterogeneity was noted (I (2) = 95 %, p < 0.00001). Subgroup analysis demonstrated that pioglitazone and rosiglitazone were able to improve FMD. Also, thiazolidinediones improved FMD if treatment was longer than 12 weeks and if patients were younger than 65 years. Additionally, a lipid profile was found to influence thiazolidinediones effect on FMD. CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis demonstrated that thiazolidinediones were able to improve FMD, which in clinical terms can be further translated to the improvement of an impaired endothelial function. Nevertheless, the link between FMD and its predictive clinical relevance still requires further clarification.
In the past decade and a half, clinical diabetology has undergone enormous development. New drug classes have appeared in everyday practice (GLP1 receptor agonists, SGLT2 inhibitors), which are able to improve the outcome of cardiovascular (macrovascular) complications in diabetes within a few years or even a few months, in contrast to the drugs used in previous large, prospective studies (UKPDS, VADT). The use of thiazolidinediones (including pioglitazone) unfortunately and significantly has declined in recent years, both internationally and domestically, although tested in a randomized, controlled setting (PROactive, 2005), this drug was the first, one might say 'ahead of its time', that significantly reduced the composite clinical endpoint of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction and nonfatal stroke, which became later well-known and took center stage as the 3-point MACE. In this paper, we summarize the most important evidence that accumulated with pioglitazone over the past years. We briefly overview the molecular, cellular and pathophysiological changes it causes, and then, in addition to discussing the cardiovascular, metabolic and other benefits, mention the previously suspected and now confirmed possible side effects. It is our belief that pioglitazone could be successfully used today as part of a combined treatment in properly selected patients, with due care, in the personalized treatment of type 2 diabetes. Orv Hetil. 2023; 164(26): 1012-1019.
Right ventricular (RV) heart failure is the leading cause of death in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) acts as a vasoprotective metabolic regulator in smooth muscle and endothelial cells; however, its role in the heart is unclear. We report that deletion of PPARgamma in cardiomyocytes leads to biventricular systolic dysfunction and intramyocellular lipid accumulation in mice. In the SU5416/hypoxia (SuHx) rat model, oral treatment with the PPARgamma agonist pioglitazone completely reverses severe PAH and vascular remodeling and prevents RV failure. Failing RV cardiomyocytes exhibited mitochondrial disarray and increased intramyocellular lipids (lipotoxicity) in the SuHx heart, which was prevented by pioglitazone. Unbiased ventricular microRNA (miRNA) arrays, mRNA sequencing, and lipid metabolism studies revealed dysregulation of cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis, myocardial contractility, fatty acid transport/oxidation (FAO), and transforming growth factor-beta signaling in the failing RV. These epigenetic, transcriptional, and metabolic alterations were modulated by pioglitazone through miRNA/mRNA networks previously not associated with PAH/RV dysfunction. Consistently, pre-miR-197 and pre-miR-146b repressed genes that drive FAO (Cpt1b and Fabp4) in primary cardiomyocytes. We recapitulated our major pathogenic findings in human end-stage PAH: (i) in the pressure-overloaded failing RV (miR-197 and miR-146b up-regulated), (ii) in peripheral pulmonary arteries (miR-146b up-regulated, miR-133b down-regulated), and (iii) in plexiform vasculopathy (miR-133b up-regulated, miR-146b down-regulated). Together, PPARgamma activation can normalize epigenetic and transcriptional regulation primarily related to disturbed lipid metabolism and mitochondrial morphology/function in the failing RV and the hypertensive pulmonary vasculature, representing a therapeutic approach for PAH and other cardiovascular/pulmonary diseases.
BACKGROUND: Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis is regarded as a risk factor of many liver diseases. METHODS: Relevant studies were searched from The National Library of Medicine, Cochrane Library, Elsevier, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, Web of Science and WANFANG databases. A total of 15 eligible studies were analyzed in the Reviewer Manager 5.3 software, including 7 English articles and 8 Chinese articles. RESULTS: Fifteen studies are selected for this meta-analysis, which includes totally 623 patients in the treatment group and 594 patients in the control group. As a result, 8 studies show that the total effective rate of the treatment group is higher than that of the control group [Z = 3.64, 95% confidence intervals (CI): 1.78 (1.31-2.43), P = .0003]; eleven studies show that fasting plasma glucose levels of the experimental group are lower than that of the control group [Z = 4.38, 95% CI: -0.95 (-1.38 to -0.53), P < .0001]; ten studies show that glutamic-pyruvic transaminase levels of the experimental group are lower than that of the control group [Z = 3.69, 95% CI: -11.76 (-18.01 to -5.51), P = .0002]; 6 studies show that glutamic oxalacetic transaminase levels of the experimental group are lower than that of the control group [Z = 7.40, 95% CI: -3.01 (-3.81 to -2.22), P < .00001]; 6 studies show that gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase levels of the experimental group are lower than that of the control group [Z = 2.43, 95% CI: -23.77 (-42.98 to -4.57), P = .02]; 9 studies show that triglyceride levels of the experimental group are lower than that of the control group [Z = 3.06, 95% CI: -0.62 (-1.01 to -0.22), P = .002]; 6 studies show that the homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance of the experimental group is lower than that of the control group [Z = 3.22, 95% CI: -2.33 (-3.75 to -0.91), P = .001]; 6 studies show that the glycated hemoglobin A1c of the experimental group is lower than that of the control group [Z = 4.50, 95% CI: -1.90 (-2.72 to -1.07), P < .00001]; five studies show that the fasting insulin of the experimental group is lower than that of the control group [Z = 3.42, 95% CI: -2.25 (-3.53 to -0.96), P = .0006]. CONCLUSION: Pioglitazone intake is effective in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis management.
On any given night in the United States, an estimated 553,742 people are homeless. Applying a broader definition of homelessness that includes unstably housed people, an estimated 1.5% of Americans experience homelessness in a given year. Rates of diabetes are increasing among individuals experiencing homelessness. The social, psychological, and physical challenges of homelessness not only contribute to the rate of diabetes, but also complicate management. Unstable housing, limited medical resources, food insecurity, and competing priorities are barriers to diabetes care among patients experiencing homelessness. Homeless patients with diabetes more frequently develop specific comorbidities that require special attention, such as cardiovascular disease, substance abuse, depression, and foot wounds. The Affordable Care Act gave states the option to expand Medicaid to those earning up to 138% of the federal poverty level. This addressed a gap in coverage for low-income individuals not eligible for Medicaid or employer-sponsored insurance. With increased insurance coverage, this has increased the variety of medications available to treat hyperglycemia from type 2 diabetes beyond metformin, sulfonylureas, and insulin. Several of the newer classes of medications have advantages for patients experiencing homelessness, but also have special considerations in this vulnerable patient population. This narrative review will provide a review of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide agonists, sodium glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors, and thiazolidinediones in individuals experiencing homelessness.
BACKGROUND: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) are closely related and mutually contribute to the disease's development. There are many treatment options available to patients. We provide a comprehensive overview of the evidence on the treatment effects of several potential interventions for NAFLD with T2DM. METHODS: This systematic review and network meta-analysis included searches of PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Web of Science from inception to June 30, 2023, for randomised controlled trials of treatment of NAFLD with T2DM. We performed Bayesian network meta-analyses to summarise effect estimates of comparisons between interventions. We applied the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) frameworks to rate all comparative outcomes' certainty in effect estimates, categorise interventions, and present the findings. This study was registered with PROSPERO, CRD42022342373. RESULTS: Four thousand three hundred and sixty-nine records were retrieved from the database and other methods, of which 24 records were eligible for studies enrolling 1589 participants. Eight clinical indicators and 14 interventions were finally in focus. Referring to the lower surface under the cumulative ranking curves (SUCRA) and the league matrix table, exenatide and liraglutide, which are also glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RAs), showed excellent potential to reduce liver fat content, control glycemia, reduce body weight, and improve liver function and insulin resistance. Exenatide was more effective in reducing glycated haemoglobin (HbA(1c)) (mean difference (MD) 0.32, 95%CI 0.12 to 0.52), lowering BMI (MD 0.81, 95%CI 0.18 to 1.45), and lowering alanine transaminase (ALT) (MD 10.96, 95%CI 5.27 to 16.66) compared to liraglutide. However, this evidence was assessed as low certainty. Omega-3 was the only intervention that did not have a tendency to lower HbA(1c), with standard-treatment (STA-TRE) as reference (MD - 0.17, 95%CI - 0.42 to 0.07). Glimepiride is the only intervention that causes an increase in ALT levels, with standard-treatment (STA-TRE) as reference (MD - 11.72, 95%CI - 17.82 to - 5.57). Based on the available evidence, the treatment effects of pioglitazone, dapagliflozin, and liraglutide have a high degree of confidence. CONCLUSIONS: The high confidence mandates the confident application of these findings as guides for clinical practice. Dapagliflozin and pioglitazone are used for glycaemic control in patients with NAFLD combined with T2DM, and liraglutide is used for weight loss therapy in patients with abdominal obesity. The available evidence does not demonstrate the credibility of the effectiveness of other interventions in reducing liver fat content, visceral fat area, ALT, and insulin resistance. Future studies should focus on the clinical application of GLP-1Ras and the long-term prognosis of patients.
AIM: To investigate the efficacy and safety of pioglitazone compared to placebo when added to metformin plus dapagliflozin, a sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitor, for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). MATERIALS AND METHODS: In a multicentre study, with a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled design, 249 Korean patients with T2DM suboptimally managed on metformin and dapagliflozin were assigned to receive either pioglitazone (15 mg daily) or placebo for 24 weeks, followed by a 24-week pioglitazone extension. Primary outcomes included changes in glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c), with secondary outcomes assessing insulin resistance, adiponectin levels, lipid profiles, liver enzymes, body weight and waist circumference. RESULTS: Pioglitazone administration resulted in a significant reduction in HbA1c levels (from 7.80% +/- 0.72% to 7.27% +/- 0.82%) compared with placebo (from 7.79% +/- 0.76% to 7.69% +/- 0.86%, corrected mean difference: -0.42% +/- 0.08%; p < 0.01) at 24 weeks. Additional benefits from pioglitazone treatment included enhanced insulin sensitivity, increased adiponectin levels, raised high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and reduced liver enzyme levels, resulting in improvement in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease liver fat score. Despite no serious adverse events in either group, pioglitazone therapy was modestly but significantly associated with weight gain and increased waist circumference. CONCLUSIONS: Adjunctive pioglitazone treatment in T2DM inadequately controlled with metformin and dapagliflozin demonstrates considerable glycaemic improvement, metabolic benefits, and a low risk of hypoglycaemia. These advantages must be weighed against the potential for weight gain and increased waist circumference.
