Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can be a chronic and disabling condition. Post-traumatic nightmares (PTNs) form a core component of PTSD and are highly prevalent in this patient population. Nightmares in PTSD have been associated with significant distress, functional impairment, poor health outcomes, and decreased quality of life. Nightmares in PTSD are also an independent risk factor for suicide. Nightmare cessation can lead to improved quality of life, fewer hospital admissions, lower healthcare costs, and reduced all-cause mortality. Effective treatment of nightmares is critical and often leads to improvement of other PTSD symptomatology. However, approved pharmacological agents for the treatment of PTSD have modest effects on sleep and nightmares, and may cause adverse effects. No pharmacological agent has been approved specifically for the treatment of PTNs, but multiple agents have been studied. This current narrative review aimed to critically appraise proven as well as novel pharmacological agents used in the treatment of PTNs. Evidence of varying quality exists for the use of prazosin, doxazosin, clonidine, tricyclic antidepressants, trazodone, mirtazapine, atypical antipsychotics (especially risperidone, olanzapine and quetiapine), gabapentin, topiramate, and cyproheptadine. Evidence does not support the use of venlafaxine, beta-blockers, benzodiazepines, or sedative hypnotics. Novel agents such as ramelteon, cannabinoids, ketamine, psychedelic agents, and trihexyphenidyl have shown promising results. Large randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are needed to evaluate the use of these novel agents. Future research directions are identified to optimize the treatment of nightmares in patients with PTSD.
BACKGROUND: In randomized trials, prazosin, an alpha(1)-adrenoreceptor antagonist, has been effective in alleviating nightmares associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in military veterans. METHODS: We recruited veterans from 13 Department of Veterans Affairs medical centers who had chronic PTSD and reported frequent nightmares. Participants were randomly assigned to receive prazosin or placebo for 26 weeks; the drug or placebo was administered in escalating divided doses over the course of 5 weeks to a daily maximum of 20 mg in men and 12 mg in women. After week 10, participants continued to receive prazosin or placebo in a double-blind fashion for an additional 16 weeks. The three primary outcome measures were the change in score from baseline to 10 weeks on the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS) item B2 ("recurrent distressing dreams"; scores range from 0 to 8, with higher scores indicating more frequent and more distressing dreams); the change in score from baseline to 10 weeks on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI; scores range from 0 to 21, with higher scores indicating worse sleep quality); and the Clinical Global Impression of Change (CGIC) score at 10 weeks (scores range from 1 to 7, with lower scores indicating greater improvement and a score of 4 indicating no change). RESULTS: A total of 304 participants underwent randomization; 152 were assigned to prazosin, and 152 to placebo. At 10 weeks, there were no significant differences between the prazosin group and the placebo group in the mean change from baseline in the CAPS item B2 score (between-group difference, 0.2; 95% confidence interval [CI], -0.3 to 0.8; P=0.38), in the mean change in PSQI score (between-group difference, 0.1; 95% CI, -0.9 to 1.1; P=0.80), or in the CGIC score (between-group difference, 0; 95% CI, -0.3 to 0.3; P=0.96). There were no significant differences in these measures at 26 weeks (a secondary outcome) or in other secondary outcomes. At 10 weeks, the mean difference between the prazosin group and the placebo group in the change from baseline in supine systolic blood pressure was a decrease of 6.7 mm Hg. The adverse event of new or worsening suicidal ideation occurred in 8% of the participants assigned to prazosin versus 15% of those assigned to placebo. CONCLUSIONS: In this trial involving military veterans who had chronic PTSD, prazosin did not alleviate distressing dreams or improve sleep quality. (Funded by the Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Studies Program; PACT ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00532493 .).
The dynamic component of infravesical obstruction in men with symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is determined by alpha 1-adrenoceptor-mediated contractions of the prostatic capsule, prostate adenoma, and bladder neck. Since alpha 1-adrenoceptors are sparse in the bladder, medical therapy aimed at blocking the alpha receptor will relieve bladder outlet obstruction without inhibiting bladder function. Numerous clinical studies have evaluated the use of various alpha blockers for the treatment of BPH. Although the majority of these trials involved limited numbers of patients treated for only short periods, their results have consistently shown that alpha blockers improve urinary flow rates. Adverse reactions appear to be more frequent and more serious with the use of nonselective alpha blockers than with selective alpha 1 blockers, such as terazosin or prazosin. Terazosin offers the additional advantage of once-daily dosing. The common association of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and symptomatic BPH in the aging male population may provide further impetus for initiating treatment with alpha blockers because alpha blockers are effective antihypertensive agents and may favorably alter lipid profiles.
Vasodilator drugs counteract the major haemodynamic abnormality of hypertension, namely, arteriolar constriction. As a group, they tend to cause tachycardia and fluid retention, but these side-effects are variable within the group. Vasodilator drugs are effective in the treatment of the whole range of hypertensive diseases, from severe refractory hypertension to mild hypertension. With increasing recognition of the necessity of treatment in mild asymptomatic hypertension, those vasodilator drugs which can be used on their own, such as prazosin and calcium antagonists, are attractive as initial therapy, because they do not have adverse effects on the levels of atherogenic lipids and other risk factors for vascular disease. The major current use of vasodilator drugs in combination with a thiazide and a beta-adrenoreceptor-blocking drug is in the treatment of moderate-to-severe hypertension.
The importance of reporting correlations among side effects is examined using studies of BPH drugs as examples. The special relation of placebo effects in studying side-effects of drugs, as opposed to their efficacies, is introduced, and the need for special new controls is presented.
For various reasons, the alpha 1-receptor blocker prazosin has been used infrequently as initial therapy for hypertension. The introduction of additional agents of this class with properties different from prazosin provides slower onset of action, which should reduce the degree of first-dose and postural hypotension and a longer duration of action, which allows for once-a-day dosage. A summary of the published data on efficacy, side effects, and special properties of this class of agents indicates that they will probably be used more extensively, particularly because of their ability to improve lipid and glucose-insulin metabolism.
Men with moderate symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) are the best candidates for medical treatment, while surgery is usually indicated for patients with severe symptoms. Men with mild symptoms do not usually need treatment, but they might be re-evaluated annually if desirable. Finasteride, which produces selective hormonal deprivation, is now established as a well tolerated drug for the long term medical therapy of BPH. Recent studies suggest that finasteride is most effective in men with large prostates (> 40 ml), and the drug should probably be reserved for these patients. alpha-Blockers work in men with small or large prostates, and their rapid onset of action facilitates the identification of responders. alpha-Blockers are more effective than finasteride during the first year of treatment, but only finasteride induces regression of the prostate and offers increased efficacy over time. Even if drug therapy reduces the need for prostate surgery, the total economic cost of BPH treatment is likely to rise because of the increasing application of medical treatment. The magnitude of this increase depends largely on what percentage of the male population embark on long term therapy, at what age treatment is started, and how successful it is. At present, the answers to these questions are largely unknown. The personal economic expenses for men who begin long term medical therapy will probably be an important factor in deciding how common drug treatment for BPH will become in the future. For many men, the main benefit of drug treatment will be the relief of urinary symptoms, but whether this improvement is substantial enough to improve their overall quality of life has not yet been clearly demonstrated in controlled studies.
In this report, we assess the safety of terazosin in the treatment of patients with symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia. We analyzed seven prospectively designed placebo-controlled trials involving 3,080 patients, 1,689 of whom received the study drug in doses ranging from 1 mg to 20 mg daily for a total of 1,282 patient-years of exposure. The most common side effects seen in treated patients were dizziness (10.7%), asthenia (7.5%), and peripheral edema (4.0%). These side effects were generally reported as mild and improved after cessation of therapy. The incidence of withdrawal from the study due to side effects was 14.5% in the treatment arm versus 11.4% in the placebo control arm. Also noted was a statistically significant decreased risk of urinary tract infection and myocardial infarction in the terazosin-treated group. This updated report confirms that terazosin can be administered safely to a population of men with symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia with minimal clinically significant side effects.
The objective of this retrospective study was to gain a better understanding of patient and care factors that may contribute to urinary retention in critically ill trauma patients. Fifty trauma patients over a 1-year period with an International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10) code for urinary retention were identified and analyzed. Most patients had an indwelling urinary catheter placed on admission, and it was reinserted in 39 patients. Male gender, orthopedic trauma, and anesthesia were possible contributing factors for urinary retention in our sample population. The use of paralytics and more than one operative intervention had a significant relationship with prescribing bladder medications. It is imperative to have protocols based on best evidence to guide management of urinary retention in this critically ill trauma patient population.
Arterial stiffness, a prominent hallmark of ageing arteries, is a predictor of all-cause mortality. Strategies for promoting healthy vascular ageing are encouraged. Here we conducted a pilot study to evaluate the potential effects of low-dose Terazosin on arterial stiffness. We enrolled patients aged over 40 with elevated arterial stiffness, defined as a brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity (baPWV) >/=1400 cm/s, who were administered Terazosin (0.5 and 1.0 mg/day) from December 2020 to June 2023. Treatment responses were assessed every 3 months. Linear regression analysis was used to characterise the improvement. We matched cases who took Terazosin for 1 year with Terazosin-free controls using propensity score matching (PSM). Our findings demonstrate that Terazosin administration significantly affected arterial stiffness. (1) Arterial stiffness significantly improved (at least a 5% reduction in baPWV) in 50.0% of patients at 3 months, 48.6% at 6 months, 59.3% at 9 months, and 54.4% at 12 months, respectively. (2) Those with higher baseline baPWV and hypertension exhibited a significantly reduced risk of non-response. (3) Terazosin was associated with a reduction of baPWV at 1-year follow-up (linear regression: beta = -165.16, p < 0.001). This pilot study offers valuable insights into the potential significance of Terazosin in improving arterial stiffness and paves the way for future randomised clinical trials in combating vascular ageing.
Prazosin was administered orally to 24 normotensive human subjects in the form of capsules or as a solution. Plasma concentrations indicate that drug is almost completely bioavailable from the capsules, although levels peak more slowly than from drug in solution. Drug leaves plasma with a half-life of approximately 2.3 hours. Examination of data from each subject on repeated dosing indicates considerable intrasubject consistency in pharmacokinetic response despite intersubject variability. The absence of the pharmacologically active metabolites in plasma suggests that the hypotensive response derives from drug only. Prazosin is bound to human plasma proteins to the extent of 97%.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) often follows a chronic course, and the disorder is resistant to treatment with antidepressants and cognitive-behavioral therapy in a proportion of patients. Prazosin, an a1-adrenoceptor blocker, has shown some promise in treating chronic PTSD. A review of this literature was conducted via a search of MEDLINE and SUMMON, using keywords such as PTSD, prazosin, treatment, and resistance. At least 10 clinical studies of prazosin in the treatment of PTSD, including open-label and randomized controlled trials, have been published. All of these studies support the efficacy of prazosin either for treating nightmares and improving sleep or for reducing the severity of PTSD. Treatment of PTSD with prazosin is usually initiated at a dose of 1 mg, with monitoring for hypotension after the first dose. The dose is then gradually increased to maintenance levels of 2-6 mg at night. Studies of military patients with PTSD have used higher doses (e.g., 10-16 mg at night). Prazosin has also been studied in younger and older adults with PTSD and in patients with alcohol problems, in whom it was found to reduce cravings and stress responses. Prazosin offers some hope for treating resistant cases of PTSD in which recurrent nightmares are problematic, with a relatively rapid response within weeks. It is suggested that large-scale civilian trials of prazosin be done, as well as studies concerning the use of prazosin in acute PTSD and as a potential preventive agent.
Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) suggestive of benign prostatic obstruction are common in aging men. Nearly 25% of men >40 years of age have LUTS. Medical therapy with alpha-blockade is the most common method of medical therapy for benign prostatic obstruction. Multiple methods of minimally invasive surgical therapies have been introduced in the last decade. These methods include balloon dilatation, temporary and permanent urethral stents, various laser techniques, microwave thermotherapy, transurethral needle ablation, electrovaporization, and high-intensity focused ultrasound. alpha-Receptor blockers to reduce the sympathetic tone of the prostate are considered as first-line therapy to relieve the symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Selective alpha(1)-receptor blockers relax prostatic smooth muscle, relieve bladder outlet obstruction, and enhance urine flow with fewer side effects. In addition, it was determined that treating patients with alpha-blockers increases prostatic apoptosis. Pharmacokinetic activity, mode of action, clinical efficacy, and side effects of the selective alpha(1)-receptor blockers terazosin, doxazosin, and prazosin are reviewed.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize selective alpha 1-adrenergic blockers as antihypertensive agents, particularly doxazosin. CHARACTERISTICS OF ALPHA-BLOCKERS: These agents lower elevated blood pressure by reducing peripheral arterial resistance without increasing the heart rate or reducing cardiac output. They also reduce left ventricular hypertrophy; improve an atherogenic lipid profile; reduce the risk of thrombotic complications; reduce the formation of fatty streaks, the precursor of advanced athersclerosis; have no adverse metabolic effects in diabetic hypertensives; have a comparable side-effect profile to that of other antihypertensive drugs; and are cost-effective. CONCLUSIONS: In addition to reducing high blood pressure, the alpha-blockers reduce a number of other cardiovascular risk factors. In attempts to solve the hypertension-coronary dilemma, these additional effects may prove to be of crucial importance.
To ascertain whether increased sympathetic nervous system activity may contribute to the attenuation of prazosin's effect on congestive heart failure, we measured plasma norepinephrine levels in 10 patients with severe heart failure before and after chronic prazosin therapy. Norcpinephrine levels were increased in eight of 10 patients while supine (145 +/- 133 pg/mL; after, 481 +/- 376 pg/mL; P < 0.01); levels measured in five patients while upright were also increased (before, 351 +/- 238 pg/mL; after, 651 +/- 258 pg/mL; P < 0.05). Left ventricular ejection fraction measured by gated blood pool scan was increased from 16.9% +/- 8.1% to 25.4% +/- 11.3% (N = 10, P < 0.01). Mean systemic blood pressure and heart rate were unchanged. Increased plasma norepinephrine levels may attenuate prazosin's vasodilator action in heart failure. The cause of the increase in norepinephrine levels is unclear and warrants further study.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Terazosin, doxazosin, and alfuzosin (Tz/Dz/Az) are alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonists that also bind to and activate a key adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-producing enzyme in glycolysis. It is hypothesized that the increase in energy availability in the brain may slow or prevent neurodegeneration, potentially by reducing the accumulation of alpha-synuclein. Recent work has suggested a potentially neuroprotective effect of the use of Tz/Dz/Az in Parkinson disease in both animal and human studies. We investigated the neuroprotective effects of Tz/Dz/Az in a closely related disease, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). METHODS: We used a new-user active comparator design in the Merative Marketscan database to identify men with no history of DLB who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az or 2 comparator medications. Our comparator medications were other drugs commonly used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia that do not increase ATP: the alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist tamsulosin or 5alpha-reductase inhibitor (5ARI). We matched the cohorts on propensity scores and duration of follow-up. We followed up the matched cohorts forward to estimate the hazard of developing DLB using Cox proportional hazards regression. RESULTS: Men who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az had a lower hazard of developing DLB than matched men taking tamsulosin (n = 242,716, 728,256 person-years, hazard ratio [HR] 0.60, 95% CI 0.50-0.71) or 5ARI (n = 130,872, 399,316 person-years, HR 0.73, 95% CI 0.57-0.93). while the hazard in men taking tamsulosin was similar to that of men taking 5ARI (n = 159,596, 482,280 person-years, HR 1.17, 95% CI 0.96-1.42). These results were robust to several sensitivity analyses. DISCUSSION: We find an association in men who are taking Tz/Dz/Az and a lower hazard of DLB compared with similar men taking other medications. When combined with the literature of Tz/Dz/Az on Parkinson disease, our findings suggest that glycolysis-enhancing drugs may be broadly protective in neurodegenerative synucleinopathies. A future randomized trial is required to assess these associations for causality. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class III evidence that Tz/Dz/Az use reduces the rate of developing DLB in adult men.
A total of 713 patients with hypertension were evaluated in eight randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of terazosin administered in single daily doses ranging from 1 to 40 mg. In three of these studies, terazosin or placebo was added to ongoing antihypertensive drug therapy. Patient response was categorized (from excellent to inadequate) according to the change in supine diastolic blood pressure from baseline and the value at the final visit. The distribution of patients in these response categories differed significantly between patients treated with terazosin and those treated with placebo. Overall, 52 percent of terazosin-treated patients in these eight studies, compared with 30 percent of placebo-treated patients, had good to excellent responses. Subgroup analysis revealed that blood pressure response was not dependent on sex or age, although white patients appeared to achieve better responses to terazosin in comparison with placebo than did black patients. These studies demonstrate that terazosin administered once daily, either as monotherapy or in combination with other antihypertensive agents, effectively controls blood pressure in patients with mild to moderate hypertension.
A 35-year-old African-American man, who was an active duty service member, presented to the Troop Medical Clinic with a 4-hour history of priapism. He had been taking sertraline 100 mg and prazosin 10 mg nightly for 4 months to treat his posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with no reported adverse effects. These doses were titrated 2 months prior to presentation. The patient reported that he took his usual medication doses before bed and awoke at 3 am with a penile erection. At 7 am, he presented to the clinic because of pain from the continued erection.
The long-term efficacy of the new oral vasodilator, prazosin (PZ), was evaluated in nine patients with refractory heart failure due to chronic coronary heart disease. Ventricular function was assessed by cardiac catheterization, echocardiography, and treadmill testing; symptomatic evaluation was carried out for two to four months. One hour following 2-7 mg PZ, control left ventricular filling pressure was reduced (32 to 18 mm Hg, P less than 0.001) and cardiac index was elevated (1.95 to 2.89 L/min/m2, P less than 0.001) for a 6-hour period. After two weeks of PZ 2 to 7 mg four times daily, echographic end-diastolic dimension fell (5.7 to 5.4 cm, P less than 0.001) while shortening fraction increased (27.6 to 30.2%, P less than 0.005). Treadmill exercise duration increased from 209 to 317 seconds (P less than 0.001). Symptoms diminished throughout the duration of follow-up (mean 94 days) with improvement in NYHA functional class (3.7 to 2.2, P less than 0.001). Thus, prazosin possesses sustained nitroprusside-like balanced dilator actions on the systemic arterial and venous systems and is effective in the ambulatory management of chronic severe heart failure.
Finasteride, which inhibits the enzyme 5 alpha-reductase, reduces prostate size and relieves the symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) in men with enlarged prostates. alpha 1 -Adrenoceptor antagonists, such as doxazosin and terazosin, are also effective in the treatment of BPH. Previous clinical studies in which finasteride had little or no effect alone, have shown little or no additive effect with alpha 1 -adrenoceptor antagonists. The Medical Therapy of Prostatic Symptoms study showed a considerable benefit with finasteride alone and an additive effect when administered with doxazosin. One interpretation of these results is that if finasteride is effective alone in BPH, the combination with an alpha 1 -adrenoceptor antagonist will give an additive effect.
