In the last decades there has been progress in the treatment of essential tremor (TE) especially in the surgical field and to a lesser extent in the pharmacological field. We carry out a review of the currently available treatments. The first intervention is the use of non-pharmacological and non-surgical strategies (general advice, occupational therapy, speech therapy, psychotherapy). With discrete advances, the pharmacological treatment is not very satisfactory. Only 30-60% of patients have a positive response, and in these the anti-tremor effectiveness is 40-60%. The first-line drugs are still propranolol and primidone. In cases with severe tremor we will consider a surgical option, the method of choice being thalamotomy using high-intensity focused ultrasound. In the future we must continue to study the pathophysiology of TE, develop drugs specifically designed for TE and improve the technology of available invasive techniques.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Tremors can be encountered in a variety of disease states but the most common causes are Parkinson disease and essential tremor. This review was undertaken to highlight advances in the field during the last 12 months. RECENT FINDINGS: Kinetic tremor may be more prominent in essential tremor than postural tremor. Clinically Parkinson disease and essential tremor may be confused with each other but it may be possible to distinguish between these two nitrites using sophisticated electrophysiology. Monosymptomatic rest tremor has recently been shown to be associated with decreased fluorodopa uptake on the positron emission tomography scan suggesting its relationship to Parkinson disease. SUMMARY: Significant advances have been made in the understanding of the pathophysiology, genetics and therapy of tremor disorders during the last 12 months. This review will consider Parkinson disease, essential tremor and other tremors and highlight advances in the field.
Interactions between antiepileptic drugs, or between antiepileptic drugs and other drugs, can be pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic in nature. Pharmacokinetic interactions involve changes in absorption, distribution or elimination, whereas pharmacodynamic interactions involve synergism and antagonism at the site of action. Most clinically important interactions of antiepileptic drugs result from induction or inhibition of drug metabolism. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital and primidone are strong inducers of cytochrome P450 and glucuronizing enzymes (as well as P-glycoprotein) and can reduce the efficacy of co-administered medications such as oral anticoagulants, calcium antagonists, steroids, antimicrobial and antineoplastic drugs through this mechanism. Oxcarbazepine, eslicarbazepine acetate, felbamate, rufinamide, topiramate (at doses >/= 200 mg/day) and perampanel (at doses >/= 8 mg/day) have weaker inducing properties, and a lower propensity to cause interactions mediated by enzyme induction. Unlike enzyme induction, enzyme inhibition results in decreased metabolic clearance of the affected drug, the serum concentration of which may increase leading to toxic effects. Examples of important interactions mediated by enzyme inhibition include the increase in the serum concentration of phenobarbital and lamotrigine caused by valproic acid. There are also interactions whereby other drugs induce or inhibit the metabolism of antiepileptic drugs, examples being the increase in serum carbamazepine concentration by erythromycin, and the decrease in serum lamotrigine concentration by oestrogen-containing contraceptives. Pharmacodynamic interactions between antiepileptic drugs may also be clinically important. These interactions can have potentially beneficial effects, such as the therapeutic synergism of valproic acid combined with lamotrigine, or adverse effects, such as the reciprocal potentiation of neurotoxicity observed in patients treated with a combination of sodium channel blocking antiepileptic drugs.
Essential tremor is one of the most common movement disorders. It is characterized by a bilateral action tremor of the upper limbs. It may be accompanied by tremor of the head, voice, or lower limbs. Essential tremor is often present for years or decades before presentation and it progresses insidiously. It is often familial and transiently responsive to alcohol. For patients requiring treatment, the two first-line medications are propranolol and primidone, which are synergistic. Patients with disabling essential tremor that cannot be managed medically are candidates for either deep brain stimulation or focused ultrasound.
Twenty patients with tongue tremor associated with essential tremor are reported. Patients were unaware of the tongue tremor, and voice disturbance was a complaint in only one patient. Three patients had an isolated tongue tremor. Hand tremor was present in 16 patients. Dystonia, myoclonus, and tremor of other body parts were present in some patients. Three patients had a mild-to-moderate dysarthria. The frequency of tongue tremor (4-8 Hz) was identical to hand tremor. The intravenous infusion of ethanol suppressed tongue tremor. Therapy with propranolol, primidone, or clonazepam also reduced tongue tremor amplitude. Tongue tremor is a common finding in some essential tremor patients but often there are no symptoms.
Postural tremor is the most common movement disorder in psychiatry, and often a difficult problem for clinicians. It can be classified as physiological, essential, drug-induced, and postural tremor in Parkinson's disease. Drugs used in psychiatry that can produce postural tremor, include lithium, valproic acid, lamotrigine, antidepressants, and neuroleptics. Clinical characteristics of postural tremor induced by each of these drugs are described. Pharmacological strategies for therapy in disabling drug-induced tremor include beta-blockers, primidone, gabapentin, topiramate, and benzodiazepines; their utility, doses and side-effects are also discussed.
Acar T, Alkan G, Caksen H, Ertekin B, Ergin M, Kocak S, Cander B. Phenytoin induced dystonia. Turk J Pediatr 2018; 60: 111-112. The abnormalities of dopaminergic activity in the basal ganglia have been emphasized to be effective in dystonia. We hereby report a case of a 2.5-year-old male patient who presented with tonic-clonic sezures and who developed dystonia after being given phenytoin. Biperidene hydrochloride was administered intramuscularly; primidone was added to the treatment regimen. After a 7-day-follow-up at the hospital, the patient had no dystonia and was discharged.
Despite the recent entry into the market-place of a range of new pharmacological treatments for epilepsy, most patients still receive the standard antiepileptic drugs. This review considers the clinical place and practical use of these agents. Detailed consideration is given to carbamazepine, phenytoin, sodium valproate, phenobarbital and ethosuximide, with lesser emphasis on primidone, clobazam and clonazepam. Individualization of therapy, polypharmacy, refractory epilepsy, therapeutic drug monitoring, pregnancy, withdrawing treatment, epilepsy prophylaxis and referral to an epilepsy centre are also discussed. The paper concludes with a statement of 12 basic rules in prescribing established antiepileptic drugs.
Two men, aged 57 and 77 years old, reported increasing unsteadiness on standing upright for the past 2 and 5 years, respectively. It had become impossible for them to remain standing for more than 10 seconds, as otherwise they might fall down. Walking, sitting and lying were possible without difficulty. Both patients were found to have a fine tremor in both legs on standing only. There were no other neurological signs or symptoms. Electromyography of the leg muscles demonstrated tremor activity at 14-16 Hz. Propranolol, 40 mg three times daily, in the 57-year-old patient brought no improvement. However, on taking primidone, in slowly increasing doses up to 250 and 500 mg daily, respectively, the condition lastingly improved in both patients.
Essential tremor is a common movement disorder in adults that interferes with the performance of functional and social activities. Differentiation of essential tremor from other tremor syndromes is important in order to provide appropriate patient education and therapy. The mainstays of pharmacotherapy are propranolol and primidone; however, in selected patients, agents such as alcohol, benzodiazepines, botulinum toxin, and gabapentin may provide symptomatic benefits. Advances in surgical interventions, such as stereotactic thalamotomy and thalamic deep brain stimulation, offer patients an alternative treatment modality when pharmacotherapy is inadequate. A treatment algorithm is provided to guide clinicians in the management of patients with essential tremor.
Essential tremor (ET) is currently classified as a syndrome rather than a unique disease, primarily involving monosymptomatic action tremor in both hands. Different etiologies are presumed to underlie this condition. Currently only a few monogenetic conditions are known to present with this syndrome. If accompanied by additional symptoms that do not in themselves constitute a new syndrome, such as abnormal tandem gait or postures, the syndrome should be diagnosed as "ET plus". ET is associated with abnormal rhythmic activation of the cerebello-thalamo-cortical tremor circuit. Despite its strong heritability, the genetics of ET have not been elucidated as yet. Age-correlated tremor is one of the presumed subgroups of ET. Late onset is associated with a shortened life expectancy. From a treatment perspective, propranolol and primidone represent the drugs of first choice, followed by topiramate. Deep brain stimulation of the Vim nucleus of the thalamus is a proven treatment option in severely affected patients.
Tremor is a rhythmic, involuntary muscular contraction with consistency of rate, amplitude and pattern. It is the most common of all involuntary movements. Several systems for classifying tremor exist with the most frequent system classed according to behavioral context, ie, resting, postural and action. Clinical recognition of tremor type is extremely important as type determines prognosis, treatment and need for genetic counseling. The most common forms are parkinsonian, physiological, cerebellar intention and essential tremor. Essential or hereditary tremor is the most common of all neurologic conditions with 3-4 million Americans affected. Nursing implications of caring for essential tremor patients are presented.
BACKGROUND: Essential Tremor (ET) is likely the most frequent movement disorder. In this review, we have summarized the current pharmacological options for the treatment of this disorder and discussed several future options derived from drugs tested in experimental models of ET or from neuropathological data. METHODS: A literature search was performed on the pharmacology of essential tremors using PubMed Database from 1966 to July 31, 2019. RESULTS: To date, the beta-blocker propranolol and the antiepileptic drug primidone are the drugs that have shown higher efficacy in the treatment of ET. Other drugs tested in ET patients have shown different degrees of efficacy or have not been useful. CONCLUSION: Injections of botulinum toxin A could be useful in the treatment of some patients with ET refractory to pharmacotherapy. According to recent neurochemical data, drugs acting on the extrasynaptic GABAA receptors, the glutamatergic system or LINGO-1 could be interesting therapeutic options in the future.
INTRODUCTION: Essential tremor is one of the most common movement disorders throughout the world, with prevalence in the general population of 0.4-3.9%. Although most people with essential tremor are only mildly affected, those who seek medical care are disabled to some extent, and most are socially handicapped by the tremor. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of drug treatments in people with essential tremor of the hand? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library and other important databases up to December 2006 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 41 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: adding mirtazepine to other antitremor drugs; benzodiazepines; beta-blockers other than propranolol; botulinum A toxin-haemagglutinin complex; calcium channel blockers; carbonic anhydrase inhibitors; clonidine; flunarizine; gabapentin; isoniazid; Phenobarbital; primidone; propranolol; and topiramate.
Tremor is often a disabling primary condition or secondary to another disorder. No universally effective pharmacological agent exists for the treatment of essential tremor, and patients differ greatly in their response to therapies, thus requiring individualised regimens. Deep brain stimulation is the best option for patients with disabling, drug-resistant essential tremor. Resting tremor in Parkinson's disease is usually not the primary disabling feature, and in most cases, levodopa/carbidopa is satisfactory for many years. Young Parkinson's patients with dominant, disabling tremor benefit from anticholinergics in addition to dopaminergic therapies. However, older Parkinson's patients with more disabling tremor may suffer from dose-dependent side effects, and deep brain stimulation should be considered. This article outlines the available pharmacological agents and treatment considerations for various disabling tremors, including essential tremor and Parkinson's disease.
Epilepsy, one of the oldest identified neurological disorders, is now recognized as a major public health problem affecting about 1 percent of the population. The author differentiates between two major types of the disorder, the generalized and partial epilepsies, and describes different kinds of seizures in epileptic patients. The improved ability of the clinician to diagnose the disorder through use of electroencephalography, intensive monitoring, and CT scan is highlighted. The author concludes with a discussion of the major drugs used to control seizures, their biological half-lives, side effects, and how they interact with other antiepileptic drugs.
Most of the currently available antiepileptic drugs have a low therapeutic ratio and therefore a drug interaction causing elevation of the serum level of one of these compounds can readily lead to drug intoxication. Phenytoin, in particular, is vulnerable because its metabolism is dose-related and at therapeutic serum levels the enzyme system involved in its degradation is easily inhibited by concurrent drug administration. As multiple drug therapy has traditionally been practised in the management of epilepsy, clinically important interactions are common. Furthermore, most of the drugs used in the treatment of major epilepsies are potent inducers of hepatic microsomal enzymes and can therefore stimulate the metabolism of concurrently-administered drugs to such an extent that they may be rendered ineffective. The use of one drug alone is recommended, where possible, in the management of epilepsy.
There is increasing evidence that various types of behavioural disturbance, other than those described for phenytoin, for example, may occur from the use of anti-epileptic medication, and it has been suggested that these disturbances may not always be reversible. There are suspicions also that certain groups of patients--especially those with structural brain damage--are particularly susceptible. These and other factors relevant to the study of the effects of anti-epileptic drugs on behaviour are comprehensively reviewed. It is concluded that the psycho-pharmacology of anti-epileptic drugs is unsatisfactory at present because of inadequate and unsophisticated reporting of behavioural change and because of the common problem of polypharmacy, and that more accurate observations are needed on less heterogeneous groups of patients that have been described in the past.
A 49-year-old man presented with dizziness and altered behavior associated with a nonconvulsive seizure. He had a long history of well-controlled tonic-clonic seizures and daily episodes of 10-second staring spells. Despite normal neurological and laboratory examinations, an emergent electroencephalogram showed changes consistent with nonconvulsive generalized status epilepticus.
Essential tremor (ET), traditionally considered benign, is a serious neurologic condition with life-altering repercussions. Its involuntary, rhythmic oscillations involve alternating, irregular, or simultaneous contractions of agonist and antagonist muscles. It is the most common of the 20 known tremor disorders and often confused with Parkinson's disease. Numerous drugs can aggravate ET, and alcohol consumption may alleviate it. Its etiology is unknown. Proven drug treatments are currently limited to propranolol and primidone. This article reviews ET with examples from history to demonstrate points.
