The penicillins as a group are the most frequently and widely used of the antimicrobial agents because they are effective, low in toxicity, and relatively inexpensive. Effectiveness is due to the bactericidal action, the excellent distribution throughout the body spaces, and the wide spectrum of activity. Knowledge of the variation in spectrum of activity of the various types of penicillins is needed for effective use of the appropriate drug against individual infections. Allergenicity is the most frequent and serious problem associated with the use of penicillins. Individual penicillins, however, do have different side effects. The older penicillins are so inexpensive that the cost of their use need hardly be considered, whereas the newer penicillins are expensive and should be used only when they are clearly more effective for treatment than are drugs such as penicillin G.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are now commonly used for the treatment of acute gout, but caution is required in view of their adverse effects, especially in the elderly. Colchicine is still an effective acute agent, but care must be taken to monitor toxicity. Intra-articular glucocorticosteroid therapy is useful and very safe; oral steroids and corticotrophin (adrenocorticotrophic hormone) may have a small role in acute therapy and seem safe when used over short time spans. Low dose colchicine may have a cost and toxicity advantage over NSAIDs in the prophylaxis of gout when commencing therapy aimed at reducing elevated plasma urate concentrations. Allopurinol is more frequently used than uricosuric agents such as probenecid, and toxicity may be largely avoided by tailoring dosage schedules according to renal function.
OBJECTIVE: The observed associations of hyperuricaemia with hypertension, cardiovascular disease and kidney disease are receiving increasing interest. The potential role of urate-lowering therapy in the management of these "non-gout diseases" has been raised, and in some countries it is already recommended. However, there is no consistent definition of hyperuricaemia or asymptomatic hyperuricaemia, much remains unknown about the causal role of urate in these "non-gout diseases" and there is currently a lack of evidence about the effects of urate lowering on disease progression. In addition, there is potential for serious adverse effects associated with urate-lowering therapies with recent evidence suggesting that asymptomatic hyperuricaemia may be an independent risk factor for the potentially fatal allopurinol hypersensitivity syndrome. METHODS: Pubmed was searched in January 2016 using the search term "asymptomatic hyperuricaemia". RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Herein, we discuss the issues related to treating asymptomatic hyperuricaemia, which at present seems premature.
A 13-year-old girl had chronic polymicrobial bacteremia with Enterobacter hafnia and Enterobacter agglomerans in the absence of any demonstrable underlying illness, use of immunosuppressive drugs, or discovery of portal of entry of the bacteria. She was treated successfully with a prolonged course of carbenicillin and aminoglycoside antibiotics which were tolerated well. The only side effect of the therapy was a transient episode of vestibular dysfunction which was reversible following cessation of gentamicin. The principles of management of polymicrobial bacteremia are presented.
Probenecid (PROB) has been widely used for long time for different clinical purposes, from gout treatment to designs as a coadjutant for antibiotic agents. Among its many properties, the ability of PROB to preserve high concentrations of several metabolites and other agents in the CNS, together with its relative lack of side-effects, have made this drug a valuable pharmacological tool for clinical and basic research. Nowadays, biomedical research offers evidence about new targets for PROB that may help to explain its many beneficial actions. In this regard, despite most of its protective actions in the brain have been largely related to its capacity to accumulate the inhibitory metabolite kynurenic acid to further inhibit the glutamate-related excitotoxicity in different animal models of neurological disorders, in this review we describe the basic aspects of PROB's pharmacokinetics and mechanisms of action and discuss other alternative targets recently described for this drug that may complement its pattern of activity in the CNS, including its role as anti-inflammatory and anti-nociceptive agent when targeting different key proteins.
The antifolate sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) has been used in the intermittent prevention of malaria in pregnancy (IPTp). SP is an ideal choice for IPTp, however, as resistance of Plasmodium falciparum to SP increases, data are accumulating that SP may no longer provide benefit in areas of high-level resistance. Probenecid was initially used as an adjunctive therapy to increase the blood concentration of penicillin; it has since been used to augment concentrations of other drugs, including antifolates. The addition of probenecid has been shown to increase the treatment efficacy of SP against malaria, suggesting that the combination of probenecid plus SP may prolong the useful lifespan of SP as an effective agent for IPTp. Here, the literature on the pharmacokinetics, adverse reactions, interactions and available data on the use of these drugs in pregnancy is reviewed, and the possible utility of an SP-probenecid combination is discussed. This article concludes by calling for further research into this potentially useful combination.
BACKGROUND: Amoxicillin plus probenecid is an alternative to intramuscular benzathine penicillin G for treating syphilis in the United Kingdom. Low-dose amoxicillin is an alternative treatment option used in Japan. METHODS: We conducted an open-label, randomized, controlled, non-inferiority trial between 31 August 2018, and 3 February 2022, to compare 1500 mg low-dose amoxicillin monotherapy with the combination of 3000 mg amoxicillin and probenecid (non-inferiority margin 10%). Patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and syphilis were eligible. The primary outcome was the cumulative serological cure rate within 12 months post-treatment, measured using the manual rapid plasma reagin card test. Secondary outcomes included safety assessment. RESULTS: A total of 112 participants were randomized into 2 groups. Serological cure rates within 12 months were 90.6% and 94.4% with the low-dose amoxicillin and combination regimens, respectively. Serological cure rates for early syphilis within 12 months were 93.5% and 97.9% with the low-dose amoxicillin and combination regimens, respectively. Non-inferiority of low-dose amoxicillin compared with amoxicillin plus probenecid overall and for early syphilis was not confirmed. No significant side effects were detected. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first randomized controlled trial to demonstrate a high efficacy of amoxicillin-based regimens for treating syphilis in patients with HIV infection, and the non-inferiority of low-dose amoxicillin compared with amoxicillin plus probenecid was not seen. Therefore, amoxicillin monotherapy could be a good alternative to intramuscular benzathine penicillin G with fewer side effects. However, further studies comparing with benzathine penicillin G in different populations and with larger sample sizes are needed. TRIALS REGISTRATION: (UMIN000033986).
Hematuria and eosinophilia developed in two patients being treated for bacterial endocarditis with 20 or 24 gm/day of cephalexin given orally together with probenecid (Benemid). One patient had a concurrent transient increase in serum creatinine; both patients had a history of penicillin allergy and had previously received cephalexin intravenously. All abnormalities promptly remitted following discontinuation of therapy.
Clofibric acid disposition was studied in four healthy men after 1 wk of clofibrate ingestion (500 mg orally every 12 hr) with and without probenecid (500 mg orally every 6 hr). Mean (+/- SD) free clofibric acid plasma concentration in the four subjects over a dosage interval at steady state was 2.5 +/- 0.03 mg/1 before and 9.05 +/- 1.09 mg/1 after the probenecid. Probenecid reached an average plasma concentration of 71.3 mg/1. No clofibric acid glucuronide was detected in plasma during either treatment. The fractions of the dose recovered in urine as clofibric acid, clofibric acid glucuronide, and clofibric acid liberated after acid hydrolysis were not altered by probenecid. These data suggest that probenecid causes a reduction in renal and metabolic clearance of clofibric acid, probably as a result of inhibition of the conjugation of clofibric acid with glucuronide.
OBJECTIVES: The direct-acting protease inhibitor paritaprevir is a new pharmaco-logic option available for treatment of chronic hepatitis C (HCV). Paritaprevir is reported to inhibit human UGT 1A1, but the mechanism of inhibition and its possible clinical consequences are not established. Our objective was to evaluate the in-vitro metabolic interaction between paritaprevir and the oral contraceptive steroid ethinyl estradiol (EE), a UGT 1A1 substrate. METHODS: Enzyme kinetic parameters were determined using human liver microsomes for the biotransformation of EE to its glucuronide metabolites, and the potency and mechanism of inhibition by paritaprevir. Probenecid was used as a reference inhibitor for purposes of assay validation. KEY FINDINGS: The underlying pattern of EE kinetics was complex, with evidence of substrate inhibition. The in-vitro inhibition constant (K(i) ) value for paritaprevir vs EE on average was 20 mum and was consistent with a competitive inhibition mechanism. The ratio of in-vivo maximum plasma concentration of paritaprevir to in-vitro K(i) was <0.1. CONCLUSIONS: Paritaprevir is an in-vitro inhibitor of UGT 1A1. However, the in-vitro K(i) value relative to maximum clinical plasma concentrations is below the threshold to trigger a recommendation for pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies.
Hypertension is an exceedingly common disease with potentially devastating complications. Unfortunately, existing treatments are often only partially effective, indicating the utility of the development of novel therapeutics. It has recently been discovered that loss of renal organic anion transporter 3 (Oat3) results in decreased blood pressure. This suggests (regardless of the underlying mechanisms, which are, as yet, unclear) that inhibition of Oat3 function might also decrease blood pressure, and, therefore, that inhibitors of Oat3 might serve as novel drugs in the treatment of hypertension. In support of this hypothesis, it has been found that at least some potent Oat3 inhibitors can lower blood pressure. These recent findings are discussed in the context of the alternating access model that has been proposed for organic anion transporter function, with particular attention to the little-appreciated phenomenon of trans-inhibition.
Over the last 70 years, pharmacotherapy in gout with urate-lowering drugs has consisted of four drugs only: In 1952, a mild uricosuric probenecid became available, the xanthine oxidase inhibitor Allopurinol in 1964, and the latter became the most frequently used urate-lowering drug worldwide; in the Eurozone, the uricosuric benzbromarone was welcomed in 1977. Only in 2002, the potent non-purine xanthine oxidase inhibitor febuxostat was introduced. In many countries, uricosurics such as probenecid and benzbromarone have not been available up to now, and these days, the new uricosuric lesinurad is the first uricosuric that may be introduced in these countries, which is the reason for describing the position this novel uricosuric deserves in treating gout. Recent literature will be shortly reviewed, and the current proposed position for lesinurad will be given as an aid for clinicians.
The effect of concurrent probenecid administration on the pharmacokinetics of cephalosporin antibiotics varies with the available cephalosporins. Most cephalosporins are affected to some degree by concurrent probenecid administration, although ceforanide, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone and latamoxef (moxalactam) have no significant changes in pharmacokinetics. For those cephalosporins affected by probenecid, the predominant findings are impairment in renal clearance resulting in increased peak serum concentrations, an increased area under the concentration-time curve (AUC), and both delayed and prolonged recovery of the cephalosporin in the urine. The distribution of the cephalosporins is affected to varying degrees, with reports of increased penetration into ocular, central nervous system and blister fluids noted with some agents. The clinical relevance of the changes in cephalosporin distribution associated with probenecid administration has not been investigated. The dose and timing of probenecid administration appear to be major determinants in any possible interaction. Studies with ceftizoxime and cefoxitin suggest that larger probenecid doses result in greater changes in the pharmacokinetics of cephalosporins. Prolonged probenecid therapy before administration of a cephalosporin did not seem to be as relevant as the probenecid dosage in determining the magnitude of the interaction. Probenecid administration with or immediately before cephalosporin administration appears able to produce these documented changes in cephalosporin pharmacokinetics. The route of administration (oral versus parenteral) of either prolosporin pharmacokinetics. The route of administration (oral versus parenteral) of either probenecid or the cephalosporin does not appear to influence the characteristics of the interactions. The therapeutic efficacy of a combination of a cephalosporin with probenecid has been most thoroughly studied for single-dose treatment of gonorrhoea. The addition of probenecid to cephalosporin therapy results in sustained systemic concentrations adequate for eradication of Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Regimens involving either second or third generation cephalosporins demonstrate good success rates with single-dose therapy. However, the success of ceftriaxone administered alone for treatment of both penicillase-producing and non-penicillase-producing strains of N. gonorrhoeae suggests that the addition of probenecid is unnecessary. The use of probenecid, in combination with cephalosporins, to enhance the treatment of other venereal and systemic infections has preliminary, inconclusive support.
Effective vaccines are slowing the COVID-19 pandemic, but SARS-CoV-2 will likely remain an issue in the future making it important to have therapeutics to treat patients. There are few options for treating patients with COVID-19. We show probenecid potently blocks SARS-CoV-2 replication in mammalian cells and virus replication in a hamster model. Furthermore, we demonstrate that plasma concentrations up to 50-fold higher than the protein binding adjusted IC(90) value are achievable for 24 h following a single oral dose. These data support the potential clinical utility of probenecid to control SARS-CoV-2 infection in humans.
INTRODUCTION: Gout is a common inflammatory arthritis affecting almost 6% of US males and 2% of US females. The central cause of gout is deposition of monosodium urate crystals, and the focus of treatment is aimed at crystal dissolution using urate-lowering therapy. AREAS COVERED: The review describes the current treatments for urate-lowering therapy including allopurinol, febuxostat, probenecid, benzbromarone and pegloticase. Anti-inflammatory treatment of acute flares and prophylaxis of flares with NSAIDs, colchicine, corticosteroids and anti-IL-1 agents is also reviewed. In addition, drugs in Phase III clinical trials for gout indications are reviewed. EXPERT OPINION: In the last decade, there has been major progress in the pharmacotherapy of gout. Management guidelines have emphasized the importance of a therapeutic serum urate target for effective gout management. Studies have identified the safe and effective dosing strategies for 'old' drugs such as allopurinol and colchicine. New therapeutic agents have been developed and approved for both urate-lowering therapy and anti-inflammatory treatment of acute flares. However, quality of care remains a major challenge in gout management, and strategies to ensure best practice require further focus to ensure that the progress of the last decade translates into clinical benefit for people with gout.
Renal failure, proteinuria and proximal tubular acidosis are the features of cidofovir renal toxicity, its main side-effect. Proteinuria occurs in more than 40 per cent of patients and correlates with early renal dysfunction. A fall in serum potassium, bicarbonate, uric acid, calcium and phosphorus levels associated with glucosuria is the hallmark of proximal tubular acidosis. Most of the patients exhibit only glucosuria. Renal failure, diagnosed in 12 per cent of treated patients, is a late feature, usually discovered after the onset of proteinuria and glucosuria. Prevention of cidofovir-induced renal toxicity involves a search for other risk factors, probenecid treatment, and requires an optimal hydration status.
N-Acetylcysteine (NAC) has shown promise as a putative neurotherapeutic for traumatic brain injury (TBI). Yet, many such promising compounds have limited ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB), achieve therapeutic concentrations in brain, demonstrate target engagement, among other things, that have hampered successful translation. A pharmacologic strategy for overcoming poor BBB permeability and/or efflux out of the brain of organic acid-based, small molecule therapeutics such as NAC is co-administration with a targeted or nonselective membrane transporter inhibitor. Probenecid is a classic ATP-binding cassette and solute carrier inhibitor that blocks transport of organic acids, including NAC. Accordingly, combination therapy using probenecid as an adjuvant with NAC represents a logical neurotherapeutic strategy for treatment of TBI (and other CNS diseases). We have completed a proof-of-concept pilot study using this drug combination in children with severe TBI-the Pro-NAC Trial (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01322009). In this review, we will discuss the background and rationale for combination therapy with probenecid and NAC in TBI, providing justification for further clinical investigation.
In the early stages of drug discovery, researchers develop assays that are compatible with high throughput screening (HTS) and structure activity relationship (SAR) measurements. These assays are designed to evaluate the effectiveness of new and known molecular entities, typically targeting specific features within the virus. Drugs that inhibit virus replication by inhibiting a host gene or pathway are often missed because the goal is to identify active antiviral agents against known viral targets. Screening efforts should be sufficiently robust to identify all potential targets regardless of the antiviral mechanism to avoid misleading conclusions.
The influence of probenecid on the pharmacokinetics of paracetamol was investigated in a group of healthy volunteers. Pretreatment with probenecid caused a significant decrease in paracetamol clearance (6.23 to 3.42 ml.min-1.kg-1). The urinary excretion of paracetamol sulphate (243 to 193 mg); and paracetamol glucuronide (348 to 74.5 mg) were significantly reduced, whereas that of paracetamol was unchanged. Probenecid was shown to be an uncompetitive inhibitor of paracetamol glucuronidation in vitro, using rat liver microsomes.
Amoxicillin in single oral doses of 2.0 g, 2.0 g plus 1.0 g probenecid, or 3.0 g was compared with ampicillin 3.5 g plus 1.0 g probenecid in the treatment of 203 males with uncomplicated acute gonococcal urethritis. Cure rates above 95% were produced by all treatments except the 2.0-g amoxicillin dose, which cured 89% of patients. Of 198 pretreatment gonococcus isolates tested by an agar dilution technique for susceptibility to penicillin G, ampicillin and amoxicillin, over 50% showed relative resistance (MIC > 0.06 mug/ml) to the antibiotics. However, amoxicillin was somewhat more active against isolates showing considerable resistance (MIC >/= 1.0 mug/ml) to penicillin G or ampicillin. Adverse effects of amoxicillin were few: two patients reported transient nausea and six noted short-lived diarrhea. No hypersensitivity reactions were observed.
