A safe and controlled manipulation of endocytosis in vivo may have disruptive therapeutic potential. Here, we demonstrate that the anti-emetic/anti-psychotic prochlorperazine can be repurposed to reversibly inhibit the in vivo endocytosis of membrane proteins targeted by therapeutic monoclonal antibodies, as directly demonstrated by our human tumor ex vivo assay. Temporary endocytosis inhibition results in enhanced target availability and improved efficiency of natural killer cell-mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), a mediator of clinical responses induced by IgG1 antibodies, demonstrated here for cetuximab, trastuzumab, and avelumab. Extensive analysis of downstream signaling pathways ruled out on-target toxicities. By overcoming the heterogeneity of drug target availability that frequently characterizes poorly responsive or resistant tumors, clinical application of reversible endocytosis inhibition may considerably improve the clinical benefit of ADCC-mediating therapeutic antibodies.
There are many options for acute migraine attack treatment, but none is ideal for all patients. This study aims to review current medical office-based acute migraine therapy in adults and provides readers with an organized approach to this important facet of migraine treatment. A general literature review includes a review of several recent published guidelines. Acetaminophen, 4 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (ibuprofen, acetylsalicylic acid [ASA], naproxen sodium, and diclofenac potassium), and 7 triptans (almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan, and zolmitriptan) have good evidence for efficacy and form the core of acute migraine treatment. NSAID-triptan combinations, dihydroergotamine, non-opioid combination analgesics (acetaminophen, ASA, and caffeine), and several anti-emetics (metoclopramide, domperidone, and prochlorperazine) are additional evidence-based options. Opioid containing combination analgesics may be helpful in specific patients, but should not be used routinely. Clinical features to be considered when choosing an acute migraine medication include usual headache intensity, usual rapidity of pain intensity increase, nausea, vomiting, degree of disability, patient response to previously used medications, history of headache recurrence with previous attacks, and the presence of contraindications to specific acute medications. Available acute medications can be organized into 4 treatment strategies, including a strategy for attacks of mild to moderate severity (strategy one: acetaminophen and/or NSAIDs), a triptan strategy for patients with severe attacks and for attacks not responding to strategy one, a refractory attack strategy, and a strategy for patients with contraindications to vasoconstricting drugs. Acute treatment of migraine attacks during pregnancy, lactation, and for patients with chronic migraine is also discussed. In chronic migraine, it is particularly important that medication overuse is eliminated or avoided. Migraine treatment is complex, and treatment must be individualized and tailored to the patient's clinical features. Clinicians should make full use of available medications and formulations in an organized approach.
The study aims to provide an updated assessment of the evidence for individual pharmacological therapies for acute migraine treatment. Pharmacological therapy is frequently required for acutely treating migraine attacks. The American Academy of Neurology Guidelines published in 2000 summarized the available evidence relating to the efficacy of acute migraine medications. This review, conducted by the members of the Guidelines Section of the American Headache Society, is an updated assessment of evidence for the migraine acute medications. A standardized literature search was performed to identify articles related to acute migraine treatment that were published between 1998 and 2013. The American Academy of Neurology Guidelines Development procedures were followed. Two authors reviewed each abstract resulting from the search and determined whether the full manuscript qualified for review. Two reviewers studied each qualifying full manuscript for its level of evidence. Level A evidence requires at least 2 Class I studies, and Level B evidence requires 1 Class I or 2 Class II studies. The specific medications - triptans (almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan [oral, nasal spray, injectable, transcutaneous patch], zolmitriptan [oral and nasal spray]) and dihydroergotamine (nasal spray, inhaler) are effective (Level A). Ergotamine and other forms of dihydroergotamine are probably effective (Level B). Effective nonspecific medications include acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin, diclofenac, ibuprofen, and naproxen), opioids (butorphanol nasal spray), sumatriptan/naproxen, and the combination of acetaminophen/aspirin/caffeine (Level A). Ketoprofen, intravenous and intramuscular ketorolac, flurbiprofen, intravenous magnesium (in migraine with aura), and the combination of isometheptene compounds, codeine/acetaminophen and tramadol/acetaminophen are probably effective (Level B). The antiemetics prochlorperazine, droperidol, chlorpromazine, and metoclopramide are probably effective (Level B). There is inadequate evidence for butalbital and butalbital combinations, phenazone, intravenous tramadol, methadone, butorphanol or meperidine injections, intranasal lidocaine, and corticosteroids, including dexamethasone (Level C). Octreotide is probably not effective (Level B). There is inadequate evidence to refute the efficacy of ketorolac nasal spray, intravenous acetaminophen, chlorpromazine injection, and intravenous granisetron (Level C). There are many acute migraine treatments for which evidence supports efficacy. Clinicians must consider medication efficacy, potential side effects, and potential medication-related adverse events when prescribing acute medications for migraine. Although opioids, such as butorphanol, codeine/acetaminophen, and tramadol/acetaminophen, are probably effective, they are not recommended for regular use.
Nausea and vomiting are common symptoms of migraine, which can be controlled with a variety of anti-emetics including phenothiazines and antihistamines. Metoclopramide and domperidone have an additional prokinetic effect which may be important in migraine to overcome gastric stasis and enhance absorption of oral medication.
Agranulocytosis associated with spironolactone administration is described in a 57-year-old man. Four days after initiation of spironolactone, leukocyte counts decreased from 8.2 to 2.3 X 10(9)/L with 6% neutrophils. Spironolactone, domperidone, and prochlorperazine were discontinued. Domperidone and prochlorperazine were reintroduced and there was concomitant improvement of the leukocyte and neutrophil counts. Substitution of triamterene for spironolactone was not associated with recurrent leukopenia. The potential association of spironolactone with granulocytopenia warrants increased awareness of this rare but serious adverse drug reaction.
BACKGROUND: Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) is one of the most debilitating toxicities associated with cancer treatment. Although effective antiemetic agents are available, their use in practice often is suboptimal. METHODS: The author reviews the pathophysiology of CINV as well as the drug classes and cost considerations that should be incorporated into treatment planning. RESULTS: Several drug classes, including 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 receptor antagonists, neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists, and corticosteroids, are effective, especially when used in combination. Older antiemetic agents, such as prochlorperazine and metoclopramide, as well as olanzapine may provide reasonable alternatives in certain settings. CONCLUSIONS: Interventions for CINV should include standard-of-care antiemetics combined with corticosteroids. The cost of using older, less expensive antiemetics may be outweighed by the expenditures to rescue patients after suboptimal prophylaxis, as well as the indirect costs of missed work and lost productivity.
A patient with prochlorperazine-induced cholestasis that persisted for more than 2 years is reported. The timing of the onset of jaundice, the clinical, biochemical and histological findings and the subsequent course of this patient were typical of chlorpromazine-induced chronic cholestasis. Despite subsequent resolution of jaundice, liver biopsy performed 2 years after the onset of clinical disease showed fibrous expansion of the portal tracts with focal porto-portal and centro-portal bridging fibrosis, and paucity of inter-lobular bile ducts, a picture simulating that of primary biliary cirrhosis. Long-term follow-up is required to determine whether this patient will progress to frank cirrhosis.
Migraine is a debilitating disease that affects 9% of men and 19% of women worldwide with high socio-economic and personal impact. Surveys indicate that migraineurs are among the most dissatisfied with available therapeutic options, predominantly given via oral or injectable routes, citing side effects as the primary complaint. Orally inhaled therapies have the potential to offer faster onset of action with fewer side effects compared to existing therapies, yet development has stalled. Despite emerging therapies such as calcitonin gene-related peptide antagonists, there are still good opportunities for repositioning migraine drugs via the inhaled route.
Pseudotetanus is a syndrome which is produced by a variety of non-Clostridial factors. It is usually not difficult to distinguish from tetanus but is must always be considered in the differential diagnosis. Six cases are reported in which tetanus was considered and in one of them the full treatment for the disease was started. It is hoped that by increasing the awareness of clinicians of this relatively common problem the risk of making an incorrect disagnosis will be reduced.
Dronabinol, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in sesame oil, has been used for several years as an antiemetic for patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. In combination studies with prochlorperazine, enhancement of efficacy, as measured by duration of episodes of nausea and vomiting and by severity of nausea, has been found. The incidence of psychotropic effects from dronabinol appears to be decreased by concomitant administration of prochlorperazine. In open pilot studies, dronabinol caused weight gain in seven of ten patients with symptomatic HIV infection. In both HIV and cancer patients, dronabinol improved appetite at a dose which was well tolerated for chronic administration.
As dizziness can be caused by so many different pathophysiological mechanisms, it is crucial to determine the type of dizziness before proceeding with the diagnostic evaluation. Vertigo, defined as an illusion of movement, is an important subtype of dizziness that indicates a lesion somewhere within the vestibular system. Probably the most useful feature for differentiating between peripheral and central causes of vertigo is the associated symptoms. Vertigo of peripheral origin is typically associated with auditory symptoms such as hearing loss and tinnitus, while vertigo of central origin is nearly always associated with neurological symptoms such as diplopia, weakness, numbness and ataxia. Each of the common causes of vertigo has a characteristic clinical profile that should suggest a likely diagnosis after the history and examination are complete. Probably the most important treatment breakthrough is the positional manoeuvre that reliably cures benign positional vertigo (see Chapter 6). The treatment strategy for an acute peripheral vestibular lesion has evolved over the past few years. Patients are encouraged to return to normal physical activity as rapidly as possible. Repeated head, eye and body movements (vestibular rehabilitation) help the brain to recalibrate the relationship between visual, proprioceptive and vestibular signals (Chapter 9).
KEY POINTS: In hemodialysis, ondansetron initiation versus initiation of lesser QT-prolonging antiemetics associated with higher 10-day sudden cardiac death risk. Analyses considering additional cardiac outcomes had consistent findings. BACKGROUND: Individuals receiving hemodialysis have a high incidence of sudden cardiac death and are susceptible to QT interval-prolonging medication-related cardiac complications. Ondansetron, an antiemetic with known QT-prolonging potential, is associated with fatal arrhythmias in the general population when administered intravenously. The cardiac safety of ondansetron in the hemodialysis population is unknown. METHODS: We conducted a new-user, active-comparator, cohort study using United States Renal Data System data (2012-2019) to examine the association between the initiation of oral ondansetron versus antiemetics with lesser QT-prolonging potential (promethazine, metoclopramide, or prochlorperazine) and the 10-day risk of sudden cardiac death among individuals receiving hemodialysis. We used inverse probability of treatment-weighted survival models to estimate adjusted hazard ratios, risk differences, and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). We used an intention-to-treat approach in which non-sudden cardiac death was considered a competing event. We examined additional cardiac outcomes in secondary analyses. RESULTS: Of 119,254 study patients, 64,978 (55%) initiated ondansetron and 54,276 (45%) initiated a comparator antiemetic. Initiation of ondansetron versus a comparator antiemetic was associated with higher relative and absolute 10-day risks of sudden cardiac death (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.44 [95% CI, 1.08 to 1.93]; adjusted risk difference, 0.06% [95% CI, 0.01% to 0.11%]). The number needed to harm was 1688. Analyses of additional cardiac outcomes yielded similar findings. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with initiation of antiemetics with lesser QT-prolonging potential, initiation of ondansetron was associated with higher short-term cardiac risks among people receiving hemodialysis.
Two patients with toxic reactions to prochlor-perazine (Compazine) prescribed as an antiemetic are presented. The authors caution against wrongfully labeling such patients as having psychiatric disturbances when the cause is iatrogenic.
Medical therapy of Meniere's disease is geared not only toward the differential diagnosis that has led to Meniere's disease and the supportive therapy for the physical manifestations of the disease but also for the psychologic sequelae of the disease such as mild-to-moderate situational depression and even chronic depression. Overall, with adequate medical therapy, allergy workup, and immunotherapy for patients with known diagnoses of allergies, the author's clinic has been able to help more than 85% of its patients who present with symptoms of Meniere's disease. For intractable cases where autoimmune phenomena can be suspected with a strong degree of suspicion, the author's clinic has also treated patients with immunosuppressive medications such as azathioprine and/or methotrexate in a low dose.
The Research to Practice Column is designed to improve translational research critique skills of nurse practitioners (NPs). In this issue, the article "Randomized study of IV prochlorperazine plus diphenhydramine vs IV hydromorphone for migraine" is discussed in the context of a patient with an acute headache presenting to the emergency department (ED). The study was designed to assess the efficacy of intravenous prochlorperazine and diphenhydramine as compared with intravenous hydromorphone for patients with acute migraine in the ED. With the growing trend to avoid the use of opiates to curb potential addiction and increased ED length of stay, NPs need to be aware of efficacious, evidence-based treatments for acute migraines, a common ED presentation.
Ketamine is utilized often in the emergency department (ED) for rapid sequence intubation, procedural sedation, and acute pain management. The treatment of migraine headache in the ED varies widely and is dependent on several factors including migraine cause, previous successful abortive methods, and provider preference. Several medications are currently employed to treat acute migraine including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, triptans, antihistamines, prochlorperazine, and corticosteroids, among others. Interest in ketamine as an abortive agent to treat migraine has increased as evidenced by recent studies evaluating its use in the ED. This review examines the data regarding the use of ketamine to treat migraine headache. The concept of treating migraine headache with ketamine has been studied for more than 20 years. Early studies conducted primarily in the outpatient setting evaluated ketamine through multiple routes of administration and differing migraine causes with varying results. These early data seem to suggest that ketamine provides relief from headache severity but provides little information regarding the optimal dose and route of administration. Recent active comparator and placebo-controlled trials in the ED utilizing subdissociative doses of ketamine (0.2-0.3 mg/kg intravenously) show conflicting results. To confound the decision regarding its use further, ED providers encounter differing recommendations regarding its place in therapy. Current data suggest that ketamine may provide pain relief to patients with migraine headache. Although there may be a role for ketamine in certain cases after more robust evidence becomes available, currently it is premature to incorporate ketamine into routine use. Several questions remain to be answered including its overall efficacy, place in therapy, dosage, and risk of undesirable side effects.
This article discusses the use of serotonin1D agonists in the treatment of acute migraine. Specifically, the author reviews the efficacy and safety of this class of drugs with sumatriptan as the main focus. Agents under clinical trial are also discussed. Recurrence of migraine, long-term usage, and side effects of serotonin1D agonists are included in the review. The article also discusses alternative medications, such as intranasal lidocraine, intravenous chlorpromazine, and intravenous prochlorperazine, for acute treatment of migraine. The limited role of narcotics and sedatives is also mentioned.
Intravenous 5-hydroxytryptamine3 (5-HT3) receptor antagonists are now established antiemetics in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced emesis. For optimal convenience and acceptability, oral therapy is desirable. Retrospective comparisons indicate that oral granisetron may have an efficacy comparable with that of intravenous granisetron. Recent new data are available on the use of granisetron in the prophylaxis of acute emesis in randomized, double-masked trials. After moderately emetogenic chemotherapy, the optimal regimen appears to be 1 mg twice daily, although 2 mg once daily is equally effective. Oral granisetron is significantly superior to oral prochlorperazine. After high-dose cisplatin chemotherapy, oral granisetron is as effective as metoclopramide plus dexamethasone; the addition of dexamethasone further enhances its efficacy. Oral granisetron was well tolerated in all these trials. Headache and constipation were the most common adverse events, as has been reported for other 5-HT3 receptor antagonists. No randomized trials of oral-only tropisetron or dolasetron have yet been published.
Many dopamine antagonists are proven acute migraine treatments. Genetic studies also imply that polymorphisms in dopamine genes (DRD2 receptors) in persons with migraine may create dopamine hypersensitivity. However, treatment is limited by the adverse event profiles of conventional neuroleptics including extrapyramidal symptoms, anticholinergic and antihistaminergic effects, hyperprolactinemia, and prolonged cardiac QT interval. Atypical neuroleptics cause less extrapyramial symptoms and some atypical neuroleptics, including olanzapine and quetiapine, may be beneficial as both acute and preventive migraine treatment. The combination of prochlorperazine, indomethacin, and caffeine is effective in the treatment of the acute migraine attack. The mechanism of action by which neuroleptics relieve headache is probably related to dopamine D2 receptor antagonist. Other actions via serotonin (5HT) receptor antagonists may also be important, particularly for migraine prevention. Additional studies to clarify the mechanism of action of neuroleptics in migraine could lead to new drugs and better management of migraine.
(1) A wide array of data regarding acute migraine treatment are available, but few trials strictly adhere to International Headache Society guidelines for patient inclusion criteria.(2) Triptans appear to have similar efficacy profiles, but among newer triptans, almotriptan offers improved tolerability over sumatriptan.(3) Combination indomethacin/caffeine/prochlorperazine most likely has similar therapeutic efficacy to triptan therapy, with further research needed to complete understanding of any potential differences between these treatments.(4) Multi-targeted combination therapy with a triptan plus a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID), such as sumatriptan/naproxen sodium, is more effective in acute migraine treatment than monotherapy with either agent alone.(5) It is unclear whether triptans offer clinically relevant benefits over aspirin or NSAIDs in migraine patients. Thus NSAIDs, particularly effervescent aspirin, should be considered the first-line treatment of migraine attacks.
