A 55-year-old man was admitted after a suspected hypnotic overdose of valerian extracts. In addition to altered consciousness, the first clinical symptoms included not only diffuse rash on the face, trunk, and limbs, but also an inspiratory dyspnea with a marked hypoxemia. A major laryngeal edema was noted during orotracheal intubation. After correction of hypoxemia, the patient became agitated and propofol was administered by continuous infusion. In addition, the patient passed pink urine staining the urine collection bag. The presence of an unidentified toxic substance was suspected.
Meniere's disease (MD) is a disorder of the inner ear that causes vertigo attacks, fluctuating hearing loss, tinnitus and aural fullness. The aetiology of MD is multifactorial. A characteristic sign of MD is endolymphatic hydrops (EH), a disorder in which excessive endolymph accumulates in the inner ear and causes damage to the ganglion cells. In most patients, the clinical symptoms of MD present after considerable accumulation of endolymph has occurred. However, some patients develop symptoms in the early stages of EH. The reason for the variability in the symptomatology is unknown and the relationship between EH and the clinical symptoms of MD requires further study. The diagnosis of MD is based on clinical symptoms but can be complemented with functional inner ear tests, including audiometry, vestibular-evoked myogenic potential testing, caloric testing, electrocochleography or head impulse tests. MRI has been optimized to directly visualize EH in the cochlea, vestibule and semicircular canals, and its use is shifting from the research setting to the clinic. The management of MD is mainly aimed at the relief of acute attacks of vertigo and the prevention of recurrent attacks. Therapeutic options are based on empirical evidence and include the management of risk factors and a conservative approach as the first line of treatment. When medical treatment is unable to suppress vertigo attacks, intratympanic gentamicin therapy or endolymphatic sac decompression surgery is usually considered. This Primer covers the pathophysiology, symptomatology, diagnosis, management, quality of life and prevention of MD.
A sedative technique with meperidine hydrochloride and promethazine hydrochloride via an intramuscular injection is presented. We believe this is an excellent technique because of the safety to the patient and the ease of administration. Like any technique using potentially dangerous medications, practitioners and their staff must be familiar with and prepared for possible complications. When the technique is mastered, it will be a valuable addition for treatment of certain mentally and physically handicapped patients.
The case of a 15-year-old girl who experienced an acute dystonic reaction to promethazine therapy administered during an uncomplicated episode of acute gastroenteritis is reported. The pertinent literature is reviewed.
As dizziness can be caused by so many different pathophysiological mechanisms, it is crucial to determine the type of dizziness before proceeding with the diagnostic evaluation. Vertigo, defined as an illusion of movement, is an important subtype of dizziness that indicates a lesion somewhere within the vestibular system. Probably the most useful feature for differentiating between peripheral and central causes of vertigo is the associated symptoms. Vertigo of peripheral origin is typically associated with auditory symptoms such as hearing loss and tinnitus, while vertigo of central origin is nearly always associated with neurological symptoms such as diplopia, weakness, numbness and ataxia. Each of the common causes of vertigo has a characteristic clinical profile that should suggest a likely diagnosis after the history and examination are complete. Probably the most important treatment breakthrough is the positional manoeuvre that reliably cures benign positional vertigo (see Chapter 6). The treatment strategy for an acute peripheral vestibular lesion has evolved over the past few years. Patients are encouraged to return to normal physical activity as rapidly as possible. Repeated head, eye and body movements (vestibular rehabilitation) help the brain to recalibrate the relationship between visual, proprioceptive and vestibular signals (Chapter 9).
A 50-year-old woman known to have type 1 diabetes mellitus presented with a rare case of angio-oedema associated with colistin use. The angio-oedema was temporally associated with the use and discontinuation of colistin with the reasonable exclusion of important differential diagnoses. Pseudoallergy may be a probable underlying mechanism. However, we cannot exclude the possibility of hereditary angio-oedema type 2 or 3, or that her concomitant medications (particularly enalapril) and her renal impairment contributed to the risk and severity of her angio-oedema.
Histamine-1 (H1) antihistamines are the first-line drug for the treatment of urticaria. Major progress has been achieved in recent years both in the understanding of their ligands, the H1-histamine receptors, and therefore in the mechanisms of their pharmacologic effects, as well as in the development of safer antihistamines with low or no sedating effects and no interactions on the level of potassium channels leading to QT-prolongations and interactions on the level of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. This development has brought antihistamines very close to the ideal antihistamines that are desired by clinicians to treat most types of urticaria in patients who have to take these drugs for a long time.
Ketamine in a dose of 6 mg.kg-1 was nasally administered in 86 healthy children (ASA I and II), aged from two to five years undergoing elective general, urological or plastic surgery, 20 to 40 min before the scheduled surgery time. These children were compared with 62 others, also aged from two to five years, in whom promethazine and meperidine, 1 mg.kg-1 of each, were injected im. Sedation was started as excellent in 48 and as adequate in 19 children in the ketamine group, compared with nine and 12 respectively in Group 2 (P < 0.05), while salivation was similar in both groups. We conclude that nasal ketamine is an alternative to im preanaesthetic sedation administration in children aged from two to five years.
OBJECTIVE: To estimate the incidence of potential in-hospital adverse reactions with the use of alert drugs in a general hospital in southern Brazil. Method: Cross-sectional study, carried out in a hospital in southern Brazil. The electronic medical records (TASY(R)) of patients hospitalized between January  and August 2020, who were prescribed one of the drugs earmarked for  tracking adverse drug reactions, were evaluated: the drugs included  flumazenil, fexofenadine hydrochloride, naloxone, promethazine, diphenhydramine and loperamide. RESULTS: A total of 13,476 medical records were reviewed and 204 (1.5%)  were included in the study in which tracker use was indicated in the management of adverse drug reactions. In this study a total of 18 different signs or symptoms were found in medical records, with  pruritus/hyperemia/urticaria being the most reported symptoms (n = 76).  Among the drug classes that caused most adverse drug reactions, opioids were  the most mentioned (n = 44). It should be noted that in 49 medical  records the information on which drug caused the adverse events was not  reported. Regarding the cause of hospitalization of patients who used creening drugs, cancer was the most frequent (n = 37). CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that the use of trackers can be a tool to  estimate the occurrence of adverse drug reactions and to establish adverse  events related to the use of medications, which should be reported to the  pharmacovigilance service, with a view to patient safety.
Trichosporon spp. are emerging opportunistic fungi associated with invasive infections, especially in patients with haematological malignancies. The present study investigated the in vitro inhibition of efflux pumps by promethazine (PMZ) as a strategy to control T. asahii and T. inkin. Planktonic cells were evaluated for antifungal susceptibility to PMZ, as well as inhibition of efflux. The effect of PMZ was also studied in Trichosporon biofilms. PMZ inhibited T. asahii and T. inkin planktonic cells at concentrations ranging from 32 to 256 mug( )ml(-1). Subinhibitory concentrations of PMZ inhibited efflux activity in Trichosporon. Biofilms were completely eradicated by PMZ. PMZ potentiated the action of antifungals, affected the morphology, changed the amount of carbohydrates and proteins and reduced the amount of persister cells inside biofilms. The results showed indirect evidences of the occurrence of efflux pumps in Trichosporon and opens a perspective for the use of this target in the control of trichosporonosis.
The Institute for Safe Medication Practices and the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists have advocated for removing all injectable promethazine from inpatient and outpatient settings; however, this drug is still being used despite the risk for tissue necrosis, gangrene, and possible amputation when it inadvertently is given by the subcutaneous or intra-arterial route. This article describes alternative injectable medications that can be selected based on patient comorbidities, indications, and clinician experience.
These therapeutic approaches to the premedication of children, in our opinion, offer a more rational, probably safer, and at least equally efficacious treatment regimen as the DPT/lytic cocktail. It is understood that controlled, double-blind comparative clinical trials in children are needed of these or other potential premedicant regimens for specific pediatric procedures (e.g., cardiac catheterization, CT scans, bone marrow aspiration, gastrointestinal endoscopy, pleural taps, etc.) to establish the premedication treatment(s) with the greatest benefit-to-risk ratio. Until these data are available, we must maintain prudence in the selection (design) of premedicant regimens and carefully monitor all children receiving these "cocktails."
Promethazine hydrochloride is a first-generation H1 receptor antagonist, antihistamine, and antiemetic medication that can also have strong sedative effects. The apparent ability of topical H1r/2r antagonists to target epidermal H1/2r was translated into increased efficacy in the treatment of inflammatory dermatoses, likely due to decreased inflammation and enhanced barrier function.
Eight subjects, male and female, were rotated using the step method to progressively increase the speed of rotation (+2 rpm) after every 40 head movements to a maximum of 35 rpm. The end-point for motion sickness was the Graybiel Malaise III total of symptoms short of frank nausea. The drug treatments were placebo, scopolamine 0.6 mg and 1 mg, scopolamine 0.6 mg/d-amphetamine 10 mg, scopolamine 1 mg/d-amphetamine 10 mg and amphetamine 10 mg. RESULTS: Scopolamine increased tolerated head movements over placebo level by +81, scopolamine 1 mg + 183, d-amphetamine + 118, scopolamine 0.6/d-amphetamine + 165, and scopolamine 1 mg/d-amphetamine 10 mg + 201. DISCUSSION: The drugs effective in preventing motion sickness are divided into those with central acetylcholine blocking activity and those which enhance norepinephrine activity. A combination of both of these actions produces the most effective antimotion sickness medications. CONCLUSIONS: The balance between the acetylcholine and norepinephrine activity in the CNS appears to be responsible for motion sickness.
Embedded in an extracellular matrix, biofilm-residing bacteria are protected from diverse physicochemical insults. In accordance, in the human host the general recalcitrance of biofilm-grown bacteria hinders successful eradication of chronic, biofilm-associated infections. In this study, we demonstrate that upon addition of promethazine, an FDA approved drug, antibiotic tolerance of in vitro biofilm-grown bacteria can be abolished. We show that following the addition of promethazine, diverse antibiotics are capable of efficiently killing biofilm-residing cells at minimal inhibitory concentrations. Synergistic effects could also be observed in a murine in vivo model system. PMZ was shown to increase membrane potential and interfere with bacterial respiration. Of note, antibiotic killing activity was elevated when PMZ was added to cells grown under environmental conditions that induce low intracellular proton levels. Our results imply that biofilm-grown bacteria avoid antibiotic killing and become tolerant by counteracting intracellular alkalization through the adaptation of metabolic and transport functions. Abrogation of antibiotic tolerance by interfering with the cell's bioenergetics promises to pave the way for successful eradication of biofilm-associated infections. Repurposing promethazine as a biofilm-sensitizing drug has the potential to accelerate the introduction of new treatments for recalcitrant, biofilm-associated infections into the clinic.
BACKGROUND: Promethazine was first approved in 1951 and has since been used as a treatment option for a variety of indications. A histamine H(1) receptor competitive antagonist with antihistaminic, sedative, anti-kinetotic, antiemetic, and antimuscarinic effects, promethazine is utilized for the treatment of nausea and vomiting, a common reason for emergency department (ED) visits. OBJECTIVE: This review of promethazine explores its pharmacology and history of toxicities, and discusses current recommendations from patient safety organizations, which implicate its role in therapy. DISCUSSION: Injectable promethazine utilization should take into consideration patient-specific factors, institutional policies, medication shortages of alternative agents, and the efficacy and toxicities of injectable promethazine itself. For decades, injectable promethazine has been associated with rare but serious limb-threatening adverse effects after extravasation or inadvertent intra-arterial injection. Patient safety organizations have called for hospitals to remove injectable promethazine from formularies, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration acted in December of 2023 to change the product labeling, adding dilution and administration recommendations for intravenous administration and stating a preference for intramuscular administration. CONCLUSION: Promethazine offers a suitable alternative antiemetic for use in the ED due to its distinct mechanism of action. Injectable promethazine, however, must be used with caution to minimize risk of serious patient harm in the event of intra-arterial or perivascular extravasation when given parenterally.
Evidence supporting the claim that specific phenothiazines, notably chlorpromazine and promethazine, may be used as sole agents for the treatment of cancer in man, has been reviewed. Selective destruction of cancerous tissue can be achieved by modulating energy metabolism in malignant cells. In the light of available information, the drug of choice is promethazine, the effects of which on the central nervous system are relatively weak. The maintenance of continuous pharmacological pressure against malignant growths forms an essential feature of the therapy. Protection against blood dyscrasias may be secured through the provision of adequate amounts of trace elements necessary for the function of enzyme systems which detoxicate active oxygen species. Tumour-cell death may be facilitated by nutritional supplements of specific polyunsaturated fatty acids. Interference from adventitious medications and drug resistance are discussed; appropriate therapy is outlined.
A pilot study involving 36 patients was undertaken to test the efficacy of combining 1% lidocaine with 60% methylglucamine iothalamate for relief of the severe burning pain often experienced during peripheral arteriography. Of 24 patients premedicated with meperidine hydrochloride and promethazine hydrochloride, 12 received lidocaine with the contrast medium and 12 did not. The remaining 12 patients were premedicated with diazepam and received lidocaine with the contrast material. By both subjective and objective criteria, those patients receiving lidocaine in the intraarterial injection of contrast medium suffered less pain. Optimum results were achieved for the lidocaine group receiving analgesic premedication. No adverse reactions attributable to the lidocaine were encountered. Subsequent to completion of the pilot study, more than 300 patients have been studied with similar impressive results of pain relief and safety.
Ginger and several other medications were compared with scopolamine and d-amphetamine for effectiveness in prevention of motion sickness. METHODS: Double-blind techniques were used. The subjects were given the medications two hours before they were rotated in a chair making head movements until a symptom total short of vomiting was reached. Standardized N.A.S.A. techniques were used for speed of rotation and end-point of motion sickness. RESULTS: The three doses of ginger were all at the placebo level of efficacy. Amitriptyline, ethopropazine and trihexyphenidyl increased the tolerated head movements but the increase was not statistically significant. Significant levels of protection were produced by dimenhydrinate, promethazine, scopolamine and d-amphetamine. Protection was further increased by combination of these latter drugs with d-amphetamine. Efficacy was greatest as the dose was increased. CONCLUSIONS: The medication of choice in this study was scopolamine 0.6 mg with d-amphetamine 10 mg. This combination provided good protection with acceptable side effects.
