Propranolol is a noncardioselective beta-blocker. It is reported to have membrane-stabilizing properties, but it does not own intrinsic sympathomimetic activity. Propranolol hydrochloride is used to control hypertension, pheochromocytoma, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmias, angina pectoris, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. It is also used to control symptoms of sympathetic overactivity in the management of hyperthyroidism, anxiety disorders, and tremor. Other indications cover the prophylaxis of migraine and of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with portal hypertension. This study provides a detailed, comprehensive profile of propranolol, including formulas, elemental analysis, and the appearance of the drug. In addition, the synthesis of the drug is described. The chapter covers the physicochemical properties, including X-ray powder diffraction, pK, solubility, melting point, and procedures of analysis (spectroscopic, electrochemical, and chromatographic). In-depth pharmacology is also presented (pharmacological actions, therapeutic dosing, uses, Interactions, and adverse effects and precautions). More than 60 references are given as a proof of the abovementioned studies.
The worldwide incidence of melanoma has risen rapidly in the past 50 years and is a considerable public health burden in the United States, with significant financial implications. Studies have demonstrated the potential anticarcinogenic effects of antihypertensive agents, specifically beta-blockers, in patients with prostate cancer, breast cancer, and lately cutaneous malignant melanoma. This article explores the empirical clinical evidence of propranolol's anticarcinogenic effects on melanoma and the chemoprotective mechanisms of beta-blockers and other agents that have been used to modify melanoma progression.
Hemangiomas are benign tumors most commonly encountered in infancy and early childhood. While most of them regress spontaneously, some require treatment due to a significant proliferation, which may be complicated by ulceration, deformation aesthetic deformation or worse impairment vital. Among the treatments used corticosteroids is the standard treatment but its use in high doses expose to potential risks. In 2008, the discovery by "chance" of the effectiveness of propranolol in the management of hemangioma revolutionizes the first line treatment. Its mechanism of action is not yet well understood and establishment of such treatment should be done by a hospital paediatrician in the absence of any contraindications. This article proposes focus on effectiveness and tolerance of beta-blockers used as treatment of infantile hemangiomas.
Infantile hemangiomas (IH) are the most common tumors occurring in early childhood, with a prevalence of approximately 5-10% of infants. While the natural history of IH is to spontaneously involute, a significant minority of IH require therapy with the aim to prevent disfigurement, functional impairment, or ulceration. In 2008, propranolol, a non-selective beta (beta)-blocker, was reported to be highly effective in treating IH. Since that time there have been more than 200 articles published regarding the efficacy and potential toxicity of beta-blockers, both systemic and topical, for the treatment of IH. Based on these finding, beta-blockers appear to be highly effective in treating IH and are well tolerated, though side effects have been reported. When therapy is appropriately monitored, beta-blockers have been proven to be a safer and superior alternative to systemic steroids.
The authors review the available literature on the use of propranolol in the treatment of anxiety disorders. First studied in 1966, propranolol has been shown to be most effective in the control of certain somatic symptoms associated with anxiety. Despite these studies, however, it is still not certain where this beta-adrenergic blocker fits into the overall treatment of anxiety disorders. Reasons for this uncertainty and other related problems are discussed.
1. 15 schizophrenic patients diagnosed according to criteria of I.C.D.-9 were treated with d1-propranolol in a 4 week open study. 2. A fixed dose schedule was followed and a maximum dose of 1920 mg/day was reached by day 17. 3. Results revealed a significant reduction in core schizophrenic symptoms of CPRS & BPRS starting between 1st and second weeks of therapy. Higher doses were well tolerated and serious bradycardia occurred only in 3 patients. 4. The implications of these results are discussed.
Hangover following consumption of alcohol includes many disagreeable signs and symptoms that are suggestive of sympathetic overactivity. We performed a randomized, double-blind, crossover controlled study to assess the effect of beta blockade in preventing the symptoms of hangover. Ten subjects were randomized to receive 160 mg of a long-acting preparation of propranolol or a placebo and then participated in a controlled drinking situation. Patients were then evaluated for symptoms and signs of hangover. The results showed that although beta blockade was achieved, there was no clinically important reduction in symptoms of hangover. We conclude that propranolol does not prevent the symptoms of hangover.
Minoxidil in combination with propranolol and diuretics controlled the blood-pressure in a group of hypertensive patients who were resistant to treatment with large doses of standard drugs. The main problem was fluid retention but subjective side-effects were fewer than in a comparable group on other drugs.
The authors report the cases of 3 patients who had depressive episodes after administration of propranolol for medical illnesses. The depressive episodes were severe, occurred in a dose-dependent manner, and promptly remitted when propranolol was discontinued. Physicians' awareness of this complication, especially in cases of patients with a history of depression, may reduce the occurrence of this drug reaction.
The time course of pharmacodynamic effects allow to resolve bioavailability relevant pharmacokinetic information, provided simple assumptions can be made about their interrelation. This approach furthermore allows to differentiate ancillary properties of chemically distinct pharmacological agents on the basis of their mutual pharmacodynamic actions. The advantages and pitfalls of this strategy are discussed here for beta-adrenoceptor antagonists on the basis of their pharmacodynamic characterization by the extent of their binding ability to ex vivo in vitro beta-adrenoceptors (RRA assay) and their blunting effects on the ergometric rise in heart rate.
INTRODUCTION: Fifteen percent of proliferating infantile hemangioma (IH) require intervention because of the threat to function or life, ulceration, or tissue distortion. Propranolol is the mainstay treatment for problematic proliferating IH. Other beta-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors have been explored as alternative treatments. AREAS COVERED: The demonstration of a hemogenic endothelium origin of IH, with a neural crest phenotype and multi-lineage differentiation capacity, regulated by the renin-angiotensin system, underscores its programmed biologic behavior and accelerated involution induced by propranolol, other beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors. We review the indications, dosing regimens, duration of treatment, efficacy and adverse effects of propranolol, and therapeutic alternatives including oral atenolol, acebutolol, nadolol, intralesional propranolol injections, topical propranolol and timolol, and oral captopril. EXPERT OPINION: Improved understanding of the biology of IH provides insights into the mechanism of action underscoring its accelerated involution induced by propranolol, other beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors. More research is required to understand the optimal dosing and duration, efficacy and safety of these alternative therapies. Recent demonstration of propranolol's actions mediated by non-beta-adrenergic isomer R-propranolol on stem cells, offers an immense opportunity to harness the efficacy of beta-blockers to induce accelerated involution of IH, while mitigating their beta-adrenergic receptor-mediated adverse effects.
Eleven consecutive patients with recurrent ventricular arrhythmias were treated by an aggressive protocol and followed up prospectively. Arrhythmias, symptoms, and cardiac lesions were defined. Antiarrhythmic drugs were given on schedule, with blood levels determining dose; success or failure was defined by elimination or recurrence of symptomatic arrhythmias. When drug therapy failed, left ventricular aneurysmectomy was done when appropriate. Recurrent ventricular tachycardia was most frequently responsible for symptoms; coronary artery disease was the most frequent underlying disease. Symptomatic arrhythmias were eliminated in 8 of 11 patients (5 with drugs and 3 with aneurysmectomies), with a 16.5-month symptom-free average follow-up. An average of 2.9 therapeutic trials per patient was needed to control symptomatic arrhythmias. The average time from entry into the study until the start of ultimately effective therapy was 18 days. Therapy that eliminated symptoms did not eliminate all premature ventricular contractions, and occasionally even brief asymptomatic episodes of ventricular tachycardia persisted. Recurrent symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias can be controlled in many patients by rigorous application of current therapies.
A double-blind trial of propranolol, in a dosage of 120 mg a day, and placebo was conducted in 11 patients with essential tremor. An improvement in tremor was observed in all patients who received propranolol and was most pronounced in the upper extremities. The favorable clinical assessment was further confirmed by improvement in a grooved pegboard test and in the quality of handwriting as evaluated by two "blind" observers. No side effects were encountered. It is concluded that propranolol is at present the best available drug for the treatment of essential tremor.
BACKGROUND: The objective of this systematic review was to determine the effectiveness and safety of propranolol compared to placebo or usual care for improving clinical relevant outcomes in severely burned patients (TBSA >20%). METHODS: Relevant articles from randomized controlled trials were identified by a literature search in MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CENTRAL. We included trials involving patients with a severe burn (>20% of total body surface area affected). Trials were eligible if they evaluated propranolol and compared to usual care or placebo. Two investigators independently assessed articles for inclusion and exclusion criteria and selected studies for the final analysis. We conducted a meta-analysis using a random-effects model. RESULTS: We included ten studies in our systematic review. These studies randomized a total of 1236 participants. There were no significant differences between propranolol and placebo with respect to mortality (RD -0.02 [95% CI -0.06 to 0.02]), sepsis (RD -0.03 [95% CI -0.09 to 0.04]), and the overall hospital stay (MD -0.37 [-4.52 to 3.78]). Propranolol-treated adults had a decrease in requirements of blood transfusions (MD -185.64 [95% CI -331.06 to -40.43]) and a decreased heart rate (MD -26.85 [95% CI -39.95 to -13.75]). CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis indicates that there were no differences in mortality or sepsis in severely burned patients treated with propranolol compared with those who had usual care or placebo. However, the use of propranolol in these patients resulted in lower requirements of blood transfusion and lower values of heart rate. The evidence synthesized in this systematic review is limited to conclude that propranolol reduces the length of hospital stay among severely burned patients. Future trials should assess the impact of propranolol on clinically relevant outcomes such as mortality and adverse events.
BACKGROUND: Propranolol, a nonselective beta-adrenergic receptor antagonist, is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat problematic infantile hemangiomas, but a subset of patients experience treatment complications. Parents wary of long-term use and side effects consult plastic surgeons on surgical options or as a second opinion. Understanding the mechanism(s) of action of propranolol will allow plastic surgeons to better inform parents. METHODS: A systemic literature search was performed to query published translational and basic science studies on propranolol effects on infantile hemangiomas and cells derived from these lesions. RESULTS: In experimental studies, propranolol was antiproliferative and cytotoxic against hemangioma endothelial and stem cells and affected infantile hemangioma perivascular cell contractility. Propranolol inhibited migration, network formation, vascular endothelial growth factor A production, and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 activation and down-regulated PI3K/AKT and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling in hemangioma endothelial cells, but it increased ERK1/2 activity in hemangioma stem cells. At effective clinical doses, measured propranolol plasma concentration is 100 times higher than necessary for complete beta-adrenergic receptor blockade, yet was 10 to 100 times less than required to induce hemangioma stem cell death. CONCLUSIONS: Propranolol targets multiple cell types in infantile hemangiomas by means of beta-adrenergic receptor-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Plasma concentration played a significant role. At clinically relevant doses, incomplete infantile hemangioma suppression may explain the rebound phenomenon and worsening ulceration, and propranolol off target effects may lead to commonly reported adverse effects, such as sleep and gastrointestinal disturbances. Propranolol limitations and complications underscore the importance of surgical treatment options in cases of rebound and severe adverse effects. Surgical intervention remains an important treatment choice when parents are hesitant to use propranolol.
Infantile haemangiomas are the most common benign tumour of infancy. However the majority are self-resolving and only a small minority of cases require treatment, with various different medications being used in the past. Over the last few years, propranolol, a non-selective beta-blocker, has become a popular and successful treatment for infantile haemangiomas. However, further research on its safety is needed if it is going to be used more frequently. This article summarises the current literature on propranolol for haemangioma treatment with emphasis on its toxicity and adverse event profile.
The antihypertensive efficacy of a new beta-adrenergic receptor inhibiting compound, timolol (MK-950), was evaluated using two treatment protocols: double-blind timolol vs. placebo treatment and double-blind timolol vs. propranolol (10 and 12 patients, respectively). These studies indicate that timolol significantly and safely reduced arterial pressure in mild to moderately severe essential hypertensive patients. The reduction in mean arterial pressure with timolol was equivalent to the pressure reduction with propranolol when the doses of 30 and 120 mg. per day, respectively, were used.
Enprostil, an orally active prostaglandin E2 analog, is undergoing clinical trials in the treatment of peptic ulcer disease. Because results of animal studies suggested that prostaglandins might affect both hepatic drug metabolizing ability and hepatic blood flow, the effects of enprostil on drug elimination were studied and compared with those of the standard antiulcer drug cimetidine in a double-blind, randomized, crossover study of nine normal subjects. Cimetidine reduced the oral clearance of propranolol by 50%, consistent with the inhibition of drug metabolism reported in previous studies. On the other hand, enprostil had no effect on propranolol elimination. Neither drug altered liver blood flow as assessed either by the clearance of indocyanine green or by the technique of dual route of administration of propranolol. Thus in contrast to cimetidine, enprostil had no effect on hepatic drug metabolism.
Fifty patients with non-cirrhotic portal fibrosis who were admitted to hospital because of upper gastrointestinal bleeding were randomly assigned to treatment with either oral propranolol given in doses that reduced the resting pulse rate by 25% (25 patients) or with a placebo (25 patients). One year after the start of the study 20 patients in the propranolol group and five patients in the placebo group were free from recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding (p less than 0.0001). Giving continuous oral propranolol treatment is therefore effective in preventing recurrent upper gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with non-cirrhotic portal fibrosis.
This study examines the influence of 40 mg of propranolol on agoraphobics throughout 5-hour periods of exposure in vivo on 3 alternate days. Twenty-three patients were studied using a double-blind parallel design and 19 followed up for 3 months. The propranolol group spent significantly less time than the placebo group travelling alone in the month after treatment, and had improved significantly less on a measure of general symptoms at 3 months. The adverse influence of propranolol on treatment outcome appeared mainly due to a waning effect in the last hour of exposure. Attempts to measure coping with panics as an independent variable were largely unsuccessful.
