Therapeutic Reviews aim to provide essential independent information for health professionals about drugs used in palliative and hospice care. The content is also available on www.palliativedrugs.com and will feature in future editions of the Hospice and Palliative Care Formulary USA and its British and Canadian counterparts. The series editors welcome feedback on the articles (hq@palliativedrugs.com).
Propofol is an intravenous hypnotic drug that is used for induction and maintenance of sedation and general anaesthesia. It exerts its effects through potentiation of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) at the GABA(A) receptor, and has gained widespread use due to its favourable drug effect profile. The main adverse effects are disturbances in cardiopulmonary physiology. Due to its narrow therapeutic margin, propofol should only be administered by practitioners trained and experienced in providing general anaesthesia. Many pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) models for propofol exist. Some are used to inform drug dosing guidelines, and some are also implemented in so-called target-controlled infusion devices, to calculate the infusion rates required for user-defined target plasma or effect-site concentrations. Most of the models were designed for use in a specific and well-defined patient category. However, models applicable in a more general population have recently been developed and published. The most recent example is the general purpose propofol model developed by Eleveld and colleagues. Retrospective predictive performance evaluations show that this model performs as well as, or even better than, PK models developed for specific populations, such as adults, children or the obese; however, prospective evaluation of the model is still required. Propofol undergoes extensive PK and PD interactions with both other hypnotic drugs and opioids. PD interactions are the most clinically significant, and, with other hypnotics, tend to be additive, whereas interactions with opioids tend to be highly synergistic. Response surface modelling provides a tool to gain understanding and explore these complex interactions. Visual displays illustrating the effect of these interactions in real time can aid clinicians in optimal drug dosing while minimizing adverse effects. In this review, we provide an overview of the PK and PD of propofol in order to refresh readers' knowledge of its clinical applications, while discussing the main avenues of research where significant recent advances have been made.
We update an evidence-based clinical practice guideline for the administration of propofol for emergency department procedural sedation. Both the unique considerations of using this drug in the pediatric population and the substantial new research warrant revision of the 2007 advisory. We discuss the indications, contraindications, personnel requirements, monitoring, dosing, coadministered medications, and adverse events for propofol sedation.
We presented a case of a postoperative patient with low-flow priapism, possibly initiated by propofol-based anaesthesia or epidural anaesthesia. The delay in diagnosing priapism resulted in emergency interventions with a partially successful effect and eventually permanent erectile dysfunction. Due to the delay in treatment, erectile dysfunction ensued and was manageable with medication; hence, the patient decided against a penile prosthesis.
Propofol is an intravenous agent used commonly for the induction and maintenance of anesthesia, procedural, and critical care sedation in children. The mechanisms of action on the central nervous system involve interactions at various neurotransmitter receptors, especially the gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptor. Approved for use in the USA by the Food and Drug Administration in 1989, its use for induction of anesthesia in children less than 3 years of age still remains off-label. Despite its wide use in pediatric anesthesia, there is conflicting literature about its safety and serious adverse effects in particular subsets of children. Particularly as children are not "little adults", in this review, we emphasize the maturational aspects of propofol pharmacokinetics. Despite the myriad of propofol pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic studies and the ability to use allometrical scaling to smooth out differences due to size and age, there is no optimal model that can be used in target controlled infusion pumps for providing closed loop total intravenous anesthesia in children. As the commercial formulation of propofol is a nutrient-rich emulsion, the risk for bacterial contamination exists despite the Food and Drug Administration mandating addition of antimicrobial preservative, calling for manufacturers' directions to discard open vials after 6 h. While propofol has advantages over inhalation anesthesia such as less postoperative nausea and emergence delirium in children, pain on injection remains a problem even with newer formulations. Propofol is known to depress mitochondrial function by its action as an uncoupling agent in oxidative phosphorylation. This has implications for children with mitochondrial diseases and the occurrence of propofol-related infusion syndrome, a rare but seriously life-threatening complication of propofol. At the time of this review, there is no direct evidence in humans for propofol-induced neurotoxicity to the infant brain; however, current concerns of neuroapoptosis in developing brains induced by propofol persist and continue to be a focus of research.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) models are used in target-controlled-infusion (TCI) systems to determine the optimal drug administration to achieve a desired target concentration in a central or effect-site compartment. Our aim was to develop a PK-PD model for propofol that can predict the bispectral index (BIS) for a broad population, suitable for TCI applications. METHODS: Propofol PK data were obtained from 30 previously published studies, five of which also contained BIS observations. A PK-PD model was developed using NONMEM. Weight, age, post-menstrual age (PMA), height, sex, BMI, and presence/absence of concomitant anaesthetic drugs were explored as covariates. The predictive performance was measured across young children, children, adults, elderly, and high-BMI individuals, and in simulated TCI applications. RESULTS: Overall, 15 433 propofol concentration and 28 639 BIS observations from 1033 individuals (672 males and 361 females) were analysed. The age range was from 27 weeks PMA to 88 yr, and the weight range was 0.68-160 kg. The final model uses age, PMA, weight, height, sex, and presence/absence of concomitant anaesthetic drugs as covariates. A 35-yr-old, 170 cm, 70 kg male (without concomitant anaesthetic drugs) has a V(1), V(2), V(3), CL, Q(2), Q(3), and k(e0) of 6.28, 25.5, 273 litres, 1.79, 1.75, 1.11 litres min(-1), and 0.146 min(-1), respectively. The propofol TCI administration using the model matches well with recommendations for all age groups considered for both anaesthesia and sedation. CONCLUSIONS: We developed a PK-PD model to predict the propofol concentrations and BIS for broad, diverse population. This should be useful for TCI in anaesthesia and sedation.
Propofol is one of the most commonly used agents by anesthesia providers. Despite its excellent safety profile, numerous drawbacks and patient safety issues remain. This article is a focused review of the common issues surrounding propofol administration as they relate to infection, pediatric sedation, and the propofol infusion syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Target-controlled infusion (TCI) systems incorporating pharmacokinetic (PK) or PK-pharmacodynamic (PK-PD) models can be used to facilitate drug administration. Existing models were developed using data from select populations, the use of which is, strictly speaking, limited to these populations. Recently a propofol PK-PD model was developed for a broad population range. The aim of the study was to prospectively validate this model in children, adults, older subjects, and obese adults undergoing general anaesthesia. METHODS: The 25 subjects included in each of four groups were stratified by age and weight. Subjects received propofol through TCI with the Eleveld model, titrated to a bispectral index (BIS) of 40-60. Arterial blood samples were collected at 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 60 min after the start of propofol infusion, and every 30 min thereafter, to a maximum of 10 samples. BIS was recorded continuously. Predictive performance was assessed using the Varvel criteria. RESULTS: For PK, the Eleveld model showed a bias < +/-20% in children, adults, and obese adults, but a greater bias (-27%) in older subjects. Precision was <30% in all groups. For PD, the bias and wobble were <5 BIS units and the precision was close to 10 BIS units in all groups. Anaesthetists were able to achieve intraoperative BIS values of 40-60 using effect-site target concentrations about 85-140% of the age-adjusted Ce(50). CONCLUSIONS: The Eleveld propofol PK-PD model showed predictive precision <30% for arterial plasma concentrations and BIS predictions with a low (population) bias when used in TCI in clinical anaesthesia practice.
Acute pain in the pediatric population has important differences in terms of biology, intrapopulation variation, and epidemiology. Discussion as to the pharmacologic considerations of anesthetic agents, such as induction agents, neuromuscular blockers, opioids, local anesthetics, and adjuvant agents, is presented in this article. Special considerations and concerns, such as risk for propofol infusion syndrome and adverse potential side effects of anesthesia agents, are discussed. Anesthesiologists managing pediatric patients need to have a firm understanding of physiologic and pharmacologic differences compared with the adult population. Future studies to improve the understanding of pharmacokinetics in the pediatric population are needed.
Fospropofol (fospropofol disodium), a sedative/hypnotic agent, is a water-soluble prodrug of propofol, metabolized in vivo to produce liberated propofol (producing the sedative effect), phosphate and formaldehyde. Intravenous fospropofol 6.5 mg/kg was significantly more effective than fospropofol 2.0 mg/kg (a placebo surrogate) as sedation in patients undergoing colonoscopy or flexible bronchoscopy, with regard to the primary endpoint of sedation success rate in randomized, double-blind, phase III trials. In patients undergoing colonoscopy, the sedation success rate was >3-fold higher among fospropofol 6.5 mg/kg (n = 158) than fospropofol 2.0 mg/kg recipients (n = 102). Similar results were observed in patients undergoing flexible bronchoscopy; the sedation success rate was >3-fold greater among fospropofol 6.5 mg/kg (n = 150) than among fospropofol 2.0 mg/kg recipients (n = 102). Fospropofol was generally well tolerated in clinical trials. Adverse events were mostly of mild to moderate severity, and were transient and self-limiting. Patients undergoing flexible bronchoscopy appeared to have a higher rate of sedation-related adverse events requiring airway assistance than did those undergoing colonoscopy or minor procedures.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The current review examines the success and failures of the development of new hypnotic compounds for the human market. One of the important aspects is that one of the key present agents, propofol, is considered by many anaesthesiologists as 'the ideal'. However, all drugs have adverse or side-effects. RECENT FINDINGS: The last 30 years since the introduction of propofol has seen many new compounds evaluated; but as at the present time, only three agents may achieve a pivotal position in the market - fospropofol (a sedative agent which may have a role in endoscopic surgery); remimazolam (a short-acting benzodiazepine) whose development is also being focused on the sedation rather than anaesthesia market; and the pregnane steroid, alfaxalone (an anaesthetic agent first introduced in 1972, but withdrawn in 1984 because of adverse allergic reactions to the solvent, Cremophor EL) now solvented in a cyclodextrin. SUMMARY: Studies of these three agents thus far have shown that none of them has any major adverse side-effects; all have properties which warrant further clinical evaluation.
GPI-15715 (PQ-1002, Aquavan), a water-soluble prodrug of propofol, is being developed by Guilford, under license from ProQuest, as a potential anesthetic agent. In May 2004, Guilford initiated phase III trials in the US to evaluate the sedative effects of this prodrug in several patient populations.
The electroencephalographic effects of two intravenous sedative/hypnotic drugs, propofol and thiopental, were studied at three stable blood concentrations in 52 normal healthy volunteers. The higher concentration resulted in unresponsiveness (lack of response to auditory/tactile stimuli) in all subjects. This report describes the strong frontal-central rhythms apparent in this state using a quantitative description of oscillatory systems underlying the rhythm. These rhythms occur when sedative drug concentrations are greater than those producing the well-described increase in broadband beta-power associated with many sedative drugs. Propofol induces rhythms in the alpha-range, while thiopental produces rhythms in the beta-range. Quasistationary for a period of about 1 h, these rhythms exceed the baseline alpha-rhythm in power. By their resonant nature, these propofol-induced rhythms are analogous to 'the classic alpha-rhythm', but quantitative characteristics of the underlying oscillatory systems are different. Baseline properties of the oscillatory system underlying the initial resting alpha-rhythm recover completely as drug concentration decays to negligible values.
The Institute of Medicine has identified adverse drug events as factors that significantly contribute to increased patient morbidity and mortality. As critically ill patients receive numerous drugs to treat a multitude of complicated health problems, they are at high risk for adverse drug events. Sedation is often a key requirement for the optimal management of critical illness, and propofol, a common sedative, has many desirable characteristics that make it the ideal agent in numerous circumstances. However, over the last decade, increasing numbers of reports have described a potentially fatal adverse effect called propofol-related infusion syndrome. Whether this adverse drug event is preventable is unclear, but recommendations have been proposed to minimize the potential for development of this syndrome. Research is under way to collect data on the use of propofol in intensive care units and on its prevalence.
Propofol is a short-acting intravenous anesthetic commonly utilised in the intensive care unit (ICU) for sedation of mechanically ventilated patients. The rapid onset and termination of action make it an attractive drug for use in the ICU. The safety profile of propofol is well established. However, there are potential adverse reactions associated with the drug. This review discusses the pharmacology, administration and adverse effects associated with propofol with which clinicians who administer propofol should be familiar.
Delirium is a common problem in terminally ill patients that is associated with significant distress and, hence, considered a palliative care emergency. The three subtypes of delirium are hyperactive, hypoactive, and mixed, depending on the level of psychomotor activity and arousal disturbance. When agitated delirium becomes refractory in the setting of imminent dying, the agitation may be so severe that palliative sedation (PS) is required. Palliative sedation involves the administration of sedative medications with the purpose of reducing level of consciousness for patients with refractory suffering in the setting of a terminal illness. Propofol is a sedative that has a short duration of action and a very rapid onset. These characteristics make it relatively easy to titrate. Reported doses range from 50 to 70 mg per hour. The authors present a case of antipsychotic-resistant agitated delirium treated with a propofol intravenous infusion.
Pain on propofol injection (POPI) is a minor problem that all anesthetists face every day. Introduction of several new formulations and hundreds of clinical trials have failed to find its remedy with just one intervention in all patients. This article highlights the causes of POPI and interventions that are used to eliminate this pain in current practice. Relevant articles from Medline and Embase databases were searched and included in this descriptive review with the following conclusions: (1) POPI is due to irritation of venous adventitia leading to release of mediators such as kininogen from kinin cascade. (2) When two or more drugs or measures are used, the incidence of POPI decreases considerably. Hence, the approach to eliminating POPI should be multimodal. (3) Any regimen that includes a drug having local anesthetic effect combined with central sedative/analgesic and rapid injection into a large vein should definitely reduce the risk of POPI to negligible levels.
Clinical studies have demonstrated sex-related differences in recovery from surgical anesthesia. This study aimed to characterize the emergence pattern following two anesthesia regimens in both sexes of rats. We considered six different markers of emergence from anesthesia: sigh, eye blinking, forelimb movement, mastication, neck extension, and recovery of the righting reflex (RORR). Spontaneous motor activity 24 h after the anesthesia induction was also examined. Our results showed that the rank order of the emergence latency after intraperitoneal propofol, PRO, exposure was forelimb movement < sigh < blink < mastication < neck extension < RORR, while after inhaled isoflurane, ISO, anesthesia the sequence was changed as sigh < blink < mastication < forelimb movement < neck extension < RORR in both male and female rats. Moreover, the latency to emergence after PRO in female rats was significantly higher than male rats, although following ISO there was no difference between the sexes (P < 0.001; P > 0.05, respectively). Open-field testing revealed no difference in PRO and ISO spontaneous locomotor activity due to drug administration (P > 0.05). These two anesthetics presented different emergence sequences. Although clinical data suggests that females arouse faster than males from anesthesia with propofol, our intraperitoneal technique in a rodent model had the opposite effect. Pharmacokinetic analysis demonstrated increased absorption of injected propofol for the female rats in our study, emphasizing the role of sexual dimorphism in drug distribution in rodents. Despite these pharmacokinetic differences, the pharmacodynamic effects of the drugs were remarkably consistent among both sexes through emergence.
Thirteen patients with treatment-resistant major depression were given venlafaxine, at doses ranging from 150 mg to 375 mg, combined with ECT. Propofol was used as an anesthetic. Ten of 13 (76.9%) were considered responsive to combined ECT-venlafaxine treatment, and positive responses were not associated with venlafaxine doses. An asystole episode was observed in 4 patients; these patients had received significantly higher doses of venlafaxine (P<0.01). Treatment seems to be safe at venlafaxine doses <300 mg/day. At higher doses, with propofol used as anesthetic, the possibility of asystole cannot be ruled out. A possible additive effect of high-dose venlafaxine and propofol-blocking sodium channels are discussed.
Tonic-clonic seizure activity is a recognized complication of amoxapine overdose. Refractory drug-induced status epilepticus is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Standard regimens for controlling status epilepticus may be ineffective for aborting drug-induced seizures. The authors report the case of a 30-year-old woman who presented with an amoxapine overdose that deteriorated into status epilepticus refractory to conventional therapy. Propofol given by intravenous bolus and maintenance infusion successfully halted the patient's seizure activity. This case suggests that propofol may be effective as an anticonvulsant in refractory drug-induced status epilepticus.
