Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease of the neuromuscular junction for which many therapies were developed before the era of evidence based medicine. The basic principles of treatment are well known, however, patients continue to receive suboptimal treatment as a result of which a myasthenia gravis guidelines group was established under the aegis of The Association of British Neurologists. These guidelines attempt to steer a path between evidence-based practice where available, and established best practice where evidence is unavailable. Where there is insufficient evidence or a choice of options, the guidelines invite the clinician to seek the opinion of a myasthenia expert. The guidelines support clinicians not just in using the right treatments in the right order, but in optimising the use of well-known therapeutic agents. Clinical practice can be audited against these guidelines.
BACKGROUND: Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIPO) may be a primary or secondary phenomenon and is often multifactorial. Treatment is largely directed at improving colonic motility. The use of cholinesterase inhibitors such as pyridostigmine has been hypothesized to increase acetylcholine in the bowel, improving symptoms and transit times. METHODS: A systematic review of the use of pyridostigmine in CIPO was conducted using scientific and commercial search engines identifying scientific studies enrolling adult human subjects, published from 2000 to 2022 in the English language. RESULTS: Four studies were identified including two randomized controlled trials (RCT) and two observational studies. The studies had heterogenous inclusion criteria, dosing regimens and reported outcomes. Two studies were identified as being at high risk of bias. All studies reported improved patient outcomes with use of pyridostigmine, and low rates (4.3%) of mild cholinergic side effects. No major side effects were reported. CONCLUSION: The use of pyridostigmine in management of CIPO is biologically plausible due to its ability to increase colonic motility, and early studies on its role are uniformly suggestive of benefit with low side-effect profile. Four clinical studies have been conducted to date, with small sample sizes, heterogeneity and high risk of bias. Further high-quality studies are required to enable assessment of pyridostigmine's utility as an effective management strategy in CIPO.
The management of myasthenia gravis (MG) during pregnancy requires special skills as both diseases as well as its treatment can have deleterious effects on mother and fetus. MG often affects women in second and third decades of life during the childbearing age. Exacerbations of MG are likely to occur during the first trimester and postpartum period. The treatment of MG during pregnancy needs to be individualized depending on the severity of MG as well as the efficacy of various treatment modalities and their possible harmful effects on pregnancy. In addition, special attention has to be given to avoid drugs and other factors (such as urinary tract infections) which may worsen MG. The key to successful outcome during pregnancy in myasthenic women lies in multidisciplinary care involving obstetricians, neurologists, anesthetist as well as neonatologist. In this review, we discuss various therapeutic options available for the management of MG during pregnancy and provide recommendations based on the current best evidence.
A 78-year-old woman presented with vertical double vision. The Bielschowsky-Parks' three-step test suggested a left inferior rectus muscle paresis. Diagnostic testing confirmed the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. Despite treatment with pyridostigmine bromide (mestinon) the diplopia persisted. She refused corticosteroid treatment and sought a second opinion, resulting in three unsuccessful strabismus surgeries to correct her ocular misalignment. The evaluation and management of ocular myasthenia gravis is reviewed and the appropriate timing of strabismus surgery is discussed.
Pyridostigmine is the most commonly used drug in the symptomatic treatment of myasthenia gravis (MG); however, research into its effectiveness and side effects is scarce. The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness, prevalence of side effects and net benefit of pyridostigmine. All MG patients participating in the Dutch-Belgian myasthenia patient registry were included. A dynamic online questionnaire was developed to assess the effectiveness, side effects and net benefit of pyridostigmine. Out of 642 invited patients, 410 patients (64%) fully completed the questionnaire; 61% reported that they currently used pyridostigmine, 36% had discontinued pyridostigmine and 2% reported to never have used pyridostigmine. Patients reported a median effectiveness of 60, IQR 28-78 and net benefit of 65, IQR 45-84. Of all patients currently using pyridostigmine, 91% reported side effects (vs. 55% in the control group). Most frequently reported side effects were flatulence, urinary urgency, muscle cramps, blurred vision and hyperhidrosis. In the group of patients who discontinued pyridostigmine, side effects were the reason for discontinuation in 26%. Diarrhea, abdominal cramps and muscle twitching were the most frequently cited reasons to discontinue pyridostigmine. These results can be used to guide shared decision making prior to starting symptomatic treatment for MG.
A boy aged five and a girl aged one year suffering from myasthenia gravis are described. Both cases had respiratory complications and were treated erroneously until their ptosis was noticed and the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis confirmed. The etiology, types, symptomatology, and treatment of the diseases are described. Attention of the pediatric ophthalmologists is called to the fact that they should consider myasthenia gravis in the differential diagnosis of ptosis and external ophthalmoplegia.
The evident defect in this disease is postsynaptic dysfunction due to anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies. The postsynaptic membrane is simplified, the number of acetylcholine receptors is reduced, and neuromuscular transmission is impaired. Antiacetylcholinesterase drugs still play a role in management. Newer options include prednisone, azathioprine, and cyclosporine.
Ocular myasthenia is a special form of general myasthenia gravis characterized by unilateral or bilateral ptosis and eye muscle pareses of distinct variability, depending on the time of day and the state of fatigue of the patient. Most important for diagnosis is the Tensilon test, which can, however, produce negative results. In such cases a combination of the Tensilon test with electromyography is indispensable. In ocular myasthenia there is not always an increase in the antibody titer against acetylcholine receptors in the blood. The treatment of ocular myasthenia is based on the application of cholinesterase inhibitors. The drug of choice is Mestinon; however, the reaction of the eye muscles to this drug is often unsatisfactory. Local application of cholinesterase inhibitors in the form of Eserine, Prostigmin etc. is an additional important therapy. Also in ocular myasthenia the modern treatment with Cortisone (alternate-day therapy with 100 mg Prednisone every second day) has proved very useful. Another possible method of interfering with the immunological systems of myasthenia is immunosuppression with Azathioprin or Cyclophosphamide. The pathognomonic significance of the thymus in the autoimmune process of myasthenia gravis is demonstrated by the good results obtained by thymectomy, which can also be performed successfully in ocular myasthenia, not only in young patients in whom the condition is severe, but also in older patients in whom it is chronic. Often, the therapeutic measures mentioned have to be tested one after another or in combination in order to achieve an optimal therapeutic effect.
Currently, pyridostigmine bromide is an indispensable anticholinesterase agent used worldwide to treat patients with Myasthenia Gravis (MG). However, pyridostigmine bromide was unsuccessful in its "pioneering trials" to treat a series of MG patients. There are important historical landmarks before pyridostigmine bromide becomes useful, safe and indispensable for MG therapy. After 70 years of these "pioneering trials", this article reviews some historical aspects related to them, as well as other preliminary trials using pyridostigmine bromide as therapy for MG patients.
As the celiac disease (CD), the non-celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS) has also been associated with several autoimmune manifestations. It is rarely associated with myasthenia gravis (MG). This paper shall introduce the case of a young female patient, initially presenting a peripheral neuropathy framework. During clinical and neurological follow-up, she began to present symptoms of various immune-mediated morbidities. Diseases related to gluten represent a clinical spectrum of manifestations with a trigger in common, the ingestion of gluten. CD is the most well-known and serious disease of the spectrum, also called gluten-sensitive enteropathy. The NCGS is diagnosed from clinical evidence of improvement in symptoms followed by a Gluten Free Diet (GFD) in patients without signs of enteropathy in duodenal biopsy. There are indications that, although rare, with a prevalence of 1 in 5000, myasthenia gravis (MG) may occur more often when CD is also present. Between 13 to 22% of the patients with MG have a second autoimmune disorder. However, it is often associated with dermatomyositis or polymyositis, lupus erythematosussystemic lupus erythematosus, Addison's disease, Guillain-Barre syndrome and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Thus, the symptoms of neuromuscular junction involvement may give a diagnostic evidence of this rare association.
[Figure: see text].
Authors studies impedance, stapedius reflex thresholds and stapedius muscle exhaustion on 31 ears of 16 MG patients. Investigations were carried out using GSI 33 computer-assisted middle ear analyzator. Stapedius reflex threshold values were increased in 93% of patients. Stapedius exhaustion was observed in 71% of patients. After the administration of the reversible cholinesterase inhibitor Mestinon (60 mg pyridostigmin bromide), reflex threshold decreased and exhaustion occurred in only 50% of cases. Authors review the literature in context with the audiometric diagnostics of MG and also recommend the use of these methods in more complicated ocular and bulbar cases of MG.
Graves disease complicates two pregnancies out of 1000 and when it is known before pregnancy, it warrants careful monitoring of the fetus and the newborn. We report on a case of neonatal hyperthyroidism, which revealed a previously unknown maternal thyroid disease. In this situation, neonatal signs can be misinterpreted, delaying the diagnosis. Neonatal hyperthyroidism is, however, a therapeutic emergency because of the risk of cardiac and neurological complications. The neonatologist must identify thyroid disease in the absence of a maternal history in order to promptly start therapy.
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease of neuromuscular junctions. We report a three-year-old boy with post-varicella myasthenia gravis. This patient, to the best of our knowledge, is the youngest in age and second reported case of the condition. The patient presented with drooping of both eyelids which increased as the day progressed, two weeks after varicella infection. Repetitive nerve stimulation tests showed decremental response in action potential, and the child responded dramatically to test doses of neostigmine. A diagnosis of post-varicella myasthenia gravis was made and the patient was started on oral pyridostigmine. He is doing well at follow-up and there is no recurrence of symptoms to date.
Patient registries are a resource to better study neurologic disease and may facilitate the development of future treatments. Clinicians should become comfortable with the strengths and limitations of patient registries and be able to discuss them with their patients. This article discusses the use of patient registries through the example of registries for patients with neuromuscular disease.
A simplified gas chromatographic method for measuring quaternary ammonium compounds has been developed and used to measure the serum concentration of pyridostigmine in human beings. Pyridostigmine is present in the serum within 1 hour after oral administration and reaches a peak at 2 hours. Results in several patients suggest that the serum concentration achieved is related to the size of the dose and that there is a relationship between serum concentration and clinical response.
An 88-year-old male patient presented with left ptosis, diplopia, muscle weakness of the lower limbs, dysphagia for solids, dysphonia and constipation. On investigation, he was found to have myasthenia gravis (MG). Further evaluation for the possible cause of MG, with CT scan, revealed that the patient had concomitant prostatic cancer. The patient was given steroids and pyridostigmine, with consequent resolution of his neurological symptoms. This is a rare case of MG associated with prostatic cancer.
INTRODUCTION: Decremental responses in repetitive nerve stimulation have been reported in a few hereditary myopathies. We examined the frequency of decrement in a cohort of myopathy patients. METHODS: We reviewed all patients referred for myopathy who underwent repetitive nerve stimulation between January 2007 and May 2017. We included patients with decrement (>10%) and either a pathological or molecular diagnosis of myopathy. RESULTS: Among 157 patients with myopathies, 4 patients had decrement (2 hydroxychloroquine-associated vacuolar myopathy, 1 centronuclear myopathy, and 1 distal myopathy). One hydroxychloroquine-associated vacuolar myopathy patient also had inflammatory myopathy. Pyridostigmine improved weakness in the centronuclear myopathy patient, but not in the distal myopathy patient. No patient with an acquired myopathy received pyridostigmine. CONCLUSIONS: Despite the rare occurrence of decrement in myopathy, its presence may urge consideration of pharmacological intervention. Muscle Nerve 59:475-478, 2019.
A 14 year old boy with atypical myasthenia gravis is reported. The interesting features of the case were the onset in first decade with progressive weakness of limb muscles simulating limb girdle myopathy, presence of bilateral symmetrical non fluctuating external ophthalmoplegia with ptosis and the absence of diplopia. Differential response to choline esterase inhibitors was clinically apparent. In contrast to excellent improvement in limb weakness with choline esterase inhibitors, there was no improvement in external ophthalmoplegia or ptosis. The possibilities are discussed and literature is reviewed.
For nearly 50 years, nerve agents have constituted a serious threat that has stimulated extensive efforts to develop effective medical countermeasures. Recent progress in producing pharmacologic defenses suggests that humans can be largely protected from the lethal and prolonged incapacitating effects of these compounds on a chemical battlefield. Current research on new approaches to binding and inactivating nerve agents may further decrease their potential as a threat against protected persons.
