Treatment-resistant depression (TRD) affects one in three patients with major depressive disorder and is associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality. Studies of real-world practices suggest that antidepressant monotherapy continues to be the most widely used treatment after inadequate response to a first-line treatment. However, rates of remission with antidepressants in TRD are suboptimal. Atypical antipsychotics are the most widely studied augmentation agent and aripiprazole, brexpiprazole, cariprazine, quetiapine extended-release, and olanzapine-fluoxetine combination are approved for depression. Benefits of using atypical antipsychotics for TRD has to be weighted against their potential adverse events, such as weight gain, akathisia, and tardive dyskinesia.
BACKGROUND: In treatment-resistant depression, commonly defined as a lack of response to two or more consecutive treatments during the current depressive episode, the percentage of patients with remission is low and the percentage with relapse is high. The efficacy and safety of esketamine nasal spray as compared with extended-release quetiapine augmentation therapy, both in combination with ongoing treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) or a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), in patients with treatment-resistant depression are unknown. METHODS: In an open-label, single-blind (with raters unaware of group assignments), multicenter, phase 3b, randomized, active-controlled trial, we assigned patients, in a 1:1 ratio, to receive flexible doses (according to the summary of product characteristics) of esketamine nasal spray (esketamine group) or extended-release quetiapine (quetiapine group), both in combination with an SSRI or SNRI. The primary end point was remission, defined as a score of 10 or less on the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS), at week 8 (scores range from 0 to 60, with higher scores indicating more severe depression). The key secondary end point was no relapse through week 32 after remission at week 8. All patients were included in the analysis; patients who discontinued the trial treatment were considered as having had an unfavorable outcome (i.e., they were grouped with patients who did not have remission or who had a relapse). Analyses of the primary and key secondary end points were adjusted for age and number of treatment failures. RESULTS: Overall, 336 patients were assigned to the esketamine group and 340 to the quetiapine group. More patients in the esketamine group than in the quetiapine group had remission at week 8 (91 of 336 patients [27.1%] vs. 60 of 340 patients [17.6%]; P = 0.003) and had no relapse through week 32 after remission at week 8 (73 of 336 patients [21.7%] vs. 48 of 340 patients [14.1%]). Over 32 weeks of follow-up, the percentage of patients with remission, the percentage of patients with a treatment response, and the change in the MADRS score from baseline favored esketamine nasal spray. The adverse events were consistent with the established safety profiles of the trial treatments. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with treatment-resistant depression, esketamine nasal spray plus an SSRI or SNRI was superior to extended-release quetiapine plus an SSRI or SNRI with respect to remission at week 8. (Funded by Janssen EMEA; ESCAPE-TRD ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04338321.).
A 48 year old lady presented with a 7-week history of progressive generalised myalgia and muscle weakness resulting in recurrent falls. Her past medical history included bipolar affective disorder and a previous stroke. Her medications included clopidogrel 75mg, atorvastatin 80mg, and quetiapine 400mg twice daily.
The second-generation antipsychotic drug quetiapine (Seroquel) is increasingly being used off-label for treating insomnia in the general population, possibly to avoid standard medications with known addictive qualities and adverse side effects. However, evidence to support using it in this way is scant, and quetiapine is associated with weight gain and other metabolic effects. It must be used cautiously and with appropriate monitoring for adverse effects and abuse.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To provide an overview of recently published work on anxiety, focusing on generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and its treatment. RECENT FINDINGS: Self-reported anxiety symptoms were highly prevalent during the COVID-19 global pandemic in both the general population and in selected groups. There remains divided opinion about whether internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is noninferior to face-to-face CBT for GAD. A systematic review of drug treatment for GAD showed efficacy for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), agomelatine, and quetiapine. There may be a place for repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in the treatment of GAD. There was some evidence of efficacy for complementary therapies, including physical exercise, yoga, acupuncture, and Withania somnifera (ashwagandha). However, a systematic review of cannabidiol and tetrahydrocannabinol found insufficient evidence of efficacy in anxiety disorders. SUMMARY: Antidepressants and quetiapine show efficacy in the treatment of GAD. Internet-based psychological interventions have a place in the treatment of GAD when face-to-face treatment is inaccessible. There is increasing evidence for the use of physical exercise in the management of GAD. Some other complementary therapies, including cannabinoids, require further, methodologically sound, research.
Practice guidelines provide clear evidence-based recommendations for the use of drug therapy to manage pain, agitation, and delirium associated with critical illness. Dosing recommendations however are often based on strategies used in patients with normal body habitus. Recommendations specific to critically ill patients with extreme obesity are lacking. Nonetheless, clinicians must craft dosing regimens for this population. This paper is intended to help clinicians design initial dosing regimens for medications commonly used in the management of pain, agitation, and delirium in critically ill patients with extreme obesity. A detailed literature search was conducted with an emphasis on obesity, pharmacokinetics, and dosing. Relevant manuscripts were reviewed and strategies for dosing are provided.
A 22-year-old woman, known to have a BMI of 12 kg/m2 and a personality disorder, developed urinary retention on a normal dose of quetiapine. She had earlier tolerated a dose of 800 mg quetiapine without complications. The daily dose was 600 mg in combination with oxazepam and zolpidem. Reduction had no effect. The patient intervened with intermittent urinary catheterization the next 19 months. Normal urinary function returned three days after the last dose of quetiapine 25 mg. This case report shows that patients with a low BMI may be more receptive of the anticholinergic effects of quetiapine.
OBJECTIVE: Withdrawal from psychoactive medication such as quetiapine is a well-documented phenomenon. Despite the extensive use of quetiapine, there have been few studies into the presence of discontinuation symptoms. We therefore performed a systematic review of published literature for evidence of quetiapine withdrawal or symptoms associated with discontinuation. METHODS: We searched PubMed, Embase, CINAHL, Medline, Web of Science, PsycINFO for articles containing the terms 'Quetiapine' AND 'withdraw($)' OR 'discontinue($)'. We included all study types that reported on somatic withdrawal symptoms and had no language restrictions. We excluded studies where there was withdrawal from multiple medications or any other psychoactive substance, or where the only symptoms were psychological such as rebound psychosis or craving. RESULTS: We included 13 papers, all of which were individual case reports. The quality of the individual case reports was sub-optimal, as assessed by the CARE Case Report Guidelines. There was an association between rapid cessation of quetiapine and onset of somatic symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, agitation, restlessness, diaphoresis, irritability, anxiety, dysphoria, sleep disturbance, insomnia, tachycardia, hypertension and dizziness. Three studies also reported the onset of a withdrawal dyskinesia characterised by abnormal choreiform movements as well as confusion and speech disturbance in some cases. However, these findings were limited by the number and quality of case reports identified. CONCLUSION: Discontinuation symptoms are an uncommon side effect of quetiapine cessation, which may have clinical implications. Clinicians should therefore be alert to the possibility of quetiapine withdrawal in individuals who present with somatic symptoms or choreiform movements. However, large prospective studies are required to clarify this association.
Quetiapine is a common off-label antipsychotic drug for treating insomnia. Its effects in different disease conditions and dosages remain unclear. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis in clinical trials examining the efficacy of low-dose quetiapine in sleep. We obtained 21 clinical trials. Mean difference (MD), standard mean difference (SMD), and odds ratio (OR) were used to estimate the effect sizes using a random-effects model. The pooled results showed that quetiapine improved sleep quality compared with placebo (SMD: -0.57 [95%CI: -0.75, -0.4]). The SMD of sleep quality was correlated with age (coefficient: -0.0174) and sex (coefficient: -0.012). The significant effects were observed in the general anxiety disorder (SMD: -0.59 [95%CI: -0.92, -0.27]), major depressive disorder (SMD: -0.47 [95%CI: -0.66, -0.28]), and healthy (SMD: -1.33, [95%CI [-2.12, -0.54]) subgroups, at the dosage of 50 mg (SMD: -0.36 [95%CI: -0.36, -0.11]), 150 mg (SMD: -0.4 [95%CI: -0.52, -0.29]), and 300 mg (SMD: -0.17 [95%CI: -0.31,-0.04]). Quetiapine increased total sleep time compared with placebo (MD: 47.91 [95%CI: 28.06, 67.76]) but not when compared with other psychiatric drugs (MD: -4.19 [95%CI: -19.43, 11.05]). Adverse events (AEs) and discontinuation due to AEs were common among the quetiapine users. Quetiapine is effective as a sleep-helping drug. Precaution is suggested when interpreting the results on the elderly due to the high heterogeneity caused by incorporating patients over 66 years in the meta-analyses. We recommend an initial dosage of 50-150 mg/day with priority consideration for the elderly with GAD or MDD while monitoring its potential AEs.
BACKGROUND: Oculogyric crises are involuntary movements of the eyeballs and can occur due to different etiologies. PHENOMENOLOGY SHOWN: This video abstract shows a man with oculogyric crises due to side effect of neuroleptics. EDUCATIONAL VALUE: Oculogyric crises are easy to recognize if once seen.
Hypothyroidism has been associated with quetiapine, but the underlying mechanism is not well understood and has been presumed to result from thyroid gland dysfunction (primary hypothyroidism). We present a case of symptomatic quetiapine-induced hypothyroidism due to hypothalamic/pituitary gland dysfunction (central [secondary] hypothyroidism).
INTRODUCTION: Lurasidone (LUR) was compared with quetiapine extended release (QUE-ER) regarding 1-year discontinuation in patients with bipolar depression (n=317). METHODS: This is a retrospective cohort study. RESULTS: Although the time to all-cause discontinuation was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier survival curve with log-rank tests to compare treatment groups, no difference was found (p=0.317). The Cox proportional hazard model revealed that only the presence of adverse events (AEs) is associated with increased treatment discontinuation (p<0.0001). The most common AEs were akathisia for LUR (17.7%) and somnolence for QUE-ER (34.7%). In other Cox models divided by LUR or QUE-ER, the presence of akathisia or somnolence was associated with increased LUR (p=0.0205) or QUE-ER (p<0.0001) discontinuation, respectively. DISCUSSION: The acceptability of both antipsychotics to bipolar depression in clinical practice may be similar. However, specific AEs for each antipsychotic (LUR: akathisia and QUE-ER: somnolence) were associated with high treatment discontinuation.
Complaints of hypoglycemia resemble the sedative effect of antipsychotics. As such, clinicians may overlook hypoglycemia in patients with psychiatric disorders. Here, a case of hypoglycemia associated with hyperinsulinemia induced by quetiapine in a female patient with bipolar disorder is reported. The case suggests that clinicians should be aware of the potential for hypoglycemia induced by second-generation antipsychotics.
BACKGROUND: While clinical trial evidence has firmly established the efficacy of several atypical antipsychotics (AAPs) for treating bipolar depression, no randomized controlled trials (RCT's) comparing AAPs have been conducted. This Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA) compared the relative efficacy and tolerability of AAP monotherapy in adults with bipolar depression. METHODS: Efficacy measures included change in Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS), Clinical Global Improvement - Bipolar Disorder (CGI-BP), response, and remission. Multiple tolerability outcomes were examined. Results from random effects models were reported as difference in change from baseline for continuous variables or odds ratios for dichotomous variables. Treatments were ranked using the surface under the curve cumulative ranking probabilities. Number needed to treat (NNT) and harm (NNH) were calculated. RESULTS: Eighteen RCT's met inclusion criteria of the systematic literature review. On change in MADRS, lurasidone (- 4.71 [95% Crl - 6.98, - 2.41]), quetiapine (- 4.80 [- 5.93, - 3.72]), olanzapine (- 4.57 [- 5.92, - 3.20]), and cariprazine (- 2.29 [- 3.47, - 1.09]) were more efficacious than placebo. Lurasidone was associated with a significantly greater odds of response (>/=50% improvement in MADRS) compared to cariprazine (1.78 [95% Crl 1.08, 2.77]), aripiprazole (2.38 [1.38, 3.85]), and ziprasidone (2.47 [1.41, 3.98]), but was similar to olanzapine (1.68 [0.99,2.65]) and quetiapine (1.25 [0.78, 1.90]). For change in CGI-BP-S-overall score, lurasidone was significantly better than cariprazine (- 0.38 [95% Crl - 0.66,-0.10]) and ziprasidone (- 0.58 [- 0.91,-0.26]), but similar to quetiapine (- 0.08 [- 0.36, 0.19])and olanzapine (- 0.04 [- 1.41, 1.46]). Lurasidone (0.34 kg [95% Crl - 0.22, 0.89]) and aripiprazole (0.20 kg [- 0.59, 1.00]) had a similar weight change compared to placebo, but olanzapine (2.88 kg [2.40, 3.36]), quetiapine (1.17 kg [0.84, 1.49]), and cariprazine (0.65 kg [0.34, 0.96]) were associated with greater weight gain. The NNT for response was the lowest for lurasidone (NNT = 5) followed by quetiapine (NNT = 6), olanzapine (NNT = 10) and cariprazine (NNT = 12). CONCLUSIONS: In this NMA in adults with bipolar depression, which evaluated change in depressive symptoms (assessed by MADRS) across short-term trials, the largest improvement versus placebo was observed for lurasidone, olanzapine and quetiapine with cariprazine, showing a smaller treatment effect. Aripiprazole and ziprasidone were ineffective for the treatment of bipolar depression. Improvement in CGI-BP-S score for lurasidone was larger than cariprazine and ziprasidone but similar to quetiapine and olanzapine. Based on short term studies lurasidone and aripiprazole had similar weight gain compared to placebo.
In the past two decades, the search for novel pharmacotherapies to treat alcohol addiction has been a global endeavor. This has resulted in several drugs that have been approved and successfully marketed for public use while some are still in the testing phase. These pharmacological agents, though effective for the treatment of alcoholism, are not without shortcomings; such as abuse potential, serious mental and physical adverse effects, interaction with alcohol and also poor metabolism and excretion. As more is being understood about the neurobiology of alcohol addiction as well as the unique pharmacological action of these drugs, new agents are evaluated for potential benefits when used as an adjunct in combination therapy. This review article summarizes the novel pharmacotherapeutic approaches used in the treatment of alcohol addiction by focusing on the drugs, which include neramexane, gabapentin, baclofen, aripiprazole, nalmafene, and quetiapine.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to report and describe a case of quetiapine-induced dystonia in an older lady with psychosis. Quetiapine is a second-generation antipsychotic and known to be rare in causing extrapyramidal side effects with rates similar to placebo. CONCLUSIONS: There have been few documented cases of quetiapine-induced dystonia. It is important to be vigilant and consider the development of dystonia in patients who may not fit the typical risk profile.
The discovery of antipsychotic agents in the 1950s revolutionized the treatment of schizophrenia. A large body of evidence supports the dopamine D2 receptor antagonist's efficacy in the treatment of psychotic symptoms. However, the advent of newer agents seems to point to a more complex interaction of neurotransmission in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. In fact, a defining characteristic of atypical agents is a higher ratio of serotonin (5HT2) receptor blockade to D2 receptor blockade. Clozapine was the first atypical agent to be introduced; it was followed by risperidone, olanzapine, and now quetiapine, which is a dibenzothiazepine derivative structurally related to clozapine and olanzapine.
We report a case of myoclonus induced by quetiapine. A 64-year-old man with schizophrenia developed myoclonic jerks when given higher doses of quetiapine. These movements were dose-related and completely abated on reducing the dose. To our knowledge, these movements have not been reported previously as an adverse effect of quetiapine.
Neuropsychiatric symptoms affect most patients with dementia over the course of the disease. They include a wide variety of symptoms from apathy and depression to psychosis, irritability, impulsivity and agitation. These symptoms are associated with significant distress to the patient and caregivers, as well as more rapid progression of dementia, institutionalisation and higher mortality. The first-line management of the neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia should be non-pharmacological. If medications are required, antipsychotics are commonly chosen. Second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole are prescribed more often than first-generation antipsychotics, such as haloperidol. The aim of this review is to provide an update on findings on adverse outcomes and clinical implications of antipsychotic use in dementia. These medications may increase mortality and can be associated with adverse events including pneumonia, cerebrovascular events, parkinsonian symptoms or higher rates of venous thromboembolism. Risks related to antipsychotic use in dementia are moderated by a number of modifiable and non-modifiable factors such as co-prescribing of other medications, medical and psychiatric co-morbidities, and demographics such as age and sex, making individualised treatment decisions challenging. Antipsychotics have further been associated with an increased risk of reliance on long-term care and institutionalisation, and they might not be cost-effective for healthcare systems. Many of these risks can potentially be mitigated by close physical health monitoring of antipsychotic treatment, as well as early withdrawal of pharmacotherapy when clinically possible.
Consensus panel guidelines advocate for the judicious use of antipsychotic drugs to manage delirium in hospitalized patients when nonpharmacologic measures fail and the patient is in significant distress from symptoms, poses a safety risk to self or others, or is impeding essential aspects of his or her medical care. Here, we review the use of haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and aripiprazole for this purpose.
