Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are an antacid drug often used in acid-related disorders. They decrease acid secretion in the stomach by blocking an enzyme called H+/K+ ATPase which controls acid production. Introduced to the market in 1989, their use has increased rapidly worldwide and they are now among the top 10 most prescribed drugs in the United States. As of 2015, the FDA has already approved six drugs of this class (omeprazole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole, dexlansoprazole, pantoprazole and rabeprazole). Recently, the risks and benefits of long-term PPI use were questioned and many studies indicated that their use should be carefully considered, especially in young patients, whose treatment with these drugs could last many years. Even greater concerns have been raised about a potential positive association between PPIs and osteoporotic fracture risk including the hip, spine and wrist. Although based on observational studies, there is substantial evidence associating the long-term use of PPIs and fracture. This relationship is only partially admitted due to the lack of consistent effects of PPIs on bone mineral density loss. Therefore, this narrative review aimed to discuss the recent findings pertaining to the risk of osteoporotic fracture associated with PPIs, in particular prolonged use, and to call for further research to elucidate the mechanisms associated with this bone fragility.
BACKGROUND: The pharmacokinetics of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) may be affected by food intake. We aimed to evaluate the effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of omeprazole, rabeprazole, and pantoprazole. SETTING: The study population comprised 186 healthy volunteers participating in 6 bioequivalence clinical trials. METHOD: Subjects were evaluated to determine the effect of a high-fat breakfast on the pharmacokinetics of omeprazole (n = 36), rabeprazole (n = 69), and pantoprazole (n = 81). MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Drug plasma concentrations were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. RESULTS: Food affected the pharmacokinetics of omeprazole (increased T(max) and decreased AUC and C(max)), pantoprazole (increased T(max) and decreased AUC), and rabeprazole (increased T(max), C(max) and half-life). Food increased variability in T(max) for all 3 drugs, delaying absorption around 3 to 4 h and until 20 h in some subjects. CONCLUSION: As food delays the absorption of PPIs and increases their variability, it would be better to administer these drugs under fasting conditions. TRIAL REGISTRATION: European Union Drug Regulating Authorities Clinical Trials Database: EudraCT : 2004-003863-59 (registration date 05/MAR/2004), EudraCT 2006-001162-17 (registration date 17-MAR-2006), EudraCT: 2007-002489-37 (registration date 12-JUN-2007), EudraCT: 2007-002490-31 (registration date 12-JUN-2007), EudraCT: 2010-024029-19 (registration date 23-NOV-2010).
BACKGROUND/AIMS: Studies on the therapeutic efficacy of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) have been recently published. In most of these studies, comparison of only two PPIs have been made. There are few studies on the comparison of four or more PPIs. We aimed to compare the acid inhibitory effects of esomeprazole 40 mg, rabeprazole 20 mg, lansoprazole 30 mg, and pantoprazole 40 mg on days 1 and 5 of treatment in patients with GERD, who were extensive metabolizers in regard to the CYP2C19 genotype. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Helicobacter pylori-negative with typical symptoms of GERD patients were randomly divided into four treatment groups. Efficacy analysis on days 1 and 5 were performed on the four groups which comprised 10 (esomeprazole), 11 (rabeprazole), 10 (lansoprazole), and 10 (pantoprazole) patients. RESULTS: On day 1 of PPI treatment, the mean percentage of time with intragastric Ph>4 were 54%, 58%, 60%, and 35% for the groups, respectively, and on day 5, these values were 67%, 60%, 68%, and 59%, respectively. Esomeprazole, rabeprazole, and lansoprazole were found to be superior to pantoprazole on the first day of treatment. CONCLUSION: Pantoprazole is a less potent proton pump inhibitor than the other PPIs tested on the first day of treatment. When the time needed to raise the intragatric pH to over 4 was evaluated, esomeprazole was found to have the most rapid action, followed by lansoprazole and rabeprazole.
1. Proton pump inhibitors have been extensively used for the treatment of ailments due to increased gastric acid secretion such as peptic ulcers, gastroesophageal reflux disease, etc. 2. There are several approved drugs in the proton pump inhibitor class with the latest entries representing single enantiomer drugs of the previously approved racemic drugs. 3. Despite having a high degree of structural resemblance, rabeprazole, was shown to possess some unique differentiation from other drugs in the class. One of the key distinguishing features of rabeprazole was related to the lesser involvement of polymorphic metabolism in its pharmacokinetic disposition. 4. The review was aimed to provide pharmacokinetic data of rabeprazole from several clinical studies including drug-drug interaction studies where rabeprazole was either a perpetrator drug or victim drug. 5. Additional perspectives on therapy considerations due to the unique metabolic disposition of rabeprazole including the possible issues related to chirality were provided.
Rabeprazole is a proton pump inhibitor with antisecretory properties. In vitro animal experiments have indicated that the inhibition of the proton pump by rabeprazole is partially reversible. Rabeprazole has 2- to 10-fold greater antisecretory activity than omeprazole in vitro. However, it dissociates more readily from H+,K(+)-ATPase than omeprazole, resulting in a shorter duration of action. In comparative clinical trials rabeprazole was significantly more effective than placebo, famotidine or ranitidine and as effective as omeprazole in the treatment of patients with erosive or ulcerative gastro-oesophageal reflux disease or gastric or duodenal ulcers. Healing rates with rabeprazole were independent of Helicobacter pylori status. Rabeprazole in combination with either clarithromycin and metronidazole or clarithromycin and amoxicillin or amoxicillin and metronidazole or clarithromycin for 7 days produced eradication of H. pylori in 100, 95, 90 and 63% of patients. The tolerability profile of rabeprazole 20mg once daily was similar to that of famotidine 20mg twice daily, ranitidine 150mg 4 times daily or omeprazole 20mg once daily in comparative trials. The adverse events reported with once daily administration of rabeprazole 20mg include malaise, nausea, diarrhoea, headache, dizziness and skin eruptions in 0.7 to 2.2% of patients.
Gastro-duodenal content reflux from gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD) induces the inflammation-metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma sequence. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are potent blockers of gastric acid secretion, which are widely used for treating GERD and peptic ulcer-associated acid-secreting diseases. The effect of PPI therapy on esophageal carcinogenesis remains unclear. While some studies suggest PPIs result in a significant reduction in the risk of developing dysplasia and adenocarcinoma in patients with Barrett's esophagus, others suggest that PPIs have no effect. Recent studies have revealed that PPIs can exert anti-inflammatory effects such as anti-oxidant properties and immunomodulatory effects through their interactions with neutrophils, monocytes, endothelial and epithelial cells. In addition, PPIs have the ability to prevent adhesion molecule binding in malignant cells and suppress metastasis. This article reviews the role of PPIs in esophageal carcinogenesis and their use as antitumor agents.
INTRODUCTION: A national survey in the general population showed that gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is highly prevalent in Mexico. OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of two isomers, dexrabeprazole (10 mg) vs. esomeprazole (20 mg), in the treatment of GERD for four weeks. METHODS: Randomized, multicenter, prospective, double-blind phase III clinical trial in two groups that included 230 patients. RESULTS: A statistically significant decrease in the severity of GERD symptoms (heartburn, regurgitation, epigastric pain and dysphagia), evaluated using a visual analogue scale, was observed with both treatments. Mean score for dexrabeprazole on Carlsson-Dent questionnaire at 28 days was 2.12, and for esomeprazole, 3.02. Both treatments were effective, with no statistically significant difference being recorded (p < 0.05). On SF-36 health questionnaire, both were observed to improve the quality-of-life score, with no significant difference being identified. Both drugs were well tolerated, and the adverse event incidence profile was low. CONCLUSIONS: In the treatment of non-erosive GERD, the use of dexrabeprazole at 10 mg/day is as effective as esomeprazole 20 mg/day, with the advantage that the dose is lower with an appropriate safety profile.
BACKGROUND: Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are widely used for the treatment of acid-related diseases. Vonoprazan is a member of a new class of acid suppressants; potassium-competitive acid blockers. Vonoprazan may thus be an alternative to PPIs. AIM: To evaluate efficacy, rapidity and duration of acid-inhibitory effects of vonoprazan vs. two control PPIs, esomeprazole and rabeprazole, in 20 healthy Japanese adult male volunteers with CYP2C19 extensive metaboliser genotype. METHODS: In this randomised, open-label, two-period cross-over study, vonoprazan 20 mg and esomeprazole 20 mg (Study V vs. E) or rabeprazole 10 mg (Study V vs. R) were orally administered daily for 7 days. Primary pharmacodynamic endpoint was gastric pH over 24 h measured as percentage of time pH >/=3, >/=4 and >/=5 (pH holding time ratios; HTRs) and mean gastric pH. RESULTS: Acid-inhibitory effect (pH4 HTR) of vonoprazan was significantly greater than that of esomeprazole or rabeprazole on both Days 1 and 7; Day 7 difference in pH4 HTR for vonoprazan vs. esomeprazole was 24.6% [95% confidence interval (CI): 16.2-33.1] and for vonoprazan vs. rabeprazole 28.8% [95% CI: 17.2-40.4]. The Day 1 to Day 7 ratio of 24-h pH4 HTRs was >0.8 for vonoprazan, compared with 0.370 for esomeprazole and 0.393 for rabeprazole. Vonoprazan was generally well tolerated. One vonoprazan subject withdrew due to a rash which resolved after discontinuation. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated a more rapid and sustained acid-inhibitory effect of vonoprazan 20 mg vs. esomeprazole 20 mg or rabeprazole 10 mg. Therefore, vonoprazan may be a potentially new treatment for acid-related diseases.
Since their introduction in the late 1980s, proton pump inhibitors have demonstrated gastric acid suppression superior to that of histamine H2-receptor blockers. Proton pump inhibitors have enabled improved treatment of various acid-peptic disorders, including gastroesophageal reflux disease, peptic ulcer disease, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug-induced gastropathy. Proton pump inhibitors have minimal side effects and few significant drug interactions, and they are generally considered safe for long-term treatment. The proton pump inhibitors omeprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole, and the recently approved esomeprazole appear to have similar efficacy.
We hereby describe a rare case of levosulpiride-induced atypical parkinsonism presenting with sluggish movements, atypical kinetic tremors (tremors with voluntary movement), periorbital tremors, dystonia, difficulty in speech and coordination, postural imbalance, with additional features of difficulty in swallowing and drooling with associated recent onset psychiatric disturbances such as anxiety and low-lying depression. The dechallenge of levosulpiride and medications for associated anxiety and low-lying depression caused a complete remission of the disease within 2 (1/2) months.
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is an increasing health problem in developed countries and is associated with enormous costs in terms of reduced quality of life, loss of productivity, health expenses and mortality. The gastrointestinal disease with the highest annual direct costs in the US (in the year 2000) was GERD (9.3 billion US dollars). GERD is primarily a motility disorder of the oesophagus, however, there are no available promotility drugs on the market. The main symptoms are heartburn and acid regurgitation arising from the reflux of gastric acid, which is the only factor at present suited for pharmacological intervention. The proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) give optimal benefit in the treatment of GERD. The sales of PPIs in the year 2002 amounted to 12 billion US dollars in North America and 4 billion US dollars in Europe and the sales have been increasing by > 10% annually. This paper reviews the use of PPIs in the treatment of GERD with particular focus on one of the newer agents, rabeprazole.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: Tegoprazan, a novel potassium-competitive acid blocker, has been approved for Helicobacter pylori eradication in Korea. We compared the efficacy and safety of tegoprazan- and rabeprazole-based concomitant therapies for H. pylori eradication in real-world clinical practice. METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed data from patients with H. pylori infection treated with tegoprazan- or rabeprazole-based concomitant therapies. The primary endpoint was H. pylori eradication rate. The secondary endpoint was adverse events. RESULTS: Among the 1474 included patients, 620 and 854 received tegoprazan- and rabeprazole-based concomitant therapies, respectively. Intention-to-treat analysis showed no significant difference in the eradication rates between the tegoprazan- and rabeprazole-based concomitant therapy groups (74.7% [95% confidence interval [CI], 71.1-78.0%] vs 72.7% [95% CI, 69.7-75.6%], P = 0.400). Per-protocol analysis also demonstrated similar eradication rates for the groups (tegoprazan vs rabeprazole: 88.0% [95% CI, 85.0-90.6%] vs 85.9% [95% CI, 83.2-88.3%], P = 0.288). Although the overall adverse event rate did not differ between groups (tegoprazan vs rabeprazole, 39.2% vs 40.6%, P = 0.578), abdominal discomfort was less frequent in the tegoprazan group than in the rabeprazole group (1.3 vs 4.8%, P = 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Tegoprazan- and rabeprazole-based concomitant therapies for H. pylori eradication showed comparable efficacy and overall safety. The effect of tegoprazan on dose increases or other regimens, such as bismuth-containing quadruple therapy, should be further evaluated, because the efficacy of tegoprazan-based concomitant therapy may be suboptimal in regions where the clarithromycin resistance rate is high.
Fixed drug eruption is one of the most common forms of cutaneous adverse drug reactions. Analgesics and antibiotics are the most common drugs causing fixed drug eruption. Here, we report a case of multiple widespread fixed drug eruption caused by rabeprazole.
AIM: To investigate whether potent acid inhibition is effective in non-erosive reflux disease (NERD) refractory to standard rabeprazole (RPZ) treatment. METHODS: We treated 10 Japanese patients with NERD resistant to standard dosages of RPZ: 10 mg or 20 mg od, 20 mg bid, or 10 mg qid for 14 d. All patients completed a frequency scale for symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease questionnaire frequency scale for the symptoms of GERD (FSSG); and underwent 24 h pH monitoring on day 14. RESULTS: With increased dosages and frequency of administration of RPZ, median intragastric pH significantly increased, and FSSG scores significantly decreased. With RPZ 10 mg qid, potent acid inhibition was attained throughout 24 h. However, five subjects were refractory to RPZ 10 mg qid, although the median intragastric pH in these subjects (6.6, range: 6.2-7.1) was similar to that in the remaining five responsive subjects (6.5, range: 5.3-7.3). With baseline RPZ 10 mg od, FSSG scores in responsive patients improved by > 30%, whereas there was no significant decrease in the resistant group. CONCLUSION: NERD patients whose FSSG score fails to decrease by > 30% after treatment with RPZ 10 mg od for 14 d are refractory to higher dosage.
BACKGROUND: Doxycycline-induced esophageal ulcer is a documented adverse drug reaction. Unfortunately, many health care professionals are not familiar with this particular drug reaction. Because doxycycline frequently is prescribed in the clinical practice of periodontics, it is important for dentists to be aware of this potential drug reaction. METHODS: The authors describe the case of a patient who was taking doxycycline after undergoing periodontal surgery and experienced a complication. The diagnosis revealed that the patient had developed an esophageal ulcer as a result of taking the doxycycline. RESULTS: The patient's esophageal ulcer resolved with the aid of dietary changes and a prescription of rabeprazole, a proton pump inhibitor. CONCLUSIONS: and CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: The etiology of doxycycline-induced esophageal ulceration is complex, and proper diagnosis is essential for its resolution. Dentists should be aware of the potential for this adverse drug reaction.
AIM: To evaluate the possible association between polymorphisms in CYP2C19 and the pharmacokinetics of omeprazole, rabeprazole and pantoprazole. MATERIALS & METHODS: 151 healthy volunteers were evaluated for polymorphisms in the CYP2C19 gene using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Plasma concentrations were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. RESULTS: Carriers of the *2 allele displayed poor metabolism for all the PPIs studied (around 50% decrease in clearance). Subjects with the *17 allele showed a light increase in clearance compared with *1/*1 (not significant). CONCLUSION: CYP2C19*2 is associated with decreased clearance of all the PPIs, that could be associated with higher drug efficacy. CYP2C19*17 could increase clearance of these drugs, although the effect seems small.
A patient suffering from Zollinger-Ellison was treated with Nexium, but after patent expiry only the costs of generic omeprazol were reimbursed. Generic tablets and capsules, pantoprazol and rabeprazol, were tried without success and finally the pharmacist dispensed Nexium at his own expense. Registered generic drugs have been shown to be bioequivalent with the originator drug within narrow margins. When two batches of the originator are compared, the same requirements are valid. Although the subject has received a lot of negative publicity, meta-analyses on outcome comparison support generic substitution; problems associated with switching can be partially explained by the loss of trust in the treatment, and differences in appearance also cause confusion. Generic prescribing should be encouraged to keep medical treatment affordable; however, in order to prevent the problems described it is desirable to keep to the same product as far as possible. Effective education and patient information are essential if switching is to be successful.
BACKGROUND: Vonoprazan, a potassium-competitive acid blocker, is expected to improve the healing of endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD)-induced gastric ulcers compared with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). AIM: To compare the healing status of ESD-induced gastric ulcers and the incidence of post-ESD bleeding between subjects treated with vonoprazan for 5 weeks and those treated with PPIs for 8 weeks. METHODS: Patients in the vonoprazan group (n = 75) were prospectively enrolled, whereas patients in the PPI group (n = 150) were selected for a 2:1 matched historical control cohort according to baseline characteristics including gastric ulcer size immediately following ESD, age, sex and status of Helicobacter pylori infection. Two controls per case of vonoprazan-treated group were matched with a margin of 20% in terms of ulcer size and a margin of 5 years in terms of their age. RESULTS: Although a higher number of completely healed ulcers was observed in the PPI group (95/150, 63.3%) than that in the vonoprazan group (14/75, 18.7%; P < 0.001), the ulcer size reduction rates, which were 96.0 +/- 6.7% in the vonoprazan group and 94.7 +/- 11.6% in the PPI group, were not significantly different (P = 0.373). The post-ESD bleeding incidence in the vonoprazan group (1/75, 1.3%) was less than that in the PPI group (15/150, 10.0%; P = 0.01). The factors affecting post-ESD bleeding incidence were the type of acid secretion inhibitor (P = 0.016) and use of an anti-thrombotic agent (P = 0.014). CONCLUSION: Vonoprazan significantly reduced post-endoscopic submucosal dissection bleeding compared with PPIs.
A 59-year-old man was orally administered rabeprazole, a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), for gastroesophageal reflux disease, after which he gradually developed iron-deficiency anemia. The anemia did not improve following the administration of ferrous fumarate, and endoscopic screening of the entire gastrointestinal tract, including the small intestine, did not reveal any findings indicating the cause of the anemia. The patient was then switched from rabeprazole to famotidine and the anemia was cured within three months. There is much debate as to whether the long-term use of PPIs causes iron-deficiency. However, this case strongly suggests that PPIs can induce iron-deficiency anemia.
BACKGROUND: To seek a promising therapeutic regimen for proton pump inhibitor (PPI)-refractory patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) after the standard PPI treatment, we compared the efficacies of rikkunshito (a Japanese traditional medication) combined with rabeprazole (RPZ) and a double dose of RPZ in a prospective randomized multicenter trial in Japanese PPI-refractory GERD patients. METHODS: One hundred and four patients with GERD symptoms remaining after 4-week treatment with RPZ (10 mg/day) were randomly assigned to 4 weeks of either combination therapy [rikkunshito (7.5 g/day) with a standard dose of RPZ (10 mg/day)] or a double dose of RPZ (20 mg/day). The primary endpoint was the improvement rate, calculated based on the frequency scale for the symptoms of GERD (FSSG) before and after treatment. Subgroup analysis was also performed with respect to each subject's background factors such as reflux esophagitis (RE)/non-erosive GERD (NERD), age, gender, and body mass index (BMI). RESULTS: Four-week treatment with rikkunshito combined with RPZ significantly decreased the FSSG score from 17.6 +/- 6.5 to 12.0 +/- 6.9, similar to the decrease seen on treatment with a double dose of RPZ. Regarding the therapeutic improvement rate, there were also significant effects in both groups. However, in the subgroup analysis based on RE/NERD, the improvement rate of male NERD patients in the rikkunshito group was significantly greater than that of such patients in the other group (P < 0.05). In the rikkunshito group, the treatment was more effective in NERD patients with a low BMI than in those with a high BMI (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Rikkunshito combined with standard-dose RPZ therapy may be a useful new strategy for PPI-refractory GERD patients.
