An oral, fixed-dose combination of dextromethorphan hydrobromide [an uncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist and sigma-1 receptor agonist] and the antidepressant bupropion hydrochloride (an aminoketone and CYP2D6 inhibitor that increases dextromethorphan bioavailability) [AUVELITY(TM); dextromethorphan/bupropion], is being developed by Axsome Therapeutics, Inc. for the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD), Alzheimer's disease agitation and smoking cessation. Dextromethorphan/bupropion was approved in the USA in August 2022 for the treatment of MDD in adults. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of dextromethorphan/bupropion leading to this first approval for the treatment of adults with MDD.
Nuedexta is a combination of dextromethorphan hydrobromide and quinidine sulfate and was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2010 to treat pseudobulbar affect (PBA). There have since been anecdotal case reports of bulbar function improvements after Nuedexta treatment. Here, we review the off-label use of Nuedexta for improving bulbar function in people with ALS. Nuedexta has plausible mechanisms for protecting brain stem motor neurons via its effects on S1R and glutamate excitotoxicity. Recent clinical trials support that Nuedexta can improve bulbar function in PALS, with or without PBA. Nuedexta causes mild to moderate side effects. Based on this information, we support considering Nuedexta treatment for bulbar dysfunction in ALS patients with or without PBA.
Many drugs are carbon-based, and carbon-hydrogen bonding is particularly relevant for understanding important properties of drug molecules. Deuteration refers to the selective replacement of protium hydrogen isotope atoms in small-molecule drugs with deuterium hydrogen isotope atoms. Deuteration of a drug is most likely to affect pharmacokinetic properties, such as metabolism, rather than its pharmacodynamic effects. For this reason, the metabolism of certain drugs may be favorably influenced when deuterium is substituted for protium, resulting in improved safety, tolerability, or efficacy. Examples of deuterated drugs that have been evaluated in clinical studies include paroxetine, tetrabenazine, and dextromethorphan.
Objective: Altered glutamatergic neurotransmission has been implicated in the pathogenesis of depression. This trial evaluated the efficacy and safety of AXS-05 (dextromethorphan-bupropion), an oral N-methyl-(D)-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist and sigma(1) receptor agonist, in the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD). Methods: This double-blind, phase 3 trial, was conducted between June 2019 and December 2019. Patients with a DSM-5 diagnosis of MDD were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive dextromethorphan-bupropion (45 mg-105 mg tablet) or placebo, orally (once daily for days 1-3, twice daily thereafter) for 6 weeks. The primary endpoint was the change from baseline to week 6 in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) total score. Other efficacy endpoints and variables included MADRS changes from baseline at week 1 and 2, clinical remission (MADRS score </= 10), clinical response (>/= 50% reduction in MADRS score from baseline), clinician- and patient-rated global assessments, Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology-Self-Rated, Sheehan Disability Scale, and quality of life measures. Results: A total of 327 patients were randomized: 163 patients to dextromethorphan-bupropion and 164 patients to placebo. Mean baseline MADRS total scores were 33.6 and 33.2 in the dextromethorphan-bupropion and placebo groups, respectively. The least-squares mean change from baseline to week 6 in MADRS total score was -15.9 points in the dextromethorphan-bupropion group and -12.0 points in the placebo group (least-squares mean difference, -3.87; 95% confidence interval [CI], -1.39 to -6.36; P = .002). Dextromethorphan-bupropion was superior to placebo for MADRS improvement at all time points including week 1 (P = .007) and week 2 (P < .001). Remission was achieved by 39.5% of patients with dextromethorphan-bupropion versus 17.3% with placebo (treatment difference, 22.2; 95% CI, 11.7 to 32.7; P < .001), and clinical response by 54.0% versus 34.0%, respectively (treatment difference, 20.0%; 95% CI, 8.4%, 31.6%; P < .001), at week 6. Results for most secondary endpoints were significantly better with dextromethorphan-bupropion than with placebo at almost all time points (eg, CGI-S least-squares mean difference at week 6, -0.48; 95% CI, -0.48 to -0.79; P = .002). The most common adverse events in the dextromethorphan-bupropion group were dizziness, nausea, headache, somnolence, and dry mouth. Dextromethorphan-bupropion was not associated with psychotomimetic effects, weight gain, or increased sexual dysfunction. Conclusions: In this phase 3 trial in patients with MDD, treatment with dextromethorphan-bupropion (AXS-05) resulted in significant improvements in depressive symptoms compared to placebo starting 1 week after treatment initiation and was generally well tolerated. Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04019704.
Dextromethorphan is an over-the-counter dissociative agent of increasing popularity as a drug of abuse among younger adolescents. The drug produces a range of toxicities depending upon either the dose or the components of the specific formulation that was ingested. Most cases improve with supportive care alone, but severely intoxicated patients may require significant attention. Because dextromethorphan is misused primarily by younger adolescents, the early identification and treatment of dextromethorphan abuse may be important in preventing broader substance abuse in these children. Consequently, it is important for clinicians to recognize, treat, and appropriately refer those who present with intoxication from this drug.
Auvelity, an extended-release fixed combination of dextromethorphan and bupropion, is approved for the treatment of major depressive disorder in adults.Like all antidepressants, dextromethorphan-bupropion carries a boxed warning that it may increase the risk of suicidal thoughts and behaviors in pediatric and young adult patients. Seizures can also occur and are more likely at higher doses.The most common adverse effects of dextromethorphan-bupropion include dizziness, nausea, headache, diarrhea, somnolence, dry mouth, sexual dysfunction, hyperhidrosis, anxiety, constipation, decreased appetite, and insomnia.
Dextromethorphan (DXM) was introduced in 1958 as the first non-opioid cough suppressant and is indicated for multiple psychiatric disorders. It has been the most used over-the-counter cough suppressant since its emergence. However, individuals quickly noticed an intoxicating and psychedelic effect if they ingested large doses. DXM's antagonism at N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDAr) is thought to underly its efficacy in treating acute cough, but supratherapeutic doses mimic the activity of dissociative hallucinogens, such as phencyclidine and ketamine. In this Review we will discuss DXM's synthesis, manufacturing information, drug metabolism, pharmacology, adverse effects, recreational use, abuse potential, and its history and importance in therapy to present DXM as a true classic in chemical neuroscience.
BACKGROUND: Cough causes concern for parents and is a major cause of outpatient visits. Cough can impact quality of life, cause anxiety, and affect sleep in children and their parents. Honey has been used to alleviate cough symptoms. This is an update of reviews previously published in 2014, 2012, and 2010. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effectiveness of honey for acute cough in children in ambulatory settings. SEARCH METHODS: We searched CENTRAL (2018, Issue 2), which includes the Cochrane Acute Respiratory Infections Group's Specialised Register, MEDLINE (2014 to 8 February 2018), Embase (2014 to 8 February 2018), CINAHL (2014 to 8 February 2018), EBSCO (2014 to 8 February 2018), Web of Science (2014 to 8 February 2018), and LILACS (2014 to 8 February 2018). We also searched ClinicalTrials.gov and the World Health Organization International Clinical Trial Registry Platform (WHO ICTRP) on 12 February 2018. The 2014 review included searches of AMED and CAB Abstracts, but these were not searched for this update due to lack of institutional access. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials comparing honey alone, or in combination with antibiotics, versus no treatment, placebo, honey-based cough syrup, or other over-the-counter cough medications for children aged 12 months to 18 years for acute cough in ambulatory settings. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. MAIN RESULTS: We included six randomised controlled trials involving 899 children; we added three studies (331 children) in this update.We assessed two studies as at high risk of performance and detection bias; three studies as at unclear risk of attrition bias; and three studies as at unclear risk of other bias.Studies compared honey with dextromethorphan, diphenhydramine, salbutamol, bromelin (an enzyme from the Bromeliaceae (pineapple) family), no treatment, and placebo. Five studies used 7-point Likert scales to measure symptomatic relief of cough; one used an unclear 5-point scale. In all studies, low score indicated better cough symptom relief.Using a 7-point Likert scale, honey probably reduces cough frequency better than no treatment or placebo (no treatment: mean difference (MD) -1.05, 95% confidence interval (CI) -1.48 to -0.62; I(2) = 0%; 2 studies; 154 children; moderate-certainty evidence; placebo: MD -1.62, 95% CI -3.02 to -0.22; I(2) = 0%; 2 studies; 402 children; moderate-certainty evidence). Honey may have a similar effect as dextromethorphan in reducing cough frequency (MD -0.07, 95% CI -1.07 to 0.94; I(2) = 87%; 2 studies; 149 children; low-certainty evidence). Honey may be better than diphenhydramine in reducing cough frequency (MD -0.57, 95% CI -0.90 to -0.24; 1 study; 80 children; low-certainty evidence).Giving honey for up to three days is probably more effective in relieving cough symptoms compared with placebo or salbutamol. Beyond three days honey probably had no advantage over salbutamol or placebo in reducing cough severity, bothersome cough, and impact of cough on sleep for parents and children (moderate-certainty evidence). With a 5-point cough scale, there was probably little or no difference between the effects of honey and bromelin mixed with honey in reducing cough frequency and severity.Adverse events included nervousness, insomnia, and hyperactivity, experienced by seven children (9.3%) treated with honey and two children (2.7%) treated with dextromethorphan (risk ratio (RR) 2.94, 95% Cl 0.74 to 11.71; I(2) = 0%; 2 studies; 149 children; low-certainty evidence). Three children (7.5%) in the diphenhydramine group experienced somnolence (RR 0.14, 95% Cl 0.01 to 2.68; 1 study; 80 children; low-certainty evidence). When honey was compared with placebo, 34 children (12%) in the honey group and 13 (11%) in the placebo group complained of gastrointestinal symptoms (RR 1.91, 95% CI 1.12 to 3.24; I(2) = 0%; 2 studies; 402 children; moderate-certainty evidence). Four children who received salbutamol had rashes compared to one child in the honey group (RR 0.19, 95% CI 0.02 to 1.63; 1 study; 100 children; moderate-certainty evidence). No adverse events were reported in the no-treatment group. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Honey probably relieves cough symptoms to a greater extent than no treatment, diphenhydramine, and placebo, but may make little or no difference compared to dextromethorphan. Honey probably reduces cough duration better than placebo and salbutamol. There was no strong evidence for or against using honey. Most of the children received treatment for one night, which is a limitation to the results of this review. There was no difference in occurrence of adverse events between the honey and control arms.
INTRODUCTION: Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is a common mental health disorder marked by sadness, hopelessness, and anhedonia. Various therapies exist, but their effectiveness is limited. Dextromethorphan hydrobromide combined with bupropion hydrochloride (Auvelity(R)) is a recently approved alternative for treating this condition in adults. AREAS COVERED: This review summarizes the neurobiology of major depression and delves into the pharmacology, efficacy, safety, and tolerability of dextromethorphan plus bupropion in adult patients. It is based on observational studies, clinical trials, and other secondary studies obtained through systematic literature searches. EXPERT OPINION: The combination of bupropion and dextromethorphan as a new pharmacotherapy for mental health is an interesting addition to the treatment options that can be used for MDD. The combination can be used in a range of scenarios, including as a first line therapy, as a second option when a patient has failed to achieve remission with a serotonin targeting agent, and for treatment resistant depression. Further research for other indications, including addiction disorders, may provide exciting results. Although a new combination, clinicians will be very familiar with both agents, increasing their acceptability. This pharmacotherapy also may bring increased impetus for discovering other combinations that may have beneficial synergistic effects.
INTRODUCTION: The large percentage of adults with major depressive disorder (MDD) insufficiently responding and/or tolerating conventional monoamine-based antidepressants invites the need for mechanistically novel treatments. Convergent evidence implicates glutamatergic signaling as a potential therapeutic target in MDD. AREAS COVERED: The synthesis herein of preclinical and clinical studies indicates that dextromethorphan (DXM) is well tolerated and exhibits clinically significant antidepressant effects; DXM combined with bupropion has demonstrated replicated and relatively rapid onset efficacy in adults with MDD. DXM efficacy has been preliminarily reported in adults with bipolar depression. The combination of DXM and bupropion represents a pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic synergy which may account for the rapidity of action in MDD. EXPERT OPINION: The combination of DXM and bupropion is a safe, well tolerated and efficacious treatment option in adults with MDD. Priority questions are whether DXM/bupropion is uniquely effective across discrete domains of psychopathology (e.g. anhedonia, reward processing, general cognitive systems) and/or whether it is able to significantly improve patient-reported outcomes (e.g. quality of life, psychosocial functioning). The availability of ketamine/esketamine and DXM/bupropion instantiates the relevance of glutamate as a treatment target in MDD. Studies in bipolar depression with DXM/bupropion are warranted as well as in MDD with suicidality.
Dextromethorphan (DXM) has been re-purposed several times over the past 7 decades: first as a cough suppressant, then as a compounded formulation with quinidine for treatment of pseudobulbar affect, and most recently as a compounded formulation with bupro-pion for treatment of major depressive disorder. The current article describes the history and purported mechanisms of action of DXM for each use and the uniquely rapid action and safety profile of the oral dextromethorphan- bupropion antidepressant formulation. [Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Services, 60(11), 9-11.].
OBJECTIVE: Altered glutamatergic neurotransmission is implicated in the pathogenesis of major depressive disorder. AXS-05 (dextromethorphan-bupropion) is an oral NMDA receptor antagonist and sigma-1 receptor agonist, which utilizes inhibition of CYP2D6 to increase its bioavailability. This phase 2 trial assessed the efficacy and safety of dextromethorphan-bupropion in the treatment of major depressive disorder. METHODS: This randomized, double-blind, multicenter, parallel-group trial evaluated dextromethorphan-bupropion versus the active comparator sustained-release bupropion in patients 18-65 years old with a diagnosis of major depressive disorder of moderate or greater severity. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either dextromethorphan-bupropion (45 mg/105 mg tablet) or bupropion (105 mg tablet), once daily for the first 3 days and twice daily thereafter, for a total of 6 weeks. The primary endpoint was overall treatment effect on Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) score (average of the change from baseline for weeks 1-6), assessed in all randomized patients whose diagnosis and severity were confirmed by an independent assessor and who received at least one dose of study medication and had at least one postbaseline assessment. RESULTS: Of 97 patients randomized, 17 did not have a confirmed diagnosis and severity based on the independent assessment, resulting in 80 patients in the efficacy population (dextromethorphan-bupropion, N=43; bupropion, N=37). The mean change from baseline in MADRS score over weeks 1-6 (overall treatment effect) was significantly greater with dextromethorphan-bupropion than with bupropion (-13.7 points vs. -8.8 points; least-squares mean difference=-4.9; 95% CI=-3.1, -6.8). MADRS score change with dextromethorphan-bupropion was significantly greater than with bupropion at week 2 and every time point thereafter (week 6: -17.3 vs. -12.1 points; least-squares mean difference=-5.2, 95% CI=-1.1, -9.3). Remission rates were significantly greater with dextromethorphan-bupropion at week 2 and every time point thereafter (week 6: 46.5% vs. 16.2%; least-squares mean difference=30.3%, 95% CI=11.2, 49.4). Response rates (>/=50% decrease in MADRS score from baseline) at week 6 were 60.5% with dextromethorphan-bupropion and 40.5% with bupropion (least-squares mean difference=19.9%, 95% CI=-1.6, 41). Most secondary outcomes favored dextromethorphan-bupropion. The most common adverse events with dextromethorphan-bupropion were dizziness, nausea, dry mouth, decreased appetite, and anxiety. Dextromethorphan-bupropion was not associated with psychotomimetic effects, weight gain, or sexual dysfunction. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with major depression, dextromethorphan-bupropion (AXS-05) significantly improved depressive symptoms compared with bupropion and was generally well tolerated.
Methotrexate-induced neurotoxicity (MTX-Ntox) is a frequent complication of methotrexate (MTX) therapy for patients with both malignant and inflammatory diseases. MTX-Ntox can occur after intrathecal MTX or after low-, intermediate-, or high-dose systemic administration. Symptoms can present in the acute, subacute, or late setting form, and can range from affective disorders, malaise, and headaches, to somnolence, focal neurologic deficits, and seizures. While the pathogenesis of MTX-Ntox is likely multifactorial, one potential biochemical pathway leading from MTX to neurotoxicity involves the folate dependent remethylation of homocysteine (Hcy). MTX therapy is known to cause elevations of both plasma and CSF Hcy. Hcy is directly toxic to vascular endothelium and it and its metabolites are excitatory agonists of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. Competitive or noncompetitive antagonists might afford protection from or reversal of MTX-Ntox. Using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with coulometric electrochemical detection, the authors measured CSF Hcy in sequential patients with severe subacute MTX-Ntox. CSF Hcy was higher in these patients (n = 9, median = 0.93 microM) than in asymptomatic patients (n = 11, median 0.2 microM, p < .01). Five patients with severe subacute MTX-Ntox (most with dysarthria and/or hemiplegia) were treated with 1-2 mg/kg oral dextromethorphan (DM), a noncompetitive antagonist of the N-methyl-1-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. All five had resolution of symptoms. These data provide additional clinical support for elevated CSF Hcy in the induction of MTX-Ntox through activation of the NMDA-receptor. These data provide support for a placebo-controlled clinical trial to examine the ability of DM to prevent or alleviate MTX-Ntox.
BACKGROUND: A significant proportion of adults with major depressive disorder (MDD) do not respond to treatments which are currently used in clinical practice such as first-generation monoamine-based antidepressants. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this systematic review was to assess the efficacy, safety, and mechanisms of action of AXS-05, a combination of the NMDA-receptor antagonist dextromethorphan with bupropion, in adults with MDD. METHODS: We searched PubMed, Embase, Google Scholar, and ClinicalTrials.gov for current studies reporting on efficacy and/or safety of AXS-05 in patients with MDD. The search terms included: "AXS-05" OR "dextromethorphan and bupropion" AND "depression". Studies from database inception to January 2023 were evaluated. Risk of bias was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool. RESULTS: The search yielded 54 studies of which 5 were included. All studies had low risk of bias. Depression severity, measured with the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) significantly decreased as early as 1-week post-treatment from baseline when compared to a placebo-controlled group (LS mean difference 2.2; 95% CI 0.6-3.9; p = 0.007) and at 2 weeks compared to an active control group (LS mean difference 4.7; 95% CI 0.6-8.8; p = 0.024). Treatment efficacy could be maintained for up to 12 months with mean MADRS score reduction of 23 points from baseline. Clinical remission and response rates also improved at week 1 and were maintained for 12 months. The treatment was well-tolerated, with some transient adverse events reported. CONCLUSION: Current evidence suggests that the combination of dextromethorphan and bupropion is a well-tolerated, rapid-acting treatment option for adults with MDD. Initial success with AXS-05 supports the mechanistic role of glutamatergeric and sigma 1 signaling in the pathophysiology of MDD.
Over-the-counter medications are widely accessible and used. Cough suppressant syrups contain dextromethorphan (DM), which has the potential to be abused, with resultant psychiatric symptoms. This case report describes a young woman presenting with psychotic mania secondary to DM abuse. We also describe the treatment of this toxidrome and include the results of a literature search on this topic. The recognition of cough syrup as an agent of abuse and its toxidrome is important. This will facilitate early diagnostic clarification and promote efficient treatment strategies.
Dextromethorphan (3-methoxy-17-methylmorphinan) has complex pharmacologic effects on the central nervous system. Although some of these effects are neuropsychotoxic, this review focuses on the neuroprotective effects of dextromethorphan and its analogs. Some of these analogs, particularly dimemorfan (3-methyl-17-methylmorphinan) and 3-hydroxymorphinan, have promising neuroprotective properties with negligible neuropsychotoxic effects. Their neuroprotective effects, the mechanisms underlying these effects, and their therapeutic potential for the treatment of diverse neurodegenerative disorders are discussed.
A woman in her 30s who was being treated for a mental illness with several psychotropic drugs was admitted to the hospital after being found in a state of unconsciousness and respiratory arrest at home. She was pronounced dead 12 hours after she was discovered. Her autopsy revealed symmetrical hemorrhagic necrosis in the putamen on both sides of her cerebrum. Although many drugs were detected in her blood, all of those other than dextromethorphan (DXM) were within or below the therapeutic range. Her blood DXM was 1.73 mug/ml at admission and 1.61 mug/ml at autopsy, which were within the toxic range or coma-to-death range. The cause of death was diagnosed as DXM poisoning. DXM can cause hallucinations and euphoria if taken in excess, but since it is available as an over-the-counter drug at general pharmacies, an increasing number of young people are overdosing on it, mistakenly believing it to be a safe drug with few side effects. We believe that further social measures against DXM are necessary in Japan, such as disseminating correct knowledge in society and regulating over-the-counter sales.
Pregnancy increases the pharmacological management challenge of numerous neurological diseases as a result of complex physiological changes. Understanding pregnancy-induced changes in pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters can lead to better outcomes for both the mother and baby. Although the application of pharmacogenomics in maternal-fetal medicine is in its infancy, further research and developments will provide important new developments for managing the efficacy of drug treatments during pregnancy and improving maternal-fetal safety. Although a wide variety of neurological medications are used during pregnancy, this article will focus on the drugs with currently known pharmacogenomic implications.
Adolescents have access to a variety of legal or illicit substances that they use to alter their mood or "get high." The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of common substances adolescents use to get high, including the illicit substances synthetic marijuana or "Spice," salvia, MDMA, synthetic cathinones, and 2C-E. Dextromethorphan and energy drinks are easily accessible substances that teenagers abuse. The toxic effects of common ingestions and treatment of overdose is discussed to inform pediatric providers who provide care for adolescents.
Morphinans are a class of compounds containing the basic structure of morphine. It is well-known that morphinans possess diverse pharmacological effects on the central nervous system. This review will demonstrate novel neuroprotective effects of several morphinans such as, dextromethorphan, its analogs and naloxone on the models of multiple neurodegenerative disease by modulating glial activation associated with the production of a host of proinflammatory and neurotoxic factors, although dextromethorphan possesses neuropsychotoxic potentials. The neuroprotective effects and the therapeutic potential for the treatment of excitotoxic and inflammatory neurodegenerative diseases, and underlying mechanism of morphinans are discussed.
