Osteoporosis is a metabolic disease of the skeletal system which currently affects over 200 million patients worldwide. The WHO criteria define osteoporosis as low bone mineral density, with a T-score </= -2.5 found in the spine, the neck of the femur, or during a full hip examination. Osteoporosis considerably reduces a patient's quality of life. QoL should be carefully evaluated before fractures occur to enable the development of an appropriate treatment plan. The progression of osteoporosis may be significantly inhibited by following a proper diet, leading a healthy lifestyle, taking dietary supplements, and receiving appropriate treatment. Education and the prevention of the disease play a major role. Potentially modifiable risk factors for osteoporosis are vitamin D deficiency, smoking, alcohol consumption, low calcium intake, low or excessive phosphorus intake, protein deficiency or a high-protein diet, excessive consumption of coffee, a sedentary lifestyle or lack of mobility, and insufficient exposure to the sun. Pharmaceutical treatment for osteoporosis involves bisphosphonates, calcium and vitamin D3, denosumab, teriparatide, raloxifene, and strontium ranelate. Data indicates that 30%-50% of patients do not take their medication correctly. Other methods of treatment include exercise, kinesitherapy, treatment at a health resort, physical therapy, and diet.
BACKGROUND: Drug repurposing provides a cost-effective approach to address the need for breast cancer prevention and therapeutics. We aimed to identify actionable druggable targets using Mendelian randomization (MR) and then validate the candidate drugs using population-based analyses. METHODS: We identified genetic instruments for 1406 actionable targets of approved non-oncological drugs based on gene expression, DNA methylation, and protein expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL, mQTL, and pQTL, respectively). Genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary statistics were obtained from the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (122,977 cases, 105,974 controls). We further conducted a nested case-control study using data retrieved from Swedish registers to validate the candidate drugs that were identified from MR analyses. FINDINGS: We identified six significant MR associations with gene expression levels (TUBB, MDM2, CSK, ULK3, MC1R and KCNN4) and two significant associations with gene methylation levels across 21 CpG islands (RPS23 and MAPT). Results from the nested case-control study showed that the use of raloxifene (targeting MAPT) was associated with 35% reduced breast cancer risk (odds ratio, OR, 0.65; 95% confidence interval, CI, 0.51-0.83). However, usage of estradiol, tolterodine, and nitrofurantoin (also targeting MAPT) was associated with increased breast cancer risk, with adjusted ORs and 95% CI of 1.10 (1.07-1.13), 1.16 (1.09-1.24), and 1.09 (1.05-1.13), respectively. The effect of raloxifene and nitrofurantoin lost significance in further validation analyses using active-comparator and new-user design. INTERPRETATION: This large-scale MR analysis, combined with population-based validation, identified eight druggable target genes for breast cancer and suggested that raloxifene is an effective chemoprevention against breast cancer. FUNDING: Swedish Research Council, Cancerfonden, Crafoordska Stiftelsen, Allmanna Sjukhusets i Malmo Stiftelsen for bekampande av cancer, 111 Project and MAS cancer.
INTRODUCTION: Reduced estrogen levels at menopause mean a loss of the neuroprotection that is conferred, from puberty until menopause, on women with schizophrenia. The postmenopausal stage of schizophrenia requires therapeutic attention because women with this diagnosis almost invariably experience increased symptoms and increased side effects at this time. So far, few targeted therapies have been successfully developed. AREAS COVERED: This non-systematic, narrative review is based on the relevant published literature indexed in PubMed. A digital search was combined with a manual check of references from studies in the field of gender differences, menopause and schizophrenia. Aside from the inclusion of a few early classic papers, the review focuses on 21st century basic, psychopharmacologic, and clinical literature on the treatment of women with schizophrenia after menopause. EXPERT OPINION: Beyond a relatively low dose threshold, all antipsychotic medications have adverse effects, which become more prominent for women at the time of menopause. Estrogen modulators may not help all symptoms of schizophrenia but are, nevertheless, relatively safe and, when used as adjuncts, help to keep antipsychotic doses low, thus reducing the side effect burden. The field is currently moving towards precision medicine and individual genetic profiles will help to determine the efficacy of available treatments in the future.
During the past 2 decades, many interventions were proven effective in the management of postmenopausal osteoporosis. The objective of an anti-osteoporosis treatment is to reduce fracture rates, ideally at all skeletal sites (i.e. spine, hip, and other non-spine). The armamentarium against osteoporosis includes anti-resorptive agents (i.e. bisphosphonates, selective estrogen receptor modulators and denosumab), bone-forming agents (i.e. peptides from the parathyroid hormone family) and one agent with a dual mechanism of action (i.e. strontium ranelate). All these medications combine antifracture efficacy with a reasonable benefit/risk profile. However, the choice of a particular chemical entity, in one individual patient is based on the knowledge and expertise of the physician. Prioritization of drugs should be based on the individual profile of the patient, the severity of osteoporosis and the specific contraindications, warnings and precautions of use of the various available medications.
Primary prevention trials have shown that tamoxifen lowers breast cancer incidence by 30-40%. Because of the endometrial risk of tamoxifen and the pro-thrombotic effects of tamoxifen and raloxifene, different strategies are being pursued to improve the risk:benefit ratio of breast cancer chemoprevention. Thus, raloxifene is being compared with tamoxifen in a phase III trial, while the minimal active dose of tamoxifen is being assessed in phase I-II trials. Also, the combination of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and tamoxifen may reduce the risks while retaining the benefits of either agent. Anastrozole holds promise as a preventive agent based on preliminary results on contralateral breast cancer. The identification of women at increased risk for estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer due to hormonal and reproductive factors may maximize the therapeutic index of hormonal agents. Finally, new targets that interfere with ER-negative breast carcinogenesis are being sought as one-third of breast cancers will not be preventable by hormonal interventions.
Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) were discovered in the mid-1900s in connection with estrogen-related pathological conditions. They were developed to antagonize the adverse effects of estrogen and have been shown to be effective against postmenopausal disorders manifested by estrogen deficiency. Raloxifene (RAL), one of the most widely used SERMs, expresses estrogen-like effects on bones, while it is found to be an antagonist on breast and uterus. RAL has multiple beneficial effects throughout the body, including antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, because of which it gains particular attention. Additionally, previous studies have revealed that RAL is an efficient modulator of heme-oxygenase (HO) expression. HO, through its general activity, participates in comprehensive cell defense processes, thus the induction of HO by RAL administration indicates a major role in its therapeutic efficacy. In this review, we compile the current knowledge about the overall metabolic, neurocognitive, and cardiovascular effects of RAL involving the cytoprotective HO-system.
Efforts to interfere with the initiation and promotion of breast and other cancers by endocrine manipulation are not new. It is of obvious benefit to cancer patients to administer substances that combine minimal general toxicity with maximal oestrogen inhibition. Raloxifene is a relatively recent addition to a group of compounds loosely designated as antioestrogens, which implies their ability to antagonize oestrogen effects via competitive binding to the various receptors. This is a reductionist simplification, since their effect varies and ranges from interaction with lipid transduction cascades, covalent binding to proteins and DNA, regulation of growth factors, erbB2, mdr1 and probably p53 expression, complexing with E-cadherin/catenin to active induction of apoptosis and many other effects on the genome. Also, the action of most antioestrogens is not solely antagonistic and different compounds do exert some agonistic effects in various tissues. Apart from some "pure" antioestrogens, the benzothiophene derivative Raloxifene has been found to combine a high degree of selective oestrogen suppression with several other desirable characteristics, such as reduction of bone demineralisation and antiatherogenic effects without endometrial stimulation. It is well tolerated, has been successfully tested as a chemopreventive agent for breast cancer in certain groups of the population and does not prevent ovulation in women with normal menstrual cycles. Certainly, Raloxifene is only another forerunner of upcoming "designer" oestrogen modulators, but it represents a welcome addition to the therapeutic choices available for the control of some menopausal problems as well as for the prevention and treatment of breast cancer, as outlined in the following brief review.
Raloxifene, a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), was designed to have the expected benefits of long-term estrogen replacement therapy without the risks. This paper reviews the clinical trial evidence for raloxifene benefits and risks, and how they compare with those of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and relate to the choices of postmenopausal women.
Osteonecrosis is a disease with diverse pathophysiology, clinical presentation, and management. It may be associated with some medications used to treat systemic issues with bone metabolism. A few cases of jaw bone osteonecrosis have been associated with raloxifene. In this paper, the authors present a clinical report of a 64-year-old woman who presented with a necrosis foci in the right alveolar ridge of the mandible, associated with continued raloxifene use.
Raloxifene is a selective estrogen receptor modulator, a compound that has estrogen agonist activity at some sites and antagonist activity at others. In investigations in animals and in rigorously conducted trials in humans, raloxifene treatment is associated with a 30%-40% reduction in risk of one or more spine fractures using the 60 mg dose. This reduction in risk is found in women with or without baseline fractures, in women with bone mineral density (BMD) in the lower, middle, or upper third of the low range (all had BMD reduced by more than 2.5 SD) and in women aged less than 65 years, between 65-70 years, and greater than 70 years. A reduction in ankle fractures, but not hip or wrist fractures, was found. Raloxifene treatment also is associated with a 60%-70% reduction in risk for breast cancer and is associated with reduced total and LDL cholesterol, lower fibrinogen, and no rise in triglyceride. Reduced aortic wall cholesterol content is reported in animal studies. These are surrogate endpoints of cardioprotection. There is no evidence that raloxifene reduces the incidence of myocardial or cerebrovascular events. Raloxifene does not induce breast tenderness, endometrial hyperplasia, menstrual bleeding, or endometrial cancer, but may be associated with an increased risk of thromboembolic disease (1/1000 cases per year), leg cramps in 2%-4% of cases and hot flushes in 4%-6% of cases, usually in first 6 months.
Tamoxifen has not only proved to be a valuable treatment for estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer, but is also a pioneering medicine for chemoprevention in high-risk pre- and postmenopausal women. Insights into the pharmacology and toxicology of tamoxifen have led to the recognition of selective ER modulators (SERMs) with estrogen-like actions in maintaining bone density and in lowering circulating cholesterol, but antiestrogenic actions in the breast. Raloxifene, a related SERM, is now available to treat osteoporosis and is also being tested as a preventive for breast cancer and coronary heart disease. Emerging knowledge about the action of SERMs will provide clues for the design of mechanism-based medicines.
Extended exposure to the selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) such as raloxifene to prevent osteoporosis and tamoxifen or the aromatase inhibitors to treat or prevent breast cancer are established therapeutic strategies. However, there are now clearly defined consequences of exhaustive antihormonal therapy in breast cancer. Ultimately, drug resistance to SERMs and aromatase inhibitors enhances cancer cell survival but a paradoxical supersensitivity to estrogen action develops that causes cancer cell apoptosis. The future exploitation of these novel data will allow selective killing of cancer with fewer side effects for patients.
Osteoporosis is a chronic condition that reflects reduced bone strength and an associated increased risk for fracture. As a chronic condition, osteoporosis generally requires sustained medical intervention(s) to limit the risks for additional bone loss, compromise of skeletal integrity, and fracture occurrence. Further complicating this issue is the fact that the abrupt cessation of some therapies can be associated with an increased risk for harm. It is in this context that the COVID-19 pandemic has brought unprecedented disruption to the provision of health care globally, including near universal requirements for social distancing. In this Perspective, we provide evidence, where available, regarding the general care of patients with osteoporosis in the COVID-19 era and provide clinical recommendations based primarily on expert opinion when data are absent. Particular emphasis is placed on the transition from parenteral osteoporosis therapies. It is hoped that these recommendations can be used to safely guide care for patients with osteoporosis until a return to routine clinical care standards is available. (c) 2020 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
In France, women carrying BRCA1/2 mutation, at an identified high risk of breast cancer are recommended to undergo breast MRI screening. That screening does not however prevent the risk of developing a breast cancer. The only alternative to breast cancer screening available in France is surgical prevention by prophylactic mastectomy. An interesting option for women who wish to reduce their breast cancer risk, but are unready for prophylactic mastectomy is a preventive hormonal treatment by aromatase inhibitors, or selective estrogens receptor modulators (SERMs). Reliable clinical trials show the efficiency of tamoxifen, raloxifen, exemestane, and anastrozole especially, in reducing breast cancer incidence by 33%, 34%, 65% and 53% respectively. This article tries to sum up the main published trials of breast cancer prevention with hormonal treatment, and presents the latest American and English clinical guidelines concerning hormonal prevention for women at high risk of breast cancer, and starts thinking about the possibilities of hormonoprevention, especially among women carrying a BRCA1/2 mutation in France.
A large body of evidence suggests hormone replacement therapy (HRT) reduces cardiovascular risk in postmenopausal women. It is, however, associated with serious side effects, such as increased risk of breast and endometrial cancer. This has likely caused uneasiness among both women and health care providers. A new class of compounds, called selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), have emerged. Through their interactions at the estrogen receptor level they have become a class of compounds distinct from estrogen. While they share similar effects with estrogen on such factors as lipid profile and bone density, they affect other tissues differently. Specifically, they do not induce endometrial hyperplasia and are therefore not associated with endometrial cancer. In vitro studies have also shown that they inhibit lipoprotein oxidation and vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. The cumulative effects of these compounds may prove quite beneficial in reducing cardiovascular risk in postmenopausal women while avoiding serious side effects. This may, in turn, ease much of the anxiety surrounding the issue of HRT. Clinical trials are presently being conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of raloxifene, a SERM, on cardiovascular risk reduction in postmenopausal women.
Since raloxifene, a drug used in osteoporosis therapy, inhibits osteoclast, but not osteoblast functions, it has been suggested to improve recovery during implant surgery. The present paper describes an effective method to link raloxifene, through a covalent bond, to a nano-Hydroxyapatite-based biomaterial by interfacing with (3-aminopropyl)-Triethoxysilane as assessed by Infra Red-Fourier Transformed (IR-FT) spectroscopy and Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). To evaluate the safety of this modified new material, the vitality of osteoblast-like cells cultured with the new biomaterial was then investigated. Raloxifene-conjugated HAbiomaterial has been shown to be a safe material easy to obtain which could be an interesting starting point for the use of a new functional biomaterial suitable in bone regeneration procedures.
Despite significant progress in breast cancer treatment, mammary tumours still represent the second most frequent cause of cancer-related death in women in the US, with > 211,000 new cases in 2005; however, an expanding range of options for early diagnosis and more reliable risk assessment offers new alternatives for disease control by cancer prevention. Completed large studies with the classical selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) tamoxifen have demonstrated that preventing breast cancer pharmacologically is now possible. Novel SERMs, aromatase inhibitors and gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists targeting hormonal pathways are being tested in clinical trials, revealing the potential for dramatic reductions in tumour incidence with minimal side effects; however, SERMs and aromatase inhibitors are effective only against estrogen receptor-positive tumours, thus chemopreventive drugs targeting other critical signalling pathways (such as retinoids, selective COX inhibitors and tyrosine kinase inhibitors) may provide a means to prevent estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer. In the future, hormonal and estrogen receptor-independent agents may be combined to prevent the development of all mammary tumours. This article reviews the current and novel strategies for breast cancer prevention.
Raloxifene is an anti-resorptive agent used in postmenopausal osteoporosis. This is the first report of the occurrence of clinically significant hypocalcemia following raloxifene treatment in a patient with occult vitamin D deficiency. Since vitamin D deficiency is widely prevalent in the community, screening for vitamin D deficiency and its correction is advisable before the initiation of anti-resorptive therapy.
The following bone density measurements have limited utility in determining bone strength because they do not include bone quality: microarchitecture, mineralization, ability to repair damage, collagen structure, crystal size, or marrow composition. Patients with kidney disease have poor bone quality. Newman et al. now describe beneficial effects with raloxifene in an animal model of progressive kidney disease. These biomechanical measurements will be important in the development of medications to decrease fractures in patients.
We review 42 studies examining the effects of estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) on memory and cognition in nondemented postmenopausal women. Although there are an appreciable number of nonsignificant findings, the number of significant findings favoring ERT users considerably outnumbers the rare findings of better performance in controls. Experimental studies demonstrate a consistent beneficial effect on verbal memory, but these are short-term studies of the more acute effects of ERT. The observational studies suggest that there may be a long-lasting effect of continued ERT on cognitive functioning, but these studies need to be interpreted with caution because of the lack of random assignment and a possible "healthy user bias." We also summarize findings from studies on the effects of ERT on Alzheimer's disease (AD). ERT is associated with a decreased risk for dementia, but there is little evidence for a positive effect on cognition in women with AD. Definitive answers to questions about the long-term effects of ERT on cognitive aging and risk of developing AD should be provided by 3 ongoing clinical trials.
