Ranitidine is an H2-receptor antagonist that was released recently for use in the treatment of acute duodenal ulcer disease, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, and systemic mastocytosis with gastric hypersecretion. The pharmacokinetics, efficacy, adverse effects, and clinical utility of ranitidine are presented. The drug is similar in therapeutic effect to its predecessor, cimetidine, yet has certain advantages over cimetidine in clinical applications.
Ranitidine is a selective, competitive histamine H2-receptor antagonist recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use in the short-term treatment of active duodenal ulcers and gastric hypersecretory conditions. Ranitidine is four to ten times more potent than cimetidine on a molar basis in inhibiting stimulated gastric acid secretion. Clinical studies have demonstrated that ranitidine is as effective as cimetidine and is similarly well tolerated. Based on available literature (approximately 700 publications), this article reviews the pharmacology, safety profile, and clinical efficacy of ranitidine in duodenal ulcers and gastric hypersecretory conditions.
Three cases are described in which the cessation of the H2-antagonist ranitidine was followed by a rapid improvement in severe depressive symptoms. The literature concerning H2-receptor antagonists and depression is reviewed, and an alternative drug (omeprazole) for severe peptic ulceration is discussed.
H2 receptors' antagonists (H2RA) are widely used drugs and they are generally well-tolerated. Ranitidine hypersensitivity reactions (HR) are rarely reported. The article emphasizes the importance of recognizing ranitidine as a cause of anaphylaxis and the advantages and limits of allergological evaluation to establish a positive diagnose. We reviewed a series of published cases of ranitidine-induced hypersensitivity reactions, starting from a clinical case presentation. Moreover, we analyzed the ranitidine related adverse events in the Eudravigilance European database of adverse reactions. Most of the allergic reactions induced by ranitidine are type I HR with immediate onset after exposure, with variable clinical presentation. But in a few cases, there were also described delayed reactions, some after occupational exposure. The article underlines the importance of allergy evaluation to avoid future contact with the drug to reduce the risk of more severe reactions. The suspected reactions should be reported, allowing pharmacovigilance systems to analyse them and to establish further recommendations for clinicians.
Cimetidine and ranitidine are specific and potent H2-receptor antagonists widely used in the effective therapy of peptic ulcer disease. The drugs also possess other pharmacological properties unrelated to H2-receptor antagonism. More recently large experimental doses of cimetidine or ranitidine were found to have anticholinesterase, ganglion blocking and neuromuscular blocking activities. Actions of the drugs at such cholinergic sites may account for some of their clinically documented adverse effects. The toxicological implications of these findings including the potential for drug interactions to occur, especially during some anesthetic procedures, are discussed.
Adverse reactions involving the central nervous system have been rarely reported with ranitidine, a H2-receptor antagonist. A 72 year old female is described that developed visual hallucinations shortly after initiation of ranitidine therapy. Rechallenge with the drug resulted in both visual and auditory hallucinations following a single dose.
In vitro studies and animal experiments as well as clinical observations in humans concerning cardiovascular effects of H2-receptor antagonists have been published shortly after the development. Thus, clinical studies were performed to investigate these effects. The following review summarizes the results from in vitro studies up to the clinical investigations performed.
Reported observed intention-to-treat eradication rates for ranitidine bismuth citrate plus clarithromycin for 14 days range from 70-86% in studies from the USA and 82-96% in multinational studies carried out primarily in Europe. Two double-blind head-to-head comparisons with omeprazole plus clarithromycin or amoxycillin have shown that ranitidine bismuth citrate plus clarithromycin gives considerably higher eradication rates than the omeprazole based regimens. Ongoing studies will define the efficacy of shorter duration dual therapies and provide further data on two antibiotics with ranitidine bismuth citrate. The possibility that ranitidine bismuth citrate may help in the eradication of resistant organisms and even in the prevention of primary resistance requires further work to expand the preliminary in vitro observations. In the meantime, it can be concluded that ranitidine bismuth citrate, when used in conjunction with clarithromycin for 14 days, is an effective therapy for the eradication of H. pylori.
Triple therapy, combining a proton pump inhibitor with clarithromycin (C) and either amoxycillin (A) or a nitro-imidazole (I) is the standard in Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy. Recently, triple therapies based on ranitidine bismuth citrate (RBC) have emerged as an alternative. This review examines the current literature for studies directly comparing proton pump inhibitor- with RBC-based triple therapies. Seventeen studies were identified, of which three have been published as a full paper. Eradication rates in an intention-to-treat analysis ranged from 51 to 98%. No large difference in cure rates between the different regimens was demonstrated, although the RBC-I-C combination was somewhat superior. No definite conclusions could be made about the impact of metronidazole or clarithromycin resistance since only three studies performed a formal resistance analysis. No serious side-effects were reported, and dropout rates were equal for the two regimens. Both RBC- and proton pump inhibitor-based triple therapies are highly effective. If one prefers a imidazole/clarithromycin combination the evidence presented here suggests that RBC should be used instead of a proton pump inhibitor. Larger studies comparing both forms of triple therapy, using proper resistance analysis, are needed before final conclusions can be reached regarding efficacy in the setting of bacterial resistance.
A 45-year-old woman with no history of heart disease twice experienced chest pain after consuming a dose of ranitidine. The chest pain, which lasted about one hour, was substernal, left of midline, dull, and pounding. H2-receptors are present in cardiovascular tissues. Although several studies have not noted an effect of ranitidine on cardiac indices there have been case reports indicating a cardiac effect. There are no reports of chest pain associated with H2-blocker ingestion; however, both bradycardia and hypotension (reported effects) might cause chest pain. A discussion of the possible mechanisms is presented.
Ranitidine has been used for the treatment of millions of patients during the past 10 years. A small proportion of patients have developed a reaction to the drug shortly after the start of treatment, usually as a result of 'individual idiosyncrasy'. Reactions during continuous, long term treatment with ranitidine are uncommon, so that maintenance treatment of the chronic peptic diseases with ranitidine for more than 10 years has not been associated with significant iatrogenic disease.
The pharmacokinetics of oral ranitidine were studied in 24 Mexican male healthy volunteers. Subjects received a tablet containing 150 mg of ranitidine (Azantac, Glaxo de Mexico, Mexico City) after an overnight fast and blood samples were drawn at several times for a period of 24 h. Ranitidine concentration in plasma was measured by high performance liquid chromatography and pharmacokinetic parameters were determined by non-compartmental analysis. Ranitidine plasma concentration increased with time, reaching a maximum of (mean +/- SEM) 484 +/- 34 ng/ml in 2.7 +/- 0.2 h. Plasma levels then decayed with a terminal half-life of 4.8 +/- 0.3 h. The area under the plasma concentration against time curve was 2440 +/- 126 ngh/ml. Oral ranitidine pharmacokinetic parameters in Mexicans appeared to be similar to those previously reported for Caucasians.
The H2-receptor antagonist, ranitidine, is among the most widely used pharmaceuticals to treat gastroesophageal reflux disease and peptic ulcers. While previous studies have demonstrated that amines can form N-nitrosamines when exposed to nitrite at stomach-relevant pH, N-nitrosamine formation from ranitidine, an amine-based pharmaceutical, has not been demonstrated under these conditions. In this work, we confirmed the production of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), a potent carcinogen, by nitrosation of ranitidine under stomach-relevant pH conditions in vitro We also evaluated the urinary NDMA excretion attributable to ingestion of clinically used ranitidine doses. Urine samples collected from five female and five male, healthy adult volunteers over 24-h periods before and after consumption of 150mg ranitidine were analyzed for residual ranitidine, ranitidine metabolites, NDMA, total N-nitrosamines and dimethylamine. Following ranitidine intake, the urinary NDMA excreted over 24h increased 400-folds from 110 to 47 600ng, while total N-nitrosamines increased 5-folds. NDMA excretion rates after ranitidine intake equaled or exceeded those observed previously in patients with schistosomiasis, a disease wherein N-nitrosamines are implicated as the etiological agents for bladder cancer. Due to metabolism within the body, urinary NDMA measurements represent a lower-bound estimate of systemic NDMA exposure. Our results suggest a need to evaluate the risks attributable to NDMA associated with chronic consumption of ranitidine, and to identify alternative treatments that minimize exposure to N-nitrosamines.
We assessed the pharmacokinetics and interaction of ABT-773 in 12 volunteers receiving ABT-773 alone or concomitantly with ranitidine or sucralfate. Data for 150 mg of ABT-773 were as follows: the maximum concentration of the drug in plasma (C(max)) was 318 ng/ml, its half-life was 5.66 h, and its area under the plasma concentration-time curve from 0 h to infinity (AUC(0- infinity )) was 1,662 ng. h/ml. Coadministration of ranitidine, reduced the C(max) (-25.7%) and AUC(0- infinity ) (-15.8%) significantly. Sucralfate had no impact on the bioavailability of ABT-773.
The authors report three cases of depression associated with ranitidine. These illustrate that ranitidine, like cimetidine, may produce an organic affective disorder. The authors discuss clinical implications for the treatment of depression in patients with peptic ulcer disease.
BACKGROUND: Ranitidine, a histamine 2 blocker, is the standard of care to prevent hypersensitivity reactions (HSRs) caused by paclitaxel infusion. However, the added value of ranitidine in this premedication regimen is controversial. Therefore, we compared the incidence of HSRs during paclitaxel treatment between a standard regimen including ranitidine and a regimen without ranitidine. METHODS: This prospective, pre-post interventional, non-inferiority study compared the standard premedication regimen (N = 183) with dexamethasone, clemastine and ranitidine with a premedication regimen without ranitidine (N = 183). The primary outcome was the incidence of HSR grade >/=3. Non-inferiority was determined by checking whether the upper bound of the two-sided 90% confidence interval (CI) for the difference in HSR rates excluded the +6% non-inferiority margin. RESULTS: In both the pre-intervention (with ranitidine) and post-intervention (without ranitidine) group 183 patients were included. The incidence of HSR grade >/=3 was 4.4% (N = 8) in the pre-intervention group and 1.6% (N = 3) in the post-intervention group: difference -2.7% (90% CI: -6.2 to 0.1). CONCLUSIONS: As the upper boundary of the 90% CI does not exceed the predefined non-inferiority margin of +6%, it can be concluded that a premedication regimen without ranitidine is non-inferior to a premedication regimen with ranitidine. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: www.trialregister.nl ; NL8173.
Newly diagnosed patients of pulmonary tuberculosis (n = 112) were put on a rifampicin-containing drug regimen. Fifty six patients were also given a placebo tablet twice daily while the other fifty-six were given ranitidine 150 mg twice daily. Gastric pH, gastric emptying time, serum rifampicin levels, urinary total and unchanged rifampicin, serum bilirubin and ALT levels were measured serially. Clinical record of adverse symptoms was maintained. Ranitidine increased the basal as well as post-drug gastric pH without altering the gastric emptying time. Concomitant administration of ranitidine and rifampicin did not alter the absorption, metabolism or excretion of the latter but reduced the frequency of gastrointestinal symptoms.
Ranitidine is an H2-receptor antagonist which is usually well tolerated. Hypersensitivity reactions to ranitidine, as well as other H2 antihistamines, have been rarely described. We report the case of a 47-year-old woman who developed an anaphylactic reaction to ranitidine used as intravenous premedication before anesthesia induction. The patient's history revealed that previous use of oral ranitidine for a peptic ulcer disease did not cause any adverse reaction. Intradermal test with ranitidine at a dilution of 1:100 gave an intense positive reaction. The protective role of H2-receptor antagonists as premedication is still unclear and should be carefully reconsidered on the basis of the available controversial evidence and the possible risk of hypersensitivity reactions.
The findings that the immunosuppressant cyclosporine A (CsA) improves psoriasis raise the possibility that cellular immune processes may play a major role in the pathogenesis of this disease. It is broadly agreed that histamine released by mast cells is one of the molecules involved in the pathogenesis. This is supported by the findings that CsA and methotrexate (Mxt) reduce formation and release of histamine. However, the well known side-effects of CsA and Mxt may argue potential use of other agents acting on formation and action of histamine. Such agents may be the histamine-2 receptor antagonists, previously reported to have a clinical effect on psoriasis. But randomised short-term studies have disclosed that these drugs have no beneficial or even an aggravating effect on the disease. This article reports on recent findings of improvement in psoriasis using high doses of the histamine-2 receptor antagonist ranitidine in long-term studies. Also presented are a hypothetical action of histamine in development of psoriasis and a rationale for ranitidine as a potential agent in the therapy of psoriasis.
INTRODUCTION: Gastric acidity plays an important role in the protection of infants against various pathogens from the environment. The histamine-2 receptor blockers (H2-blockers) are off-labeled drugs that are frequently prescribed in preterm neonates to prevent stress ulcers. The impact of the H2-blockers on the development of the necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) in preterm infants is still controversial, particularly in the developing world. MATERIALS AND METHODS: One hundred twenty-two preterm infants were enrolled in the study. The multivariate logistic regression model was used to identify potential postnatal risk factors associated with NEC. RESULTS: Preterm infants (n = 51) with total NEC, medical NEC, and surgical NEC had the highest rate of receiving ranitidine compared with controls (n = 71) (39.2%, 19.6%, and 47.6%, p < 0.05). Logistic regression analysis revealed that ranitidine use and nosocomial infections were significantly associated with NEC development (odds ratios 1.55 and 3.3). CONCLUSIONS: We confirm that ranitidine administration was associated with an increased risk of NEC in preterm infants. H2-blockers use should be only administered in very strictly selected cases after careful consideration of the risk-benefit ratio.
