The nondystrophic myotonias are rare muscle hyperexcitability disorders caused by gain-of-function mutations in the SCN4A gene or loss-of-function mutations in the CLCN1 gene. Clinically, they are characterized by myotonia, defined as delayed muscle relaxation after voluntary contraction, which leads to symptoms of muscle stiffness, pain, fatigue, and weakness. Diagnosis is based on history and examination findings, the presence of electrical myotonia on electromyography, and genetic confirmation. In the absence of genetic confirmation, the diagnosis is supported by detailed electrophysiological testing, exclusion of other related disorders, and analysis of a variant of uncertain significance if present. Symptomatic treatment with a sodium channel blocker, such as mexiletine, is usually the first step in management, as well as educating patients about potential anesthetic complications.
Erythromelalgia is a condition characterized by episodic pain, erythema and temperature of the extremities, which is relieved by cooling and aggravated by warming. It is useful to review this topic in light of recent discoveries of the genetic mutations that now define primary erythromelalgia, as opposed to secondary erythromelalgia, which is often associated with underlying medical disorders.
Ischaemic heart disease is a major cause of death and disability worldwide, while angina represents its most common symptom. It is estimated that approximately 9 million patients in the USA suffer from angina and its treatment is challenging, thus the strategy to improve the management of chronic stable angina is a priority. Angina might be the result of different pathologies, ranging from the "classical" obstruction of a large coronary artery to alteration of the microcirculation or coronary artery spasm. Current clinical guidelines recommend antianginal therapy to control symptoms, before considering coronary artery revascularization. In the current guidelines, drugs are classified as being first-choice (beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and short-acting nitrates) or second-choice (ivabradine, nicorandil, ranolazine, trimetazidine) treatment, with the recommendation to reserve second-line modifications for patients who have contraindications to first-choice agents, do not tolerate them, or remain symptomatic. However, such a categorical approach is currently questioned. In addition, current guidelines provide few suggestions to guide the choice of drugs more suitable according to the underlying pathology or the patient comorbidities. Several other questions have recently emerged, such as: is there evidence-based data between first- and second-line treatments in terms of prognosis or symptom relief? Actually, it seems that newer antianginal drugs, which are classified as second choice, have more evidence-based clinical data that are more contemporary to support their use than what is available for the first-choice drugs. It follows that actual guidelines are based more on tradition than on evidence and there is a need for new algorithms that are more individualized to patients, their comorbidities, and pathophysiological mechanism of chronic stable angina.
Ranolazine is a new anti-anginal medication that was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2006 for patients with symptomatic chronic angina despite optimized therapy. This paper presents a case report of a fifteen year old male patient admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit after ranolazine overdose ingestion. He had recurrent new onset seizures that are most likely due to ranolazine overdose. Seizures have never been reported with ranolazine use or abuse.
The stable coronary artery disease (SCAD) population is a heterogeneous group of patients both for clinical presentations and for different underlying mechanisms. The recent European Society of Cardiology guidelines extensively review SCAD from its definition to patients' diagnostic and therapeutic management. In this review, we deal with five topics that, in our opinion, represent the most intriguing, novel and/or clinically relevant aspects of this complex coronary condition. Firstly, we deal with a peculiar SCAD population: patients with angina and 'normal' coronary arteries. Secondly, we reinforce the clinical importance of a diagnostic approach based on the pretest probability of disease. Thirdly, we review and critically discuss the novel pharmacological therapies for SCAD patients. Finally, we analyse the results of the most recent clinical trials comparing revascularization versus optimal medical therapy in SCAD patients and review the currently recommended use of intracoronary functional evaluation of stenosis.
Ranolazine derives from piperazine and has been approved as a drug for the therapy of chronic stable angina. It acts by selectively inhibiting the late sodium inward current. Moreover, ranolazine has other metabolic features which makes it effective in other diseases as well as coronary artery ones. In this paper I make an updated review of all possible therapeutic roles of ranolazine: through cardiology and beyond.
Chronic stable angina is a significant problem in older adults. The goal of therapy is to provide symptomatic relief, improve patient quality of life, and prevent subsequent angina or myocardial infarction that could lead to sudden death. The efficacy and safety of drugs such as beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers for managing chronic stable angina in older adults has not been rigorously investigated. Drug selection should be based on physiologic alterations, patient comorbidities, adverse reaction profile, and cost.
Ranolazine is an antianginal drug that inhibits a number of ion currents that are important for the genesis of transmembrane cardiac action potential. It was initially developed as an antianginal agent but was found to additionally exert antiarrhythmic actions, due to its multichannel-blocking properties. In recent years, several studies about the antiarrhythmic properties of ranolazine were conducted, demonstrating the beneficial effects of this drug in both atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, such as atrial fibrillation, ventricular premature beats, ventricular tachycardia, torsades de pointes, and ventricular fibrillation. Our aim is to briefly review the main points of these studies, most more experimental than clinical.
Disturbed myocardial calcium (Ca(+)) handling is one of the pathophysiologic hallmarks of cardiovascular diseases such as congestive heart failure, cardiac hypertrophy, and certain types of tachyarrhythmias. Pharmacologic treatment of these diseases thus focuses on restoring myocardial Ca(2+) homeostasis by interacting with Ca(2+)-dependent signaling pathways. In this article, we review the currently used pharmacologic agents that are able to restore or maintain myocardial Ca(2+) homeostasis and their mechanism of action as well as emerging new substances.
The therapy of atrial fibrillation often involves the use of a rhythm control strategy, in which 1 or more antiarrhythmic drugs (AAD), ablative procedures, and/or hybrid approaches involving both of these options are utilized in an attempt to restore and maintain sinus rhythm. For chronic therapy, an AAD is taken daily. However, for patients with symptomatic but infrequent, acute, but nondestabilizing episodes, the use of an AAD only at the time of an episode that can quickly restore sinus rhythm, generally as an out-patient, without the burden of a daily drug regimen, may be better. This is called "pill-in-the-pocket" therapy. This manuscript reviews the "pill-in-the-pocket" concept, traces its development from its origins using quinidine, to its expansion using class IC AADs, to the more recent investigation of ranolazine for this purpose. Who should get it, what it involves, its efficacy rates and concerns are all discussed.
Ranolazine utilization in the management of refractory angina has been established by multiple randomized clinical studies. However, there is growing evidence showing an evolving role in the field of cardiac arrhythmias. Multiple experimental and clinical studies have evaluated the role of ranolazine in prevention and management of atrial fibrillation, with ongoing studies on its role in ventricular arrhythmias. In this review, we will discuss the pharmacological, experimental, and clinical evidence behind ranolazine use in the management of various cardiac arrhythmias.
More than 6 million people in the United States are affected by chronic angina. On January 27, 2006, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a new medication for the treatment of chronic stable angina called ranolazine (Ranexa). This is the first angina drug approved by the FDA in over a decade. The unique thing about this drug is that it falls into a new class of therapies in that it works at the level of cellular metabolism in decreasing demand on the cardiac tissue. There are many factors to consider when prescribing this medication including past studies, dosing, and education. There is also evidence that this drug may also benefit diabetic patients with glycemic control.
The present review summarizes the available information on the effects of the three major classes of antianginal agents (nitrates, calcium and beta-blockers) on myocardial energy metabolism. It also discusses the role of some new molecules (L-carnitine, trimetazidine and ranolazine) that have been proposed as an alternative pharmacological approach for the metabolic management of cardiac ischaemic syndromes.
The failing heart has an increased metabolic demand and at the same time suffers from impaired energy efficiency, which is a detrimental combination. Therefore, therapies targeting the energy-deprived failing heart and rewiring cardiac metabolism are of great potential, but are lacking in daily clinical practice. Metabolic impairment in heart failure patients has been well characterized for patients with reduced ejection fraction, and is coming of age in patients with 'preserved' ejection fraction. Targeting cardiomyocyte metabolism in heart failure could complement current heart failure treatments that do improve cardiovascular haemodynamics, but not the energetic status of the heart. In this review, we discuss the hallmarks of normal cardiac metabolism, typical metabolic disturbances in heart failure, and past and present therapeutic targets that impact on cardiac metabolism.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a heterogenous condition associated with a myriad of symptoms. Just as in other disease states, the aim of medical therapy is the alleviation of suffering, improvement of longevity, and the prevention of complications. This article focuses on the associated comorbidities seen in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, potential lifestyle interventions, and conventional medical treatments for symptomatic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Over the last years, evidence is accumulating that enhanced late sodium current (I(NaL)) in cardiac pathologies has fundamental consequences for cellular electrophysiology. This review discusses the underlying mechanisms of I(NaL)-induced arrhythmias and the significance of I(NaL)-inhibition as a possible therapeutic approach. RECENT FINDINGS: Inhibition of enhanced I(NaL), e.g., by ranolazine, was shown to reverse these effects in different myocardial diseases including heart failure. The antianginal drug ranolazine has already been examined in larger clinical trials with promising antiarrhythmic actions. Enhanced I(NaL) was found to be present in several cardiac pathologies like ischemia, long QT syndromes, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and heart failure. In settings of enhanced I(NaL), a sodium-dependent calcium overload leads to severe impairment of excitation-contraction coupling and therefore has a high proarrhythmogenic potential. Experimental data showed that inhibition of I(NaL) has a high antiarrhythmic potential which could be confirmed in further clinical trials.
Chronic refractory angina is a term used to describe patients who, despite optimal medical therapy, have both angina and objective evidence of ischaemia. It is estimated that 5-15% of the 12 million patients with chronic angina in the US meet the criteria for having refractory angina. This review focuses on the following evolving pharmacological therapies for chronic refractory angina: L-arginine, ivabradine, ranolazine, nicorandil and trimetazidine. Evolving devices and invasive procedures including enhanced external counterpulsation, spinal cord stimulation, and transmyocardial revascularisation are also briefly discussed.
The number of patients with coronary artery disease and its risk factors is increasing in Western nations. New treatments for these patients may soon include a class of agents known as the metabolic modulators. This group of agents consists of the partial fatty acid oxidation inhibitors trimetazidine and ranolazine, as well as dichloroacetate, which promotes carbohydrate utilization. Metabolic modulators also include the nutriceuticals L-carnitine and D-ribose. The available evidence regarding the benefits of each of these five agents is reviewed.
Using BRAVO algorithm (AMPS-LLC, NY, v4.4.0), 5223 ECGs from a publicly available annotated dataset from a randomized clinical trial on four different compounds and placebo were analyzed. ECGs were automatically processed and JTp interval was computed on: 12 standard ECG leads, Vector Magnitude (VM), and root mean square (RMS) leads. On VM and RMS, JTp intervals were nearly identical (228 +/- 29 vs. 227 +/- 30 ms respectively, with correlation of 0.99, p < 0.0001). On lead II, JTp interval was about 10 ms longer, but highly correlated with that measured on VM (0.94, p < 0.0001). Similarly, on lead V5, JTp was about 8 ms longer than on VM, with a correlation of 0.95, p < 0.0001. When compared to the public available annotations, JTp by BRAVO generated longer (about 8 ms) measurement and evidenced outliers conducible to both the T-wave peak (in few ECGs presenting notched shapes) and, to a lesser degree, to the J point, due to variability of the two algorithms. Differences on the drug-induced effect from the four compounds were negligible.
Treatment of heart failure involves management of risk factors and control of symptoms. Traditional management of heart failure involves the use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, beta-blockers, diuretics, aldosterone antagonists, and digitalis. Metabolic modulators are a newer class of drugs that benefit these patients by modulating cardiac metabolism without altering hemodynamics. They have the potential to relieve symptoms in patients with refractory heart failure who are already on optimal medical therapy. These drugs increase glucose metabolism at the expense of free fatty acid metabolism, thereby enhancing efficient use of oxygen. This review discusses the role of 4 metabolic modulators drugs that could potentially be used for heart failure therapy: trimetazidine, ranolazine, perhexiline, and etomoxir.
