OBJECTIVE: Antipsychotics play a crucial role in the management of behavioral problems in patients undergoing hemodialysis. Oral and injectable antipsychotics are routinely prescribed to control emergent delirium or exacerbation of previous psychiatric symptoms. However scanty literature is available on the pharmacokinetics of antipsychotics in such patients. Avoiding amisulpride and warning against increasing the dosage in renal failure is the only recommendation by drug manufacturers and clinical guidelines. Hemodialysis affects the volume of distribution (V(d)) and blood levels of antipsychotics in a complex manner. It is hence difficult to equate data on renal failure with hemodialysis to reliably predict the treatment response. METHOD: We systematically analyzed online data from 1981 to 2019 on the use of antipsychotics in hemodialysis. The outcome was defined as the safety and efficacy of AP, measured in terms of adverse effects and relapse of existing or new onset of behavioral symptoms in Hemodialysis. RESULTS: The data from 182 studies revealed that only 14 case reports and 1 case series met the review criteria. Oral Risperidone, Clozapine, Aripiprazole, Ziprasidone, Haloperidol, and Long-acting Risperidone, Flupenthixol, and Paliperidone were the antipsychotics studied in terms of pharmacokinetics during hemodialysis. AP levels in the blood were found to be unaffected in two studies during HD while the other two studies recommended scheduling of AP regimen w.r.t HD session. Six reports mentioned exacerbation of pre-existing psychiatric ailments in patients undergoing HD, the most common being schizophrenia. CONCLUSION: Findings of the review reveals modest evidence favoring multiple dosing regimens of oral aripiprazole, ziprasidone, olanzapine, and risperidone. Long-acting risperidone and paliperidone are well tolerated and half of the conventional dose may be effective in the case of paliperidone. Though CYP-3A4 remains relatively and transiently unaltered during hemodialysis, none of the antipsychotics are compromised in HD. While selecting an AP during HD, one has to consider the protein binding, clearance by dialysis, duration of an HD session, route of administration of AP, and impaired bowel absorption in HD.
Evidence-based treatment approaches for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) comprise psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, or a combination of the two. First-line pharmacotherapy agents include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, and, in certain European guidelines, pregabalin, which gained European Commission approval. Although short- and long-term efficacy have been established for these agents in controlled trials, response rates of 60-70 % are insufficient, remission rates are relatively modest, and relapse rates considerable. Moreover, questions increasingly arise regarding tolerability and side-effect profiles. As an alternative, antipsychotics have long been of interest for the treatment of anxiety disorders, but investigation had been tempered by their potential for irreversible side effects. With the improved side-effect profiles of atypical antipsychotics, these agents are increasingly being investigated across Axis I disorders. Atypical antipsychotics such as quetiapine, aripiprazole, olanzapine, and risperidone have been shown to be helpful in addressing a range of anxiety and depressive symptoms in individuals with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders, and have since been used in the treatment of a range of mood and anxiety disorders. In this article, we review the efficacy and tolerability of atypical antipsychotics as adjunctive therapy and/or monotherapy for individuals with GAD, a currently off-label indication. The most evidence has accumulated for quetiapine. Findings suggest that approximately 50 % of participants tolerate the side effects, most commonly sedation and fatigue. Among this subset, those who continue treatment demonstrate significant reductions in anxiety when used as adjunctive therapy or monotherapy. The appropriateness of the use of antipsychotics in the treatment of GAD is discussed.
BACKGROUND: Atypical antipsychotic agents, which block postsynaptic dopamine and serotonin receptors, have advantages over traditional antipsychotic medications in the treatment of adults with schizophrenia and may be beneficial in children with autistic disorder who have serious behavioral disturbances. However, data on the safety and efficacy of atypical antipsychotic agents in children are limited. METHODS: We conducted a multisite, randomized, double-blind trial of risperidone as compared with placebo for the treatment of autistic disorder accompanied by severe tantrums, aggression, or self-injurious behavior in children 5 to 17 years old. The primary outcome measures were the score on the Irritability subscale of the Aberrant Behavior Checklist and the rating on the Clinical Global Impressions - Improvement (CGI-I) scale at eight weeks. RESULTS: A total of 101 children (82 boys and 19 girls; mean [+/-SD] age, 8.8+/-2.7 years) were randomly assigned to receive risperidone (49 children) or placebo (52). Treatment with risperidone for eight weeks (dose range, 0.5 to 3.5 mg per day) resulted in a 56.9 percent reduction in the Irritability score, as compared with a 14.1 percent decrease in the placebo group (P<0.001). The rate of a positive response, defined as at least a 25 percent decrease in the Irritability score and a rating of much improved or very much improved on the CGI-I scale, was 69 percent in the risperidone group (34 of 49 children had a positive response) and 12 percent in the placebo group (6 of 52, P<0.001). Risperidone therapy was associated with an average weight gain of 2.7+/-2.9 kg, as compared with 0.8+/-2.2 kg with placebo (P<0.001). Increased appetite, fatigue, drowsiness, dizziness, and drooling were more common in the risperidone group than in the placebo group (P<0.05 for each comparison). In two thirds of the children with a positive response to risperidone at eight weeks (23 of 34), the benefit was maintained at six months. CONCLUSIONS: Risperidone was effective and well tolerated for the treatment of tantrums, aggression, or self-injurious behavior in children with autistic disorder. The short period of this trial limits inferences about adverse effects such as tardive dyskinesia.
A child with psychotic symptoms and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder who developed extrapyramidal symptoms while on a combination of risperidone, methylphenidate, sertraline, tropisetron and ketorolac is described herein. The extrapyramidal symptoms resolved with the administration of benztropine, an anticholinergic drug. Successful treatment of his psychosis was achieved by decreasing the dose of risperidone, followed by slow upward titration.
INTRODUCTION: Irritability (including tantrums, aggression and moodiness) is often associated with autistic disorder. Children with autism are frequently prescribed atypical antipsychotic medications for these behaviors. Although multiple agents have been found to be effective, the safety and tolerability of each antipsychotic may be the determining factor in its selection. AREAS COVERED: The pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, safety and efficacy data on aripiprazole for the treatment of irritability associated with autism are discussed. Knowledge of the mechanism of action, advantages and disadvantages relative to other atypical antipsychotics, and an appreciation of the efficacy of aripiprazole when used to treat irritability in autism is also explored in this paper. EXPERT OPINION: Aripiprazole may have a more favorable side-effect profile than another commonly prescribed medication, risperidone, because of its unique mechanism of action. It seems to be effective in treating irritability associated with autism, but more research is needed.
In 2 pivotal trials comparing risperidone with placebo, the risk of adverse events was similar in both treatment groups when risperidone was given at the optimal clinical dose (1 mg/day). During 12-month, open-label extensions to these studies, the incidence of de novo tardive dyskinesia was very low. No clinically significant adverse events, changes in vital signs, or laboratory signs were observed. In summary, the safety and tolerability of risperidone in treating elderly dementia sufferers has been favorable in several clinical trials.
The current literature describing the pharmacokinetics of the atypical antipsychotics clozapine and risperidone is reviewed, and discussion on the clinical significance of these data is presented. These drugs are well absorbed when taken orally but are poorly bioavailable because of presystemic elimination. They are highly cleared by hepatic metabolism involving specific P450 isozymes. Risperidone elimination produces a potent active metabolite. Neither of the drugs has received extensive study related to drug-drug interactions, but several are potentially important because a purported therapeutic plasma concentration range is proposed for clozapine and a possible curvilinear dose response relationship has been reported for risperidone. The current clinical pharmacokinetic database for these atypical antipsychotics suggests that much can be learned with additional study that would be of value in individualizing their dosage regimens.
This retrospective study delineated the efficacy of antiepileptic drugs in preventing the need for methylphenidate in patients with benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Seventeen patients were identified. A reduction of electroencephalogram pathologic activity by more than 50% was achieved in some patients with the antiepileptic drugs levetiracetam, sulthiame, lamotrigine, clobazam, and valproic acid. Complete normalization was achieved in two patients with sulthiame. Improvement in attention along with the reduction of pathologic electroencephalogram activity was observed in four patients, two with sulthiame, and one each with lamotrigine and levetiracetam (which was ceased because of suicidal tendencies). However, this improvement in attention was either temporary or not significant enough to discontinue methylphenidate. Methylphenidate was eventually prescribed to all patients.
PURPOSE: The efficacy, safety, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, drug-drug interactions, and administration of paliperidone for schizophrenia are reviewed. SUMMARY: Paliperidone is a benzisoxazole derivative and the principal active metabolite of risperidone. Representative of most oxidative metabolites, paliperidone is less lipophilic than risperidone. Like other atypical antipsychotics, paliperidone has a greater affinity for serotonin type 2A- receptor blockade relative to dopamine type 2-receptor blockade. Paliperidone's advanced-generation osmotic release delivery system allows for the avoidance of dosage adjustment when initiating therapy and may decrease the frequency of antido-paminergic effects that would occur with an immediate-release formulation. The pharmacologic actions of paliperidone are similar to other high potency atypical antipsychotics. The receptor-binding profile of paliperidone most closely resembles that of risperidone and ziprasidone. Paliperidone differs from risperidone and most other antipsychotics by its relatively low extent of enzymatic metabolism. A limited number of investigations have demonstrated the ability of paliperidone to produce significant improvements in psychopathology, functioning, and relapse in patients with schizophrenia when compared with placebo. Paliperidone appears to have a similar adverse-effect profile compared to risperidone, except for an increased rate of hyperprolactinemia. The recommended dose of paliperidone for the treatment of adults with schizophrenia is 6 mg every morning. CONCLUSION: Paliperidone does not offer any clear advantage over other atypical antipsychotics with a similar receptor-binding profile, such as risperidone and ziprasidone. Nevertheless, a few investigations have demonstrated the ability of paliperidone to produce significant improvements in psychopathology, functioning, and relapse when compared with placebo. Based on limited studies, the frequency of adverse effects, except for hyperprolactinemia, appears to favor paliperidone over risperidone.
Since their introduction into clinical practice in the early 1960s, long-acting depot antipsychotics have been widely used as maintenance therapy for patients with schizophrenia. The improved pharmacokinetics of injectable long-acting antipsychotic therapies have provided more reliable drug delivery and reduced differences in peak and trough plasma levels of the drug. Studies that have compared short-acting oral antipsychotics with long-acting injectable antipsychotics, although imperfect, support injectable antipsychotics as having real benefit over oral antipsychotics on patient outcome owing largely to improved adherence. If patients forget or refuse to take their prescribed oral medications, weeks or months may go by before they experience an exacerbation; the effects of nonadherence become apparent too late to preempt the problem. On the other hand, if a patient fails to show up for an injection, the problem of nonadherence can be immediately addressed. When injectable medication is combined with an active psychosocial treatment program that will respond assertively to nonadherence, relapse rates may be reduced. By preventing or delaying relapse, consistent treatment can improve the patient's quality of life and lead to an overall reduction in the cost of care.
OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, and safety profile of long-acting (LA) risperidone for the treatment of schizophrenia. DATA SOURCES: Information was selected from PubMed (1965-July 2004). Applicable scientific posters were also used. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All published information on risperidone LA was considered. Material providing a comprehensive description was considered. DATA SYNTHESIS: Risperidone LA is the first long-acting, injectable atypical antipsychotic. It is dosed at 25-50 mg every 2 weeks. Adverse effects are similar to those seen with oral risperidone. A short-term study showed that risperidone LA is better than placebo in reducing the signs and symptoms of schizophrenia, and a long-term trial showed that stable schizophrenic patients can be switched from either oral or other injectable antipsychotic medications to risperidone LA. CONCLUSIONS: Risperidone LA is efficacious and safe in the treatment of schizophrenia.
After the identification of the influence of serotonergic receptors in ameliorating the negative symptoms associated with schizophrenia, atypical antipsychotics were developed by incorporating dopamine and serotonin antagonism. Risperidone, sold under the trade name Risperdal, was the second atypical antipsychotic developed following clozapine but quickly became a first-line treatment for acute and chronic schizophrenia because of its preferential side effect profile. Despite initial Food and Drug Administration approval 25 years ago, risperidone continues to be a fundamental treatment for schizophrenia, bipolar I disorder, and autism-related irritability. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines for its balance of efficacy, safety, tolerability, and cost-effectiveness. In this review, we highlight the history and importance of risperidone as an atypical antipsychotic, in addition to its chemical synthesis, manufacturing, drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, structure-activity relationship, indications, and adverse effects.
This report presents a potential case of risperidone-induced tardive dyskinesia. A 28 year old white schizophrenic male has been under risperidone monotherapy for about one year when he developed dyskinetic movements. There was only a short term exposure to classic antipsychotics prior to risperidone administration.
The most frequent problems associated with the older generation of antipsychotic agents are extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) and tardive dyskinesia. Neuroleptic-induced EPS are thought to be caused by blockade of nigrostriatal dopamine tracts resulting in a relative increase in cholinergic activity; tardive dyskinesia is less well understood but is thought to be a supersensitivity response to chronic dopamine blockade. The leading hypothesis for the mechanism of action of the newer generation of atypical antipsychotics is the presence of a high serotonin-to-dopamine receptor blockade ratio in the brain. When serotonergic activity is blocked-as is the case with atypical antipsychotics-dopamine release increases and balances out the dopamine blockade effect at postsynaptic receptor sites, which results in few or no EPS. Prospective data indicate that the risk of tardive dyskinesia in patients taking atypical antipsychotics is less than that for those taking typical antipsychotics. This article reviews the mechanisms of neuroleptic-induced EPS and tardive dyskinesia and discusses the relationship between these movement disorders and atypical antipsychotic agents.
Schizophrenia is a chronic disorder, usually necessitating lifelong treatment. Although atypical antipsychotic agents have improved outcomes in schizophrenia, their clinical potential remains limited by patients' nonadherence to medication. Long-acting antipsychotics were developed in the 1960s to enhance treatment adherence and simplify the medication process. However, although conventional long-acting agents assure medication delivery, they are associated with similar side effects to their oral equivalents. The need for an agent combining the advantages of a long-acting formulation with those of an atypical antipsychotic was highlighted in 1997 by the American Psychiatric Association's Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients with Schizophrenia. The first long-acting injectable atypical antipsychotic, long-acting risperidone (Risperdal Consta, Johnson & Johnson), has since been developed. This article discusses the efficacy, tolerability and cost-effectiveness of long-acting risperidone in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder patients, and suggests possibilities for how its role in clinical practice may change over the next 5 years.
The authors emphasize the need for careful differential diagnosis when symptoms of psychosis arise in patients over the age of 65 years. Prevalence of psychotic disorders in the elderly ranges from 0.2%-4.7% in community-based samples to 10% in a nursing home population and as high as 63% in a study of Alzheimer's patients. Risk factors associated with the development of psychotic symptoms and common causes of delirium are reviewed. Because age-related changes affect the pharmacokinetics of neuroleptics, the authors' treatment recommendations, which include the use of traditional and novel antipsychotics, take into account the higher risk of side effects in the elderly.
Schizophrenic patients who have been prescribed atypical antipsychotics have a potential risk of gaining weight. The implications of weight gain for clinical care may differ depending on whether a patient is underweight or overweight at baseline. The exact mechanism for weight gain is not known, but several factors have been identified that can help predict which patients are at risk for gaining weight. These factors include better clinical outcome, increased appetite, and low baseline body mass index. In patients treated with olanzapine for up to 3 years, weight gain trended toward a plateau at approximately 36 weeks. Weight gain interventions, including behavioral modifications, show promise in controlling or reducing weight in patients treated with antipsychotics.
Objective: To systematically review the impact of CYP2D6 genetic variation on antipsychotic pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and adverse drug reactions among children and youth. Method: The published literature was systematically searched in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses recommendations and critically evaluated using standardized tools and consensus criteria. Results: A total of 20 eligible studies comprising 1078 children and youth were evaluated. The included studies were of fair to moderate quality and included mostly males, individuals of European ancestry, and those treated with risperidone. CYP2D6 poor metabolizers (PMs) were consistently shown to have increased concentrations of risperidone relative to normal metabolizers (NMs). PMs were also consistently shown to have a greater propensity to experience antipsychotic (primarily risperidone) associated adverse drug reactions relative to NMs. However, robust evidence for an association between CYP2D6 and efficacy was less apparent. Conclusion and Clinical Significance: The current knowledge base suggests that CYP2D6 genetic variation has an appreciable impact on antipsychotic pharmacokinetics and the propensity for adverse drug reactions, particularly among children receiving risperidone treatment. However, several limitations with the current literature (e.g., sample sizes, study design, sample heterogeneity) should be addressed in future studies. Assuming that future studies support the link between CYP2D6 genetic variation and antipsychotic outcomes, we would anticipate an increase in the implementation of CYP2D6-guided antipsychotic drug selection and dose optimization in child and adolescent psychiatric services.
Anxiety may worsen outcome in psychotic disorders. We assessed anxiety in 44 acutely psychotic subjects and found a positive association with heart rate and blood pressure. Risperidone treatment reduced anxiety but increased heart rate. We concluded that anxiety may adversely affect cardiovascular status in schizophrenia, but the anxiolytic effect of risperidone is not straightforward.
Introduction: Paliperidone is approved in the United States and Europe for the short- and long-term treatment of schizophrenia in adults and adolescents as well as for the acute treatment of schizoaffective disorder either as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy to mood stabilizers and/or antidepressants. It is recommended in patients with hepatic impairment and evokes less drug-drug interactions.Areas covered: This review article focuses on the preclinical discovery of paliperidone, the major active metabolite of risperidone. It provides details regarding paliperidone's pharmacological and neurochemical mechanisms, and their contribution to therapeutic benefits and adverse effects, based on the available literature with respect to the preclinical and clinical findings and product labels.Expert opinion: Paliperidone exhibits a high affinity and antagonistic activity toward D(2) and 5-HT(2A) receptors, followed by 5-HT(7), H(1), alpha(1,) and alpha(2) receptors. In preclinical studies, paliperidone produces antidepressant, anxiolytic, mood-stabilizing, analgesic actions, and affects the endocannabinoid system. It is also known to evoke procognitive, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory activities. Its positive activity on neurogenesis, neuronal, and synaptic plasticity deserves to be emphasized. The clinical superiority of paliperidone is based primarily on the available formulations of the drug rather than in the subtle differences in its pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic properties compared to risperidone.
