By inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) cause mucosal damage, ulceration and ulcer complication throughout the gastrointestinal tract. The recognition that there are two cyclo-oxygenase enzymes, one predominating at sites of inflammation (COX-2) and one constitutively expressed in the gastrointestinal tract (COX-1), has led to the important therapeutic development of COX-2 inhibitors. COX-2 is phylogenetically more primitive that COX-1 and, while very similar, has critical differences, particularly the existence of a small pocket half way down the active enzyme site. A number of drugs achieve selectivity by binding to this pocket, including presumptively rofecoxib and celecoxib. Others, such as meloxicam, may inhibit COX-2 by different mechanisms. Truly selective COX-2 inhibitors have been shown to have no effect on gastric mucosal prostaglandin synthesis, to cause no acute injury, and no chronic ulceration compared to placebo. Rofecoxib has, in a prospective systematic evaluation involving 8076 patients, been shown to reduce clinically significant ulcers, ulcer complications and gastrointestinal bleeding significantly compared to naproxen. Outcomes data for celecoxib have also been published although differences from the combined comparator agents (diclofenac and ibuprofen) did not reach statistical significance. Use of aspirin in the class study has shown that the benefits of COX-2 inhibitors may be reduced by aspirin use. The VIGOR study has raised the possibility that some NSAIDs, particularly naproxen, may protect against vascular disease compared to COX-2 inhibitors (or placebo).
Etoricoxib (Arcoxia) is a novel non steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that selectively inhibits the inducible form of cyclo-oxygenase (COX), COX-2. Etoricoxib has a higher COX-1/COX-2 selectivity ratio than the other COX-2-selective NSAIDs as rofecoxib, valdecoxib or celecoxib. Tablets of 60, 90 and 120 mg are available. The recommended dosage of etoricoxib is 60 mg/day for osteoarthritis, 90 mg/day for rheumatoid arthritis and 120 mg/day for acute gouty arthritis. Etoricoxib's efficacy has been widely studied in comparative studies, showing the same efficacy as non-COX-2 selective NSAID, with fewer gastro-intestinal adverse effects.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) play a major role in the management of inflammation and pain caused by arthritis. A new class of NSAIDs that selectively inhibit the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) enzyme has been developed. The first COX-2 inhibitors, celecoxib and rofecoxib, are said to provide therapeutic benefit with less toxicity than traditional NSAIDs. A third COX-2-selective inhibitor, meloxicam, has recently been introduced. COX-2 inhibitors and traditional NSAIDs do not appear to differ significantly in their effectiveness in alleviating pain or inflammation. They have similar gastrointestinal side effects, including abdominal pain, dyspepsia and diarrhea. However, short-term studies show fewer gastrointestinal ulcers in patients treated with COX-2 inhibitors compared with traditional NSAIDs.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are used chronically to reduce pain and inflammation in patients with arthritic conditions, and also acutely as analgesics by many patients. Both therapeutic and adverse effects of NSAIDs are due to inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme. NSAIDs are classified as non-selective and COX-2-selective inhibitors (COXIBS) based on their extent of selectivity for COX inhibition. However, regardless of their COX selectivity, reports are still appearing on the GI side effect of NSAIDs particularly on the lower gastrointestinal (GI) tract and the harmful role of their controlled release formulations. In addition, previously unpublished data stored in the sponsor's files, question the GI sparing properties of rofecoxib, a COXIB that has been withdrawn due to cardiovascular (CV) side effects. Presently, the major side effects of NSAIDs are the GI complications, renal disturbances and CV events. There is a tendency to believe that all NSAIDs are associated with renal and CV side effects, a belief that is not supported by solid evidence. Indeed, lower but still therapeutics doses of some NSAIDs may be cardioprotective. In this review, we briefly discuss the GI toxicity of the NSAIDs and assess their renal and CV adverse effects in more detail.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit the enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX), which forms prostaglandins involved in pain and inflammation. COX inhibitors have analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects, but also increase risks for gastrointestinal ulcers, bleeding, and renal and cardiovascular adverse events. Identification of two isoforms of COX, COX-1 and COX-2, led to the development of selective COX-2 inhibitors, which were launched as having fewer gastrointestinal side effects since gastroprotective prostaglandins produced via COX-1 are spared. The balance between COX-1 mediated prothrombotic thromboxane and COX-2 mediated antithrombotic prostacyclin is important for thrombotic risk. An increased risk of suffering myocardial infarction and death with COX-2 inhibitor treatment is well established from clinical trials and observational research. Rofecoxib (Vioxx) was withdrawn from the market for this reason, but the equally COX-2 selective etoricoxib has replaced it in Europe but not in the United States. The "traditional" NSAID diclofenac is as COX-2 selective as celecoxib and increases cardiovascular risk dose dependently. COX inhibitor dosages should be lower in osteoarthritis than in rheumatoid arthritis. Randomized trials comparing COX-2 inhibitors with NSAIDs have exaggerated their gastrointestinal benefits by using maximal NSAID doses regardless of indication, and/or hidden the cardiovascular risk by comparing with COX-2 selective diclofenac instead of low-dose ibuprofen or naproxen. Observational studies show increased cardiovascular risks within weeks of treatment with COX-2 inhibitors and high doses of NSAIDs other than naproxen, which is the safest alternative. COX inhibitors are symptomatic drugs that should be used intermittently at the lowest effective dosage, especially among individuals with an increased cardiovascular risk.
Rofecoxib selectively inhibits cyclo-oxygenase-2 in a dose-dependent manner in humans. No significant inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase-1 is observed with rofecoxib up to doses of 1000 mg. In 4 large double-blind randomised trials performed in patients with osteoarthritis, rofecoxib 12.5 and 25 mg/day significantly improved physical functioning, assessed using the Western Ontario and McMasters Universities Osteoarthritis Index and patient or investigator global assessment, compared with placebo. In addition, rofecoxib showed similar clinical efficacy to that observed with diclofenac 50 mg 3 times daily, ibuprofen 800 mg 3 times daily and nabumetone 1500 mg once daily. Rofecoxib is also an effective analgesic in patients with primary dysmenorrhoea or postoperative dental pain and demonstrates similar analgesic efficacy to that of naproxen sodium and ibuprofen. Rofecoxib is generally well tolerated. The most common adverse events associated with rofecoxib are diarrhoea, headache, nausea and upper respiratory tract infection. There was a significantly lower incidence of upper-gastrointestinal adverse events (perforations, ulcers and bleeds) in patients with osteoarthritis receiving rofecoxib 12.5, 25 or 50 mg/day than in those receiving ibuprofen, diclofenac or nabumetone.
Initially, the selective COX-2 inhibitors were developed as safer alternatives to the conventional NSAIDs, but later on, most of them were withdrawn from the market due to the risk of heart attack and stroke. Celecoxib, the first selective COX-2 inhibitor, was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in December 1998 and was taken back from the market in 2004. Since then, many coxibs have been discontinued one by one due to adverse cardiovascular events. United States (US), Australian and European authorities related to Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) implemented the requirements to carry the "Black box" warning on the labels of COX-2 drugs highlighting the risks of serious cardiovascular events. These facts encouraged the researchers to explore them well and find out the biochemical basis behind the cardiotoxicity. From the last few decades, the molecular mechanisms behind the coxibs have regained the attention, especially the specific structural features of the selective COX-2 inhibitors that are associated with cardiotoxicity. This review discusses the key structural features of the selective COX-2 inhibitors and underlying mechanisms that are responsible for the cardiotoxicity. This report also unfolds different strategies that have been reported in the last 10 years to combat the problem of selective COX-2 inhibitors mediated cardiotoxicity.
Even though non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been widely used for a long time, the search continues for anti-inflammatory drugs with few side-effects. COX-2 inhibitors are currently most debated, because they have less gastrointestinal side effects but have been linked to increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, presumably related to thrombotic events. This has brought about the withdrawal of rofecoxib and other COX-2 inhibitors from the market. Although the results of several large studies with prospective, randomized design and meta-analysis of different trials have led to the demise of many popular COX-2 inhibitors, yet the conclusion seems to be rather simplistic. This review presents evidence from basic biology and clinical studies with the expectation that a balanced position, particularly in relation to increase in cardiovascular events, may be elucidated.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are one of the most frequently used medications. NSAIDs profoundly modify prostaglandin homeostasis through inhibition of the enzyme, cyclooxygenase (COX), especially COX-2. COX-2 inhibition is associated with adverse cardiovascular outcomes as demonstrated by recent trials using this type of drug. This review explores the latest available data, including recent, randomized, clinical trials, controversies, and pathophysiology of the adverse effects of COX-inhibition.
BACKGROUND: Each year, clinical upper gastrointestinal events occur in 2 to 4 percent of patients who are taking nonselective nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). We assessed whether rofecoxib, a selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2, would be associated with a lower incidence of clinically important upper gastrointestinal events than is the nonselective NSAID naproxen among patients with rheumatoid arthritis. METHODS: We randomly assigned 8076 patients who were at least 50 years of age (or at least 40 years of age and receiving long-term glucocorticoid therapy) and who had rheumatoid arthritis to receive either 50 mg of rofecoxib daily or 500 mg of naproxen twice daily. The primary end point was confirmed clinical upper gastrointestinal events (gastroduodenal perforation or obstruction, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, and symptomatic gastroduodenal ulcers). RESULTS: Rofecoxib and naproxen had similar efficacy against rheumatoid arthritis. During a median follow-up of 9.0 months, 2.1 confirmed gastrointestinal events per 100 patient-years occurred with rofecoxib, as compared with 4.5 per 100 patient-years with naproxen (relative risk, 0.5; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.3 to 0.6; P<0.001). The respective rates of complicated confirmed events (perforation, obstruction, and severe upper gastrointestinal bleeding) were 0.6 per 100 patient-years and 1.4 per 100 patient-years (relative risk, 0.4; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.2 to 0.8; P=0.005). The incidence of myocardial infarction was lower among patients in the naproxen group than among those in the rofecoxib group (0.1 percent vs. 0.4 percent; relative risk, 0.2; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.1 to 0.7); the overall mortality rate and the rate of death from cardiovascular causes were similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, treatment with rofecoxib, a selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2, is associated with significantly fewer clinically important upper gastrointestinal events than treatment with naproxen, a nonselective inhibitor.
Conventional nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are commonly used to treat pain and inflammation but are frequently associated with gastrointestinal side effects, including life-threatening bleeding or perforation of gastroduodenal ulcers. Conventional NSAIDs are nonselective inhibitors of two isoforms of cyclooxygenase (COX): COX-1 and COX-2. The inhibition of COX-1 is believed to be responsible for inducing mucosal injury primarily by impairing prostaglandin-dependent mucosal protective mechanisms. The latest development in reducing the incidence of ulcers and ulcer complications associated with conventional NSAIDs is the use of recently approved COX-2-specific inhibitors (CSIs). This article critically reviews the data on gastrointestinal toxic side effects for conventional NSAIDs without as well as with prevention therapy. In addition, we compare these data with those for the CSIs, namely, celecoxib and rofecoxib. Finally, we offer recommendations on the clinical use of these drugs, emphasizing the need to balance clinical effectiveness with the avoidance of potential gastrointestinal side effects.
OBJECTIVE: To review the safety of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors in asthma patients with aspirin hypersensitivity. DATA SOURCES: Clinical studies were identified using MEDLINE (1966-September 2002). Key search terms included cyclooxygenase inhibitors, aspirin, asthma, and hypersensitivity. English-language articles were identified and included. References from the identified articles were also reviewed. DATA SYNTHESIS: The literature provides information regarding the safety of COX-2 inhibitors in asthma patients with aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD). The mechanism of AERD involves inhibition of cyclooxygenase, particularly COX-1. Inhibition of COX-1 causes an increased production of certain inflammatory mediators, which results in the reactions seen with AERD. Considering this mechanism, COX-2 inhibitors may be an alternative to aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in a patient with AERD. This article analyzes 4 studies to evaluate the safety of COX-2 inhibitors in this population. RESULTS: The 4 studies evaluated included a total of 172 patients with AERD. All patients included demonstrated intolerance to aspirin or NSAIDs and tolerated the selective COX-2 inhibitor administered. CONCLUSIONS: COX-2 inhibitors provide a potentially safe alternative for treatment of inflammatory conditions in patients with AERD.
Rofecoxib (Vioxx, Merck & Co., Inc.) is a new orally-effective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) approved for treatment of acute pain, fever, primary dysmenorrhea and pain and inflammation in osteoarthritis (OA). It is also being evaluated for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and adenomatous polyps of the colon. Rofecoxib is a specific inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), thereby inhibiting prostanoid synthesis in cells that express COX-2, including inflammatory cells. As cells in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract principally express COX-1, a different isoform of cyclooxygenase, it is predicted that rofecoxib will have less GI toxicity than other less selective NSAIDs. In clinical trials, rofecoxib was found to be as effective as other NSAIDs for management of pain and inflammation. In trials that compare rofecoxib with ibuprofen, diclofenac and indomethacin, less GI toxicity has been observed, as assayed by a decrease in lesions visible on endoscopy, by GI blood loss and, in a meta-analysis, by frequency of serious adverse GI events. The presence of COX-2 in cells other than inflammatory cells results in side effects common among NSAIDs, including peripheral oedema and hypertension. These side effects are dose-dependent. Rofecoxib, together with other branded NSAIDs, are relatively expensive, which has led to concern regarding costs versus benefits. There is also concern regarding potential risks associated with the use of rofecoxib by populations that would otherwise not tolerate NSAIDs.
We describe 2 male patients, a 49-year-old with psoriatic arthritis and impaired renal function and a 43-year-old renal transplant recipient, who both sustained a marked decline in glomerular filtration rate in conjunction with a selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), rofecoxib. In the second patient, acute renal failure necessitated hemodialysis. Both patients made an uneventful recovery. Our report lends further support to the assumption that COX-2 inhibitors, as a class, can be as nephrotoxic as their nonselective predecessors. Therefore, COX-2 inhibitors should be used with caution in renal transplant recipients and in patients with salt depletion and renal insufficiency.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) account for more reports of drug related toxicity than any other class of drugs. Their most widely recognised adverse effects are on the gastrointestinal tract. They cause acute erosions and chronic ulcers that result in hospitalisation and death because of ulcer bleeding and perforation. Between them, aspirin and non-aspirin NSAIDs may account for more than half of all episodes of ulcer bleeding and perforation.
Traditionally, clinicians have relied heavily on the use of NSAIDs to treat the pain of osteoarthritis, as numerous studies have proven these agents effective. However, controversy has arisen regarding their use as first-line therapy, due to increasing awareness of their cardiovascular risks. One of these agents, rofecoxib, was withdrawn from the market in 2004 due to these concerns. Since that time, numerous studies have illustrated that many of the NSAIDs, both the selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors and the traditional nonselective agents, may confer similar risks of cardiovascular toxicity. Although these agents may still be useful in many patients, concerns over side effects have begun to limit their use, and patients and clinicians are reaching for alternate agents. This review highlights the evidence behind the effectiveness of other, non-NSAID pharmacologic options in the treatment of pain and inflammation in osteoarthritis.
Regulatory error is an issue that has come to the fore following the withdrawal of rofecoxib (Vioxx; Merck) a year ago. Here, we provide a theoretical discussion of the factors that could influence regulatory error, drawing on the Vioxx episode in particular as a possible example of error, and consider the implications for future regulatory policy.
Treating patients with osteoarthritis (OA) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) remains challenging; however, new agents offer the chance for an improved quality of life. As an alternative to traditional nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors provide pain relief for OA and RA patients with possible fewer side effects. Otherwise, OA patients may opt for topical agents, injections, or supplements. Rheumatoid arthritis research has led to an improved understanding of the inflammatory cascade and an appreciation of the early tissue destruction. A new treatment philosophy has thus emerged along with the development of new biologic agents; the latter, along with combination therapy and a new disease modifying antirheumatic drug, leflunomide, have greatly expanded the chances for disease control in RA patients.
Herbal antirheumatics are indicated in painful inflammatory and degenerative rheumatic diseases. Their mechanism of action is broader than that of synthetic antirheumatics. Particular preparations from Devils's Claw with 50 to 100 mg of harpagoside in the daily dosage as well as a particular willow bark extract with 120 to 240 mg salicin in the daily dosage proved efficacy in a number of clinical studies including confirmatory ones. Exploratory studies indicate that these herbal antirheumatics were not inferior to the selective COX-2 inhibitor rofecoxib when treating acute exacerbations of chronic low back pain. For the proprietary nettle root extract IDS23 promising in vitro/in vivo results indicate an anti-inflammatory effect, however there are only 2 open uncontrolled clinical studies available and the proof of efficacy is still missing. Safety data in order to recommend use during pregnancy and lactation are only available for the herbal combination product Phytodolor prepared from aspen, ash and goldenrod. In principle, blackcurrent leaf with not less than 1.5% flavonoids may be an appropriate antirheumatic. Likewise, the seed oils of blackcurrent, evening primrose and borage offering at least 1 to 3 g gammalinolenic acid/day are recommendable. In case superiority versus placebo has been established, proprietary herbal antirheumatics should be administered before the conventional analgesics due to the lower incidence of adverse events.
NSAIDs are used throughout the World Health Organization three-step analgesic ladder, and are indicated for pain in all stages of malignancy. Side-effects are common with NSAIDs. Much has been written about NSAIDs and COX, since the discovery of COX-1 and COX-2 isoforms. How do you choose the appropriate NSAID? The choice of NSAID continues to be dependent upon associated gastroduodenal toxicity and the related risk factors of individual patients. Choosing the appropriate NSAID should minimize the likelihood of needing additional medications to manage adverse effects and symptoms caused by the NSAID therapy itself.
