PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are the only pharmacologic agents that specifically treat insulin resistance. The beneficial effects of TZDs on the cardiovascular risk factors associated with insulin resistance have been well documented. TZD use has been limited because of concern about safety issues and side effects. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies indicate that cardiovascular toxicity with rosiglitazone and increase in bladder cancer with pioglitazone are no longer significant issues. There are new data which show that pioglitazone treatment reduces myocardial infarctions and ischemic strokes. New data concerning TZD-mediated edema, congestive heart failure, and bone fractures improves the clinician's ability to select patients that will have minimal significant side effects. Thiazolidinediones are now generic and less costly than pharmaceutical company-promoted therapies. Better understanding of the side effects coupled with clear benefits on the components of the insulin resistance syndrome should promote TZD use in treating patients with type 2 diabetes.
The term ferroptosis coined in 2012 causes acute kidney injury (AKI). However, its pathway mechanism in AKI is poorly understood. In this study, we conducted an RNA-sequence analysis of kidneys in AKI and normal mice to explore the pathway mechanism of ferroptosis. Consequently, differentially expressed genes highlighted Acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family (ACSL4), a known promotor for ferroptosis. Besides, RT-PCR, Western blot, and immunohistochemical analyses confirmed its upregulation. HIF-1alpha was downregulated in I/R-AKI mice, and in vitro studies confirmed a negative regulation of HIF-1alpha on ACSL4. To explore the role of ACSL4 in AKI, we constructed ACSL4 knockout in kidney tubules of mice-as Cdh16Cre-ACSL4(F/F) mice. Results revealed that ACSL4 knockout significantly reduced ferroptosis and inhibited the functional and pathological injury of AKI mice. Meanwhile, the kidneys of Cdh16Cre-ACSL4(F/F) mice demonstrated a significantly decreased inflammation and macrophage infiltration. Further, additional explorations were explored to decipher a more thorough understanding of ferroptotic immunogenicity. As a result, neutrophils were not directly recruited by ferroptotic cells, but by ferroptotic cell-induced macrophages. Further, ACSL4 inhibitor rosiglitazone significantly inhibited AKI. Collectively, these data provide novel insights into the AKI pathogenesis, and defined ACSL4 as an effective target in AKI.
Cancer cell plasticity facilitates the development of therapy resistance and malignant progression. De-differentiation processes, such as an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), are known to enhance cellular plasticity. Here, we demonstrate that cancer cell plasticity can be exploited therapeutically by forcing the trans-differentiation of EMT-derived breast cancer cells into post-mitotic and functional adipocytes. Delineation of the molecular pathways underlying such trans-differentiation has motivated a combination therapy with MEK inhibitors and the anti-diabetic drug Rosiglitazone in various mouse models of murine and human breast cancer in vivo. This combination therapy provokes the conversion of invasive and disseminating cancer cells into post-mitotic adipocytes leading to the repression of primary tumor invasion and metastasis formation.
The study aims to explore the effect of PPARgamma signaling on ferroptosis and preeclampsia (PE) development. Serum and placental tissue are collected from healthy subjects and PE patients. The PPARgamma and Nrf2 decreases in the PE. Rosiglitazone intervention reverses hypoxia-induced trophoblast ferroptosis and decreases lipid synthesis by regulating Nfr2 and SREBP1. Compared to the Hypoxia group, the migratory and invasive abilities enhance after rosiglitazone and ferr1 treatment. Rosiglitazone reduces the effect of hypoxia and erastin. The si-Nrf2 treatment attenuats the effects of rosiglitazone on proliferation, migration, and invasion. The si-Nrf2 does not affect SREBP1 expression. PPARgamma agonists alleviates ferroptosis in the placenta of the PE rats. The study confirms that PPARgamma signaling and ferroptosis-related indicators were dysregulated in PE. PPARgamma/Nrf2 signaling affects ferroptosis by regulating lipid oxidation rather than SREBP1-mediated lipid synthesis. In conclusion, our study find that PPARgamma can alleviate PE development by regulating lipid oxidation and ferroptosis.
Clinicians and patients with type 2 diabetes enjoy an expanding list of medications to improve glycemic control. With this expansion has come a flurry of concerns about the safety of these antihyperglycemic agents, concerns that affect judgments about the risk/benefit balance of therapy. Some of these safety signals have been identified through the synthesis of existing research evidence. Thus, it has become important for clinicians and clinical policymakers to understand the strengths and limitations of systematic reviews and meta-analyses in determining the safety of diabetes medications. In this paper, we highlight key safety concerns with diabetes medications and discuss the role evidence synthesis plays in each, with special attention to its strengths and limitations.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The crosstalk between cancer stem cells (CSCs) and their niche is required for the maintenance of stem cell-like phenotypes of CSCs. Here, we identified E26 transformation-specific homologous factor (EHF) as a key molecule in decreasing the sensitivity of pancreatic cancer (PC) cells to CSCs' niche stimulus. We also explored a therapeutic strategy to restore the expression of EHF. DESIGN: We used a LSL-Kras(G12D/+)mice, LSL-Trp53(R172H/+) and Pdx1-Cre (KPC) mouse model and samples from patients with PC. Immunostaining, flow cytometry, sphere formation assays, anchorage-independent growth assay, in vivo tumourigenicity, reverse transcription PCR, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and luciferase analyses were conducted in this study. RESULTS: CXCL12 derived from pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) mediates the crosstalk between PC cells and PSCs to promote PC stemness. Tumorous EHF suppressed CSC stemness by decreasing the sensitivity of PC to CXCL12 stimulus and inhibiting the crosstalk between PC and CSC-supportive niches. Mechanically, EHF suppressed the transcription of the CXCL12 receptor CXCR4. EHF had a cell autonomous role in suppressing cancer stemness by inhibiting the transcription of Sox9, Sox2, Oct4 and Nanog. Rosiglitazone suppressed PC stemness and inhibited the crosstalk between PC and PSCs by upregulating EHF. Preclinical KPC mouse cohorts demonstrated that rosiglitazone sensitised PDAC to gemcitabine therapy. CONCLUSIONS: EHF decreased the sensitivity of PC to the stimulus from PSC-derived CSC-supportive niche by negatively regulating tumorous CXCR4. Rosiglitazone could be used to target PC stem cells and the crosstalk between CSCs and their niche by upregulating EHF.
AIMS: Thiazolidinediones administration is assumed to be related with an improvement of endothelial dysfunction (ED); nevertheless, previous studies have been inconsistent. For this reason, the present meta-analysis was directed to estimate if thiazolidinediones were related to endothelial dysfunction improvement by using flow-mediated dilation (FMD) measurement. METHODS: Literature search of the PubMed, the Cochrane Library, the Web of Science, and the Scopus databases was performed covering the period until July 01, 2015, for randomized clinical trials that investigated an influence of thiazolidinediones on FMD. For the calculation of the pooled overall effect, a random effect model was used. Meta-regression and subgroup analyses were performed to evaluate the impact of study characteristics on the effect of thiazolidinediones administration on FMD. RESULTS: This meta-analysis included 16 studies with 812 subjects. The obtained results demonstrated an improvement of endothelial dysfunction measured with FMD (16 studies, 812 subjects; WMD: 2.4 %, 95 % CI = 1.1 to 3.69 %; p = 0.0003). The significant heterogeneity was noted (I (2) = 95 %, p < 0.00001). Subgroup analysis demonstrated that pioglitazone and rosiglitazone were able to improve FMD. Also, thiazolidinediones improved FMD if treatment was longer than 12 weeks and if patients were younger than 65 years. Additionally, a lipid profile was found to influence thiazolidinediones effect on FMD. CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis demonstrated that thiazolidinediones were able to improve FMD, which in clinical terms can be further translated to the improvement of an impaired endothelial function. Nevertheless, the link between FMD and its predictive clinical relevance still requires further clarification.
The obesity epidemic continues to worsen worldwide, driving metabolic and chronic inflammatory diseases. Thiazolidinediones, such as rosiglitazone (Rosi), are PPARgamma agonists that promote 'M2-like' adipose tissue macrophage (ATM) polarization and cause insulin sensitization. As ATM-derived small extracellular vesicles (ATM-sEVs) from lean mice are known to increase insulin sensitivity, we assessed the metabolic effects of ATM-sEVs from Rosi-treated obese male mice (Rosi-ATM-sEVs). Here we show that Rosi leads to improved glucose and insulin tolerance, transcriptional repolarization of ATMs and increased sEV secretion. Administration of Rosi-ATM-sEVs rescues obesity-induced glucose intolerance and insulin sensitivity in vivo without the known thiazolidinedione-induced adverse effects of weight gain or haemodilution. Rosi-ATM-sEVs directly increase insulin sensitivity in adipocytes, myotubes and primary mouse and human hepatocytes. Additionally, we demonstrate that the miRNAs within Rosi-ATM-sEVs, primarily miR-690, are responsible for these beneficial metabolic effects. Thus, using ATM-sEVs with specific miRNAs may provide a therapeutic path to induce insulin sensitization.
Rosiglitazone, a thiazolidinedione antidiabetic agent, improves insulin resistance, a key underlying metabolic abnormality in most patients with type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. In animal models of insulin resistance, rosiglitazone decreased plasma glucose, insulin and triglyceride levels and also attenuated or prevented diabetic nephropathy and pancreatic islet cell degeneration. In contrast with troglitazone, rosiglitazone does not induce cytochrome P4503A4 metabolism. It does not interact significantly with nifedipine, oral contraceptives, metformin, digoxin, ranitidine or acarbose. In clinical trials in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, rosiglitazone 2 to 12 mg/day (as a single daily dose or 2 divided daily doses) improved glycaemic control, as shown by decreases in fasting plasma glucose and glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c). Addition of rosiglitazone 2 to 8 mg/day to existing sulphonylurea, metformin or insulin therapy achieved further reductions in fasting plasma glucose and HbA1c. Oral combinations improved insulin sensitivity and beta-cell function according to a homeostasis model assessment. Consistent with its mechanism of action, rosiglitazone appears to be associated with a low risk of hypoglycaemia (<2% of patients receiving monotherapy). There is no evidence to date that rosiglitazone shares the hepatotoxicity of troglitazone.
Meta-analyses of clinical trials suggest that the use of the thiazolidinedione (TZD), rosiglitazone, in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus may increase the risk of myocardial ischaemic events by 30-40%. Although these controversial data must be interpreted with caution, in the absence of definitive prospective cardiovascular (CV) outcomes data, they represent a prominent source of evidence concerning the CV safety of rosiglitazone. The results of meta-analyses and a large randomized-controlled CV outcomes trial provide strong evidence that pioglitazone does not increase the risk of coronary events. This article clarifies the clinical significance of these meta-analytical findings alongside other sources of evidence and assesses their impact on evolving treatment guidelines and recommendations for the use of TZDs in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Troglitazone, the first in the thiazolidinedione class of oral hypoglycaemic agents, was launched in the USA in March, 1997. It reached Europe later that year, only to be withdrawn within weeks on the grounds of liver toxicity. Meanwhile it went on to generate sales of over $2 billion in the USA, and caused at least 90 cases of liver failure (70 resulting in death or transplantation) before it was withdrawn in March, 2000. Rosiglitazone and pioglitazone reached the US market in 1999 as first-line agents to be used alone or in combination with other drugs, but in Europe the same dossiers were used one year later to apply for a limited licence as second-line agents restricted to oral combination therapy. How should we use the glitazones? And how did they achieve blockbuster status without any clear evidence of advantage over existing therapy?
Human adenoviruses (HAdVs) often cause mild respiratory infections. These infections, however, can potentially become fatal in immunosuppressive patients. Unfortunately, there has been no specific anti-HAdV drug approved for treatment of HAdV infections. In this study, a time-course transcriptome of HAdV-infected human lung epithelial cells (A549 cells) was performed and compared with perturbation datasets of 890 drug-treated A549 cells from the library of integrated network-based cellular signatures (LINCS) database to predict previously unknown therapeutic drug-HAdV relationships using a characteristic direction (CD) algorithm. We performed experiments to validate a prediction for the anti-diabetic drug rosiglitazone as a candidate drug for treatment of anti-HAdV both in vivo and in vitro. The Type I interferon (IFNs) signaling pathway was negatively regulated during the course of HAdV infection and rosiglitazone increased STAT1 phosphorylation for antiviral IFN response induction. Taken together, this study confirmed the prospect for re-exploitation of this FDA-approved drug as a potential therapeutic for HAdV infections.
Xenografts have emerged as a promising option for severe tendon defects treatment. However, despite undergoing decellularization, concerns still remain regarding the immunogenicity of xenografts. Because certain components within the extracellular matrix also possess immunogenicity. In this study, a novel strategy of post-decellularization modification aimed at preserving the endogenous capacity of cells on collagen synthesis to mask antigenic epitopes in extracellular matrix is proposed. To implement this strategy, a human-derived rosiglitazone-loaded decellularized extracellular matrix (R-dECM) is developed. R-dECM can release rosiglitazone for over 7 days in vitro. By suppressing M1 macrophage polarization, R-dECM protects the migration and collagen synthesis abilities of tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs), while also stabilizing the phenotype of M2 macrophages in vitro. RNA sequencing reveals R-dECM can mitigate the detrimental crosstalk between TDSCs and inflammatory cells. When applied to a rat patellar tendon defect model, R-dECM effectively inhibits early inflammation, preventing chronic inflammation. Its duration of function far exceeds the release time of rosiglitazone, implying the establishment of immune evasion, confirming the effectiveness of the proposed strategy. And R-dECM demonstrates superior tendon repair outcomes compared to dECM. Thus, this study provides a novel bioactive scaffold with the potential to enhance the long-term clinical outcomes of xenogeneic tendon grafts.
Secondary lymphedema occurs in up to 20% of patients after lymphadenectomy performed for the surgical management of tumors involving the breast, prostate, uterus, and skin. Patients develop progressive edema of the affected extremity due to retention of protein-rich lymphatic fluid. Despite compression therapy, patients progress to chronic lymphedema in which noncompressible fibrosis and adipose tissue are deposited within the extremity. The presence of fibrosis led to our hypothesis that rosiglitazone, a PPARgamma agonist that inhibits fibrosis, would reduce fibrosis in a mouse model of secondary lymphedema after hind limb lymphadenectomy. In vivo, rosiglitazone reduced fibrosis in the hind limb after lymphadenectomy. Our findings verified that rosiglitazone reestablished the adipogenic features of TGF-beta1-treated mesenchymal cells in vitro. Despite this, rosiglitazone led to a reduction in adipose tissue deposition. Single-cell RNA-Seq data obtained from human tissues and flow cytometric and histological evaluation of mouse tissues demonstrated increased presence of PDGFRalpha+ cells in lymphedema; human tissue analysis verified these cells have the capacity for adipogenic and fibrogenic differentiation. Upon treatment with rosiglitazone, we noted a reduction in the overall quantity of PDGFRalpha+ cells and LipidTOX+ cells. Our findings provide a framework for treating secondary lymphedema as a condition of fibrosis and adipose tissue deposition, both of which, paradoxically, can be prevented with a pro-adipogenic agent.
Type 2 diabetes is a common disease associated with an increased risk of long-term complications, in particular cardiovascular disease. Intervention trials have provided evidence that strict metabolic control can substantially reduce the burden of the disease. However, in order to accomplish this, the pathogenetic defects must be tackled by appropriate therapy. Insulin resistance is a common defect in these patients and it is even more severe in those who are obese. Insulin resistance not only contributes to impaired glucose homeostasis, but also to the development of dyslipidaemia, hypertension, inflammatory response and endothelial dysfunction, thus exacerbating the cardiovascular risk. Improvement of insulin sensitivity can be obtained with metformin and thiazolidinediones. These drugs act through different mechanisms with metformin exerting a prevalent effect on the liver and glitazones improving insulin sensitivity in peripheral tissue. Because of different mechanisms, the association of the two compounds is likely to result in an additive effect. Clinical trials available indicate that the combination of the two drugs results in greater improvement in plasma glucose concentration and HbA(1c) as compared to single therapy, without increasing the occurrence of specific side effects. More recently, the two compounds have been associated in the same tablet, thus providing the opportunity for a more convenient treatment that may encourage patient compliance and, at the same time, provide a tool to assess whether a more aggressive intervention on insulin resistance may produce favourable effects on the cardiovascular risk.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cardiovascular outcome trials (CVOT) with glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RA) have had variable results to date: with two CVOTs being positive and two concluding neutrality/safety results for primary cardiovascular outcome. Mechanistic insights delving into the pathophysiologic mechanisms that may link certain GLP-1 RA to cardioprotection may help define the application of this medication class in clinical practice based on the evidence of the CVOT data. We discuss the various mechanisms that have been postulated from animal and preclinical human studies to help explain the benefits observed in CVOTs with GLP-1 RA. RECENT FINDINGS: Cardiovascular benefits of GLP-1 may be dependent on the complex interactions of this incretin hormone with the atherosclerotic pathways, either through its direct actions on the cardiovascular system or indirectly through intermediary actions on metabolism, energy transfer, inflammation or thrombosis. An indirect metabolic action of GLP-1 RA, via an initial step of achieving glucose homeostasis or balancing inter-organ energy metabolism, leading to favorable downstream effects on the inflammation-thrombosis pathways, finally impacting atherosclerosis, appears compelling. SUMMARY: In addition to their metabolic benefits, specific GLP-1 RA medications offer cardiovascular protection in high-risk type 2 diabetes. Further mechanistic studies and clinical trials in lower cardiovascular risk populations may help cement the place of this class of medications across the spectrum of type 2 diabetes.
A large number of studies have indicated that thiazolidinediones (TZDs) such as rosiglitazone and pioglitazone inhibit tumor growth, progression, and metastasis. These agents are specific agonists for the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR gamma) but also engage other pathways. In lung cancer, these agents have been shown to induce apoptosis and inhibit tumor growth in xenograft models. Retrospective studies have indicated a significant decrease in lung cancer risk in patients using these agents, suggesting that TZDs may be chemopreventive for lung cancer. However, emerging data suggest that chronic use of these agents is associated with increased risk of adverse cardiovascular events. It is therefore critical to determine the relative contributions of PPAR gamma-dependent versus PPAR gamma-independent pathways in mediating both the anti-tumorigenic effects and the cardiovascular effects of TZDs. This review examines these pathways with a specific focus on the role of TZDs and PPAR gamma in lung cancer.
The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) family is an important group of transcription factors that regulates immune surveillance, cell proliferation, fatty acid regulation, and angiogenesis--functions which have all been implicated in the pathogenesis of bladder cancer. One particular subtype, PPARgamma, is expressed at higher levels in bladder cancer specimens than in benign urothelium, and is an attractive molecular target for the development of novel treatment strategies for bladder cancer. In this review, we summarize the data available regarding relevance of PPARgamma in bladder cancer and discuss the potential value of PPAR-targeted treatment of bladder cancer.
Postsurveillance data should be systematically collected, timely, and publicly available
Rosiglitazone is the second of the marketed thiazolidinediones to fall from grace, and its demise bears an uncanny resemblance to the earlier downfall of troglitazone. Both narratives demonstrate the inadequacy of a regulatory system that is mandated to place a higher value on commercial secrecy than on patient safety.
