Asthma is a common inflammatory disease of the lungs. The prevalence of asthma is increasing worldwide, and the tendency indicates that the number of asthma sufferers will soar in the coming years for several reasons, in particular, the lifestyles we have adopted that expose us to risk factors. Salbutamol is the first selective short-acting beta(2)-agonist (SABA) used as an alternative reliever in the treatment of asthma. Its therapeutic effect is based on its potent smooth muscle relaxant properties, which allow the inhibition of bronchial smooth muscle contraction and subsequent bronchodilation. Salbutamol can be administered orally, intravenously (IV), intramuscularly (IM), subcutaneously, or by inhalation. For this reason, the pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters-absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination-are highly diverse and, consequently, the efficacy and adverse effects also differ between each formulation. Here, we review the pharmacological profile of different salbutamol formulations, focusing on their efficacy and adverse effects for its original application, asthma.
A new generation of bronchodilators is being developed for acute asthma management-single-isomer beta-agonists. These drugs consist only of the active bronchodilatory isomer (eutomer); they do not have the inactive and potentially harmful isomer (distomer) that is present in marketed racemic beta-agonists. Clinical studies comparing the effectiveness of (R)-albuterol (levalbuterol) with racemic albuterol established a strong rationale for using single-isomer beta-agonists in place of the racemic mixture: reduced dosages provide equivalent bronchodilatory effects with fewer beta-mediated side effects. Higher dosages achieve superior bronchodilation in episodes of severe asthma and may reduce costs of emergency department treatment.
Racemic albuterol, a commonly used bronchodilator, is an exact 50:50 mixture of two enantiomers, R- and S-albuterol. Concern regarding increased mortality associated with the use of this beta-2 (beta 2) agonist triggered the study of both of these enantiomers separately. In vitro studies suggest that the two enantiomers have different binding affinities for beta-adrenoreceptors, may exert opposing effects on inflammation, demonstrate different effects on mucocilary transport, and display differing pharmacokinetics. Clinical studies comparing both enantiomers are few, of short duration, and often in small patient populations, and their results vary. R-albuterol has greater bronchodilatory effects than the racemate and may have anti-inflammatory properties. S-albuterol has markedly less affinity for the beta-adrenoreceptor. It was found to cause bronchoconstriction in animal models, but neither bronchoconstrictive nor pro-inflammatory effects have been conclusively demonstrated in human studies. The data available at present, while suggestive, are insufficient to conclusively recommend R-albuterol over the racemate. Further basic research and investigations in humans comparing both enantiomers at increasing doses over longer time periods are required to clarify the precise roles of R- and S-albuterol.
For patients whose asthma is not adequately controlled with inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy alone, increasing the dose of ICS or the addition of a long-acting beta(2)-agonist is recommended. Greater improvements in lung function are achieved with the addition of a long-acting beta(2)-agonist to ICS therapy, rather than doubling the dose of ICS. Formoterol and salmeterol have a similarly long duration of effect (up to 12 h). However, as a result of their different chemical structures, there are marked pharmacological differences in the mechanism of action which affect their speeds of onset. These differences amount to a more rapid onset of effect for formoterol compared with salmeterol. Long-acting beta(2)-agonists appear to be well tolerated at elevated doses. These two features (tolerability at high doses and rapid onset of effect) support the use of formoterol as a reliever medication in addition to use in maintenance therapy. The long-acting beta(2)-agonists can be considered as beneficial additions to ICS therapy for the management of moderate-to-severe asthma.
Dizziness, together with hypotension and faintness, are well-known adverse drug reactions of salbutamol that have been related to its cardiovascular effects. However, we could find no published reference to vertigo in patients taking salmeterol, in the absence of cardiovascular alterations. We present the case of a woman who experienced four independent episodes of vertigo lasting 36 h each, following four inhalations of salmeterol several months apart. The close temporal relationship between the inhalation of salmeterol and the onset of symptoms, as well as the positive re-exposures, reinforce this alleged association.
BACKGROUND: Salmeterol xinafoate is a highly selective beta2-adrenoceptor for the maintenance treatment of asthma in adults and children. OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacokinetics, clinical pharmacology, and therapeutic properties of a recently introduced, long acting antiasthmatic drug. METHODS: Recent English-language publications were selected using Medline as database. RESULTS: Salmeterol's pharmacokinetics, clinical pharmacology, and therapeutic properties are reviewed and aspects related to salmeterol's unusual duration of action, its high potency, beta2-selectivity, possible antiinflammatory actions, its interaction with other drugs, low systemic adverse effects, dosage, and administration are also discussed. CONCLUSION: Salmeterol is a safe long-acting beta2-agonist very useful for maintenance treatment of asthma.
The purpose of this review is to determine whether the proinflammatory actions identified in vitro for (S)-albuterol provide a clinically significant therapeutic advantage for levalbuterol over racemic albuterol. Clinical trials evaluating the bronchodilation in chronic and acute asthma provide conflicting evidence. Older trials suggested an advantage for levalbuterol; however, the newer trials have failed to confirm those advantages. Although (S)-albuterol produces increased bronchial hyperresponsiveness in vitro and in animal models, this has not been consistently confirmed in clinical trials; however, the heterogeneity of the trials precludes definitive conclusions. Current clinical trials do not provide evidence of a substantial advantage of levalbuterol over racemic albuterol although the data are insufficient to determine whether subsets of the patient population might benefit from single isomer therapy.
Levalbuterol, the pure (R)-isomer of racemic albuterol, is a new therapeutic option for patients with asthma. Racemic albuterol comprises a 50:50 mixture of (R)- and (S)-albuterol, with (R)-albuterol conferring all of the bronchodilator effects of the racemate. Numerous preclinical and in vitro studies have indicated that (S)-albuterol is not an inert isomer, but may have proinflammatory effects. Results from clinical trials in adults and children with asthma have demonstrated that 0.63 mg levalbuterol provides effective bronchodilation with lower b-mediated side effects compared with 2.5 mg racemic albuterol. In the emergency department, levalbuterol provided greater bronchodilation and significantly reduced hospital admissions compared with racemic albuterol. Recent studies have supported that levalbuterol use in acute settings may reduce the cost of asthma treatment by decreasing the total treatments and subsequent respiratory therapy resources. Levalbuterol provides heath care professionals with a safe, effective, and potentially cost-saving alternative to racemic albuterol for the treatment of patients with asthma.
Foreign body aspiration can be a life-threatening emergency. An aspirated solid or semi-solid object may lodge in the larynx, trachea or other breathing airways. If the object is large enough to cause nearly complete obstruction of the airway, asphyxia may rapidly cause death. We report a 19-year old man admitted with right lower lobe pneumonia who spontaneously expelled a foreign body, one day after admission and glucocorticoids administration. Glucocorticoids should be considered in foreign body aspiration management because improvement of the inflammatory reaction may facilitate expontaneous expulsion or foreign body extraction
Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is a zoonotic skin disease that is frequently diagnosed in tropical and subtropical countries. Loeffler's syndrome (LS) is a transient respiratory ailment characterised by pulmonary infiltration along with peripheral eosinophilia and commonly follows parasitic infestation. We report a 33-year-old male patient who presented to a tertiary care hospital in eastern India in 2019 with LS that was attributed secondary to multifocal CLM. Treatment with seven-day course of oral albendazole (400 mg daily) coupled with nebulisation (levosalbutamol and budesonide) led to complete resolution of cutaneous lesions and respiratory complaints within two weeks. There was complete resolution of pulmonary pathology at four-weeks follow-up.
Although racemic albuterol is an effective bronchodilator, regular use has been associated with some loss of bronchodilator potency, decreased protection against bronchoprovocation, increased sensitivity to allergen challenge, and increased sensitivity to some bronchoconstrictor stimuli. In experimental animals racemic albuterol has produced bronchial hyperresponsiveness, which could also be induced by administration of (S)-albuterol. These findings suggest that the pure or homochiral formulation of (R)-albuterol (levalbuterol) might be more effective as a bronchodilator than the racemic form. Single doses of levalbuterol provided more prolonged protection against methacholine challenge than the racemate, whereas (S)-albuterol significantly increased sensitivity to methacholine. In a 4-week study in adults, equivalent amounts of pure levalbuterol provided greater bronchodilation than did similar amounts of levalbuterol given as racemic mixtures. Furthermore, after 4 weeks, the baseline morning FEV(1 ) was lower in those receiving the racemate than in those receiving placebo or levalbuterol. In a single-dose study in children, the same conclusion regarding greater bronchodilation with pure levalbuterol compared with the same amount of levalbuterol in a racemic mixture was confirmed. These studies appear to confirm the greater efficacy of pure levalbuterol over a similar amount in a racemic mixture. This implies a deleterious effect of (S)-albuterol on both the acute bronchodilator response and baseline airway caliber, the exact mechanism of which will require further investigation.
We used cyclosporin to treat 12 adult patients with severe bronchial asthma who had been on systemic steroids for an average of 16 years. During the baseline period, lasting 4-6 months, therapy with high doses of inhaled beclamethasone, aminophylline and salbutamol was standardized and a minimum necessary dose of systemic steroids was established. After 9 months' treatment with low-dose cyclosporin (average whole-blood trough levels of 105 ng/ml), in six patients the daily dose of oral prednisone could be reduced from mean 30 mg to mean 11 mg, while daily symptom scores and peak expiratory flows improved significantly. This was accompanied by a reduction in exacerbations of asthma. However, in six other patients attempts to taper the steroid doses were unsuccessful, and cyclosporin was stopped after 4 to 7 months. These preliminary results suggest that cyclosporin might be of benefit in some patients with steroid-dependent asthma.
beta-Adrenergic agonist medications such as albuterol are the mainstay for treatment of patients with acute asthma exacerbations. Patients who present to the emergency department with severe symptoms are often treated with multiple albuterol doses in sequence to maximize the impact of the medications, relax bronchoconstriction, and relieve their breathlessness. Patients who present with acute dyspnea have numerous potential causes of hyperlactatemia and acidosis including an uncommonly recognized outcome of albuterol administration. This clinical case report outlines a scenario where a patient who was treated for an acute asthma exacerbation had rising lactate levels despite improving clinically. Causes of elevated lactate levels are discussed, particularly related to beta-adrenergic agonist use, and considerations for monitoring and withdrawal of albuterol administration are outlined.
Bronchodilators are the mainstay of therapy for patients with established chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) but, at present, the majority of patients use short-acting agents. There is increasing evidence that long-acting agents, such as the beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists salmeterol and formeterol, and the new anticholinergic tiotropium bromide provide a better therapeutic option. In the treatment of COPD, long-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) given twice daily cause the same degree of bronchodilation as tiotropium bromide given once daily. Combined use of an inhaled LABA with tiotropium bromide should provide important therapeutic benefits, as these drugs have distinct and complementary pharmacological actions in the airways. Although clinical trials of this combination have not been performed, clinical experience with Combivent, a combination of a short-acting beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonist (salbutamol) and a short-acting anticholinergic (ipratropium bromide), in COPD is encouraging because the bronchodilation produced is of a magnitude greater than that of either component alone. However, because LABAs are given twice daily but tiotropium bromide is required only once daily, the challenge is to develop a combined inhaler that can be employed on a daily basis.
Albuterol has been used for more than 40 years to treat acute asthma exacerbations as a racemic mixture of isomers: the active form, (R)-albuterol, or levalbuterol, and (S)-albuterol, classically considered inert. The single-isomer formulation, levalbuterol, has been synthesized recently and used therapeutically when the racemate is deemed less desirable. Basic investigations indicate that racemic albuterol and levalbuterol can produce effects that favor asthma remediation, including corticosteroid amplification and reduction of inflammatory mediators; in contrast, (S)-albuterol produces opposite effects. With inhalation of racemic albuterol, circulating (S)-albuterol persists 12 times longer than levalbuterol, suggesting potential for paradoxical effects observed clinically. Although mainly consistent with basic findings, clinical studies suggest no overwhelming superiority of levalbuterol over racemic albuterol; however, levalbuterol's effects may be greatest in moderate to severe asthma patients, especially with racemic albuterol overuse. Recent adoption of the hydrofluoroalkane formulation has narrowed the cost gap between levalbuterol and racemic albuterol metered-dose inhalers, but it remains for the nebulized formulations. Thus, physician selection of these drugs has remained dependent on experience, pharmaceutical knowledge, and established prescribing habits combined with cost factors, formulary structures, and availability, such that racemic albuterol is still used significantly compared with levalbuterol to treat acute asthma exacerbations.
Pulse oximetry is increasingly used to assess hypoxaemia in respiratory illnesses. Six children presenting with acute asthma and prolonged falls in oxygen saturation values after treatment with salbutamol are described who were subsequently shown to have pneumonic consolidation on chest radiography.
Salbutamol was administered intravenously to 14 patients in premature labour. Inhibition of uterine contractions occurred on 22 out of 23 occasions. The mean increase in maternal and fetal heart rate and blood pressure were within clinically acceptable limits but there were wide individual variations. The mean delay achieved when the intravenous regime was supplemented with oral salbutamol was greater than that achieved by intravenous salbutamol alone, but the difference was not statistically significant.
The effects of frequent high-dose nebulized salbutamol on plasma glucose concentrations were studied in 12 children (mean age 60 months) with acute severe asthma. There was a significant difference between mean initial glucose levels and peak levels. We conclude that hyperglycaemia can be produced in children as a result of nebulized salbutamol.
Since the discovery of propranolol in the treatment of infantile hemangioma (IH), there has been emergent investigation of beta-adrenergic receptor (beta-AR) signaling in IH and the mechanisms of action for which beta-AR blockers regulate hemangioma cell proliferation. However, beta-AR agonists and antagonists are known to act antithetically via the same intracellular beta-AR-driven proangiogenic pathways. We present the case of a patient with involuted IH treated with propranolol that showed a full and rapid regrowth during the intravenous administration of salbutamol, a selective beta2-adrenergic agonist, for an episode of severe obstructive bronchitis. This observation brings forward the clinical implication of beta-signaling effects in IH and raises awareness of the potential proliferative response of IH to beta-AR agonists such as salbutamol.
Albuterol is a 50:50 mixture of R-albuterol, the active enantiomer, and S-albuterol, which appears to be inactive in humans. The Food and Drug Administration recently approved levalbuterol, the pure R-isomer, as a preservative-free nebulizer solution. Published studies indicate that it is neither safer nor more effective than an equimolar dose of racemic albuterol (levalbuterol 1.25 mg = albuterol 2.5 mg). However, these studies were conducted in patients with stable asthma (at the top of the dose-response curve), whereas a nebulized bronchodilator most likely would be used by patients with an acute exacerbation. Because such patients, in the hospital setting, often require higher doses of albuterol, the manufacturer's recommended dose of levalbuterol is likely to be too low for rescue therapy. Levalbuterol may cost as much as 5 times more than racemic albuterol, depending on purchase method. We conclude that levalbuterol offers no advantage over albuterol but is likely to be more costly.
