Salmeterol xinafoate is a potent and a long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist. It is prescribed for the treatment of severe persistent asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Different methods were used to prepare (R)-(-)-salmeterol such as: mixing a sample of 4-benzyloxy-3-hydroxymethyl-omega-bromoacetophenone with sodium lauryl sulfate and the mixture was added to the microbial culture of Rhodotorula rubra, treatment of p-hydroxyacetophenone with Eschenmoser's salt and carbonate exchange resin followed by a sequence of supported reagents and scavenging agents or via Rh-catalyzed asymmetric transfer hydrogenation. The enantioselective synthesis of (S)-salmeterol was achieved via asymmetric reduction of the azidoketone 4 by Pichia angusta yeast. Physical characteristics of salmeterol xinafoate were confirmed via: X-ray powder diffraction pattern, thermal analysis and UV, vibrational, nuclear magnetic resonance, and mass spectroscopical data. Initial improvement in asthma control may occur within 30 min following oral inhalation of salmeterol in fixed combination with fluticasone propionate. Clinically important improvements are maintained for up to 12 h in most patients. It is extensively metabolized in the liver by hydroxylation, thus increased plasma concentrations may occur in patients with hepatic impairment.
INTRODUCTION: Few randomised controlled trials (RCTs) have directly compared long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta(2)-agonist (LAMA/LABA) dual maintenance therapies for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This systematic literature review and network meta-analysis (NMA) compared the efficacy of umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI) versus other dual and mono-bronchodilator therapies in symptomatic patients with COPD. METHODS: A systematic literature review (October 2015-November 2020) was performed to identify RCTs >/= 8 weeks long in adult patients with COPD that compared LAMA/LABA combinations against any long-acting bronchodilator-containing dual therapy or monotherapy. Data extracted on changes from baseline in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)), St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score, Transitional Dyspnoea Index (TDI) focal score, rescue medication use and moderate/severe exacerbation rate were analysed using an NMA in a frequentist framework. The primary comparison was at 24 weeks. Fixed effects model results are presented. RESULTS: The NMA included 69 full-length publications (including 10 GSK clinical study reports) reporting 49 studies. At 24 weeks, UMEC/VI provided statistically significant greater improvements in FEV(1) versus all dual therapy and monotherapy comparators. UMEC/VI provided similar improvements in SGRQ total score compared with all other LAMA/LABAs, and significantly greater improvements versus UMEC 125 mug, glycopyrronium 50 mug, glycopyrronium 18 mug, tiotropium 18 mug and salmeterol 50 mug. UMEC/VI also provided significantly better outcomes versus some comparators for TDI focal score, rescue medication use, annualised moderate/severe exacerbation rate, and time to first moderate/severe exacerbation. CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI provided generally better outcomes compared with LAMA or LABA monotherapies, and consistent improvements in lung function (measured by change from baseline in trough FEV(1) at 24 weeks) versus dual therapies. Treatment with UMEC/VI may improve outcomes for symptomatic patients with COPD compared with alternative maintenance treatments.
Dizziness, together with hypotension and faintness, are well-known adverse drug reactions of salbutamol that have been related to its cardiovascular effects. However, we could find no published reference to vertigo in patients taking salmeterol, in the absence of cardiovascular alterations. We present the case of a woman who experienced four independent episodes of vertigo lasting 36 h each, following four inhalations of salmeterol several months apart. The close temporal relationship between the inhalation of salmeterol and the onset of symptoms, as well as the positive re-exposures, reinforce this alleged association.
For most patients, asthma is not controlled as defined by guidelines; whether this is achievable has not been prospectively studied. A 1-year, randomized, stratified, double-blind, parallel-group study of 3,421 patients with uncontrolled asthma compared fluticasone propionate and salmeterol/fluticasone in achieving two rigorous, composite, guideline-based measures of control: totally and well-controlled asthma. Treatment was stepped-up until total control was achieved (or maximum 500 microg corticosteroid twice a day). Significantly more patients in each stratum (previously corticosteroid-free, low- and moderate-dose corticosteroid users) achieved control with salmeterol/fluticasone than fluticasone. Total control was achieved across all strata: 520 (31%) versus 326 (19%) patients after dose escalation (p < 0.001) and 690 (41%) versus 468 (28%) at 1 year for salmeterol/fluticasone and fluticasone, respectively. Asthma became well controlled in 1,071 (63%) versus 846 (50%) after dose escalation (p < 0.001) and 1,204 (71%) versus 988 (59%) at 1 year. Control was achieved more rapidly and at a lower corticosteroid dose with salmeterol/fluticasone versus fluticasone. Across all strata, 68% and 76% of the patients receiving salmeterol/fluticasone and fluticasone, respectively, were on the highest dose at the end of treatment. Exacerbation rates (0.07-0.27 per patient per year) and improvement in health status were significantly better with salmeterol/fluticasone. This study confirms that the goal of guideline-derived asthma control was achieved in a majority of the patients.
This review has been withdrawn because it has been split into the following reviews: 'Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators for cystic fibrosis' and 'Short-acting inhaled bronchodilators for cystic fibrosis'. The editorial group responsible for this previously published document have withdrawn it from publication.
Introduction: Recently, the generic formulation of FP/SAL FDC has been approved in COPD. Although FP/SAL FDC has been the first long-acting FDC approved in COPD, no systematic review assessed the effect of this combination for the treatment of COPD by considering specifically Phase IV studies. The aim of this review was to systematically assess the effect of FP/SAL FDC in COPD patients enrolled in Phase IV studies.Areas covered: The question of this systematic review was to examine the evidence regarding the impact of FP/SAL FDC for the treatment of COPD by searching for Phase IV studies in the ClinicalTrials.gov database.Expert opinion: Generic drugs represent an effective cost-saving step for health-care budgets in the treatment of COPD and should be used in agreement with current recommendations and prescription accuracy. FP/SAL FDC is recommended for the initiation therapy just in a small percentage of symptomatic patients that are at high risk of exacerbation with blood eosinophil counts >/=300 cells per mul. At follow-up, FP/SAL FDC can be escalated to triple ICS/LABA/LAMA combination or switched to LABA/LAMA combination by considering symptoms, exacerbations, lack of response to ICS, inappropriate original indication, and ICS-related adverse events such as pneumonia.
For patients whose asthma is not adequately controlled with inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy alone, increasing the dose of ICS or the addition of a long-acting beta(2)-agonist is recommended. Greater improvements in lung function are achieved with the addition of a long-acting beta(2)-agonist to ICS therapy, rather than doubling the dose of ICS. Formoterol and salmeterol have a similarly long duration of effect (up to 12 h). However, as a result of their different chemical structures, there are marked pharmacological differences in the mechanism of action which affect their speeds of onset. These differences amount to a more rapid onset of effect for formoterol compared with salmeterol. Long-acting beta(2)-agonists appear to be well tolerated at elevated doses. These two features (tolerability at high doses and rapid onset of effect) support the use of formoterol as a reliever medication in addition to use in maintenance therapy. The long-acting beta(2)-agonists can be considered as beneficial additions to ICS therapy for the management of moderate-to-severe asthma.
Fixed dose combinations (FDC) of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and long-acting beta agonist (LABA) are well established in asthma treatment. The budesonide/salmeterol (B/S) FDC is now about to reach the market. It is provided as powder in hard capsules of two strengths: 120/20mug and 240/20mug when expressed as delivered doses, equivalent to 150/25mug and 300/25mug when expressed as nominal doses. Its development involved 9 pharmacokinetic (320 subjects), 3 phase II (123 subjects) and 4 phase III (1206 patients with different asthma severity) studies. Delivery is effectuated via low resistance inhaler device, Axahaler(R), generating also fine particles targeting the small airways. B/S safety, assessed in 1401 subjects, did not outline novel concerns specific for this FDC. In conclusion, the B/S dry powder FDC can be used for asthma treatment in adults not adequately controlled on ICS alone, or to maintain control of ICS/LABA treated patients, in whom switching to alternative FDC is indicated.
BACKGROUND: Prospective evidence is lacking regarding incremental benefits of long-acting dual- versus mono-bronchodilation in improving symptoms and preventing short-term disease worsening/treatment failure in low exacerbation risk patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) not receiving inhaled corticosteroids. METHODS: The 24-week, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group Early MAXimisation of bronchodilation for improving COPD stability (EMAX) trial randomised patients at low exacerbation risk not receiving inhaled corticosteroids, to umeclidinium/vilanterol 62.5/25 mug once-daily, umeclidinium 62.5 mug once-daily or salmeterol 50 mug twice-daily. The primary endpoint was trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) at Week 24. The study was also powered for the secondary endpoint of Transition Dyspnoea Index at Week 24. Other efficacy assessments included spirometry, symptoms, heath status and short-term disease worsening measured by the composite endpoint of clinically important deterioration using three definitions. RESULTS: Change from baseline in trough FEV(1) at Week 24 was 66 mL (95% confidence interval [CI]: 43, 89) and 141 mL (95% CI: 118, 164) greater with umeclidinium/vilanterol versus umeclidinium and salmeterol, respectively (both p < 0.001). Umeclidinium/vilanterol demonstrated consistent improvements in Transition Dyspnoea Index versus both monotherapies at Week 24 (vs umeclidinium: 0.37 [95% CI: 0.06, 0.68], p = 0.018; vs salmeterol: 0.45 [95% CI: 0.15, 0.76], p = 0.004) and all other symptom measures at all time points. Regardless of the clinically important deterioration definition considered, umeclidinium/vilanterol significantly reduced the risk of a first clinically important deterioration compared with umeclidinium (by 16-25% [p < 0.01]) and salmeterol (by 26-41% [p < 0.001]). Safety profiles were similar between treatments. CONCLUSIONS: Umeclidinium/vilanterol consistently provides early and sustained improvements in lung function and symptoms and reduces the risk of deterioration/treatment failure versus umeclidinium or salmeterol in symptomatic patients with low exacerbation risk not receiving inhaled corticosteroids. These findings suggest a potential for early use of dual bronchodilators to help optimise therapy in this patient group.
Beta2-adrenoreceptor agonists (beta2-agonists) are extensively used in the treatment of childhood asthma. However, there have been concerns regarding their adverse effects and safety. In 2005, the FDA commissioned a "Black Box Warning" communicating the potential for an increased risk for serious asthma exacerbations or asthma related deaths, with the regular use of LABAs. In a meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials, the incidence of severe adverse events appeared to be highest in the 4-11 year age group. Several mechanisms have been proposed regarding the risk of regular use of beta2-agonists, such as masking patients' perception of worsening asthma, desensitization and downregulation of the beta2-adrenoreceptor, pro-inflammatory effects of beta2-agonists, pharmacogenetic effects of beta2-adrenoreceptor polymorphisms and age related differences in pathophysiology of asthma. In this paper, we review beta2-receptor pharmacology, discuss the concerns regarding treatment with beta2-agonists in childhood asthma, and provide suggestions for clinical pediatric practice in the light of current literature.
The effects of the long-acting beta 2-agonist salmeterol on early and late phase airways events provoked by inhaled allergen were assessed in a group of atopic asthmatic patients. In a placebo-controlled study, salmeterol 50 micrograms inhaled before allergen challenge ablated both the early and late phase of allergen-induced bronchoconstriction over a 34 h time period. Salmeterol also completely inhibited the allergen-induced rise in non-specific bronchial responsiveness over the same time period. These effects were shown to be unrelated to prolonged bronchodilatation or functional antagonism. These data suggest novel actions for topically active long-acting beta 2-agonists in asthma that extend beyond their protective action on airways smooth muscle.
The ability of chemically distinct ligands to produce different effects on the same G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) has interesting therapeutic implications, but, if excessively propagated downstream, would introduce biologic noise compromising cognate ligand detection. We asked whether cells have the ability to limit the degree to which chemical diversity imposed at the ligand-GPCR interface is propagated to the downstream signal. We carried out an unbiased analysis of the integrated cellular response elicited by two chemically and pharmacodynamically diverse beta-adrenoceptor agonists, isoproterenol and salmeterol. We show that both ligands generate an identical integrated response, and that this stereotyped output requires endocytosis. We further demonstrate that the endosomal beta2-adrenergic receptor signal confers uniformity on the downstream response because it is highly sensitive and saturable. Based on these findings, we propose that GPCR signaling from endosomes functions as a biologic noise filter to enhance reliability of cognate ligand detection.
Inhaled beta 2-stimulants are the most effective drugs for acute asthma attacks. This is probably due to the functional antagonism against a large variety of possible asthma mediators. A slight rebound increase of bronchial hyperreactivity 12 to 23 h after stopping regular treatment has been proposed. This finding is not well documented and must be further studied. There is no convincing evidence that tachyphylaxis of clinical importance to the bronchodilating effect occurs in asthmatics receiving normal doses of beta 2-receptor stimulants but cannot be totally excluded. Candidates for regular inhaled beta 2-agonist treatment always have inflammation in their airways and should be given inhaled steroids. Steroids not only seem to reduce airway inflammation and hyperreactivity but they also reverse beta 2-receptor subsensitivity in experimental studies. Patients on purely prophylactic antiasthmatic drugs should be instructed always to carry their beta 2-stimulants inhalers.
Asthma control is often suboptimal in adolescents, but few studies have evaluated asthma treatments in this population.This post hoc analysis assessed the efficacy and safety of budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FORM) maintenance and reliever therapy (MART) for treatment of persistent asthma in adolescent (age 12-17 years) subgroups within six randomised, double-blind trials. The primary end-point was time to first severe exacerbation. Secondary end-points included number of severe exacerbations, asthma-related symptoms, night-time awakenings, morning peak expiratory flow, forced expiratory volume in 1 s, as-needed medication use and five-item asthma control questionnaire scores.In adolescents (n=1847), BUD/FORM MART was similar to or more effective than comparators across each of the studies in reducing the risk of a first severe exacerbation (hazard ratios (HR) BUD/FORM MART versus comparators 0.15-1.01; pooled HR 0.49, 95% CI 0.34-0.70), with comparable outcomes to the adult subgroups (n=12 197). Similar treatment benefits for BUD/FORM MART were observed for secondary end-points. As-needed medication use was lower with BUD/FORM MART than comparators, and BUD/FORM as-needed use was lower in adolescents than adults. Treatment was well tolerated.This analysis supports the use of BUD/FORM MART in adolescents with persistent asthma, its efficacy and safety being consistent with that reported for adults.
Apart from the individual diseases, some patients also show overlapping manifestations of asthma and COPD. Nevertheless, the diagnosis of COPD is often delayed due to inaccessibility to spirometry; the prevalence of the asthma COPD overlap phenotype is rather high given the exposure to biomass smoke. Furthermore, the rates of exacerbations are twice as high compared to the patients with either of the diseases. A treatment strategy that would reduce the risk of exacerbations would contribute immensely to the management of such patients. Evidence of eosinophilia (marker of inflammation) in patients with asthma, asthma COPD overlap phenotype or COPD alone should prompt treatment with a combination of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)/ long-acting beta-agonists (LABA); several studies have shown improvement in the airflow limitation and reduction in the rate of exacerbations with salmeterol-fluticasone combination (SFC). Considering the association of COPD and cardiovascular diseases (CVD), it is critical to determine the cardiovascular safety of the LABA in such patients. Salmeterol is a highly selective partial b-2 agonist; the TORCH study and the studies comparing formoterol and salmeterol infer that there is no increased risk of new cardiovascular adverse events either with Salmeterol or SFC. Furthermore, the combination may provide certain degree of cardio-protection. Since COPD per se increases the risk of CVD, the cardio-safety of salmeterol outweighs its onset of action. SFC has well substantiated benefits in patients with asthma, COPD and high-risk patients such as those with an overlap of COPD and asthma symptoms, patients with elevated eosinophils and pre-existing CVD. An advisory board was hence conducted, which discussed the role of combination of salmeterol and fluticasone (SFC) not only in asthma and COPD but also in asthma COPD overlap phenotype. Based on the panel's clinical experience and the expertise derived thereof, the propositions regarding the place of SFC therapy in patients with stable and uncontrolled asthma, asthma COPD overlap phenotype and COPD has been put forth.
In the Salmeterol Multicenter Asthma Research Trial (SMART), patients receiving the long-acting beta agonist salmeterol--particularly African Americans--had a statistically significantly higher risk of fatal or potentially fatal asthma episodes. As a result, medications that contain salmeterol (Serevent, Advair) or formoterol (Foradil) carry a "black box warning." However, the benefits of these drugs continue to outweigh the risks, if they are used appropriately.
The aim of this study was to investigate relationships between acute exacerbation and Forced Expiratory Volume 1 second (FEV1) improvement after treatment with combined long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). A total of 137 COPD patients were classified as responders or nonresponders according to FEV1 improvement after 3 months of LABA/ICS treatment in fourteen referral hospitals in Korea. Exacerbation occurrence in these two subgroups was compared over a period of 1 yr. Eighty of the 137 COPD patients (58.4%) were classified as responders and 57 (41.6%) as nonresponders. Acute exacerbations occurred in 25 patients (31.3%) in the responder group and in 26 patients (45.6%) in the nonresponder group (P=0.086). FEV1 improvement after LABA/ICS treatment was a significant prognostic factor for fewer acute exacerbations in a multivariate Cox proportional hazard model adjusted for age, sex, FEV1, smoking history, 6 min walk distance, body mass index, exacerbation history in the previous year, and dyspnea scale.Three-month treatment response to LABA/ICS might be a prognostic factor for the occurrence of acute exacerbation in COPD patients.
Mountaineering brings many health risks, one of which is mountain sickness. Its mildest form - acute mountain sickness - is mainly characterized by subjective symptoms (headache, loss of appetite, insomnia, weakness, nausea and rarely also vomiting). Advanced and life-threatening forms are characterized by tissue edema - cerebral or pulmonary high altitude edema. The common denominator of these acute forms is the low oxygen tension leading to hypoxemia and tissue ischemia. Sum of maladaptive or adaptive processes can modify the clinical picture. Underlying mechanisms of the chronic forms of pulmonary disease are the adaptation processes - pulmonary hypertension and polycythemia leading to heart failure.The only causal therapeutic intervention is to restore adequate oxygen tension, descend to lower altitudes or oxygen therapy. Pharmacotherapy has only a supportive effect. The prophylaxis includes stimulation of the respiratory center by carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide) antiedematous treatment with glucocorticoids (dexamethasone), increase lymphatic drainage of the lungs and brain by beta2-agonists (salmeterol) or mitigation of pulmonary hypertension by calcium channel blockers or phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (sildenafil or tadalafil).
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) play a crucial role in modulating physiological responses and serve as the main drug target. Specifically, salmeterol and salbutamol, which are used for the treatment of pulmonary diseases, exert their effects by activating the GPCR beta2-adrenergic receptor (beta2AR). In our study, we employed coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations with the Martini 3 force field to investigate the dynamics of drug molecules in membranes in the presence and absence of beta2AR. Our simulations reveal that, in more than 50% of the flip-flop events, the drug molecules use the beta2AR surface to permeate the membrane. The pathway along the GPCR surface is significantly more energetically favorable for the drug molecules, which was revealed by umbrella sampling simulations along spontaneous flip-flop pathways. Furthermore, we assessed the behavior of drugs with intracellular targets, such as kinase inhibitors, whose therapeutic efficacy could benefit from this observation. In summary, our results show that beta2AR surface interactions can significantly enhance the membrane permeation of drugs, emphasizing their potential for consideration in future drug development strategies.
PURPOSE: No studies have investigated genetic effects on quality of life (QoL) measurements like improvements in the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scores for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treatments with fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FSC). Therefore, in addition to testing genetic effects on change from baseline in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)), genetic associations that may predict SGRQ response to FSC treatment were investigated in this analysis. METHODS: This post hoc exploratory genome-wide genetic analysis included subjects from 10 clinical trials: NCT01772134, NCT01772147, NCT00633217, NCT01817764, NCT01879410, NCT01822899, NCT01323621, NCT01342913, NCT01323634, and NCT01706328. The Genetics Analysis Population (subjects who provided written consent, a blood sample for genetic research, and were successfully genotyped) included 2005/2900 subjects in the intent-to-treat sample, who received FSC, for testing association with change from baseline in trough FEV(1) and 1188/2005 subjects for testing SGRQ responses (change from baseline SGRQ score and categorical response by SGRQ score with Responders achieving >4 unit decrease at end of study treatment). MAIN FINDINGS: One locus on chromosome 20 with seven variants with low minor allele frequencies significantly associated with change from baseline SGRQ score. The binary SGRQ response provided similar trends for association but did not attain genome-wide significance levels. No genetic association was detected with change from baseline in trough FEV(1). CONCLUSIONS: Common variants are unlikely to play a role in response to FSC.
