A review of the treatment of vestibular disorders with drugs is presented. In animal experiments, administration of certain drugs, e.g. alcohol, barbiturates and chlorpromazine, retards the vestibular compensation, while others, e.g. caffeine, amphetamine and ACTH, accelerate the compensation. In compensated animals, some drugs produce overcompensation and some decompensation. A double-blind, randomized trial of the effect of scopolamine and dimenhydrinate in patients with vertigo of varying origin showed, as compared with placebo, that these drugs did not significantly alleviate the vestibular imbalance. The reason for the poor efficacy of the treatment may have been overcompensation of vestibular function loss and adverse effects caused by the drugs. Care should be taken that the drugs used do not retard the vestibular compensation caused by the central nervous system.
Frey's syndrome occurs after parotid gland surgery or injury to the parotid gland and is characterized by gustatory sweating and erythema of the face upon mastication. The syndrome occurs in 50 to 60 per cent of all patients undergoing parotid surgery but the symptoms are only distressing to about 10 per cent of patients undergoing parotidectomy. A case of Frey's syndrome is reported The patient obtained good relief of symptoms with scopolamine cream and atropine cream. Other methods of therapy are discussed along with their limitations. Noninvasive therapy with topical anticholinergic creams is effective and seems appropriate in the control of gustatory sweating.
The alkaloid L-(-)-scopolamine [L-(-)-hyoscine] competitively inhibits muscarinic receptors for acetylcholine and acts as a nonselective muscarinic antagonist, producing both peripheral antimuscarinic properties and central sedative, antiemetic, and amnestic effects. The parasympatholytic scopolamine, structurally very similar to atropine (racemate of hyoscyamine), is used in conditions requiring decreased parasympathetic activity, primarily for its effect on the eye, gastrointestinal tract, heart, and salivary and bronchial secretion glands, and in special circumstances for a CNS action. Therefore, scopolamine is most suitable for premedication before anesthesia and for antiemetic effects. This alkaloid is the most effective single agent to prevent motion sickness. Scopolamine was the first drug to be made commercially available in a transdermal therapeutic system (TTS-patch) delivering alkaloid. Recently, pharmacokinetic data on scopolamine in different biozlogic matrices were obtained most efficiently using liquid chromatographic-tandem mass spectrometric (LC-MS/MS) or gas chromatography online coupled to mass spectrometry. Pharmacokinetic parameters are dependent on the dosage form (oral dose, tablets; parenteral application; IV infusion; SC and IM injection). Scopolamine has a limited bioavailability if orally administered. The maximum drug concentration occurs approximately 0.5 hours after oral administration. Because only 2.6% of nonmetabolized L-(-)-scopolamine is excreted in urine, a first-pass metabolism is suggested to occur after oral administration of scopolamine. Because of its short half-life in plasma and dose-dependent adverse effects (in particular hallucinations and the less serious reactions, eg, vertigo, dry mouth, drowsiness), the clinical use of scopolamine administered orally or parenterally is limited. To minimize the relatively high incidence of side effects, the transdermal dosage form has been developed. The commercially available TTS-patch contains a 1.5-mg drug reservoir and a priming dose (140 microg) to reach the steady-state concentration of scopolamine quickly. The patch releases 0.5 mg alkaloid over a period of 3 days (releasing rate 5 microg/h). Following the transdermal application of scopolamine, the plasma concentrations of the drug indicate major interindividual variations. Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) of approximately 100 pg/mL (range 11-240 pg/mL) of the alkaloid are reached after about 8 hours and achieve steady state. During a period of 72 hours the plaster releases scopolamine, so constantly high plasma levels (concentration range 56-245 pg/mL) are obtained, followed by a plateau of urinary scopolamine excretion. Although scopolamine has been used in clinical practice for many years, data concerning its metabolism and the renal excretion in man are limited. After incubation with beta-glucuronidase and sulfatase, the recovery of scopolamine in human urine increased from 3% to approximately 30% of the drug dose (intravenously administered). According to these results from enzymatic hydrolysis of scopolamine metabolites, the glucuronide conjugation of scopolamine could be the relevant pathway in healthy volunteers. However, scopolamine metabolism in man has not been verified stringently. An elucidation of the chemical structures of the metabolites extracted from human urine is still lacking. Scopolamine has been shown to undergo an oxidative demethylation during incubation with CYP3A (cytochrome P-450 subfamily). To inhibit the CYP3A located in the intestinal mucosa, components of grapefruit juice are very suitable. When scopolamine was administered together with 150 mL grapefruit juice, the alkaloid concentrations continued to increase, resulting in an evident prolongation of tmax (59.5 +/- 25.0 minutes; P < 0.001). The AUC0-24h values of scopolamine were higher during the grapefruit juice period. They reached approximately 142% of the values associated with the control group (P < 0.005). Consequently, the related absolute bioavailabilities (range 6% to 37%) were significantly higher than the corresponding values of the drug orally administered together with water (range 3% to 27%). The effect of the alkaloid on quantitative electroencephalogram (qEEG) and cognitive performance correlated with pharmacokinetics was shown in studies with healthy volunteers. From pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling techniques, a direct correlation between serum concentrations of scopolamine and changes in total power in alpha-frequency band (EEG) in healthy volunteers was provided. The alkaloid readily crosses the placenta. Therefore, scopolamine should be administered to pregnant women only under observation. The drug is compatible with nursing and is considered to be nonteratogenic. In conclusion, scopolamine is used for premedication in anesthesia and for the prevention of nausea and vomiting associated with motion sickness. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of scopolamine depend on the dosage form. Effects on different cognitive functions have been extensively documented.
OBJECTIVE: To review the efficacy and safety of various drug treatments for sialorrhea. Pharmacotherapy for drug-induced sialorrhea is not addressed. DATA SOURCES: Clinical studies were identified using PubMed (1966-October 2001). Key search terms included sialorrhea and drug therapy. DATA SYNTHESIS: Sialorrhea is a social and physical detriment to patients. Drug treatment, although not necessarily the treatment of choice for all patients, can offer some symptom relief. CONCLUSIONS: Literature has documented that benztropine, glycopyrrolate, and scopolamine can reduce the incidence of sialorrhea. Although the literature evaluating the therapeutic options has limitations (e.g., small sample size, inconsistent outcome measurements), glycopyrrolate may have an advantage over the other agents due to fewer adverse effects.
Despite the growing burden of major depressive disorder (MDD) on the society, therapeutic management that is mostly based on the conventional monoaminergic mechanisms, is significantly delimited especially from low response rate and time lag for treatment response; thus, often prolonging the distress for patients. The mechanistic exploration of drug candidates that could exert antidepressant effects rapidly has highlighted the significance of modulating mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway in MDD. Fast acting antidepressants acts at different receptors, subunits and sites, including NMDA, AMPA, m1ACh, mGluR2/3 and GluN2B to enhance mTOR function, leading to increase in synaptic protein synthesis, synaptogenesis and spine-remodeling, which in turn contribute to the rapid antidepressant effects. This review focuses on the preclinical and clinical evidences on the fast acting antidepressants that can modulate mTOR pathway. It can be understood that modulating mTOR pathway for rapid onset of antidepressant effect in MDD is not without challenges as some of the drugs have failed in advanced stages of clinical trials. However, considering the recent approval of esketamine as a breakthrough in decades, fast acting antidepressants in the mTOR pathway may have promising prospects in the drug discovery pipeline.
As travel by air and ship becomes increasingly popular, more and more travelers are using transdermal scopolamine to avoid motion sickness. In fact, it has become almost fashionable for ocean travelers to sit on the sun deck with a patch behind the ear. This article describes withdrawal symptoms in a patient who used transdermal scopolamine beyond the recommended 3 days.
Alzheimer's disease leads to progressive cognitive function loss, which may impair both intellectual capacities and psychosocial aspects. Although the current knowledge points to a multifactorial character of Alzheimer's disease, the most issued pathological hypothesis remains the cholinergic theory. The main animal model used in cholinergic theory research is the scopolamine-induced memory loss model. Although, in some cases, a temporary symptomatic relief can be obtained through targeting the cholinergic or glutamatergic neurotransmitter systems, no current treatment is able to stop or slow cognitive impairment. Many potentially successful therapies are often blocked by the blood-brain barrier since it exhibits permeability only for several classes of active molecules. However, the plant extracts' active molecules are extremely diverse and heterogeneous regarding the biochemical structure. In this way, many active compounds constituting the recently tested plant extracts may exhibit the same general effect on acetylcholine pathway, but on different molecular ground, which can be successfully used in Alzheimer's disease adjuvant therapy.
The drugs atropine and hyoscine are reviewed in the context of their use by anaesthetists. The results of recent studies are stressed and guidelines given for use of these drugs in modern anaesthetic practice.
Two hundred and forty-four surgical patients who received no anticholinergic premedication were compared with 160 patients who had received atropine or scopolamine before the induction of anaesthesia. Infants and patients undergoing heart surgery were excluded. Eleven anaesthetists participated in the study. They were asked to report problems with oropharyngeal and tracheobronchial secretions. Two per cent of unpremedicated patients experienced problems with secretions of a degree sufficient to require treatment. This small percentage appears insufficient to warrant routine preoperative anticholinergic medication.
Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter that is important for communication between neurons and muscle, is involved in direct neurotransmission in the autonomic parasympathetic nervous system, and has been implicated in cognitive processing, arousal, and attention in the brain. The cholinergic-adrenergic hypothesis of mood disorders states that a given affective state might represent a balance between central cholinergic and adrenergic neurotransmitter activity in those areas of the brain regulating moods. According to this hypothesis, depression would be the clinical manifestation of a state of cholinergic dominance, whereas mania would reflect adrenergic dominance. On the basis of this hypothesis, anticholinergic drugs have been investigated as potential treatments for depression, but study results have not shown consistent antidepressant effects. However, the dosage dependency of scopolamine's effect across different studies and the lack of antidepressant effects with other anticholinergic drugs suggest that a specific muscarinic receptor subtype might be most relevant to the potential antidepressant mechanism of action of anticholinergic drugs.
Gastrointestinal obstruction is associated with nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Antisecretory agents can relieve these symptoms, even in the absence of surgical or mechanical intervention. These medical management approaches are outlined, and recommendations are made.
Double-blind, placebo-controlled investigations of scopolamine, physostigmine, arecoline, and tetrahydroaminoacridine (THA) in normal adults and in dementia of the Alzheimer-type (DAT) were reviewed to determine the relative sensitivity of various assessment procedures in the measurement of drug effects. In normal adults, word list learning techniques have been most widely employed and have been sensitive to drug effects. In DAT, a wide variety of assessment procedures have been employed. Based on the limited number of possible comparisons across studies, two procedures appear to be useful: word list learning tasks that generate an index of intrusion errors, and visual recognition tasks. The lack of standardized assessments limits the ability of investigators to replicate studies, to compare relative efficacy of various drugs, or to address a number of other questions that are fundamental to the development of effective cholinergic treatments for DAT.
Transdermal therapeutic systems have been increasingly used in the past two decades. However, cutaneous side effects are fairly common and may result in poor patient compliance. This review article summarizes the spectrum of reactions due to transdermal therapeutic systems and provides a current list of known allergens.
The literature is reviewed for contact dermatitis associated with transdermal therapeutic systems. Clonidine, nitroglycerin, scopolamine, estradiol and testosterone are utilized in such applications, and fentanyl is under investigation. Most cutaneous reactions are limited to localized dermatitis; however, generalized systemic effects may occur. Investigators are reporting skin-related side-effects in up to 50% of patients using transdermal clonidine; however, with the other agents, this is demonstrated much less frequently. Reactivation of the dermatitis via oral medication, following sensitization to the patch, is noted in rare instances.
BACKGROUND: Post-rhytidectomy sialocele is a rare complication. The usual treatment uses prolonged drainage. The use of antisialogogues has been described previously, but has potential side effects. Transdermal scopolamine SCOPODERM TTS is indicated for the prevention of motion sickness and also has antisialogugue action. METHODS: An interventional case report is presented. RESULTS: The application of transdermal scopolamine SCOPODERM TTS resulted in resolution of a post-rhytidectomy sialocele within 6 days. CONCLUSION: Transdermal scopolamine delivery should be considered as an option for the treatment of post-rhytidectomy parotid fistulas.
BACKGROUND: In most animal species, opioids alter colonic motility via the inhibition of excitatory enteric motor neurons. The mechanisms by which opioids alter human colonic motility are unclear. The aim of this study was to describe the effects of loperamide on neuromuscular function in the human colon. METHODS: Tissue specimens of human colon from 10 patients undergoing an anterior resection were divided into three inter-taenial circular muscle strips. Separate organ baths were used to assess: (1) excitatory transmission (selective blockade of inhibitory transmission: L-NOARG/MRS2179); (2) inhibitory transmission (selective blockade of excitatory transmission: hyoscine hydrobromide); and (3) a control bath (no drug additions). Neuromuscular function was assessed using force transducer recordings and electrical field stimulation (EFS; 20 V, 10 Hz, 0.5 ms, 10 s) prior to and following loperamide and naloxone. KEY RESULTS: In human preparations with L-NOARG/MRS2179, loperamide had no significant effects on isometric contractions. In preparations with hyoscine hydrobromide, loperamide reduced isometric relaxation during EFS (median difference + 0.60 g post-loperamide, Z = -2.35, p = 0.019). CONCLUSIONS AND INFERENCES: Loperamide had no effect on excitatory neuromuscular function in human colonic circular muscle. These findings suggest that loperamide alters colonic function by acting primarily on inhibitory motor neurons, premotor enteric neurons, or via alternative non-opioid receptor pathways.
The drug hyoscine has several indications for symptom control for patients with end-stage disease. The transdermal preparation, Scopoderm, is most widely used to control excess salivary secretions but it can also have a role in the management of terminal secretions and in the control of nausea.
The effectiveness of the "Sea Band" acupressure band compared with placebo and hyoscine (0.6 mg), also known as scopolamine, to increase tolerance to a laboratory nauseogenic cross-coupled motion challenge was assessed using 18 subjects. The results showed that the subjects had a significant increase in tolerance with hyoscine but had no increase in tolerance with the "Sea Band" or placebo. Possible reasons for the failure to show any significant protection from the use of these acupressure bands are insufficient movement of the wrist to provide continuous stimulation, and/or the likelihood that only a minority of the population would show non-negligible benefit as experience with medical acupressure would suggest. The application of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation may be worthy of study.
The respiratory effects of induction of anaesthesia with Minaxolone 0.4 mg/kg were studied following premedication with either atropine alone, lorazepam and atropine or papaveretum and hyoscine. There was no significant difference in the incidence of apnoea in the three groups. Those who received non-narcotic premedication showed a significant increase in respiratory rate, but the minute volumes in these patients did not differ significantly from control values in the third minute after injection of minaxolone. In those who received papaveretum and hyoscine, there was no change in respiratory rate and a highly significant reduction in minute volume.
