Sevoflurane has been widely used in clinical anesthesia as an inhalation anesthetic. With the development of medicine, there have been several new applications in recent years, such as daytime surgery, labor analgesia, and combined nerve block for some surgeries. Moreover, as research progresses, it has been found that it not only has potential organ protection effects but can also be used to treat severe asthma and relieve the tracheal spasm state. In addition, local administration can effectively treat vascular ulcers. We briefly review the organ protective effect of sevoflurane, its application in dental treatment, asthma treatment, vascular ulcer treatment and some new progress in clinical application.
Cancer is one of most the significant threats to human health worldwide, and the primary method of treating solid tumours is surgery. Propofol, one of the most widely used intravenous anaesthetics in surgery, was found to be involved in many cancer-related pathophysiology processes, mainly including anti-tumour and minor cancer-promoting effects in various types of cancer. An increasing number of studies have identified that propofol plays a role in cancer by regulating the expression of multiple signalling pathways, downstream molecules, microRNAs and long non-coding RNAs. Emerging evidence has indicated that propofol can enhance the anti-tumour effect of chemotherapeutic drugs or some small molecular compounds. Additionally, in vivo animal models have shown that propofol inhibits tumour growth and metastasis. Furthermore, most clinical trials indicate that propofol is associated with better survival outcomes in cancer patients after surgery. Propofol use is encouraged in cancers that appear to have a better prognosis after its use during surgery. We hope that future large and prospective multicenter studies will provide more precise answers to guide the choice of anaesthetics during cancer surgery.
Hospitals worldwide are experiencing a shortage in essential intravenous sedative medications. This is attributable to high number and high sedative needs of COVID-19 critical care patients with disruption of drug supply chains. Inhaled volatile anesthetic agents are an abundant resource and readily implementable solution for providing ICU sedation. Inhaled volatile agents may also provide important pulmonary benefits for COVID-19 patients with ARDS that could improve gas exchange and reduce time spent on a ventilator. We review the use of volatile agents, and provide a technical overview and algorithm for administering inhaled volatile-based sedation in ICUs.
Anesthetic agents cause unique electroencephalogram (EEG) activity resulting from actions on their diverse molecular targets. Typically to produce balanced anesthesia in the clinical setting, several anesthetic and adjuvant agents are combined. This creates challenges for the clinical use of intraoperative EEG monitoring, because computational approaches are mostly limited to spectral analyses and different agents and combinations produce different EEG responses. Thus, testing of many combinations of agents is needed to generate accurate, protocol independent analyses. Additionally, most studies to develop new computational approaches take place in young, healthy adults and electrophysiological responses to anesthetics vary widely at the extremes of age, due to physiological brain differences. Below, we discuss the challenges associated with EEG biomarker identification for anesthetic depth based on the diversity of molecular targets. We suggest that by focusing on the generalized effects of anesthetic agents on network activity, we can create paths for improved universal analyses.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: There is scarce evidence on the hemodynamic stability of remimazolam during anesthetic induction in patients with significant coronary artery disease. This study aims to compare the effects of remimazolam and propofol on post-induction hypotension in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial. SETTING: Tertiary teaching hospital. PATIENTS: Adult patients undergoing isolated CABG. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomly allocated to received either remimazolam (n = 50) or propofol (n = 50) for anesthetic induction. The remimazolam group received an initial infusion at 6 mg/kg/h, which was later adjusted to 1-2 mg/kg/h to maintain a bispectral index of 40-60 after loss of consciousness. In the propofol group, a 1.5 mg/kg bolus of propofol was administered, followed by 1-1.5% sevoflurane inhalation as needed to achieve the target bispectral index. MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcome was the area under the curve (AUC) below the baseline mean arterial pressure (MAP) during the first 10 min after anesthetic induction. Secondary outcomes included the AUC for MAP <65 mmHg and the requirement for vasopressors. MAIN RESULTS: The remimazolam group demonstrated a significantly lower AUC under the baseline MAP compared to the propofol group (mean [SD], 169.8 [101.0] mmHg.min vs. 220.6 [102.4] mmHg.min; mean difference [95% confidence interval], 50.8 [10.4-91.2] mmHg.min; P = 0.014). Additionally, the remimazolam group had a reduced AUC for MAP <65 mmHg (7.3 [10.3] mmHg.min vs. 13.9 [14.9] mmHg.min; P = 0.007) and a lower frequency of vasopressor use compared to the propofol group (60% vs. 88%, P = 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Remimazolam may offer improved hemodynamic stability during anesthetic induction in patients undergoing CABG, suggesting its potential advantage over propofol for patients with significant coronary artery disease in terms of hemodynamic stability.
BACKGROUND: Volatile anesthetics are used more commonly for sedation in the intensive-care-unit (ICU). However, evidence for long-term use remains low. We therefore conducted a randomized-controlled trial comparing sevoflurane with intravenous sedation with particular focus on efficacy and safety. METHODS: In this prospective, randomized-controlled phase-IIb monocentric clinical-trial ICU patients requiring at least 48 h of sedation were randomized to receive sevoflurane (S) or propofol/midazolam (P). Sedation quality was monitored using the Richmond-Agitation-Sedation-Scale. Following termination of sedation, the time to spontaneous breathing and extubation, opioid consumption, hemodynamics, ICU and hospital length of stay (LOS) and adverse events were recorded. RESULTS: 79 patients were eligible to randomization. Sedation quality was comparable between sevoflurane (n = 39) and propofol (n = 40). However, the use of sevoflurane lead to a reduction in time to spontaneous breathing (26 min vs. 375 min, P < 0.001). Patients sedated with propofol had lower opioid requirements (remifentanil:400 mug/h vs. 500 mug/h, P = 0.007; sufentanil:40 mug/h vs. 30 mug/h, P = 0.007) while hemodynamics, LOS or the occurrence of adverse events did not differ. CONCLUSION: ICU patients sedated with sevoflurane >48 h may return to spontaneous breathing faster, while the quality of sedation is comparable to a propofol-based sedation regime. Sevoflurane might be considered to be safe for long-term sedation in this patient population, while being non-inferior compared to propofol.
This study estimated the climate footprint of halogenated inhalation anesthetics in Sweden and estimated effects of a decreased use of these compounds. We collected data on sales of desflurane, sevoflurane and isoflurane in Sweden during 2017 and calculated the mass of CO2 equivalents (CO2e) using Global Warming Potential data over 100 years for the compounds. Inhalation anesthetics contributed by 5000 tons of CO2e which corresponds to 0.005 percent of the Swedish climate footprint. By replacing desflurane with sevoflurane the footprint can be reduced by 73 percent. By replacing sevoflurane with intravenous propofol the climate effect can be reduced further by at least 2 orders of magnitude.
This review assesses the extent to which sevoflurane fulfills the requirements of the ideal inhalational agent for use in neuroanesthetic practice. Sevoflurane's pharmacokinetic profile is outlined. Data from animal and human studies are used to discuss its effects on cerebral hemodynamics, central nervous system monitoring, and cardiovascular parameters. Where possible, sevoflurane is compared with isoflurane, currently considered the inhalational agent of choice in neuroanesthesia. Sevoflurane's potential for toxicity is reviewed.
BACKGROUND: We reported that premedication with nasal dexmedetomidine was associated with a more intense oculocardiac reflex (OCR). In this study we performed an intrasubject, intravenous comparison to test our hypothesis that this alpha-adrenergic agonist potentiates the trigemino-vagal reflex. METHODS: OCR (greatest change heart rate/baseline heart rate) was prospectively monitored with 10-second, square-wave 200 g tension on the inferior rectus or other muscles during strabismus surgery. Between the first and second muscle, intravenous dexmedetomidine 0.5 mug/kg was delivered. RESULTS: All patients had no anticholinergic agents. A total 842 historic control patients (median age, 5.5 years) with no dexmedetomidine between muscles experienced the first OCR of 75% +/- 24% (SD) and the second OCR of 77% +/- 22%. The 33 study patients (median age, 5.6 years) experienced the first OCR 84% +/- 16% and dexmedetomidine second OCR of 66% +/- 25% for a bradycardia augmentation of 18% +/- 19% (P < 0.01 [Mann-Whitney]). CONCLUSIONS: Similar to the effect of fentanyl, intravenous fast-push dexmedetomidine augmented the bradycardia associated with extraocular muscle traction.
Inhalatory anesthetic agents are frequently used for anesthesia maintenance. Sevoflurane is considered one of the safest regarding its cardiac effects. We report a case of a cardiac arrhythmia induced by sevoflurane in an otherwise healthy adult and discuss sevoflurane's cardiac effects.
BACKGROUND: The effect of intraoperative anesthetic regimen on pulmonary outcome after minimally invasive esophagectomy for esophageal cancer is yet undetermined. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of volatile anesthesia (sevoflurane or desflurane) compared with propofol-based intravenous anesthesia on pulmonary complications after minimally invasive esophagectomy. METHODS: Patients scheduled for minimally invasive esophagectomy were randomly assigned to 1 of 3 general anesthetic regimens (sevoflurane, desflurane, or propofol). The primary outcome was the incidence of pulmonary complications within the 7 days postoperatively, which was a collapsed composite end point, including respiratory infection, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, atelectasis, respiratory failure, bronchospasm, pulmonary embolism, and aspiration pneumonitis. The severity of pulmonary complications, surgery-related complications, and other secondary outcomes were also assessed. RESULTS: Of 647 patients assessed for eligibility, 558 were randomized, and 553 were analyzed. A total of 185 patients were assigned to the sevoflurane group, 185 in the desflurane, and 183 in the propofol group. Patients receiving a volatile anesthetic (sevoflurane or desflurane) had a significantly lower incidence (36.5% vs 47.5%; odds ratio, 0.63; 95% confidence interval, 0.44-0.91; P = .013) and lower severity grade of pulmonary complications ( P = .035) compared to the patients receiving propofol. There were no statistically significant differences in other secondary outcomes between the 2 groups. CONCLUSIONS: In patients undergoing minimally invasive esophagectomy, the use of volatile anesthesia (sevoflurane or desflurane) resulted in the reduced risk and severity of pulmonary complications within the first 7 postoperative days as compared to propofol-based intravenous anesthesia.
BACKGROUND: Malignant hyperthermia syndrome is a hereditary pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle characterized by hypermetabolic state related to the exposure of volatile anesthetic gases or depolarizing muscle relaxants. It is an infrequent entity that occurs in genetically predisposed individuals, with a very low incidence in pediatrics (1 in 10,000-15,000 anesthetic procedures). CASE REPORT: We report a case of malignant hyperthermia related to exposure to sevoflurane during adenoidectomy surgery in a 6-year-old female. The patient presented with tachycardia, hypercapnia, and hyperthermia, requiring two successive doses of dantrolene sodium administration, with an adequate response to the treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Malignant hyperthermia syndrome is a rare condition in pediatric patients that should be detected in early stages since it is essential to initiate the treatment as soon as possible.
The pathophysiology of emergence delirium (ED) remains a mystery. Using a case study approach, ED is discussed from a clinical perspective. The case is a 4-year-old male who had myringotomy tube placement while anesthetized with sevoflurane. The negative outcome for this child is presented. The epidemiology of the phenomena is reviewed and definitions are examined. Several methods to assess ED are presented, accompanied by a discussion of the development of assessment tools. Research findings are included that address the possible causes of ED including preoperative anxiety, rapid awakening, pain, and a predisposition for this phenomenon in certain children. Various interventions, both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic are considered. The impact of anesthesia on pediatric brain development is discussed and finally some possible solutions are hypothesized.
BACKGROUND: The occurrence of hypotension after induction of general anaesthesia is common in geriatric patients, and should be prevented to minimise perioperative complications. Compared with propofol, remimazolam potentially has a lower incidence of hypotension. This study aimed to compare the incidence of hypotension after general anaesthesia induction with remimazolam or propofol in geriatric patients. METHODS: This single-centre, double-blind, randomised trial enrolled 90 patients aged >/=80 yr who received general anaesthesia for scheduled surgery. Patients were randomised to receive remimazolam (12 mg kg(-1) h(-1)) or propofol (0.025 mg kg(-1) s(-1)) for anaesthesia induction, with remifentanil and sevoflurane. The presence or absence of hypertension on the ward served as the stratification factor. The incidence of hypotension after the induction of general anaesthesia, defined as a noninvasive mean arterial pressure of <65 mm Hg measured every minute from initiation of drug administration to 3 min after tracheal intubation, was the primary outcome. Subgroup analysis was performed for the primary outcome using preoperative ward hypertension, clinical frailty scale, Charlson Comorbidity Index, and age. RESULTS: Three subjects were excluded before drug administration, and 87 subjects were included in the analysis. The incidence of hypotension was 72.1% (31/43) and 72.7% (32/44) with remimazolam or propofol, respectively. No statistically significant differences (adjusted odds ratio, 0.96; 95% confidence interval, 0.37-2.46; P=0.93) were observed between groups. Subgroup analysis revealed no significant differences between groups. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with propofol, remimazolam did not reduce the incidence of hypotension after general anaesthesia induction in patients aged >/=80 yr. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: UMIN000042587.
In current anesthesiology practice, anesthesiologists infer the state of unconsciousness without directly monitoring the brain. Drug- and patient-specific electroencephalographic (EEG) signatures of anesthesia-induced unconsciousness have been identified previously. We applied machine learning approaches to construct classification models for real-time tracking of unconscious state during anesthesia-induced unconsciousness. We used cross-validation to select and train the best performing models using 33,159 2s segments of EEG data recorded from 7 healthy volunteers who received increasing infusions of propofol while responding to stimuli to directly assess unconsciousness. Cross-validated models of unconsciousness performed very well when tested on 13,929 2s EEG segments from 3 left-out volunteers collected under the same conditions (median volunteer AUCs 0.99-0.99). Models showed strong generalization when tested on a cohort of 27 surgical patients receiving solely propofol collected in a separate clinical dataset under different circumstances and using different hardware (median patient AUCs 0.95-0.98), with model predictions corresponding with actions taken by the anesthesiologist during the cases. Performance was also strong for 17 patients receiving sevoflurane (alone or in addition to propofol) (median AUCs 0.88-0.92). These results indicate that EEG spectral features can predict unconsciousness, even when tested on a different anesthetic that acts with a similar neural mechanism. With high performance predictions of unconsciousness, we can accurately monitor anesthetic state, and this approach may be used to engineer infusion pumps to intelligibly respond to patients' neural activity.
Postoperative residual curarization is still a problem of the modern anesthesia. Neostigmine is not the safest drug that allows a safe decurarization, especially when neuromuscular transmission monitoring is not used. Sugammadex is a A-cyclodextrin designed to encapsulate rocuronium bromide, providing a rapid reversal of neuromuscular blockade. It has not cardiovascular, respiratory and cholinergic effects. It has been used in renally impaired patients with no neuromuscular blockade recurrence. Sugammadex reverses either a shallow or a deep neuromuscular block. Volatile agents such as sevoflurane seems not to influence the sugammadex ability to reverse the rocuronium neuromuscular blockade. There is no difference in the sugammadex pharmacokinetic in children and adults. Sugammadex would be able to have a role in the future in reversing a non depolarizing steroidal neuromuscular block.
Sevoflurane is a volatile anesthetic agent that does not tend to cause clinically significant hepatotoxicity, but there are some reported hepatotoxicity cases in the literature. In the case presented here, adenotonsillectomy was performed during influenza infection, and sevoflurane was administered, after which acute fulminant hepatitis developed. At hour 24 of hospitalization after fulminant hepatic failure, liver transplant was performed in a 3.5-year-old patient without any known diseases. In such cases, etiology investigations should be planned, life support therapy should be administered, and information should be given to the patient to avoid exposure to sevoflurane in the future.
Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in females. Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a molecular subtype of breast cancer which has a high mortality rate because of aggressive proliferation, quick occurrence of metastasis, and lack of effective treatment. New data show evidence that the type of anaesthesia can affect breast cancer recurrence and long-term outcome. Because TNBC lacks targets for modern specific therapy, a perioperative period could be the field of investigations for the long-term outcomes in TNBC influence. We reviewed the literature on research focusing on the influence of anaesthetics to oxidative stress, inflammation, molecular regulators, and TNBC oncological outcomes.
Under general anesthesia (GA), advanced analysis methods enhance the awareness of the electroencephalography (EEG) signature of transitions from consciousness to unconsciousness. For nonlinear and nonstationary signals, empirical mode decomposition (EMD) works as a dyadic filter bank to reserve local dynamical properties in decomposed components. Moreover, cross-frequency phase-amplitude coupling analysis illustrates that the coupling between the phase of low-frequency components and the amplitude of high-frequency components is correlated with the brain functions of sensory detection, working memory, consciousness, and attentional selection. To improve the functions of phase-amplitude coupling analysis, we utilized a multi-timescale approach based on EMD to assess changes in brain functions in anesthetic-induced unconsciousness using a measure of phase-amplitude coupling. Two groups of patients received two different anesthetic recipes (with or without ketamine) during the induction period of GA. Long-term (low-frequency) coupling represented a common transitional process of brain functions from consciousness to unconsciousness with a decay trend in both groups. By contrast, short-term coupling reflected a reverse trend to long-term coupling. However, the measures of short-term coupling also reflected a higher degree of coupling for the group with ketamine compared with that without ketamine. In addition, the coupling phase is a factor of interest. The phases for different combinations of coupling components showed significant changes in anesthetic-induced unconsciousness. The coupling between the delta-band phase and the theta-band amplitude changed from in-phase to out-phase coupling during the induction process from consciousness to unconsciousness. The changes in the coupling phase in EEG signals were abrupt and sensitive in anesthetic-induced unconsciousness.
Sevoflurane is a commonly used inhalational anesthetic agent for inducing and maintaining general anesthesia. However, it has been associated with a rare but serious pulmonary condition known as diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH). DAH is characterized by decreased hemoglobin levels, diffuse pulmonary infiltration, and respiratory failure with hypoxemia. We present a case of DAH in a healthy young adult who experienced this condition following general anesthesia with inhaled sevoflurane during an uncomplicated orthopedic procedure. Notably, there were no other risk factors or known causes that could account for the development of DAH in this patient.
