Simvastatin and other HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) are one of the most frequently prescribed class of medications in the United States, with over 15 million Americans taking these drugs. Relatively rare adverse effects related to the known toxic effects of these drugs are more common than generally realized. Clinically significant statin-induced rhabdomyolysis is an uncommon but life-threatening adverse effect. We describe a case of simvastatin-induced rhabdomyolysis. Current knowledge of the pharmacology of the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors and the drug interactions that potentiate these adverse effects are discussed. The clinical features of rhabdomyolysis and current treatment recommendations are presented.
The primary objective of this 6-week, parallel-group, open-label, randomized, multicenter trial was to compare rosuvastatin with atorvastatin, pravastatin, and simvastatin across dose ranges for reduction of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. Secondary objectives included comparing rosuvastatin with comparators for other lipid modifications and achievement of National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III and Joint European Task Force LDL cholesterol goals. After a dietary lead-in period, 2,431 adults with hypercholesterolemia (LDL cholesterol > or =160 and <250 mg/dl; triglycerides <400 mg/dl) were randomized to treatment with rosuvastatin 10, 20, 40, or 80 mg; atorvastatin 10, 20, 40, or 80 mg; simvastatin 10, 20, 40, or 80 mg; or pravastatin 10, 20, or 40 mg. At 6 weeks, across-dose analyses showed that rosuvastatin 10 to 80 mg reduced LDL cholesterol by a mean of 8.2% more than atorvastatin 10 to 80 mg, 26% more than pravastatin 10 to 40 mg, and 12% to 18% more than simvastatin 10 to 80 mg (all p <0.001). Mean percent changes in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in the rosuvastatin groups were +7.7% to +9.6% compared with +2.1% to +6.8% in all other groups. Across dose ranges, rosuvastatin reduced total cholesterol significantly more (p <0.001) than all comparators and triglycerides significantly more (p <0.001) than simvastatin and pravastatin. Adult Treatment Panel III LDL cholesterol goals were achieved by 82% to 89% of patients treated with rosuvastatin 10 to 40 mg compared with 69% to 85% of patients treated with atorvastatin 10 to 80 mg; the European LDL cholesterol goal of <3.0 mmol/L was achieved by 79% to 92% in rosuvastatin groups compared with 52% to 81% in atorvastatin groups. Drug tolerability was similar across treatments.
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), a management of aggressive breast cancer, remains an unmet medical challenge. Although a wave of efforts had spurred to design novel therapeutic method of TNBC, unpredictable prognosis with lacking effective therapeutic targets along with the resistance to apoptosis seriously limited survival benefits. Ferroptosis is a non-apoptotic form of cell death that is induced by excessive lipid peroxidation, which provide an innovative way to combat cancer. Emerging evidence suggests that ferroptosis plays an important role in the treatment of TNBC cells. Herein, a novel ferroptosis nanomedicine was prepared by loading simvastatin (SIM), a ferroptosis drug, into zwitterionic polymer coated magnetic nanoparticles (Fe(3)O(4)@PCBMA) to improve the therapeutic effect of TNBC. The as-obtained Fe(3)O(4)@PCBMA-SIM nanoparticles demonstrated more cytotoxicity against MDA-MB-231 than MCF-7 due to the higher expression of 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), which demonstrated that statins could effectively kill TNBC. Further experiments showed that SIM could inhibit the expression of HMGCR to downregulate the mevalonate (MVA) pathway and glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), thereby inducing cancer cell ferroptosis. What's more, PCBMA endows Fe(3)O(4)@PCBMA longer blood circulation performance to enhance their accumulation at tumor sites. Given that Fe(3)O(4) have proven for clinical applications by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and SIM could induce cancer cell ferroptosis, the developed Fe(3)O(4)@PCBMA-SIM nanosystem would have great potential in clinics for overcoming the drug resistance brought about by apoptotic drugs to cancer cells.
The statins are widely used to treat dyslipidemias. They are generally associated with mild adverse effects, but rarely, more serious reactions may occur. A 51-year-old man experienced delayed-onset, progressive memory loss while receiving simvastatin for hypercholesterolemia. His therapy was switched to pravastatin, and memory loss resolved gradually over the next month, with no recurrence of the adverse effect.
Oral fixed-dose niacin extended release/simvastatin is associated with clinically relevant improvements in plasma lipid profiles, including lowering of non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, relative to simvastatin monotherapy in patients with mixed dyslipidemias who had not responded fully to simvastatin monotherapy, and is generally well tolerated.
INTRODUCTION: Statin use results in a significant reduction of cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. However, patients still have residual CVD risk, even if they are receiving optimal statin treatment. AREAS COVERED: This review, based on a Pubmed/Scopus search, discusses the available evidence regarding the use of a fixed-dose fenofibrate plus simvastatin combination. This combination is useful for patients with mixed dyslipidaemia because it improves the overall lipoprotein profile. Although in clinical trials the rate of adverse events was not significantly greater than monotherapy, patients who receive combination treatment should be monitored carefully. Furthermore, in the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) Study, this combination did not result in a significant reduction of CVD events compared with simvastatin monotherapy. However, a possible benefit in this trial was observed in the subgroup of patients with high triglyceride and low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels. EXPERT OPINION: The fixed-dose fenofibrate plus simvastatin combination treatment produces additive results and is safe when patients are properly monitored. Existing evidence appears to support the addition of fenofibrate to simvastatin treatment for the reduction of residual CVD risk in patients with atherogenic dyslipidaemia. However, this combination did not lead to better clinical outcomes in the absence of dyslipidaemia.
Ezetimibe (Sch-58235) is a cholesterol absorption inhibitor being developed by Schering-Plough for the potential treatment of atherosclerosis and hypercholesterolemia. By January 2000, it was in phase III trials in the US [353762], [363364]. Schering-Plough is studying ezetimibe as a monotherapy for lowering lipid levels and, by February 2000, it was also planning combination studies with commonly used statin (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor) therapies. The company believes that ezetimibe will have additive effects with the statins, inhibiting the absorption of cholesterol in the intestine while the statins work by inhibiting the production of cholesterol in the liver [363364]. In May 2000, Merck signed an agreement with Schering-Plough to develop and market in the US a once-daily, fixed-combination tablet with simvastatin (Zocor) [368021]. This combination has been shown to improve LDL reduction to 52% as compared to 35% with Zocor alone [375966].
Albiglutide is a glucagon-like peptide-1 analogue composed of tandem copies of modified human glucagon-like peptide-1 (7-36) coupled to recombinant human albumin that is approved in adults for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. After subcutaneous administration, albiglutide is likely primarily absorbed via the lymphatic circulation, with maximum concentrations being reached in 3 to 5 days; steady-state exposures are achieved following approximately 4 to 5 weeks of once-weekly administration. The elimination half-life of albiglutide is approximately 5 days. Clearance of albiglutide is 67 mL/h with between-subject variability of 34.9%; no covariates have been identified that would require dose adjustment of albiglutide. Albiglutide lowers the fasting plasma glucose and reduces postprandial glucose excursions. In addition, beta-cell secretion is enhanced by albiglutide during hyperglycemia, whereas secretion is suppressed during hypoglycemia; alpha-cell response to hypoglycemia is not impaired by albiglutide. Albiglutide does not prolong the corrected QT interval but has a modest effect on heart rate in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Dose adjustment is not suggested in patients with renal impairment, but experience in patients with severe renal impairment is very limited, and it is recommended that albiglutide be used with care in such patients due to an increased frequency of diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. No clinically relevant drug interactions have been observed in clinical trials. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00938158, NCT01406262, NCT00537719, NCT01077505, NCT01147731, NCT01147718, NCT01147692, NCT00354536, NCT00394030, NCT00530309, NCT01357889, NCT00518115, NCT01098461, NCT01475734, NCT00849017, NCT00838916, NCT00839527, NCT01098539.
Background: The calcium supplement is a clinically approved approach for osteoporosis therapy but usually requires a large dosage without targetability and with poor outcome. This modality is not fully explored in current osteoporosis therapy due to the lack of proper calcium supplement carrier. Methods: In this study, we constructed a tetracycline (Tc) modified and simvastatin (Sim) loaded phospholipid-amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) hybrid nanoparticle (Tc/ACC/Sim). Results: The resulted Tc/ACC/Sim was able to enhance its accumulation at the osteoporosis site. Most importantly, the combination of calcium supplement and Sim offered synergetic osteoblast promotion therapy of osteoporosis with advanced performance than non-targeted system or mono therapy. Conclusion: This platform provides an alternative approach to stimulate bone formation by synergetic promotion of osteoblast differentiation using calcium supplement and Sim.
A low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol goal of less than 100 mg/dl is recommended for patients at moderate to high risk of cardiovascular disease with an optional LDL goal of less than 70 mg/dl for patients at a very high risk of cardiovascular disease. Most patients will require reductions in LDL of more than 50% in order to achieve these more aggressive goals. Only a few agents will lower LDL by at least 50%. This review will focus on the efficacy and safety ezetimibe/simvastatin coadministered as a therapy with enhanced LDL-lowering efficacy, while minimizing the adverse effects of statins in a wide range of patients. Ezetimibe 10 mg/simvastatin 80 mg lowers LDL by approximately 60% and has been demonstrated to be superior to the highest doses of atorvastatin and rosuvastatin for lowering LDL and raising high-density lipoprotein.
Niacin extended-release (ER)/simvastatin is a once-daily, fixed-dose combination of the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor simvastatin and an ER formulation of niacin (a B-complex vitamin). In healthy volunteers who were given niacin ER/simvastatin 2000 mg/40 mg, niacin exposure was similar to that with niacin ER 2000 mg, while simvastatin exposure was increased compared to that with simvastatin 40 mg. In patients with elevated non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (non-HDL-C) but with low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) at or below the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) goal after a > or = 2-week simvastatin 20 mg/day run-in period (SEACOAST I), 24 weeks of niacin ER/simvastatin 1000 mg/20 mg or 2000 mg/20 mg per day reduced median plasma non-HDL-C levels to a significantly greater extent than simvastatin 20 mg/day. In patients with elevated non-HDL-C and LDL-C at any level after a > or = 2-week simvastatin 40 mg/day run-in period (SEACOAST II), 24 weeks of niacin ER/simvastatin 1000 mg/40 mg or 2000 mg/40 mg per day was noninferior to simvastatin 80 mg/day in reducing median plasma non-HDL-C levels. Compared with simvastatin monotherapy, there was no significant difference in reduction in plasma LDL-C levels with niacin ER/simvastatin in SEACOAST I, and the noninferiority criterion for LDL-C was not met in SEACOAST II. However, plasma HDL-C levels increased more and triglyceride levels were lowered more than with simvastatin monotherapy (SEACOAST I and II). Niacin ER/simvastatin was generally well tolerated, with flushing being the most common adverse reaction.
BACKGROUND: Frequently statins were administered to reduce the LDL-concentration in circulating blood. Especially simvastatin (SV) is an often prescribed statin. Pleiotropic effects of these drugs were reported. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate effects of SV on osteoblastic mineralization. METHODS: After informed consent primary osteoblasts were collected from tissue surplus after treatment of 14 individuals in the Department of Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Munster. The cells were passaged according to established protocols. Viability, mineralization capability and osteoblastic marker (alkaline phosphatase) were determined at day 9, 13 and 16 after adding various SV concentrations (0.05 muM, 0.1 muM, 0.5 muM, 1.0 muM). Statistical analysis was performed using the Kruskal-Wallis-test. RESULTS: The cell cultures showed a time and dose-dependent significantly decreased viability (p < 0.01) and a significantly increased mineralization (p < 0.01) in a late mineralization stage after adding SV. The typical alteration of the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels during osteogenic differentiation was not recognizable. CONCLUSIONS: The pleiotropic effects found for different SV concentrations were possibly originated from other mineralization pathways beside the ALP induced one. Additionally, possible alterations of protein expression levels during mineralization and investigation of possible deviating application of SV in other treatment fields can be considered after gaining a deeper insight in the affected mechanisms.
Reduced arterial compliance is associated with arteriosclerosis. In some arteries, this is due in part to abnormal vascular tone, which can be altered by low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol reduction and statin therapy. We tested the effectiveness of statin therapy in improving arterial compliance in patients with manifest coronary disease (CAD) and/or diabetes. Simvastatin (40 mg/day) was administered to 10 patients with proven CAD for 4 months. As measured by air plethysmography, compliance of the arterial segments in the thigh improved in every patient after 2 months, increasing by 34% by the fourth month. Compliance at the calf was not affected. These results suggest that compliance in the thigh is controlled by smooth muscle tone. Compliance measurements in the thigh and calf may be a useful measurement in evaluating high-risk patients and monitoring cholesterol-lowering therapy.
AIM: Current inhaled treatments are not adequate to treat all lung diseases. In this study, a promising nanotechnology has been developed to deliver a potential anti-inflammatory and muco-inhibitory compound, simvastatin, for treatment of inflammatory lung diseases via inhalation. MATERIALS & METHODS: Simvastatin nanoparticles (SV-NPs) encapsulated with poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid were fabricated using the solvent and anti-solvent precipitation method. RESULTS: SV-NPs were found to be stable up to 9 months at 4 degrees C in a freeze-dried form prior to reconstitution. The amount of mucus produced was significantly reduced after SV-NPs treatment on inflammation epithelial cell models and were effective in suppressing the proinflammatory marker expression. CONCLUSION: This study suggests that SV-NPs nebulization could potentially be used for the treatment of chronic pulmonary diseases.
Rhabdomyolysis is a potential adverse consequence of statin therapy. Here, we report a patient with prostate cancer being treated with simvastatin who developed rhabdomyolysis after coadministration with fluconazole. The rhabdomyolysis promptly resolved after discontinuation of fluconazole, suggesting the possible role of drug interaction in the development of rhabdomyolysis with coadministration of the two medications. Both simvastatin and fluconazole were promptly discontinued, and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, where vigorous hydration along with urine alkalinization led to resolution of rhabdomyolysis. Since statins are commonly prescribed treatments for individuals with hyperlipidemia, caution is advised in coadministration with azoles such as fluconazole. Although supportive treatment remains the mainstay of therapy for patients with rhabdomyolysis, fatal consequences can arise from hyperkalemia, cardiac arrhythmia, renal failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Ranolazine is a medication indicated for treatment of chronic angina and is a partial inhibitor of the fatty acid beta-oxidation. We present an adult patient who developed subacute progressive muscle weakness and exercise-induced myalgia, soon after increasing the daily dose of ranolazine, in the setting of therapy with simvastatin. CK persisted normal throughout the duration of the weakness and muscle biopsy showed a lipid storage myopathy for which no underlying genetic defect was identified. Discontinuation of both drugs resulted in clinical improvement. Although simvastatin may have contributed to the myopathy, the temporal relation between the increase in ranolazine dose and the onset of the weakness would favor ranolazine as major culprit for the weakness.
BACKGROUND: Treatments with ezetimibe/simvastatin (combined or alone) have been indicated as very promising approaches to strongly reduce cholesterol levels in hyperlipidemic patients. OBJECTIVE: We will discuss the efficacy and safety of ezetimibe/simvastatin and their potential to reduce atheroprogression. The molecular mechanisms underlying the possible benefits in atherosclerosis and its complications will also be described. RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: Combined therapy with ezetimibe/simvastatin has been shown to improve lipid profile inducing a very rapid reduction of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in clinical trials. In the near future, potential clinical benefits could be observed in the IMPROVE-IT or SHARP trials. Although clinical studies are needed to further confirm safety of ezetimibe/simvastatin therapy, the greater efficacy in lipid-lowering was not associated with the increase of adverse events. Also the possible association between ezetimibe and cancer, which was observed in the SEAS trial, was not confirmed by further studies and meta-analyses. At present, ezetimibe should be considered an effective lipid-lowering agent that can be used in conjunction with simvastatin at the beginning of therapy, or included in the treatment of patients who do not achieve their low-density lipoprotein cholesterol goal with statins alone.
Simvastatin is a long-established hydroxy-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitor, first introduced in 1988. At the maximal recommended dose of 80 mg/day, it produces an average reduction in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) of 47%, accompanied by reductions in very LDL-C, triglycerides and apolipoprotein B, and a modest increase in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. The only important, although rare, adverse effect of simvastatin is myopathy, an effect shared by all members of the class; when severe, this can take the form of rhabdomyolysis, which may lead to acute renal failure. The mechanism of the myopathy is not understood. The risk is increased by certain concomitant drugs, including gemfibrozil and potent inhibitors of cytochrome P450 3A4. Simvastatin has been studied in two large outcome trials, the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S), and the Heart Protection Study (HPS), both of which demonstrated strikingly beneficial effects on a variety of cardiovascular outcomes, with minimal adverse effects. 4S was the first study with a cholesterol-lowering agent to demonstrate an unequivocal reduction in all-cause mortality (30%; p = 0.0003). HPS showed that the beneficial effects of simvastatin were obtainable in a broad array of patients with, or at high risk of, coronary heart disease (CHD) in categories previously little studied, including women, the elderly, patients with diabetes without known CHD, and, perhaps most importantly, patients with LDL-C well below the UK population average. Simvastatin has recently become available in many countries as a combination product with the cholesterol absorption inhibitor, ezetimibe. Because of its long record of safety and demonstrated ability to reduce cardiovascular risk, simvastatin has recently become available without a prescription in the UK at the 10 mg dosage level.
The review considers trials dealing with the efficiency of combination hypolipidemic therapy with simvastatin and ezetimibe. Its synergistic potentiating effect can cause a considerable decrease in the level of total cholesterol, low-density lipoproteins, triglycerides, and C-reactive protein, which are important participants in the atherogenic process. This effect promotes the achievement of hypolipidemic therapeutic goals in many cases when this cannot be attained by high-dose statin monotherapy. The authors consider the results of trials of combination hypolipidemic therapy with simvastatin and ezetimibe performed as basic ones done in both previous and recent years.
Clarithromycin is the most documented cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) inhibitor to cause an adverse interaction with simvastatin. This particular case is of interest as rhabdomyolysis only occurred after an increase in the dose of clarithromycin. The patient developed raised cardiac biomarkers without any obvious cardiac issues, a phenomenon that has been linked to rhabdomyolysis previously. To date, there has been no reported effect of rhabdomyolysis on the structure and function of cardiac muscle. Clinicians need to be aware of prescribing concomitant medications that increase the risk of myopathy or inhibit the CYP3A4 enzyme. Our case suggests that troponin elevation could be associated with statin induced rhabdomyolysis, which may warrant further studies.
