Five beta-blocking agents are effective as long-term prophylactic treatment of migraine: propranolol, metoprolol, timolol, atenolol and nadolol. Propranolol has been most extensively studied and proved effective in 19 of 21 controlled trials. The optimal dose should be determined on a case-by-case basis, by increasing the daily dosage gradually. Among the properties of beta-blockers, the only one which appears to be correlated--albeit negatively--with effectiveness on migraine is intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA): drugs without ISA are effective against migraine whereas partial agonists are not. The mode of action of beta-blockers in migraine is still poorly understood; one of the most cogent current hypotheses involves reduction of brain catecholaminergic hyperactivity.
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is a channelopathy characterized by adrenergic mediated ventricular arrhythmia. Untreated CPVT is a malignant syndrome with more than 50% of arrhythmic events and up to 25% of fatal or near-fatal cardiac events at 8 years follow-up. Prevention of sudden cardiac death starts with exclusion of competitive sports. Beta blockers (BB) are the cornerstone pharmacological therapy for the prevention of cardiac event in CPVT patients. Dose of BB should be highly tolerable, preferably nadolol. Efficiency of BB is undeniable but uncompleted. Therefore, on top of BB, one can propose the use of Calcium channel blockers or Class 1c antiarrythmic drugs. Indeed Flecainide allows reducing exercise- induced premature ventricular contraction and ventricular arrhythmia. Pharmacological management should be a stepwise approach with BB as the first line of choice. At each step of therapeutic changes, heart rhythm during exercise should be monitored by Holter monitoring and exercise testing. If the pharmacological management fails, left cardiac sympathetic denervation or implantation of cardioverter defibrillator should be considered.
IMPORTANCE: Propranolol for infantile hemangiomas (IH) has been shown to be effective and relatively safe. However, other less lipophilic beta-blockers, such as nadolol, may be preferable in individuals who experience propranolol unresponsiveness or adverse events. OBJECTIVE: To document the noninferiority and safety of oral nadolol compared with oral propranolol in infants with IH. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This double-blind noninferiority prospective study with a noninferiority margin of 10% compared propranolol with nadolol in infants aged 1 to 6 months with problematic IH. The study was conducted in 2 academic pediatric dermatology centers in Canada between 2016 and 2020. Infants aged 1 to 6 months with a hemangioma greater than 1.5 cm on the face or 3 cm or greater on another body part causing or with potential to cause functional impairment or cosmetic disfigurement. INTERVENTIONS: Oral propranolol and nadolol in escalating doses up to 2 mg/kg/d. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURE: Between-group differences comparing changes in the bulk (size and extent) and color of the IH at week 24 with baseline using a 100-mm visual analog scale. RESULTS: The study included 71 patients. Of these, 36 were treated with propranolol. The mean (SD) age in this group was 3.1 (1.4) months, and 31 individuals (86%) were female. Thirty-five infants were treated with nadolol. The mean (SD) age in this group was 3.2 (1.6) months, and 26 individuals (74%) were female. The difference in IH between groups by t test was 8.8 (95% CI, 2.7-14.9) for size and 17.1 (95% CI, 7.2-30.0) for color in favor of the nadolol group, demonstrating that nadolol was noninferior to propranolol. Similar differences were noted at 52 weeks: 6.0 (95% CI, 1.9-10.1) and 10.1 (95% CI, 2.9-17.4) for size and color improvement, respectively. For each doubling of time unit (week), the coefficient of involution was 2.4 (95% CI, 0.5-4.4) higher with nadolol compared with propranolol. Safety data were similar between the 2 interventions. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Oral nadolol was noninferior to oral propranolol, indicating it may be an efficacious and safe alternative in cases of propranolol unresponsiveness or adverse events, or when faster involution is required. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02505971.
Great advances have been made in our understanding of cardiac arrhythmias and the effect of drugs on these arrhythmias. Several new types of antiarrhythmic drugs have been introduced. For example, encainide, flecainide, or lorcainide are new type I drugs that exert their major effects on depressing cardiac conduction. These drugs appear to be very effective for suppression of premature ventricular contractions. The introduction of verapamil (a calcium antagonist) allows for rapid control of supraventricular arrhythmias by virtue of its effects on the slow-channel (predominately Ca++) receptors. New beta-blocking drugs have been introduced which may prove beneficial in certain clinical situations since they exert more selective blockade of the cardiac receptors (beta1) as opposed to smooth muscle receptors (beta2). Amiodarone is an extremely potent drug which is effective for both supraventricular as well as ventricular arrhythmias. The major cellular electrophysiologic effect of this drug is to prolong the action potential duration. Its major clinical drawback is the rather formidable long-term side effects which include corneal opacities, thyroid dysfunction, neurologic toxicity, and pulmonary fibrosis.
BACKGROUND: Non-selective beta-blockers are recommended for the prevention of bleeding in people with cirrhosis, portal hypertension and gastroesophageal varices. Carvedilol is a non-selective beta-blocker with additional intrinsic alpha(1)-blocking effects, which may be superior to traditional, non-selective beta-blockers in reducing portal pressure and, therefore, in reducing the risk of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. OBJECTIVES: To assess the beneficial and harmful effects of carvedilol compared with traditional, non-selective beta-blockers for adults with cirrhosis and gastroesophageal varices. SEARCH METHODS: We combined searches in the Cochrane Hepato-Biliary's Controlled Trials Register, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, Embase, LILACS, and Science Citation Index with manual searches. The last search update was 08 May 2018. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised clinical trials comparing carvedilol versus traditional, non-selective beta-blockers, irrespective of publication status, blinding, or language. We included trials evaluating both primary and secondary prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in adults with cirrhosis and verified gastroesophageal varices. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three review authors (AZ, RJ and LH), independently extracted data. The primary outcome measures were mortality, upper gastrointestinal bleeding and serious adverse events. We undertook meta-analyses and presented results using risk ratios (RR) or mean differences (MD), both with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and I(2) values as a marker of heterogeneity. We assessed bias control using the Cochrane Hepato-Biliary domains and the quality of the evidence with GRADE. MAIN RESULTS: Eleven trials fulfilled our inclusion criteria. One trial did not report clinical outcomes. We included the remaining 10 randomised clinical trials, involving 810 participants with cirrhosis and oesophageal varices, in our analyses. The intervention comparisons were carvedilol versus propranolol (nine trials), or nadolol (one trial). Six trials were of short duration (mean 6 (range 1 to 12) weeks), while four were of longer duration (13.5 (6 to 30) months). Three trials evaluated primary prevention; three evaluated secondary prevention; while four evaluated both primary and secondary prevention. We classified all trials as at 'high risk of bias'. We gathered mortality data from seven trials involving 507 participants; no events occurred in four of these. Sixteen of 254 participants receiving carvedilol and 19 of 253 participants receiving propranolol or nadolol died (RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.48 to 1.53; I(2) = 0%, low-quality evidence). There appeared to be no differences between carvedilol versus traditional, non-selective beta-blockers and the risks of upper gastrointestinal bleeding (RR 0.77, 95% CI 0.43 to 1.37; 810 participants; 10 trials; I(2) = 45%, very low-quality evidence) and serious adverse events (RR 0.97, 95% CI 0.67 to 1.42; 810 participants; 10 trials; I(2) = 14%, low-quality evidence). Significantly more deaths, episodes of upper gastrointestinal bleeding and serious adverse events occurred in the long-term trials but there was not enough information to determine whether there were differences between carvedilol and traditional, non-selective beta-blockers, by trial duration. There was also insufficient information to detect differences in the effects of these interventions in trials evaluating primary or secondary prevention. There appeared to be no differences in the risk of non-serious adverse events between carvedilol versus its comparators (RR 0.55, 95% CI 0.23 to 1.29; 596 participants; 6 trials; I(2) = 88%; very low-quality evidence). Use of carvedilol was associated with a greater reduction in hepatic venous pressure gradient than traditional, non-selective beta-blockers both in absolute (MD -1.75 mmHg, 95% CI -2.60 to -0.89; 368 participants; 6 trials; I(2) = 0%; low-quality evidence) and percentage terms (MD -8.02%, 95% CI -11.49% to -4.55%; 368 participants; 6 trials; I(2) = 0%; low-quality evidence). However, we did not observe a concomitant reduction in the number of participants who failed to achieve a sufficient haemodynamic response (RR 0.76, 95% CI 0.57 to 1.02; 368 participants; 6 trials; I(2) = 42%; very low-quality evidence) or in clinical outcomes. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found no clear beneficial or harmful effects of carvedilol versus traditional, non-selective beta-blockers on mortality, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, serious or non-serious adverse events despite the fact that carvedilol was more effective at reducing the hepatic venous pressure gradient. However, the evidence was of low or very low quality, and hence the findings are uncertain. Additional evidence is required from adequately powered, long-term, double-blind, randomised clinical trials, which evaluate both clinical and haemodynamic outcomes.
Beta-adrenergic antagonists are one of the most commonly used class of agents in the treatment of hypertension. They have also demonstrated utility in the treatment of angina pectoris and certain arrhythmias and for the reduction in mortality following a myocardial infarction. The use of this class of agents creates the potential for beta-blocker exposure among lactating women. This review focuses on the most up-to-date data regarding the more common agents--metoprolol, atenolol, propranolol, carvedilol, nadolol, sotalol, and betaxolol--and their safety in lactating women.
IMPORTANCE: Patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) may experience life-threatening arrhythmic events (LTAEs) despite beta-blocker treatment. Further complicating management, the role of implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) in CPVT is debated. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the long-term outcomes of patients with RYR2 CPVT treated with beta-blockers only and the cost to benefit ratio of ICD. DESIGN, SETTINGS, AND PARTICIPANTS: This prospective cohort study conducted from January 1988 to October 2020 with a mean (SD) follow-up of 9.4 (7.5) years included patients who were referred to the Molecular Cardiology Clinics of ICS Maugeri Hospital, Pavia, Italy. Participants included consecutive patients with CPVT who were carriers of a pathogenic or likely pathogenic RYR2 variant with long-term clinical follow-up. EXPOSURES: Treatment with selective and nonselective beta-blocker only and ICD implant when indicated. MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURES: The main outcome was the occurrence of the first LTAE while taking a beta-blocker. LTAE was defined as a composite of 3 hard end points: sudden cardiac death, aborted cardiac arrest, and hemodynamically nontolerated ventricular tachycardia. RESULTS: The cohort included 216 patients with RYR2 CPVT (121 of 216 female [55%], median [IQR] age 14, [9-30] years). During a mean (SD) follow-up of 9.4 (7.5) years taking beta-blockers only, 28 of 216 patients (13%) experienced an LTAE (annual rate, 1.9%; 95% CI, 1.3-2.7). In multivariable analysis, experiencing either an LTAE (hazard ratio [HR], 3.3; 95% CI, 1.2-8.9; P = .02) or syncope before diagnosis (HR, 4.5; 95% CI, 1.8-11.1; P = .001) and carrying a C-terminal domain variant (HR, 18.1; 95% CI, 4.1-80.8; P < .001) were associated with an increased LTAE risk during beta-blocker therapy only. The risk of LTAE among those taking selective beta-blockers vs nadolol was increased 6-fold (HR, 5.8; 95% CI, 2.1-16.3; P = .001). Conversely, no significant difference was present between propranolol and nadolol (HR, 1.8; 95% CI, 0.4-7.3; P = .44). An ICD was implanted in 79 of 216 patients (37%) who were followed up for a mean (SD) of 8.6 (6.3) years. At the occurrence of LTAE, ICD carriers were more likely to survive (18 of 18 [100%]) than non-ICD carriers (6 of 10 [60%]; P = .01). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this cohort study, selective beta-blockers were associated with a higher risk of LTAE as compared with nadolol. Independently from treatment, LTAE and syncope before diagnosis and C-terminal domain variants identified patients at higher risk of beta-blocker failure, and the ICD was associated with reduced mortality in high-risk patients with CPVT.
Peripheral alpha antagonists not only preserve renal hemodynamics, but decrease RVR and maintain renal perfusion autoregulation in the face of decreased systemic perfusion pressures. On the other hand, central alpha agonists appear to have variable effects. Clonidine preserves RBF and GFR both acutely and chronically, guanabenz decreases RBF acutely but not chronically, and alpha-methyl dopa preserved RBF but decreases GFR. Beta blockers also have variable effects on RBF: the most-often-studied beta blocker, propranolol, has reduced RBF by 10-20% while other commonly used beta blockers, such as nadolol and metoprolol, may preserve RBF. This may reflect propranolol's inability to maintain renal perfusion autoregulation in the face of decreased systemic blood pressure. This failure of propranolol is not completely understood but may be a function of its lack of cardioselectivity or ISA (49). It is also possible that inhibition of renal vasodilators such as the kallikrein-kinin system plays a role (49). Finally, it appears that patients with normal renal vascular tone may be at highest risk to suffer decrements in RBF with beta blockers. Perhaps most importantly, the clinical impact of propranolol's effect on renal function is unclear, since the reductions in GFR have not been sufficient to produce azotemia.
Infantile hemangiomas (IH) are common childhood vascular tumors.  Treatment of IH has undergone rapid change in recent years.  Since 2008, oral propranolol has been used to treat complicated IH and has proven superior to previously used therapies.  More recently, the efficacy of other systemic beta blockers, specifically atenolol and nadolol, has been reported.  In addition, topical timolol solution has been effective for treatment of smaller, more superficial IH.  The purpose of this article is to review the current literature of beta-blocker therapy for IH.
Beta blockers (beta-adrenoceptor blockers) are known to be used for the prophylactic treatment of migraine. The improvement of migraine in the patients who recieved propranolol for angina pectoris revealed the effectiveness of propranolol in migraine prophylaxis. Many clinical trials have confirmed that propranolol is effective in the prophylactic treatment of migraine. Other beta-blocking drugs, namely nadolol, metoprolol, atenolol, timolol and bisoprolol, have also been demonstrated to be effective in the prophylaxis of migraine. In contrast, several beta blockers with intrinsic sympathetic activity (ISA), such as alprenolol, oxprenolol, pindolol and acebutolol, have not been demonstrated to be effective in migraine prophylaxis. In this review, we have descrived the pharmacologic background and pharmacokinetics of the beta blockers that demonstrated a prophylactic effect for migraine will be described. We have also reviewed the results of clinical trials of beta-blocking drugs for migraine.
Although several studies on pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic herb-drug interactions (HDI) have been conducted in healthy volunteers, there is large uncertainty on the validity of these studies. A qualitative review and a meta-analysis were performed to establish the clinical evidence of these interaction studies. Out of 4026 screened abstracts, 32 studies were included into the qualitative analysis. The meta-analysis was performed on eleven additional studies. St. John's wort (SJW) significantly decreased the AUC (p < 0.0001) and clearance (p = 0.007) of midazolam. Further subgroup analysis identified age to affect C(max) of midazolam (p < 0.01) in the presence of SJW. Echinacea purpurea (EP) significantly increased the clearance of midazolam (p = 0.01). Evidence of publication bias (p > 0.001) was shown on the effect of the herbal products o half-life of midazolam. Green tea (GT) showed significant 85% decrease in plasma concentration of nadolol. The study findings suggest that GT, SJW and EP perpetuate significant interactions with prescribed medications via CYP3A4 or OATP1A2. Our studies show that meta-analyses are important in the area of natural products to provide necessary information on their use in overall medication plans in order to avoid unintended interactions.
RATIONAL & OBJECTIVE: Beta-blockers are recommended for patients with heart failure (HF) but their benefit in the dialysis population is uncertain. Beta-blockers are heterogeneous, including with respect to their removal by hemodialysis. We sought to evaluate whether beta-blocker use and their dialyzability characteristics were associated with early mortality among patients with chronic kidney disease with HF who transitioned to dialysis. STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study. SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: Adults patients with chronic kidney disease (aged>/=18 years) and HF who initiated either hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis during January 1, 2007, to June 30, 2016, within an integrated health system were included. EXPOSURES: Patients were considered treated with beta-blockers if they had a quantity of drug dispensed covering the dialysis transition date. OUTCOMES: All-cause mortality within 6 months and 1 year or hospitalization within 6 months after transition to maintenance dialysis. ANALYTICAL APPROACH: Inverse probability of treatment weights using propensity scores was used to balance covariates between treatment groups. Cox proportional hazard analysis and logistic regression were used to investigate the association between beta-blocker use and study outcomes. RESULTS: 3,503 patients were included in the study. There were 2,115 (60.4%) patients using beta-blockers at transition. Compared with nonusers, the HR for all-cause mortality within 6 months was 0.79 (95% CI, 0.65-0.94) among users of any beta-blocker and 0.68 (95% CI, 0.53-0.88) among users of metoprolol at transition. There were no observed differences in all-cause or cardiovascular-related hospitalization. LIMITATIONS: The observational nature of our study could not fully account for residual confounding. CONCLUSIONS: Beta-blockers were associated with a lower rate of mortality among incident hemodialysis patients with HF. Similar associations were not observed for hospitalizations within the first 6 months following transition to dialysis.
1 Twenty outpatients with thyrotoxicosis received the non-selective beta-adrenoceptor antagonist nadolol as sole treatment for 3 weeks. 2 Clinical improvement as measured by reduction in thyrotoxicosis therapeutic index occurred during the first week of treatment and was continued thereafter, and was accompanied by a significant reduction in serum T3 and elevation of serum reverse T3. 3 As measured by reduction in exercise heart rate, during chronic dosing nadolol 160 mg once daily produced blockade of beta-adrenoceptors for 12 h in all patients and 24 h in all but 2. 4 Wide interindividual variability was noted in steady state plasma nadolol concentrations, in part related to age and renal function. 5 Steady state plasma nadolol concentrations were related to reduction in heart rate.
A 22-year-old man was referred to us for syncope during a game of Captain's ball. There was no prodrome. His friends did not notice any ictal movements. He was otherwise well prior to passing out. He was not taking any medications or supplements. He was not usually physically active, but was otherwise well with no significant medical history. This is his first episode of syncope. There was no history of cardiac arrest or seizures. There is no family history of premature sudden cardiac death.Physical examination was normal. ECG at rest demonstrated sinus rhythm with corrected QT interval of 400 ms. Echocardiography revealed a structurally normal heart. Holter monitoring was normal. Treadmill exercise stress test demonstrated the following rhythm on figure 1 during stage 4 Bruce protocol. Stress test was terminated in view of sustained arrhythmia as illustrated. He felt light-headed during the period, but otherwise felt that he could carry on with the exercise. ECG during recovery was unremarkable.
Almost all beta-adrenergic blockers, regardless of their pharmacologic characteristics, appear to have blood pressure-lowering activity in hypertensive patients. Comparisons between nonselective beta-blocking agents, such as propranolol and nadolol, with beta 1-selective drugs, such as metoprolol, atenolol and acebutolol, have demonstrated close similarities in their antihypertensive effects in patients. Similarly, beta blockers with and without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA) have comparable antihypertensive effects. However, beta-selective agents may offer some advantages over conventional beta blockers in hypertensive patients with concurrent conditions such as chronic obstructive airways disease, peripheral vascular disease, diabetes and hyperlipidemia. Beta 1-selective drugs are also preferred in diabetic patients receiving hypoglycemic agents because they do not interfere with glycogenolysis. Agents lacking ISA, such as propranolol, acutely increase peripheral resistance. beta blockers with ISA usually lower resistance. ISA may also minimize the bradycardia frequently found in elderly patients. Agents with ISA may protect against the decrease in high density lipoprotein cholesterol and the modest increase in triglycerides noted with some beta blockers that do not have ISA. Thus, in a large number of clinical situations in which hypertension is found, the properties of beta 1 selectivity and ISA allow beta blockers to be used with greater safety. Therefore, agents possessing both of these properties may be particularly valuable.
Calcium antagonists are effective antianginal agents in the treatment of patients with stable exercise-induced angina pectoris. A series of randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies with the novel, once-daily calcium antagonist amlodipine have been completed in a large number of patients with stable exercise-induced angina pectoris. Compared with placebo, once-daily amlodipine demonstrated a significant dose-related extension in exercise duration and workload accomplished, and reduction in number of anginal attacks and associated glyceryl trinitrate consumption. The clinical antianginal attributes of amlodipine were accompanied by significant reductions in electrocardiographic evidence of myocardial ischemia. In comparison with other antianginal drugs, once-daily amlodipine at a dosage range of 5-10 mg demonstrated antianginal activity comparable to thrice-daily diltiazem and once-daily nadolol. Amlodipine administered once daily achieves symptomatic and electrocardiographic amelioration of myocardial ischemic episodes induced by exercise in the majority of patients with stable angina pectoris. Amlodipine does not depress left ventricular pumping activity, and its side-effect profile does not differ substantially from that of placebo.
Nadolol, 120 and 240 mg daily, reduced essential tremor in a placebo-controlled double-blind study. The effect was observed in patients who had previously responded to propranolol but not in those who had not benefited from propranolol therapy.
Situational stressors and anxiety impede performance on creativity tests requiring cognitive flexibility. Preliminary research revealed better performance on a task requiring cognitive flexibility, the anagram task, after propranolol (beta-adrenergic antagonist) than after ephedrine (beta-adrenergic agonist). However, propranolol and ephedrine have both peripheral and central beta-adrenergic effects. In order to determine whether noradrenergic modulation of cognitive flexibility is a centrally or peripherally mediated phenomenon, we compared the effects of propranolol (peripheral and central beta-blocker), nadolol (peripheral beta-blocker), and placebo on anagram task performance. Solution latency scores for each subject were compared across the drug conditions. Anagram solution latency scores after propranolol were significantly lower than after nadolol. This suggests a centrally mediated modulatory influence of the noradrenergic system on cognitive flexibility.
The antihypertensive effect of pindolol has been demonstrated in several hundred clinical trials performed in many countries. The results of several representative trials will be reviewed in this article. In a cooperative study of pindolol by Swiss internists, blood pressure (BP) normalization was achieved in 76% of the patients and a fair response in 9%. In a French trial, BP reduction was found to correlate with the initial pressure level. Pindolol was also found effective in treating renal hypertension (Germany) and was considered particularly useful in hypertensive patients with coexistent angina pectoris (South Africa). A favorable effect on the BP profile registered during the whole day was demonstrated by means of BP telemetry (Germany). A Swedish long-term study showed pindolol to have a sustained antihypertensive effect over 16 months associated with a progressive decrease in systemic vascular resistance. In a study conducted in New Zealand, pindolol compared favorably with drugs previously used for hypertension, (methyldopa, diuretics, rauwolfia, guanethidine, etc.). It proved slightly less effective than methyldopa in a Canadian trial but significantly more effective than this drug in a South African study. Danish investigators found pindolol equivalent to chlorthalidone in lowering the resting BP but more effective than the diuretic in reducing the pressure and pulse response to exercise. Of particular interest are comparisons of pindolol with other beta-blockers performed in Germany, Sweden, Australia, and New Zealand. BP reductions obtained with pindolol did not differ significantly from those obtained with the other beta-blockers, whether they were cardioselective (metoprolol, atenolol) or not (propranolol, timolol, nadolol); however, pindolol produced less slowing of resting heart rate than these five other drugs, which are devoid of intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA). Pindolol proved somewhat more effective than other nonselective beta-blockers with ISA (i.e., oxprenolol), although both produced less bradycardia than propranolol (New Zealand). In resistant cases, the combination of pindolol with diuretics, methyldopa, or hydralazine was found to significantly increase the responder rate.
INTRODUCTION: Fifteen percent of proliferating infantile hemangioma (IH) require intervention because of the threat to function or life, ulceration, or tissue distortion. Propranolol is the mainstay treatment for problematic proliferating IH. Other beta-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors have been explored as alternative treatments. AREAS COVERED: The demonstration of a hemogenic endothelium origin of IH, with a neural crest phenotype and multi-lineage differentiation capacity, regulated by the renin-angiotensin system, underscores its programmed biologic behavior and accelerated involution induced by propranolol, other beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors. We review the indications, dosing regimens, duration of treatment, efficacy and adverse effects of propranolol, and therapeutic alternatives including oral atenolol, acebutolol, nadolol, intralesional propranolol injections, topical propranolol and timolol, and oral captopril. EXPERT OPINION: Improved understanding of the biology of IH provides insights into the mechanism of action underscoring its accelerated involution induced by propranolol, other beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors. More research is required to understand the optimal dosing and duration, efficacy and safety of these alternative therapies. Recent demonstration of propranolol's actions mediated by non-beta-adrenergic isomer R-propranolol on stem cells, offers an immense opportunity to harness the efficacy of beta-blockers to induce accelerated involution of IH, while mitigating their beta-adrenergic receptor-mediated adverse effects.
