The term OAB (overactive bladder) describes a symptom complex. Therefore, initial treatment should be based on clinical symptoms and the results of basic diagnostics. Patient preference is essential for the choice of the initial treatment. Behavioural therapy, electrostimulation and medical treatment are available treatment options. If these are not effective, extended diagnostic examinations should be performed prior to minimally invasive treatments, like onabotulinumtoxin injections in the detrusor or sacral neuromodulation. Surgical interventions like augmentation cystoplasty are rarely required today.
Overactive bladder (OAB) is a common and bothersome condition manifested by urgency, frequent urination, significantly impairing patients quality of life. The article presents an overview of the evidence on pharmacotherapy of neurogenic and idiopathic OAB. Selective M3 receptor blockers have been shown to be the medications of choice in treating these patients. Many studies have shown that solifenacin 10 mg is a starting dose for patients with OAB. Mirabegron (Betmiga) is the only 3-adrenergic receptor agonist approved for primary treatment of OAB patients refractory to anticholinergics or have their side effects. It seems promising to use this drug, both as monotherapy and concurrently with anticholinergic agents to improve treatment results in patients with idiopathic and neurogenic OAB.
bladder based on a systematic review and network meta-analysis approach. METHODS: Pubmed, Embase, Web of Science, and the Cochrane Register of Clinical Trials databases were systematically searched. The search time frame was from database creation to June 2, 2022. Randomized controlled double-blind trials of oral medication for overactive bladder were screened against the protocol's entry criteria. Trials were evaluated for quality using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Assessment Tool, and data were statistically analyzed using Stata 16.0 software. RESULT: A total of 60 randomized controlled double-blind clinical trials were included involving 50,333 subjects. Solifenacin 10mg was the most effective in mean daily micturitions and incontinence episodes, solifenacin 5/10mg in mean daily urinary urgency episodes and nocturia episodes, fesoterodine 8mg in urgency incontinence episodes/d and oxybutynin 5mg in voided volume/micturition. In terms of safety, solifenacin 5mg, ER-tolterodine 4mg, mirabegron, vibegron and ER-oxybutynin 10mg all showed a better incidence of dry mouth, fesoterodine 4mg, ER-oxybutynin 10mg, tolterodine 2mg, and vibegron in the incidence of constipation. Compared to placebo, imidafenacin 0.1mg showed a significantly increased incidence in hypertension, solifenacin 10mg in urinary tract infection, fesoterodine 4/8mg and darifenacin 15mg in headache. CONCLUSION: Solifenacin showed better efficacy. For safety, most anticholinergic drugs were more likely to cause dry mouth and constipation, lower doses were better tolerated. The choice of drugs should be tailored to the patient's specific situation to find the best balance between efficacy and safety.
INTRODUCTION: Robotic assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP) is getting more and more popular becoming the most common radical prostatectomy technique. Unfortunately, a not negligible proportion of patients in whom RARP is performed experience urinary incontinence. We aimed to systematically review the current literature evidence on urinary incontinence conservative treatment after RARP. EDIDENCE AQUISITION: A systematic literature review search using PubMed (Medline), Scopus, and Web of Science databases was performed in December 2019. PRISMA guidelines have been adopted. Population consisted of patients with urinary incontinence after RARP (P), conservative intervention was considered of interest (I). No comparator was considered mandatory (C). Outcomes of interest were the recovery of continence and quality of life (O). EVIDEDENCE SYNTHESIS: Six studies were included. Four of them investigated the use of pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT). PFMT improved pelvic muscle strength. Continence recovery was faster when guided PFMT was adopted. Moreover, two studies tested the effect of solifenacin on urinary incontinence. One of them, a randomized clinical trial, failed to show shorter time to continence in solifenacin group compared to placebo. CONCLUSIONS: The use of pads is associated with a detrimental effect on quality of life thus active treatments for UI post-RARP are warranted. PFMT has the main advantage to shorten the time for recovery. The use of solifenacin seems to not offer striking advantages in UI following RARP. Future studies should focus on testing the efficacy of these treatments when used after robotic vs. open radical prostatectomy.
The Guidelines Project, an initiative of the Brazilian Medical Association, aims to combine information from the medical field in order to standardize producers to assist the reasoning and decision-making of doctors. The information provided through this project must be assessed and criticized by the physician responsible for the conduct that will be adopted, depending on the conditions and the clinical status of each patient.
The literature data on the urgent neurological problem - overactive bladder (OAB) are summarized. The OAB prevalence, current conceptions on the physiology and pathophysiology of urination and pathogenetic mechanisms of OAB development are presented. Main groups of pharmacological agents used in OAB treatment are described. Special attention is drawn to rationale of using anticholinergic (antimuscarinic) drugs. The authors present the results of their own comparative analysis on the efficacy and tolerability of these drugs in treatment of patients with cerebral vascular diseases including the use of solifenacin succinate (VESIcare).
The blockade of muscarinic receptors in the management of overactive bladder (OAB) symptoms provides beneficial as well as adverse effects. The cognitive changes observed are caused by the drugs' ability to cross the blood-brain barrier and bind to muscarinic receptors within the central nervous system (CNS). To date, while not specifically testing for CNS side effects, most of the controlled efficacy trials of multiple OAB medications have not shown significant adverse effects on cognitive function. However, elderly individuals, in whom OAB is more prevalent, often are excluded from these studies. The few trials that have performed cognitive testing in healthy elderly people taking antimuscarinics have clearly shown that oxybutynin can adversely affect cognition. Darifenacin, trospium, solifenacin, and tolterodine appear to have little to no risk of causing CNS side effects in this population. However, caution needs to be used in elderly patients with preexisting dementia.
Overactive bladder (OAB) is a condition defined by its symptoms--urinary urgency with or without urgency urinary incontinence and often with frequency and nocturia. As such, determining the efficacy of OAB treatments using objective measures, such as urodynamic testing, can be difficult. A better means of gauging treatment efficacy for symptom-based conditions is through the use of patient-reported outcomes (PROs). With PROs, clinicians can gain insight into how a treatment affects a patient's symptoms and whether improvement in symptoms has a positive effect from the patient's perspective. PROs are increasingly being included as end points in clinical trials, including those of antimuscarinic drugs for OAB. Consequently, clinicians should become familiar with the most commonly used instruments. We provide an overview of instruments used to assess symptoms, health-related quality of life, and treatment satisfaction in patients with OAB and discuss how PROs can be incorporated into clinical trial protocols.
Although antimuscarinic drug therapy has been proven to be effective in the management of patients with symptoms of the overactive bladder syndrome, compliance with medication is often affected by the antimuscarinic adverse effects of dry mouth, constipation, somnolence and blurred vision. The development of bladder-selective M(3)-specific antagonists offers the possibility of increasing efficacy whilst minimising adverse effects. At present there are no M(3)-specific antagonists currently available although solifenacin and darifenacin are both under development and are due to be launched in 2004. The purpose of this article is to review the pharmacology and clinical trial data available for solifenacin, in addition to examining its role in the treatment of the overactive bladder syndrome.
Several studies with modern antimuscarinics have used a flexible-dosing strategy. We reviewed data from several studies with solifenacin, darifenacin and oxybutynin extended-release that evaluated the impact of dose flexibility on clinical management. A strategy based on patient-requested dose increases was found to be consistently effective in improving the symptoms of overactive bladder. Patients requesting a dose increase often had more severe symptoms at baseline than those who did not request a dose increase, and these patients derived most benefit from the increased dose. Specialists and family doctors should encourage open discussion with their patients about requesting dose titration so as to meet patients' individual needs.
Antimuscarinic drug therapy has been shown to be effective in the management of patients with symptoms of the overactive bladder syndrome (OAB), but the bothersome antimuscarinic adverse effects of dry mouth, constipation, somnolence and blurred vision often affect compliance with medication. The development of bladder selective M3 specific antagonists offers the possibility of increasing efficacy whilst minimising adverse effects. The M3 specific antagonist solifenacin has recently been marketed, and darifenacin will soon be available. The purpose of this article is to review the pharmacology and clinical trial data available for darifenacin, in addition to examining its role in the treatment of the OBS.
BACKGROUND: Solifenacin is an anticholinergic that is used to treat overactive bladder syndrome (OAB) in children. It is important to ascertain the safety and tolerability of solifenacin in the paediatric population as solifenacin offers an alternative, is more bladder specific, and should have less anticholinergic side effects than other therapies. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to systematically evaluate the safety and tolerability of solifenacin in children and adolescents with OAB. STUDY DESIGN: We included studies that reported the safety and tolerability of solifenacin in children and adolescents. All study types were included. Electronic searches were conducted in Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid Embase, TRIP, CINAHL and ICTRP on the 18th of January 2022. Risk of bias was assessed with the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool 2.0 (ROB-2) for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and the Newcastle-Ottowa scale for cohort studies. RESULTS: A total of twelve studies including two RCTs were included in this review. Results from the meta-analysis of RCTs showed the commonest side effects were constipation (RR 3.5, 95%CI 0.9-13.7) and dry mouth (RR 3.1 95%CI 0.2-53). In terms of tolerability, the effect estimate of ceasing solifenacin due to an adverse effect was 2.7 (95%CI 0.8-9.1). Within the cohort studies, out of the 779 patients 21.7% experienced side effects. The most common side effects were constipation (6.8%) and dry mouth/lips (6.0%) and 3.5% of patients ceased solifenacin due to adverse effects. Overall, the certainty of the evidence for side effects and tolerability were very low. DISCUSSION: The reported incidence of side effects is low, and less than reported with oxybutynin use. However, the very low certainty of the evidence means the findings should be interpreted with caution. There is limited reporting of a prolonged QTc interval on ECG. Studies that described this only had an increase of QTc from baseline and not a clinically significant prolonged QTc that resulted in arrhythmias. CONCLUSION: Solifenacin is an alternative anticholinergic for the treatment of OAB in children. However, given the paucity of good quality data on safety and tolerability it should be used cautiously in children with close monitoring for potential side effects.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Post-prostatectomy overactive bladder (OAB) is a common and challenging condition to manage. The aim of the present report was to review the recent evidences regarding OAB symptoms that develop in men after prostatectomy and how to manage them. RECENT FINDINGS: The prevalence of OAB after radical prostatectomy may range from 15.2 to 37.8%. Recent studies have highlighted the role of the urethrogenic mechanism (facilitation of the urethrovesical reflex due to stress urinary incontinence (SUI)) in the genesis of post-prostatectomy OAB in a significant proportion of patients. Several other pathophysiological factors such as iatrogenic decentralization of the bladder, defunctionalized bladder due to severe SUI, detrusor underactivity, or bladder outlet obstruction might be involved. The evaluation should aim to identify the underlying mechanism to tailor the treatment, which could range from SUI surgery, to fixing a urethral stricture, improving bladder emptying or using the conventional spectrum of OAB therapies. There is a paucity of data for OAB therapies specific to post-prostatectomy patients, with the exception of solifenacin, tolterodine, and botulinum toxin. There is currently no data on how preoperative management or surgical technique may prevent post-prostatectomy OAB.
Overactive bladder is a common and distressing problem. Standard therapy is directed towards modifying the detrusor motor sensitivity and response via anticholinergic medication. Currently available medications are reviewed and alternative targets for treatment are presented.
AIM: We conducted a meta-analysis to evaluate the safety and efficacy of mirabegron (50 mg) and solifenacin (5 mg) monotherapy for overactive bladder (OAB) during a 12-week cycle. METHODS: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of mirabegron and solifenacin for OAB were searched systematically by using MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register. The reference lists of retrieved studies were also perused. RESULTS: Five RCTs which compared solifenacin with mirabegron were studied. Mirabegron achieved the same effect as solifenacin in treating OAB. The mean number of incontinence episodes per 24 h (P = 0.20), mean number of micturitions per 24 h (P = 0.11), mean number of urgency episodes per 24 h (P = 0.23), and mean volume voided per micturition (P = 0.05) suggested that mirabegron and solifenacin had no significant differences in terms of OAB treatment. With regard to drug-related treatment-emergent adverse events (DR-TEAEs) and dry mouth, mirabegron showed better tolerance than solifenacin. Post-voiding residual volume showed a distinct difference in the two groups. Hypertension and tachycardia did not show a significant difference between the two groups, but the pulse rate did. CONCLUSION: The therapeutic effect of mirabegron is similar to that of solifenacin, and mirabegron does not increase the risk of adverse events (AEs).
Overactive bladder (OAB) is a chronic syndrome with debilitating symptoms that negatively affect health-related quality of life. Although anticholinergic agents have been first-line treatment for OAB for many years, the efficacious pharmacologic management of this condition has been compromised by concerns regarding tolerability. Anticholinergic agents prevent involuntary contractions of the bladder detrusor muscle by preventing acetylcholine from binding to the M2 and M3 muscarinic receptor subtypes. Anticholinergics are not tissue specific, and their use for treatment of OAB has been associated with side effects such as dry mouth, constipation, and blurred vision. Recent studies with extended-release formulations and newly developed receptor subtype-specific anticholinergic agents demonstrate that side effects are typically mild to moderate and generally tolerable, seldom leading to patient withdrawal. By incorporating patient-initiated dose adjustment into the protocol, the primary care physician can effectively manage adverse events associated with OAB without compromising efficacy. Recent dose-adjustment data with extended-release oxybutynin suggest that, given some control in the process, patients are willing to tolerate certain side effects in exchange for symptom relief.
Aclidinium bromide, AE-37, Alemtuzumab, AMA1-C1/ISA 720, Amlodipine besylate/atorvastatin calcium, Arachidonic acid, Arbaclofen placarbil, Aripiprazole, ARQ-621, Azelnidipine, Azilsartan medoxomil potassium; Bevacizumab, Biphasic insulin aspart, Bortezomib; Choriogonadotropin alfa, CTS-1027; Dapagliflozin, Dasatinib, Deforolimus, Degarelix acetate, Denufosol tetrasodium, Desvenlafaxine succinate, Dronedarone hydrochloride, Duloxetine hydrochloride, Dutasteride; Enfuvirtide, Entecavir, Etaracizumab, Everolimus, Exenatide, Ezetimibe; Ferric carboxymaltose, Fludarabine, Foretinib; Gefitinib, GFT-505, GSK-256066; HPV-6/11/16/18, HuM195/rGel, HyperAcute-Lung cancer vaccine; I5NP, Imatinib mesylate, Imexon, Insulin detemir, Insulin glargine, Ivabradine hydrochloride; L2G7, Lacosamide, Lapatinib ditosylate, Lenalidomide, Lidocaine/prilocaine, Liposomal vincristine, Liraglutide, Lixivaptan; Meningococcal (groups A, C, Y and W-135) oligosaccharide diphtheria CRM197 conjugate vaccine, Methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin-beta, Mirabegron, Morphine/oxycodone, MR Vaccine, MSC-1936369B, Mycophenolic acid sodium salt; Narlaprevir, N-Desmethylclozapine; Ocriplasmin, Olaparib, Olmesartan medoxomil, Olmesartan medoxomil/azelnidipine, ONO-5334, ONO-8539; Palifermin, Panitumumab, Pardoprunox hydrochloride, PCV7, Peginterferon alfa-2a, Peginterferon alfa-2b, Pemetrexed disodium, Pexelizumab, PF-337210, Pitavastatin calcium; Raltegravir potassium, Recombinant interleukin-7, Regadenoson, Reniale, Roflumilast, Rosuvastatin calcium; Safinamide mesilate, SB-1518, SCH-527123, Selumetinib, Sipuleucel-T, Solifenacin succinate, Sorafenib, Sunitinib malate; Tadalafil, Talaporfin sodium, Tanespimycin, Technosphere/Insulin, Telaprevir, Telatinib, Telcagepant, Telmisartan/hydrochlorothiazide, Teriparatide, Testosterone transdermal gel, TH-302, Tiotropium bromide, Tocilizumab, Trabedersen, Tremelimumab; Valsartan/amlodipine besylate, Vernakalant hydrochloride, Visilizumab, Voreloxin, Vorinostat.
OBJECTIVE: Historical and current view on the therapy of overactive bladder. METHODS: This review summarizes the historical approach and current therapy of overactive bladder. The articles were gathered from Pubmed and Scopus databases. Studies published before December 2020 were used for the review. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Overactive bladder is a condition that quite a lot reduces the quality of life of our patients. Our therapeutic approach starts with non-pharmacological treatment, such as pelvic floor exercises. The next step is a pharmacological approach. The entry level drug is trospium. If the effect is not sufficient, propiverine, solifenacin, fesoterodine, darifenacin or mirabegron are used. Electrostimulation or botulinum toxin A application is an option only in cases that didnt respond to pharmacological treatment. It is safe to say, that in the end, there is a way of reducing the severity of overactive bladder symptoms for every  patient.
PURPOSE: To determine the relationship between HLA-B gene mutations and levofloxacin-induced toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). METHODS: A 71-year-old Chinese woman developed TEN after oral administration of solifenacin (5 mg) and levofloxacin (0.5 g) for cystitis. HLA-B*5801 and HLA-B*1502 alleles were detected using real-time PCR. FINDINGS: After supportive therapy (antiallergic treatments, plasma exchange, etc) and withdrawal of the culprit medication levofloxacin, the patient was discharged with re-epithelialization of the exfoliated skin. The patient was HLA-B*1502 allele positive and HLA-B*5801 allele negative. IMPLICATIONS: This is the first report of levofloxacin-induced TEN suspected to be caused by mutations in the HLA-B*1502 allele.
Pharacologic therapy has been the mainstay of treatment for patients who have overactive bladder. In recent years, a number of new antimuscarinic agents have been introduced. Solifenacin succinate is a new once-daily antimuscarinic agent that is an effective and well-tolerated treatment option for patients who have overactive bladder. Solifenacin increases functional bladder capacity and decreases urgency, frequency, and incontinence. In pharmacokinetic studies, solifenacin demonstrated selectivity for the bladder over the salivary gland; thus, it is likely that the bladder selectivity of this agent is responsible for the low incidence of dry mouth and constipation reported in the clinical trials.
