BACKGROUND: In the phase III HIMALAYA study (NCT03298451) in unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (uHCC), STRIDE (Single Tremelimumab Regular Interval Durvalumab) significantly improved overall survival (OS) versus sorafenib; durvalumab monotherapy was noninferior to sorafenib for OS. Results reported herein are from a 4-year updated OS analysis of HIMALAYA. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Participants with uHCC and no previous systemic treatment were randomized to STRIDE (n = 393), durvalumab (n = 389), or sorafenib (n = 389). The updated data cut-off was 23 January 2023. OS and serious adverse events (AEs) were assessed. Additionally, baseline characteristics and subsequent therapies were analyzed in long-term survivors (>/=36 months beyond randomization). RESULTS: For STRIDE, durvalumab, and sorafenib, median [95% confidence interval (CI)] follow-up was 49.12 months (46.95-50.17 months), 48.46 months (46.82-49.81 months), and 47.31 months (45.08-49.15 months), respectively. OS hazard ratio (95% CI) for STRIDE versus sorafenib was 0.78 (0.67-0.92). The 36-month OS rate for STRIDE was 30.7% versus 19.8% for sorafenib. The 48-month OS rate remained higher for STRIDE at 25.2%, versus 15.1% for sorafenib. The long-term OS benefit of STRIDE was observed across clinically relevant subgroups and was further improved in participants who achieved disease control. Long-term survivors with STRIDE (n = 103) included participants across clinically relevant subgroups, and 57.3% (59/103) had no reported subsequent anticancer therapy. No new serious treatment-related AEs occurred with STRIDE from the primary analysis (17.5%; 68/388). Durvalumab maintained OS noninferiority to sorafenib and no late-onset safety signals were identified. CONCLUSIONS: These data represent the longest follow-up to date in phase III studies in uHCC. The unprecedented 3- and 4-year OS rates reinforce the sustained long-term OS benefit of STRIDE versus sorafenib. STRIDE maintained a tolerable yet differentiated safety profile from other current uHCC therapies. Results continue to support the long-term benefits of STRIDE in a diverse population, reflective of uHCC globally.
BACKGROUND: A single, high priming dose of tremelimumab (anti-cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4) plus durvalumab (anti-programmed cell death ligand-1), an infusion regimen termed STRIDE (Single Tremelimumab Regular Interval Durvalumab), showed encouraging clinical activity and safety in a phase 2 trial of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. METHODS: In this global, open-label, phase 3 trial, the majority of the patients we enrolled with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma and no previous systemic treatment were randomly assigned to receive one of three regimens: tremelimumab (300 mg, one dose) plus durvalumab (1500 mg every 4 weeks; STRIDE), durvalumab (1500 mg every 4 weeks), or sorafenib (400 mg twice daily). The primary objective was overall survival for STRIDE versus sorafenib. Noninferiority for overall survival for durvalumab versus sorafenib was a secondary objective. RESULTS: In total, 1171 patients were randomly assigned to STRIDE (n=393), durvalumab (n=389), or sorafenib (n=389). The median overall survival was 16.43 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 14.16 to 19.58) with STRIDE, 16.56 months (95% CI, 14.06 to 19.12) with durvalumab, and 13.77 months (95% CI, 12.25 to 16.13) with sorafenib. Overall survival at 36 months was 30.7%, 24.7%, and 20.2%, respectively. The overall survival hazard ratio for STRIDE versus sorafenib was 0.78 (96.02% CI, 0.65 to 0.93; P=0.0035). Overall survival with durvalumab monotherapy was noninferior to sorafenib (hazard ratio, 0.86; 95.67% CI, 0.73 to 1.03; noninferiority margin, 1.08). Median progression-free survival was not significantly different among all three groups. Grade 3/4 treatment-emergent adverse events occurred for 50.5% of patients with STRIDE, 37.1% with durvalumab, and 52.4% with sorafenib. CONCLUSIONS: STRIDE significantly improved overall survival versus sorafenib. Durvalumab monotherapy was noninferior to sorafenib for patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. (Funded by AstraZeneca; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03298451.)
Sorafenib is a multikinase inhibitor capable of facilitating apoptosis, mitigating angiogenesis and suppressing tumor cell proliferation. In late-stage hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), sorafenib is currently an effective first-line therapy. Unfortunately, the development of drug resistance to sorafenib is becoming increasingly common. This study aims to identify factors contributing to resistance and ways to mitigate resistance. Recent studies have shown that epigenetics, transport processes, regulated cell death, and the tumor microenvironment are involved in the development of sorafenib resistance in HCC and subsequent HCC progression. This study summarizes discoveries achieved recently in terms of the principles of sorafenib resistance and outlines approaches suitable for improving therapeutic outcomes for HCC patients.
Lenvatinib (Lenvima((R))) is an oral small molecule inhibitor of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases, and is approved for the first-line treatment of patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in the USA, EU, Japan and China. The approval of lenvatinib was based on results of the randomized, open-label, multinational, non-inferiority phase III REFLECT trial in patients with unresectable HCC, who had not received treatment for advanced disease. In REFLECT, lenvatinib was non-inferior, but not superior, to sorafenib (current standard of care) for overall survival (OS). However, lenvatinib was associated with significant improvements compared with sorafenib in terms of all secondary endpoints [higher objective response rate (ORR), and longer progression-free survival (PFS) and time to progression (TTP)]. Lenvatinib had a generally manageable tolerability profile in REFLECT, with the most common treatment-emergent adverse events being hypertension, diarrhoea, decreased appetite and decreased weight. Given its non-inferior efficacy to sorafenib and manageable tolerability profile, lenvatinib represents a long-awaited alternative option to sorafenib for the first-line systemic treatment of patients with unresectable HCC. Further clinical experience may be required to fully define the position of lenvatinib in this setting.
In most cases, sorafenib-resistant HCC cells exhibit significant mesenchymal phenotype and stemness features. In this context, tumor cells might undergo cell fate transition in response to sorafenib or other targeted drugs in the presence or absence of genetic mutations. Therefore, understanding the major characteristics of drug-resistant cells state helps to discover new treatments that overcome drug resistance. To note, little is known about the metabolic or microenvironmental aspects of the certain tumor cell states beyond the genome. This review mainly focuses on the underlying mechanisms of acquired sorafenib resistance based on CSCs and EMT models, which explain tumor heterogeneity and have been considered the major cause of secondary sorafenib resistance. In particular, it discusses how the tumor microenvironment and tumor metabolism regulate cell stemness, mesenchymal state, and sorafenib resistance through epigenetic regulations, and provides reliable targets that might have synergetic effect with sorafenib.
Regorafenib (Stivarga((R))), a small molecule inhibitor of multiple kinases, is the first drug to be approved for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in patients who have progressed during or after sorafenib therapy. Its approval was based on the results of the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multinational, phase III RESORCE trial in patients with HCC who had progressed during sorafenib therapy. In RESORCE, regorafenib significantly prolonged overall survival (OS; primary endpoint), progression-free survival (PFS) and time to progression (TTP) compared with placebo, with the OS benefit appearing to be largely due to disease stabilization. Regorafenib had an acceptable tolerability profile. The most common treatment-related adverse events in the regorafenib group included hand-foot skin reaction, fatigue, diarrhoea and hypertension. No fatal hepatic failure was reported with regorafenib in patients with HCC in RESORCE. In conclusion, current evidence suggests that regorafenib is an important new targeted therapy option for the treatment of HCC patients who have progressed on sorafenib therapy.
Sorafenib is the first-line medication for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but it can only extend limited survival. It is imperative to find a combination strategy to increase sorafenib efficacy. Artesunate is such a preferred candidate, because artesunate is clinically well-tolerated and more importantly both drugs can induce ferroptosis through different mechanisms. In this study we investigated the combined effect of sorafenib and artesunate in inducing ferroptosis of HCC and elucidated the involved molecular mechanisms. We showed that artesunate greatly enhanced the anticancer effects of low dose of sorafenib against Huh7, SNU-449, and SNU-182 HCC cell lines in vitro and against Huh7 cell xenograft model in Balb/c nude mice. The combination index method confirmed that the combined effect of sorafenib and artesunate was synergistic. Compared with the treatment with artesunate or sorafenib alone, combined treatment induced significantly exacerbated lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis, which was blocked by N-acetyl cysteine and ferroptosis inhibitors liproxstatin-1 and deferoxamine mesylate, but not by inhibitors of other types of cell death (z-VAD, necrostatin-1 and belnacasan). In Huh7 cells, we demonstrated that the combined treatment induced oxidative stress and lysosome-mediated ferritinophagy, two essential aspects of ferroptosis. Sorafenib at low dose mainly caused oxidative stress through mitochondrial impairments and SLC7A11-invovled glutathione depletion. Artesunate-induced lysosome activation synergized with sorafenib-mediated pro-oxidative effects by promoting sequential reactions including lysosomal cathepsin B/L activation, ferritin degradation, lipid peroxidation, and consequent ferroptosis. Taken together, artesunate could be repurposed to sensitize sorafenib in HCC treatment. The combined treatment can be easily translated into clinical applications.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common type of liver cancer and one of the leading causes of cancer-related death worldwide. Advanced HCC displays strong resistance to chemotherapy, and traditional chemotherapy drugs do not achieve satisfactory therapeutic efficacy. Sorafenib is an oral kinase inhibitor that inhibits tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis and induces cancer cell apoptosis. It also improves the survival rates of patients with advanced liver cancer. However, due to its poor solubility, fast metabolism, and low bioavailability, clinical applications of sorafenib have been substantially restricted. In recent years, various studies have been conducted on the use of nanoparticles to improve drug targeting and therapeutic efficacy in HCC. Moreover, nanoparticles have been extensively explored to improve the therapeutic efficacy of sorafenib, and a variety of nanoparticles, such as polymer, lipid, silica, and metal nanoparticles, have been developed for treating liver cancer. All these new technologies have improved the targeted treatment of HCC by sorafenib and promoted nanomedicines as treatments for HCC. This review provides an overview of hot topics in tumor nanoscience and the latest status of treatments for HCC. It further introduces the current research status of nanoparticle drug delivery systems for treatment of HCC with sorafenib.
BACKGROUND: Desmoid tumors (also referred to as aggressive fibromatosis) are connective tissue neoplasms that can arise in any anatomical location and infiltrate the mesentery, neurovascular structures, and visceral organs. There is no standard of care. METHODS: In this double-blind, phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned 87 patients with progressive, symptomatic, or recurrent desmoid tumors to receive either sorafenib (400-mg tablet once daily) or matching placebo. Crossover to the sorafenib group was permitted for patients in the placebo group who had disease progression. The primary end point was investigator-assessed progression-free survival; rates of objective response and adverse events were also evaluated. RESULTS: With a median follow-up of 27.2 months, the 2-year progression-free survival rate was 81% (95% confidence interval [CI], 69 to 96) in the sorafenib group and 36% (95% CI, 22 to 57) in the placebo group (hazard ratio for progression or death, 0.13; 95% CI, 0.05 to 0.31; P<0.001). Before crossover, the objective response rate was 33% (95% CI, 20 to 48) in the sorafenib group and 20% (95% CI, 8 to 38) in the placebo group. The median time to an objective response among patients who had a response was 9.6 months (interquartile range, 6.6 to 16.7) in the sorafenib group and 13.3 months (interquartile range, 11.2 to 31.1) in the placebo group. The objective responses are ongoing. Among patients who received sorafenib, the most frequently reported adverse events were grade 1 or 2 events of rash (73%), fatigue (67%), hypertension (55%), and diarrhea (51%). CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with progressive, refractory, or symptomatic desmoid tumors, sorafenib significantly prolonged progression-free survival and induced durable responses. (Funded by the National Cancer Institute and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02066181 .).
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is becoming one of the leading causes of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Sorafenib is the only first-line therapy for advanced HCC despite its serious adverse effects. Here, we report that at an equivalent of approximately one-tenth the clinical dose for HCC, sorafenib treatment effectively prevents the progression of NASH in both mice and monkeys without any observed significant adverse events. Mechanistically, sorafenib's benefit in NASH is independent of its canonical kinase targets in HCC, but involves the induction of mild mitochondrial uncoupling and subsequent activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Collectively, our findings demonstrate a previously unappreciated therapeutic effect and signaling mechanism of low-dose sorafenib treatment in NASH. We envision that this new therapeutic strategy for NASH has the potential to translate into a beneficial anti-NASH therapy with fewer adverse events than is observed in the drug's current use in HCC.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a poor prognosis, and the efficacy of current therapeutic strategies is extremely limited in advanced diseases. Our previous study reported that protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor epsilon (PTPRE) is a promoting factor in HCC progression. In this study, our objective was to evaluate the treatment effect of PTPRE inhibitors in different HCC preclinical models. Our results indicated that the PTPRE inhibitory compound 63 (Cpd-63) inhibited tumor cell proliferation, migration, and HCC organoid growth. Mechanism research revealed that Cpd-63 could inhibit the expression of MYC and MYC targets by inhibiting the activation of SRC. Additionally, we found that Cpd-63 could improve the response of sorafenib in HCC cells. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the PTPRE inhibitors represented a potential therapeutic agent for HCC management.
PURPOSE: Donafenib, a novel multikinase inhibitor and a deuterated sorafenib derivative, has shown efficacy in phase Ia and Ib hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) studies. This study compared the efficacy and safety of donafenib versus sorafenib as first-line therapy for advanced HCC. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This open-label, randomized, parallel-controlled, multicenter phase II-III trial enrolled patients with unresectable or metastatic HCC, a Child-Pugh score </= 7, and no prior systemic therapy from 37 sites across China. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive oral donafenib (0.2 g) or sorafenib (0.4 g) twice daily until intolerable toxicity or disease progression. The primary end point was overall survival (OS), tested for noninferiority and superiority. Efficacy was primarily assessed in the full analysis set (FAS), and safety was assessed in all treated patients. RESULTS: Between March 21, 2016, and April 16, 2018, 668 patients (intention-to-treat) were randomly assigned to donafenib and sorafenib treatment arms; the FAS included 328 and 331 patients, respectively. Median OS was significantly longer with donafenib than sorafenib treatment (FAS; 12.1 v 10.3 months; hazard ratio, 0.831; 95% CI, 0.699 to 0.988; P = .0245); donafenib also exhibited superior OS outcomes versus sorafenib in the intention-to-treat population. The median progression-free survival was 3.7 v 3.6 months (P = .0570). The objective response rate was 4.6% v 2.7% (P = .2448), and the disease control rate was 30.8% v 28.7% (FAS; P = .5532). Drug-related grade >/= 3 adverse events occurred in significantly fewer patients receiving donafenib than sorafenib (125 [38%] v 165 [50%]; P = .0018). CONCLUSION: Donafenib showed superiority over sorafenib in improving OS and has favorable safety and tolerability in Chinese patients with advanced HCC, showing promise as a potential first-line monotherapy for these patients.
In this article, we focus on a variety of immunosuppression scenarios and whether multikinase inhibitors, as systemic therapy for advanced thyroid carcinoma (TC), could be useful for the treatment of immunocompromised patients with TC. Lenvatinib and sorafenib, among other MKIs, have become the standard of care for advanced TC based on their efficacy data and despite their adverse effects. Currently, published data on MKIs in immunosuppressed patients are scarce. Secondary malignancies can arise in immunosuppressed patients who have undergone solid organ transplantation, human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients, and hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. This review will explore different immunosuppression settings, the risk of secondary malignancies in immunosuppressed patients, and the special characteristics of this population. Some considerations regarding anticancer treatment in immunosuppressed patients with advanced malignancies are reviewed.
BACKGROUND: Patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (aHCC) have a poor prognosis and high mortality. Nivolumab monotherapy demonstrated clinical benefit with an acceptable safety profile in patients with aHCC in the CheckMate 040 study. Five-year follow-up of the sorafenib-naive and sorafenib-experienced groups of CheckMate 040 is presented here. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients received nivolumab monotherapy at dose levels of 0.1-10.0 mg/kg (dose-escalation phase) or 3 mg/kg (dose-expansion phase) every 2 weeks until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. Primary endpoints were safety and tolerability (dose escalation), and objective response rate (ORR) by blinded independent central review (BICR) and by investigator as per RECIST version 1.1 (dose expansion). RESULTS: Eighty sorafenib-naive and 154 sorafenib-experienced patients were treated. Minimum follow-up in both groups was 60 months. ORR as per BICR was 20% [95% confidence interval (CI) 12% to 30%] and 14% (95% CI 9% to 21%) in the sorafenib-naive and sorafenib-experienced groups, respectively. Responses occurred regardless of HCC etiology or baseline tumor cell programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression levels. Median overall survival (OS) was 26.6 months (95% CI 16.6-30.6 months) and 15.1 months (95% CI 13.0-18.2 months) in sorafenib-naive and sorafenib-experienced patients, respectively. The 3-year OS rates were 28% in the sorafenib-naive and 20% in the sorafenib-experienced groups; 5-year OS rates were 14% and 12%, respectively. No new safety signals were identified; grade 3/4 treatment-related adverse events were observed in 33% and 21% of patients in the sorafenib-naive and sorafenib-experienced groups, respectively. Biomarker analyses showed that baseline PD-L1 expression >/=1% was associated with higher ORR and longer OS compared with PD-L1 <1%. In the sorafenib-naive group, patients with OS >/=3 years exhibited higher baseline CD8 T-cell density compared with those with OS <1 year. CONCLUSION: With 5 years of follow-up, nivolumab monotherapy continued to provide durable clinical benefit with manageable safety in sorafenib-naive and sorafenib-experienced patients with aHCC.
Thyroid cancer is the most frequent endocrine tumor. However, in locally advanced or metastatic disease we have only two types of treatment at our disposal: radioactive iodine (RAI) when the disease is RAI-sensitive and multikinase inhibitors (MKIs), lenvatinib and sorafenib, when the disease becomes RAI-refractory (RR). This review revisits the published data on the potential combination of MKIs/lenvatinib with RAI in RR-differentiated thyroid cancer and evaluates some special situations where this combination may be of particular interest. The combination of MKIs/lenvatinib with RAI could, at least hypothetically, improve the efficacy seen in both treatments alone via a synergistic effect and with a lower rate of toxicity rates. Early preclinical data support this notion, while its generalized use awaits the results of ongoing clinical trials.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent malignant tumors in the contemporary era, representing a significant global health concern. Early HCC patients have mild symptoms or are asymptomatic, which promotes the onset and progression of the disease. Moreover, advanced HCC is insensitive to chemotherapy, making traditional clinical treatment unable to block cancer development. Sorafenib (SFB) is a first-line targeted drug for advanced HCC patients with anti-angiogenesis and anti-tumor cell proliferation effects. However, the efficacy of SFB is constrained by its off-target distribution, rapid metabolism, and multi-drug resistance. In recent years, nanoparticles based on a variety of materials have been demonstrated to enhance the targeting and therapeutic efficacy of SFB against HCC. Concurrently, the advent of joint drug delivery systems has furnished crucial empirical evidence for reversing SFB resistance. This review will summarize the application of nanotechnology in the field of HCC treatment over the past five years. It will focus on the research progress of SFB delivery systems combined with multiple therapeutic modalities in HCC treatment.
Since 2007 Sorafenib has represented the only approved drug for first-line treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Lenvatinib, an orally active inhibitor of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (VEGFR 1-3, FGFR 1-4, PDGFRa, RET and KIT), showed preclinical and clinical activity in the treatment of solid tumors, including HCC. Areas covered: In this review, we summarize the current therapeutic paradigm for the systemic treatment of advanced HCC, focusing on Lenvatinib pre-clinical and clinical development. Keywords 'Lenvatinib', ' Target therapy', 'REFLECT trial', 'Hepatocellular carcinoma', 'HCC', 'Sorafenib' were used for literature search on PubMed. Expert commentary: In Phase-III multicentric REFLECT trial Lenvatinib demonstrated a non-inferior overall survival (OS) compared to Sorafenib in the first-line treatment of advanced HCC, with a manageable toxicity profile, becoming a valid alternative option in the therapeutic repertoire of this disease. Nevertheless, the potential role of Lenvatinib in real-life clinical practice has still to be defined, especially in the light of the positive results that have been achieved with other new therapeutic agents (e.g. immunotherapy).
OBJECTIVE: This trial compared the efficacy and safety of transarterial chemoembolisation (TACE) plus sorafenib with TACE alone using a newly established TACE-specific endpoint and pre-treatment of sorafenib before initial TACE. DESIGN: Patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were randomised to TACE plus sorafenib (n=80) or TACE alone (n=76). Patients in the combination group received sorafenib 400 mg once daily for 2-3 weeks before TACE, followed by 800 mg once daily during on-demand conventional TACE sessions until time to untreatable (unTACEable) progression (TTUP), defined as untreatable tumour progression, transient deterioration to Child-Pugh C or appearance of vascular invasion/extrahepatic spread. Co-primary endpoints were progression-free survival (PFS), which is not a conventional one but defined as TTUP, or time to any cause of death plus overall survival (OS). Multiplicity was adjusted by gatekeeping hierarchical testing. RESULTS: Median PFS was significantly longer in the TACE plus sorafenib than in the TACE alone group (25.2 vs 13.5 months; p=0.006). OS was not analysed because only 73.6% of OS events were reached. Median TTUP (26.7 vs 20.6 months; p=0.02) was also significantly longer in the TACE plus sorafenib group. OS at 1 year and 2 years in TACE plus sorafenib group and TACE alone group were 96.2% and 82.7% and 77.2% and 64.6%, respectively. There were no unexpected toxicities. CONCLUSION: TACE plus sorafenib significantly improved PFS over TACE alone in patients with unresectable HCC. Adverse events were consistent with those of previous TACE combination trials. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01217034.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major cause of mortality worldwide with an increasing incidence due to escalating rates of obesity and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Unfortunately, a majority of patients with HCC present with advanced disease. The immune checkpoint inhibitor atezolizumab, a PD-L1 inhibitor, in combination with bevacizumab, anti-VEGF, has become the new standard of care for patients with advanced HCC after demonstrating improved overall and progression free survival over sorafenib. In this review, we discuss the evolving role of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment of HCC and their safety, efficacy, and tolerability.
Tumor lineage plasticity is emerging as a critical mechanism of therapeutic resistance and tumor relapse. Highly plastic tumor cells can undergo phenotypic switching to a drug-tolerant state to avoid drug toxicity. Here, we investigate the transmembrane tight junction protein Claudin6 (CLDN6) as a therapeutic target related to lineage plasticity for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). CLDN6 was highly expressed in embryonic stem cells but markedly decreased in normal tissues. Reactivation of CLDN6 was frequently observed in HCC tumor tissues as well as in premalignant lesions. Functional assays indicated that CLDN6 is not only a tumor-associated antigen but also conferred strong oncogenic effects in HCC. Overexpression of CLDN6 induced phenotypic shift of HCC cells from hepatic lineage to biliary lineage, which was more refractory to sorafenib treatment. The enhanced tumor lineage plasticity and cellular identity change were potentially induced by the CLDN6/TJP2 (tight junction protein 2)/YAP1 (Yes-associated protein 1) interacting axis and further activation of the Hippo signaling pathway. A de novo anti-CLDN6 monoclonal antibody conjugated with cytotoxic agent (Mertansine) DM1 (CLDN6-DM1) was developed. Preclinical data on both HCC cell lines and primary tumors showed the potent antitumor efficiency of CLDN6-DM1 as a single agent or in combination with sorafenib in HCC treatment.
