Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs (beta-blockers) are one of the most frequently used class of cardiovascular drugs that are mainly used in conventional dosage forms., which have their own limitations including hepatic first-pass metabolism, high incidence of adverse effects due to variable absorption profiles, higher frequency of administration and poor patient compliance. Essentially, attempts have been made to develop novel drug delivery systems for beta-blockers, including transdermal delivery systems, to circumvent the drawbacks of conventional drug delivery. However, so far none of the beta-blocker drugs have been marketed as transdermal delivery systems. Nevertheless, there have been noteworthy research endeavours worldwide at the laboratory level to investigate the skin permeation and to develop transdermal formulations of beta-blockers including: propranolol, metoprolol, atenolol, timolol, levobunolol, bupranolol, bopindolol, mepindolol, sotalol, labetolol, pindolol, acebutolol and oxprenolol. Innovative research exploiting penetration-enhancing strategies, such as iontophoresis, electroporation, microneedles and sonophoresis, holds promise for the successful use of these drugs as consumer-friendly transdermal dosage forms in clinical practice. This paper presents an overview of the transdermal research on this important class of drugs.
BACKGROUND: Patients with ventricular tachycardia and ischemic cardiomyopathy are at high risk for adverse outcomes. Catheter ablation is commonly used when antiarrhythmic drugs do not suppress ventricular tachycardia. Whether catheter ablation is more effective than antiarrhythmic drugs as a first-line therapy in patients with ventricular tachycardia is uncertain. METHODS: In an international trial, we randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio patients with previous myocardial infarction and clinically significant ventricular tachycardia (defined as ventricular tachycardia storm, receipt of appropriate implantable cardioverter-defibrillator [ICD] shock or antitachycardia pacing, or sustained ventricular tachycardia terminated by emergency treatment) to receive antiarrhythmic drug therapy or to undergo catheter ablation. All the patients had an ICD. Catheter ablation was performed within 14 days after randomization; sotalol or amiodarone was administered as antiarrhythmic drug therapy according to prespecified criteria. The primary end point was a composite of death from any cause during follow-up or, more than 14 days after randomization, ventricular tachycardia storm, appropriate ICD shock, or sustained ventricular tachycardia treated by medical intervention. RESULTS: A total of 416 patients were followed for a median of 4.3 years. A primary end-point event occurred in 103 of 203 patients (50.7%) assigned to catheter ablation and in 129 of 213 (60.6%) assigned to drug therapy (hazard ratio, 0.75; 95% confidence interval, 0.58 to 0.97; P = 0.03). Among patients in the catheter ablation group, adverse events within 30 days after the procedure included death in 2 patients (1.0%) and nonfatal adverse events in 23 patients (11.3%). Among the patients assigned to drug therapy, adverse events that were attributed to antiarrhythmic drug treatment included death from pulmonary toxic effects in 1 patient (0.5%) and nonfatal adverse events in 46 patients (21.6%). CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and ventricular tachycardia, an initial strategy of catheter ablation led to a lower risk of a composite primary end-point event than antiarrhythmic drug therapy. (Funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and others; VANISH2 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02830360.).
Used in adequate dosages, sotalol is efficacious in the conversion of acute supraventricular arrhythmias, an effect that is predictable on the basis of the drug's known electropharmacologic actions. Electrophysiologic studies have shown that both oral and intravenous sotalol are effective in preventing the induction of sustained arrhythmias and that the success of acute suppression is indicative of subsequent clinical control. Interim results of a recent trial of prophylaxis against recurrence of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia are reported, demonstrating a high efficacy with an acceptably low profile of adverse effects.
In the post-AFFIRM era, treatment of AF has become the treatment of symptoms. In some patients, this will be simple rate control, but there remain a significant cohort of patients in whom rate control alone does not give acceptable symptom relief. In this group, antiarrhythmic therapy still has a role, and the AFFIRM trial indicates that this therapeutic strategy is without significant deleterious effect on mortality. The choice of antiarrhythmic agent must be individualized according to underlying cardiac pathologies and comorbidities, however. Most recently, the introduction of dofetilide has widened the therapeutic options in patients with severe heart disease, and the Canadian Trial of Atrial Fibrillation indicated the superior efficacy of amiodarone at low doses. The release/ development of newer Class III antiarrhythmic agents may offer hope for the benefits of amiodarone without the serious adverse effects with long-term therapy.
Cardiac arrhythmias frequently respond only to drugs that have as their predominant electrophysiologic effect the prolongation of repolarization and refractoriness. According to the Singh-Vaughan Williams classification, these drugs are known as class III agents. In the last few years, interest has increased in the development of class III antiarrhythmic drugs as alternatives to sodium channel blocking agents, which mainly affect cardiac conduction. Much of this interest results from a perceived danger of using drugs with sodium channel blocking properties, particularly in patients with ischemic heart disease, based on the results of the Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial (CAST) and several other trials. This article is a review of the pharmacology, including the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, of the most commonly used and investigated class III antiarrhythmic drugs. As will be seen from the discussion, each of these drugs has novel pharmacology that makes it applicable in specific clinical situations. Their putative effects on various arrhythmogenic mechanisms and their efficacy in treating specific target arrhythmias will be addressed.
Sotalol is a water-soluble, nonselective, beta-adrenergic blocker that was recently approved in oral form in the United States for the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias that are judged to be life-threatening. As a beta-blocker, sotalol is unique in having additional class-III antiarrhythmic activity. It is still not resolved whether sotalol is more effective than other beta-blockers in managing arrhythmias, but there are suggestions that it might possess greater antiarrhythmic and life-protecting activities than other types of antiarrhythmic drugs. The drug is well tolerated, but, because of its electrophysiologic activity, there is a small risk of proarrhythmia, specifically the development of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and torsade de pointes.
Sotalol is a novel antiarrhythmic agent combining beta-adrenergic-antagonist actions with the ability to increase cardiac repolarization and refractoriness. The drug's electrophysiologic and clinical profile is different from that of conventional beta-receptor antagonists. As compared with other antiarrhythmic agents, sotalol prevents recurrences of arrhythmia in a higher proportion of patients, particularly among those presenting with ventricular tachycardia and aborted sudden cardiac death. The net hemodynamic effect of sotalol is the result of a balance between the depressant effects due to beta-receptor blockade and an action that tends to increase contractility. Although initially marketed in the United States for treatment of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias, sotalol also has demonstrated efficacy in many patients with supraventricular arrhythmias. As with all drugs that prolong the QT interval, the syndrome of torsade de pointes is a serious potential adverse effect.
The role of antiarrhythmic drugs in the management of children with arrhythmias has changed due to the rapid development of radiofrequency ablation. Moreover, the release of new drugs and a better insight into the electrophysiologic mechanisms of arrhythmias have changed former patterns of drug management. However, because of lack of controlled trials, arrhythmia management in pediatrics is still mainly based on clinical studies and individual experience. Within these limitations, I attempt to give practical recommendations for the management of the different arrhythmias seen in children based on the latest developments in this area.
The inotropic effects of sotalol in comparison to other antiarrhythmic drugs were tested in an experimental model allowing isovolumic measurements independently of the loading conditions. All class I drugs had a similar negative inotropic effect. d,l-Sotalol caused a dose-dependent depressant effect on the rate of left ventricular pressure development. The same held true for l-sotalol. In contrast, d-sotalol, in clinical doses, revealed no significant inotropic effects in normal hearts. In a postischemic model, d-sotalol led to a further deterioration of left ventricular function. It could be demonstrated by autonomic blockade that this effect was mainly the result of the remaining weak beta-blocking activity of the d-isomer in addition to its class III action. After intravenous administration of amiodarone in doses of 10 mg.kg-1, no significant inotropic effects were found in normal rats.
The prevalence of arrhythmia in the population is increasing as more people survive for longer with cardiovascular disease. It was once thought that antiarrhythmic therapy could save life, however, it is now evident that antiarrhythmic therapy should be administrated with the purpose of symptomatic relief. Since many patients experience a decrease in physical performance as well as a diminished quality of life during arrhythmia there is still a need for antiarrhythmic drug therapy. The development of new antiarrhythmic agents has changed the focus from class I to class III agents since it became evident that with class I drug therapy the prevalence of mortality is considerably higher. This review focuses on the benefits and risks of known and newer class III antiarrhythmic agents. The benefits discussed include the ability to maintain sinus rhythm in persistent atrial fibrillation patients, and reducing the need for implantable cardioverter defibrillator shock/antitachycardia therapy, since no class III antiarrhythmic agents have proven survival benefit. The risks discussed mainly focus on pro-arrhythmia as torsade de pointes ventricular tachycardia.
Serum drug level monitoring facilitates dosage optimization of agents with a narrow therapeutic index. Concentration-dependent antiarrhythmic and toxic effects have been demonstrated for several class I drugs, whereas the concentration-effect relationships of class III antiarrhythmics are less well established. The efficacy and toxicity of amiodarone, in particular, may be determined more by extensive tissue deposition than by its serum concentration. Furthermore, accumulation of the active metabolite desethylamiodarone seems to play an additional role. The antiarrhythmic serum concentration range of sotalol is wide; monitoring is not required. The clinical utility of serum concentration measurements with the newly developed class III antiarrhythmic agents remains to be evaluated in properly planned therapeutic trials in patients with supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias.
Granuloma annulare (GA) is a common, benign skin condition, which was first described over a century ago, but still remains an enigma with respect to etiology, associated systemic diseases, and treatment. A number of clinical variants have been classified. We report an atypical presentation of GA localized to the palms.
We studied the frequency dependence of the effects of the novel Russian class III antiarrhythmic drug refralon on the duration of action potentials (AP) in rabbit ventricular myocardium. The absence of an inverse frequency dependence of AP prolongation was demonstrated: the effects of refralon at stimulation frequency of 1 Hz were stronger than at 0.1 Hz. The patch-clamp experiments with recording of rapid delayed rectifier potassium current I(Kr) in a heterologous expression system showed that the blocking effect of refralon developed significantly faster at 2 Hz depolarization frequency than at 0.2 Hz. This feature of refralon distinguishes it among the majority of other class III drugs (sotalol, dofetilide, E-4031) and explains the relatively high safety of this drug together with its high efficacy.
Arrhythmogenesis as an effect of antiarrhythmic therapy is a relatively recent concern. Satisfactory definitions are lacking, but 2 categories, clinical and technical, can be recognized. Although arrhythmogenesis is an international problem and multifactorial, its expression depends on variables that differ according to geographic location. In Europe, use of antiarrhythmic therapy is more conservative than it is in the U.S. In the U.S., many antiarrhythmic drugs commonly used in Europe are either recently released, are on limited release or are available only in investigational protocols. Mexiletine, class IC agents and sotalol are agents in routine use in Europe. All have arrhythmogenic potential, although this appears lowest with mexiletine.
According to the American Heart Association, approximately 6 million adults have been afflicted with heart failure in the United States in 2020 and are more likely to have sudden cardiac death accounting for approximately 50% of the cause of mortality. Sotalol is a nonselective beta-adrenergic receptor antagonist with class III antiarrhythmic properties that has been mostly used for atrial fibrillation treatment and suppressing recurrent ventricular tachyarrhythmias. The use of sotalol in patients with left ventricular dysfunction is not recommended by the American College of Cardiology or American Heart Association because studies are inconclusive with conflicting results regarding safety. This article aims to review the mechanism of action of sotalol, the beta-blocking effects on heart failure, and provide an overview of clinical trials on sotalol use and its effects in patients with heart failure. Small- and large-scale clinical trials have been controversial and inconclusive about the use of sotalol in heart failure. Sotalol has been shown to reduce defibrillation energy requirements and reduce shocks from implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. Torsades de Pointes is the most life-threatening arrhythmia that has been documented with sotalol use and occurs more commonly in women and heart failure patients. Thus far, mortality benefits have not been demonstrated with sotalol use and larger multicenter studies are required going forward.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Ventricular tachycardia occurrence in implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) patients may result in shock delivery and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. In addition, shocks may have deleterious mechanical and psychological effects. Prevention of ventricular tachycardia (VT) recurrence with the use of antiarrhythmic drugs or catheter ablation may be warranted. Antiarrhythmic drugs are limited by incomplete efficacy and an unfavorable adverse effect profile. Catheter ablation can be effective but acute complications and long-term VT recurrence risk necessitating repeat ablation should be recognized. A shared clinical decision process accounting for patients' cardiac status, comorbidities, and goals of care is often required. RECENT FINDINGS: There are four published randomized trials of catheter ablation for sustained monomorphic VT (SMVT) in the setting of ischemic heart disease; there are no randomized studies for non-ischemic ventricular substrates. The most recent trial is the VANISH trial which randomly allocated patients with ICD, prior infarction, and SMVT despite first-line antiarrhythmic drug therapy to catheter ablation or more aggressive antiarrhythmic drug therapy. During 28 months of follow-up, catheter ablation resulted in a 28% relative risk reduction in the composite endpoint of death, VT storm, and appropriate ICD shock (p = 0.04). In a subgroup analysis, patients having VT despite amiodarone had better outcomes with ablation as compared to increasing amiodarone dose or adding mexiletine. There is evidence for the effectiveness of both catheter ablation and antiarrhythmic drug therapy for patients with myocardial infarction, an implantable defibrillator, and VT. If sotalol is ineffective in suppressing VT, either catheter ablation or initiation of amiodarone is a reasonable option. If VT occurs despite amiodarone therapy, there is evidence that catheter ablation is superior to administration of more aggressive antiarrhythmic drug therapy. Early catheter ablation may be appropriate in some clinical situations such as patients presenting with relatively slow VT below ICD detection, electrical storms, hemodynamically stable VT, or in very selected patients with left ventricular assist devices. The optimal first-line suppressive therapy for VT, after ICD implantation and appropriate programming, remains to be determined. Thus far, there has not been a randomized controlled trial to compare catheter ablation to antiarrhythmic drug therapy as a first-line treatment; the VANISH-2 study has been initiated as a pilot to examine this question.
Glucagon is considered the drug of choice for treating bradycardia and hypotension encountered during beta-blocker poisoning. Its potential usefulness in reversing adverse effects encountered during therapeutic dosing with beta-blockers has not been well characterized. We present a case of sotalol-induced bradycardia reversed by glucagon.
Sotalol causes noncardioselective beta-adrenergic antagonism and prolongation of repolarization of cardiac tissues (Class III electrophysiologic action). This dual pharmacologic profile confers unprecedented antiarrhythmic properties to the drug. Sotalol is highly bioavailable when administered orally in the fasting state and is mostly cleared unchanged in the urine with an apparent half-life of elimination of 15 to 17 hours. It has been found effective in the suppression of nearly all cardiac arrhythmias, with the exception of those precipitated by prolongation of ventricular repolarization. Its safety and efficacy relative to other antiarrhythmic drugs need to be examined more fully in randomized controlled trials of unselected patients. The adverse effects potentially associated with the use of sotalol are those commonly observed with beta-adrenergic blockade, as well as those resulting from excessive prolongation of the QT interval. The occurrence of torsade de pointes during treatment with sotalol may be minimized by limiting doses to no more than 640 mg/day and by strictly avoiding the development of hypokalemia.
Fifty patients (25 Blacks and 25 Indians) suffering from mild-to-moderate hypertension (supine diastolic blood pressure 100 - 105 mmHg) were studied in order to compare the antihypertensive effect of a combination of a beta-blocker (sotalol hydrochloride 160 mg/d) plus a thiazide derivative (hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg/d) ( Sotazide ; B-M) with that of a combination of reserpine 0,1 mg/d ( Serpasil ; Ciba) plus hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg/d ( Dichlotride ; Frosst MSD). The combination of reserpine plus hydrochlorothiazide was found to be as effective as that of sotalol plus hydrochlorothiazide in lowering the blood pressure in both the Black and the Indian patients. Two patients taking the combination containing reserpine developed side-effects, but this did not occur in any of those taking the combination containing sotalol. We feel that in developing countries, where the cost of therapy is important, reserpine in a dosage of less than 0,1 mg/d plus a thiazide derivative in low dosage is preferable to a beta-blocker plus a thiazide derivative in the treatment of hypertension.
An 82-year-old woman with persistent atrial fibrillation underwent successful electrical cardioversion and was begun on sotalol. After 3 days of in-hospital observation she had only mild lengthening of the QT interval. Two weeks later in clinic, the day after her husband's unexpected death, she was noted to have profound QT interval prolongation. Although she was asymptomatic and echocardiography did not disclose regional wall motion abnormalities consistent with takotsubo cardiomyopathy, she probably had a forme fruste of stress cardiomyopathy. Following emotional trauma, a period of heightened vigilance for ventricular proarrhythmia is probably warranted in women treated with antiarrhythmic drugs that lengthen repolarization.
