Fentanyl and its derivatives sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil are potent opioids. A comprehensive review of the use of fentanyl and its derivatives in the pediatric population was performed using the National Library of Medicine PubMed. Studies were included if they contained original pharmacokinetic parameters or models using established routes of administration in patients younger than 18 years of age. Of 372 retrieved articles, 44 eligible pharmacokinetic studies contained data of 821 patients younger than 18 years of age, including more than 46 preterm infants, 64 full-term neonates, 115 infants/toddlers, 188 children, and 28 adolescents. Underlying diagnoses included congenital heart and pulmonary disease and abdominal disorders. Routes of drug administration were intravenous, epidural, oral-transmucosal, intranasal, and transdermal. Despite extensive use in daily clinical practice, few studies have been performed. Preterm and term infants have lower clearance and protein binding. Pharmacokinetics was not altered by chronic renal or hepatic disease. Analyses of the pooled individual patients' data revealed that clearance maturation relating to body weight could be best described by the Hill function for sufentanil (R (2) = 0.71, B (max) 876 mL/min, K (50) 16.3 kg) and alfentanil (R (2) = 0.70, B (max (fixed)) 420 mL/min, K (50) 28 kg). The allometric exponent for estimation of clearance of sufentanil was 0.99 and 0.75 for alfentanil clearance. Maturation of remifentanil clearance was described by linear regression to bodyweight (R (2) = 0.69). The allometric exponent for estimation of remifentanil clearance was 0.76. For fentanyl, linear regression showed only a weak correlation between clearance and bodyweight in preterm and term neonates (R (2) = 0.22) owing to a lack of data in older age groups. A large heterogeneity regarding study design, clinical setting, drug administration, laboratory assays, and pharmacokinetic estimation was observed between studies introducing bias into the analyses performed in this review. A limitation of this review is that pharmacokinetic data, based on different modes of administration, dosing schemes, and parameter estimation methods, were combined.
Alfentanil, fentanyl and sufentanil are synthetic opioid analgesics acting at specific opioid receptors. These opioids are widely used as analgesics to supplement general anaesthesia for various surgical procedures or as primary anaesthetic agents in very high doses during cardiac surgery. Fentanyl and sufentanil especially are administered via infusion for long term analgesia and sedation in intensive care patients. Opioid analgesics are mainly administered using the intravenous route. However, other techniques of administration, including epidural, intrathecal, transdermal and intranasal applications, have been demonstrated. Important pharmacokinetic differences between alfentanil, fentanyl and sufentanil have been shown in many reports. Alfentanil has the most rapid analgesic onset and time to peak effect as well as the shortest distribution and elimination half-lives. The volume of distribution and total body clearance of this agent are smaller when compared with those of fentanyl and sufentanil. The pharmacokinetics of the opioid analgesics can be affected by several factors including patient age, plasma protein content, acid-base status and cardiopulmonary bypass, but not significantly by renal insufficiency or compensated hepatic dysfunction. In addition, pharmacokinetic properties can be influenced by changes in hepatic blood flow and administration of drug combinations which compete for the same plasma protein carrier or metabolising pathway. Although comparing specific pharmacokinetic parameters such as half-lives is deeply entrenched in the literature and clinical practice, simply comparing half-lives is not a rational way to select an opioid for specific requirements. Using pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic models, computer simulations based on changes in the effect site opioid concentration or context-sensitive half-times seem to be extremely useful for selecting an opioid on a more rational basis.
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD) is a common neurological system disorder in surgical patients. The choice of anesthetic can potentially reduce POCD. The authors performed this network meta-analysis to compare different anesthetic drugs in reducing the incidence of POCD for elderly people undergoing noncardiac surgery. We searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, and the Web of Science for randomized controlled trials comparing the different anesthetic drugs for noncardiac surgery in elderly from inception until July, 2022. The protocol was registered on the PROSPERO database (CRD#42020183014). A total of 34 trials involving 4314 patients undergoing noncardiac surgery in elderly were included. The incidence of POCD for each anesthetic drug was placebo (27.7%), dexmedetomidine (12.9%), ketamine (15.2%), propofol (16.8%), fentanyl (23.9%), midazolam (11.3%), sufentanil (6.3%), sevoflurane (24.0%), and desflurane (28.3%). Pairwise and network meta-analysis showed dexmedetomidine was significantly reducing the incidence of POCD when compared with placebo. Network meta-analysis also suggested dexmedetomidine was significantly reducing the incidence of POCD when compared with sevoflurane. Sufentanil and dexmedetomidine ranked the first and second in reducing the incidence of POCD with the surface under the cumulative ranking curve value of 87.4 and 81.5%. Sufentanil and dexmedetomidine had the greatest possibility to reduce the incidence of POCD for elderly people undergoing noncardiac surgery.
INTRODUCTION: The authors discuss a novel patient controlled analgesia system utilizing a preprogrammed device that delivers a small submucosal tablet of sufentanil. AREAS COVERED: This submucosal sufentanil system is not yet commercially available. A literature review of the current patient controlled analgesia systems and current information of this device are discussed. EXPERT OPINION: This novel device has the potential to enhance patient safety as it is preprogrammed and delivers a standard dose of sufentanil, a rapidly acting opioid devoid of active metabolites.
INTRODUCTION: Intravenous patient-controlled analgesia using opioids is frequently used to provide perioperative analgesia. However, there are a number of drawbacks for intravenous patient-controlled analgesia. The sufentanil sublingual tablet system is a major evolution in technology and drug development for postoperative pain management. AREAS COVERED: We reviewed the use of sublingual sufentanil in postoperative pain management, with a focus on chemistry, pharmacokinetics and clinical use in different surgical patients. EXPERT OPINION: The sufentanil sublingual tablet system can decrease intravenous patient-controlled analgesia-related safety issues. Current clinical studies have demonstrated this novel system to be safe and effective in postoperative pain management.
Fetal heart rate (FHR) changes occasionally follow the use of labor epidurals. Most studies of the phenomenon have focused on specific techniques, but similar timing and appearance suggest a common cause. Induction of analgesia may transiently alter the balance between factors encouraging and inhibiting uterine contractions with subsequent changes of FHR patterns. Regardless the etiology, these changes are transient and do not produce maternal or fetal morbidity. However, they must be promptly recognized and treated if necessary.
BACKGROUND:  There are few studies on continuous intercostal nerve block after single operation hole thoracoscopic surgery, that is, two-port thoracoscopic surgery. OBJECTIVE:  To evaluate the analgesic effect of continuous intercostal nerve block after thoracoscopic surgery. METHODS:  A total of 80 patients who underwent single operation hole thoracoscopic surgery in our hospital between September 2020 and June 2021 were enrolled and divided into two groups. Based on basic analgesia, an intercostal catheter was placed during the operation for continuous intercostal block analgesia after the operation in the experimental group (group A, n = 40). The control group (group B, n = 40) was treated with sufentanil intravenous analgesia after surgery, which is namely "basic analgesia." The postoperative pain scores, restlessness during the recovery period, effect on reducing opioid use, postoperative chest complications, patient satisfaction, etc., were compared between the two groups. RESULTS:  The pain scores of patients in group A were significantly lower compared with those in group B at 12, 24, 36, and 48 hours after surgery (3.325 +/- 1.163 vs. 4.550 +/- 1.176, 2.650 +/- 1.001 vs. 4.000 +/- 1.038, 2.325 +/- 0.917 vs. 3.700 +/- 0.966, and 1.775 +/- 1.050 vs. 3.150 +/- 1.075, p < 0.001, respectively). Sufentanil consumption in group A was significantly lower than in group B at 48 hours after surgery (98.625 +/- 4.158 vs. 106.000 +/- 7.228, p < 0.001). CONCLUSION:  Multimodal analgesia is ideal for early pain control after thoracotomy. A continuous intercostal nerve block can effectively reduce postoperative pain in patients.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recent advances in drug delivery technology have provided new means of delivering medications with improved efficacy and safety. This review details developments in drug delivery recently made available or in development with the potential to better deliver analgesia. RECENT FINDINGS: Patient-controlled analgesia of intravenous medications was a major advance in drug delivery technology that allowed opioids to be administered more effectively and more safely. Extension of this technology to medications not administered intravenously has further broadened therapeutic options in the treatment of acute pain. Improvements in sustained-release formulations and patient-controlled analgesia modalities that are not catheter-based confer the potential to deliver analgesia less invasively. Receptor-specific antagonists allow opioids to be administered with fewer untoward side effects. SUMMARY: New routes of administration allow familiar medications to be utilized with greater clinical efficacy. Elimination of the need for indwelling catheters may reduce both the frequency of analgesic gaps and catheter-related complications. Physicians need to be familiar with developments in drug delivery technologies to be able to effectively utilize analgesics as part of well designed multimodal regimens to bring effective and well tolerated analgesia to patients with acute pain.
The control of post-operative pain in Italy and other western countries is still suboptimal. In recent years, the Sufentanil Sublingual Tablet System (SSTS; Zalviso; AcelRx Pharmaceuticals, Redwood City, CA, USA), which is designed for patient-controlled analgesia (PCA), has entered clinical practice. SSTS enables patients to manage moderate-to-severe acute pain during the first 72 postoperative hours directly in the hospital setting. However, the role of SSTS within the current framework of options for the management of post-operative pain needs to be better established. This paper presents the position on the use of SSTS of a multidisciplinary group of Italian Experts and provides protocols for the use of this device.
BACKGROUND: Hip fracture is common in the geriatric population. Patients in this group are often at high risk for perioperative complications from concurrent diseases. Conventional spinal anesthesia can be associated with hypotension but has a better postoperative outcome compared to general anesthesia. We judged that a reduced dose of bupivacaine in combination with sufentanil could give reliable blocks with minimal hypotension. METHODS: Fifty elderly patients were randomized into two groups. The study group received spinal anesthesia as a combination of hyperbaric bupivacaine 7.5 mg and sufentanil 5 microg while the control group received hyperbaric bupivacaine 15 mg. The hemodynamic stability of the patients and the quality of the blocks were compared. RESULTS: All patients had adequate duration of reliable blocks. More control group patients than study group patients required ephedrine due to hypotension. CONCLUSION: A reduced dose of hyperbaric bupivacaine (7.5 mg) in combination with sufentanil (5 microg) provides reliable spinal anesthesia for the repair of hip fracture in aged patients with few events of hypotension and little need for vasopressor support of blood pressure.
Aim: To evaluate the pooled safety of sufentanil sublingual tablets (SSTs) administered at 30-mcg dose equivalents over </=72 h for moderate-to-severe acute pain management in medically supervised settings. Patients & methods: Safety data from SST 30 mcg Phase III studies were pooled with an additional patient subset from studies in which two SST 15 mcg were self-administered within 20-25 min (30-mcg dose-equivalent). Results: Analyses included 804 patients. Median (range) SST 30-mcg dosing over 24 h was 7.0 (1-15) tablets. Adverse events (AEs) were experienced by 60.5% (SST) and 61.4% (placebo) and treatment-related AEs by 43.8% (SST) and 33.5% (placebo; 10.3% difference; 95% CI: 2.0-18.6) of patients. No dose-dependent increase in oxygen desaturation was observed with SST. Conclusion: SST was well-tolerated, with most AEs considered mild or moderate in severity.
BACKGROUND: Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) is an effective method of postoperative pain, there have been many studies performed that have compared the efficacy of hydromorphone with continuous sufentanil. The purpose of this systematic review is to compare the efficacy and safety of hydromorphone and sufentanil. METHODS: Seven databases were searched for controlled trials to compare the efficacy and safety of hydromorphone and sufentanil. After selecting the studies, extracting the data, and assessing study quality, the meta-analysis was performed on several of the studies with RevMan 5.3. RESULTS: Thirteen studies comprised of 812 patients were found. The pain intensity of the hydromorphone group was significantly lower than that of the sufentanil group at 12 hours. With no statistical difference at 24 to 48 hours (MD12 = -1.52, 95% CI [-2.13, -1.97], P <.05). The sedation intensity of the hydromorphone group at 12, 24, and 48 hours were lower than those of the sufentanil group, with no statistical difference (MD12 = -0.03, 95% CI [-0.18, 0.12], P > .05; MD24 = -0.20, 95% CI [-0.42, 0.03], P > .05; MD48 = -0.03, 95% CI [-0.18, 0.11)], P > .05). The PCA requests in the hydromorphone group were less than that in the sufentanil group, and there was no significant difference (RR = -0.20, 95% CI [-1.93,1.53], P > .05). The incidence of adverse events in the hydromorphone group was less than that in the sufentanil group, and there was a statistical difference: (RR = 0.61, 95% CI [0.47,0.79], P < .05). CONCLUSION: Compared with sufentanil, PCA with hydromorphone was more effective in relieving pain and PCA requests 12, 24, and 48 hours after operation, and significantly reduced the incidence of adverse events, but it did not have an advantage in sedation intensity.
The most widely used method for fetocide in late termination of pregnancy for fetal abnormalities (TOPFA) consists of injecting of potassium chloride (KCl) into the fetal heart and is likely to be painful after 22 weeks of gestation. We studied ten consecutive women undergoing TOPFA between 22 and 38 weeks. This technique for fetocide consisted of a single umbilical vein puncture under ultrasound guidance with injections of sufentanil 5 microg followed by KCl 2 g. No electrocardiographic modifications could be observed and maternal plasma potassium levels did not show any significant variation throughout the procedure. Fetal umbilical phlebotomy for fetal analgesia followed by fetocide therefore appears to be a safe procedure for the mother and allows the fetus to die without pain when late termination of pregnancy (TOP) is indicated.
INTRODUCTION: Sufentanil is a potent synthetic opioid used for analgesia in neonates; however, data concerning drug disposition of sufentanil and dosage regimen are sparse in this population. Therefore, the aim of the study was to explore sufentanil disposition and to propose optimal loading and maintenance doses of sufentanil in ventilated full-term neonates. METHODS: Individual sufentanil pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated based on therapeutic drug monitoring data using a 2-compartmental model. Linear regression models were used to explore the covariates. RESULTS: The median (IQR) central volume of distribution (Vdc) and clearance (CL) for sufentanil were 4.7 (4.1-5.4) L/kg and 0.651 (0.433-0.751) L/h/kg, respectively. Linear regression models showed relationship between Vdc (L) and GA (r2 = 0.3436; p = 0.0452) as well as BW (r2 = 0.4019; p = 0.0268). Median optimal sufentanil LD and MD were 2.13 (95% CI: 1.78-2.48) mug/kg and 0.29 (95% CI: 0.22-0.37) mug/kg/h, respectively. Median daily COMFORT-B (IQR) scores ranged from 6 to 23 while no significant relationship between pharmacokinetic parameters and COMFORT-B scores was found. DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION: Body weight and gestational age were found as weak covariates for sufentanil distribution, and the dosage regimen was developed for a prospective trial.
Priapism is a rare complication of epidural anaesthesia, and the pathophysiology is poorly understood. In general, 95% of all priapism episodes are ischemic because of decreased penile blood flow, and therefore requires immediate treatment. A case is reported of a 45-year-old male patient in which a clear relation is demonstrated between continuous thoracic epidural analgesia and priapism after transabdominal nephrectomy. The level of epidural anaesthesia supports the theory that the erection is a consequence of increased penile blood flow, thus a relatively harmless condition. However, confirmation by serial cavernous blood gas analysis or colour duplex ultrasonography is mandatory. Until this hypothesis is confirmed, termination of epidural infusion is advised as a primary treatment.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: The analgesic effect on labour pain of either spinal or epidural sufentanil or fentanyl was tested in a total of 80 primiparous parturients at an early phase of the delivery. The aim of the study was to compare the level of analgesia achieved within 20 minutes. METHODS: The parturients were randomly assigned to groups receiving either spinal sufentanil (5 microg), epidural sufentanil (20 microg), spinal fentanyl (20 microg) or epidural fentanyl (100 microg), whereafter the parturients were monitored for reported pain during contraction and side effects for 30 minutes. The primary outcome was the level of analgesia achieved within 20 minutes, while the secondary outcome was the time until the administration of the first epidural bolus. RESULTS: At baseline, the mean maximum pain VAS was 86 (84-89) mm. At 20 minutes after spinal sufentanil, epidural sufentanil, spinal fentanyl or epidural fentanyl, the maximum VAS was 19 (7-31), 45 (32-59), 25 (10-39) or 52 (40-63) mm, respectively (P < .01 spin vs epid groups). There were no differences in efficacy between spinal or epidural sufentanil and fentanyl. The mean (95% CI) time to the activation of epidural analgesia was 151 (111-192), 130 (93-168), 177 (121-234) and 112 (80-143) minutes after spinal sufentanil, epidural sufentanil, spinal fentanyl and epidural fentanyl, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: In terms of a reduction of VAS score at 20 minutes, epidural sufentanil or fentanyl provide 63% and 60% of the analgesic effect of the corresponding spinal analgesia. Epidural sufentanil or fentanyl could be used in situations in which spinal/CSE administration is not possible or desired.
Pupillometry has proven effective for the monitoring of intraoperative analgesia in non-cardiac surgery. We performed a prospective randomized study to evaluate the impact of an analgesia-guided pupillometry algorithm on the consumption of sufentanyl during cardiac surgery. Fifty patients were included prior to surgery. General anesthesia was standardized with propofol and target-controlled infusions of sufentanyl. The standard group consisted of sufentanyl target infusion left to the discretion of the anesthesiologist. The intervention group consisted of sufentanyl target infusion based on the pupillary pain index. The primary outcome was the total intraoperative sufentanyl dose. The total dose of sufentanyl was lower in the intervention group than in the control group and (55.8 microg [39.7-95.2] vs 83.9 microg [64.1-107.0], p = 0.04). During the postoperative course, the cumulative doses of morphine (mg) were not significantly different between groups (23 mg [15-53] vs 24 mg [17-46]; p = 0.95). We found no significant differences in chronic pain at 3 months between the 2 groups (0 (0%) vs 2 (9.5%) p = 0.49). Overall, the algorithm based on the pupillometry pain index decreased the dose of sufentanyl infused during cardiac surgery.Clinical trial number: NCT03864016.
We report the repeated improvement in neurological function following naloxone administration in a patient who developed acute hemiplegia after an intracranial neurological procedure. The mechanisms responsible for the neurological deficit and for its reversal by naloxone are discussed. A review of the literature suggests that the beneficial effect of naloxone can result from an improvement in haemodynamic status or from metabolic effects that could be favorable during cerebral ischaemia.
Saddle spinal is a reliable method for control of pain during labor. This method has rapid onset and causes complete sensory block without significant influence on motor neurons.Our goal was to compare the analgesic efficacy and side effects of pethidine and sufentanil via saddle spinal administration during labor.600 parturients requesting analgesia were randomly divided into 2 groups. First group was composed of 300 patients received 0.4 mg/kg pethidine and the second group was composed of 300 patients received 0.1 mug/kg sufentanil. Then, analgesia according to Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), itching, nausea, apnea and urinary retention were examined between 2 groups.VAS=3 was noted in both groups. Equal rate of apnea was seen in both groups. Patients received pethidine showed significantly a higher rate of nausea compared with sufentanil group (P<0.0001). Pruritus was significantly higher in patients received sufantanil (P<0.0001).Our findings suggest that saddle spinal by pethidine or sufentanil causes a considerable analgesia for labor. Proper management of the untoward effects of this method may introduce it as a safe and low-cost method for painless labor.
Objective: The purpose of this article is to review the safety and efficacy of sufentanil sublingual tablet (SST) and suggest its place in therapy for managing acute pain in patients requiring intravenous (IV) opioids. Data Sources: A MEDLINE/PubMed search was performed (2010 to April 2019) using the following keywords: sufentanil sublingual tablet, sufentanil, opioid, moderate to severe acute pain. Study Selection and Data Extraction Quantification: We included English language articles evaluating SST pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and safety in humans for the treatment of acute pain. Data Synthesis: SST is Food and Drug Administration approved and considered safe and effective for the treatment of acute pain in Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy-certified and medically supervised health care settings. Phase III clinical trials showed a statistically significant decrease in summed pain intensity score when SST was compared with placebo. Relevance to Patient Care and Clinical Practice: SST can be a useful option in patients requiring a parenteral opioid who do not have IV access, or it may be unnecessary or difficult to obtain. Because of its quick onset and sustained analgesia, SST may also be useful for procedural pain in the critically ill, to expedite discharges for outpatient procedures, in emergency departments (EDs), and in the battlefield. Conclusions: SST can satisfy an unmet need in patients with acute pain, who require parenteral opioids, and either have no IV access or require prolonged time to achieve IV access such as patients in outpatient surgical centers, EDs, and the battlefield. During periods of parenteral opioid shortage, SST may provide another option for adequate analgesia.
