BACKGROUND: Burn wounds cause high levels of morbidity and mortality worldwide. People with burns are particularly vulnerable to infections; over 75% of all burn deaths (after initial resuscitation) result from infection. Antiseptics are topical agents that act to prevent growth of micro-organisms. A wide range are used with the intention of preventing infection and promoting healing of burn wounds. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects and safety of antiseptics for the treatment of burns in any care setting. SEARCH METHODS: In September 2016 we searched the Cochrane Wounds Specialised Register, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid MEDLINE (In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations), Ovid Embase, and EBSCO CINAHL. We also searched three clinical trials registries and references of included studies and relevant systematic reviews. There were no restrictions based on language, date of publication or study setting. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that enrolled people with any burn wound and assessed the use of a topical treatment with antiseptic properties. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently performed study selection, risk of bias assessment and data extraction. MAIN RESULTS: We included 56 RCTs with 5807 randomised participants. Almost all trials had poorly reported methodology, meaning that it is unclear whether they were at high risk of bias. In many cases the primary review outcomes, wound healing and infection, were not reported, or were reported incompletely.Most trials enrolled people with recent burns, described as second-degree and less than 40% of total body surface area; most participants were adults. Antiseptic agents assessed were: silver-based, honey, Aloe Vera, iodine-based, chlorhexidine or polyhexanide (biguanides), sodium hypochlorite, merbromin, ethacridine lactate, cerium nitrate and Arnebia euchroma. Most studies compared antiseptic with a topical antibiotic, primarily silver sulfadiazine (SSD); others compared antiseptic with a non-antibacterial treatment or another antiseptic. Most evidence was assessed as low or very low certainty, often because of imprecision resulting from few participants, low event rates, or both, often in single studies. Antiseptics versus topical antibioticsCompared with the topical antibiotic, SSD, there is low certainty evidence that, on average, there is no clear difference in the hazard of healing (chance of healing over time), between silver-based antiseptics and SSD (HR 1.25, 95% CI 0.94 to 1.67; I(2) = 0%; 3 studies; 259 participants); silver-based antiseptics may, on average, increase the number of healing events over 21 or 28 days' follow-up (RR 1.17 95% CI 1.00 to 1.37; I(2) = 45%; 5 studies; 408 participants) and may, on average, reduce mean time to healing (difference in means -3.33 days; 95% CI -4.96 to -1.70; I(2) = 87%; 10 studies; 979 participants).There is moderate certainty evidence that, on average, burns treated with honey are probably more likely to heal over time compared with topical antibiotics (HR 2.45, 95% CI 1.71 to 3.52; I(2) = 66%; 5 studies; 140 participants).There is low certainty evidence from single trials that sodium hypochlorite may, on average, slightly reduce mean time to healing compared with SSD (difference in means -2.10 days, 95% CI -3.87 to -0.33, 10 participants (20 burns)) as may merbromin compared with zinc sulfadiazine (difference in means -3.48 days, 95% CI -6.85 to -0.11, 50 relevant participants). Other comparisons with low or very low certainty evidence did not find clear differences between groups.Most comparisons did not report data on infection. Based on the available data we cannot be certain if antiseptic treatments increase or reduce the risk of infection compared with topical antibiotics (very low certainty evidence). Antiseptics versus alternative antisepticsThere may be some reduction in mean time to healing for wounds treated with povidone iodine compared with chlorhexidine (MD -2.21 days, 95% CI 0.34 to 4.08). Other evidence showed no clear differences and is of low or very low certainty. Antiseptics versus non-antibacterial comparatorsWe found high certainty evidence that treating burns with honey, on average, reduced mean times to healing in comparison with non-antibacterial treatments (difference in means -5.3 days, 95% CI -6.30 to -4.34; I(2) = 71%; 4 studies; 1156 participants) but this comparison included some unconventional treatments such as amniotic membrane and potato peel. There is moderate certainty evidence that honey probably also increases the likelihood of wounds healing over time compared to unconventional anti-bacterial treatments (HR 2.86, 95% C 1.60 to 5.11; I(2) = 50%; 2 studies; 154 participants).There is moderate certainty evidence that, on average, burns treated with nanocrystalline silver dressings probably have a slightly shorter mean time to healing than those treated with Vaseline gauze (difference in means -3.49 days, 95% CI -4.46 to -2.52; I(2) = 0%; 2 studies, 204 participants), but low certainty evidence that there may be little or no difference in numbers of healing events at 14 days between burns treated with silver xenograft or paraffin gauze (RR 1.13, 95% CI 0.59 to 2.16 1 study; 32 participants). Other comparisons represented low or very low certainty evidence.It is uncertain whether infection rates in burns treated with either silver-based antiseptics or honey differ compared with non-antimicrobial treatments (very low certainty evidence). There is probably no difference in infection rates between an iodine-based treatment compared with moist exposed burn ointment (moderate certainty evidence). It is also uncertain whether infection rates differ for SSD plus cerium nitrate, compared with SSD alone (low certainty evidence).Mortality was low where reported. Most comparisons provided low certainty evidence that there may be little or no difference between many treatments. There may be fewer deaths in groups treated with cerium nitrate plus SSD compared with SSD alone (RR 0.22, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.99; I(2) = 0%, 2 studies, 214 participants) (low certainty evidence). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: It was often uncertain whether antiseptics were associated with any difference in healing, infections, or other outcomes. Where there is moderate or high certainty evidence, decision makers need to consider the applicability of the evidence from the comparison to their patients. Reporting was poor, to the extent that we are not confident that most trials are free from risk of bias.
Silver has a long and intriguing history as an antibiotic in human health care. It has been developed for use in water purification, wound care, bone prostheses, reconstructive orthopaedic surgery, cardiac devices, catheters and surgical appliances. Advancing biotechnology has enabled incorporation of ionizable silver into fabrics for clinical use to reduce the risk of nosocomial infections and for personal hygiene. The antimicrobial action of silver or silver compounds is proportional to the bioactive silver ion (Ag(+)) released and its availability to interact with bacterial or fungal cell membranes. Silver metal and inorganic silver compounds ionize in the presence of water, body fluids or tissue exudates. The silver ion is biologically active and readily interacts with proteins, amino acid residues, free anions and receptors on mammalian and eukaryotic cell membranes. Bacterial (and probably fungal) sensitivity to silver is genetically determined and relates to the levels of intracellular silver uptake and its ability to interact and irreversibly denature key enzyme systems. Silver exhibits low toxicity in the human body, and minimal risk is expected due to clinical exposure by inhalation, ingestion, dermal application or through the urological or haematogenous route. Chronic ingestion or inhalation of silver preparations (especially colloidal silver) can lead to deposition of silver metal/silver sulphide particles in the skin (argyria), eye (argyrosis) and other organs. These are not life-threatening conditions but cosmetically undesirable. Silver is absorbed into the human body and enters the systemic circulation as a protein complex to be eliminated by the liver and kidneys. Silver metabolism is modulated by induction and binding to metallothioneins. This complex mitigates the cellular toxicity of silver and contributes to tissue repair. Silver allergy is a known contra-indication for using silver in medical devices or antibiotic textiles.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to assess the wound healing efficacy in second-degree burns in rats treated with 1% silver sulfadiazine (SSD)-a sulfonamide antibiotic. METHOD: This is a systematic literature review and meta-analysis performed according to the PICO (Population, Intervention, Comparison and Outcomes) strategy. RESULTS: The review found 100 studies in PubMed, Web of Science and other search engines. Of these, 70 studies were pre-selected after removing duplicates. After independent analysis by two reviewers, only seven studies met the inclusion criteria for meta-analysis. All studies except one showed faster wound closure by the application of silver sulfadiazine ointment. Using a random effects model, healing was faster in SSD-treated groups when compared to the control group on day 21, with a statistically significant mean difference of -2.72 days (95% confidence interval: -4.99, -0.45) between treatment and control groups (p<0.01). CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis revealed that SSD aided in faster healing of second-degree burns.
INTRODUCTION: Superficial burns that affect the epidermis and upper dermis only are characterised by redness of the skin that blanches on pressure, pain, and hypersensitivity. The skin blisters within hours and usually heals with minimal scarring within 2 to 3 weeks if no infection is present. Most minor burns occur in the home, with less than 5% requiring hospital treatment. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of treatments for minor thermal burns? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to October 2008 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found eight systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: alginate dressing; antibiotics; chlorhexidine-impregnated paraffin gauze dressing; foam dressing; hydrocolloid dressing; hydrogel dressing; paraffin gauze dressing; polyurethane film; silicone-coated nylon dressing; and silver sulfadiazine cream.
Use of silver in burns, chronic ulcers and diabetic ulcers can lead to circulatory absorption and deposits in wound sites, liver, kidney and other organs. Despite this, the risks of lasting tissue damage or functional disorders are low.
This review traces the use of silver in wound care, discussing its merits as an antibacterial agent and constituent of many new dressings, which are increasingly tailored to the treatment of wounds ranging from acute surgical lesions to chronic and diabetic leg ulcers. Misconceptions regarding the biological properties of silver, its possible physiological value in the human body and wound bed, absorption through the skin, and safety factors are addressed. The article aims to present silver and the new range of sustained silver-release dressings as important features in the management of skin wounds, providing effective control of wound infections while ensuring patient comfort and quality of life.
IMPORTANCE: Peceleganan spray is a novel topical antimicrobial agent targeted for the treatment of skin wound infections. However, its efficacy and safety remain unclear. OBJECTIVE: To assess the safety and efficacy of peceleganan spray for the treatment of wound infections. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This multicenter, open-label, phase 3 randomized clinical trial recruited and followed up 570 adult patients diagnosed with secondary open wound infections from 37 hospitals in China from August 23, 2021, to July 16, 2022. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to 2 groups with a 2:1 allocation. One group received treatment with 2% peceleganan spray (n = 381) and the other with 1% silver sulfadiazine (SSD) cream (n = 189). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary efficacy outcome was the clinical efficacy rate (the number of patients fulfilling the criteria for efficacy of the number of patients receiving the treatment) on the first day following the end of treatment (day 8). The secondary outcomes included the clinical efficacy rate on day 5 and the bacterial clearance rate (cases achieving negative bacteria cultures after treatment of all cases with positive bacteria cultures before treatment) on days 5 and 8. The safety outcomes included patients' vital signs, physical examination results, electrocardiographic findings, blood test results, and adverse reactions. RESULTS: Among the 570 patients randomized to 1 of the 2 groups, 375 (98.4%) in the 2% peceleganan treatment group and 183 (96.8%) in the 1% SSD control group completed the trial (n = 558). Of these, 361 (64.7%) were men, and the mean (SD) age was 48.6 (15.3) years. The demographic characteristics were similar between groups. On day 8, clinical efficacy was achieved by 339 patients (90.4%) in the treatment group and 144 (78.7%) in the control group (P < .001). On day 5, clinical efficacy was achieved by 222 patients (59.2%) in the treatment group and 90 (49.2%) in the control group (P = .03). On day 8, bacterial clearance was achieved by 80 of 334 patients (24.0%) in the treatment group and in 75 of 163 (46.0%) in the control group (P < .001). On day 5, bacterial clearance was achieved by 55 of 334 patients (16.5%) in the treatment group and 50 of 163 (30.7%) in the control group (P < .001). The adverse events related to the application of peceleganan spray and SSD cream were similar. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This randomized clinical trial found that peceleganan spray is a safe topical antimicrobial agent with a satisfactory clinical efficacy rate for the treatment of skin wound infections, while the effectiveness of bacterial clearance remains uncertain. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry Identifier: ChiCTR2100047202.
Fungal infections of the gastrointestinal tract have risen to higher levels of prevalence in the past decade. Major factors accounting for this increase are social changes, such as the increased ease and frequency of travel, which exposes the individual to environmental conditions that may result in fungal infection; increasing use of antibiotic and hormonal medications by otherwise healthy persons; and improved therapy for other diseases, such as polychemotherapy of cancer with its immunosuppressive effects. Both noninvasive and invasive fungal disease of the intestinal tract in otherwise healthy individuals can be successfully treated. The invasive fungal infections in patients with severe prior underlying disease are often first diagnosed postmortem, but improvement in serologic techniques now offers a possibility of earlier diagnosis and therapeutic intervention.
A 3-year-old Japanese girl with severe epilepsy had been treated with potassium bromide since August 1999. The dose of potassium bromide was increased from 0.5 g/day to 0.8 g/day in May 2000 because of poor control of epilepsy. She also presented high fever, caused by bacterial pneumonia, in the same period. On June 11, a reddish eruption suddenly appeared on her back. Physical examination revealed grain-size, dark-red, erythematous papules and pustules on the back and face (Fig. 1). Some of the lesions on the back were ovoid to circular with small pustules and necrotic centers. Although some papules seemed to have dell in their centers, showing the appearance of herpes virus infection, Tzanck test was negative. A biopsy specimen obtained from one of the papules revealed a massive infiltration of eosinophils and neutrophils, forming an abscess in the epidermis and dermis (Fig. 2). The serum bromide level, which was 43.7 mEq/L (normal, 0-5 mEq/L) on May 25, increased to 114 mEq/L on June 14. The eruption disappeared within 10 days after the withdrawal of potassium bromide and treatment with topical sulfadiazine silver cream. The serum bromide decreased to 56.8 mEq/L on July 6.
Forty patients having fixed drug eruptions were subjected to provocation tests. Twelve patients failed to complete the provocation tests while in the remaining, the causative drugs were shown to be tetracyclines (6), analgin (metamizole) (6), oxyphenbutazone (5), phenobarbitone (4), sulphadiazine (3), sulphaphenazole (2), penicillin (1), suphadimethoxone (1), Saridon (1), sulphadimidine (1) and sulphamethoxypryridazine (1). There was evidence of cross-sensitivity between tetracycline and demethylchlortetracycline and also between exyphenbutazone and phenylbutazone, but not between different sulphonamides, In 2 cases, the minimum dose of the drug capable of reactivating the lesions was 100 mg of sulphadiazine and 50 mg of Saridon respectively.
Antiseptics are chemical substances that when applied topically onto intact skin, mucous membranes or wounds partially or completely reduces the population of living microorganisms in those tissues. Different types of antiseptics are available - those most commonly used in clinical practice being alcohols, iodinated compounds and chlorhexidine. When using an antiseptic, consideration is required of its spectrum of antimicrobial activity, latency, residual effects, possible interferences of the presence of organic material with the activity of the antiseptic, its side effects, compatibility with other antiseptics, and cost. This article is part of a supplement entitled "Antisepsis in the critical patient", which is sponsored by Becton Dickinson.
Silver is generally considered to present a relatively low toxic threat to humans because unintentional exposure to large doses of the noble metal is quite rare. However, as the intentional utilization of silver in pharmaceutical preparations and devices increases, subtle toxic effects of silver may be predictable and expected. The present review examines the scientific literature, primarily covering the past 10 years, dealing with reports describing various types of silver toxicity. These reports consist of both in vitro and in vivo data dealing with immunological, mesenchymal, neural, and parenchymal cell types. Particular emphasis is given to (1) the use of silver in topical antimicrobial preparations as toxicity relates to absorption through dermal wounds into the systemic circulation and possible effects on delayed wound healing, (2) possible local silver toxicity via iontophoretic devices, (3) current theories relating to the toxicological mechanism of action of silver.
BACKGROUND: Burns are classified according to their mechanism of injury, depth, affected body area, affected region or part of the body, and extent of the lesions. Topical insulin modulates the healing process. However, studies evaluating the effects of topical insulin treatment on burns in human patients are lacking. PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of topical insulin on healing time of second-degree burns. METHODS: In this nonrandomized clinical trial, patients with second-degree burns were allocated to a control group (CG) or an intervention group (IG) in which wounds were treated with 1% silver sulfadiazine and topical insulin, respectively. RESULTS: Healing time was significantly shorter in the IG relative to the CG (9.1 +/- 1.9 days and 12.7 +/- 3.3 days, respectively; P < .05). The estimated burn area was similar in both groups (CG 1.44 +/- 1.0%; IG 1.42 +/- 0.53%). CONCLUSION: In this study, topical insulin reduced healing time in second-degree burns. Further investigation is warranted to support wider use in clinical practice.
A short-cut review was carried out to establish whether silver sulphadiazine cream is better than normal dressing in promoting healing without infection. A total of 410 papers were found using the reported searches, of which 12 showed the best evidence to answer the clinical question. The author, date and country of publication, patient group studied, study type, relevant outcomes, results and study weaknesses of these best papers are tabulated. It is concluded that although there is evidence of antibacterial effect, there is no direct evidence of improved healing or reduced infection.
Infrequently reported, serious allergic reactions to topical antimicrobial agents used in the treatment of burn injuries are a potential source of confusion. To avoid misdirected therapy, an understanding of the manifestations of such reactions is important. Two recent cases of serious allergic reactions, one to silver sulphadiazine, one to mafenide acetate, are presented and the literature is reviewed.
The scientific basis for using folinic acid in combination with the antiparasitic drugs prescribed to AIDS patients has been reviewed. In vitro and experimental data are unclear. On the basis of folinic acid metabolism and pharmacology and of clinical experience, we suggest that folinic acid should not be systematically added to the curative treatment of pneumocystosis with cotrimoxazole. Folinic acid may be added to prophylactic regimens using high-dose cotrimoxazole (i.e. 800 mg sulfamethoxazole twice a day) and in malnourished patients. It should be administered as soon as cytopenia occurs in the course of treatment. Concerning toxoplasmosis, the addition of folinic acid is recommended in doses of 10 to 20 mg/day in acute therapy and 5 to 10 mg/day in maintenance therapy. Dosage must be adjusted to the results of blood counts.
Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) burns are an ill-defined entity due to a lack of reported sizable burns from this chemical. In this case report of the largest reported burn from TFA, we demonstrate that TFA causes extensive, progressive full-thickness tissue injury that may initially appear superficial. Trifluoroacetic acid does not seem to involve the systemic toxicities that result from hydrofluoric acid burns, and there is no role for calcium gluconate in acute management based on this case. Operative intervention should be staged because wound beds may initially seem healthy yet demonstrate continued necrosis.
23 patients who had used silver sulfadiazine cream were patch tested. No reactions to the active principle occurred but 2 vehicle components, cetyl alcohol and propylene glycol, were positive. No sulfonamide-sensitive subject reacted to silver sulfadiazine. There is no evidence that silver sulfadiazine has a contact sensitizing potential or that it is contra-indicated for patients with a history of sulfonamide hypersensitivity.
Toxoplasmosis is one of the major opportunistic infections observed in France in 15 to 37 percent of HIV-infected patients. Its main manifestation is encephalitis. Other, less frequent manifestations are chorioretinitis, pneumonia or disseminated toxoplasmosis. The conventional treatment is a combination of pyrimethamine 50-75 mg/day and sulfadiazine 6-8 g/day. Acute therapy should be pursued for at least 3 weeks or until optimal response is achieved, i.e. 6 to 8 weeks in most cases. The pyrimethamine-clindamycin combination in doses of at least 2.4 g/day is a possible alternative. Other drugs are being studied, but there is still a need for new drugs active against the parasite, that could be used in humans. In HIV-infected patients treatment should be maintained lifelong to prevent relapses. Maintenance regimens use the same drugs as acute therapy but in lower doses. The main field of research is primary prophylaxis of toxoplasmosis in HIV-infected patients.
Radiation therapy (RT) following breast-conserving surgical excision of cancer reduces cancer-related mortality and recurrence.1 However, most patients experience acute radiation dermatitis (ARD) within weeks after beginning RT2; symptoms of ARD, including severe skin erythema, dryness, moist or dry desquamation, and/or ulceration, may interrupt radiotherapy. This can negatively affect patient quality of life (QoL) and cancer outcomes. Acute radiation dermatitis is not to be confused with chronic radiation dermatitis, which can lead to fibrosis, skin atrophy, pigmentation, and telangiectasia months to years after RT.3 Evidence-based guidelines4 to both prevent and treat ARD recommend the application of 1 of 2 topical interventions during and/or after RT: (1) corticosteroids to improve ARD-related discomfort and itching5 or (2) 1% silver sulfadiazine (SSD) cream to reduce ARD-related dermatitis scores.6 This Evidence Corner reviews evidence supporting the 2 aforementioned topical interventions for patients undergoing RT for breast cancer.
