Headache associated with the chronic use of medications has become a significant problem in the management of headache. Typically, patients overusing analgesics suffer from tension headache, whereas those over-using triptans may experience daily migraine-type headaches or an increase in the frequency of migraine attacks. The treatment of choice in such cases is withdrawal of the medication followed as early as possible by medicinal prophylaxis of the primary headache.
Some important limitations must be taken into consideration for analgesic therapy during pregnancy. Paracetamol is the agent of choice for mild to moderate pain in any stage of pregnancy. Ibuprofen is the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) of choice; however, these substances are contraindicated after 28 weeks of gestation due to the increasing risk of premature closure of the ductus arteriosus and impairment of fetal kidney function. Even opioids can be used for severe pain but peripartum administration can lead to neonatal respiratory depression and adaptation disorders and long-term therapy up to the end of pregnancy can lead to neonatal withdrawal symptoms. Migraine can also be treated with sumatriptan. Antiepileptic drugs should not be taken during pregnancy as a teratogenic risk mostly cannot be excluded; however, well studied antidepressants, such as amitriptyline can be used for chronic pain with the appropriate indications.
Migraineurs often do not use acute migraine-specific medications. Patient-reported satisfaction with triptans is modest. Patients are generally interested in obtaining more rapid and complete symptom relief. The role of trigeminal vascular activation may explain why some patients fail to respond to current treatment. Novel formulations of currently available acute migraine treatments have been developed, with improved clinical outcomes, response times, and pain-free rates. Currently available effective, novel, acute migraine therapies include needle-free injectable sumatriptan and effervescent diclofenac. Orally inhaled dihydroergotamine is a new treatment modality. These novel formulations may help patients achieve desirable outcomes, including faster and more complete relief, more consistent response, and improved drug tolerability.
The migraine-specific triptans have revolutionized the treatment of migraine and are usually the drugs of choice to treat a migraine attack in progress. Sumatriptan (Imitrex) has been available for the longest time within the class, is most flexible in form and has been given successfully to the most number of patients. It is useful for the full range of attacks experienced by a migraine suffer. The aim of this review is to provide an overview of the first 10 years of the use of sumatriptan.
The triptans represent a relatively new class of compounds effective in the treatment of migraine. The safety and tolerability of these drugs have been extensively investigated since the first triptan (sumatriptan) became commercially available. A report on a very large population of patients tested during clinical trials and in postmarketing studies, confirms that these drugs are safe and well tolerated when correctly used. Adverse events are frequently reported, but are usually mild and only a few patients discontinue therapy because of them. These adverse events include, in particular, the so-called 'triptan symptoms' (tingling, sensation of warmth, etc.). The exact mechanism of chest symptoms reported by 20% of patients with migraine treated with triptans remains unclear, but are exceptionally related to a cardiac mechanism. CNS adverse events (i.e. somnolence) are also reported, but it is a matter of debate whether they are related to the pharmacological properties (i.e. lipophilicity) of the drug or are symptoms of the disease itself. The potential risk for drug overuse must be taken into account when the triptans are given to patients with a high frequency of migraine attacks. Clinical interaction of triptans with other drugs metabolised in the liver may theoretically influence the incidence of adverse events, but there is little evidence to support this assumption. There is no evidence of a teratogenic risk of triptans in pregnant women taking these drugs.
INTRODUCTION: Oral triptans have dominated the prescription market for acute treatment of migraine for nearly 25 years. Today, patients often express dissatisfaction with prescribed acute treatment in part because they do not have confidence that the therapy will provide consistent efficacy over time. Major limitations to sustained successful use of oral triptans are their relatively slow onset of meaningful clinical benefit and variable absorption/efficacy due to impaired gastrointestinal function during migraine. AVP-825, a new intranasal delivery system for sumatriptan , may be an effective alternative to oral triptans. AREAS COVERED: This article reviews AVP-825, which deposits low-dose sumatriptan powder deep into the vascular mucosa of the posterior nose, allowing rapid absorption of drug into the systemic circulation. Studies suggest that AVP-825 is a highly effective, well-tolerated acute treatment for episodic migraine. EXPERT OPINION: Oral triptans are limited in providing effective patient-centered outcomes to migraine patients. Failed or suboptimal abortive treatment of migraine is a major driver of migraine chronification and increases in healthcare costs. AVP-825 is an easy to use, novel, breath-powered intranasal delivery system that provides early onset of efficacy with low systemic drug exposure and few triptan-associated adverse events. AVP-825 will be a welcomed therapeutic tool for the acute treatment of migraine.
The availability of an effective drug for attack treatment is a main need of migraine patients. Symptomatic therapy of migraine now includes three main classes of drugs: ergot alkaloids, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and triptans. Clinical randomised placebo-controlled trials affirmed the efficacy and tolerability of these drugs, when used at the recommended doses and in the absence of contraindications. The efficacy data from comparative trials showed a trend in favour of triptans vs. ergot alkaloids, but failed to show significant differences between triptans and NSAIDs. However, clinical practice experience of most headache clinicians suggests that triptans provide superior efficacy in comparison with nonspecific agents, mainly in that they better satisfy migraine patient expectations. In fact, these selective specific antimigraine drugs are an advance in acute migraine treatment.
The clinical efficacy in migraine was compared for oral and subcutaneous sumatriptan and naratriptan. Doses of the two administration forms were chosen as resulting in comparable blood concentrations. Subcutaneous administrations of the drugs were superior for efficacy than the oral forms. This most likely due to a quicker rise in blood concentrations after subcutaneous injections.. In designing new therapies for migraine one should aim at a quick absorption of the drug, which will probably result in an increased efficacy.
The paradigm of early treatment of the migraine attack at mild pain intensity has become one alternative to circumventing the problem of compromised oral absorption of symptomatic drugs due to migraine-induced gastrointestinal dysmotility. Early treatment also has been proposed to be advantageous because most migraineurs could be less responsive to delayed treatment, owing to the development of central sensitization of the trigeminal pain transmission. Ranking the underlying principles, it seems that the improved response to an oral triptan formulation at mild migraine symptom intensity has more to do with less impaired gastrointestinal absorption in the early stage of the attack than decreasing the time and preventing chances for central sensitization and development of cutaneous allodynia. Furthermore, parenteral administration of a triptan is always more likely to provide relief of symptoms than conventional tablets, even when it is used later in the course of the migraine attack. Individually tailored use of the available triptan formulations will increase, without any doubt, the within-migraineur consistency of response. It also will reduce the overall proportion of migraine attacks or migraineurs not responding to triptan treatment. Notwithstanding, the recommendation of early treatment during the migraine attack when the pain is mild remains valid.
The 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptor family mediates the effects of several drugs highly effective in migraine primarily by activating 5-HT(1B) , 5-HT(1D) , and 5-HT(1F) receptors. Ergotamine, dihydroergotamine, and methysergide, as well as the "triptan" sumatriptan, are all agonists for these receptors. The receptor profile and degree of selectivity of these four drugs differ, which is reflected by their side effects that limit their use in the acute and prophylactic treatment of migraine. The acute antimigraine efficacy of these remedies is very much dependent on the formulation used where, in general, parenteral formulations are more effective in reliving the symptoms of a migraine attack.
INTRODUCTION: For more than a century, aspirin has been used for the acute treatment of primary headaches. However, the many formulations available are characterized by differences in the pharmacokinetic profile that could affect therapy effectiveness. AREAS COVERED: The formulations of aspirin affect the speed of absorption of the drug. This feature, in turn, moduates the peak plasmatic concentration (the faster the absorption, the higher the peak plasmatic concentration of aspirin). Recently, a new formulation, consisting in a micronized tablet with an effervescent nucleus, has been shown to be comparable to the formulations associated to the faster absorption. The efficacy of aspirin in migraine is well characterized: the drug is able to rapidly reduce pain and restore functionality, acting also on associated symptoms, in a manner comparable to that of oral sumatriptan. In tension-type headache, aspirin acts in a dose-dependent fashion. The safety profile of the drug is favorable: gastrointestinal complaints are generally mild in intensity and with an incidence comparable to that of ibuprofen and paracetamol. EXPERT OPINION: According to international guidelines, aspirin should be considered as first-line therapy in primary headaches. Formulations that allow fast absorption, like the new micronized tablets, and portability, are to be preferred.
Advanced practice nurses treat many patients, including children and adolescents, with migraine headaches. Management of headache episodes requires a delicate balance of prophylactic and abortive therapies. Sumatriptan has been used effectively to treat adult patients with migraine headaches, but its efficacy in children has not been established. Results of a literature review provide strong evidence supporting the use of sumatriptan in treating adults with migraine headaches. Some evidence also exists for using sumatriptan to treat migraines in pediatric patients. Open prospective studies used small convenience samples, thus limiting the external validity of the research findings. Two randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trials found conflicting results for the efficacy of sumatriptan in the treatment of pediatric migraine. Further research is needed to determine its efficacy in children.
The acute treatment and prophylaxis of migraine headache are discussed in this article. The medications for acute treatment, their doses, indications, contraindications and adverse effects are compared. The special attention for migraine headache prophylaxis is paid. The migraine diagnostic criteria and triggers of migraine headache are noted.
Although we have several acute care medications for the treatment of migraine, we are always looking for new medications to treat our patients. Patients often say that their headaches are not under optimal control and would be happy to try another medication. Patients look for faster onset of relief, more complete relief, no recurrent headache and no adverse events. This article will cover some new and some anticipated acute care products, CGRP antagonists, sumatriptan by iontophoretic patch, sumatriptan by needle-free injections, DHE by oral inhalation and diclofenac potassium in a sachet. Botulinum toxin therapy, although a preventive measure, will be mentioned at the end.
The potential advantages of eletriptan lie firstly in its lipophilicity reflected as an increased rate of absorption and Tmax compared to sumatriptan. This is manifested in a modest advantage over sumatriptan in terms of speed of onset, 2 h headache response and 2 h pain free. However, eletriptan has not yet been shown to have an advantage over the other triptans for lack of head-to head comparisons. It does not appear to have an advantage over sumatriptan for headache recurrence. The second advantage is the partial agonist activity at the 5-HT(1B) receptor, reducing the potential for cardiovascular side-effects compared to the other triptans. Although no serious cardiovascular events have yet been recognized, eletriptan should still be used with extreme caution for patients with cardiovascular risk factors.
In this manuscript we review the key basic and clinical data of almotriptan, the new selective 5-HT(1B/D) agonist developed for the symptomatc treatment of migraine. Among triptans, almotriptan has the highest oral bioavailability, with more than two-thirds of the administered dose absorbed within the first hourboth inside and outside a migraine attack. Gender or the presence of food in the stomach do not influence this pharmacokinetic profile, and its clean metabolism results in no relevant interactions with other medications. The dose exhibiting the best efficacy/ tolerability ratio is 12.5 mg. Efficacy parameters with this dose are very comparable to those of sumatriptan 100 mg, with a recurrence rate in the lower range. The tolerability of almotriptan is similar to that for placebo. The incidence of chest symptoms is very low (<1%), even though this drug remains contraindicated in patients with ischaemic cardiomyopathy. In summary, almotriptan's promising basic profile together with its excellent tolerability/safety profile and good efficacy confirm this new 5-HT(1B/D) agonist as a drug of choice for the symptomatic treatment of migraine attacks.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this report was to describe a case with paracentral acute middle maculopathy after oral intake of sumatriptan. METHODS: Case presentation. RESULTS: One patient showed typical findings on fundoscopic examination and optical coherence tomography consistent with paracentral acute middle maculopathy following oral intake of sumatriptan. CONCLUSION: Sumatriptan may be a trigger for paracentral acute middle maculopathy.
Certain medications have been implicated in causing acute myocardial infarctions (AMI). Sumatriptan, a medication usually prescribed for acute migraine and cluster headaches has been documented as potentially causing coronary vasospasm, thereby leading to MI. This is usually seen in patients with strong risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD) or in those with established CAD. Most cases thus far have been reported in patients using the subcutaneous preparation of sumatriptan. Here, we present a case of a patient without prior risk factors for CAD and angiographically unremarkable coronary arteries who presented with evidence of an AMI after oral sumatriptan use for migraines.
Sumatriptan subcutaneous administration is the fastest and most effective of the triptans for relief of acute migraine headache. This occurs even when the patient has already developed symptoms related to central sensitization, a key parameter in determining the effectiveness of these agents. In patients whose migraine attacks have historically failed to respond to oral triptans, this route of administration has also proven to be more consistent and effective. Until recently this method of drug delivery was dependent upon a needle for administration. A new method of delivery for this agent, Sumavel((R)) DosePro, eliminates the needle and disposal issues coupled with an improved ease of use of drug delivery and acceptable tolerability for patients in clinical trials.
