Legionnaires' disease is pneumonia, usually caused by Legionella pneumophila, which can range in severity from mild to quite severe. While it is commonly acquired in the community, it can just as easily be acquired nosocomially from water sources that have not been appropriately decontaminated. While historically initial treatment was always with erythromycin, current case series and treatment recommendations suggest that outpatients receive immediate treatment with one of the following antibacterials: azithromycin, erythromycin, clarithromycin, telithromycin, doxycycline or an extended-spectrum fluoroquinolone. If the symptoms are severe enough to warrant hospitalisation then the patient should receive treatment with parenteral azithromycin or extended-spectrum fluoroquinolones followed by step-down to oral formulations to complete the regimens. While a shorter course of 7-10 days for more severe infections may be possible for intravenous/oral azithromycin, other antibacterials should be administered for a total of 10-21 days and started as soon as possible upon presentation to optimise outcomes.
PURPOSE: The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, antimicrobial activity, clinical safety, and current regulatory status of solithromycin are reviewed. SUMMARY: Solithromycin is a novel ketolide antibiotic developed for the treatment of community-acquired bacterial pneumonia (CABP). Its pharmacologic, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic properties provide activity against a broad range of intracellular organisms, including retained activity against pathogens displaying various mechanisms of macrolide resistance. Phase III clinical trials of solithromycin demonstrated noninferiority of both oral and i.v.-to-oral regimens of 5-7 days' duration compared with moxifloxacin for patients with moderately severe CABP. Nearly one third of patients receiving i.v. solithromycin experienced infusion-site reactions. Although no liver-related adverse events were reported in patients receiving oral solithromycin, more patients receiving i.v.-to-oral solithromycin experienced asymptomatic, transient transaminitis, with alanine transaminase levels of >3 to >5 times the upper limit, compared with those treated with moxifloxacin. These results led the Food and Drug Administration to conclude that the solithromycin new drug application was not approvable as filed, adding that the risk of hepatotoxicity had not yet been adequately characterized. The agency further recommended a comparative study of patients with CABP to include approximately 9,000 patients exposed to solithromycin in order to exclude drug-induced liver injury events occurring at a rate of 1 in 3,000 with 95% probability. CONCLUSION: Solithromycin is a novel ketolide antibiotic with activity against a broad spectrum of intracellular organisms, including those displaying macrolide resistance. While demonstrating noninferiority to a current first-line agent in the treatment of CABP, concerns for drug-induced liver injury and infusion-site reactions have placed its regulatory future in doubt.
Streptococcus pneumoniae is the leading bacterial cause of community-acquired respiratory tract infections. Prior to the 1970s this pathogen was uniformly susceptible to penicillin and most other antimicrobials. However, since the 1990s there has been a significant increase in drug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (DRSP) due, in large part, to increased use of antimicrobials. The clinical significance of this resistance is not definitely established, but appears to be most relevant to specific MICs for specific antimicrobials. Certain beta-lactams (amoxicillin, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone), the respiratory fluoroquinolones, and telithromycin are among several agents that remain effective against DRSP. Continued surveillance studies, appropriate antimicrobial usage campaigns, stratification of patients based on known risk factors for resistance, and vaccination programmes are needed to appropriately manage DRSP and limit its spread.
The advanced macrolides, azithromycin and clarithromycin, and the ketolide telithromycin are structural analogues of erythromycin. They have several distinct advantages when compared with erythromycin including enhanced spectrum of activity, more favorable pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, once daily administration, and improved tolerability. This article reviews the pharmacokinetics, antimicrobial activity, clinical use, and adverse effects of these antimicrobial agents.
Vancomycin is considered the workhorse for the treatment of most drug-resistant gram-positive bacterial infections. However, concerns have been raised regarding the increasing rates of vancomycin-resistant enterococci and the clinical shortcomings of vancomycin in the treatment of invasive Staphylococcus aureus infections. Resources have been committed to the development of antimicrobial agents with activity against these organisms. This review will focus on the newer antibacterial agents that have been developed for the treatment of resistant gram-positive pathogens. Included in this review are the agents: quinupristin-dalfopristin, linezolid, daptomycin, telithromycin, and tigecycline.
The rates of resistance to erythromycin and clindamycin among Streptococcus agalactiae strains isolated in our hospital increased from 4.2 and 0.8% in 1993 to 17.4 and 12.1%, respectively, in 2001. Erythromycin resistance was mainly due to the presence of an Erm(B) methylase, while the M phenotype was detected in 3.8% of the strains. Telithromycin was very active against erythromycin-resistant strains, irrespective of their mechanisms of macrolide resistance.
Telithromycin (HMR 3647) is the first ketolide introduced into clinical practice. Ketolides are semisynthetic derivates of erythromycin A that carry novel biological properties on the erythronolide A ring. This new class of antimicrobials was designed to overcome current resistance mechanisms against erythromycin A within Gram-positive cocci. Ketolides do not induce macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B (MLS(B)) resistance and are active against erythromycin resistance methylase gene (erm)-carrying Gram-positive cocci. This review summarizes published data on telithromycin and intends to define the challenge that a new antimicrobial brings to medical practice.
For the time being telithromycin is the only representative of a new group of antibiotics - ketolides - available for clinical use. Its chemical structure is derived from erythromycin, but it is better resorbed from the digestive tract and is efficacious against most macrolide-resistant strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus pyogenes. Telithromycin is registered for the treatment of respiratory infections: sinusitis, acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, community-acquired pneumonia and streptococcal tonsillopharyngitis. The drug is well tolerated. It is less likely to induce MLS(B) resistance than macrolides with a 14- or 15-member ring.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To identify the key publications of 2006 dealing with drug-induced liver injury. RECENT FINDINGS: When given in therapeutic doses over 14 days, acetaminophen produced significant asymptomatic elevations in alanine aminotransferase among healthy volunteers, suggesting that subclinical injury may be more common than previously thought. Acute liver failure in children was shown to differ in several important respects from that seen in adults, notably a much lower incidence of acetaminophen toxicity with nearly half of all cases being indeterminate in origin. The first cases of hepatotoxicity with telithromycin, a new class of ketolide antibiotic, were described along with reports suggesting liver injury from ezetimibe among other agents. The potential for chronic injury to develop after acute drug-induced liver injury was analyzed in a large Swedish database; 5-6% of cases were judged to become chronic, with drugs causing cholestatic injury predominating. Among well described hepatotoxins, new reports appeared with highly active antiretroviral therapy agents, herbal therapies and several antibiotics. Finally, the safe use of pravastatin and pioglitazone was demonstrated in patients with chronic liver disease in controlled clinical trials. SUMMARY: Drug-induced liver injury remains an important concern for many existing drugs as well as for agents in development.
Antibiotics are the therapeutic agents most often associated with hepatotoxicity. However, this is mainly due to the widespread prescription of these drugs. The relative risk of antibiotic-related hepatotoxicity is low. Causality assessment of suspected drug-induced liver injury (DILI) related to antibiotics can be difficult, particularly because some cases occur long after the drug has been stopped. Among the penicillins, amoxicillin clavulanate is the most associated with hepatotoxicity and is the most frequent cause of DILI-related hospitalisations. Flucloxacillin ranks as the second highest cause of DILI in many countries. The severity of antibiotic-induced DILI varies widely, with the hepatitis-like (hepatocellular) damage tending to be more severe that than cholestatic/mixed type. The pattern is strongly influenced by age. Recently telithromycin (a new generation macrolide) has been linked with DILI, with a typical pattern, which includes abrupt commencement of fever, abdominal pain, jaundice and, in some cases, ascites. Antibiotic-induced DILI appears, in most instances, to be idiosyncratic. Genetic-association studies have recently identified genotypes related to flucloxacillin and possibly to amoxicillin-clavulanate hepatotoxicity.
Antimicrobial agents in the macrolide family have long been considered drugs of potential utility in the management of infections caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. However, with the emergence of macrolide resistance, the clinical value of macrolides in pneumococcal infections is threatened. In part, as a consequence of the development of macrolide resistance, recently the first agent in the ketolide antimicrobial class, telithromycin, was developed and introduced into clinical practice. The ketolides are macrolide antimicrobials whose chemistry has been modified so as avoid the effects of the most common mechanisms of macrolide resistance with S pneumoniae. This discussion reviews the current state of resistance to macrolides and ketolides with S pneumoniae in North America.
Despite the revolutionary introduction of antibiotic therapy in the post-World War II era, primary care physicians continue to struggle with the issue of optimal treatment strategies for bacterial infection and the growing problem of antimicrobial resistance. The aggressive use of potent agents as first-line therapy maximises the potential for successful eradication of bacterial pathogens and slowing of the development of drug-resistant strains. Therapeutic drug monitoring and quantitative assessment of antibacterial potency are not always feasible in daily practice, but the pharmacodynamic profiles of antibacterials - which integrate pharmacokinetic profiles and microbiological properties - can be used to predict clinical success. Telithromycin possesses pharmacodynamic characteristics that make this novel ketolide an optimal choice for the empirical management of community-acquired respiratory tract infections.
In patients with infection, improving the probability of positive treatment outcomes depends on optimizing the interactions between the host, pathogen, and drug. In this setting, optimal regimens must be utilized which not only maximize effectiveness in a specific patient, but also minimize the development of microbial resistance. The probability of achieving a specifically targeted antimicrobial exposure can be assessed using Monte Carlo simulation, a technique which integrates an agent's in vitro potency distribution (i.e., minimum inhibitory concentrations [MICs]) with the pharmacokinetic profile. The targeted pharmacodynamic parameters assessed by this technique include the ratio of peak concentration (C(max)) to MIC (C(max) : MIC); the ratio of the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) to MIC (AUC : MIC), and the time the drug concentration exceeds the MIC (T > MIC). Some antimicrobials, e.g., the aminoglycosides, are most effective/bactericidal when they have a high C(max) : MIC ratio; others, e.g., the fluoroquinolones, are more effective when the AUC : MIC ratio is high. In both of these scenarios, organism eradication is concentration-dependent, and the therapeutic goal is to maximize drug exposure. Like the fluoroquinolones, the efficacy of telithromycin, a newly developed ketolide, is most related to the AUC : MIC ratio. Outcome for other agents, such as the beta-lactams, is best predicted by the T > MIC; in this case, organism eradication is time-dependent, and the therapeutic goal is to optimize the duration of antimicrobial exposure. This article discusses how the use of currently available antimicrobials can be optimized through an appreciation of pharmacodynamic profiling.
As a well-established class, macrolide antibiotics continue to enjoy a remarkable interest within pharmaceutical industry. Several stunning breakthroughs in semi-synthetic study of erythromycin A (EMA) contribute to the important role played by the macrolide class in search for new anti-infectious agents. Earlier structural modifications of EMA to address the issue of acid instability resulted in the first breakthrough in search for anti-infectious agents derived from EMA. Clarithromycin (CAM) and azithromycin (AZM) are two representative antibacterials commercialized during this period. Afterwards, continued research on the modifications of EMA to combat bacterial resistance culminated in the second breakthrough in this field. Telithromycin and cethromycin are two innovative antibacterials discovered in this period for treating community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). Recently, further structural modifications of EMA generate promising antibacterials endlessly, which will hopefully arouse another breakthrough in the near future. In this review, we will give an account of these breakthroughs and discuss the future directions of semi-synthetic research on EMA. In particular, the design and synthesis of some distinguished or promising antibacterials derived from EMA will be highlighted.
Increasing numbers of resistant bacteria and decreasing numbers of efficient antimicrobial agents demand for the development of new highly potent antimicrobial agents. The two main directions for the development of new antimicrobial agents are either the development of completely novel antimicrobial agents, or the modification of already existing antimicrobial molecules. The second direction proved to be a more successful and cost-efficient way of generating new antimicrobial agents. For this, chemical modifications have been included which render the antimicrobial agents insensitive to prevalent bacterial resistance mechanisms. However, detailed knowledge of the resistance mechanisms is indispensable. Molecular analysis of resistance mechanisms provides the required data to identify critical target structures. Furthermore, modification of antimicrobial agents makes it possible to escape known resistance mechanisms. In this report, two examples for such successful developments, one from human medicine (telithromycin) and the other from veterinary medicine (florfenicol), are presented.
In spite of decades of research, our understanding of the principles of antibiotic binding to the ribosome and the mechanisms of drug action remains only fragmentary. Recent progress in biochemical and genetic studies of some "old" and new antibiotics and the availability of high-resolution structures of the ribosome subunits allows mapping the antibiotic-binding sites at atomic resolution. In this review, interaction of three groups of antibiotics with the ribosome and the mechanisms of the drug action are discussed, considering the data used to map the binding sites of the new macrolide derivatives, ketolides, a novel clinically important antibiotic linezolid, and a still experimental drug evernimicin.
The global emergence of antibacterial resistance among common and atypical respiratory pathogens in the last decade necessitates the strategic application of antibacterial agents. The use of bactericidal rather than bacteriostatic agents as first-line therapy is recommended because the eradication of microorganisms serves to curtail, although not avoid, the development of bacterial resistance. Bactericidal activity is achieved with specific classes of antimicrobial agents as well as by combination therapy. Newer classes of antibacterial agents, such as the fluoroquinolones and certain members of the macrolide/lincosamine/streptogramin class have increased bactericidal activity compared with traditional agents. More recently, the ketolides (novel, semisynthetic, erythromycin-A derivatives) have demonstrated potent bactericidal activity against key respiratory pathogens, including Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Moraxella catarrhalis. Moreover, the ketolides are associated with a low potential for inducing resistance, making them promising first-line agents for respiratory tract infections.
Ketolides are erythromycin A derivatives with a keto group replacing the cladinose sugar and an aryl-alkyl group attached to the lactone macrocycle. The aryl-alkyl extension broadens its antibacterial spectrum to include all pathogens responsible for community-acquired pneumonia (CAP): Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis as well as atypical pathogens (Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila). Ketolides have extensive tissue distribution, favorable pharmacokinetics (oral, once-a-day) and useful anti-inflammatory/immunomodulatory properties. Hence, they were considered attractive additions to established oral antibacterials (quinolones, beta-lactams, second-generation macrolides) for mild-to-moderate CAP. The first ketolide to be approved, Sanofi-Aventis' telithromycin (RU 66647, HMR 3647, Ketek(R)), had tainted clinical development, controversial FDA approval and subsequent restrictions due to rare, irreversible hepatotoxicity that included deaths. Three additional ketolides progressed to non-inferiority clinical trials vis-a-vis clarithromycin for CAP. Abbott's cethromycin (ABT-773), acquired by Polymedix and subsequently by Advanced Life Sciences, completed Phase III trials, but its New Drug Application was denied by the FDA in 2009. Enanta's modithromycin (EDP-420), originally codeveloped with Shionogi (S-013420) and subsequently by Shionogi alone, is currently in Phase II in Japan. Optimer's solithromycin (OP-1068), acquired by Cempra (CEM-101), is currently in Phase III. Until this hepatotoxicity issue is resolved, ketolides are unlikely to replace established antibacterials for CAP, or lipoglycopeptides and oxazolidinones for gram-positive infections.
The prevalence of antibiotic resistance in bacterial pathogens associated with community-acquired respiratory tract infections is increasing. Ketolides, semi-synthetic derivatives of erythromycin, overcome the macrolide resistance mechanisms found in Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus pyogenes, two key pathogens. They also have improved potency and longer post-antibiotic effects, while maintaining the antibacterial spectrum of the macrolide class. The new ketolides cethromycin (ABT-773) and telithromycin have overall antibacterial properties that suggest they will be clinically useful new antibiotics and are undergoing clinical development and regulatory review.
The in vitro and in vivo antichlamydial activities of dexamethasone and beclomethasone alone and in combination with an antibiotic were tested. In vitro, dexamethasone and beclomethasone decreased the number of inclusion-forming units versus the control number (P < 0.001). The combination of glucocorticoids with azithromycin, telithromycin, or levofloxacin was more active than antibiotics used alone (P < 0.001). The combination, tested in a murine Chlamydophila pneumoniae infection model, produced similar results.
