This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of single-pill combination (SPC) antihypertensive drugs in patients with uncontrolled essential hypertension. Through Searching Pubmed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, and Web of Science collected only randomized controlled trials on the efficacy of single-pill combination antihypertensive drugs in people with uncontrolled essential hypertension. The search period is from the establishment of the database to July 2022. The methodological quality of the included studies was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Assessment, and statistical analyses were performed using Review Manage 5.3 and Stata 15.1 software. This review ultimately included 32 references involving 16 273 patients with uncontrolled essential hypertension. The results of the network meta-analysis showed that a total of 11 single-pill combination antihypertensive drugs were included, namely: Amlodipine/valsartan, Telmisartan/amlodipine, Losartan/HCTZ, Candesartan/HCTZ, Amlodipine/benazepril, Telmisartan/HCTZ, Valsartan/HCTZ, Irbesartan/amlodipine, Amlodipine/losartan, Irbesartan/HCTZ, and Perindopril/amlodipine. According to SUCRA, Irbesartan/amlodipine may rank first in reducing systolic blood pressure (SUCRA: 92.2%); Amlodipine/losartan may rank first in reducing diastolic blood pressure (SUCRA: 95.1%); Telmisartan/amlodipine may rank first in blood pressure control rates (SUCRA: 83.5%); Amlodipine/losartan probably ranks first in diastolic response rate (SUCRA: 84.5%). Based on Ranking Plot of the Network, we can conclude that single-pill combination antihypertensive drugs are superior to monotherapy, and ARB/CCB combination has better advantages than other SPC in terms of systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, blood pressure control rate, and diastolic response rate. However, due to the small number of some drug studies, the lack of relevant studies has led to not being included in this study, which may impact the results, and readers should interpret the results with caution.
Single risk factors, such as hypertension and dyslipidemia, can combine to exacerbate the development and severity of cardiovascular disease. Treatment goals may be more effectively achieved if multiple disease factors are targeted with combination treatment. We enrolled 202 patients who were randomly divided into the following three groups: telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg, telmisartan 80 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg, and telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg. The primary efficacy variables were changes from baseline in mean sitting systolic blood pressure (MSSBP) between telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan 80 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg at 8 weeks, and the percent changes from baseline in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol between telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg at 8 weeks. The secondary efficacy variables were changes in MSSBP, mean sitting diastolic blood pressure (MSDBP), LDL cholesterol and other lipid levels at 4 weeks and 8 weeks, as well as observed adverse events during follow-up. There were no significant differences between the three groups in demographic characteristics and no significant difference among the three groups in terms of baseline characteristics for the validity evaluation variables. The mean overall treatment compliance in the three groups was, respectively, 98.42%, 96.68%, and 98.12%, indicating strong compliance for all patients. The Least-Square (LS) mean (SE) for changes in MSSBP in the two (telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan 80 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg) groups were -19.3 (2.68) mm Hg and -6.69 (2.76) mm Hg. The difference between the two groups was significant (-12.60 (2.77) mm Hg, 95% CI -18.06 to -7.14, P < .0001). The LS Mean for the percent changes from baseline in LDL cholesterol in the two (telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg + rosuvastatin 20 mg and telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg) groups were -52.45 (3.23) % and 2.68 (3.15) %. The difference between the two groups was significant (-55.13 (3.20) %, 95% CI -61.45 to -48.81, P < .0001). There were no adverse events leading to discontinuation or death. Combined administration of telmisartan/amlodipine 80/5 mg and rosuvastatin 20 mg for the treatment of hypertensive patients with dyslipidemia significantly reduces blood pressure and improves lipid control. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03067688.
Cancer stem cells (CSC) possess abilities generally associated with embryonic or adult stem cells, especially self-renewal and differentiation. The CSC model assumes that this subpopulation of cells sustains malignant growth, which suggests a hierarchical organization of tumors in which CSCs are on top and responsible for the generation of intratumoral heterogeneity. Effective tumor therapy requires the eradication of CSC as they can support regrowth of the tumor resulting in recurrence. However, eradication of CSC is difficult because they frequently are therapy resistant. Therapy resistance is mediated by the acquisition of dormancy, increased DNA repair and drug efflux capacity, decreased apoptosis as well as the interaction between CSC and their supporting microenvironment, the CSC niche. This review highlights the role of CSC in chemo- and radiotherapy resistance as well as possible ways to overcome CSC mediated therapy resistance.
Telmisartan is an angiotensin-II receptor antagonist (ARB) used in the treatment of hypertension. Generally, angiotensin-II receptor blockers such as telmisartan bind to the angiotensin-II type 1 receptors with high affinity, causing inhibition of the action of angiotensin II on vascular smooth muscle, ultimately leading to a reduction in arterial blood pressure. The present study gives a comprehensive profile of telmisartan, including detailed nomenclature, formulae, elemental analysis, and appearance of the drug are mentioned. The uses and applications and the several methods described for its preparation of the drug are outlined. The profile contains the physicochemical properties including: pKa value, solubility, X-ray powder diffraction, melting point, and methods of analysis (including compendial, electrochemical, spectroscopic, and chromatographic methods of analysis). Developed validated stability-indicating (HPLC and biodiffusion assay methods under accelerated acidic, alkaline, and oxidative conditions, in addition to effect of different types of light, temperature, and pH. Detailed Pharmacology also presented (Pharmacological actions, Therapeutic uses and Dosing, Interactions, and adverse effects and precautions). More than 80 references were given as a proof of the above-mentioned studies.
Telmisartan is an antagonist of the angiotensin II receptor used in the management of hypertension (alone or in combination with other antihypertensive agents. It belongs to the drug class of angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs). Among drugs of this class, telmisartan shows particular pharmacologic properties, including a longer half-life than any other angiotensin II receptor blockers that bring higher and persistent antihypertensive activity. In hypertensive patients, telmisartan has superior efficacy than other antihypertensive drugs (losartan, valsartan, ramipril, atenolol, and perindopril) in controlling blood pressure, especially towards the end of the dosing interval. Telmisartan has a partial PPARgamma-agonistic effect whilst does not have the safety concerns of full agonists of PPARgamma receptors (thiazolidinediones). Moreover, telmisartan has an agonist activity on PPARalpha and PPARdelta receptors and modulates the adipokine levels. Thus, telmisartan could be considered as a suitable alternative option, with multi-benefit for all components of metabolic syndrome including hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obesity, and hyperlipidemia. This review will highlight the role of telmisartan in metabolic syndrome and the main mechanisms of action of telmisartan are discussed and summarized. Many studies have demonstrated the useful properties of telmisartan in the prevention and improving of metabolic syndrome and this well-tolerated drug can be greatly proposed in the treatment of different components of metabolic syndrome. However, larger and long-duration studies are needed to confirm these findings in long-term observational studies and prospective trials and to determine the optimum dose of telmisartan in metabolic syndrome.
Drug-related muscular adverse effects are relatively common among certain groups of drugs, such as statins and steroids. However, these adverse effects are less well-known for angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs). It is proposed that telmisartan and irbesartan may cause myotoxicity via increased Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor gamma (PPAR-gamma) activity. Herein, we present two hypertensive patients in whom telmisartan-induced myotoxicity was observed. Therefore, physicians should be aware that telmisartan, along with some other ARBs, can also cause myopathy. Possible drug-drug interactions should be considered in cases of concomitant prescription of these agents with other myopathic drugs.
This study aimed to compare and evaluate the efficacy of the blood pressure (BP) control and cholesterol-lowering effects and safety of combination therapy with telmisartan, rosuvastatin, and ezetimibe versus rosuvastatin and ezetimibe double therapy or telmisartan single therapy in dyslipidemia patients with hypertension. After a wash-out/therapeutic lifestyle change period of >/=4 weeks, a total of 100 eligible patients were randomized and received one of three treatments for 8 weeks: (1) telmisartan 80 mg/rosuvastatin 20 mg/ezetimibe 10 mg (TRE), (2) rosuvastatin 20 mg/ezetimibe 10 mg (RE), or (3) telmisartan 80 mg (T). The primary endpoint was the efficacy evaluation of TRE by comparing changes in mean sitting systolic blood pressure (msSBP) and mean percentage change in low-density lipoprotein-C (LDL-C) from baseline after 8 weeks of treatment. The least square (LS) mean (SE) changes in msSBP at 8 weeks compared with baseline were -23.02 (3.04) versus -7.18 (3.09) mmHg in the TRE and RE groups, respectively (p < .0001), and -25.80 (2.74) versus -14.92 (2.65) mmHg in the TRE and T groups, respectively (p = .0005). The percentage changes in the mean (SD) LDL-C at 8 weeks compared with baseline were -54.97% (3.49%) versus -0.17% (3.23%) in the TRE and T groups, respectively (p < .0001). No serious adverse events occurred, and no statistically significant differences in the incidence of overall AEs and adverse drug reactions occurred among the three groups. TRE therapy significantly decreased msSBP and LDL-C compared to RE or T therapy with comparable safety and tolerability profiles.
Telmisartan is a nonpeptide angiotensin II receptor antagonist which selectively and insurmountably inhibits the angiotensin II AT1 receptor subtype without affecting other receptor systems involved in cardiovascular regulation. Oral telmisartan dose-dependently reduced blood pressure (BP) in various animal models of hypertension. In transgenic rats, telmisartan reduced cardiac hypertrophy and glomerulosclerosis. When administered at dosages of 40 to 160 mg once daily to patients with mild to moderate hypertension, telmisartan significantly reduced systolic and diastolic BP compared with placebo and was at least as effective as atenolol 50 or 100 mg and lisinopril 10 to 40 mg. One study showed telmisartan 80 mg/day to be more effective than enalapril 20 mg/day. In 2 studies that used ambulatory BP monitoring, once daily telmisartan provided better control of diastolic BP for the full dosing interval than losartan potassium 50 mg or amlodipine 5 or 10 mg. In a single study in patients with severe hypertension, a telmisartan-based regimen had antihypertensive efficacy similar to that of an enalapril-based regimen. Telmisartan had a tolerability profile similar to that of placebo in clinical studies.
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common hepatic disease. It is rapidly emerging as the frequent cause for liver transplantation with the risk of disease recurrence, even after transplantation. Clinical evidence showed an abnormally altered expression of different peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) isotypes (PPAR-alpha/gamma/delta) in NAFLD with an involvement in the induction of insulin resistance, hepatic steatosis, reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation, and hepatic inflammation. Recently, several dual PPAR-gamma/alpha agonists were developed to simultaneously achieve the insulin-sensitizing effect of PPAR-gamma as well as lipid catabolizing effect of PPAR-alpha. PPAR-alpha activation could counterbalance the steatogenic and adipogenic effects of PPAR-gamma. But most of the drugs were ended in the initial level itself due to harmful adverse effects. In the present review, we discuss the possible mechanism of telmisartan, a typical angiotensin receptor blocker with excellent safety and pharmacokinetic profile, as a PPAR-gamma/alpha dual agonist in the treatment of NAFLD.
BACKGROUND: Single-pill combinations (SPCs) of three low-dose antihypertensive drugs can improve hypertension control but are not widely available. A key issue for any combination product is the contribution of each component to efficacy and tolerability. This trial compared a new triple SPC called GMRx2, containing telmisartan, amlodipine, and indapamide, with dual combinations of components for efficacy and safety. METHODS: In this international, randomised, double-blind, active-controlled trial, we enrolled adults with hypertension receiving between zero and three antihypertensive drugs, with a screening systolic blood pressure (SBP) ranging from 140-179 mm Hg (on no drugs) to 110-150 mm Hg (on three drugs). Participants were recruited from Australia, the Czech Republic, New Zealand, Poland, Sri Lanka, the UK, and the USA. In a 4-week active run-in, existing medications were switched to GMRx2 half dose (telmisartan 20 mg, amlodipine 2.5 mg, and indapamide 1.25 mg). Participants were then randomly allocated (2:1:1:1) to continued GMRx2 half dose or to each possible dual combination of components at half doses (telmisartan 20 mg with amlodipine 2.5 mg, telmisartan 20 mg with indapamide 1.25 mg, or amlodipine 2.5 mg with indapamide 1.25 mg). At week 6, doses were doubled in all groups, unless there was a clinical contraindication. The primary efficacy outcome was mean change in home SBP from baseline to week 12, and the primary safety outcome was withdrawal of treatment due to an adverse event from baseline to week 12. Secondary efficacy outcomes included differences in clinic and home blood pressure levels and control rates. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04518293, and is completed. FINDINGS: The trial was conducted between July 9, 2021 and Sept 1, 2023. We randomly allocated 1385 participants to four groups: 551 to GMRx2, 276 to telmisartan-indapamide, 282 to telmisartan-amlodipine, and 276 to amlodipine-indapamide groups. The mean age was 59 years (SD 11), 712 (51%) participants self-reported as female and 673 (48.6%) male, and the mean clinic blood pressure at the screening visit was 142/85 mm Hg when taking an average of 1.6 blood pressure medications. Following the run-in on GMRx2 half dose, the mean clinic blood pressure level at randomisation was 133/81 mm Hg and the mean home blood pressure level was 129/78 mm Hg. At week 12, the mean home SBP was 126 mm Hg in the GMRx2 group, which was lower than for each of the dual combinations: -2.5 (95% CI -3.7 to -1.3, p<0.0001) versus telmisartan-indapamide, -5.4 (-6.8 to -4.1, p<0.0001) versus telmisartan-amlodipine, and -4.4 (-5.8 to -3.1, p<0.0001) versus amlodipine-indapamide. For the same comparisons, differences in clinic blood pressure at week 12 were 4.3/3.5 mm Hg, 5.6/3.7 mm Hg, and 6.3/4.5 mm Hg (all p<0.001). Clinic blood pressure control rate below 140/90 mm Hg at week 12 was superior with GMRx2 (74%) to with each dual combination (range 53-61%). Withdrawal of treatment due to adverse events occurred in 11 (2%) participants in the GMRx2 group, four (1%) in telmisartan-indapamide, three (1%) in telmisartan-amlodipine, and four (1%) in amlodipine-indapamide, with none of the differences being statistically significant. INTERPRETATION: A novel low-dose SPC product of telmisartan, amlodipine, and indapamide provided clinically meaningful improvements in blood pressure reduction compared with dual combinations and was well tolerated. This SPC provides a new therapeutic option for the management of hypertension and its use could result in a substantial improvement in blood pressure control in clinical practice. FUNDING: George Medicines.
BACKGROUND: Eggs are a rich source of essential nutrients, but they are also a source of dietary cholesterol. Therefore, some guidelines recommend limiting egg consumption. However, there is contradictory evidence on the impact of eggs on diseases, largely based on studies conducted in high-income countries. OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to assess the association of egg consumption with blood lipids, cardiovascular disease (CVD), and mortality in large global studies involving populations from low-, middle-, and high-income countries. METHODS: We studied 146,011 individuals from 21 countries in the Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) study. Egg consumption was recorded using country-specific validated FFQs. We also studied 31,544 patients with vascular disease in 2 multinational prospective studies: ONTARGET (Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and in Combination with Ramipril Global End Point Trial) and TRANSCEND (Telmisartan Randomized Assessment Study in ACEI Intolerant Subjects with Cardiovascular Disease). We calculated HRs using multivariable Cox frailty models with random intercepts to account for clustering by study center separately within each study. RESULTS: In the PURE study, we recorded 14,700 composite events (8932 deaths and 8477 CVD events). In the PURE study, after excluding those with history of CVD, higher intake of egg (>/=7 egg/wk compared with <1 egg/wk intake) was not significantly associated with blood lipids, composite outcome (HR: 0.96; 95% CI: 0.89, 1.04; P-trend = 0.74), total mortality (HR: 1.04; 95% CI: 0.94, 1.15; P-trend = 0.38), or major CVD (HR: 0.92; 95% CI: 0.83, 1.01; P-trend = 0.20). Similar results were observed in ONTARGET/TRANSCEND studies for composite outcome (HR 0.97; 95% CI: 0.76, 1.25; P-trend = 0.09), total mortality (HR: 0.88; 95% CI: 0.62, 1.24; P-trend = 0.55), and major CVD (HR: 0.97; 95% CI: 0.73, 1.29; P-trend = 0.12). CONCLUSIONS: In 3 large international prospective studies including  approximately 177,000 individuals, 12,701 deaths, and 13,658 CVD events from 50 countries in 6 continents, we did not find significant associations between egg intake and blood lipids, mortality, or major CVD events. The ONTARGET and TRANSCEND trials were registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00153101. The PURE trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT03225586.
Despite the substantial evidence of the benefits of lowering blood pressure, conventional treatment does not normalize the burden of major cardiovascular events in patients with hypertension. Data now suggest that the nature of the antihypertensive agent used may have an important impact on long-term cardiovascular outcomes, including stroke. Optimal treatment should provide powerful 24-hour blood pressure control, including during the early morning hours when the risk of stroke is highest. In addition, antihypertensive therapies selected should have positive blood pressure-independent effects on stroke risk. In contrast to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) provide consistent benefits in stroke protection beyond blood pressure lowering. The ARB telmisartan has a particularly interesting profile for stroke management. Selective angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockade and 24-hour blood pressure control with telmisartan provide the potential for improved stroke prevention. This will be investigated in the Prevention Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes (PROFESS) study.
IMPORTANCE: With the high burden of hypertension in sub-Saharan Africa, there is a need for effective, safe and scalable treatment strategies. OBJECTIVE: To compare, among Black African adults, the effectiveness and safety of a novel low-dose triple-pill protocol compared with a standard-care protocol for blood pressure lowering. DESIGN AND SETTING: Randomized, parallel-group, open-label, multicenter trial conducted in public hospital-based family medicine clinics in Nigeria. PARTICIPANTS: Black African adults with uncontrolled hypertension (>/=140/90 mm Hg) who were untreated or receiving a single blood pressure-lowering drug. INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomly allocated to low-dose triple-pill or standard-care protocols. The triple-pill protocol involved a novel combination of telmisartan, amlodipine, and indapamide in triple one-quarter, one-half, and standard doses (ie, 10/1.25/0.625 mg, 20/2.5/1.25 mg, and 40/5/2.5 mg), with accelerated up-titration. The standard-care protocol was the Nigeria hypertension treatment protocol starting with amlodipine (5 mg). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary effectiveness outcome was the reduction in home mean systolic blood pressure, and the primary safety outcome was discontinuation of trial treatment due to adverse events, both from randomization to month 6. RESULTS: The first participant was randomized on July 19, 2022, and the last follow-up visit was on July 18, 2024. Among 300 randomized participants (54% female; mean age, 52 years; baseline mean home blood pressure, 151/97 mm Hg; and clinic blood pressure, 156/97 mm Hg), 273 (91%) completed the trial. At month 6, mean home systolic blood pressure was on average 31 mm Hg (95% CI, 28 to 33 mm Hg) lower in the triple-pill protocol group and 26 mm Hg (95% CI, 22 to 28 mm Hg) lower in the standard-care protocol group (adjusted difference, -5.8 mm Hg [95% CI, -8.0 to -3.6]; P < .001]). At month 6, clinic blood pressure control (<140/90 mm Hg) was 82% vs 72% (risk difference, 10% [95% CI, -2% to 20%]) and home blood pressure control (<130/80 mm Hg) was 62% vs 28% (risk difference, 33% [95% CI, 22% to 44%]) in the triple-pill compared with the standard-care protocol group; these were 2 of 21 prespecified secondary effectiveness end points. No participants discontinued trial treatment due to adverse events. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among Black African adults with uncontrolled hypertension, a low-dose triple-pill protocol achieved better blood pressure lowering and control with good tolerability compared with the standard-care protocol. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Pan African Clinical Trials Registry Identifier: PACTR202107579572114.
Nowadays, fixed drug combinations are very important part of pharmacotherapy in essential arterial hypertension. The ameliorated activity of RAAS system (ACE inhibitors or sartans) along with calcium-ion channel inhibitor results in additive decrease of blood pressure with concomitant beneficial safety profile. Both telmisartan and amlodipine possess very favorable pharmacological properties, what is reflected in results of performed clinical trials, in which they were used as combinations.Key words: amlodipine - calcium channel blockers - fixed combination - hypertension - sartans - telmisartan.
BACKGROUND: Single-pill combinations of 3 or more low-dose blood pressure (BP)-lowering drugs hold promise for initial or early treatment of hypertension. OBJECTIVES: The authors conducted a placebo-controlled trial of a new single-pill combination containing low doses of telmisartan, amlodipine, and indapamide in 2 dose options to assess efficacy and safety. METHODS: This international, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial enrolled adults with hypertension receiving 0 to 1 BP-lowering drugs. After a 2-week placebo run-in during which any BP-lowering medication was stopped, participants were eligible if home systolic BP (SBP) was 130 to 154 mm Hg. Participants were randomized in a 2:2:1 ratio to GMRx2 (1/4) dose (telmisartan 10 mg/amlodipine 1.25 mg/indapamide 0.625 mg), GMRx2 (1/2) dose (telmisartan 20 mg/amlodipine 2.5 mg/indapamide 1.25 mg), or placebo. The primary efficacy outcome was difference in change in home SBP from randomization to week 4, and primary safety outcome was treatment discontinuation due to an adverse event. RESULTS: From June 14, 2021 to October 18, 2023, a total of 295 participants (mean age: 51 years; 56% female) were randomized and 96% completed the trial. Baseline mean home BP was 139/86 mm Hg and clinic BP was 138/86 mm Hg after placebo run-in. The placebo-corrected least square mean differences in home SBP at Week 4 were -7.3 mm Hg (95% CI: -4.5 to -10.2) for GMRx2 (1/4) dose and -8.2 mm Hg (95% CI: -5.2 to -11.3) for GMRx2 (1/2) dose; reductions for clinic BP were 8.0/4.0 and 9.5/4.9 mm Hg. At Week 4, clinic BP control (<140/90 mm Hg) was 37%, 65%, and 70% for placebo, GMRx2 (1/4) dose, and GMRx2 (1/2) dose, respectively (both doses P < 0.001 vs placebo). Placebo, GMRx2-triple (1/4), and GMRx2 (1/2) treatment discontinuation due to an adverse event occurred in 1 (1.6%), 0, and 6 (5.1%), respectively; out of normal range serum sodium or potassium was observed in 4 (6.3%), 12 (10.6%), and 12 (10.1%), respectively, but no participant had a serum sodium <130/>150 mmol/L or potassium <3.0/>6.0 mmol/L. Serious adverse events were reported by 2 participants in the placebo and GMRx2 (1/2) groups and none in the GMRx2 (1/4) group. CONCLUSIONS: In a population with mild-to-moderate BP elevation, both dose versions of the novel low-dose triple single-pill combination showed good tolerability and clinically relevant BP reductions compared with placebo. (Efficacy and Safety of GRMx2 Compared to Placebo for the Treatment of Hypertension: NCT04518306).
Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system with selective AT1 receptor antagonists is recognized as an effective mean to lower blood pressure in hypertensive patients. Among the class of AT1 receptor antagonists, telmisartan offers the advantage of a very long half-life. This enables blood pressure control over 24 hours using once-daily administration. The combination of telmisartan with hydrochlorothiazide is a logical step because numerous previous studies have demonstrated that sodium depletion enhances the antihypertensive efficacy of drugs interfering with the activity of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS). In accordance with past experience using similar compounds blocking the RAS, several controlled studies have now demonstrated that the fixed-dose combination oftelmisartan/hydrochlorothiazide is superior in lowering blood pressure than either telmisartan or hydrochlorothiazide alone. Of clinical interest also is the observation that the excellent clinical tolerance of the angiotensin II receptor antagonist is not affected by the association of the low-dose thiazide. Thus telmisartan/hydrochlorothiazide is an effective and well-tolerated antihypertensive combination. Finally, the development of fixed-dose combinations should improve drug adherence because of the one-pill-a-day regimen.
There is a growing body of evidence that the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. Indeed, large clinical trials have demonstrated substantial benefit of the blockade of this system for cardiovascular-organ protection. Although several types of angiotensin II type 1 (AT(1)) receptor blockers (ARBs) are commercially available for the treatment of patients with hypertension, we have recently found that telmisartan (Micardis) could have the strongest binding affinity to AT(1) receptor. Telmisartan will be a promising cardiometabolic sartan due to its unique peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma)-inducing properties as well. In this review, we focused on telmisartan, and discussed its potential therapeutic implications in cardiometabolic disorders.
A growing body of literature has elucidated the involvement of the central renin-angiotensin system (RAS) in various neuropsychiatric diseases. While consensus on the exact mechanism of the central RAS in schizophrenia pathophysiology does not currently exist, increasing evidence reveals promise in harnessing the therapeutic potential of RAS modulation in the treatment of schizophrenia. In this review, we examine how the central RAS affects inflammation, glutamate, dopamine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma, all of which are associated with schizophrenia etiology. In addition, a recent study has demonstrated the therapeutic potential of RAS modulators, especially angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers (ARBs), as adjunctive therapy to the currently available antipsychotic medications for schizophrenia treatment. With a greater understanding of how RAS inhibition directly modulates neurotransmitter balance in the brain, it is possible that compounds with RAS-inhibiting properties could be used to optimize physiological levels of glutamate, dopamine, and GABA, and the balance among the three neurotransmitters, analogously to how antipsychotic medications mediate the dopaminergic pathways. It can be hoped that a novel approach based on this concept, such as adjunctive telmisartan therapy, may offer practical interventional strategies to address currently unmet therapeutic needs in patients with schizophrenia, especially those with treatment-resistant schizophrenia.
Vascular protection is key to reducing the morbidity associated with diabetes. Angiotensin II is known to exert a variety of deleterious effects on the vasculature, and this is likely to be a major explanation of the protective benefits observed with blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). Intriguingly, RAAS blockade also appears to reduce the onset of new diabetes, which points to a fundamental effect on metabolism. Recent developments have thrown new light onto the mechanism of these effects. The importance of unopposed stimulation of the angiotensin II type 2 (AT(2)) receptor in vascular protection is recognised, and recent studies have revealed that some angiotensin II type 1 (AT(1)) receptor blockers (ARBs) show partial peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) agonistic activity in vitro, an effect that is at least partly due to direct interaction with PPARgamma itself. There is a clear order of potency among the ARBs, with telmisartan the most potent and the only ARB to show an effect at physiologically achievable plasma concentrations. Adiponectin, an adipokine closely involved with glucose sensitisation, is also modulated by the relative activation of AT(1) and AT(2) receptors. Such effects would suggest that important benefits may result from the use of ARBs in clinical practice, although confirmation of the clinical relevance will depend upon the results of numerous ongoing studies.
Dyslipidemia-hypertension proves to be a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases. In order to achieve better adherence and cost-effectiveness than free equivalent combination therapies, a fixed-dose combination therapy with telmisartan (TEL), rosuvastatin calcium (ROS) and amlodipine besylate (AML) is required in this type of patients.
