There is a discrepancy between the recommendation for caution and daily practice in the prescription of benzodiazepines. Although there is heterogeneity in the registered indications, all benzodiazepine agonists have almost the same mechanism of action. There are, however, substantial pharmacokinetic differences between individual benzodiazepine agonists. During short-term use of benzodiazepines, the elimination half-life is no measure of duration of action. Benzodiazepine lipophilicity determines the speed of action. If a rapid effect is desired, for instance in acute anxiety or agitation, then regarding oral medication the use of a lipophilic benzodiazepine such as diazepam is a rational choice. An accumulation factor can be used to estimate benzodiazepine accumulation during chronic use. In theory, accumulation does not occur with once-daily dosage of benzodiazepines that have an elimination half-life markedly shorter than 24 h, such as oxazepam, temazepam, and lorazepam.
In an unrandomised uncontrolled study on boats and trains, capsules of flurazepam (30 mg) and temazepam (20 mg), when chewed, but not when swallowed whole (even with the ends pricked), gave a better night's sleep than 'Mandrax' (methaqualone 250 mg/diphenhydramine 50 mg) and a better night's sleep than nitrazepam 7.5 mg.
PURPOSE: Insomnia is problematic for older adults. After behavioral modifications fail to show adequate response, pharmacologic options are used. The pharmacokinetics of agents used to treat insomnia may be altered. This review focuses on the safety and efficacy of medications used to treat insomnia. METHODS: A literature search of Medline, PubMed, and Embase was conducted (January 1966-June 2016). It included systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials, observational studies, and case series that had an emphasis on insomnia in an older population. Search terms included medications approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for insomnia: benzodiazepines (triazolam, estazolam, temazepam, flurazepam, and quazepam), nonbenzodiazepine receptor agonists (non-BzRAs; zaleplon, zolpidem, and eszopiclone), suvorexant, ramelteon, doxepin and trazodone. Off-label drugs such as other antidepressants, antihistamines, antipsychotics, gabapentin, pramipexole, tiagabine, valerian, and melatonin were also included. FINDINGS: Cognitive behavioral therapy and sleep hygiene are considered initial therapy for insomnia. Benzodiazepines are discouraged in the geriatric population, especially for long-term use. Although non-BzRAs have improved safety profiles compared with benzodiazepines, their side effects include dementia, serious injury, and fractures, which should limit their use. Ramelteon has a minimal adverse effect profile and is effective for sleep-onset latency and increased total sleep time, making it a valuable first-line option. Although the data on suvorexant are limited, this drug improves sleep maintenance and has mild adverse effects, including somnolence; residual daytime sedation has been reported, however. Sedating low-dose antidepressants should only be used for insomnia when the patient has comorbid depression. Antipsychotic agents, pramipexole, and tiagabine have all been used for insomnia, but none has been extensively studied in an older population, and all have considerable adverse effects. Gabapentin may be useful in patients with restless leg syndrome or chronic neuropathic pain and insomnia. Diphenhydramine should be avoided in the elderly. Valerian and melatonin are unregulated products that have a small impact on sleep latency and can produce residual sedation. IMPLICATIONS: An ideal treatment for insomnia should help to improve sleep latency and sleep duration with limited awakenings and be without significant adverse effects such as daytime somnolence or decreased alertness. Cognitive behavioral therapy should always be first line treatment. Clinical inertia regarding previous prominent use of benzodiazepines and non-BzRAs will be a significant challenge for patients accustomed to their issuance. The future direction of insomnia treatment should have an emphasis on nonpharmacologic interventions, treating comorbid conditions, and focusing therapy on using benzodiazepines and non-BzRAs as last resorts.
DNA-damaging therapies represent the most frequently used non-surgical anticancer strategies in the treatment of human tumors. These therapies can kill tumor cells, but at the same time they can be particularly damaging and mutagenic to healthy tissues. The efficacy of DNA-damaging treatments can be improved if tumor cell death is selectively enhanced, and the recent application of poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors in BRCA1/2-deficient tumors is a successful example of this. DNA damage is known to trigger cell-cycle arrest through activation of DNA-damage checkpoints. This arrest can be reversed once the damage has been repaired, but irreparable damage can promote apoptosis or senescence. Alternatively, cells can reenter the cell cycle before repair has been completed, giving rise to mutations. In this review we discuss the mechanisms involved in the activation and inactivation of DNA-damage checkpoints, and how the transition from arrest and cell-cycle re-entry is controlled. In addition, we discuss recent attempts to target the checkpoint in anticancer strategies.
Serotonin syndrome is an under-reported and under-recognised condition that occurs on administration of selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors alone, or in combination with other medication known to increase levels of 5-hydroxytryptamine. This case report demonstrates signs and symptoms associated with their overdose and illustrates the importance of recognition of this syndrome to instigate appropriate treatment for the patient.
Using a high-performance liquid chromatography method, we measured seven commonly prescribed benzodiazepines (chlordiazepoxide, nitrazepam, nordiazepam, oxazepam, lorazepam, temazepam and diazepam) in 100 urine samples obtained from patients attending the Leeds Addiction Unit. All of the urines selected for investigation were positive for benzodiazepines using an EMIT (Enzyme Immunoassay) screen. Forty-four of the urines contained a range of benzodiazepines, none of which had been prescribed. Nitrazepam was detected most frequently (61 urine samples), but had not been prescribed to any of the patients in this study. Chlordiazepoxide was detected in 49 urine samples, although it had been prescribed to only five patients. Temazepam was detected in 28 urine samples. Fourteen patients providing 21 urine samples had been prescribed temazepam for treatment. However, temazepam was detected in only 14 of these samples. Multiple benzodiazepine abuse was evident from the high rate of detection of unrelated benzodiazepines.
Three benzodiazepine derivatives are currently indicated specifically for the treatment of insomnia in the United States. Flurazepam is biotransformed to at least two rapidly appearing and rapidly eliminated intermediate metabolites which probably contribute to sleep induction. The final metabolite, desalkylflurazepam, appears slowly, but has a long half-life ranging from 40 to 150 h. This metabolite accumulates extensively during multiple dosage. Temazepam is a slowly absorbed drug and has an intermediate half-life in the range of 10-20 h. Triazolam has an intermediate absorption rate, but is rapidly eliminated (half-life 1.5-5 h) making it essentially non-accumulating. Understanding of the pharmacokinetics of benzodiazepine hypnotics can contribute to understanding of their clinical properties.
A large number of benzodiazepines have been studied for use as sedatives and for their anxiolytic potential as premedicants for outpatient surgery. Potent, new, orally-administered drugs with short half-lives, rapid onset, and minimal residual effects have been developed. Dose-dependent amnesia is also produced by some of these agents. Advances in understanding receptor physiology have shed light on specific pharmacologic activities and aided the discovery of benzodiazepine antagonists with antidote properties. While these drugs have relatively low toxicity, dose-related oversedation remains a risk in susceptible patients, especially when combined with other sedatives.
Findings from a four-city study of the beneficial and adverse effects of hypnotics are reported. The study employed a new volunteer call-in method for monitoring drug effects outside of the clinical setting. Respondents were recruited through newspaper advertisements. They were invited to complete a short telephone interview if, during the past 12 months, they (1) had significant trouble with insomnia or (2) had taken a medication to induce sleep. Comparison groups were flurazepam, temazepam, triazolam, and over-the-counter (OTC) sleep medications. An untreated insomnia group also was included. Results indicate that most users of prescription hypnotics attributed positive effects to their sleep medications and that adverse effects were infrequent. OTC hypnotics were less effective and more likely to produce negative effects. The untreated insomnia group was more symptomatic than any of the medication groups.
Although over 20 years of clinical experience with benzodiazepine hypnotics have demonstrated their relative safety, flurazepam, temazepam, triazolam, and quazepam do not have identical safety profiles. Dose-related central nervous system (CNS) depression such as daytime sedation and psychomotor impairment may be expected because they are an extension of the therapeutic action of these agents. Therefore, drug dose is an important factor in determining the expected frequency and severity of these side effects. Also, it is important for a clinician not to assume that these unwanted CNS effects relate only to the length of a drug's half-life. Half-life does appear to be an important determinant of the presence or absence of rebound insomnia.
INTRODUCTION: Up to 40% of adults have insomnia, with difficulty getting to sleep, early waking, or feeling unrefreshed on waking. The prevalence of insomnia increases with age. Other risk factors include psychological factors, stress, daytime napping, and hyperarousal. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical questions: What are the effects of non-drug treatments for insomnia in elderly people? What are the effects of drug treatments for insomnia in elderly people? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library and other important databases up to October 2006 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 28 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: benzodiazepines (brotizolam, flurazepam, loprazolam, midazolam, nitrazepam, quazepam, temazepam, and triazolam), cognitive behavioural therapy, diphenhydramine, exercise programmes, timed exposure to bright light, zaleplon, zolpidem, and zopiclone.
The pharmacokinetics of a new 10 mg sublingual tablet formulation of temazepam and those of a currently marketed 10 mg oral capsule formulation were evaluated in a group of ten healthy volunteers. No significant differences were observed between the two formulations with respect to any of the pharmacokinetic parameters assessed. Lethargy and somnolence were reported on both capsule and tablet by several subjects at a time which corresponded with the maximum concentration of drug in plasma. The data indicate that the sublingual tablet and orally administered capsule have a similar pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile.
Sleep complaints are common in the elderly, and are often related to physiological changes with ageing, or secondary to illness and drug therapy. Primary sleep disorders, such as sleep apnoea and movement disorders, are also common. Management should be specific to the problem. Attention to underlying factors and sleep hygiene, as well as reassurance and education about age-related sleep changes, will often be sufficient. Hypnotics, which usually offer only temporary symptomatic relief, may be counterproductive, and should be prescribed only in the short term, except in limited specific cases. Short-acting benzodiazepines (e.g., temazepam or oxazepam), or possibly zopiclone, are currently the drugs of choice.
The effect of temazepam as a hypnotic was assessed with two different formulations, the solution-filled soft gelatin capsule and the more recently introduced elixir. Sixty psychiatric in-patients were included in the trial and 59 completed it. The study followed a double-blind crossover design for two consecutive nights. Patients took a capsule and elixir each night, but only one would contain the active ingredient (in a dose of 20 mg temazepam). In contrast to earlier work with volunteers, the elixir failed to reveal more of the characteristics of an ideal hypnotic. In fact, in those measures that were statistically significant, the balance favoured the capsule. We conclude that although there are many situations where an elixir is clearly clinically preferable, the essential hypnotic effect of the elixir is not conspicuously different to that of the capsule.
The most important task of clinical and experimental nephrology is to identify risk factors for progression of renal failure with the ultimate goal to counteract the dramatic increase of patients reaching end-stage renal disease. Recently, cigarette smoking has been recognized to be one of the most important remediable renal risk factors. The adverse renal effects of smoking seem to be independent of the underlying renal disease and the current evidence suggests a near doubling of the rate of progression in smokers vs. non-smokers. Cessation of smoking slows the rate of progression. Besides smoking, alcohol abuse has also been implicated as a renal risk factor. The present article reviews the current knowledge about the adverse renal effects of these legal drugs. Furthermore, the acute and chronic renal complications due to illegal recreational drugs is discussed. The impact of these drugs on the risk to reach end-stage renal failure is difficult to assess, which is mainly due to the fact that it is difficult to perform controlled prospective studies in substance abusers. According to estimates, 5-6% of new patients starting end-stage renal disease therapy may have opiate-use-related renal diseases in the USA--a figure which documents the magnitude of the problem. Thus, in any case of unexplained renal functional impairment substance abuse should be considered by the physician.
A single dose of temazepam 10 mg, as a solution in soft gelatin capsules, was given to 10 fasting geriatric in-patients (mean age 83 years) in a stable clinical condition. The mean peak plasma concentration was 306 ng/ml, with a median time of 0.75 h to peak concentration. Temazepam was eliminated from plasma in a biexponential manner, with a distribution phase (mean t1/2 alpha = 0.7 h) predominating for 3 h. The drug had a mean elimination half-life of 8.7 h. In a chronic study, in which temazepam 10 mg p.o. was given nightly to 13 patients, the plasma concentrations on Days 3, 5, 8, 12 and 15 were not significantly different from each other, showing rapid attainment of steady state levels and the lack of drug accumulation.
Among the various benzodiazepines large differences exist with regard to their pharmacokinetic properties and metabolism in man. Some are eliminated from the body at a relatively slow rate (e. g. diazepam), others are metabolized rather rapidly (e. g. oxazepam, temazepam, triazolam). Several benzodiazepines have the long-acting metabolite N-desmethyldiazepam in common (diazepam, fosazepam, prazepam, clorazepate). Such differences may be very important clinically because pharmacokinetic factors will determine the duration of drug effect and pharmacokinetic parameters constitute the basis for a rational dosage regimen. For the various clinical indications of benzodiazepines the required duration of drug action differs quite fundamentally. In anticonvulsant and anti-anxiety treatment continuous treatment is pursued, so that compounds with long elimination half-lives of parent drug or active metabolites are of advantage. If on the other hand a benzodiazepine is taken as a hypnotic, the duration of action should be restricted to the night, hence a compound with a short elimination half-life is to be preferred. A review is given of the pharmacokinetics of the major benzodiazepines presently available.
A 75-year-old woman with a previous repair of a cribiform plate fracture was nasotracheally intubated following a suicide attempt. Twenty-one days later she was readmitted to the hospital with a massive pneumocephalus, followed by a terminal intracranial hemorrhage. Nasotracheal intubation as a contributing factor in the development of pneumocephalus is previously unreported.
Narcolepsy is characterized by fragmented nighttime sleep and frequent arousals. One treatment approach to improve daytime symptoms is to consolidate nighttime sleep through decreasing arousals. Sodium oxybate is the first FDA-approved medication that follows this approach. Benzodiazepines are known to also decrease arousals at night and have been proposed to help with sleep fragmentation. In one report, clonazepam was shown to improve cataplexy in 10 of 14 patients with narcolepsy although no improvement in daytime sleepiness was reported. The purpose of this case review was to share our experience of nocturnal temazepam on daytime sleepiness in patients with narcolepsy as measured by the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS).
For the second time in the past ten years adverse reports in the lay press have questioned the safety of triazolam. Anecdotal reports of central nervous system adverse reactions can be separated into four general categories: (1) delirium in psychiatric patients; (2) delirium in geriatric patients; (3) withdrawal reactions; and (4) anterograde amnesia. Of the four, the amnesia reactions are regarded as serious enough by the Food and Drug Administration that it is requiring hypnotic drug manufacturers to revise the labeling of temazepam and flurazepam along with triazolam to emphasize the potential for this class of drugs to cause traveler's amnesia.
