Temozolomide (TMZ) is a first-choice alkylating agent inducted as a gold standard therapy for glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and astrocytoma. A majority of patients do not respond to TMZ during the course of their treatment. Activation of DNA repair pathways is the principal mechanism for this phenomenon that detaches TMZ-induced O-6-methylguanine adducts and restores genomic integrity. Current understanding in the domain of oncology adds several other novel mechanisms of resistance such as the involvement of miRNAs, drug efflux transporters, gap junction's activity, the advent of glioma stem cells as well as upregulation of cell survival autophagy. This review describes a multifaceted account of different mechanisms responsible for the intrinsic and acquired TMZ-resistance. Here, we summarize different strategies that intensify the TMZ effect such as MGMT inhibition, development of novel imidazotetrazine analog, and combination therapy; with an aim to incorporate a successful treatment and increased overall survival in GBM patients.
O(6)-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is a crucial determinant of temozolomide (TMZ) sensitivity in patients with glioblastoma (GBM). The therapeutic potential of small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting MGMT to enhance TMZ sensitivity has been hampered by serum nuclease degradation, off-target effects, poor accumulation at tumor sites, and low circulation in blood stream. In this study, we developed a framework nucleic acid-based nanoparticles (FNN), which is constructed from a six-helix DNA bundle, to encapsulate and protect siMGMT for improving TMZ sensitivity in GBM treatment. For better blood-brain barrier (BBB) penetration and GBM targeting, we conjugated Angiopep-2 (ANG) targeting modules to each end of the FNN. Nucleolin (NCL)-responsive locks were engineered along the sides of the six-helix DNA bundle, which safeguard siMGMT before tumor entry. Upon interaction with tumor-overexpressed NCL, these locks unlock, exposing siMGMT, this allows for effective suppression of MGMT, resulting in a significant improvement of TMZ therapeutic efficacy in GBM. This innovative strategy has the potential to transform the current treatment landscape for GBM.
Glioblastoma (GBM) remains a fatal diagnosis despite the current standard of care of maximal surgical resection, radiation, and temozolomide (TMZ) therapy. One aspect that impedes drug development is the lack of an appropriate model representative of the complexity of patient tumors. Brain organoids derived from cell culture techniques provide a robust, easily manipulatable, and high-throughput model for GBM. In this review, we highlight recent progress in developing GBM organoids (GBOs) with a focus on generating the GBM microenvironment (i.e., stem cells, vasculature, and immune cells) recapitulating human disease. Finally, we also discuss the use of organoids as a screening tool in drug development for GBM.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an incurable brain cancer that lacks effective therapies. Here we show that EAG2 and Kvbeta2, which are predominantly expressed by GBM cells at the tumor-brain interface, physically interact to form a potassium channel complex due to a GBM-enriched Kvbeta2 isoform. In GBM cells, EAG2 localizes at neuron-contacting regions in a Kvbeta2-dependent manner. Genetic knockdown of the EAG2-Kvbeta2 complex decreases calcium transients of GBM cells, suppresses tumor growth and invasion and extends the survival of tumor-bearing mice. We engineered a designer peptide to disrupt EAG2-Kvbeta2 interaction, thereby mitigating tumor growth in patient-derived xenograft and syngeneic mouse models across GBM subtypes without overt toxicity. Neurons upregulate chemoresistant genes in GBM cells in an EAG2-Kvbeta2-dependent manner. The designer peptide targets neuron-associated GBM cells and possesses robust efficacy in treating temozolomide-resistant GBM. Our findings may lead to the next-generation therapeutic agent to benefit patients with GBM.
Temozolomide (TMZ) is currently the first-line chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). However, the inherent heterogeneity of GBM often results in suboptimal outcomes, particularly due to varying degrees of resistance to TMZ. Over the past several decades, O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT)-mediated DNA repair pathway has been extensively investigated as a target to overcome TMZ resistance. Nonetheless, the combination of small molecule covalent MGMT inhibitors with TMZ and other chemotherapeutic agents has frequently led to adverse clinical effects. Recently, additional mechanisms contributing to TMZ resistance have been identified, including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations, overactivation of intracellular signalling pathways, energy metabolism reprogramming or survival autophagy, and changes in tumor microenvironment (TME). These findings suggest that novel therapeutic strategies targeting these mechanisms hold promise for overcoming TMZ resistance in GBM patients. In this review, we summarize the latest advancements in understanding the mechanisms underlying intrinsic and acquired TMZ resistance. Additionally, we compile various small-molecule compounds with potential to mitigate chemoresistance in GBM. These mechanism-based compounds may enhance the sensitivity of GBM to TMZ and related chemotherapeutic agents, thereby improving overall survival rates in clinical practice.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an intractable malignancy with high recurrence and mortality. Combinatorial therapy based on temozolomide (TMZ) and cisplatin (CDDP) shows promising potential for GBM therapy in clinical trials. However, significant challenges include limited blood-brain-barrier (BBB) penetration, poor targeting of GBM tissue/cells, and systemic side effects, which hinder its efficacy in GBM therapy. To surmount these challenges, new GBM-cell membrane camouflaged and pH-sensitive biomimetic nanoparticles (MNPs) inspired by the fact that cancer cells readily pass the BBB and localize with homologous cells, are developed. This study's results show that MNPs can efficiently co-load TMZ and CDDP, transport these across the BBB to specifically target GBM. Incorporation of pH-sensitive polymer then allows for controlled release of drug cargos at GBM sites for combination drug therapy. Mice bearing orthotopic U87MG or drug-resistant U251(R) GBM tumor and treated with MNPs@TMZ+CDDP show a potent anti-GBM effect, greatly extending the survival time relative to mice receiving single-drug loaded nanoparticles. No obvious side effects are apparent in histological analyses or blood routine studies. Considering these results, the study's new nanoparticle formulation overcomes multiple challenges currently limiting the efficacy of combined TMZ and CDDP GBM drug therapy and appears to be a promising strategy for future GBM combinatorial chemotherapy.
Glioblastoma remains one of the most challenging and devastating cancers, with only a very small proportion of patients achieving 5-year survival. The current standard of care consists of surgery, followed by radiation therapy with concurrent and maintenance chemotherapy with the alkylating agent temozolomide. To date, this drug is the only one that provides a significant survival benefit, albeit modest, as patients end up acquiring resistance to this drug. As a result, tumor progression and recurrence inevitably occur, leading to death. Several factors have been proposed to explain this resistance, including an upregulated antioxidant system to keep the elevated intracellular ROS levels, a hallmark of cancer cells, under control. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms of chemoresistance -including the important role of glioblastoma stem cells-with emphasis on antioxidant defenses and how agents that impair redox balance (i.e.: sulfasalazine, erastin, CB-839, withaferin, resveratrol, curcumin, chloroquine, and hydroxychloroquine) might be advantageous in combined therapies against this type of cancer.
Temozolomide (TMZ) represents the cornerstone of therapy for glioblastoma (GBM). However, acquisition of resistance limits its therapeutic potential. The human kinome is an undisputable source of druggable targets, still, current knowledge remains confined to a limited fraction of it, with a multitude of under-investigated proteins yet to be characterized. Here, following a kinome-wide RNAi screen, pantothenate kinase 4 (PANK4) isuncovered as a modulator of TMZ resistance in GBM. Validation of PANK4 across various TMZ-resistant GBM cell models, patient-derived GBM cell lines, tissue samples, as well as in vivo studies, corroborates the potential translational significance of these findings. Moreover, PANK4 expression is induced during TMZ treatment, and its expression is associated with a worse clinical outcome. Furthermore, a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic approach, reveals that PANK4 abrogation leads to a significant downregulation of a host of proteins with central roles in cellular detoxification and cellular response to oxidative stress. More specifically, as cells undergo genotoxic stress during TMZ exposure, PANK4 depletion represents a crucial event that can lead to accumulation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and subsequent cell death. Collectively, a previously unreported role for PANK4 in mediating therapeutic resistance to TMZ in GBM is unveiled.
Recent developments in pharmacogenomics have created opportunities for predicting temozolomide response in gliomas. Temozolomide is the main first-line alkylating chemotherapeutic drug together with radiotherapy as standard treatments of high-risk gliomas after surgery. However, there are great individual differences in temozolomide response. Besides the heterogeneity of gliomas, pharmacogenomics relevant genetic polymorphisms can not only affect pharmacokinetics of temozolomide but also change anti-tumor effects of temozolomide. This review will summarize pharmacogenomic studies of temozolomide in gliomas which can lay the foundation to personalized chemotherapy.
BACKGROUD: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is among the most aggressive cancers, with current treatments limited in efficacy. A significant hurdle in the treatment of GBM is the resistance to the chemotherapeutic agent temozolomide (TMZ). The methylation status of the MGMT promoter has been implicated as a critical biomarker of response to TMZ. METHODS: To explore the mechanisms underlying resistance, we developed two TMZ-resistant GBM cell lines through a gradual increase in TMZ exposure. Transcriptome sequencing of TMZ-resistant cell lines revealed that alterations in histone post-translational modifications might be instrumental in conferring TMZ resistance. Subsequently, multi-omics analysis suggests a strong association between histone H3 lysine 9 acetylation (H3K9ac) levels and TMZ resistance. RESULTS: We observed a significant correlation between the expression of H3K9ac and MGMT, particularly in the unmethylated MGMT promoter samples. More importantly, our findings suggest that H3K9ac may enhance MGMT transcription by facilitating the recruitment of the SP1 transcription factor to the MGMT transcription factor binding site. Additionally, by analyzing single-cell transcriptomics data from matched primary and recurrent GBM tumors treated with TMZ, we modeled the molecular shifts occurring upon tumor recurrence. We also noted a reduction in tumor stem cell characteristics, accompanied by an increase in H3K9ac, SP1, and MGMT levels, underscoring the potential role of H3K9ac in tumor relapse following TMZ therapy. CONCLUSIONS: The increase in H3K9ac appears to enhance the recruitment of the transcription factor SP1 to its binding sites within the MGMT locus, consequently upregulating MGMT expression and driving TMZ resistance in GBM.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM, grade IV) is the most common malignant and invasive central nervous system tumor with poor survival outcome. Various pathogenesis signatures such as genetic mutation, hypoxia, necrosis and neo-angiogenesis are involved in GBM. Standard treatment includes surgical resection along with radiation therapy and temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy that do not improve the overall survival of patients. In this review, we focused on the diagnosis, risk factors and novel therapies, using advanced therapies such as nanotechnology in drug delivery, gene therapy and hyperthermia that have promising roles in the treatment of aggressive brain tumors.
There is currently no universally accepted standard of care treatment for low-grade gliomas, a molecularly heterogeneous group of tumors with similarly heterogeneous clinical outcomes. Risk stratification by clinical and molecular features is useful to help determine which patients benefit the most from adjuvant treatment. The addition of combination chemotherapy with procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine confers survival advantage, as likely does temozolomide, but radiochemotherapy may not be appropriate for all patients owing to its toxicity profile. We review the approach to treatment in patients with low-grade gliomas with an emphasis on the clinical trials focusing on adjuvant chemotherapy in this population.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and highly lethal type of brain tumor, with poor survival despite advances in understanding its complexity. After current standard therapeutic treatment, including tumor resection, radiotherapy and concomitant chemotherapy with temozolomide, the median overall survival of patients with this type of tumor is less than 15 months. Thus, there is an urgent need for new insights into GBM molecular characteristics and progress in targeted therapy in order to improve clinical outcomes. The literature data revealed that a number of different signaling pathways are dysregulated in GBM. In this review, we intended to summarize and discuss current literature data and therapeutic modalities focused on targeting dysregulated signaling pathways in GBM. A better understanding of opportunities for targeting signaling pathways that influences malignant behavior of GBM cells might open the way for the development of novel GBM-targeted therapies.
The capecitabine/temozolomide regimen has significant activity in pancreatic NETs; however, data are limited in NETs of the small bowel (midgut). A retrospective study of all patients with metastatic midgut NETs seen at Moffitt Cancer Center between January 2008 and June 2019 treated with CAPTEM was conducted. 32 patients with proven or suspected well-differentiated primary small bowel NETs (excluding duodenum) were identified. 6 patients were found to have a radiographic response (19%), 5 of whom had high-grade disease. Only one patient among 23 with low/intermediate-grade disease responded (4%), whereas the response rate for patients with high-grade disease was 56%. Among patients with low/intermediate-grade disease, 44% discontinued due to poor tolerability. The CAPTEM regimen appears to have an activity in patients with high-grade small bowel NETs and is largely inactive in patients with low/intermediate-grade tumors.
Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved catabolic process that plays an essential role in maintaining cellular homeostasis by degrading unneeded cell components. When exposed to hostile environments, such as hypoxia or nutrient starvation, cells hyperactivate autophagy in an effort to maintain their longevity. In densely packed solid tumors, such as glioblastoma, autophagy has been found to run rampant due to a lack of oxygen and nutrients. In recent years, targeting autophagy as a way to strengthen current glioblastoma treatment has shown promising results. However, that protective autophagy inhibition or autophagy overactivation is more beneficial, is still being debated. Protective autophagy inhibition would lower a cell's previously activated defense mechanism, thereby increasing its sensitivity to treatment. Autophagy overactivation would cause cell death through lysosomal overactivation, thus introducing another cell death pathway in addition to apoptosis. Both methods have been proven effective in the treatment of solid tumors. This systematic review article highlights scenarios where both autophagy inhibition and activation have proven effective in combating chemoresistance and radioresistance in glioblastoma, and how autophagy may be best utilized for glioblastoma therapy in clinical settings.
The prognosis of patients with relapsed osteosarcoma is extremely poor and the optimal treatment remains to be identified. Here, we retrospectively analysed the clinical outcomes of nine patients with relapsed osteosarcoma treated with temozolomide/etoposide. Of the two patients who received temozolomide/etoposide as palliative therapy for unresectable tumours, one remained alive with stable disease for >4 years. The remaining seven patients received temozolomide/etoposide as adjuvant therapy following resection of relapsed metastatic disease; of these, one was free from disease for 41 months. Potentially beneficial effects were observed in two of three O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase protein-negative patients, whereas all five O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase-positive patients experienced subsequent relapse. None of the patients experienced severe adverse effects requiring hospitalization. Temozolomide/etoposide is a feasible candidate as salvage therapy for relapsed osteosarcoma. Further studies are needed to verify the utility of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase protein expression as a biomarker for predicting the response to this treatment.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a challenging cancer with poor prognosis. The classical standard for treatment is safe resection, followed by concurrent chemoradiotherapy with subsequent adjuvant temozolomide (TMZ). Despite several attempts at different treatments, the 5-year survival rate remains poor. In recent years, with the continuous progress of treatment technology, tumor treating fields (TTFields) were preferable. The device could generate an intermediate frequency alternating electric field and induce apoptosis of some specific types of cancer cells with few toxic and side effects. TTFields induced apoptosis through multiple activations of the pathway. TTFields have been Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved for diagnosis and recurrent GBM as additional clinical trial results are revealed. This study reviewed the current status, mechanisms, correlations with immune pathways, the prospects of applying TTFields for GBM, and the adverse events.
BACKGROUND: The poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib potentiated radiation and temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy in preclinical glioblastoma models but brain penetration was poor. Clinically, PARP inhibitors exacerbate the hematological side effects of TMZ. The OPARATIC trial was conducted to measure penetration of recurrent glioblastoma by olaparib and assess the safety and tolerability of its combination with TMZ. METHODS: Preclinical pharmacokinetic studies evaluated olaparib tissue distribution in rats and tumor-bearing mice. Adult patients with recurrent glioblastoma received various doses and schedules of olaparib and low-dose TMZ in a 3 + 3 design. Suitable patients received olaparib prior to neurosurgical resection; olaparib concentrations in plasma, tumor core and tumor margin specimens were measured by mass spectrometry. A dose expansion cohort tested tolerability and efficacy of the recommended phase II dose (RP2D). Radiosensitizing effects of olaparib were measured by clonogenic survival in glioblastoma cell lines. RESULTS: Olaparib was a substrate for multidrug resistance protein 1 and showed no brain penetration in rats but was detected in orthotopic glioblastoma xenografts. Clinically, olaparib was detected in 71/71 tumor core specimens (27 patients; median, 496 nM) and 21/21 tumor margin specimens (9 patients; median, 512.3 nM). Olaparib exacerbated TMZ-related hematological toxicity, necessitating intermittent dosing. RP2D was olaparib 150 mg (3 days/week) with TMZ 75 mg/m2 daily for 42 days. Fourteen (36%) of 39 evaluable patients were progression free at 6 months. Olaparib radiosensitized 6 glioblastoma cell lines at clinically relevant concentrations of 100 and 500 nM. CONCLUSION: Olaparib reliably penetrates recurrent glioblastoma at radiosensitizing concentrations, supporting further clinical development and highlighting the need for better preclinical models.
IMPORTANCE: Acral melanoma, known for low tumor mutation burden, responds poorly to immunotherapy. A standard therapy is still lacking. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the activity and safety of camrelizumab (an anti-programmed cell death-1 antibody) plus apatinib (a vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 inhibitor) and temozolomide as first-line treatment in patients with advanced acral melanoma. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this single-arm, single-center, phase 2 nonrandomized clinical trial, patients with treatment-naive unresectable stage III or IV acral melanoma were enrolled at Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute between June 4, 2020, and August 24, 2021. The data cutoff date was April 10, 2022. INTERVENTIONS: Patients received 4-week cycles of intravenous camrelizumab, 200 mg, every 2 weeks; oral apatinib 250 mg, once daily; and intravenous temozolomide, 200 mg/m2, once daily on days 1 to 5 until disease progression or unacceptable toxic effects. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was objective response rate as assessed by investigators according to the Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (version 1.1). Secondary end points included progression-free survival, time to response, duration of response, disease control rate, overall survival, and safety. RESULTS: A total of 50 patients (32 men [64%]; median age, 57 years [IQR, 52-62 years]) were enrolled and received treatment. The median follow-up duration was 13.4 months (IQR, 9.6-16.2 months). The objective response rate was 64.0% (32 of 50; 95% CI, 49.2%-77.1%). The median time to response and duration of response were 2.7 months (IQR, 0.9-2.9 months) and 17.5 months (95% CI, 12.0 to not reached), respectively. The disease control rate was 88.0% (44 of 50; 95% CI, 75.7%-95.5%). The estimated median progression-free survival was 18.4 months (95% CI, 10.6 to not reached). The median overall survival was not reached. The most common grade 3 or 4 treatment-related adverse events were increased gamma-glutamyltransferase levels (15 [30%]), decreased neutrophil count (11 [22%]), increased conjugated bilirubin levels (10 [20%]), and increased aspartate aminotransferase levels (10 [20%]). No treatment-related deaths occurred. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The findings of this nonrandomized clinical trial suggest that camrelizumab plus apatinib and temozolomide may be a potential first-line treatment option for patients with advanced acral melanoma, which warrants further validation in a randomized clinical trial. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04397770.
Metabolic adaptations are central for carcinogenesis and response to therapy, but little is known about the contribution of mitochondrial dynamics to the response of glioma cells to the standard treatment with temozolomide (TMZ). Glioma cells responded to TMZ with mitochondrial mass increased and the production of round structures of dysfunctional mitochondria. At single-cell level, asymmetric mitosis contributed to the heterogeneity of mitochondrial levels. It affected the fitness of cells in control and treated condition, indicating that the mitochondrial levels are relevant for glioma cell fitness in the presence of TMZ.
