Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disease that lacks therapies to prevent progressive neurodegeneration. Impaired energy metabolism and reduced ATP levels are common features of PD. Previous studies revealed that terazosin (TZ) enhances the activity of phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1), thereby stimulating glycolysis and increasing cellular ATP levels. Therefore, we asked whether enhancement of PGK1 activity would change the course of PD. In toxin-induced and genetic PD models in mice, rats, flies, and induced pluripotent stem cells, TZ increased brain ATP levels and slowed or prevented neuron loss. The drug increased dopamine levels and partially restored motor function. Because TZ is prescribed clinically, we also interrogated 2 distinct human databases. We found slower disease progression, decreased PD-related complications, and a reduced frequency of PD diagnoses in individuals taking TZ and related drugs. These findings suggest that enhancing PGK1 activity and increasing glycolysis may slow neurodegeneration in PD.
Recently published data suggest that clinical benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), which is hallmarked by the occurrence of moderate-to-severe lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), occurs in about one quarter of men in their 50s, one third of men in their 60s, and about half of all men 80 years or older. Although effective treatments for LUTS/BPH are available, this condition often occurs in the context of common, age-related comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease, hypertension, and erectile dysfunction. Alpha1-selective adrenergic receptor (a1-AR) antagonists (eg, alfuzosin, doxazosin, tamsulosin, terazosin) remain the cornerstone of therapy for LUTS/BPH. In addition, 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors (ie, dutasteride, finasteride) have been associated with improvements in LUTS/BPH in men with larger prostates, especially when used in combination with a1-AR antagonists. Although all these drugs have been shown to be beneficial for the treatment of BPH, there are differences in side-effect profiles. When selecting an appropriate course of therapy, these side effects and any impact they may have on existing comorbid conditions must be considered.
Drug therapy with alpha blockers has become the standard treatment for patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Medical treatment is often preferred by patients as opposed to minimally invasive therapy or transurethral resection of the prostate. Alpha blockers reduce urethral pressure by blocking the motor sympathetic adrenergic nerve supply to the prostate. Several alpha blockers are available for treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia, including alfuzosin, tamsulosin, terazosin, and doxazosin. Different meta-analyses have shown these agents to be comparable in terms of efficacy in improving symptom score and increasing urinary flow rates. The clinical uroselectivity of these agents differs, however, and translates into differences in side effects. Side effects that have been reported with some alpha blockers include dizziness, headache, postural hypotension, and retrograde ejaculation.
In this report, we assess the safety of terazosin in the treatment of patients with symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia. We analyzed seven prospectively designed placebo-controlled trials involving 3,080 patients, 1,689 of whom received the study drug in doses ranging from 1 mg to 20 mg daily for a total of 1,282 patient-years of exposure. The most common side effects seen in treated patients were dizziness (10.7%), asthenia (7.5%), and peripheral edema (4.0%). These side effects were generally reported as mild and improved after cessation of therapy. The incidence of withdrawal from the study due to side effects was 14.5% in the treatment arm versus 11.4% in the placebo control arm. Also noted was a statistically significant decreased risk of urinary tract infection and myocardial infarction in the terazosin-treated group. This updated report confirms that terazosin can be administered safely to a population of men with symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia with minimal clinically significant side effects.
Many monotherapies are currently available to clinically treat and alleviate symptoms of lower urinary tract symptoms secondary to benign prostatic hyperplasia: alpha-blockers, 5ARIs, PDE5Is, beta-3-andrenoceptor agonists, and anticholinergic agents. Current studies have evaluated the effective of these treatments in comparison to other groups or in combination therapies. The current review evaluates the effectiveness of class formulations. Based on the findings, alpha-blockers, specifically doxazosin and terazosin, were most effective in reducing IPSS scores and peak urinary flow rate, while being most cost-effective. However, further clinical investigations are required to evaluate the clinical implications of different formulations.
The prevalence of hypertension increases with age. Multiple physiologic factors are involved in the development of hypertension in the elderly. Alpha1-adrenergic blocking agents lower blood pressure through a reduction in total peripheral resistance. Prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin have been shown to be equally effective in reducing blood pressure in older persons. The bioavailability, terminal elimination half-life, and volume of distribution of prazosin is increased in the elderly. Hybrid drugs, such as ketanserin, urapidil, and indoramin are also effective in lowering blood pressure. Ketanserin seems to have a greater effect on blood pressure reduction in persons older than 60 years of age. Alpha1-adrenergic blockers may be used safely in patients with diabetes, asthma, and hyperlipidemia.
Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) suggestive of benign prostatic obstruction are common in aging men. Nearly 25% of men >40 years of age have LUTS. Medical therapy with alpha-blockade is the most common method of medical therapy for benign prostatic obstruction. Multiple methods of minimally invasive surgical therapies have been introduced in the last decade. These methods include balloon dilatation, temporary and permanent urethral stents, various laser techniques, microwave thermotherapy, transurethral needle ablation, electrovaporization, and high-intensity focused ultrasound. alpha-Receptor blockers to reduce the sympathetic tone of the prostate are considered as first-line therapy to relieve the symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Selective alpha(1)-receptor blockers relax prostatic smooth muscle, relieve bladder outlet obstruction, and enhance urine flow with fewer side effects. In addition, it was determined that treating patients with alpha-blockers increases prostatic apoptosis. Pharmacokinetic activity, mode of action, clinical efficacy, and side effects of the selective alpha(1)-receptor blockers terazosin, doxazosin, and prazosin are reviewed.
Terazosin, a new selective long-acting alpha1-adrenergic blocking agent, has been shown to be an effective once-daily antihypertensive agent in four of five randomized double-blind placebo-controlled studies of patients with mild to moderate hypertension. In one trial, 24-h monitoring revealed that terazosin produced a sustained blood pressure lowering effect throughout the day. In three fixed-dose trials, steady patterns of blood pressure response during maintenance therapy indicated that tolerance to terazosin did not develop. Favourable changes in the plasma lipid profile were observed, while laboratory data suggested the development of haemodilution. Overall, terazosin was well tolerated. Asthenia, dizziness and peripheral oedema were significantly more common in patients treated with terazosin than with placebo.
Alpha blockers (AB) are the main group of drugs used for medical expulsive therapy (MET) in patients with ureteral stones. However, there is no consensus on the relative efficacy and safety of individual AB in MET. Areas covered: The present work is a network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials comparing AB with either placebo or standard of care in patients with ureteral stones. Electronic databases of Medline, Cochrane CENTRAL and Google Scholar were searched for eligible clinical studies. Inverse variance heterogeneity model was used for mixed treatment comparisons. Stone expulsion rate (SER) and stone expulsion time (SET) were the primary outcomes. Sub-group analyses for the following sub-groups were carried out: children; after shockwave lithotripsy; stone size of </=5 mm; >5 mm; proximal and distal ureteral stones. Expert review: AB, phosphodiesterase inhibitors and combined AB with corticosteroids were observed with significant stone expulsion rate compared to control group in a recent network meta-analysis. Due to lack of head-to-head clinical trials within AB, only tamsulosin has been widely recommended by various urological guidelines. The results of this network meta-analysis will guide the future researchers in evaluating other promising ABs as agents for MET.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: alpha1-Adrenoceptor blockers are the most frequently prescribed medical therapy in the treatment of lower urinary tract symptom suggestive of benign prostatic hyperplasia (LUTS/BPH). The purpose of this review is to highlight the evolution of adrenoceptor blockers with emphasis on newly approved drugs. RECENT FINDINGS: Over the past years new formulations of several alpha1-adrenoceptor blockers were introduced to the market. Five long-acting alpha1-blockers are currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration for treatment of symptomatic LUTS/BPH: terazosin, doxazosin, tamsulosin, alfuzosin and silodosin. Silodosin is the only adrenoceptor blocker that exhibits true selectivity for the alpha1-adrenoceptor subtypes. This unique adrenoceptor selectivity profile likely accounts for the very favorable cardiovascular safety profile. SUMMARY: Tamsulosin, alfuzosin slow release and silodosin do not require dose titration. Alfuzosin, terazosin, doxazosin and silodosin have all been shown to be effective in relieving LUTS/BPH independent of prostate size. Low incidence of orthostatic hypotension has been reported for silodosin, but abnormal ejaculation is the most commonly reported adverse effect.
Alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists (alpha-blockers) are efficacious in treating lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) suggestive of benign prostatic obstruction (BPO), also termed symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), causing bladder outlet obstruction (BOO). There is little difference among the various alpha-blockers in terms of efficacy in treating LUTS. However, conventional quinazoline derivatives such as terazosin, doxazosin and alfuzosin, originally developed for hypertension, have inherent cardiovascular extension effects, which influence the well being and safety of patients with LUTS by impairing physiological blood pressure (BP) control, even when their effect on unchallenged BP may be quite low. Preclinically, tamsulosin, a sulphonamide-substituted phenethylamine, has a relative selectivity for the alpha 1-adrenoceptors of the lower urinary tract. Clinically, this is associated with fewer cardiovascular extension effects with tamsulosin (modified release capsule) 0.4 mg once daily. This allows the use of convenient regimens of 0.4 mg tamsulosin administered once daily after breakfast from initiation of treatment without the need for 'step-up' increases of dose to avoid 'first-dose' hypotension. Extensive investigation, including multiple orthostatic stress testing (which otherwise is unusual in the characterization of alpha-blockers because of their inherent safety), confirms that tamsulosin 0.4 mg definitely carries a lower risk of impaired BP control.
The importance of reporting correlations among side effects is examined using studies of BPH drugs as examples. The special relation of placebo effects in studying side-effects of drugs, as opposed to their efficacies, is introduced, and the need for special new controls is presented.
Hypertension and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) are common disorders of aging men. As the world population is aging these two diseases are becoming a significant public health problem worldwide. Approximately 30% of men treated for BPH have coexisting hypertension. The alpha-Adrenergic Blockers: Prazosin, Terazosin and Doxazosin are established agents in the therapy of hypertension, and are also effective drugs in the treatment of BPH. It is reasonable to use alpha-Adrenergic Blockers as the treatment of choice for men with hypertension and BPH.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) result from age-related changes in detrusor function and prostatic growth that are driven by alterations in the ratio of circulating androgens and estrogens. Alpha-adrenergic receptor blockers are commonly used to treat LUTS because they influence urethral tone and intra-urethral pressure. Molecular cloning studies have identified three alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor subtypes (alpha(1A), alpha(1B), and alpha(1D)). The alpha(1A) subtype is predominant in the human prostate but is also present in many parts of the brain that direct cognitive function. Tamsulosin is the most widely used alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor antagonist with 12.6 million prescriptions filled in 2010 alone. When compared to the other common types of alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor antagonists (i.e., terazosin, doxazosin, and alfuzosin), tamsulosin is 10- to 38-fold more selective for the alpha(1A) versus the alpha(1B) subtype. RECENT FINDINGS: Duan et al. have recently shown that men taking tamsulosin have a higher risk of developing dementia when compared to men taking other alpha-adrenergic antagonists or no alpha-adrenergic antagonists at all (HR 1.17; 95% CI 1.14-1.21). Based upon this retrospective analysis, we believe that tamsulosin, because of its unique affinity for alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptors, may increase the risk of developing dementia when used for an extended period of time. If these findings are confirmed, they carry significant public health implications for an aging society.
Finasteride, which inhibits the enzyme 5 alpha-reductase, reduces prostate size and relieves the symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) in men with enlarged prostates. alpha 1 -Adrenoceptor antagonists, such as doxazosin and terazosin, are also effective in the treatment of BPH. Previous clinical studies in which finasteride had little or no effect alone, have shown little or no additive effect with alpha 1 -adrenoceptor antagonists. The Medical Therapy of Prostatic Symptoms study showed a considerable benefit with finasteride alone and an additive effect when administered with doxazosin. One interpretation of these results is that if finasteride is effective alone in BPH, the combination with an alpha 1 -adrenoceptor antagonist will give an additive effect.
Men with moderate symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) are the best candidates for medical treatment, while surgery is usually indicated for patients with severe symptoms. Men with mild symptoms do not usually need treatment, but they might be re-evaluated annually if desirable. Finasteride, which produces selective hormonal deprivation, is now established as a well tolerated drug for the long term medical therapy of BPH. Recent studies suggest that finasteride is most effective in men with large prostates (> 40 ml), and the drug should probably be reserved for these patients. alpha-Blockers work in men with small or large prostates, and their rapid onset of action facilitates the identification of responders. alpha-Blockers are more effective than finasteride during the first year of treatment, but only finasteride induces regression of the prostate and offers increased efficacy over time. Even if drug therapy reduces the need for prostate surgery, the total economic cost of BPH treatment is likely to rise because of the increasing application of medical treatment. The magnitude of this increase depends largely on what percentage of the male population embark on long term therapy, at what age treatment is started, and how successful it is. At present, the answers to these questions are largely unknown. The personal economic expenses for men who begin long term medical therapy will probably be an important factor in deciding how common drug treatment for BPH will become in the future. For many men, the main benefit of drug treatment will be the relief of urinary symptoms, but whether this improvement is substantial enough to improve their overall quality of life has not yet been clearly demonstrated in controlled studies.
Tamsulosin is the most potent adrenergic alpha-1 antagonist used for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Priapism has been reported rarely in patients taking Prazosin, Doxazosin and Terazosin. We describe an otherwise healthy man with recurrent and then persistent unresolved priapism after the use of tamsulosin. Initial treatment consisted of aspiration and intracavernosal irrigation of iced saline and vasoconstrictive agent, but in vain. We then performed Winters procedure but that too failed and the priapism persisted. Health-care professionals should inform all patients taking such medications about rare but possible serious adverse effects.
Antihypertensive monotherapy provides adequate blood pressure control in less than 50% of patients with hypertension (BP > 140/90 mmHg), especially those with stage 2-3 disease. This article reviews clinical studies that demonstrate that add-on therapy with an alpha1-blocker (doxazosin, terazosin or prazosin) is an effective and well-tolerated regimen for improving blood pressure control in patients with inadequately controlled hypertension. Furthermore, alpha1-blockers have therapeutic benefits that go beyond blood pressure management. They have a small but positive effect on the serum lipid profile and they have favourable or benign effects on conditions that frequently coexist with hypertension, such as type 2 diabetes mellitus and benign prostatic hyperplasia.
The objective of this retrospective study was to gain a better understanding of patient and care factors that may contribute to urinary retention in critically ill trauma patients. Fifty trauma patients over a 1-year period with an International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10) code for urinary retention were identified and analyzed. Most patients had an indwelling urinary catheter placed on admission, and it was reinserted in 39 patients. Male gender, orthopedic trauma, and anesthesia were possible contributing factors for urinary retention in our sample population. The use of paralytics and more than one operative intervention had a significant relationship with prescribing bladder medications. It is imperative to have protocols based on best evidence to guide management of urinary retention in this critically ill trauma patient population.
PURPOSE: To describe the otorhinolaryngological adverse effects of the main drugs used in urological practice. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A review of the scientific literature was performed using a combination of specific descriptors (side effect, adverse effect, scopolamine, sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil, oxybutynin, tolterodine, spironolactone, furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide, doxazosin, alfuzosin, terazosin, prazosin, tamsulosin, desmopressin) contained in publications until April 2020. Manuscripts written in English, Portuguese, and Spanish were manually selected from the title and abstract. The main drugs used in Urology were divided into five groups to describe their possible adverse effects: alpha-blockers, anticholinergics, diuretics, hormones, and phosphodiesterase inhibitors. RESULTS: The main drugs used in Urology may cause several otorhinolaryngological adverse effects. Dizziness was most common, but dry mouth, rhinitis, nasal congestion, epistaxis, hearing loss, tinnitus, and rhinorrhea were also reported and varies among drug classes. CONCLUSIONS: Most of the drugs used in urological practice have otorhinolaryngological adverse effects. Dizziness was most common, but dry mouth, rhinitis, nasal congestion, epistaxis, hearing loss, tinnitus, and rhinorrhea were also reported. Therefore, doctors must be aware of these adverse effects to improve adherence to the treatment and to minimize damage to the health of patients.
