Despite its history as a human teratogen, thalidomide is emerging as a treatment for cancer and inflammatory diseases. Although the evolution of its clinical application could not have been predicted from the tragedy associated with its misuse in the past, its history serves as a lesson in drug development that underscores the need to understand the molecular pharmacology of a compound's activity, including associated toxicities. Here, we summarise the applications for thalidomide with an emphasis on clinical trials published over the past 10 years, and consider our knowledge of the molecular pharmacology of the drug in the context of clinical trial data, attempting to provide a mechanism-guided understanding of its activity.
BACKGROUND: Recurrent bleeding from the small intestine accounts for 5 to 10% of cases of gastrointestinal bleeding and remains a therapeutic challenge. Thalidomide has been evaluated for the treatment of recurrent bleeding due to small-intestinal angiodysplasia (SIA), but confirmatory trials are lacking. METHODS: We conducted a multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial to investigate the efficacy and safety of thalidomide for the treatment of recurrent bleeding due to SIA. Eligible patients with recurrent bleeding (at least four episodes of bleeding during the previous year) due to SIA were randomly assigned to receive thalidomide at an oral daily dose of 100 mg or 50 mg or placebo for 4 months. Patients were followed for at least 1 year after the end of the 4-month treatment period. The primary end point was effective response, which was defined as a reduction of at least 50% in the number of bleeding episodes that occurred during the year after the end of thalidomide treatment as compared with the number that occurred during the year before treatment. Key secondary end points were cessation of bleeding without rebleeding, blood transfusion, hospitalization because of bleeding, duration of bleeding, and hemoglobin levels. RESULTS: Overall, 150 patients underwent randomization: 51 to the 100-mg thalidomide group, 49 to the 50-mg thalidomide group, and 50 to the placebo group. The percentages of patients with an effective response in the 100-mg thalidomide group, 50-mg thalidomide group, and placebo group were 68.6%, 51.0%, and 16.0%, respectively (P<0.001 for simultaneous comparison across the three groups). The results of the analyses of the secondary end points supported those of the primary end point. Adverse events were more common in the thalidomide groups than in the placebo group overall; specific events included constipation, somnolence, limb numbness, peripheral edema, dizziness, and elevated liver-enzyme levels. CONCLUSIONS: In this placebo-controlled trial, treatment with thalidomide resulted in a reduction in bleeding in patients with recurrent bleeding due to SIA. (Funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China and the Shanghai Municipal Education Commission, Gaofeng Clinical Medicine; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02707484.).
The introduction of lenalidomide into the therapeutic arsenal of hematologic malignancies has represented an important step forward in the management of multiple myeloma. However, its use is associated with several toxicities including kidney injury. The present review examines the drug's pharmacokinetics, discusses the main adverse renal effects that are associated with lenalidomide treatment, and makes recommendations for dosage adjustment in patients with underlying renal impairment.
In the last couple of years major progress has been made in the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM) through the introduction of novel agents like thalidomide, lenalidomide, bortezomib and pomalidomide, mostly in combination with autologous stem cell transplantation. Lenalidomide, a second-generation immunomodulatory agent with antitumor and immunomodulatory effects against MM, in combination with dexamethasone was proven to show significant clinical benefits (overall survival and progression-free survival) in Phase III trials either as induction or as maintenance therapy. With a manageable toxicity profile, lenalidomide seems to be an attractive agent in the treatment of MM. Here, we discuss the present data and research on lenalidomide in the treatment of MM.
Apremilast is a small-molecule inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 4 with an intracellular mechanism of action that increases levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) indicated for the oral treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis and for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis. Efficacy of apremilast in moderate-to-severe psoriasis has been demonstrated in the pivotal trials, with a 30% PASI-75 response rate at week 16, an efficacy that was maintained through week 52. Apremilast also achieved significant responses in disease involving specific sites, such as palmoplantar, nail and scalp psoriasis, improved patient quality of life, and achieved rapid improvements in pruritus. The findings of some of the real world series indicate that the PASI-75 response may be higher in patients with a lower baseline PASI than that observed in the pivotal trials, enhancing the importance of using the absolute PASI score as a marker of therapeutic success rather than a relative PASI index in this setting. Apremilast has demonstrated good safety and tolerability in both clinical trials and clinical practice series. The most frequent adverse effects were diarrhea (17.3%), nausea (15.7%), upper respiratory tract infections (15.5%), nasopharyngitis (14.4%), tension headache (9.0%) and headache (6.3%). The rate of adverse events recorded in the clinical practice series has been lower compared to the clinical trials.
Thalidomide has been successful in the treatment of several dermatologic conditions unresponsive to other agents. Further experience may lead to a better understanding of its mechanism of action in these various diseases. Thalidomide should be considered an extremely valuable therapeutic option in selected patients when the benefits clearly outweigh the risks of teratogenicity and peripheral neuropathy.
Transplant-eligible patients with multiple myeloma (MM) now have extended survival after diagnosis owing to effective modern treatment strategies that include new agents in induction therapy, autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT), consolidation therapy and posttransplant maintenance therapy. Standard of care for newly diagnosed, fit patients includes ASCT and, often nowadays, posttransplant maintenance. Several large studies have shown the efficacy of maintenance with thalidomide, lenalidomide and bortezomib in the treatment scheme of MM with regards to prolonging progression-free survival and, to a lesser degree, overall survival. Herein we discuss the data currently available to support the use of maintenance therapy in patients after ASCT as well as the newer available agents that may be a part of its changing landscape in the years to come.
Aponermin () is a recombinant circularly permuted human tumour necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) developed by Beijing Sunbio Biotech (a wholly owned subsidiary of Wuhan Hiteck Biological Pharma CO., LTD) for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Aponermin binds to and activates the death receptors 4 and/or 5 on tumour cells, triggering intracellular caspase reactions and inducing apoptosis, thereby exerting antitumor effects. In November 2023, aponermin in combination with thalidomide and dexamethasone received its first approval in China for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma who have received at least two prior therapies. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of aponermin leading to this first approval for relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma.
Apremilast is a relatively new therapy for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in adults. While this medication is considered safe with a very low risk of serious side effects, a few common (>/=5% of patients) mild to moderate side effects have been reported, including diarrhea, nausea, headache, and nasopharyngitis. Not addressing these symptoms may lead to medication nonadherence and unnecessary discontinuation of therapy. These side effects are often easily managed with interventions available to the practicing dermatologist, and in only rare instances will these side effects require dose adjustment or discontinuation of therapy. The purpose of this article is to review common side effects of apremilast at its approved dose of 30 mg orally twice daily (BID) and to provide clear, simple recommendations for their management in dermatological practice.
Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable malignancy of plasma cells. The introduction of thalidomide was a milestone in the treatment of MM. Thalidomide analogues termed immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) have been developed that are more effective and have less toxicity than thalidomide. The role of lenalidomide in relapsed MM has been well defined. This review discusses the data regarding the upfront use of lenalidomide with dexamethasone or in multidrug combinations, as well as its potential role as maintenance therapy. It also reviews our experience with pomalidomide, a new IMid with remarkable activity in relapsed, refractory MM.
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with deletion 5q (del(5q)) is a distinct clinical and pathological disease subset that is exquisitely sensitive to lenalidomide for the treatment of red blood cell transfusion-dependent anemia. Although lenalidomide has erythropoeitic promoting activity in MDS without del(5q) (non-del(5q) MDS), the frequency of response to treatment is lower and relates to biologically separate drug effects. In del(5q) MDS, lenalidomide suppresses the malignant clone to restore effective erythropoiesis by virtue of synthetic lethality, arising from cereblon-dependent degradation of haplodeficient proteins encoded within the commonly deleted region of the chromosome 5q deletion. In contrast, in non-del(5q) MDS, lenalidomide restores effective erythropoiesis via enhancement of erythropoietin (EPO) receptor-initiated transcriptional response arising from the assembly of signaling-competent receptor complexes within membrane lipid raft domains. Recently, large phase III clinical studies have explored the role of lenalidomide, alone and in combination with, erythropoiesis-stimulating agents showing additive improvement in erythroid responses. Herein, we will describe the mechanisms of lenalidomide action in MDS and pivotal clinical studies testing the benefit of lenalidomide in both del(5q) and non-del(5q) MDS. Furthermore, we discuss evidence-based strategies to incorporate lenalidomide into the treatment algorithm for patients with MDS.
Lenalidomide is an immunomodulatory drug (IMiD) used principally in the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM), myelodysplastic syndromes (MS) and amyloidosis. Adverse reactions related to lenalidomide include myelosuppression (mainly neutropenia but also thrombocytopenia), gastrointestinal problems, skin eruption, atrial fibrillation and asthenia, decreased peripheral blood stem cell yield during stem cell collection, venous thromboembolism, and secondary malignances. In this review we focused our attention on the cutaneous adverse reactions to lenalidomide.
The hypomethylating agents (HMA) azacitidine and decitabine are both approved by the FDA for the treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). Although heralded as a significant advancement, HMA lead to responses in less than half of patients and for those that respond most will relapse. As such, there is a crucial need to improve frontline therapy approaches. One promising strategy involves combining azacitidine or decitabine with investigational or existing therapies with the goal of achieving synergistic activity and better patient outcomes. The purpose of this paper is to critically review the efficacy and safety of reported HMA-based combination regimens in patients with higher-risk MDS.
Leprosy has been a challenge in different areas of medicine; in underdeveloped countries it remains a public health problem, in which the social and economic problems facilitate the disease persistence. The diagnosis and consequently the treatment are delayed due to the clinical polymorphism of leprosy, which especially at the beginning the manifestations are not as evident, as is the case of diffuse lepromatous leprosy. This favors the disabilities and the development of the reaction episodes. Fortunately, reaction episodes have decreased with the use of multidrug therapy, and better control of the type 2 reactions has been managed with the use of thalidomide, as in Lucio's phenomenon.
Multiple myeloma is an incurable bone marrow cancer, the treatment of which is notoriously difficult. Only modest advances have been achieved using complex polychemotherapeutic regimens, transplant strategies and supportive therapy. In 1999, when new drugs for myeloma were urgently needed, thalidomide was introduced and opened up a completely new line of therapy for the disease. Although the mechanism of action is not yet completely understood, thalidomide has demonstrated efficacy in patients with refractory, relapsed myeloma, even in late-stage cases. This article reviews the current knowledge of thalidomide in myeloma treatment, focusing especially on the possible mechanisms of action, clinical results and adverse events of this drug.
After nearly decades of extinction as a sedative and antiemetic, thalidomide reemerged as the parent compound of a novel and promising class of therapeutics termed the immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs). The analogues of thalidomide, CC-5013 (lenalidomide, Revlimid) and CC-4047 (Actimid) are more potent regulators of cellular immune and cytokine response while lacking some of the dose limiting side effects of the parent compound, such as neurologic toxicity. Preclinical data will be reviewed that outlines these drugs' effects on tumor necrosis alpha, interleukin 12, angiogenesis, and T-cell function. The evolution of the use of thalidomide as a therapeutic for diseases such as multiple myeloma and myelodysplastic syndrome and the promising initial results of the new IMiDs will be reviewed.
Thalidomide is approved for treating erythema nodosum leprosum and multiple myeloma, but it has also emerged as a useful treatment option for many refractory dermatologic disorders. Some of the innovative but off-label uses of thalidomide include aphthous stomatitis, Behcet's disease, lupus erythematosus, prurigo nodularis, sarcoidosis, actinic prurigo, graft-versus-host disease, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, erythema multiforme, lichen planus, Kaposi sarcoma, Jessner lymphocytic infiltrate, uremic pruritus, pyoderma gangrenosum, scleroderma, scleromyxedema, and necrobiosis lipoidica. This article reviews the background, pharmacology, and innovative uses of thalidomide in dermatology.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a heterogeneous group of B-cell neoplasm. CLL is typically sensitive to a variety of cytotoxic agents, but relapse frequently occurs with conventional approaches. The treatment of CLL is evolving rapidly with the introduction of novel drugs, such as bendamustine, ofatumumab, lenalidomide, ibrutinib, idelalisib, veltuzumab, XmAb5574, navitoclax, dasatinib, alvespimycin, and TRU-016. This review summarizes the most current clinical experiences with these agents in the treatment of CLL.
Lenalidomide (REVLIMID), an immunomodulatory compound targeting both cancer cells and their microenvironment, has substantial activity in several difficult-to-manage hematological malignancies. In previously treated multiple myeloma, lenalidomide produces high-quality responses combined with sustained disease control. Recently, several randomized studies have demonstrated a clinical benefit of continuous lenalidomide treatment in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. In many patients with refractory anemia associated with lower risk myelodysplastic syndromes and a 5q chromosome deletion, lenalidomide leads to transfusion independence, considerably improving quality of life. It has a manageable safety profile, and its oral formulation reduces the burden on patients. Several phase III trials are ongoing in other indications currently underserved by conventional therapy, such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and prostate cancer. Several early-stage studies are exploring lenalidomide alone and in combination across different hematological malignancies, solid tumors, and immune-related disorders.
Although myeloma remains an incurable disease among majority of myeloma patients, the prognosis has significantly improved after the introduction of novel agents. While more agents are being explored for their anti-myeloma activity, the more familiar agents with a better tolerability profile have been tested in the maintenance arena. Lenalidomide and bortezomib so far have shown promise as effective maintenance agents in prolonging PFS, and also OS in some studies. The current review aims at describing the clinical data supporting various maintenance therapies and also at providing some clarity to a few concerns associated with maintenance therapies.
