Clinical trials have demonstrated the superior clinical efficacy of dual antiplatelet therapy with a thienopyridine (a P2Y(12) receptor blocker) and aspirin (COX-1 inhibitor) in patients undergoing stenting as well as patients with acute coronary syndromes. However, clopidogrel treatment is associated with a wide response variability and non-responsiveness in selected patients. The latter phenomenon is linked to the occurrence of recurrent ischaemic events including stent thrombosis in the recent studies. Prasugrel is a new thienopyridine derivative that produces more potent platelet inhibition and a rapid onset of action that is associated with irreversible P2Y(12) receptor blockade. The latter properties of prasugrel may provide a superior alternative to clopidogrel, with less response variability and a decreased prevalence of non-responsiveness.
Clopidogrel is an effective inhibitor of platelet activation and aggregation due to its selective and irreversible blockade of the P2Y(12) receptor. Combination antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel and aspirin is an important strategy for patients with acute coronary syndromes and those undergoing percutaneous interventions. Despite significant benefits demonstrated with combination antiplatelet treatment in large clinical trials, the occurrence of adverse ischemic events, including stent thrombosis, remains a serious clinical problem. Recent studies have demonstrated distinct response variability and nonresponsiveness to clopidogrel therapy based on ex vivo platelet function measurements. Small scale investigations have suggested that nonresponsiveness may be associated with a heightened risk for adverse clinical events. The above findings have stimulated a close examination of clopidogrel metabolism.
Despite the significant reduction in mortality, ischemic stroke is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in adults in industrialized countries. Antiplatelet therapy has reduced the risk of stroke and other vascular events. Although most commonly used treatment is aspirin, other antiplatelet drugs with different mechanisms of action have been developed. Clopidogrel blocks platelet aggregation by inhibiting the adenosine diphosphate receptor and the subsequent activation of the complex IIb/IIIa. In addition to its antiplatelet action, it also has pleiotropic effects, reducing the inflammatory mechanisms that occur during ischemia. Clopidogrel has demonstrated a benefit over aspirin in preventing vascular events, especially in patients at high cardiovascular risk. In this paper we review the main studies that have been conducted with clopidogrel in preventing ischemic stroke, either as monotherapy or in combination with other antiplatelet agents.
One by-product of the flurry of large-scale clinical trials accompanying the emergence of drugs that inhibit platelet function is volumes of information chronicling the adverse effects of this class of medications. One aspect all antiplatelet drugs share is a propensity toward bleeding. Beyond that similarity, however, the different pharmacologic agents in this broad collection have few attributes in common. Aspirin, by virtue of its long history, has been studied most extensively, and has proven to be an exceptionally valuable therapy. However, the complicated adverse profile of this seemingly simple drug is commonly overlooked by practitioners and deserves clinical review. The thienopyridine class (including ticlopidine and clopidogrel) share certain peculiarities that continue to be clarified, including life-threatening thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura. Dipyridamole is a veteran drug that is enjoying renewed attention as a prophylactic aid in preventing cerebrovascular events. One class, the oral platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors, has failed to find its way into clinical implementation due to an unfavorable balance between efficacy and adverse effect. This review summarizes the adverse profiles of each of these drug classes and draws on data gathered in large clinical studies.
Clopidogrel is a thienopyridine that irreversibly inhibits platelet aggregation by selectively binding to adenylate cyclase-coupled ADP receptors on the platelet surface. In animal models, clopidogrel reduced the formation of both arterial and venous thrombi. After oral administration, clopidogrel is rapidly absorbed and undergoes metabolic activation in the liver. The principal circulating metabolite is SR 26334, an inactive carboxylic acid derivative. The active metabolite is not yet known. Findings of a large, well controlled study of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients with atherosclerotic vascular disease (CAPRIE study) indicate that clopidogrel has superior efficacy in terms of prevention of ischaemic stroke, myocardial infarction and vascular death. Clopidogrel-treated patients experienced less frequent gastrointestinal upset, abnormal liver function and gastrointestinal haemorrhage than patients who received aspirin, but more frequent rash and diarrhoea. Neutropenia and thrombocytopenia occurred rarely and at similar rates in both groups.
A large number of patients worldwide receive anticoagulant and antiplatelet agents, collectively known as antithrombotic agents. Several new anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents recently were approved for use. Gastroenterologists may be unfamiliar with the mechanism of action, indications for use, and pharmacokinetics of these newer drugs. In patients undergoing elective and urgent endoscopic procedures, clinicians must be familiar with these medications to optimize outcomes. When the decision is made to continue the newer antithrombotic agents for elective procedures, the clinician must understand the risk that these agents may impart on procedural-induced bleeding. Finally, it is important to understand how to manage these agents in the presence of acute gastrointestinal bleeding. In this article the use of newer antithrombotic agents is reviewed.
Clopidogrel is an inhibitor of platelet aggregation, indicated for the prevention of ischemic stroke and in-stent thrombosis. However, it has a number of drawbacks, including an increased risk of hemorrhage; a clinical effect that is slow in onset and irreversible; a genetically determined variability in its clinical potency; and interactions with other commonly administered drugs.
Thienopyridines are platelet adenosine diphosphate receptor antagonists used in the treatment and prevention of thrombotic events in patients with acute coronary syndrome. The pharmacokinetic profile of the thienopyridine clopidogrel has resulted in highly variable pharmacokinetics and efficacy responses. The purpose of this review is to provide a brief overview of the pharmacokinetics of prasugrel and clopidogrel and discuss factors that would influence the metabolism of those drugs. Clinical studies have shown that the coadministration of prasugrel with other drugs is less likely to result in clinically relevant pharmacokinetic drug interactions compared with clopidogrel. The lack of effect of variant genotypes on the efficacy of prasugrel suggests that more patients will receive adequate platelet inhibition after administration of prasugrel. The efficient generation of the active metabolite of prasugrel results in greater and more rapid inhibition of P2Y(12) receptor-mediated platelet aggregation.
The results obtained in the CAPRIE study in 1996 led to the introduction of the clopidogrel as a new antiplatelet drug in the secondary prevention of acute myocardial infarct (AMI), ischemic stroke (IS) and symptomatic peripheral artery disease (PAD). Clopidogrel showed a similar efficacy and safety than acetylsalicylic acid (ASA). More recently, the combined use of clopidogrel with ASA has evidenced a better protection than ASA alone in some patients: patients with past history of AMI, angina pectoris, intermittent claudication or PAD, IS or TIA, coronary bypass, and diabetes mellitus, patients on treatment with statins, and patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis >/=50%. We review the reported evidence on the efficacy of clopidogrel in the secondary prevention of ischemic stroke.
High on-clopidogrel platelet reactivity (HcPR) during dual-antiplatelet therapy is a marker of vascular risk, in particular stent thrombosis, in patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS). Genetic determinants (CYP2C19*2 polymorphism), advanced age, female gender, diabetes and reduced ventricular function are related to a higher risk to develop HcPR. In addition, inflammation and increased platelet turnover, as revealed by the elevated percentage of reticulated platelets in patients' blood, that characterize the acute phase of acute coronary syndromes, are associated with HcPR. To overcome the limitation of clopidogrel, new antiplatelet agents (prasugrel and ticagrelor) were developed and the demonstration of their superiority over clopidogrel was obtained in the two randomized trials, TRITON TIMI 38 and PLATO. Emerging evidence is accumulating on the role of high-on aspirin platelet reactivity (HaPR), especially in the clinical context of diabetes. Finally, the presence of new, potent antiplatelet drugs has shifted the focus from thrombotic to bleeding risk. Recent data document that low on-treatment platelet reactivity (LPR) is associated with a significantly higher bleeding risk. Due to the current possibility to choose between multiple antiplatelet strategies, the future perspective is to include in the management of ACS, in addition to clinical data and classical risk factors, the definition of platelet function during treatment in order to set a tailored therapy.
Paclitaxel is mainly eliminated by CYP2C8 in the liver. CYP2C8 is strongly inhibited by the clopidogrel metabolite acyl-beta-D-glucuronide. To determine if this interaction has clinical relevance, we identified 48 patients treated with clopidogrel and paclitaxel using databases and a prescription register. Peripheral sensory neuropathy was retrospectively evaluated from medical charts and compared to that of 88 age- and sex-matched controls treated with paclitaxel and low-dose aspirin. By a cumulative dose of 1,500 mg paclitaxel, 35% of the patients had developed severe neuropathy. The overall hazard ratio between clopidogrel use and severe paclitaxel neuropathy was 1.7 (95% confidence interval, 0.9-3.0). Among those receiving a high-dose paclitaxel regimen, the hazard ratio was 2.3 (95% confidence interval, 1.1-4.5). Our study indicates that clopidogrel is associated with a clinically relevant increased risk of neuropathy in patients treated with high-dose paclitaxel.
Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor is standard therapy following acute coronary syndrome and percutaneous coronary intervention. Despite the use of potent antiplatelet agents, vascular events continue to occur. Lack of response to clopidogrel therapy has been widely investigated using various methods of platelet function testing. These studies have consistently found an association between poor clopidogrel response and an increased risk of vascular events. Strategies to overcome this problem include higher clopidogrel doses or the use of an alternative P2Y12 agent. To date, the majority of studies investigating tailored antiplatelet therapy have failed to show any reduction in clinical events likely due to the low-risk population studied. Despite this lack of benefit from altering therapy, platelet function testing may be done in certain patient populations. Patients at high risk of deleterious outcomes from stent thrombosis may be an appropriate patient population for platelet function testing to ensure adequate response to therapy. In addition, emerging data suggests a potential role for platelet function testing to assess for bleeding risk. The purpose of this article is to review the key studies demonstrating response variability to clopidogrel therapy, strategies to overcome variability, and practical considerations for the clinician.
Proton pump inhibitors are often prescribed for patients on clopidogrel to prevent gastrointestinal bleeding complications. Recent data suggest higher rates of adverse cardiovascular events in patients on proton pump inhibitors and clopidogrel, in comparison to patients on clopidogrel only. Both drugs are metabolized by similar pathways of the cytochrome P450 system, so proton pump inhibitors may inhibit the metabolism of clopidogrel to its active metabolite. This article reviews the pharmacodynamic and clinical evidence for this phenomenon.
P2Y(12) antagonists, in combination with aspirin, significantly reduce thrombotic and ischemic events in patients presenting with an acute coronary syndrome and in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. The thienopyridine clopidogrel is a prodrug that requires bioactivation by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) system in order to exert its antiplatelet effect. Common genetic polymorphisms that reduce the catalytic activity of the CYP2C19 isoenzyme decrease circulating levels of active metabolite, reduce levels of platelet inhibition, and increase the risk of ischemic events in clopidogrel-treated patients. Herein, we review the impact of the CYP2C19 genotype on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of clopidogrel, the association between CYP2C19 genotype and clinical outcome, and present the rationale for the implementation of CYP2C19 genotyping to individualize antiplatelet therapy in clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: Dual antiplatelet therapy has to be used for at least one month after placement of bare metal coronary stents and for a minimum of one year after placement of drug eluting stents. Because of the higher risk of bleeding, guidelines recommend cessation of clopidogrel seven days prior to high-risk endoscopic procedures and to delay elective surgery/endoscopy until dual antiplatelet therapy is ended. Premature cessation of clopidogrel however, may lead to catastrophic cardiovascular sequelae. METHODS: We searched the MEDLINE database, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library for English-language literature up to October 2012 to identify clinical trials on the bleeding risk of gastrointestinal endoscopic procedures in patients on uninterrupted clopidogrel/dual antiplatelet therapy. RESULTS: Six studies (high-risk endoscopic procedures: 5, low-risk endoscopic procedures: 1) on this issue were identified through the literature search. A total of 1,245 endoscopic procedures were performed under clopidogrel. Thirteen bleeding complications occurred (1%). None of the patients required angiographic or surgical intervention and there were no long-term sequelae. CONCLUSION: To date, data published on this issue are scarce and of poor quality. Nevertheless, there is no evidence to support the recommendations of the current guidelines to stop clopidogrel for at least one week prior to high-risk endoscopic procedures. In this setting, the clinical decision making should take place on an individual basis.
Clopidogrel is a second generation of thienopyridine, which has antiplatelet effect by inhibiting P2Y12 receptor. Hematologic adverse effect is very uncommon during clopidogrel use, but some cases of clopidogrel-associated neutropenia were reported in the past decade. Until now, there was no summary data to delineate the clinical course and safe alternatives of this event. We report 2 cases of clopidogrel-associated neutropenia and review other 10 case reports from 2000 to 2014. The median onset of neutropenia was 22 days, and the recovery time was 4 days after receiving granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor. Bone marrow studies in 6 cases all showed hypocellular or toxic damage. Six cases used cilostazol, prasugrel, or ticagrelor as safe alternatives. Closely monitoring blood cell counts is highly suggested in the first month after using clopidogrel. Newer P2Y12 inhibitors, especially ticagrelor, could be effective and safe alternatives if patients had a history of clopidogrel-associated neutropenia.
Like all antithrombotic drugs, antiplatelet agents expose to a risk of bleeding complications. Clinical research has extensively focused on the efficacy of these drugs to reduce ischemic events. The bleeding risk associated with them was solely considered as an inevitable and acceptable complication. When two new potent P2Y12-receptor inhibitors, prasugrel and ticagrelor, were marketed, the risk of major bleeding increased. These new agents have modified the balance between the absolute risk reduction in ischemic events and the absolute risk increase in bleeding events. This paper is an update on the bleeding risk assessment associated with antiplatelet agents. It discusses the place of platelet function monitoring, and the optimal management of bleeding complications. It addresses the challenging issue of reversal of antiplatelet therapy, focusing especially on ticagrelor, which pharmacodynamics complicate bleeding management.
INTRODUCTION: As it is importance to understand the involvement of platelets in the initiation and propagation of thrombosis, antiplatelet drugs have come to the forefront of atherothrombotic disease treatment. Dual antiplatelet therapy of aspirin plus clopidogrel has its benefits, but it also has its limitations with regard to its pharmacologic properties and adverse effects. For these reasons, within the last decade or so, the investigation of novel antiplatelet agents has prospered. AREAS COVERED: In this review, we discuss the unique pharmacodynamic properties of several antiplatelet drugs with their possible potential molecular of mechanisms on inhibiting platelet aggregation. EXPERT OPINION: Considering multiple synergetic pathways of platelet activation and their close interplay with coagulation, the current treatment strategies are not only based on platelet inhibition, they also rely on the attenuation of procoagulant activity, inhibition of thrombin generation, and enhancement of clot dissolution. Current guidelines recommend various antiplatelet agents in addition to aspirin for patients with acute coronary syndromes. The advantages of these agents, as repute mortality, may be associated with off-target effects of the drug. Hence, further studies are required to facilitate the physician's choice of the most appropriate antiplatelet agents for each patient for thrombosis treatment.
The high rate of restenosis associated with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) procedures can be reduced with the implantation of metallic stents into the stenotic vessels. The knowledge that neointimal formation can result in restenosis after stent implantation led to the development of drug-eluting stents (DES) which require long lasting antiplatelet therapy to avoid thrombotic complications. In the last years, the drug-eluting balloon (DEB) technology has emerged as an alternative option for the treatment of coronary and peripheral arteries. Clinical studies demonstrated the safety and effectiveness of DEB in various clinical scenarios and support the use of paclitaxel-eluting balloons for the treatment of in-stent restenosis, of small coronary arteries and bifurcations lesions. The protocols of DEB studies suggest that the dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel of four weeks after DEB is safe and effective.
