The treatment of opioid withdrawal is an important area of clinical concern when treating patients with chronic, non-cancer pain, patients with active opioid use disorder, and patients receiving medication for opioid use disorder. Current standards of care for medically supervised withdrawal include treatment with mu-opioid receptor agonists, (eg, methadone), partial agonists (eg, buprenorphine), and alpha2-adrenergic receptor agonists (eg, clonidine and lofexidine). Newer agents likewise exploit these pharmacological mechanisms, including tramadol (mu-opioid receptor agonism) and tizanidine (alpha2 agonism). Areas for future research include managing withdrawal in the context of stabilising patients with opioid use disorder to extended-release naltrexone, transitioning patients with opioid use disorder from methadone to buprenorphine, and tapering opioids in patients with chronic, non-cancer pain.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic autoimmune disease with demyelination, inflammation, neuronal loss, and gliosis (scarring). Our object to review MS pathophysiology causes and treatment. A Narrative Review article was conducted by searching on Google scholar, PubMed, Research Gate about relevant keywords we exclude any unique cases and case reports. The destruction of myelinated axons in the central nervous system reserves this brunt. This destruction is generated by immunogenic T cells that produce cytokines, copying a proinflammatory T helper cells1-mediated response. Autoreactive cluster of differentiation 4 + cells, particularly the T helper cells1 subtype, are activated outside the system after viral infections. T-helper cells (cluster of differentiation 4+) are the leading initiators of MS myelin destruction. The treatment plan for individuals with MS includes managing acute episodes, using disease-modifying agents to decrease MS biological function of MS, and providing symptom relief. Management of spasticity requires physiotherapy, prescription of initial drugs such as baclofen or gabapentin, secondary drug options such as tizanidine or dantrolene, and third-line treatment such as benzodiazepines. To treat urinary incontinence some options include anticholinergic medications such as oxybutynin hydrochloride, tricyclic antidepressants (such as amitriptyline), and intermittent self-catheterization. When it comes to bowel problems, one can try to implement stool softeners and consume a high roughage diet. The review takes about MS causes Pathophysiology and examines current treatment strategies, emphasizing the advancements in disease-modifying therapies and symptomatic treatments. This comprehensive analysis enhances the understanding of MS and underscores the ongoing need for research to develop more effective treatments.
Spasticity is common in many neurological disorders, such as stroke and multiple sclerosis. It is part of the upper motor neurone syndrome manifesting as increased tone, clonus, spasms, spastic dystonia and co-contractions. The impact of spasticity varies from it being a subtle neurological sign to severe spasticity causing pain and contractures. Existing spasticity can be worsened by external factors such as constipation, urinary tract infections or pressure ulcers. Its management involves identification and elimination of triggers; neurophysiotherapy; oral medications such as baclofen, tizanidine and dantrolene; focal injection of botulinum toxin, alcohol or phenol, or baclofen delivered intrathecally through a pump; and surgical resection of selected dorsal roots of the spinal cord. This article reviews the current understanding of pathophysiology, clinical features and management of spasticity.
Health care providers prescribe skeletal muscle relaxants for a variety of indications. However, the comparative efficacy of these drugs is not well known. Skeletal muscle relaxants consist of both antispasticity and antispasmodic agents, a distinction prescribers often overlook. The antispasticity agents-baclofen, tizanidine, dantrolene, and diazepam-aid in improving muscle hypertonicity and involuntary jerks. Antispasmodic agents, such as cyclobenzaprine, are primarily used to treat musculoskeletal conditions. Much of the evidence from clinical trials regarding skeletal muscle relaxants is limited because of poor methodologic design, insensitive assessment methods, and small numbers of patients. Although trial results seem to support the use of these agents for their respective indications, efficacy data from comparator trials did not particularly favor one skeletal muscle relaxant over another. Therefore, the choice of a skeletal muscle relaxant should be based on its adverse-effect profile, tolerability, and cost.
Among the glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)-antibody-spectrum disorders, the most common phenotypic subset is the stiff-person syndrome (SPS), caused by impaired GABAergic inhibitory neurotransmission and autoimmunity characterized by very high titers of GAD antibodies and increased GAD-IgG intrathecal synthesis. If not properly treated or untreated because of delayed diagnosis, SPS progresses leading to disability; it is therefore fundamental to apply the best therapeutic schemes from the outset. This article is focused on the rationale of specific therapeutic strategies based on the SPS pathophysiology targeting both the impaired reciprocal GABAergic inhibition to symptomatically improve the main clinical manifestations of stiffness in the truncal and proximal limb muscles, gait dysfunction, and episodic painful muscle spasms and the autoimmunity to enhance improvement and slow down disease progression. A practical, step-by-step therapeutic approach is provided, highlighting the importance of combination therapies with the preferred gamma-aminobutyric acid-enhancing antispasmodic drugs, such as baclofen, tizanidine, benzodiazepines, and gabapentin, that provide the first-line symptomatic therapy, while detailing the application of current immunotherapies with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) plasmapheresis, and rituximab. The pitfalls and concerns of long-term therapies in different age groups, including children, women planning pregnancy, and especially the elderly considering their comorbidities are emphasized, also highlighting the challenges in distinguishing the conditioning effects or expectations of chronically applied therapies from objective meaningful clinical benefits. Finally, the need for future targeted immunotherapeutic options based on disease immunopathogenesis and the biologic basis of autoimmune hyperexcitability are discussed, pointing out the unique challenges in the design of future controlled clinical trials especially in quantifying the extend and severity of stiffness, episodic or startle-triggered muscle spasms, task-specific phobias, and excitability.
Skeletal muscle relaxants are widely used in treating musculoskeletal conditions. However, evidence of their effectiveness consists mainly of studies with poor methodologic design. In addition, these drugs have not been proven to be superior to acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for low back pain. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses support using skeletal muscle relaxants for short-term relief of acute low back pain when nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or acetaminophen are not effective or tolerated. Comparison studies have not shown one skeletal muscle relaxant to be superior to another. Cyclobenzaprine is the most heavily studied and has been shown to be effective for various musculoskeletal conditions. The sedative properties of tizanidine and cyclobenzaprine may benefit patients with insomnia caused by severe muscle spasms. Methocarbamol and metaxalone are less sedating, although effectiveness evidence is limited. Adverse effects, particularly dizziness and drowsiness, are consistently reported with all skeletal muscle relaxants. The potential adverse effects should be communicated clearly to the patient. Because of limited comparable effectiveness data, choice of agent should be based on side-effect profile, patient preference, abuse potential, and possible drug interactions.
Skeletal muscle relaxants are a heterogeneous group of medications used to treat two different types of underlying conditions: spasticity from upper motor neuron syndromes and muscular pain or spasms from peripheral musculoskeletal conditions. Although widely used for these indications, there appear to be gaps in our understanding of the comparative efficacy and safety of different skeletal muscle relaxants. This systematic review summarizes and assesses the evidence for the comparative efficacy and safety of skeletal muscle relaxants for spasticity and musculoskeletal conditions. Randomized trials (for comparative efficacy and adverse events) and observational studies (for adverse events only) that included oral medications classified as skeletal muscle relaxants by the FDA were sought using electronic databases, reference lists, and pharmaceutical company submissions. Searches were performed through January 2003. The validity of each included study was assessed using a data abstraction form and predefined criteria. An overall grade was allocated for the body of evidence for each key question. A total of 101 randomized trials were included in this review. No randomized trial was rated good quality, and there was little evidence of rigorous adverse event assessment in included trials or observational studies. There is fair evidence that baclofen, tizanidine, and dantrolene are effective compared to placebo in patients with spasticity (primarily multiple sclerosis). There is fair evidence that baclofen and tizanidine are roughly equivalent for efficacy in patients with spasticity, but insufficient evidence to determine the efficacy of dantrolene compared to baclofen or tizanidine. There is fair evidence that although the overall rate of adverse effects between tizanidine and baclofen is similar, tizanidine is associated with more dry mouth and baclofen with more weakness. There is fair evidence that cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, and tizanidine are effective compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions (primarily acute back or neck pain). Cyclobenzaprine has been evaluated in the most clinical trials and has consistently been found to be effective. There is very limited or inconsistent data regarding the effectiveness of metaxalone, methocarbamol, chlorzoxazone, baclofen, or dantrolene compared to placebo in patients with musculoskeletal conditions. There is insufficient evidence to determine the relative efficacy or safety of cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, orphenadrine, tizanidine, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and chlorzoxazone. Dantrolene, and to a lesser degree chlorzoxazone, have been associated with rare serious hepatotoxicity.
BACKGROUND: Skeletal muscle spasticity is a major physical complication resulting from traumatic brain injury (TBI), which can lead to muscle contracture, joint stiffness, reduced range of movement, broken skin and pain. Treatments for spasticity include a range of pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions, often used in combination. Management of spasticity following TBI varies from other clinical populations because of the added complexity of behavioural and cognitive issues associated with TBI. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of interventions for managing skeletal muscle spasticity in people with TBI. SEARCH METHODS: In June 2017, we searched key databases including the Cochrane Injuries Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE (Ovid), Embase (Ovid) and others, in addition to clinical trials registries and the reference lists of included studies. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and cross-over RCTs evaluating any intervention for the management of spasticity in TBI. Only studies where at least 50% of participants had a TBI (or for whom separate data for participants with TBI were available) were included. The primary outcomes were spasticity and adverse effects. Secondary outcome measures were classified according to the World Health Organization International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health including body functions (sensory, pain, neuromusculoskeletal and movement-related functions) and activities and participation (general tasks and demands; mobility; self-care; domestic life; major life areas; community, social and civic life). DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. Data were synthesised narratively; meta-analysis was precluded due to the paucity and heterogeneity of data. MAIN RESULTS: We included nine studies in this review which involved 134 participants with TBI. Only five studies reported between-group differences, yielding outcome data for 105 participants with TBI. These five studies assessed the effects of a range of pharmacological (baclofen, botulinum toxin A) and non-pharmacological (casting, physiotherapy, splints, tilt table standing and electrical stimulation) interventions, often in combination. The studies which tested the effect of baclofen and tizanidine did not report their results adequately. Where outcome data were available, spasticity and adverse events were reported, in addition to some secondary outcome measures.Of the five studies with results, three were funded by governments, charities or health services and two were funded by a pharmaceutical or medical technology company. The four studies without useable results were funded by pharmaceutical or medical technology companies.It was difficult to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of these interventions due to poor reporting, small study size and the fact that participants with TBI were usually only a proportion of the overall total. Meta-analysis was not feasible due to the paucity of data and heterogeneity of interventions and comparator groups. Some studies concluded that the intervention they tested had beneficial effects on spasticity, and others found no difference between certain treatments. The most common adverse event was minor skin damage in people who received casting. We believe it would be misleading to provide any further description of study results given the quality of the evidence was very low for all outcomes. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The very low quality and limited amount of evidence about the management of spasticity in people with TBI means that we are uncertain about the effectiveness or harms of these interventions. Well-designed and adequately powered studies using functional outcome measures to test the interventions used in clinical practice are needed.
INTRODUCTION: Dystonia is usually a lifelong condition with persistent pain and disability. Focal dystonia affects a single part of the body; generalised dystonia can affect most or all of the body. It is more common in women, and some types of dystonia are more common in people of Ashkenazi descent. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical questions: What are the effects of drug treatments, surgical treatments, and physical treatments for focal and generalised dystonia? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to September 2013 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 19 studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: acupuncture, amantadine, baclofen, benzatropine, biofeedback, botulinum toxins, bromocriptine, carbamazepine, carbidopa/levodopa, clonazepam, clozapine, deep brain stimulation of thalamus and globus pallidus, diazepam, gabapentin, haloperidol, lorazepam, myectomy (for focal dystonia), occupational therapy, ondansetron, physiotherapy, pregabalin, procyclidine, selective peripheral denervation (for focal dystonia), speech therapy, tizanidine, trazodone hydrochloride, and trihexyphenidyl.
As the population ages, spine-related pain is increasingly common in older adults. While medications play an important role in pain management, their use has limitations in geriatric patients due to reduced liver and renal function, comorbid medical problems, and polypharmacy. This review will assess the evidence basis for medications used for spine-related pain in older adults, with a focus on drug metabolism and adverse drug reactions. A PubMed/OVID search crossing common spine, neck, and back pain terms with key words for older adults and geriatrics was combined with common drug classes and common drug names and limited to clinical trials and age over 65 years. The results were then reviewed with identification of commonly used drugs and drug categories: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, corticosteroids, gabapentin and pregabalin, antispastic and antispasmodic muscle relaxants, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tramadol, and opioids. Collectively, 138 double-blind, placebo-controlled trials were the focus of the review. The review found a variable contribution of high-quality studies examining the efficacy of medications for spine pain primarily in the geriatric population. There was strong evidence for NSAID use with adjustments for gastrointestinal and renal risk factors. Gabapentin and pregabalin had mixed evidence for neuropathic pain. SNRIs had good evidence for neuropathic pain and a more favorable safety profile than TCAs. Tramadol had some evidence in older patients, but more so in persons aged < 65 years. Rational therapeutic choices based on geriatric spine pain diagnosis are helpful, such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen for arthritic and myofascial-based pain, gabapentinoids or duloxetine for neuropathic and radicular pain, antispastic agents for myofascial-based pain, and combination therapy for mixed etiologies. Tramadol can be well tolerated in older patients, but has risks of cognitive and classic opioid side effects. Otherwise, opioids are typically avoided in the treatment of spine-related pain in older adults due to their morbidity and mortality risk and are reserved for refractory severe pain. Whenever possible, beneficial geriatric spine pain pharmacotherapy should employ the lowest therapeutic doses with consideration of polypharmacy, potentially decreased renal and hepatic metabolism, and co-morbid medical disorders.
IMPORTANCE: Stricter opioid prescribing guidelines have increased prescriptions of skeletal muscle relaxants (SMRs) for chronic pain, but the efficacy of long-term use of SMRs for chronic pain is unknown. OBJECTIVE: To systematically review the effectiveness or efficacy of long-term use of SMRs for chronic pain. EVIDENCE REVIEW: Two reviewers systematically searched Ovid MEDLINE, Embase (Ovid), Web of Science, CINAHL, and Cochrane through December 4, 2023. They included articles published in English, Spanish, or Italian. Only randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and cohort studies with comparator groups evaluating at least 1-month duration of SMRs for chronic pain were included. The reviewers dually reviewed data abstraction, risk-of-bias, and quality. They characterized studies by chronic pain syndrome: low back pain, fibromyalgia, headaches, painful cramps or spasticity, and other syndromes. FINDINGS: A total of 30 RCTs with 1314 participants and 14 cohort studies with 1168 participants assessed SMRs for chronic pain. Studies were primarily short-term (4-6 weeks). Nine unique SMRs were represented by the studies identified. Eleven studies (25%) examined baclofen, 8 (18%) examined tizanidine, and 7 (16%) examined cyclobenzaprine. Evidence for effectiveness was strongest for SMRs used for trigeminal neuralgia, neck pain, and painful cramps; evidence suggested SMRs for fibromyalgia, low back pain, and other syndromes were not more beneficial than placebo. The most common adverse effects were sedation and dry mouth. RCTs had a low to moderate risk of bias, and the quality of cohort studies was fair to good. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this systematic review of long-term use of SMRs for chronic pain, findings suggest that their long-term use may benefit patients with painful spasms or cramps and neck pain; their long-term use for low back pain, fibromyalgia, and headaches did not appear to be beneficial. Clinicians should be vigilant for adverse effects and consider deprescribing if pain-related goals are not met.
INTRODUCTION: Trigeminal neuralgia is a rare condition that can be effectively treated by carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine but these older drugs are associated with dose-dependent and potentially treatment-limiting adverse effects. Third-generation anticonvulsants, new calcitonin gene-related peptide blockers for migraine, and older drugs such as ketamine and cannabinoids may be promising adjuvants or monotherapeutic options. AREAS COVERED: The new drugs, their presumed mechanisms of action, safety and efficacy are discussed herein. There is a paucity of robust clinical evidence in support of these drugs for trigeminal neuralgia. New migraine agents are considered as well although migraines and trigeminal neuralgia are distinct, albeit similar, conditions. No new drugs have been released to market in recent years with the specific indication of trigeminal neuralgia. EXPERT OPINION: In real-world clinical practice, about half of trigeminal neuralgia patients take more than one agent for prevention and combination therapy may be the optimal approach. Combination therapy might allow for lower doses of carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine, thus reducing the number and severity of potential adverse events but the potential for pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions must be considered. Drug therapy for trigeminal neuralgia involves acute or abortive treatments, often administered in hospital versus long-term preventive therapy, usually involving oral agents.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the comparative effectiveness and safety of analgesic medicines for acute non-specific low back pain. DESIGN: Systematic review and network meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES: Medline, PubMed, Embase, CINAHL, CENTRAL, ClinicalTrials.gov, clinicialtrialsregister.eu, and World Health Organization's International Clinical Trials Registry Platform from database inception to 20 February 2022. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR STUDY SELECTION: Randomised controlled trials of analgesic medicines (eg, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, paracetamol, opioids, anti-convulsant drugs, skeletal muscle relaxants, or corticosteroids) compared with another analgesic medicine, placebo, or no treatment. Adults (>/=18 years) who reported acute non-specific low back pain (for less than six weeks). DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Primary outcomes were low back pain intensity (0-100 scale) at end of treatment and safety (number of participants who reported any adverse event during treatment). Secondary outcomes were low back specific function, serious adverse events, and discontinuation from treatment. Two reviewers independently identified studies, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias. A random effects network meta-analysis was done and confidence was evaluated by the Confidence in Network Meta-Analysis method. RESULTS: 98 randomised controlled trials (15 134 participants, 49% women) included 69 different medicines or combinations. Low or very low confidence was noted in evidence for reduced pain intensity after treatment with tolperisone (mean difference -26.1 (95% confidence intervals -34.0 to -18.2)), aceclofenac plus tizanidine (-26.1 (-38.5 to -13.6)), pregabalin (-24.7 (-34.6 to -14.7)), and 14 other medicines compared with placebo. Low or very low confidence was noted for no difference between the effects of several of these medicines. Increased adverse events had moderate to very low confidence with tramadol (risk ratio 2.6 (95% confidence interval 1.5 to 4.5)), paracetamol plus sustained release tramadol (2.4 (1.5 to 3.8)), baclofen (2.3 (1.5 to 3.4)), and paracetamol plus tramadol (2.1 (1.3 to 3.4)) compared with placebo. These medicines could increase the risk of adverse events compared with other medicines with moderate to low confidence. Moderate to low confidence was also noted for secondary outcomes and secondary analysis of medicine classes. CONCLUSIONS: The comparative effectiveness and safety of analgesic medicines for acute non-specific low back pain are uncertain. Until higher quality randomised controlled trials of head-to-head comparisons are published, clinicians and patients are recommended to take a cautious approach to manage acute non-specific low back pain with analgesic medicines. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42019145257.
INTRODUCTION: Trigeminal neuralgia is a sudden, unilateral, brief, stabbing, recurrent pain in the distribution of one or more branches of the fifth cranial nerve. Pain occurs in paroxysms which last from a few seconds to 2 minutes. The frequency of the paroxysms ranges from a few to hundreds of attacks a day. Periods of remission can last for months to years, but tend to shorten over time. METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical question: What are the effects of treatments in people with trigeminal neuralgia? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other important databases up to September 2007 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). RESULTS: We found 14 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: ablative neurosurgical techniques to the Gasserian ganglion, baclofen, carbamazepine, clonazepam, cryotherapy of peripheral nerves, gabapentin, lamotrigine, microvascular decompression, nerve block, oxcarbazepine, peripheral acupuncture, phenytoin, proparacaine eye drops, sodium valproate, stereotactic radiosurgery, tizanidine, and topiramate.
Spasticity is a common symptom observed after pyramidal system lesion. The treatment of spasticity has considerably changed during last years, notably with the generalization of Botulinum toxin use. However, the treatment of spasticity should consider all therapeutic possibility in accordance with patient status and objective. Drugs are only a part of the treatment and physical therapy must always be used. Others treatments such as surgery, orthosis, occupational therapy must also be discussed individually. Several guidelines are now available for Botulinum toxin treatment but only the French guidelines consider all drug therapies. This review addresses the different drugs commonly used on the basis of an extensive review of literature. Some facts are clearly established by randomized controlled trials but a certain number of questions remains unclear and only clinical experience and consensus can guide injectors.
BACKGROUND: Xylazine is an alpha-2 adrenergic agonist commonly used as a large animal anesthetic. It is used as an adulterant in illicit opioids, and it is now well established that its synergistic effect with opioids increases lethality. The amount of xylazine adulterating illicit opioids is growing at an alarming rate, present in almost one-third of opioid overdose deaths reported in Philadelphia in 2019. Despite this, there are no reports considering the management of patients using xylazine chronically. In particular, there are no reported cases detailing the management of xylazine withdrawal or exploring the potential for ongoing treatment for those in recovery from xylazine use. CASE SUMMARY: We present the case of a 29 year old female with opioid use disorder and chronic xylazine use, admitted to the intensive care unit for treatment of chronic lower extremity wounds thought to be due to xylazine injection. Her xylazine withdrawal was managed with a combination of dexmedetomidine infusion, phenobarbital and tizanidine, later transitioned to clonidine. By hospital day 4 she was no longer experiencing withdrawal symptoms. She was transitioned from full-agonist opioids for pain to buprenorphine via a buprenorphine "micro-induction" and was ultimately discharged on buprenorphine, clonidine, and gabapentin on day 19 of admission. CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: This case illustrates a potential treatment pathway that allows for safe and comfortable xylazine withdrawal in hospitalized patients. It also provides an introduction into several medical concerns affecting this patient population specifically, including xylazine-mediated soft tissue wounds.
With the introduction of the antispasticity agent, tizanidine hydrochloride (Zanaflex), physicians have requested information about the optimal way to switch appropriate patients from baclofen to tizanidine. A group of neurologists and rehabilitation specialists with a particular interest in spasticity was therefore asked to draw up a suitable approach to changing treatment.
Motor function abnormalities are a key feature of cerebral palsy. Spasticity is one of the main motor abnormalities seen in children with cerebral palsy. Spasticity is a velocity dependent increased resistance to movement. While in some children, spasticity may adversely impact the motor abilities, in others, it may help maintain posture and ability to ambulate. Thus, treatment to reduce spasticity requires careful consideration of various factors. Non-pharmacologic interventions used to reduce spasticity include physiotherapy, occupational therapy, use of adaptive equipment, various orthopedic surgical procedures and neurosurgical procedures. Pharmacologic interventions used for reducing spasticity in children with cerebral palsy reviewed in this article include oral administration of baclofen, diazepam, dantrolene and tizanidine, intrathecal baclofen, and local injections of botulinum toxin, phenol, and alcohol.
The relationship among tizanidine dose, plasma concentration, and antispastic action is linear in nature. Response to a given dose of this agent varies among patients, and determining the appropriate clinical dose requires individual titration.
Multiple sclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease that affects the central nervous system and can cause various types of pain including ongoing extremity pain, Lhermitte's phenomenon, trigeminal neuralgia, and mixed pain. Neuropathic pain is a major concern for individuals with multiple sclerosis as it is directly linked to myelin damage in the central nervous system and the management of neuropathic pain in multiple sclerosis is challenging as the options available have limited efficacy and can cause unpleasant side effects. The literature search was conducted across two databases, PubMed, and Google Scholar. Eligible studies included clinical trials, observational studies, meta-analyses, systematic reviews, and narrative reviews. The objective of this article is to provide an overview of literature on pharmacological and non-pharmacological strategies employed in the management of neuropathic pain in multiple sclerosis. Pharmacological options include cannabinoids, muscle relaxants (tizanidine, baclofen, dantrolene), anticonvulsants (benzodiazepines, gabapentin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine), antidepressants (duloxetine, venlafaxine, tricyclic antidepressants), opioids (naltrexone), and botulinum toxin variants, which have evidence from various clinical trials. Non-pharmacological approaches for trigeminal neuralgia may include neurosurgical methods. Non-invasive methods, physical therapy, and psychotherapy (cognitive behavioral therapy, acceptance and commitment therapy and mindfulness-based stress reduction) may be recommended for patients with neuropathic pain in multiple sclerosis. The choice of treatment depends on the severity and type of pain as well as other factors, such as patient preferences and comorbidities. There is a pressing need for healthcare professionals and researchers to prioritize the development of better strategies for managing multiple sclerosis-induced neuropathic pain.
