Selman Waksman's laboratory at Rutgers University discovered the first aminoglycoside antibiotic, streptomycin, in 1943. Other aminoglycoside antibiotics, such as gentamicin and tobramycin, soon followed. Tobramycin is compatible with most intravenous fluids and tear substitutes, but it is incompatible with heparin and some beta-lactam antibiotics such as penicillin and cephalosporins. Due to tobramycin's broad spectrum of activity, it has proven useful in controlling both superficial and deep infections of the eye and ocular adnexa (i.e., blepharitis, conjunctivitis, keratitis, and endophthalmitis). However, since tobramycin has been associated with neuromuscular blockade, as well as possessing ototoxic and nephrotoxic effects, care must be taken to minimize toxicity by monitoring patients undergoing systemic tobramycin therapy.
Extended-interval once-daily dosing with the aminoglycoside tobramycin has been proven to be equally efficacious as traditional thrice-daily dosing for treatment of the pulmonary exacerbations of cystic fibrosis in adults and children older than 5 years. The frequencies of acute ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity do not appear to be significantly different between patients treated with once- versus thrice-daily dosing, and the risk of acute nephrotoxicity may actually be lower in pediatric patients when once-daily dosing is used. Long-term studies are needed to fully assess the impact that cumulative treatments with once-daily dosing have on renal and auditory function. An increase in antimicrobial resistance has been suggested with once-daily dosing in the cystic fibrosis population. The extended-interval aminoglycoside dose should be determined based on previous therapeutic drug monitoring. If the patient is aminoglycoside (tobramycin) naive, a dose of 10 mg/kg once/day is suggested, with the dose adjusted by using therapeutic drug monitoring to individualize therapy.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes the recent literature regarding the uses for and toxicity of aminoglycosides in cystic fibrosis (CF). RECENT FINDINGS: Aminoglycosides are indicated in the management of acute exacerbations of CF, to control chronic infection, and to eradicate Pseudomonas aeruginosa after recent acquisition. Intravenous gentamicin is associated with increased risk of acute kidney injury, whereas intravenous tobramycin is less so. Studies regarding chronic kidney disease related to cumulative aminoglycoside exposure are currently conflicting, but a prevalence of up to 42% has been reported. A single daily dose of intravenous tobramycin is as effective as a thrice-daily regimen and is less nephrotoxic. A large paediatric series has recently reported a prevalence of hearing impairment of 4.5%, and a small adult cohort has found a 30% rate of vestibulotoxicity. Neither appears to be related to cumulative exposure. SUMMARY: In recent years, the well known toxicities of aminoglycosides have been investigated in CF populations. It appears that intravenous tobramycin is well tolerated in the kidneys compared with gentamicin, and that cumulative exposure may result in chronic kidney disease. Hearing loss and vestibulotoxicity are also prevalent. These important epidemiological studies lay the groundwork to design interventional studies to reduce toxicity.
CASE: A 50-year-old healthy man with normal kidney function underwent surgery for fracture-related infection. Unfortunately, the patient received 2.5 times the intended dose of tobramycin pellets in the medullary cavity and developed acute kidney failure. Given the intraosseous administration of tobramycin, the drug displayed an absorption-dependent pharmacokinetics and multiple treatments with hemodialysis were needed. However, the patient had a complete recovery, and the kidney function remained normal at the 2-year follow-up. CONCLUSION: Tobramycin pellets are nephrotoxic in supratherapeutic doses; however, it was reversible in this case. Owing to the intraosseous administration, multiple treatments with hemodialysis were required.
Chronic rhinosinusitis is extremely common in patients with cystic fibrosis. It causes numerous problems in these patients and can put them at risk for life-threatening illness. Potential problems include nasal obstruction, congestion, sinus pain and pressure, infection (usually with Pseudomonas organisms), hyposmia or anosmia, and the seeding of bacteria into the lower respiratory tract. Cystic fibrosis patients with chronically infected sinuses are at increased risk for pneumonia following lung transplantation. A prophylactic protocol has been developed for the management of chronic sinusitis in patients with cystic fibrosis. These patients are fully evaluated at the Nasal Dysfunction Clinic of the University of California, San Diego (UCSD), Medical Center. Based on the results of the evaluation, they are treated with endoscopic sinus surgery, partial middle turbinectomy, septoplasty, and a large middle meatal maxillary antrostomy. Surgery is followed by a rigorous regimen of pulsatile hypotonic saline nasal irrigation to wash away tenacious cystic secretions. Tobramycin (Nebcin) is given once daily in the nasal irrigant to inhibit the growth of Pseudomonas organisms. At the USCD Nasal Dysfunction Clinic, this prepulmonary transplantation protocol is now used in all cystic fibrosis patients with chronic sinusitis.
One hundred five patients with peritonitis were randomized to receive either tobramycin sulfate plus clindamycin phosphate or moxalactam alone before surgical intervention. Fifty-nine patients were evaluable. A mean of 3.1 (moxalactam) and 3.5 (tobramycin-clindamycin) pathogens per patient were identified. Overall success rate was 85% (tobramycin-clindamycin, 24/30; moxalactam, 26/29). When patients with appendicitis were excluded, there was an observed but not statistically significant advantage of moxalactam over tobramycin-clindamycin (85% vs 67%). There were five deaths (tobramycin-clindamycin, four; moxalactam, one). Other complications included hypoprothrombinemia (tobramycin-clindamycin, five; moxalactam, five), renal dysfunction (tobramycin-clindamycin, three; moxalactam, one), and superinfection (tobramycin-clindamycin, nine; moxalactam, six). More wound infections were noted in the group given tobramycin-clindamycin. These data suggest that moxalactam is as safe and efficacious as tobramycin plus clindamycin. The observed benefits of this agent warrant study in a larger sample to verify advantages of moxalactam over combination therapy.
Nonoliguric renal insufficiency is a well-known nephrotoxic consequence of aminoglycosides, although reversible tubular damage in the absence of any change in the renal function has been occasionally found. Reported herein are 2 representative cases of a reversible tubular damage due to prolonged aminoglycoside administration: a patient with a Fanconi-like syndrome of proximal tubular dysfunction and a patient with a syndrome of hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis associated with hypomagnesemia.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is considered as the most redoubtable pathogenic agent at cystic fibrosis patients. Its eradication is a priority to avoid the passage to chronic infection, the real turning point of the disease. For this, a wide therapeutic panel of intravenous antibiotics exists, and for some years, the research teams concentrate more and more on the inhaled way. The synthesis of the literature data presented herein focuses on both already experienced molecules (colistin and tobramycin), and on new therapeutics. This review aims at loosening advantages and inconveniences of each of these therapeutic options, while bringing to light the necessity of follow-up studies in order to prove the therapeutic interests of molecules in development.
BACKGROUND: Once daily intravenous (iv) treatment with tobramycin for Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in patients with cystic fibrosis (pwCF) is frequently monitored by measuring tobramycin trough levels (TLs). Although the necessity of these TLs is recently questioned in pwCF without renal impairment, no study has evaluated this so far. The aim of this observational study was to evaluate the frequency of increased tobramycin TLs in pwCF treated with a once daily tobramycin dosing protocol. METHODS: Patient records of all consecutive once daily iv tobramycin courses in 35 pwCF between 07/2009 and 07/2019 were analyzed for tobramycin level, renal function, co-medication and comorbidity. RESULTS: Eight elevated TLs (2.9% of 278 courses) were recorded in four patients, two with normal renal function. One of these resolved without adjustment of tobramycin dosages suggesting a test timing or laboratory error. In the other patient the elevated tobramycin level decreased after tobramycin dosage adjustment. Six of the elevated levels occurred in two patients with chronic renal failure. In 15 other patients with reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (36 courses) but normal range creatinine no case of elevated tobramycin trough levels was detected. Neither cumulative tobramycin dosages nor concomitant diabetes or nutritional status were risk factors for elevated TLs. CONCLUSION: Our data show that elevated tobramycin TLs are rare but cannot be excluded, so determination of tobramycin TLs is still recommended for safety.
PURPOSE: The use of a continuous infusion of a beta-lactam antibiotic in combination with high-dose, extended-interval amino-glycoside therapy for eradication of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in an adult patient with cystic fibrosis (CF) is reported. SUMMARY: Testing of an expectorated sputum sample taken during routine evaluation of a 32-year-old woman with CF isolated P. aeruginosa; the patient's medical record indicated no prior episodes of P. aeruginosa colonization. In an initial attempt to eradicate the organism, the woman received outpatient therapy with oral ciprofloxacin twice daily combined with an aminoglycoside (tobramycin solution) by nebulization twice daily. After a culture four weeks later again isolated P. aeruginosa, the patient was hospitalized, and i.v. antimicrobial therapy was initiated. The inpatient treatment regimen consisted of continuous-infusion cefepime 6 g (100 mg/kg/24 hr) and i.v. tobramycin 700 mg (12 mg/kg/24 hr), with both drugs administered via a peripherally inserted central catheter, for two weeks. A bronchoalveolar lavage fluid culture performed two months after completion of the i.v. antimicrobial regimen, as well as several sputum cultures obtained during the subsequent three years, tested negative for P. aeruginosa. CONCLUSION: The administration of continuous-infusion cefepime and high-dose, extended-interval tobramycin led to the successful eradication of P. aeruginosa in an adult patient with CF.
INTRODUCTION: With their ability to migrate into the cornea and release toxins, caterpillar hairs can induce different clinical presentations such as conjunctivitis, keratoconjunctivitis, uveitis, and less frequently vitreoretinal inflammation (hyalitis, papillitis, macular edema). OBSERVATION: We report a case that occurred in Alsace (France) in a 13-years-old boy presenting with keratitis caused by caterpillar hairs. We localized them in the cornea, for the first time, using confocal microscopy and anterior segment spectral optical coherence tomography. CONCLUSION: Confocal microscopy and spectral optical coherence tomography can be useful for diagnosis and follow-up of this disease.
Eye drops contain several ophthalmic medications which can produce allergic reactions. We report the case of a patient with contact dermatitis from neomycin and a probable fixed exanthema after parenteral administration of tobramycin who tolerated topical tobramycin and other aminoglycosides.
Tobramycin inhalation solution given as a twice daily inhalation of nebulized aerosols of 300 mg is approved for the treatment of Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cystic fibrosis patients over 6 years of age. To investigate tobramycin pharmacokinetics (PK) after inhalation of tobramycin in pediatric cystic fibrosis patients below 7 years, a population PK approach was used to evaluate tobramycin PK data in patients 6 months to 44 years of age from 4 clinical studies. The final model used a 2-compartmental, first-order absorption model with effect of body mass index on the apparent central volume of distribution. Relative bioavailability in patients between 6 months and 7 years increased with age by a linear relationship, and was modeled as a ratio to that of patients over 7 years. Simulation showed that steady-state concentrations of tobramycin are lower in pediatric patients 6 months to 6 years than those in patients over 6 years. However, systemic exposure is not predictive of clinical efficacy due to direct dosing at the infection site. P aeruginosa eradication rate and safety profile in patients less than 7 years of age were similar to patients older than 6 years; therefore, no dose adjustment is warranted in the younger pediatric patients.
BACKGROUND: Burkholderia dolosa can result in chronic airway infection and rapid decline in lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Amiloride has antibacterial properties that may be synergistic with aminoglycosides against other species belonging to the Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc). We attempted to eradicate B. dolosa using a combination of nebulized tobramycin and nebulized amiloride in infected CF patients. METHODS: A 6-month, open-label trial of continuous inhaled amiloride, delivered via nebulization four times daily, and continuous inhaled tobramycin (TIS or TOBI(R)) nebulized twice daily, was offered to all CF patients at our institution who are chronically infected with B. dolosa. RESULTS: Twenty two of 27 patients with B. dolosa were eligible and twelve elected to participate. Eradication of B. dolosa was not noted in any study subject. While patients tolerated treatment with no adverse effects, there was also no apparent impact on other secondary outcome measures. CONCLUSIONS: Concurrent, continuous inhalation of amiloride and tobramycin for 6 months was not effective for the eradication of chronic B. dolosa airway infection in CF patients.
INTRODUCTION: Aminoglycoside (AG) antibiotics, such as tobramycin, are known to be ototoxic but important clinically due to their bactericidal efficacy. Persons with cystic fibrosis (CF) are at risk for AG-induced ototoxicity due to the repeated use of intravenous (IV) tobramycin for the treatment of pulmonary exacerbations. While it is well-established that ototoxic hearing loss is highly prevalent in this clinical population, the progression of hearing loss over time remains unclear. Cumulative IV-AG dosing has been associated with a higher risk of ototoxic hearing loss, yet some individuals lose substantial hearing after a single IV-AG treatment, while others never seem to lose hearing. METHODS: 31 persons with CF (18 on IV tobramycin, 13 controls) were enrolled in an observational study. Pure-tone hearing thresholds (0.25-16 kHz) were measured at baseline (pre-treatment) and at follow-up for each subject. A hearing shift was determined using various metrics, and outcomes were compared to characterize changes in hearing bilaterally for both study groups. RESULTS: Comparison of pure-tone threshold shifts between baseline and follow-up audiograms following either a course of IV tobramycin (n = 18) or no intervening therapy (n = 13) demonstrated significant (p < 0.05) threshold shifts in all continuous metrics tested. CONCLUSION: A single course of IV tobramycin causes ototoxic hearing loss in some people with CF, which supports the need for routine ototoxicity monitoring and management in this clinical population. These findings also suggest that people with CF are a suitable population for clinical trials examining ototherapeutics in single IV-tobramycin treatment episodes.
Aminoglycoside antibiotics have a long history of use in the control of gram-negative bacterial infections, but their systemic use has been complicated by known ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity. Because of the utility of these medications in patients with frequent pulmonary infections, there has been a move towards the use of inhaled agents, in particular tobramycin, due to a lower rate of systemic complications. Inhaled tobramycin is generally consider to be safe from otologic complications, with only two previous reports of ototoxicity, both in patients who had underlying chronic renal disease. Here we present the first case of a patient developing isolated vestibular toxicity, without associated hearing loss or evidence of renal insufficiency, in a patient receiving inhaled tobramycin. This is an extremely rare complication of an inhaled aminoglycoside and underscores the importance of careful monitoring despite perceived safety.
The global crisis of antibiotic resistance has impelled the exigency to develop more effective drug delivery systems for the treatment of bacterial infection. The development of possessing high biocompatibility and targeted delivery of antimicrobials remains a persisting challenge. For programmable release of efficient antimicrobials in infection sites to enhance antibacterial activity, herein, we fabricated diselenide-bridged mesoporous organosilica nanoparticle-supported silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) with high drug-loading capacity for the co-delivery of tobramycin (TOB) within one drug delivery system (Ag-MON@TOB (Se)). The resultant Ag-MON@TOB (Se) exhibited favorable biocompatibility due to its high stability in the physiological condition. Notably, such Ag-MON@TOB (Se) manifested a programmable structural destabilization to trigger sequential drug release in response to the oxidative stimuli within the bacterial infection microenvironment. In contradistinction to the oxidation-stable disulfide bond moieties within the framework of the nanocarrier (Ag-MON@TOB (S)), the Ag-MON@TOB (Se) with its programmed drug release behavior augmented prominent antibacterial therapy both in vitro and in vivo. This work represents a promising strategy for programmable drug release by harnessing a responsive degradable vehicle to enhance the treatment of bacterial infection.
BACKGROUND: Nebulization times have been identified as an issue in patient compliance with tobramycin solution for inhalation (TSI) therapy in cystic fibrosis (CF). METHODS: In this randomized, open-label, multicentre, two-period, crossover study, patients (n=25) with CF and chronic pulmonary pseudomonal infection received TSI for 15 days via eFlow rapid or LC PLUS nebulizer. Nebulization times and sputum/serum tobramycin concentrations were determined, and safety evaluated. RESULTS: Nebulization times were significantly shorter for eFlow rapid versus LC PLUS on Day 1 (least squares mean estimate of the difference -10.5 min, 95% confidence intervals [CI] -12.6, -8.3, p<0.0001) and Day 15 (difference -7.7 min, 95% CI -9.0, -6.5, p<0.0001). Broadly comparable sputum/systemic exposure to tobramycin was observed and the incidence of adverse events was similar for both nebulizers. CONCLUSION: Use of the eFlow rapid nebulizer reduced TSI nebulization time. The systemic exposure to tobramycin appeared to be broadly similar in this exploratory study.
Aminoglycoside (gentamicin, tobramycin) dosage regimens and subsequent serum concentrations were compared in 30 patients treated initially using traditional physician-determined methods and then switched to a pharmacokinetic-based treatment program. Patients received more drug during the kinetic phase (median 5 mg/kg) than during the traditional phase (median 3.6 mg/kg) and achieved greater peak serum concentration (5.9 vs. 4.4 micrograms/ml). Seventy-three percent of kinetic peak values but only 27% of traditional peak values exceeded 5.0 micrograms/ml. Trough concentrations were comparable in both phases of study and no nephrotoxicity was observed. This pharmacokinetic-based management program achieved more consistently greater therapeutic peak concentrations and provided more individualized therapy than did physicians. The use of pharmacokinetic consultants may be of benefit in administering safely optimal aminoglycoside therapy.
In vivo inactivation of aminoglycosides by antipseudomonal penicillins in patients with renal failure can be a significant problem when these drugs are used together in certain gram-negative infections. Our article illustrates the possible magnitude of this interaction and the resultant effect on aminoglycoside pharmacokinetic parameters. Penicillin concentrations remain relatively unaffected by this interaction. This article stresses the need for close monitoring of aminoglycoside concentrations when combined with antipseudomonal penicillins in this patient population.
