Diabetes mellitus is a major health problem due to its increasing prevalence and life-threatening complications. Antidiabetic sulfonylureas represent the first-line drugs in type 2 diabetes even though the most common associated risk is pharmacologically-induced hypoglycemia. In the development of this side effect are involved several factors including the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile of the drug, patient age and behavior, hepatic or renal dysfunctions, or other drugs associated with a high risk of interactions. If all these are controlled, the risk-benefit balance can be equal to other oral antidiabetic drugs.
Many dermatologists have reported that insulin and tolbutamide are therapeutically effective in acne. This rationalizes a recent observation that high-chromium yeast appears to have value as an acne treatment.
Glucagon, secreted by the alpha-cells of the pancreatic islets, is the most important glucose-increasing hormone of the body. The precise regulation of glucagon release remains incompletely defined but has been proposed to involve release of inhibitory factors from neighbouring beta-cells (paracrine control). However, the observation that glucose can regulate glucagon secretion under conditions when insulin secretion does not occur argues that the alpha-cell is also equipped with its own intrinsic (exerted within the alpha-cell itself) glucose sensing. Here we consider the possible mechanisms involved with a focus on ATP-regulated K(+)-channels and changes in alpha-cell membrane potential.
In the UGDP study, published in the 1970s, a high incidence of cardiovascular mortality was found in patients treated with the sulfonylurea agent tolbutamide. Impaired ischaemic preconditioning is presumed to be the most important mechanism for the excess cardiovascular mortality observed. However, as tolbutamide has only a low affinity for cardiac sulfonylurea receptors, interference with ischaemic preconditioning seems unlikely to account for this excess mortality. Several smaller studies also failed to establish a definite link between sulfonylurea treatment before acute myocardial infarction and in-hospital mortality. However, when the myocardium becomes exposed to repeated or prolonged periods of ischaemia, ischaemic preconditioning may become clinically important. Myocardial ischaemia can also develop during emergency or elective angioplasty and during coronary bypass surgery. Therefore discontinuation of sulfonylurea treatment should be considered in these circumstances.
Thyroid dysfunction can influence the physiological disposition of drugs. Depending on the pharmacokinetic properties of the individual drug, changes in the rate of metabolism ranging from profound to moderate or negligible have been observed. Since renal function is also influenced by thyroid disease, changes in renal elimination of drugs which are excreted in the urine mainly as unchanged drugs have to be considered as another reason for altered drugs disposition in thyroid disease. In patients with thyrotoxicosis lower, and in patients with myxoedema, higher, digitalis plasma levels have been observed. The altered disposition of cardiac glycosides in thyroid dysfunction can be attributed to changes in renal elimination and metabolism. These findings may be the kinetic correlate for the clinical observation that larger than the usual dose of digitalis is required in thyrotoxic patients and lower in hypothyroid patients. Antipyrene half-lives are very much shortened during hyperthyroidism and prolonged appreciably during hypothyroidism. The alterations in the disposition of these drugs seen during thyroid dysfunction can be ascribed to changes in its rate of metabolism which is controlled by the levels of circulating thyroid hormones. N-demethylation of aminopyrine is depressed both in hyper- and hypothyroid patients as compared with euthyroid subjects. Changes in the half-life of this drug were observed only during hypothyroidism. The physiological disposition of the antithyroid drug propylthiouracil is not changed during thyrotoxicosis. A decrease in plasma half-life of methimazole is however, observed during hyperthyroidism, whereas in hypothyroid patients half-life is increased. The few data available so far do not allow general prediction of how thyroid disease could alter drug metabolism in man.
A 67-year-old female diabetic is presented who developed a Coombs'-positive hemolytic anemia after a year of treatment with tolbutamide. An IgG antibody was identified in the patient's serum that caused the agglutination of both the patient's red blood cells and tolbutamide-coated erythrocytes in the absence of complement. Such a reaction did not occur with the patient's erythrocytes when not exposed to tolbutamide. Agglutination of the patient's serum also occurred with erythrocytes treated with other sulfonylureas (chlorpropamide, glibenclamide, carbutamide) but not with phenacetin.
An investigation was made of the pharmaceutical properties and the in vitro dissolution rates of 18 commercially available brands of tolbutamide tablets, all of which met the limits set by the Food and Drug Regulations for tablets sold in Canada.A marked variation in dissolution rates was found, which bore no relation to the official disintegration time. These wide variations in dissolution rate point to a need for (a) a comprehensive study of the in vivo effects of different tolbutamide tablets, and (b) an official test that sets limits for the rate of dissolution of tolbutamide tablets, in addition to the one that places limits on disintegration time.
Focused on interpreting data as statistical evidence, the evidential paradigm uses likelihood ratios to measure the strength of statistical evidence. Under this paradigm, re-examination of accumulating evidence is encouraged because (i) the likelihood ratio, unlike a p-value, is unaffected by the number of examinations and (ii) the probability of observing strong misleading evidence is naturally low, even for study designs that re-examine the data with each new observation. Further, the controllable probabilities of observing misleading and weak evidence provide assurance that the study design is reliable without affecting the strength of statistical evidence in the data. This paper illustrates the ideas and methods associated with using likelihood ratios to measure statistical evidence. It contains a comprehensive introduction to the evidential paradigm, including an overview of how to quantify the probability of observing misleading evidence for various study designs. The University Group Diabetes Program (UGDP), a classic and still controversial multi-centred clinical trial, is used as an illustrative example. Some of the original UGDP results, and subsequent re-analyses, are presented for comparison purposes.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study is to establish the inhibitory effects of 14 commonly used complementary and alternative medicines (CAM) on the metabolism of cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) substrates 7-methoxy-4-trifluoromethyl coumarine (MFC) and tolbutamide. CYP2C9 is important for the metabolism of numerous drugs and inhibition of this enzyme by CAM could result in elevated plasma levels of drugs that are CYP2C9 substrates. Especially for anticancer drugs, which have a narrow therapeutic window, small changes in their plasma levels could easily result in clinically relevant toxicities. METHODS: The effects of CAM on CYP2C9-mediated metabolism of MFC were assessed in Supersomes, using the fluorometric CYP2C9 inhibition assay. In human liver microsomes (HLM) the inhibition of CYP2C9-mediated metabolism of tolbutamide was determined, using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). KEY FINDINGS: The results indicated milk thistle as the most potent CYP2C9 inhibitor. For milk thistle, silybin (main constituent of milk thistle) was mainly responsible for the inhibition of CY2C9. CONCLUSIONS: Milk thistle and green tea were confirmed as potent inhibitors of CYP2C9-mediated metabolism of multiple substrates in vitro. Clinical studies with milk thistle are recommended to establish the clinical relevance of the demonstrated CYP2C9 inhibition.
Extrapancreatic action of sulfonylurea (SU) drugs were extensively summarized. Hypoglycemic SU drugs stimulate glycolytic pathway and inhibit gluconeogenic pathway in the liver through regulating key enzymes such as the bifunctional enzyme PFK2/F-2,6-P2ase and PEPCK. It is possible that SUs improve the primary defects in NIDDM through both pancreatic and extrapancreatic actions.
The pancreatic islet can be viewed as an integrator of nutrient, neural, and hormonal signals. In normal people, glucose directly stimulates insulin release and also plays a key role as a potentiator of nonglucose stimulants of the B-cells. In patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM), the direct effect of glucose on insulin secretion is markedly impaired. However, as hyperglycemia develops, basal insulin levels and insulin responses to nonglucose signals are maintained in many NIDD patients by the potentiating effect of hyperglycemia. Both acute and chronic administration of sulfonylurea drugs results in enhanced B-cell sensitivity to the potentiating effect of glucose. During sulfonylurea therapy this effect initially causes an increase in insulin level. However, as the glucose level falls during therapy the insulin level may tend to return toward pretreatment values, thereby masking the improvement of B-cell function. In NIDD patients with mild to moderate hyperglycemia (fasting plasma glucose less than 200 mg/dl), chronic sulfonylurea therapy results in the maintenance of near-normal insulin levels, but at a lower plasma glucose level. In patients with more severely impaired B-cell function, whose insulin levels before therapy are subnormal despite marked hyperglycemia, there is a net absolute increase in insulin levels during chronic sulfonylurea administration. Thus, some NIDD patients may show an increase in basal insulin levels during chronic sulfonylurea therapy while others may not; however, all patients who respond to sulfonylureas demonstrate increased B-cell sensitivity to glucose. Acute and chronic sulfonylurea treatment also results in a suppression of glucagon levels, an effect that may be secondary to the enhancement of B-cell function. The fall of plasma glucose during chronic sulfonylurea therapy is associated with a decrease in hepatic glucose production in NIDD patients. The magnitude of this effect is correlated with the degree of enhancement of basal insulin secretion. Thus, chronic sulfonylurea therapy clearly enhances pancreatic islet function in patients with NIDDM. We postulate that the major antihyperglycemic action of sulfonylurea therapy is mediated by this pancreatic effect.
The enzyme inducing effect of m-trifluoromethyl-alpha-ethylbenzhydrol (RGH-3332) has been studied in man, rat and mouse. In man, RGH-3332 decreased the half-life of antipyrine and tolbutamide and increased D-glucaric acid excretion. In rat and mouse the half-life of antipyrine was shortened. It was concluded that in all three species man, rat and mouse the liver microsomal drug metabolizing enzyme system was induced by RGH-3332. No side-effects were found on treatment with RGH-3332.
Two patients with psychogenic polydipsia developed hyponatraemia, one in association with administration of hydrochlorothiazide and the other with that of tolbutamide. It is suggested that the increased fluid intake in such patients may make them more susceptible to the development of hyponatraemia from thiazide or sulphonylurea compounds.
In an initial trial of glibenclamide in the treatment of maturity onset diabetes mellitus 28 patients were treated for up to one year and no toxic effects or side-effects were encountered. The hypoglycaemic potency of this drug is such that 5 mg. of glibenclamide corresponds to about 1,500 mg. of tolbutamide and 375 mg. of chlorpropamide.
To investigate the effect of fluorine substitution on tolbutamide (TB) hydroxylation catalyzed by CYP2C9, the hydroxylation of TB and its fluorinated derivative 3'-fluoro-tolbutamide (3'-F-TB) by recombinant human CYP2C9*1, CYP2C9*2, and CYP2C9*3 was analyzed. In general, fluorine substitution near the metabolic site may decrease enzymatic oxidation owing to its electron-withdrawing nature. Fluorine substitution reduced the Michaelis-Menten-derived K(m) of 4'-hydroxylation of TB catalyzed by CYP2C9*1 from 115 (TB) to 77 (3'-F-TB) microM. In the case of TB hydroxylation catalyzed by CYP2C9*2, the K(m) value of TB was also reduced by fluorine substitution from 129 to 88 microM. The greatest effect of fluorine substitution on the K(m) in TB hydroxylation was observed in the catalysis by CYP2C9*3, in which the K(m) value decreased from 287 to 117 microM. When a mixture containing TB and 3'-F-TB was hydroxylated by CYP2C9, the hydroxylated metabolite ratio in CYP2C9*3 was significantly increased compared with that in CYP2C9*1 and CYP2C9*2 (p < 0.01, Tukey-Kramer test). These results suggest that obtaining the metabolite profiles of fluorine-substituted analogs of the key substrate molecule may be useful as a new tool for phenotyping polymorphic CYP isoforms.
The incidence and risk factors of chlorpropamide-induced hyponatremia were assessed in diabetic outpatients. In 176 chlorpropamide-treated patients, 11 (6.3%) exhibited hyponatremia (serum sodium less than or equal to 129 meq/L) during the mean follow-up period of 7.4 yr. In contrast, only one (0.6%) developed hyponatremia in 162 tolbutamide- or glibenclamide-treated patients (P less than 0.005). Moreover, administration to elderly patients and combination with thiazide diuretics were regarded as significantly potent risk factors for the development of hyponatremia in patients receiving chlorpropamide.
Although possible on theoretical grounds, no interaction between cimetidine and tolbutamide could be demonstrated in ten healthy volunteers. The plasma tolbutamide concentrations over 12 h following 0.5 g orally were essentially the same before and after 1 and 7 days cimetidine (400 mg twice daily).
Suicide attempts using hypoglycemic agents are uncommon but are associated with a high level of morbidity and mortality. Their recognition is sometimes difficult and the duration of hypoglycemic effect is often prolonged. Two cases that illustrate the difficulties encountered in recognition and therapy are described. Effective therapy depends on adequate glucose supplementation to maintain euglycemia. Therapeutic intervention often must be maintained for several days. Glucocorticoids may be useful in difficult cases. Other modes of therapy, including glucagon, are unproven or controversial.
Normal subjects were given glucose (300 mg/ min) or tolbutamide (1 g, intravenously), alone and during intravenous infusions of norepi-nephrine (6 lg/ min). Immunoreactive insulin concentration was less than expected during the infusions of norepinephrine, but returned to higher values after the norepinephrine infusions. From these data it is concluded that norepinephrine inhibits the release of insulin from pancreatic beta cells.
