Often considered a rare disease, cardiac amyloidosis is increasingly recognized by practicing clinicians. The increased rate of diagnosis is in part due the aging of the population and increasing incidence and prevalence of cardiac amyloidosis with advancing age, as well as the advent of noninvasive methods using nuclear scintigraphy to diagnose transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis due to either variant or wild type transthyretin without a biopsy. Perhaps the most important driver of the increased awareness is the elucidation of the biologic mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of cardiac amyloidosis which have led to the development of several effective therapies with differing mechanisms of actions. In this review, the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of cardiac amyloidosis due to light chain (AL) or transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis are delineated as well as the rapidly evolving therapeutic landscape that has emerged from a better pathophysiologic understanding of disease development.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most important age-related neurodegenerative disorder in developed societies, after Alzheimer's disease, with a prevalence ranging from 41 per 100,000 in the fourth decade of life to over 1900 per 100,000 in people over 80 years of age. As a movement disorder, the PD phenotype is characterized by rigidity, resting tremor, and bradykinesia. Parkinson's disease -related neurodegeneration is likely to occur several decades before the onset of the motor symptoms. Potential risk factors include environmental toxins, drugs, pesticides, brain microtrauma, focal cerebrovascular damage, and genomic defects. Parkinson's disease neuropathology is characterized by a selective loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta, with widespread involvement of other central nervous system (CNS) structures and peripheral tissues. Pathogenic mechanisms associated with genomic, epigenetic and environmental factors lead to conformational changes and deposits of key proteins due to abnormalities in the ubiquitin-proteasome system together with dysregulation of mitochondrial function and oxidative stress. Conventional pharmacological treatments for PD are dopamine precursors (levodopa, l-DOPA, l-3,4 dihidroxifenilalanina), and other symptomatic treatments including dopamine agonists (amantadine, apomorphine, bromocriptine, cabergoline, lisuride, pergolide, pramipexole, ropinirole, rotigotine), monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors (selegiline, rasagiline), and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors (entacapone, tolcapone). The chronic administration of antiparkinsonian drugs currently induces the "wearing-off phenomenon", with additional psychomotor and autonomic complications. In order to minimize these clinical complications, novel compounds have been developed. Novel drugs and bioproducts for the treatment of PD should address dopaminergic neuroprotection to reduce premature neurodegeneration in addition to enhancing dopaminergic neurotransmission. Since biochemical changes and therapeutic outcomes are highly dependent upon the genomic profiles of PD patients, personalized treatments should rely on pharmacogenetic procedures to optimize therapeutics.
Inhibitors of monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) are major strategies to reduce levodopa degradation and thus to increase and prolong its effect in striatal dopaminergic neurotransmission in Parkinson's disease patients. While selegiline/rasagiline and tolcapone/entacapone have been available on the market for more than one decade, safinamide and opicapone have been approved in 2015 and 2016, respectively. Meanwhile, comprehensive data from several post-authorization studies have described the use and specific characteristics of the individual substances in clinical practice under real-life conditions. Here, we summarize current knowledge on both medication classes, with a focus on the added clinical value in Parkinson's disease. Furthermore, we outline practical considerations in the treatment of motor fluctuations and provide an outlook on ongoing studies with MAO-B and COMT inhibitors.
INTRODUCTION: Gambling disorder (GD) is a mental health condition characterized by persistent and problematic betting behavior. GD generates distress and impairment, and treatment options include psychological and pharmacological interventions. AREAS COVERED: This narrative review explores existing pharmacological treatments for GD. The following classes of medications were considered: opioid-receptor antagonists (e.g. naltrexone and nalmefene), serotonin reuptake inhibitors (e.g. fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, escitalopram, and citalopram), glutamatergic agents (e.g. N-acetylcysteine (NAC), acamprosate, and memantine), mood stabilizers (e.g. topiramate, carbamazepine, lithium), and other medications (e.g. modafinil, nefazodone, olanzapine, haloperidol, tolcapone, and bupropion). EXPERT OPINION: Due to the limitations of the studies reviewed, solid conclusions regarding the optimal choice of pharmacotherapy for individuals with GD are challenging to draw at this time. Despite some medications, such as naltrexone and nalmefene, showing promising results, efficacy has varied across studies. The review highlights current gaps/limitations, including small sample sizes, limited diversity in participant demographics, the need for exploring different gambling subtypes and treatment responses, high placebo response rates, lack of longer-term longitudinal information, limited investigation of neurobiological correlates and co-occurring disorders, and the importance of implementation research. Further research is needed to address these gaps and explore additional medications, as well as interventions like neuromodulation.
INTRODUCTION: Conventional antipsychotic drugs that attenuate dopaminergic neural transmission are ineffective in approximately one-third of patients with schizophrenia. This necessitates the development of non-dopaminergic agents. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted for completed phase II and III trials of compounds for schizophrenia treatment using the US Clinical Trials Registry and the EU Clinical Trials Register. Compounds demonstrating significant superiority over placebo in the primary outcome measure in the latest phase II and III trials were identified. Collateral information on the included compounds was gathered through manual searches in PubMed and press releases. RESULTS: Sixteen compounds were identified; four compounds (ulotaront, xanomeline/trospium chloride, vabicaserin, and roluperidone) were investigated as monotherapy and the remaining 12 (pimavanserin, bitopertin, BI 425809, encenicline, tropisetron, pregnenolone, D-serine, estradiol, tolcapone, valacyclovir, cannabidiol, and rimonabant) were examined as add-on therapy. Compared to the placebo, ulotaront, xanomeline/trospium chloride, vabicaserin, bitopertin, estradiol, cannabidiol, rimonabant, and D-serine showed efficacy for positive symptoms; roluperidone and pimavanserin were effective for negative symptoms; and encenicline, tropisetron, pregnenolone, tolcapone, BI 425809, and valacyclovir improved cognitive function. DISCUSSION: Compounds that function differently from existing antipsychotics may offer novel symptom-specific therapeutic strategies for patients with schizophrenia.
Catechol O‑methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors have been established in the treatment of Parkinson's disease for more than 20 years. They are considered the medication of choice for treating motor fluctuations. The available COMT inhibitors, entacapone, opicapone and tolcapone, differ pharmacokinetically in terms of their half-lives with implications for the dose frequency, in their indication requirements and in their spectrum of side effects, including diarrhea and yellow discoloration of urine. Many patients with motor fluctuations are currently not treated with COMT inhibitors and are, therefore, unlikely to receive individually optimized drug treatment. This manuscript summarizes the results of a working group including several Parkinson's disease experts, in which the value of COMT inhibitors was critically discussed.
Two catechol-O-methyl transferase inhibitors are currently used as add-on therapy to levodopa for the amelioration of end-of-dose motor fluctuations in Parkinson's disease patients: entacapone, which has moderate efficacy and requires multiple dosing, and tolcapone, which has a poor safety profile. Opicapone (OPC) is a novel, long-acting, peripherally selective, once daily, third-generation catechol-O-methyl transferase inhibitor. Two Phase III clinical trials demonstrated OPC efficacy in reducing OFF-time by an average of about 60 min daily compared with placebo, without increasing ON-time with troublesome dyskinesias, with a good drug safety profile. In June 2016, the European Commission granted a marketing authorization valid throughout the European Union for OPC, indicated as adjunctive of levodopa decarboxylase inhibitors in adult patients with Parkinson's disease and end-of-dose motor fluctuations.
The accumulation of mutant ataxin-3 (Atx3) in neuronal nuclear inclusions is a pathological hallmark of Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), also known as Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3. Decreasing the protein aggregation burden is a possible disease-modifying strategy to tackle MJD and other neurodegenerative disorders for which only symptomatic treatments are currently available. We performed a drug repurposing screening to identify inhibitors of Atx3 aggregation with known toxicological and pharmacokinetic profiles. Interestingly, dopamine hydrochloride and other catecholamines are among the most potent inhibitors of Atx3 aggregation in vitro. Our results indicate that low micromolar concentrations of dopamine markedly delay the formation of mature amyloid fibrils of mutant Atx3 through the inhibition of the earlier oligomerization steps. Although dopamine itself does not cross the blood-brain barrier, dopamine levels in the brain can be increased by low doses of dopamine precursors and dopamine agonists commonly used to treat Parkinsonian symptoms. In agreement, treatment with levodopa ameliorated motor symptoms in a C. elegans model of MJD. These findings suggest a possible application of dopaminergic drugs to halt or reduce Atx3 accumulation in the brains of MJD patients.
Despite advances in the treatment of PD, there remain significant unmet therapeutic needs. This is particularly true at the later stages of the disease when dopaminergic therapy is complicated by motor fluctuations and dyskinesias. Inhibition of dopamine metabolism is a valuable adjunct to exogenous dopaminergic replacement. Inhibitors of MAO-B have been used to treat early and advanced PD for a number of years. Although controversy remains, existing evidence still raises the possibility that MAO-B inhibition may confer a protective effect in PD, delaying the progression of the underlying pathology. More recently, clinically useful inhibitors of COMT have become available. These medications largely act peripherally to increase the pool of available dopamine precursor and prolong the duration of effect of L-dopa. They are indicated primarily for control of motor fluctuations.
During the initial stages of Parkinson's disease, treatment with levodopa plus a decarboxylase inhibitor (carbidopa or benserazide) provides adequate control of symptoms. However, as the disease progresses, the clinical response to treatment often begins to fluctuate, becoming increasingly correlated with fluctuations in plasma concentrations of levodopa-the "wearing-off" phenomenon. Many strategies have attempted, with various degrees of success, to increase the availability of levodopa and its active metabolites, thus reducing these fluctuations in response. This review focuses on the role of the new catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors tolcapone and entacapone as adjuncts to levodopa therapy. These agents act effectively and safely to increase the amount of levodopa that is available to enter the brain by extending the half-life of levodopa, resulting in more stable levels in the plasma and prolonging "on" time.
BACKGROUND: Despite increasing worldwide incidence of Parkinson's disease, the therapy is still suboptimal due to the diversified clinical manifestations, lack of sufficient treatment, the poor adherence in advanced patients, and varied response. Proper intake of medications regarding food and managing drug-food interactions may optimize Parkinson's disease treatment. OBJECTIVES: We investigated potential effects that food, beverages, and dietary supplements may have on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs used by parkinsonian patients; identified the most probable interactions; and shaped recommendations for the optimal intake of drugs regarding food. METHODS: We performed a systematic review in adherence to PRISMA guidelines, and included a total of 81 studies in the qualitative synthesis. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: We found evidence for levodopa positive interaction with coffee, fiber and vitamin C, as well as for the potential beneficial impact of low-fat and protein redistribution diet. Contrastingly, high-protein diet and ferrous sulfate supplements can negatively affect levodopa pharmacokinetics and effectiveness. For other drugs, the data of food impact are scarce. Based on the available limited evidence, all dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, cabergoline, ropinirole), tolcapone, rasagiline, selegiline in tablets, safinamide, amantadine and pimavanserin can be taken with or without a meal. Opicapone and orally disintegrating selegiline tablets should be administered on an empty stomach. Of monoamine oxidase B inhibitors, safinamide is the least susceptible for interaction with the tyramine-rich food, whereas selegiline and rasagiline may lose selectivity to monoamine oxidase B when administered in supratherapeutic doses. The level of presented evidence is low due to the poor studies design, their insufficient actuality, and missing data.
Entacapone is one of a new class of drugs, the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors, which expand the therapeutic options for Parkinson's disease by extending the action of levodopa. Entacapone is used in conjunction with levodopa and provides benefit to patients who suffer from motor fluctuations. Side effects include worsening of the dyskinesias associated with peak doses of levodopa, hypotension, constipation and urine discoloration. Unlike tolcapone, an earlier COMT inhibitor, entacapone does not require liver function monitoring.
Degradation of levodopa in the periphery is known to be associated with motor fluctuations and dyskinesia in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. The enzyme catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) is responsible for much of this degradation. Therefore, inhibiting COMT activity is one method of extending the action of levodopa. The new nitrocatechol-type COMT inhibitors entacapone, nitecapone, and tolcapone inhibit COMT in the periphery; tolcapone also inhibits COMT activity centrally. COMT inhibitors increase patients' duration of response to levodopa and reduce response fluctuations. Administration may prolong levodopa-induced dyskinesia, but peak-dose dyskinesia does not appear to increase. To reduce dyskinesia, the total daily dose of levodopa can be reduced.
INTRODUCTION: Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD) poses an ongoing significant global health burden. AUD is highly prevalent and affects not only the individuals with AUD, but also their communities and society at large. Even though pharmacotherapy is an integral part of AUD treatment, the few available substances show limited efficacy and limited clinical impact. Thus, there is a need for new innovative pharmacotherapeutic approaches. AREAS COVERED: This paper provides a comprehensive review of drugs approved for the treatment of AUD as well as those currently in phase II and III development. Data from recent clinical trials has been reviewed and supplemented by additional literature based on a systematic search of the PubMed database and clinical trials registries. Compounds discussed include disulfiram, naltrexone, nalmefene, acamprosat, baclofen, sodium oxybate, doxazosin, varenicline, zonisamide, gabapentin, apremilast, ibudilast, ivermectin, tolcapone, mifepristone, suvorexant, ketamine, psilocybin, semaglutide, oxytocin and cannabidiol. EXPERT OPINION: Even though the majority of the discussed compounds lack sufficient evidence to support their efficacy, multiple promising new treatment options are currently under investigation. Future research has to consider specific phenotypes and subgroups of AUD as well as a possible enhancement of the effects of psychotherapy through combination with pharmacotherapy. Practitioners should be encouraged to use available compounds to support existing therapeutic regimens.
There is increasing evidence that the left lateral frontal cortex is hierarchically organized such that higher-order regions have an asymmetric top-down influence over lower order regions. However, questions remain about the underlying neuroarchitecture of this hierarchical control organization. Within the frontal cortex, dopamine plays an important role in cognitive control functions, and we hypothesized that dopamine may preferentially influence top-down connections within the lateral frontal hierarchy. Using a randomized, double-blind, within-subject design, we analyzed resting-state fMRI data of 66 healthy young participants who were scanned once each after administration of bromocriptine (a dopamine agonist with preferential affinity for D2 receptor), tolcapone (an inhibitor of catechol-O-methyltransferase), and placebo, to determine whether dopaminergic stimulation modulated effective functional connectivity between hierarchically organized frontal regions in the left hemisphere. We found that dopaminergic drugs modulated connections from the caudal middle frontal gyrus and the inferior frontal sulcus to both rostral and caudal frontal areas. In dorsal frontal regions, effectivity connectivity strength was increased, whereas in ventral frontal regions, effective connectivity strength was decreased. These findings suggest that connections within frontal cortex are differentially modulated by dopamine, which may bias the influence that frontal regions exert over each other.
Transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR) is a group of fatal diseases described by the misfolding and amyloid deposition of transthyretin (TTR). Discovering small molecules that bind and stabilize the TTR tetramer, preventing its dissociation and subsequent aggregation, is a therapeutic strategy for these pathologies. Departing from the crystal structure of TTR in complex with tolcapone, a potent binder in clinical trials for ATTR, we combined rational design and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to generate a series of novel halogenated kinetic stabilizers. Among them, M-23 displays one of the highest affinities for TTR described so far. The TTR/M-23 crystal structure confirmed the formation of unprecedented protein-ligand contacts, as predicted by MD simulations, leading to an enhanced tetramer stability both in vitro and in whole serum. We demonstrate that MD-assisted design of TTR ligands constitutes a new avenue for discovering molecules that, like M-23, hold the potential to become highly potent drugs to treat ATTR.
Although levodopa remains the gold standard treatment for Parkinson's disease, many patients develop motor complications with chronic levodopa exposure. Tolcapone is a catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitor that extends the action of levodopa. When used in conjunction with levodopa, tolcapone has been shown to be effective in improving motor fluctuations and reducing levodopa requirements in Parkinson's disease patients. However, rare reports of severe hepatotoxicity have limited its use. A recent review of the data on tolcapone-treated patients suggests that, with proper monitoring of liver function, the potential for hepatotoxicity with tolcapone use is negligibly small.
PURPOSE: Tolcapone is an efficacious catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitor for Parkinson's disease (PD). However, safety issues hampered its use in clinical practice. We aimed to provide evidence of safety and efficacy of tolcapone by a systematic literature review to support clinicians' choices in the use of an enlarging PD therapeutic armamentarium. METHODS: We searched PubMed for studies on PD patients treated with tolcapone, documenting the following outcomes: liver enzyme, adverse events (AEs), daily Off-time, levodopa daily dose, unified Parkinson's disease rating scale (UPDRS) part-III, quality of life (QoL), and non-motor symptoms. FAERS and EudraVigilance databases for suspected AEs were interrogated for potential additional cases of hepatotoxicity. RESULTS: Thirty-two studies were included, for a total of 4780 patients treated with tolcapone. Pertaining safety, 0.9% of patients showed liver enzyme elevation > 2. Over 23 years, we found 7 cases of severe liver injury related to tolcapone, 3 of which were fatal. All fatal cases did not follow the guidelines for liver function monitoring. FAERS and EudraVigilance database search yielded 61 reports of suspected liver AEs possibly related to tolcapone. Pertaining efficacy, the median reduction of hours/day spent in Off was 2.1 (range 1-3.2), of levodopa was 108.9 mg (1-251.5), of "On" UPDRS-III was 3.6 points (1.1-6.5). Most studies reported a significant improvement of QoL and non-motor symptoms. CONCLUSION: Literature data showed the absence of relevant safety concerns of tolcapone when strict adherence to hepatic function monitoring is respected. Given its high efficacy on motor fluctuations, tolcapone is probably an underutilized tool in the therapeutic PD armamentarium.
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors are a new therapeutic option in the treatment of patients with Parkinson's disease. COMT inhibitors act by extending the duration of action of levodopa, thus improving the amount of time a patient can experience benefit from levodopa. COMT inhibitors are only used in conjunction with levodopa. They do have a propensity to augment dopaminergic effects, such that levodopa doses might need to be adjusted downward. Other side effects of COMT inhibitors include diarrhea and liver function abnormalities. Due to the latter, recent guidelines have been developed to monitor patients on tolcapone for this rare side effect, and these guidelines will be discussed. This article also provides representative case histories for the appropriate use of COMT inhibitors that illustrate how these drugs can be used to manage patients with a fluctuating response to levodopa.
Transthyretin (TTR) is a homotetrameric protein involved in human amyloidosis, including familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP). Discovering small-molecule stabilizers of the TTR tetramer is a therapeutic strategy for these diseases. Tafamidis, the only approved drug for FAP treatment, is not effective for all patients. Herein, we discovered that benzbromarone (BBM), a uricosuric drug, is an effective TTR stabilizer and inhibitor against TTR amyloid fibril formation. BBM rendered TTR more resistant to urea denaturation, similarly to iododiflunisal (IDIF), a very potent TTR stabilizer. BBM competes with thyroxine for binding in the TTR central channel, with an IC(50) similar to IDIF and tafamidis. Results obtained by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) demonstrated that BBM binds TTR with an affinity similar to IDIF, tolcapone and tafamidis, confirming BBM as a potent binder of TTR. The crystal structure of the BBM-TTR complex shows two molecules binding deeply in the thyroxine binding channel, forming strong intermonomer hydrogen bonds and increasing the stability of the TTR tetramer. Finally, kinetic analysis of the ability of BBM to inhibit TTR fibrillogenesis at acidic pH and comparison with other stabilizers revealed that benzbromarone is a potent inhibitor of TTR amyloidogenesis, adding a new interesting scaffold for drug design of TTR stabilizers.
