IMPORTANCE: Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), defined as HF with an EF of 50% or higher at diagnosis, affects approximately 3 million people in the US and up to 32 million people worldwide. Patients with HFpEF are hospitalized approximately 1.4 times per year and have an annual mortality rate of approximately 15%. OBSERVATIONS: Risk factors for HFpEF include older age, hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia, and obesity. Approximately 65% of patients with HFpEF present with dyspnea and physical examination, chest radiographic, echocardiographic, or invasive hemodynamic evidence of HF with overt congestion (volume overload) at rest. Approximately 35% of patients with HFpEF present with "unexplained" dyspnea on exertion, meaning they do not have clear physical, radiographic, or echocardiographic signs of HF. These patients have elevated atrial pressures with exercise as measured with invasive hemodynamic stress testing or estimated with Doppler echocardiography stress testing. In unselected patients presenting with unexplained dyspnea, the H2FPEF score incorporating clinical (age, hypertension, obesity, atrial fibrillation status) and resting Doppler echocardiographic (estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure or left atrial pressure) variables can assist with diagnosis (H2FPEF score range, 0-9; score >5 indicates more than 95% probability of HFpEF). Specific causes of the clinical syndrome of HF with normal EF other than HFpEF should be identified and treated, such as valvular, infiltrative, or pericardial disease. First-line pharmacologic therapy consists of sodium-glucose cotransporter type 2 inhibitors, such as dapagliflozin or empagliflozin, which reduced HF hospitalization or cardiovascular death by approximately 20% compared with placebo in randomized clinical trials. Compared with usual care, exercise training and diet-induced weight loss produced clinically meaningful increases in functional capacity and quality of life in randomized clinical trials. Diuretics (typically loop diuretics, such as furosemide or torsemide) should be prescribed to patients with overt congestion to improve symptoms. Education in HF self-care (eg, adherence to medications and dietary restrictions, monitoring of symptoms and vital signs) can help avoid HF decompensation. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Approximately 3 million people in the US have HFpEF. First-line therapy consists of sodium-glucose cotransporter type 2 inhibitors, exercise, HF self-care, loop diuretics as needed to maintain euvolemia, and weight loss for patients with obesity and HFpEF.
The field of diuretic therapy has witnessed significant advancements over the decades. Loop diuretics and other diuretic agents are crucial in the management of various conditions characterized by fluid overload. Torsemide, a loop diuretic agent, has unique pharmacological properties, safety profiles, and varied clinical applications. This special journal supplement aims to provide a comprehensive examination of torsemide, highlighting its role in contemporary medical practice.
IMPORTANCE: Systemic amyloidosis from transthyretin (ATTR) protein is the most common type of amyloidosis that causes cardiomyopathy. OBSERVATIONS: Transthyretin (TTR) protein transports thyroxine (thyroid hormone) and retinol (vitamin A) and is synthesized predominantly by the liver. When the TTR protein misfolds, it can form amyloid fibrils that deposit in the heart causing heart failure, heart conduction block, or arrhythmia such as atrial fibrillation. The biological processes by which amyloid fibrils form are incompletely understood but are associated with aging and, in some patients, affected by inherited variants in the TTR genetic sequence. ATTR amyloidosis results from misfolded TTR protein deposition. ATTR can occur in association with normal TTR genetic sequence (wild-type ATTR) or with abnormal TTR genetic sequence (variant ATTR). Wild-type ATTR primarily manifests as cardiomyopathy while ATTR due to a genetic variant manifests as cardiomyopathy and/or polyneuropathy. Approximately 50 000 to 150 000 people in the US have heart failure due to ATTR amyloidosis. Without treatment, heart failure due to ATTR amyloidosis is associated with a median survival of approximately 5 years. More than 130 different inherited genetic variants in TTR exist. The most common genetic variant is Val122Ile (pV142I), an allele with an origin in West African countries, that is present in 3.4% of African American individuals in the US or approximately 1.5 million persons. The diagnosis can be made using serum free light chain assay and immunofixation electrophoresis to exclude light chain amyloidosis combined with cardiac nuclear scintigraphy to detect radiotracer uptake in a pattern consistent with amyloidosis. Loop diuretics, such as furosemide, torsemide, and bumetanide, are the primary treatment for fluid overload and symptomatic relief of patients with ATTR heart failure. An ATTR-directed therapy that inhibited misfolding of the TTR protein (tafamidis, a protein stabilizer), compared with placebo, reduced mortality from 42.9% to 29.5%, reduced hospitalizations from 0.7/year to 0.48/year, and was most effective when administered early in disease course. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: ATTR amyloidosis causes cardiomyopathy in up to approximately 150 000 people in the US and tafamidis is the only currently approved therapy. Tafamidis slowed progression of ATTR amyloidosis and improved survival and prevented hospitalization, compared with placebo, in people with ATTR-associated cardiomyopathy.
IMPORTANCE: Although furosemide is the most commonly used loop diuretic in patients with heart failure, some studies suggest a potential benefit for torsemide. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether torsemide results in decreased mortality compared with furosemide among patients hospitalized for heart failure. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: TRANSFORM-HF was an open-label, pragmatic randomized trial that recruited 2859 participants hospitalized with heart failure (regardless of ejection fraction) at 60 hospitals in the United States. Recruitment occurred from June 2018 through March 2022, with follow-up through 30 months for death and 12 months for hospitalizations. The final date for follow-up data collection was July 2022. INTERVENTIONS: Loop diuretic strategy of torsemide (n = 1431) or furosemide (n = 1428) with investigator-selected dosage. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was all-cause mortality in a time-to-event analysis. There were 5 secondary outcomes with all-cause mortality or all-cause hospitalization and total hospitalizations assessed over 12 months being highest in the hierarchy. The prespecified primary hypothesis was that torsemide would reduce all-cause mortality by 20% compared with furosemide. RESULTS: TRANSFORM-HF randomized 2859 participants with a median age of 65 years (IQR, 56-75), 36.9% were women, and 33.9% were Black. Over a median follow-up of 17.4 months, a total of 113 patients (53 [3.7%] in the torsemide group and 60 [4.2%] in the furosemide group) withdrew consent from the trial prior to completion. Death occurred in 373 of 1431 patients (26.1%) in the torsemide group and 374 of 1428 patients (26.2%) in the furosemide group (hazard ratio, 1.02 [95% CI, 0.89-1.18]). Over 12 months following randomization, all-cause mortality or all-cause hospitalization occurred in 677 patients (47.3%) in the torsemide group and 704 patients (49.3%) in the furosemide group (hazard ratio, 0.92 [95% CI, 0.83-1.02]). There were 940 total hospitalizations among 536 participants in the torsemide group and 987 total hospitalizations among 577 participants in the furosemide group (rate ratio, 0.94 [95% CI, 0.84-1.07]). Results were similar across prespecified subgroups, including among patients with reduced, mildly reduced, or preserved ejection fraction. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients discharged after hospitalization for heart failure, torsemide compared with furosemide did not result in a significant difference in all-cause mortality over 12 months. However, interpretation of these findings is limited by loss to follow-up and participant crossover and nonadherence. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03296813.
Diuretic resistance implies a failure to increase fluid and sodium (Na(+)) output sufficiently to relieve volume overload, edema, or congestion, despite escalating doses of a loop diuretic to a ceiling level (80 mg of furosemide once or twice daily or greater in those with reduced glomerular filtration rate or heart failure). It is a major cause of recurrent hospitalizations in patients with chronic heart failure and predicts death but is difficult to diagnose unequivocally. Pharmacokinetic mechanisms include the low and variable bioavailability of furosemide and the short duration of all loop diuretics that provides time for the kidneys to restore diuretic-induced Na(+) losses between doses. Pathophysiological mechanisms of diuretic resistance include an inappropriately high daily salt intake that exceeds the acute diuretic-induced salt loss, hyponatremia or hypokalemic, hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis, and reflex activation of the renal nerves. Nephron mechanisms include tubular tolerance that can develop even during the time that the renal tubules are exposed to a single dose of diuretic, or enhanced reabsorption in the proximal tubule that limits delivery to the loop, or an adaptive increase in reabsorption in the downstream distal tubule and collecting ducts that offsets ongoing blockade of Na(+) reabsorption in the loop of Henle. These provide rationales for novel strategies including the concurrent use of diuretics that block these nephron segments and even sequential nephron blockade with multiple diuretics and aquaretics combined in severely diuretic-resistant patients with heart failure.
As we continue to advance in the field of medicine, the role of loop diuretics remains crucial in the management of a wide range of conditions associated with fluid retention. The introduction of torsemide has brought a new dimension to diuretic therapy, offering unique benefits that distinguish it from its counterparts.
Loop diuretics, including torsemide, furosemide, bumetanide, and piretanide, act by inhibiting the sodium-potassium-chloride (Na(+)/K(+)/2Cl(-)) cotransporter in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle within the nephron. This mechanism is pivotal in managing fluid retention associated with conditions such as heart failure, cirrhosis, chronic kidney disease, and hypertension. A comprehensive understanding of how these diuretics uniquely target this transporter provides crucial insights into effectively addressing fluid overload across diverse clinical conditions.
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) represents one of the greatest unmet needs in medicine. In the EMPEROR-Preserved trial, recently reported in the NEJM, the SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin reduced the primary outcome of heart failure hospitalizations and cardiovascular death by 21% in patients with HFpEF. This represents an important breakthrough in the war against heart failure.
Pulmonary edema, either cardiogenic or noncardiogenic, is caused by fluid accumulation in the alveolar spaces. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema (CPE), one of the causes of congestive heart failure (CHF), is treated with loop diuretics. Torsemide and furosemide were found to be useful in the treatment of CHF-associated pulmonary edema due to their ability to lower pulmonary capillary pressure and left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, respectively. Pharmacological features of torsemide, such as greater bioavailability, higher absorption rate, and efficacy, make it a better alternative for treating pulmonary edema than the regularly used loop diuretic, furosemide. Torsemide administered intravenously was found to be both efficacious and well tolerated in CPE. However, more research is needed to determine its usefulness in non-CPE.
Although torsemide's oral bioavailability and half-life theoretically render it a more efficient diuretic than furosemide, the clinical outcomes of torsemide compared with furosemide remain unclear. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis, including all published studies that compared torsemide and furosemide use in heart failure patients from January 1996 through August 2019. Nineteen studies (9 randomized control trials [RCTs] and 10 observational studies) with a total of 19,280 patients were included. During a mean follow-up duration of 15 months, torsemide was associated with a numerically lower risk of hospitalization due to heart failure (10.6% vs 18.4%; odds ratio [OR] 0.72, 95% confidence interval [CI] [0.51, 1.03], p = 0.07, I(2) = 18%; number needed to treat [NNT] = 23) compared with furosemide. Torsemide was associated with statistically significant more improvement in functional status from New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III/IV to I/II (72.5% vs 58%; OR 2.32, 95% CI (1.32, 4.1), p = 0.004, I(2) = 27%; NNT = 5) and lower risk of cardiac mortality (1.5% vs 4.4%; OR 0.37, 95% CI (0.20, 0.66), p <0.001, I(2) = 0%, NNT = 40) compared with furosemide. However, there was no difference in all-cause mortality or medication side effects between the 2 groups. In conclusion, compared with furosemide, torsemide use was associated with significant more improvement in functional status and lower cardiac mortality; and numerically fewer hospitalizations in patients with heart failure.
Torsemide, a loop diuretic, is increasingly recognized for its role in managing essential hypertension. Its mechanism of action involves inhibiting the reabsorption of sodium and chloride ions in the ascending loop of Henle in the kidneys. By doing so, torsemide promotes diuresis, which refers to increased urine production, and subsequently lowers blood pressure. Studies have shown that torsemide is comparably effective to other antihypertensive agents in lowering blood pressure, with the added benefit of potentially improving renal function. However, while torsemide shows promise in hypertensive management, further research is necessary to fully understand its long-term effects and to establish optimal dosing strategies. Future research should focus on clarifying its role in long-term blood pressure control and refining its use in clinical practice to maximize efficacy and minimize adverse effects.
Diabetes and hypertension have a higher than expected comorbidity. They share common etiology, pathophysiology, and organ effects. Long-term therapeutic goals are to prevent renal failure and atherosclerosis. Management should inhibit pathophysiologic mechanisms and avoid stimulating them. The most appropriate pharmacologic agents to treat hypertension in the diabetic are ACE inhibitors, selected calcium channel blockers, alpha adrenengic blockers, and certain central alpha agonists. The only diuretics that should be used are indapamide and torsemide.
Torsemide is a loop diuretic used to manage edema associated with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and acute kidney injury (AKI). It acts by inhibiting sodium and chloride ions reabsorption in the ascending limb of the loop of Henle, thereby increasing urine output and reducing fluid accumulation. Compared to other diuretics, torsemide has an extended duration of action, higher bioavailability, and its elimination route is primarily through the hepatic route, making it effective in patients with CKD and AKI. Clinical studies indicate that torsemide can improve symptoms of fluid overload and potentially enhance renal function.
From a clinicopharmacological standpoint, the urinary excretory potency of diuretics should be assessed comparatively on the basis of the changes in 24-hour natriuresis, with respect to 24-hour natriuresis after placebo, caused by single oral doses administered to healthy adult subjects who are in habitual and steady-state external sodium balance. The potency of various formulations of loop (e.g., furosemide), of early distal tubular (e.g., the thiazides), and of potassium-retaining diuretics, as well as of several combinations of diuretics, has been evaluated in a series of studies. Two formulations of loop diuretics (muzolimine 20 mg and torasemide 2.5 mg) are definitely nondiuretic. The majority of the other formulations of loop diuretics studied are, in general, comparatively less potent than most of the common formulations of early distal tubular diuretics studied. As a general rule, most common formulations of early distal tubular diuretics are at least not less potent than the majority of common formulations of loop diuretics. Hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg and furosemide 80 mg have similar potencies. Loop diuretics increase mean renal sodium output strikingly within the first few (0-6) hours after dosing, but this forced excretion is followed by a rebound with respect to postplacebo mean urinary sodium flow; the rebound usually takes place between 6 and 24 hours after dosing. However, no rebound in mean urinary sodium flow occurs during the 24 hours following a single dose of a distal tubular diuretic; these substances increase urinary sodium excretion with lower maximal intensity but more protractedly than loop diuretics.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Diuretics have an essential role in the management of heart failure (HF). However, each drug has its own benefit and side effect. Side effects include fluid, electrolyte abnormalities, and acid-base disturbance. These adverse effects of diuretics predispose patients to serious cardiac arrhythmias and may increase the risk of arrhythmic mortality. Herein, we aim to summarize the relative efficacy and safety of all available diuretics used in the treatment of patients with HF. In June 2017, a systematic electronic database search was conducted in nine databases. All randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing the different diuretics used in HF were included for meta-analysis. The protocol was registered in Prospero with CRD42018084819. Among the included 54 studies (10,740 patients), 34 RCTs were eligible for quantitative network meta-analysis (NMA) and traditional meta-analysis while the other 20 studies were qualitatively analyzed. Our results showed that azosemide and torasemide caused a significant reduction in brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level. Torasemide also caused a significant decrease in collagen volume fraction (CVF) and edema. No significant difference between the agents concerning glomerular filtration rate (GFR), water extraction, and sodium excretion was demonstrated. Regarding side effects, no significant difference among diuretics was observed in terms of hospital readmission and mortality rates. Diuretics are the main treatment of hypervolemia in HF patients. The choice of appropriate diuretic is essential for successful management and is mainly guided by patient clinical situations and the presence of other co-morbidities.
In the last years, major progress occurred in heart failure (HF) management. Quadruple therapy is now mandatory for all the patients with HF with reduced ejection fraction. Whilst verciguat is becoming available across several countries, omecamtiv mecarbil is waiting to be released for clinical use. Concurrent use of potassium-lowering agents may counteract hyperkalaemia and facilitate renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitor implementations. The results of the EMPagliflozin outcomE tRial in Patients With chrOnic heaRt Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction (EMPEROR-Preserved) trial were confirmed by the Dapagliflozin in Heart Failure with Mildly Reduced or Preserved Ejection Fraction (DELIVER) trial, and we now have, for the first time, evidence for treatment of also patients with HF with preserved ejection fraction. In a pre-specified meta-analysis of major randomized controlled trials, sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors reduced all-cause mortality, cardiovascular (CV) mortality, and HF hospitalization in the patients with HF regardless of left ventricular ejection fraction. Other steps forward have occurred in the treatment of decompensated HF. Acetazolamide in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure with Volume Overload (ADVOR) trial showed that the addition of intravenous acetazolamide to loop diuretics leads to greater decongestion vs. placebo. The addition of hydrochlorothiazide to loop diuretics was evaluated in the CLOROTIC trial. Torasemide did not change outcomes, compared with furosemide, in TRANSFORM-HF. Ferric derisomaltose had an effect on the primary outcome of CV mortality or HF rehospitalizations in IRONMAN (rate ratio 0.82; 95% confidence interval 0.66-1.02; P = 0.070). Further options for the treatment of HF, including device therapies, cardiac contractility modulation, and percutaneous treatment of valvulopathies, are summarized in this article.
Death, as a biological phenomenon, is well understood and a commonly employed endpoint for clinical trials. However, death identification and adjudication may be difficult for pragmatic clinical trials (PCT) that rely upon electronic health record and patient reported data. We propose a novel death identification and verification approach that is being used in the ToRsemide compArisoN with furoSemide FOR Management of Heart Failure (TRANSFORM-HF) PCT. We describe our hybrid approach that includes gathering information from clinical trial sites, a centralized call center, and National Death Index searches. Our methods detail how a possible death is triggered from each of these components and the types of information we require to verify a triggered death. Our different trigger/verification elements collectively define the TRANSFORM-HF PCT's definition of a death event.
Prospective studies have emphasized the key role for diuretics in the treatment of high blood pressure. Short-acting loop diuretics have not achieved the same acceptance as the thiazides in treatment of hypertension. Newer long-acting compounds, however, such as torasemide, have now been found to be as efficacious as the thiazides, particularly as they can be given once daily and have a low side-effect profile. Adverse laboratory side-effects are rare in hypertensive patients treated with torasemide; carbohydrate intolerance, dyslipidaemia, or hypokalaemia have seldom been observed during its long-term administration. For these reasons, torasemide is therapeutically attractive due to its antihypertensive efficacy with once-daily administration, low incidence of adverse side-effects, and sustained improvement of the cardiovascular risk profile.
Torasemide is a new loop diuretic that differs from others in this class in that only 20% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine with the remaining 80% being eliminated by hepatic metabolism. The large component of nonrenal clearance would predict that torasemide would have only minimal accumulation and prolongation of half-life in patients with renal insufficiency, and this proves to be the case. In contrast, in patients with liver disease, impairment of hepatic elimination causes accumulation of torasemide in plasma with prolongation of half-life. In addition, in cirrhosis, there is increased elimination of unchanged drug into the urine compared to healthy controls. In patients with renal insufficiency, response to remaining nephrons is normal as has been observed with other loop diuretics. In patients with cirrhosis and in those with congestive heart failure, response is diminished, again as has been observed with other loop diuretics. Interestingly, in patients with cirrhosis, the increased delivery of drug into the urine is sufficient to compensate for the decreased pharmacodynamics of response so that overall response is similar to that which occurs in health subjects.
Loop diuretics take the lead in the treatment of patients with symptomatic heart failure. Torasemide is the most effective and safe loop diuretic with the optimal pharmacokinetic profile, the additional properties associated with simultaneous blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and with the antiadrenergic effects of the drug, its positive impact on myocardial fibrosis and minimal severe potential negative effects. Sustained-release torasemide provides a more comfortable removal of excess liquid and does not deteriorate quality of life.
