Sedative antidepressants are commonly used drugs in the treatment of insomnia. However, some recommendations claim that only hypnotics have been proven effective in the treatment of sleep initiation and maintenance disorders. The aim of this article is to compare the effect of hypnotics and trazodone on sleep, and to analyse the evidence for the use of trazodone in the treatment of insomnia. Three studies investigated the effects of trazodone on sleep in primary insomnia, 5 studies on insomnia in the course of affective disorders and 6 studies on insomnia in other indications (PTSD, Alzheimer's disease, alcohol and opiate dependence, somatoform disorder, and insomnia during pregnancy). In the treatment of insomnia, trazodone is less effective than hypnotics in the treatment of sleep onset insomnia (i.e., disorders of falling asleep). For this indication it needs to be administered earlier than hypnotics, at least 1 hour before bedtime. It is, however, very effective in the treatment of sleep-maintenance insomnia, especially in patients with comorbid mental disorders or patients treated with activating antidepressants. Hypnotics and trazodone have the opposite effect on deep sleep. Trazodone increases the duration of deep sleep, which is associated with better sleep quality as assessed by patients. In contrast, hypnotics decrease slow-wave activityin sleep EEG, which is the biomarker of deep sleep. The main mechanism through which trazodone promotes sleep is its antagonistic effect on 5-HT2 serotonin receptors, while hypnotics are agonists of gamma-aminobutyric acid GABAA receptors, and other sedative antidepressants block H1 histamine receptors. This is associated with a low risk of weight gain, which is rare with trazodone treatment.
Trazodone is an antidepressant that is FDA-approved for the treatment of depression. It has been used by mental health and primary care providers for the treatment of multiple psychiatric and medical conditions .This review describes trazodone mechanism of action, formulation, dosage and adverse effects and then summarizes the beneficial effects of trazodone in the treatment of various psychiatric and medical conditions such as major depression, as well non-approved FDA indications such as insomnia,anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, feeding and eating disorders, substance use disorders, behavioral disturbances associated with cognitive dysfunction, sexual dysfunction, certain pain conditions, and rehabilitation after acute ischemic stroke. Despite trazodone's favorable effects in the treatment of FDA-unapproved psychiatric and medical conditions, large, randomized controlled clinical trials are still needed to confirm its efficacy in the treatment of the multiple conditions for which it is often used in clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: Insomnia disorder is a subjective condition of unsatisfactory sleep (e.g. sleep onset, maintenance, early waking, impairment of daytime functioning). Insomnia disorder impairs quality of life and is associated with an increased risk of physical and mental health problems including anxiety, depression, drug and alcohol abuse, and increased health service use. hypnotic medications (e.g. benzodiazepines and 'Z' drugs) are licensed for sleep promotion, but can induce tolerance and dependence, although many people remain on long-term treatment. Antidepressant use for insomnia is widespread, but none is licensed for insomnia and the evidence for their efficacy is unclear. This use of unlicensed medications may be driven by concern over longer-term use of hypnotics and the limited availability of psychological treatments. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness, safety and tolerability of antidepressants for insomnia in adults. SEARCH METHODS: This review incorporated the results of searches to July 2015 conducted on electronic bibliographic databases: the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL, 2015, Issue 6), MEDLINE (1950 to 2015), Embase (1980 to 2015) and PsycINFO (1806 to 2015). We updated the searches to December 2017, but these results have not yet been incorporated into the review. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of adults (aged 18 years or older) with a primary diagnosis of insomnia and all participant types including people with comorbidities. Any antidepressant as monotherapy at any dose whether compared with placebo, other medications for insomnia (e.g. benzodiazepines and 'Z' drugs), a different antidepressant, waiting list control or treatment as usual. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trials for eligibility and extracted data using a data extraction form. A third review author resolved disagreements on inclusion or data extraction. MAIN RESULTS: The search identified 23 RCTs (2806 participants).Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) compared with placebo: three studies (135 participants) compared SSRIs with placebo. Combining results was not possible. Two paroxetine studies showed significant improvements in subjective sleep measures at six (60 participants, P = 0.03) and 12 weeks (27 participants, P < 0.001). There was no difference in the fluoxetine study (low quality evidence).There were either no adverse events or they were not reported (very low quality evidence).Tricyclic antidepressants (TCA) compared with placebo: six studies (812 participants) compared TCA with placebo; five used doxepin and one used trimipramine. We found no studies of amitriptyline. Four studies (518 participants) could be pooled, showing a moderate improvement in subjective sleep quality over placebo (standardised mean difference (SMD) -0.39, 95% confidence interval (CI) -0.56 to -0.21) (moderate quality evidence). Moderate quality evidence suggested that TCAs possibly improved sleep efficiency (mean difference (MD) 6.29 percentage points, 95% CI 3.17 to 9.41; 4 studies; 510 participants) and increased sleep time (MD 22.88 minutes, 95% CI 13.17 to 32.59; 4 studies; 510 participants). There may have been little or no impact on sleep latency (MD -4.27 minutes, 95% CI -9.01 to 0.48; 4 studies; 510 participants).There may have been little or no difference in adverse events between TCAs and placebo (risk ratio (RR) 1.02, 95% CI 0.86 to 1.21; 6 studies; 812 participants) (low quality evidence).'Other' antidepressants with placebo: eight studies compared other antidepressants with placebo (one used mianserin and seven used trazodone). Three studies (370 participants) of trazodone could be pooled, indicating a moderate improvement in subjective sleep outcomes over placebo (SMD -0.34, 95% CI -0.66 to -0.02). Two studies of trazodone measured polysomnography and found little or no difference in sleep efficiency (MD 1.38 percentage points, 95% CI -2.87 to 5.63; 169 participants) (low quality evidence).There was low quality evidence from two studies of more adverse effects with trazodone than placebo (i.e. morning grogginess, increased dry mouth and thirst). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We identified relatively few, mostly small studies with short-term follow-up and design limitations. The effects of SSRIs compared with placebo are uncertain with too few studies to draw clear conclusions. There may be a small improvement in sleep quality with short-term use of low-dose doxepin and trazodone compared with placebo. The tolerability and safety of antidepressants for insomnia is uncertain due to limited reporting of adverse events. There was no evidence for amitriptyline (despite common use in clinical practice) or for long-term antidepressant use for insomnia. High-quality trials of antidepressants for insomnia are needed.
Antidepressants can cause a variety of withdrawal reactions, starting within a few days to a few weeks of ceasing the drug and persisting for days to weeks. Both tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors cause similar syndromes, most commonly characterized by gastrointestinal or somatic distress, sleep disturbances, mood fluctuations and movement disorders. Most symptoms related to tricyclic antidepressant withdrawal are believed to be caused by rebound excess of cholinergic activity after prolonged anticholinergic effect on cholinergic receptors. (This situation is analogous to the adrenergic rebound that occurs after beta-blocker withdrawal.) Treatment involves restarting the antidepressant and tapering it more slowly. Alternatively, tricyclic antidepressant withdrawal symptoms often respond to anticholinergics, such as atropine or benztropine mesylate. Three case reports of antidepressant withdrawal are presented, including one featuring akathisia (motor restlessness) related to withdrawal of venlafaxine.
We present a 41 years old male, treated with trazodone because of depression. He was seen at our Andrology unit for a 72 hours evolutioned priapism. We review the literature and submit this paper for publication because it is an uncommon pathology.
BACKGROUND: Sleep disturbances, including reduced nocturnal sleep time, sleep fragmentation, nocturnal wandering, and daytime sleepiness are common clinical problems in dementia, and are associated with significant carer distress, increased healthcare costs, and institutionalisation. Although non-drug interventions are recommended as the first-line approach to managing these problems, drug treatment is often sought and used. However, there is significant uncertainty about the efficacy and adverse effects of the various hypnotic drugs in this clinically vulnerable population. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects, including common adverse effects, of any drug treatment versus placebo for sleep disorders in people with dementia. SEARCH METHODS: We searched ALOIS (www.medicine.ox.ac.uk/alois), the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group's Specialized Register, on 19 February 2020, using the terms: sleep, insomnia, circadian, hypersomnia, parasomnia, somnolence, rest-activity, and sundowning. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that compared a drug with placebo, and that had the primary aim of improving sleep in people with dementia who had an identified sleep disturbance at baseline. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted data on study design, risk of bias, and results. We used the mean difference (MD) or risk ratio (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) as the measures of treatment effect, and where possible, synthesised results using a fixed-effect model. Key outcomes to be included in our summary tables were chosen with the help of a panel of carers. We used GRADE methods to rate the certainty of the evidence. MAIN RESULTS: We found nine eligible RCTs investigating: melatonin (5 studies, n = 222, five studies, but only two yielded data on our primary sleep outcomes suitable for meta-analysis), the sedative antidepressant trazodone (1 study, n = 30), the melatonin-receptor agonist ramelteon (1 study, n = 74, no peer-reviewed publication), and the orexin antagonists suvorexant and lemborexant (2 studies, n = 323). Participants in the trazodone study and most participants in the melatonin studies had moderate-to-severe dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (AD); those in the ramelteon study and the orexin antagonist studies had mild-to-moderate AD. Participants had a variety of common sleep problems at baseline. Primary sleep outcomes were measured using actigraphy or polysomnography. In one study, melatonin treatment was combined with light therapy. Only four studies systematically assessed adverse effects. Overall, we considered the studies to be at low or unclear risk of bias. We found low-certainty evidence that melatonin doses up to 10 mg may have little or no effect on any major sleep outcome over eight to 10 weeks in people with AD and sleep disturbances. We could synthesise data for two of our primary sleep outcomes: total nocturnal sleep time (TNST) (MD 10.68 minutes, 95% CI -16.22 to 37.59; 2 studies, n = 184), and the ratio of day-time to night-time sleep (MD -0.13, 95% CI -0.29 to 0.03; 2 studies; n = 184). From single studies, we found no evidence of an effect of melatonin on sleep efficiency, time awake after sleep onset, number of night-time awakenings, or mean duration of sleep bouts. There were no serious adverse effects of melatonin reported. We found low-certainty evidence that trazodone 50 mg for two weeks may improve TNST (MD 42.46 minutes, 95% CI 0.9 to 84.0; 1 study, n = 30), and sleep efficiency (MD 8.53%, 95% CI 1.9 to 15.1; 1 study, n = 30) in people with moderate-to-severe AD. The effect on time awake after sleep onset was uncertain due to very serious imprecision (MD -20.41 minutes, 95% CI -60.4 to 19.6; 1 study, n = 30). There may be little or no effect on number of night-time awakenings (MD -3.71, 95% CI -8.2 to 0.8; 1 study, n = 30) or time asleep in the day (MD 5.12 minutes, 95% CI -28.2 to 38.4). There were no serious adverse effects of trazodone reported. The small (n = 74), phase 2 trial investigating ramelteon 8 mg was reported only in summary form on the sponsor's website. We considered the certainty of the evidence to be low. There was no evidence of any important effect of ramelteon on any nocturnal sleep outcomes. There were no serious adverse effects. We found moderate-certainty evidence that an orexin antagonist taken for four weeks by people with mild-to-moderate AD probably increases TNST (MD 28.2 minutes, 95% CI 11.1 to 45.3; 1 study, n = 274) and decreases time awake after sleep onset (MD -15.7 minutes, 95% CI -28.1 to -3.3: 1 study, n = 274) but has little or no effect on number of awakenings (MD 0.0, 95% CI -0.5 to 0.5; 1 study, n = 274). It may be associated with a small increase in sleep efficiency (MD 4.26%, 95% CI 1.26 to 7.26; 2 studies, n = 312), has no clear effect on sleep latency (MD -12.1 minutes, 95% CI -25.9 to 1.7; 1 study, n = 274), and may have little or no effect on the mean duration of sleep bouts (MD -2.42 minutes, 95% CI -5.53 to 0.7; 1 study, n = 38). Adverse events were probably no more common among participants taking orexin antagonists than those taking placebo (RR 1.29, 95% CI 0.83 to 1.99; 2 studies, n = 323). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We discovered a distinct lack of evidence to guide decisions about drug treatment of sleep problems in dementia. In particular, we found no RCTs of many widely prescribed drugs, including the benzodiazepine and non-benzodiazepine hypnotics, although there is considerable uncertainty about the balance of benefits and risks for these common treatments. We found no evidence for beneficial effects of melatonin (up to 10 mg) or a melatonin receptor agonist. There was evidence of some beneficial effects on sleep outcomes from trazodone and orexin antagonists and no evidence of harmful effects in these small trials, although larger trials in a broader range of participants are needed to allow more definitive conclusions to be reached. Systematic assessment of adverse effects in future trials is essential.
The association of priapism with trazodone is reviewed based on data reported to the Food and Drug Administration. The data suggest that priapism may be most likely to occur within the first 28 days of treatment and that the majority of cases occur with doses of 150 mg/day or less. All age groups appear to be vulnerable to this adverse effect. Patients should be informed of this potential side effect and instructed to discontinue the medication if any unusual erectile problems develop.
Trazodone, an antidepressant with antianxiety effects, has been available in the United States since March 1982. Since then 11 cases of priapism, five requiring surgical procedures, have been reported. The authors present one of the latter cases.
Palinopsia refers to the persistence or reappearance of an image of a recently viewed object. Typically, patients with palinopsia have other visual symptoms or signs, and the underlying cause is a structural lesion of the posterior portions of the cerebral hemispheres. However, we treated three patients who experienced palinopsia as an isolated symptom, apparently as a side effect of trazodone hydrochloride therapy for depression. The palinopsia was dose related and disappeared with reduction or cessation of therapy.
Dose comparison trials were undertaken with trazodone given once, twice and thrice daily. Therapeutic effects were the same but once daily dosage produced drowsiness whilst thrice daily dosage did not. In a double-blind comparison to imipramine, anti-depressant effects were similar, except at 6 weeks when imipramine was significantly better. There were no significant differences in relief of anxiety symptoms.
Trazodone is used as an antidepressant in doses between 150 and 600 mg. At lower doses, it is commonly used to treat insomnia. There are few case reports about confusional symptoms as an undesirable side effect of this drug. We report a case of a patient who presented with delirium after prescription of trazodone 100 mg. She required hospitalisation but, shortly after discontinuation of trazodone, the symptoms disappeared without antipsychotic medication. Seven months after the episode, the patient remains asymptomatic.
Coma blisters are epidermal and subepidermal bullous lesions that can arise throughout the body after a prolonged impairment of consciousness. Coma blister-like lesions have been well-documented in adults after barbiturate-induced intoxication. More recently, other drugs and substances have been associated with the development of these bullae, which has broadened the scope of medications that put patients at risk of developing coma blister-like lesions. We present a unique case of a noncomatose patient who developed coma blister-like lesions after trazodone misuse. This case illustrates the need to further investigate the mechanism behind drug-induced coma bullae-like lesions so that clinicians can better identify and discontinue drugs that precipitate such lesions.
The authors compared the nontricyclic antidepressant trazodone with amitriptyline and placebo in a double-blind study of 202 unipolar depressed outpatients. Trazodone's clinical efficacy was similar to that of amitriptyline, with both active drugs producing significantly more clinical improvement than placebo. The incidence of anticholinergic side effects was lower for the patients taking trazodone than for those taking amitriptyline.
BACKGROUND: Chronic insomnia is common in patients undergoing in-center hemodialysis, yet there is limited evidence on effective treatments for this population. OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I), trazodone, and placebo for insomnia in patients undergoing long-term hemodialysis. DESIGN: Randomized, multicenter, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03534284). SETTING: 26 dialysis units in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and Seattle, Washington. PARTICIPANTS: Patients with Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) score of 10 or greater, with sleep disturbances on 3 or more nights per week for 3 or more months. INTERVENTION: Participants were randomly assigned to 6 weeks of CBT-I, trazodone, or placebo. MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcome was the ISI score at 7 and 25 weeks from randomization. RESULTS: A total of 923 patients were prescreened, and of the 411 patients with chronic insomnia, 126 were randomly assigned to CBT-I (n = 43), trazodone (n = 42), or placebo (n = 41). The change in ISI scores from baseline to 7 weeks with CBT-I or trazodone was no different from placebo: CBT-I, -3.7 (95% CI, -5.5 to -1.9); trazodone, -4.2 (CI, -5.9 to -2.4); and placebo, -3.1 (CI, -4.9 to -1.3). There was no meaningful change in ISI scores from baseline to 25 weeks: CBT-I, -4.8 (CI, -7.0 to -2.7); trazodone, -4.0 (CI, -6.0 to -1.9); and placebo, -4.3 (CI, -6.4 to -2.2). Serious adverse events (SAEs), particularly serious cardiovascular events, were more frequent with trazodone (annualized cardiovascular SAE incidence rates: CBT-I, 0.05 [CI, 0.00 to 0.29]; trazodone, 0.64 [CI, 0.34 to 1.10]; and placebo, 0.21 [CI, 0.06 to 0.53]). LIMITATION: Modest sample size and most participants had mild or moderate insomnia. CONCLUSION: In patients undergoing hemodialysis with mild or moderate chronic insomnia, there was no difference in the effectiveness of 6 weeks of CBT-I or trazodone compared with placebo. The incidence of SAEs was higher with trazodone. PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
Priapism is a prolonged erection lasting more than four hours. In most cases, it is a surgical emergency. Trazodone is one of the molecules that can cause priapism. This constitutes a real challenge in the management of these patients, who are often young, to avoid too bad impact on erectile function. We report the case of a 34-year-old man.
Two bipolar depressed patients and one unipolar depressed patient developed manic symptoms after receiving trazodone. The symptoms resolved when the treatment was discontinued or reduced. We believe the two bipolar patients are the first cases of this reaction reported in the literature.
Forty-seven patients with definite rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were treated in a 32 week, double blind, crossover trial of amitriptyline, desipramine, trazodone, and placebo. All drug regimens produced significant changes on pain measures relative to baseline, but only amitriptyline exceeded placebo. Amitriptyline was associated with a significant reduction in the number of painful/tender joints. Our study supports the efficacy of a moderate dose of amitriptyline as an adjunct drug for the treatment of pain in both depressed and nondepressed patients with RA.
Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder is a sleep disturbance characterized by the absence of regular paralysis during rapid eye movement sleep, accompanied by dream enactment behavior. The available pharmacotherapy options for treating rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder are limited, and the utilization of antidepressants has yielded mixed results. We report 3 cases of isolated rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder improved with trazodone. Doses of 50-100 mg of trazodone at bedtime over 4-6 months resulted in significant clinical improvement. These cases highlight that trazodone could serve as a treatment for isolated rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder that does not respond to traditional treatments at submaximal dosages. CITATION: Barrow J, Vendrame M. Treatment of REM sleep behavior disorder with trazodone: report of 3 cases. J Clin Sleep Med. 2024;20(5):821-823.
Five neuroleptic-free patients exhibited syndromes that were indistinguishable from idiopathic or neuroleptic-induced akathisia in association with antidepressant administration. While antidepressant-related akathisia may be produced by any of a variety of antidepressants, the susceptibility of each individual patient to the development of this disorder may be limited to only one or a few of these agents. A considerably rarer syndrome than neuroleptic-induced akathisia, antidepressant-related akathisia appears to respond to established pharmacologic treatments for neuroleptic-induced akathisia.
