This article deals with some of the recent evidence bearing on the issues of the liability of benzodiazepines to lead to abuse, dependence, and adverse behavioral effects. Reviews of epidemiological, clinical and experimental literature indicated that the previous conclusion about abuse of these drugs still holds: the vast majority of the use of benzodiazepines is appropriate. Problems of nonmedical use arise nearly exclusively among people who abuse other drugs. Nevertheless, there are reasons for concern about patients who take benzodiazepines regularly for long periods of time. These drugs can produce physiological dependence when taken chronically, and although this does not appear to result in dose escalation or other evidence of "psychological dependence," physiological dependence can result in patient discomfort if drug use is abruptly discontinued. Also, physicians are currently prescribing shorter-acting benzodiazepines in preference to longer-acting benzodiazepines. The shorter-acting drugs can produce a more intense withdrawal syndrome following chronic administration. Furthermore, rates of use of benzodiazepines increase with age, and elderly patients are more likely than younger ones to take the drug chronically. The clearest adverse effect of benzodiazepines is impairment of memory. This, too, may be particular concern in older patients whose recall in the absence of drug is typically impaired relative to younger individuals, and who are more compromised following drug administration.
"I fear a trip to the dentist more than I fear death" is the response one person gave in a national survey recently cited in USA Today. While clearly representing an extreme, the results of many surveys suggest that fear of dentistry is still prevalent and is a measure of the failure of current therapeutic approaches to reduce pain and anxiety sufficiently to enable people, especially those with special needs, to visit the dentist. Patients who are fearful would likely seek oral health care more regularly if anesthesia and sedation were more readily available. Taking into consideration that the safety of anxiolytic drugs is highly dependent on the drug, dose, and route of administration used, oral premedication should be the sedative technique used by most dentists because it is efficacious, requires little monitoring when appropriate doses are used, and is unlikely to result in serious morbidity.
Findings from a four-city study of the beneficial and adverse effects of hypnotics are reported. The study employed a new volunteer call-in method for monitoring drug effects outside of the clinical setting. Respondents were recruited through newspaper advertisements. They were invited to complete a short telephone interview if, during the past 12 months, they (1) had significant trouble with insomnia or (2) had taken a medication to induce sleep. Comparison groups were flurazepam, temazepam, triazolam, and over-the-counter (OTC) sleep medications. An untreated insomnia group also was included. Results indicate that most users of prescription hypnotics attributed positive effects to their sleep medications and that adverse effects were infrequent. OTC hypnotics were less effective and more likely to produce negative effects. The untreated insomnia group was more symptomatic than any of the medication groups.
BACKGROUND: Ranitidine hydrochloride (Zantac) is one of the most extensively studied and widely used drugs of all time. This has provided an excellent opportunity to define its safety profile. METHODS: Data from 189 controlled clinical trials in which more than 26,000 patients received daily doses of ranitidine for 4 weeks or more were reviewed. More than 80% of patients were treated with up to 300 mg ranitidine daily; the remaining patients received doses of up to 1200 mg daily. Eighty-seven trials were placebo controlled. Analyses of post-marketing surveillance and a database of all spontaneously reported adverse events were also evaluated. RESULTS: Overall in the clinical trial programme adverse events were reported by 20% of those receiving ranitidine compared with 27% of those receiving placebo. The pattern of events was similar in all treatment groups with no evidence of dose-related toxicity in regimens encompassing an eightfold range of therapeutic doses. Similarly in a programme of studies designed to evaluate a dose of ranitidine of 75 mg for non-prescription (over-the-counter) use in the treatment of heartburn, ranitidine was not associated with an adverse event profile distinct from that of placebo. Analysis of spontaneously reported adverse event data allowed identification of rare idiosyncratic events. CONCLUSIONS: Review of data from a large population of controlled clinical trials with analyses of postmarketing surveillance studies and spontaneously reported adverse events confirmed the excellent safety profile of ranitidine.
Triazolam, commonly prescribed to treat insomnia, also can be used to reduce dental anxiety. Despite controversial reports in the lay press, triazolam can be used safely at low doses for short periods. The authors review research concerning the drug's safety and discuss its use in dentistry.
Triazolam 0.25 mg was compared with nitrazepam 5 mg as a hypnotic for 26 geriatric inpatients in a double-blind cross-over study. Sleep quantity and quality and psychomotor performance were studied. The sleep quantity and quality were similar for both drugs. There were no statistically significant differences between the two drugs in the psychomotor tests. The results are in contrast to results from other studies and might be explained by the composition of the patient material in the present study.
1. Zolpidem (ZPD, 10 mg) was directly compared with triazolam (TRZ, 0.25 mg), a benzodiazepine hypnotic of a short action comparable to ZPD. The compounds were given to healthy young subjects for three nights, in a crossover design. 2. Polysomnographic data of three 150-min sections of the nights as well as the whole nights were analyzed, to clearly detect the proper effects of the very short acting hypnotics, which might be missed in the analysis of whole night. 3. Time courses were significantly different between the two compounds in the ratios (%) of stage wake (SW), stage 2 (S2), slow wave sleep (SWS) and stage REM (SR). 4. Compared to the baseline, SWS was increased by ZPD on the first night, not by TRZ. The separate analysis of the three 150-min sections revealed an increase of SWS during the first 150-min of the ZPD night, suggesting a proper action of ZPD to augment SWS. An increase of S2 and a decrease of SR were caused by TRZ, not by ZPD. However, the separate analysis indicated that ZPD might reduce SR during the first 150-min, which was cancelled by a subsequent rebound increase in the whole night analysis. 5. During the withdrawal period, TRZ, not ZPD, increased SW and SR with worsening of mood in the morning. ZPD did not affect sleep latency in the morning, while TRZ caused a trend of the reduction.
The kinetics of a single 0.5 mg oral dose of the triazolobenzodiazepine hypnotic triazolam, were studied in 54 healthy young men aged 20-44 years, with a mean body weight of 77 kg. Triazolam kinetics were determined from multiple plasma concentrations measured during 14 h post-dose. The overall mean +/- s.e. mean (with range) kinetic variables were: peak plasma concentration, 4.4 +/- 0.3 (1.7-9.4) ng ml-1; time of peak, 1.3 +/- 0.1 (0.5-4.0) h after dose; elimination half-life, 2.6 +/- 0.1 (1.1-4.4) h; total AUC: 19.1 +/- 1.1 (4.4-47.7) ng ml-1 h; oral clearance, 526 +/- 38 (175-1892) ml min-1. All kinetic variables were consistent with Poisson distributions, based on the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Goodness of Fit test. None of the variables fit normal distributions. Four of five were consistent with a log normal distribution. Peak plasma level was highly correlated with clearance (r = -0.85, P less than 0.0001), and AUC (r = 0.85, P less than 0.0001) but not with body weight (r = 0.21, NS). Clearance and body weight were not correlated (r = -0.01). Triazolam clearance may vary widely even within a homogeneous group of healthy young men.
Although Halcion has received a great deal of attention and scrutiny, Halcion and the other benzodiazepines have a place in the pharmacotherapy of anxiety, panic, and sleep disturbances. Obviously, any physician's prescribing practices are going to be influenced by a variety of factors, including the popular press, to some extent. However, by paying careful attention to prudent and appropriate prescribing practices, following indications and guidelines for safety, efficacy, and patient acceptance, and by prescribing Halcion with the same cautions one would prescribe any other short-acting benzodiazepine or other hypnotic, this medication can be safe, efficacious, and a useful adjunct to the treatment of insomnia. Side effects--even such rare ones as musical hallucinations--will occur, to a greater or lesser extent, as with any medication, but these can be managed by the prudent physician, taking into account the risk/benefit considerations of Halcion, or any benzodiazepine, as a physician would in prescribing any medication for any reason.
This paper uses the case study of the crisis surrounding the benzodiazepine sleeping tablet Halcion (triazolam). particularly in the UK and US, to assess the explanatory value of the developmental model of drugs as a social problem first outlined by Gabe and Bury (9). It is argued that the case study supports the value of the model's three stage approach of emergence, legitimation and state response but that further comparative work needs to be undertaken with prescribed drugs other than benzodiazepines in order to substantiate fully the claim that the model represents a "natural history" of drugs as a social problem.
Alprazolam and triazolam dependence and withdrawal may be uniquely problematic. This paper describes current clinical approaches to benzodiazepine withdrawal, with a focus on recent experience with alprazolam. The withdrawal characteristics of the triazolobenzodiazepines are discussed, and the epidemiology of benzodiazepine dependence is reviewed. Estimates of the incidence of alprazolam abuse are provided from Drug Abuse Warning Network data. The only two case reports in the literature of failure of cross tolerance between alprazolam and other benzodiazepines are noted to be open to alternative interpretations. A case is reported in which a patient was successfully detoxified with clonazepam from a very high dose of alprazolam. The author concludes that clonazepam may have a role in withdrawal from high-dose alprazolam dependence.
This article presents an overview of the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-benzodiazepine receptor complex (GBRC) and its in vitro modulation by THP, a metabolite of progesterone, as well as the results of a single-dose study of progesterone and triazolam in 16 post-menopausal women. The study results indicate that a 300 mg oral dose of progesterone administered 2.5 hours prior to a challenge dose of triazolam significantly increases sensitivity to triazolam: concentration values required for 50 percent of maximum effect (EC50) decreased by 20 to 32 percent after pre-treatment with progesterone. These data support the In vitro findings that THP enhances binding of benzodiazepines to the GBRC. The full clinical implications of these data, including extensions to other steroids, need to be explored.
This paper describes the rationale, practical details, and laboratory lore relevant to conducting an acute dose-effect crossover evaluation for abuse liability of a novel anxiolytic/hypnotic compound relative to a standard compound. Basic principles underlying meaningful abuse liability assessments are presented and illustrated with examples from a comparative evaluation of the hypnotics zolpidem and triazolam. These principles include using a double-blind placebo-controlled design, selecting an appropriate comparison compound, evaluating a wide range of doses including supratherapeutic doses, using subjects with histories of sedative drug abuse, and using a range of dependent measures. The dose-effect crossover evaluation is proposed as a crucial first step in any rigorous drug abuse liability evaluation of a novel anxiolytic or hypnotic drug. Such a study can be expected to generate a broad data base which not only provides a prediction about the likelihood of abuse of the novel compound, but provides an assessment of some of the adverse consequences of recreational abuse. The crossover study also establishes parameters for subsequent studies such as direct assessment of reinforcing effects with drug self-administration testing.
Triazolam ('Halcion'), a benzodiazepine sedative-hypnotic, has been alleged to produce unique and serious adverse effects on the central nervous system. In the Netherlands television and newspaper coverage of reported side-effects was followed by a temporary suspension of the drug there. The reported adverse reactions resemble ones known to occur occasionally after older benzodiazepines and other central nervous system drugs. Whatever the final verdict on triazolam may be, there is reason to question whether regulatory decisions forced by flamboyant media coverage are in the public interest.
Triazolam was evaluated as an oral sedative agent for dental outpatients in two studies in the oral surgery model. The first study demonstrated that 0.25 mg of triazolam in combination with nitrous oxide provides therapeutic effects but with a more rapid recovery than a 0.50 mg dose in combination with nitrous oxide. In the second study, triazolam produced a significant anxiolytic effect that was comparable to the effects of diazepam titrated to the usual clinical endpoint (mean dose = 19.3 mg). Less impairment in cognitive-psychomotor impairment and ambulatory function was seen after triazolam in comparison with diazepam. Triazolam appears to be a safe, effective alternative to parenteral sedation with a benzodiazepine for dental outpatients.
Administration of the benzodiazepine antagonist, RO 15-1788, to baboons that were chronically exposed to diazepam or triazolam precipitated withdrawal signs. When RO 15-1788 was administered repeatedly at one or three day intervals, precipitated withdrawal signs were attenuated. However, these baboons remained tolerant to the sedative effects of the high doses of benzodiazepines to which they were continuously exposed. While tolerance to agonist effects of drugs and development of physical dependence are often thought to be functionally interrelated phenomena, the present results suggest that these may be separable properties of the benzodiazepines. The present results clearly indicate that certain actions of benzodiazepine agonists and antagonists can be independently regulated.
For the second time in the past ten years adverse reports in the lay press have questioned the safety of triazolam. Anecdotal reports of central nervous system adverse reactions can be separated into four general categories: (1) delirium in psychiatric patients; (2) delirium in geriatric patients; (3) withdrawal reactions; and (4) anterograde amnesia. Of the four, the amnesia reactions are regarded as serious enough by the Food and Drug Administration that it is requiring hypnotic drug manufacturers to revise the labeling of temazepam and flurazepam along with triazolam to emphasize the potential for this class of drugs to cause traveler's amnesia.
OBJECTIVE: To review the literature that compares zolpidem with triazolam, with an emphasis on efficacy and safety in humans. DATA SOURCES: Information was retrieved from a MEDLINE search (1983-1996) of the English-language literature using the terms triazolam and zolpidem. STUDY SELECTION: Reports of clinical trials comparing the safety and efficacy of zolpidem and triazolam were included in this review. DATA EXTRACTION: Data were evaluated according to study design, efficacy, and adverse effects. Pertinent information was selected and the data synthesized into a review format. DATA SYNTHESIS: Zolpidem and triazolam have similar pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic effects in humans. Clinical trials have shown that usually recommended, equipotent dosages of zolpidem and triazolam do not differ with respect to pharmacokinetics, efficacy, tolerability, residual effects, memory impairment, rebound insomnia, abuse potential, or other adverse effects. CONCLUSIONS: Zolpidem offers no distinct therapeutic advantage over triazolam for the treatment of insomnia.
Rebound insomnia followed the withdrawal of three benzodiazepine hypnotic drugs, each of which had been administered in a single nightly dose for only short-term periods. The intense worsening of sleep is attributed to the short duration of the action of these drugs. A hypothesis involving benzodiazepine receptors in the brain is proposed in which there is a delay or lag in replacement of endogenous benzodiazepine-like molecules after the abrupt withdrawal of exogenous drugs.
RATIONALE: Recently, there has been increased research interest in the phenomenon of false recognition, in which participants claim to recognize words that had not been presented during an initial study phase but that are associatively related to presented words. Acute administration of the benzodiazepine hypnotic triazolam has been shown to decrease false recognition rates. However, no false recognition studies have examined the effects of scopolamine, an anticholinergic drug that might produce a different profile of memory-impairing effects than the benzodiazepines due to its distinct neurochemical profile. OBJECTIVE: This study was designed to examine the acute dose-effects of scopolamine on false recognition. METHODS: The effects of subcutaneously administered scopolamine (0.3 and 0.6 mg/70 kg) on performance in the Deese/Roediger-McDermott false recognition paradigm were examined in a repeated-measures placebo-controlled double-blind design in 18 healthy volunteers. RESULTS: Scopolamine produced dose-related reductions in both true and false recognition rates, and induced a more conservative response bias relative to placebo for recollection-based ("remember") responses to studied words. CONCLUSIONS: While scopolamine's effects on false recognition are similar to those observed previously with triazolam, its effects on response bias may differ from those of triazolam.
