After 25 years of use in the United States, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is widely prescribed for various indications. By virtue of sequential blockade of microbial folic acid synthesis, the antimicrobial combination has excellent in vitro inhibitory activity against many common respiratory and urinary tract pathogens, as well as many nosocomial infecting strains. In patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, TMP-SMX provides prophylactic and therapeutic potency against Pneumocystis carinii but at the risk of frequent side effects. TMP-SMX is also used for treatment of pulmonary and disseminated nocardiosis and some forms of Wegener's granulomatosis, as well as for prophylaxis of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Increasing bacterial resistance and concern about occasional severe adverse effects suggest that the usefulness of TMP-SMX may diminish in the future.
Evidence from the literature strongly supports that high doses of TMP, as used in the treatment of PCP in AIDS patients, have the propensity to cause hyperkalemia by inhibiting sodium channels in the distal nephron, thereby impairing potassium secretion. The mechanism of TMP-induced hyperkalemia is believed to be similar to that of triamterene and amiloride because of the structural similarity of these agents. It is also possible that declining renal function, which is a natural progression of HIV disease, may contribute to the hyperkalemia seen in this patient population. In addition, patients with AIDS also may exhibit a defect in adrenal function, potentiating the hyperkalemic effect of TMP therapy. Therefore, it is crucial for clinicians to monitor closely the serum potassium concentration in this patient population, especially during therapy with high doses of TMP.
Trimethoprim has recently been marketed as a single-entity product for the treatment of initial episodes of uncomplicated symptomatic urinary tract infections; it was previously available only in combination with sulfamethoxazole. Trimethoprim exerts antimicrobial activity by blocking the reduction of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate, the active form of folic acid, by susceptible organisms. It has inhibitory activity for most gram-positive aerobic cocci and some gram-negative aerobic bacilli. Resistance to trimethoprim may be either intrinsic or acquired. Acquired resistance most commonly stems from a chromosomal mutation that results in the production of a dihydrofolate reductase enzyme which is less vulnerable to trimethoprim inhibition. Gastrointestinal intolerance and skin eruptions are the most common untoward reactions resulting from the administration of trimethoprim. Trimethoprim constitutes very effective therapy for women with acute symptomatic urinary tract infections caused by E. coli, and the compound compares favorably with alternative standard agents, such as ampicillin and cephalexin. The safety of trimethoprim in the pregnant woman has not been established. Since indiscriminate use of trimethoprim could foster the emergence of trimethoprim resistance, thereby negating the value of both trimethoprim and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim should only be prescribed for well defined indications. Trimethoprim is currently being investigated as definitive therapy for a wide range of infections, including bacterial exacerbations of chronic bronchitis, bacterial pneumonia, and typhoid fever. Initial reports are encouraging.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole continues to be a useful antibiotic for common outpatient problems such as urinary tract infections, prostatitis, acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis, and acute otitis media as well as for serious infections of the hospitalized patient including Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, acute pyelonephritis, and some forms of gram negative meningitis. The other sulfonamides have a limited role.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole has excellent microbiologic activity against most pathogens that produce meningitis; both components of this drug have high penetration into tissues, including the cerebrospinal fluid. Clinical experience shows that trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole may be beneficial in the treatment of gram-negative bacillary meningitis caused by organisms only moderately susceptible to third-generation cephalosporins (Enterobacter cloacae, Serratia marcescens) or resistant to these antibiotic agents (Pseudomonas cepacia, Acinetobacter). The success of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in the treatment of four patients with Staphylococcus aureus and two patients with Listeria monocytogenes meningitis shows that this drug may also be useful in treating infrequent types of gram-positive meningitis.
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are common bacterial infections, particularly in women. Antimicrobial therapy is seldom indicated for asymptomatic infection, but antimicrobial therapy is usually indicated for amelioration of symptoms. Management of acute uncomplicated UTI (cystitis) is generally straightforward, with a predictable distribution of uropathogens isolated. First-line treatment of acute uncomplicated UTI has traditionally involved a 3-day regimen of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) or TMP alone for patients with sulfa allergies. Increasing resistance among community-acquired Escherichia coli to TMP-SMX worldwide has led to a reassessment of the most appropriate empiric therapy for these infections. Alternative first-line agents include the fluoroquinolones, nitrofurantoin, and fosfomycin. Factors to be considered in the selection of appropriate antimicrobial therapy include pharmacokinetics, spectrum of activity of the antimicrobial agent, resistance prevalence for the community, potential for adverse effects, and duration of therapy. Ideal antimicrobial agents for UTI management have primary excretion routes through the urinary tract to achieve high urinary drug levels. In addition, there are special considerations in the management of UTI among selected populations, including postmenopausal and pregnant women, and for women with frequent recurrent UTIs.
This article reviews the pharmacokinetics, clinical use, and adverse effects of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) in renally impaired patients. Renal dysfunction changes the pharmacokinetics of both component drugs. TMP and SMX disposition are not significantly altered until creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min, when SMX metabolites and TMP accumulate and may lead to toxicity. Renal dysfunction, however, does not preclude the use of TMP/SMX to treat susceptible infections, even when creatinine clearance is less than 15 mL/min. Adverse effects may occur more frequently in renally impaired patients but are not clearly related to increased serum concentrations of either drug. Guidelines for appropriate dosing and monitoring of TMP/SMX therapy in these patients are presented.
The recent marketing of trimethoprim (TMP) as a single drug has resulted in interest in the use of this drug to treat common infections. The history and antibacterial properties of TMP are reviewed. Indications for the clinical use of TMP are presented, and possible new uses for the drug are considered. The significance of adverse effects is discussed. The pharmacokinetic properties of TMP are reviewed with particular emphasis on the renal handling of the drug and its advantages over TMP/sulfonamide combinations in relation to renal function and toxicity.
OBJECTIVE: To review available data regarding the efficacy of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) for the treatment of infections caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE search was performed (January 1966-December 2003) using the search terms Staphylococcus aureus , sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim, co-trimoxazole, and methicillin resistance. Abstracts from infectious diseases meetings also were reviewed. DATA SYNTHESIS: The reported rate of TMP-SMX resistance in S. aureus is highly variable. From a mechanistic standpoint, TMP-SMX resistance among MRSA appears to be distinct from multidrug resistance, although some anecdotal reports suggest otherwise. Clonal outbreaks of MRSA resistant to TMP-SMX have been described; of these, the Brazilian clone has more often been resistant to TMP-SMX than the Iberian clone. Rates of TMP-SMX resistance are particularly high in institutions serving large numbers of patients infected by the human immunodeficiency virus, due to increased exposure for Pneumocystis prophylaxis. Limited studies and case reports have found TMP-SMX useful against infections caused by MRSA. CONCLUSIONS: A large body of anecdotal data, but only one randomized clinical trial, indicates the effectiveness of TMP-SMX as a treatment for MRSA infections. Double-blind, randomized controlled trials are needed to compare the two available oral agents-TMP-SMX and linezolid-against MRSA.
A historical survey based on the most important literature is presented as a starting point for further discussion on the significance of possible adverse reactions reported after prescription of cotrimoxazole. The often changing and contradictory assessments made of the situation in different countries and at different times are outlined, and the difficulty of making a balanced and just evaluation of long established drugs is shown, particularly if the available data are derived primarily from spontaneous reports which, besides being almost impossible to verify, are often incomplete.
We present two patients who experienced life-threatening immediate reactions and one patient who developed generalized urticaria following oral administration of trimethoprim (TMP) and sulfamethoxazole (SMX) combination. Skin prick tests with TMP were positive in the three patients. No patients reacted to skin prick tests with SMX. No significant levels of IgE antibodies to TMP were found by RAST in the serum of the patients. Normal subjects used as controls did not react to any of these tests. Single-blind, placebo-controlled oral challenges were positive with TMP and negative with SMX in all patients. These results suggest that the three patients developed type I hypersensitivity reactions to TMP. In our patients skin prick tests with TMP were useful in TMP hypersensitivity diagnosis.
For the treatment of malaria, combinations of drugs with antifolic action have the great advantage, compared with other drug associations, of synergic action, which increases the effectiveness of the preparation, limits its toxicity, and reduces the risk of resistance. The associations of a sulfonamide (sulfalene, S) with a diaminopyrimidine derivative (pyrimethamine, P, or trimethoprim, T) have given good immediate clinical results. An analysis of the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic characteristics of the three components explains the relative ease with which relapse is encountered with the association ST. The association SP is, from this point of view, more logical and effective and its importance in prophylaxis is surveyed in the light of a critical discussion of the arguments that are at present throwing doubt on the usefulness of its wider employment.
We report 5 patients with repeated episodes of meningitis related to intake of trimethoprim containing compounds. On at least one occasion the patients received pure trimethoprim prior to reaction. Autoimmune disease was established in 3 of the patients. A close temporal relationship between drug intake and reaction was noted: symptoms appeared often within minutes. No evidence of infections was found. Lumbar puncture after recovery revealed normal values in 2 patients. This aseptic meningitis is most likely an adverse drug reaction and associated with trimethoprim intake. The reaction is infrequently reported in relation to drug sales but its incidence has probably been underestimated.
BACKGROUND: Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) is a common opportunistic infection among people living with HIV (PWH), particularly among new and untreated cases. Several regimens are available for the prophylaxis of PCP, including trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), dapsone-based regimens (DBRs), aerosolized pentamidine (AP), and atovaquone. OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of PCP prophylaxis regimens in PWH by network meta-analysis. METHODS: DATA SOURCES: Embase, MEDLINE, and CENTRAL from inception to June 21, 2023. STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Comparative randomized controlled trials (RCTs). PARTICIPANTS: PWH. INTERVENTIONS: Regimens for PCP prophylaxis either compared head-to-head or versus no treatment/placebo. ASSESSMENT OF RISK OF BIAS: Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for RCTs 2. METHODS OF DATA SYNTHESIS: Title or abstract and full-text screening and data extraction were performed in duplicate by two independent reviewers. Data on PCP incidence, all-cause mortality, and discontinuation due to toxicity were pooled and ranked by network meta-analysis. Subgroup analyses of primary versus secondary prophylaxis, by year, and by dosage were performed. RESULTS: A total of 26 RCTs, comprising 55 treatment arms involving 7516 PWH were included. For the prevention of PCP, TMP-SMX was ranked the most favourable agent and was superior to DBRs (risk ratio [RR] = 0.54; 95% CI, 0.36-0.83) and AP (RR = 0.53; 95% CI, 0.36-0.77). TMP-SMX was also the only agent with a mortality benefit compared with no treatment/placebo (RR = 0.79; 95% CI, 0.64-0.98). However, TMP-SMX was also ranked as the most toxic agent with a greater risk of discontinuation than DBRs (RR = 1.25; 95% CI, 1.01-1.54) and AP (7.20; 95% CI, 5.37-9.66). No significant differences in PCP prevention or mortality were detected among the other regimens. The findings remained consistent within subgroups. CONCLUSIONS: TMP-SMX is the most effective agent for PCP prophylaxis in PWH and the only agent to confer a mortality benefit; consequently, it should continue to be recommended as the first-line agent. Further studies are necessary to determine the optimal dosing of TMP-SMX to maximize efficacy and minimize toxicity.
OBJECTIVE: To review treatment recommendations for empiric therapy of uncomplicated urinary tract infection (uUTI) in light of evolving antibiotic resistance and to consider use of guidelines to promote optimal practice. QUALITY OF EVIDENCE: PubMed was searched and additional relevant references were identified by reviewing articles found in the search. Guidelines were identified through discussion with family practitioners. Level of evidence was assessed for recommendations. MAIN MESSAGE: Many women have uUTIs. The treatment approach is usually empiric antimicrobial therapy without obtaining pretherapy cultures. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is standard first-line empiric treatment. While resistance to this drug is increasing, it remains only about 10% in community-acquired Escherichia coli in Canada. Concerns about increased resistance have contributed to greater use of fluoroquinolones, but widespread empiric use of this class of medications might promote resistance to fluoroquinolones. Hence, fluoroquinolones should not be considered first-line therapy. While guidelines for treatment of uUTIs have been developed, their usefulness is compromised by their conflicting recommendations. CONCLUSION: Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and nitrofurantoin remain first-choice empiric therapy for uUTIs. Development of guidelines relevant to family physicians and community education programs that incorporate local susceptibility patterns are important strategies for promoting optimal practice.
In Finland the usage of trimethoprim (TMP) alone constitutes about 25% of all drug usage for urinary tract infections. Despite this widespread use the proportion of TMP-resistant strains is almost same as it is in countries where only the combination of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) has been used. In general, strains resistant to TMP were seldom found; only in closed wards did the use of trimethoprim result in an increase in the proportion of resistant strains. In the treatment of acute urinary tract infections, TMP alone (dose, 160 mg taken twice daily for seven days) gave a result as good as that of TMP-SMZ (94.5% vs. 90.6%) and a better result than cephalexin (98.3% vs. 82.1%). TMP proved suitable as a single agent in the treatment of urinary tract infections in outpatients. In a study of long-term treatment, TMP (dose, 100 mg taken once daily), was more effective than nitrofurantoin, methenamine hippurate, TMP-SMZ, or placebo. Fewer adverse effects were associated with TMP than with the other drugs.
Nine patients (median age 78 years, range 62-92) treated with a constant oral dosage of digoxin were evaluated for the effect of trimethoprim on serum digoxin values. Serum digoxin increased by 22% during trimethoprim treatment (p less than 0.05). Subsequently, 6 healthy subjects (median age 29 years, range 24-31) were evaluated for the effect of trimethoprim on digoxin pharmacokinetics after an i.v. dose. Trimethoprim administration did not affect total body clearance of digoxin and the glomerular filtration rate. The renal clearance of digoxin decreased by 17% (p less than 0.05) and the extrarenal clearance of digoxin increased by 14% (N.S.). Biological half-life of digoxin and apparent volumes of central and peripheral compartments were unchanged during the study. It is suggested that the increase in serum digoxin in the elderly patients is due to decreased renal tubular secretion of digoxin and not to disturbance of the extrarenal clearance.
The antimicrobial combination of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole is active in vitro against a variety of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Clinically, it is useful for treatment and prophylaxis of various infections of the genitourinary tract and certain infections of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole by itself or in combination with other antimicrobial agents is indicated for most Nocardia asteroides infections. It is the antimicrobial agent of choice for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. The drug is relatively nontoxic in patients who do not have acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), and it is available in oral and intravenous forms. The native compounds and the metabolites of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole are excreted primarily in the urine. When the creatinine clearance decreases to less than 30 ml/min, the dosage of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole should be adjusted.
In a randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled study to evaluate the efficacy of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for the prevention of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, we studied 160 patients with cancer who were at high risk for this pneumonia over a two-year period. Seventeen of the 80 patients receiving a placebo acquired P. carinii pneumonitis, whereas none of the 80 given 150 mg of trimethoprim and 750 mg of sulfamethoxazole per square meter per day had the infection P less than 0.01). Bacterial sepsis, pneumonia other than that caused by P. carinii, acute otitis media, upper-respiratory-tract infections, sinusitis and cellulitis occurred less frequently in recipients of the drug than in the placebo group (P less than 0.01 in each case). Oral candidiasis was the only adverse effect ecountered from trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole administration. The study shows the combination to be highly effective in the prevention of P. carinii pneumonitis.
In 1975 trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) was found effective in the prophylaxis of childhood urinary tract infection. The rate of recurrence in 130 children who received prophylaxis was only 0.05 infections per year. No fecal coliforms were found in 70% of rectal swabs, and only 10% of the isolates of coliform organisms were resistant to TMP. During effective, low-dose urinary prophylaxis with TMP-SMZ in 130 children for periods of two to 10 years, no effects of the drug on hematologic or renal function were observed, and somatic growth was normal. However, the frequency of resistance to TMP among fecal coliforms increased from less than 10% in 1970-1975 to 34% in 1980. This increase was not related to the duration of prophylaxis and appeared to represent a secular increase in TMP resistance among coliforms. TMP alone also was effective in urinary prophylaxis; only three of 39 children experienced a recurrence of urinary tract infection during a total of 309 months of prophylaxis in 1978-1980. The effect of TMP prophylaxis on the bowel flora was similar to that of TMP-SMZ prophylaxis. Resistance to TMP was found in 16% of isolates from rectal swabs from children receiving TMP alone.
