BACKGROUND: Serotonin syndrome is a mild to potentially life-threatening syndrome associated with excessive serotonergic activity within the central nervous system. Serotonin syndrome is associated with medication use, drug interactions, and overdose. While serotonin syndrome is often associated with the use of selective serotonin inhibitors (SSRI), an increasing number of reports are being presented involving the use of tramadol. METHODS: This review article contains an overview of serotonin syndrome while specifically looking at tramadol's pharmacology and risk factors for serotonin syndrome. With tramadol's increasing popularity, the goal of this article is to make physicians more alert and aware of this potential side effect associated with tramadol. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, with the increasing incidence of serotonin syndrome, prescribing physicians should be aware of and educate their patients on the potential side effects of tramadol. It is important that the prescribing physician reviews patient medications for concurrent serotonergic drugs and monitors for potential abuse.
Tramadol, a centrally acting analgesic structurally related to codeine and morphine, consists of two enantiomers, both of which contribute to analgesic activity via different mechanisms. (+)-Tramadol and the metabolite (+)-O-desmethyl-tramadol (M1) are agonists of the mu opioid receptor. (+)-Tramadol inhibits serotonin reuptake and (-)-tramadol inhibits norepinephrine reuptake, enhancing inhibitory effects on pain transmission in the spinal cord. The complementary and synergistic actions of the two enantiomers improve the analgesic efficacy and tolerability profile of the racemate. Tramadol is available as drops, capsules and sustained-release formulations for oral use, suppositories for rectal use and solution for intramuscular, intravenous and subcutaneous injection. After oral administration, tramadol is rapidly and almost completely absorbed. Sustained-release tablets release the active ingredient over a period of 12 hours, reach peak concentrations after 4.9 hours and have a bioavailability of 87-95% compared with capsules. Tramadol is rapidly distributed in the body; plasma protein binding is about 20%. Tramadol is mainly metabolised by O- and N-demethylation and by conjugation reactions forming glucuronides and sulfates. Tramadol and its metabolites are mainly excreted via the kidneys. The mean elimination half-life is about 6 hours. The O-demethylation of tramadol to M1, the main analgesic effective metabolite, is catalysed by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6, whereas N-demethylation to M2 is catalysed by CYP2B6 and CYP3A4. The wide variability in the pharmacokinetic properties of tramadol can partly be ascribed to CYP polymorphism. O- and N-demethylation of tramadol as well as renal elimination are stereoselective. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic characterisation of tramadol is difficult because of differences between tramadol concentrations in plasma and at the site of action, and because of pharmacodynamic interactions between the two enantiomers of tramadol and its active metabolites. The analgesic potency of tramadol is about 10% of that of morphine following parenteral administration. Tramadol provides postoperative pain relief comparable with that of pethidine, and the analgesic efficacy of tramadol can further be improved by combination with a non-opioid analgesic. Tramadol may prove particularly useful in patients with a risk of poor cardiopulmonary function, after surgery of the thorax or upper abdomen and when non-opioid analgesics are contraindicated. Tramadol is an effective and well tolerated agent to reduce pain resulting from trauma, renal or biliary colic and labour, and also for the management of chronic pain of malignant or nonmalignant origin, particularly neuropathic pain. Tramadol appears to produce less constipation and dependence than equianalgesic doses of strong opioids.
The orally administered fixed combination tablet of tramadol (centrally-acting opiate) plus paracetamol (acetaminophen; nonopiate, nonsalicylate analgesic) [37.5/325 mg] provides effective analgesia in patients with moderate to severe acute pain and those with chronic painful conditions characterised by intermittent exacerbations of pain. Two tramadol/paracetamol 37.5/325 mg tablets provided greater relief of dental pain over an 8-hour period than either agent alone, with a faster onset of action than tramadol alone and a longer duration of action than either agent as monotherapy. In patients with postoperative dental pain, two tramadol/paracetamol tablets (37.5/325 mg) provided similar analgesia to hydrocodone/paracetamol 10/650 mg over an 8-hour period. The addition of one or two tramadol/paracetamol 37.5/32 5mg tablets (up to four times daily) for 5 days to existing NSAID or cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor analgesic therapy provided effective pain relief in patients with osteoarthritis flare pain. Tramadol/paracetamol 37.5/325 mg provided similar efficacy to that of codeine/paracetamol 30/300 mg in patients with chronic back pain in a 4-week, randomised, double-blind trial (a maximum of 10 tablets or capsules per day of the active drug).
The lack of analgesic efficacy limits tramadol as a sole agent to treat severe pain after surgery. However, it has a relative lack of respiratory depressant and constipating effects compared with morphine and codeine, and does not share the propensity of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs to provoke asthma, gastrointestinal mucosal damage and renal impairment. It may well have a place in the management of pain after surgery, in combination with another drug, such as paracetamol, or after control of the worst of pain after surgery by a regional local anaesthetic technique.
Tramadol is a unique analgesic medication, available in variety of formulations, with both monoaminergic reuptake inhibitory and opioid receptor agonist activity increasingly prescribed worldwide as an alternative for high-affinity opioid medication in the treatment of acute and chronic pain. It is a prodrug that is metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 to its more potent opioid analgesic metabolites, particularly the O-demethylation product M1. The opioid analgesic potency of a given dose of tramadol is influenced by an individual's CYP genetics, with poor metabolizers experiencing little conversion to the active M1 opioid metabolite and individuals with a high metabolic profile, or ultra-metabolizers, experiencing the greatest opioid analgesic effects. The importance of the CYP metabolism has led to the adoption of computer clinical decision support with pharmacogenomics tools guiding tramadol treatment in major medical centers. Tramadol's simultaneous opioid agonist action and serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitory effects result in a unique side effect profile and important drug interactions that must be considered. Abrupt cessation of tramadol increases the risk for both opioid and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor withdrawal syndromes. This review provides updated important information on the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, CYP genetic polymorphisms, drug interactions, toxicity, withdrawal, and illicit use of tramadol.
Tramadol, marketed as Ultram in the United States, is as a non-scheduled narcotic analgesic based on its low abuse liability. It is indicated for the treatment of moderately severe pain; however, multiple adverse effects have been reported with its use including seizures, anaphylaxis, angioedema, bronchospasm, and serotonin syndrome. An association between tramadol and pericarditis has not been previously reported. We describe the case of an 88 year-old male who developed acute pericarditis 2 days following tramadol initiation. The temporal relationship between drug initiation and pericarditis as well as the resolution of symptoms upon drug discontinuation suggested a potential association. Although pericarditis has not been described with tramadol administration, clinicians should be aware of a possible association.
Tramadol is commonly prescribed for pain control because it presents a lower risk for addiction and respiratory depression compared to other opioids. However, tramadol's serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitory effects result in a unique adverse effect profile. Two such adverse events are serotonin syndrome and seizures. The prevalence of tramadol-induced serotonin syndrome and seizures is modest in the general population, but if left untreated, the morbidity and mortality can be high; therefore, prompt recognition and management is essential. Various risk factors such as medical comorbidities, use or abuse of supratherapeutic doses of tramadol, and concomitant administration of proconvulsant serotonergic cytochrome P-450 inhibitors will help clinicians identify individuals at an elevated risk for serotonin toxicity and seizures. Serotonin syndrome and seizures can be effectively treated by administering benzodiazepines, providing supportive care, and discontinuing tramadol and other contributing agents. Cyproheptadine should be administered in moderate to severe cases of serotonin syndrome. Our objective is to summarize the literature on the pharmacology, epidemiology, risk factors, clinical presentations, and evidence-based management of tramadol-related seizures and serotonin syndrome.
Patients with chronic non-malignant pain report impairment of physical and social life along with psychological state affecting their overall quality of life. The purpose of managing pain is to reduce the trauma and improve the patient comfort with better quality of life. Tramadol is a centrally acting weak mu-opioid receptor analgesic and is a racemic mixture of (+)-tramadol and (-)-tramadol enantiomers. Tramadol is used worldwide and is listed in many medical guidelines for pain management. The (+)-tramadol has greater affinity for mu-opioid receptor and provides additional prevention of 5- hydroxy tryptamine reuptake, while the (-)-tramadol is a successful noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor and intensifies its release by activating the auto receptor. Tramadol is prescribed to relieve moderate to severe pain management in patients. Tramadol does not show much serious adverse effects without any dependency potential in therapeutic doses as seen in other opioids, like morphine. Tramadol metabolite M1 also has mu-opioid receptor agonist activity, but it faces poor blood brain barrier permeability. In this review, we report the complete updated status of Tramadol along with its chemistry, synthesis, pharmacology, medicinal uses, adverse effects and its combinations available in the market. We have also covered Tramadol patents so that a complete overview provides a broader perspective for future designing of its derivatives and increase their potential use for pain management in terminal cancer patients.
Tramadol is a synthetic, centrally acting analgesic. A sustained-release (SR) capsule formulation of tramadol gradually releases active drug, allowing for twice-daily dosing. Compared with tramadol SR tablets, tramadol SR capsules produced a smoother plasma concentration profile, with more gradual absorption and lower peak concentrations. There was less intra- and intersubject variability in tramadol plasma concentrations with SR capsules versus SR. Tramadol SR capsules had identical bioavailability to tramadol immediate-release (IR) capsules with lower peak concentrations and less fluctuation in plasma concentrations. Tramadol SR 100 mg capsules administered twice daily had equivalent efficacy to tramadol IR 50 mg capsules administered four times daily in the treatment of moderate to severe chronic low back pain in a well designed study. Patients receiving tramadol SR capsules were significantly less likely than those receiving tramadol IR capsules to report nausea. Starting treatment with tramadol SR capsules at a dosage of 50 mg twice daily with subsequent dose escalation resulted in improved tolerability in patients with moderate to severe chronic pain. The lowest tramadol SR capsule dosage of 50 mg twice daily (administered to 35% of patients with moderate to severe non-oncological pain) significantly improved pain intensity and frequency in 83.4% and 70.4% of patients, respectively, in a postmarketing observational study evaluating tramadol SR capsules 50-200 mg twice daily (n = 3888).
Opioids interact with both innate and adaptive immune systems and have direct effects on opioid receptors located on immune cells. Research on this topic has provided evidence of the opioid influence on the immune response associated with surgical stress. The immunological effects of opioids are currently being investigated, particularly whether they influence the outcome of surgery or the underlying disease regarding important aspects like infection or cancer progression. This review addresses background research related to the influence of the opioid receptor on the immune system, the immunosuppressive effect associated with major opioids during the perioperative period, and their clinical relevance. The objective of the study was to review the effects of opioids on the immune system.
We conducted a narrative review of the literature to compare the pharmacological, efficacy and safety profiles of tapentadol and tramadol, and to assess the clinical interest of tapentadol in adult patients. Tapentadol and tramadol share a mixed mechanism of action, including both mu-agonist and monoaminergic properties. Tapentadol is approximately two to three times more potent than tramadol and two to three times less potent than morphine. It has no identified analgesically active metabolite and is not significantly metabolised by cytochrome P450 enzymes, thus overcoming some limitations of tramadol, including the potential for pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions and interindividual variability due to genetic polymorphisms of cytochrome P450 enzymes. The toxicity profiles of tramadol and tapentadol are similar; however tapentadol is likely to result in less exposure to serotoninergic adverse effects (nausea, vomiting, hypoglycaemia) but cause more opioid adverse effects (constipation, respiratory depression, abuse) than tramadol. The safety of tapentadol in real-world conditions remains poorly documented, particularly in at-risk patient subgroups and also in the ability to assess the risk associated with its residual serotonergic activity (serotonin syndrome, seizures). Because of an earlier market introduction, more real-world safety data are available for tramadol, including data from at-risk patient subgroups. The level of evidence on the efficacy of both tramadol and tapentadol for the treatment of chronic pain is globally low. The trials published to date show overall that tapentadol does not provide a clinically significant analgesic improvement compared to existing treatments, for which the safety profile is much better known. In conclusion, tapentadol is not a first-line opioid but represents an additional analgesic in the therapeutic choices, which some patients may benefit from after careful examination of their clinical situation, co-morbidities and co-medications.
INTRODUCTION: Studies comprehensively summarizing the impact of tramadol use on glucose homeostasis are very sparse. Thus, the present study was performed to collect and summarize the latest information about this issue in a systematic way. AREAS COVERED: An exhaustive literature search was carried out using relevant keywords. Web of Sciences, PubMed, Scopus, and Google scholar were interrogated until 30 June 2019. Case-control, cohort, cross-sectional, clinical trial, case report, and animal studies that focused on the objective of the study were retrieved. This review summarizes the results of 761 papers on glycemic changes due to tramadol exposure. Thirty-six publications reported hypoglycemia and 17 hyperglycemia during tramadol use. Twenty-two studies either reported normal blood glucose concentrations, or did not observe any difference in the blood glucose levels following tramadol use. Finally, hypoglycemia was reported in diabetic individuals exposed to tramadol in 12 studies. EXPERT OPINION: The data suggest that primarily hypoglycemia but some degree of hyperglycemia has been reported with tramadol use. Importantly, all studies on tramadol use in diabetes reported hypoglycemia. Tramadol-induced hypoglycemia may be severe in some cases. The risk of alterations in glucose homeostasis accompanying tramadol exposure indicates time importance of careful blood glucose monitoring during tramadol use.
Tramadol hydrochloride (TrHC) is a synthetic analgesic drug exhibiting opioid and non-opioid properties, acting mainly on the central nervous system. It has been mostly used to treat pain, although its use to treat anxiety and depression has also been documented. These properties arise from the fact that they inhibit serotonin (5-HT) reuptake augmenting 5-HT concentration on the synaptic cleft. Despite this, TrHC has also been described to have several side effects which are mainly due to its fast metabolization and excretion which in turn requires multiple doses per day. To surpass this limitation, new pharmaceutical formulations are being developed intending the protection, target and sustained delivery as well as a reduction on daily dose aiming a reduction on the side effects. In the present work we have revised the efficacy, safety, biological and adverse effects of TrHC, and the added value of developing a novel drug delivery system for topical administration.
This paper reviews the use of tramadol in the management of acute pain. Tramadol is a weak opioid analgesic with a potency comparable to that of pethidine. While it is not recommended as a supplement to general anaesthesia because of its insufficient sedative activity, tramadol has been successful in the treatment of postoperative pain. Several studies have demonstrated its analgesic efficacy after intramuscular and intravenous application, both in adults and children. Moreover, negligible respiratory depressant activity and only minor side effects have consistently been shown. Patient-controlled analgesia with tramadol has been frequently employed and was well accepted by the patients. There have been only a few studies of oral or spinal application of tramadol in acute pain states. Tramadol has also been used for the control of pain associated with labour and acute myocardial infarction, as well as for the management of trauma pain. In summary, tramadol can be recommended as a basic analgesic for the treatment of patients with moderate to severe pain.
CONTEXT: Premature ejaculation (PE) is the most prevalent male sexual dysfunction. In the last few years, several pharmacologic approaches for oral or topical treatment of PE have been studied. OBJECTIVE: To systematically review the literature on the outcome of pharmacologic interventions for PE on intravaginal ejaculation latency time (IELT) in comparison to placebo. EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A systematic literature search of PubMed and Scopus using the term "premature ejaculation" was performed on 10 April 2015. Full-text articles on prospective randomized controlled trials (RCTs) investigating pharmacotherapy were included. The main outcome measure was IELT. EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: Out of 266 unique records, a total of 22 were reviewed. The majority of RCTs were of unclear methodological quality because of limited reporting of methods. Pooled evidence suggests that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), topical anesthetic creams (TAs), tramadol, and phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5is) are more effective than placebo at increasing IELT (all p<0.05). However, interpretation of the current meta-analyses may be impaired as a result of frequent heterogeneity in the pooled analyses (all I(2) > 70%). Only pooled analyses for dapoxetine 30mg and 60mg were characterized by homogeneous data (both I(2)<30%) while showing a modest but statistically significant improvement in IELT compared with placebo (mean difference 1.39min, 95% confidence interval 1.23-1.54min; p<0.00001). CONCLUSIONS: Meta-analysis revealed that treatment with dapoxetine significantly improves IELT in patients with PE but with modest efficacy. The efficacy of SSRIs, TAs, tramadol, and PDE5is remains unclear owing to high heterogeneity of the available RCT data. There is a persisting need for drug research and development in the field. PATIENT SUMMARY: Premature ejaculation is a condition for which the cause is not well understood. Several types of treatment with medium to low efficacy are available. More research is necessary to identify the ideal treatment.
Mucositis, a painful and debilitating condition, is a common side effect of chemotherapy. The role of tramadol in the treatment of mucositis in pediatric patients has not yet been determined. In this retrospective study, we evaluate whether tramadol as single agent achieved a reduction of pain intensity among oncologic children admitted for mucositis. In total, 34 of 54 (63%) episodes were treated with tramadol alone and achieved adequate pain relief. Tramadol's side effects were mild and manageable.
A 49-year-old male with major depressive disorder well-managed with venlafaxine [serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI)] and no history of manic episodes developed his first manic episode following use of tramadol. Tramadol-induced mania has been described with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors but not SNRIs. In addition, mania is not listed as a potential clinical side effect-further illustrating this relative rarity. Due to tramadol's SNRI activity, there is definitive risk for mood lability in individuals managed with tramadol and other serotonergic medications as seen in this patient. The authors findings suggest the need for greater risk consideration when prescribing tramadol with other related agents such as venlafaxine.
We reviewed a series of 66 deaths in Washington State between 1995-2000 in which tramadol (Ultram and Ultracet, Ortho-McNeil) was detected in the decedent's blood, in order to assess the role tramadol was determined to have played. Additionally, we reviewed a series of 83 impaired driving cases in which tramadol was detected in order to establish a non-lethal blood tramadol concentration reference range. In both populations, tramadol was consistently found together with other analgesic, muscle relaxant, and CNS depressant drugs. Death was rarely attributable to tramadol alone. However, tramadol may be a significant contributor to lethal intoxication when taken in excess with other drugs, via the potential interaction with serotonergic antidepressant medications, as well as the potential for increased CNS depression. Although the incidence of tramadol detection has increased consistently over the last eight years, there is no evidence of a corresponding increase in the number of cases in which death was attributed solely to tramadol. Blood drug concentrations in many deaths exceeded the therapeutic serum range of 0.28-0.61 mg/L; however, the concentrations overlapped almost completely with the range identified in living subjects arrested for impaired driving. These findings suggest caution in the interpretation of blood tramadol concentrations outside of the recognized therapeutic range. It also suggests that the drug, even when used in moderate excess, is not a principle cause of death in suicidal or accidental deaths.
Tramadol is effective in treating both acute and chronic pain, exhibiting a potency equivalent to that of pethidine, and it has an acceptable adverse event profile. Whilst the most common adverse events are nausea, vomiting, drowsiness and dizziness, as would be expected from an opioid, there is a noticeable lack of respiratory depression. This latter property, together with its low potential for the development of tolerance and dependence, make tramadol a most interesting agent for clinical use. The studies reported in this article illustrate the beneficial and adverse effects of tramadol to enable the clinician to judge the value of this agent.
