Etoricoxib (Arcoxia) is a novel non steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that selectively inhibits the inducible form of cyclo-oxygenase (COX), COX-2. Etoricoxib has a higher COX-1/COX-2 selectivity ratio than the other COX-2-selective NSAIDs as rofecoxib, valdecoxib or celecoxib. Tablets of 60, 90 and 120 mg are available. The recommended dosage of etoricoxib is 60 mg/day for osteoarthritis, 90 mg/day for rheumatoid arthritis and 120 mg/day for acute gouty arthritis. Etoricoxib's efficacy has been widely studied in comparative studies, showing the same efficacy as non-COX-2 selective NSAID, with fewer gastro-intestinal adverse effects.
Etoricoxib is a new, highly selective cyclooxygenase (COX) 2 inhibitor, reported to have an increased cutaneous and systemic safety profile compared to the previous COX-2 inhibitors, including celecoxib, rofecoxib and valdecoxib. To the best of our knowledge, the present case of etoricoxib-induced erythema-multiforme-like eruption is the first reported in the literature.
Selective inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) isozyme afforded a useful drug design concept that resulted in the development of effective anti-inflammatory drugs that are devoid of adverse side effects, in particular gastrointestinal irritation, ulcerogenicity and renal toxicity attributed to inhibition of the cytoprotective cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) isozyme. Unfortunately, some selective COX-2 inhibitory drugs such as rofecoxib and valdecoxib are believed to be responsible for cardiovascular complications. Nitric oxide (NO) is an effective vasodilator that also inhibits platelet aggregation. Therefore hybrid NSAIDs containing NO-donor moieties have been developed to obtain effective treatment of inflammation with reduced GI and cardiovascular side effects. Here we review some of the most promising recent advances in NO-NAISDs donor drug development and summarizes medicinal chemistry efforts in search for new NO-NSAIDs prodrugs in an attempt to pave the way for further development in this promising area of research.
Nitrogen containing heterocyclic rings with an oxygen atom is considered as one of the best combination in medicinal chemistry due to their diversified biological activities. Isoxazole, a five membered heterocyclic azole ring is found in naturally occuring ibetonic acid along with some of the marketed drugs such as valdecoxib, flucloxacillin, cloxacillin, dicloxacillin, and danazol. It is also significant for showing antipsychotic activity in risperidone and anticonvulsant activity in zonisamide, the marketed drugs. This review article covers research articles reported till date covering biological activity along with SAR of fused isoxazole derivatives.
In ten large, well-controlled, randomised trials (n = 203 to 1089), valdecoxib, a selective inhibitor of cyclo-oxygenase-2, was significantly more effective than placebo in the treatment of osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis and pain associated with primary dysmenorrhoea, and for postsurgical analgesia. Valdecoxib 1.25 to 10mg twice daily and valdecoxib 10mg once daily were more effective than placebo for the relief of pain in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee, and dosages above 5mg twice daily were similar in efficacy to naproxen 500mg twice daily. Similarly, valdecoxib 5 and 10 mg/day were as effective for osteoarthritis of the hip as naproxen 500mg twice daily. In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, valdecoxib 10, 20 or 40 mg/day was significantly more effective than placebo, and similar in efficacy to naproxen 500mg twice daily; there were no significant differences in efficacy between the three dosages of valdecoxib. Valdecoxib 20 or 40mg administered 1 to 3 hours before and 12, 24 and 36 hours after hip arthroplasty provided significantly better analgesia than placebo, and significantly reduced the amount of morphine taken by patients. Single doses of valdecoxib 10 to 80mg administered before foot or oral surgery provided significantly better analgesia than placebo; when administered after oral surgery, valdecoxib 20 or 40mg provided greater sustained analgesia than oxycodone 10mg/paracetamol 1000mg or rofecoxib 50mg. In contrast to three nonselective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), valdecoxib 40mg twice daily did not cause significant changes in platelet function and bleeding times. Chronic users of NSAIDs who were switched to valdecoxib 10 or 20 mg/day for 12 weeks experienced significantly fewer gastroduodenal erosions or ulcers than patients receiving ibuprofen 2400 mg/day or diclofenac 150 mg/day for 12 weeks. Valdecoxib was generally well tolerated in clinical trials, with a similar incidence of adverse events to placebo.
On September 30, 2004, because of an observed increased risk of serious cardiovascular (CV) events, Merck & Co, Inc, voluntarily withdrew rofecoxib from the worldwide market. The withdrawal has focused attention on the possible class effect on the cardiovascular system of the other currently available cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) selective inhibitors: celecoxib and valdecoxib. This review evaluates and differentiates the CV effects of COX-2 selective inhibitors through an assessment of prospective, randomized epidemiologic studies and meta-analyses.
BACKGROUND: Traditional nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as diclofenac, ibuprofen, naproxen, and related agents are nonselective inhibitors of both cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and COX-2, which catalyze prostaglandin synthesis. This inhibition accounts not only for the analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and antipyretic effects of these agents, but also for side effects such as gastric mucosal damage and renal toxicity. Substantial evidence suggests that sparing COX-1 is advantageous for gastric safety. OBJECTIVE: This article reviews available information on the new COX-2-selective inhibitor valdecoxib, including its clinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, adverse effects, potential drug interactions, and contraindications and warnings. Results of clinical trials of efficacy and tolerability are summarized. METHODS: Articles for inclusion in this review were identified through searches of PubMed and MEDLINE (1966-December 2002) and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970-December 2002). Search terms included valdecoxib, Bextra, COX-2-selective inhibitors, coxibs, and selective cyclooxygenase inhibitors. The reference lists of identified articles were reviewed for additional publications. Product information was also obtained from the manufacturer of valdecoxib. RESULTS: Fourteen clinical studies involving > 4000 patients have been conducted. Valdecoxib was significantly more effective than placebo in the treatment of adult rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, pain associated with primary dysmenorrhea, and postoperative pain. Valdecoxib was comparable to naproxen for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in 1 study and equivalent to naproxen for the treatment of osteoarthritis in other studies. Three studies found valdecoxib comparable to naproxen sodium for the relief of moderate to severe pain due to primary dysmenorrhea, and others found valdecoxib comparable to oxycodone plus acetaminophen and significantly more effective than rofecoxib for the relief of pain associated with dental surgery (P < 0.05). Four safety studies and 2 reviews of clinical trials documented lower rates of endoscopic gastroduodenal ulcer formation with valdecoxib compared with ibuprofen, naproxen, and diclofenac (P < 0.001 to P < 0.05). Valdecoxib did not inhibit platelet function (bleeding time and platelet aggregation) in healthy adults or in the elderly. Due to the risk of potentially serious skin and allergic reactions, patients who are allergic to sulfa-containing drugs should not take valdecoxib. The drug should be discontinued immediately if rash develops. CONCLUSIONS: In clinical trials, valdecoxib was effective for the treatment of osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and moderate to severe pain associated with primary dysmenorrhea. As with the other COX-2-selective inhibitors (celecoxib and rofecoxib), valdecoxib appears to produce less gastrointestinal toxicity than conventional nonselective NSAIDs, although some of the relevant clinical studies have been published only as abstracts. Use of valdecoxib should be reserved for patients at risk for NSAID-induced gastrointestinal problems.
Etoricoxib is a cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2-selective NSAID with a higher COX-1 to COX-2 selectivity ratio than the other COX-2-selective NSAIDs rofecoxib, valdecoxib or celecoxib. In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, improvements in tender and swollen joint counts and patient and investigator global assessment of disease activity were significantly greater in etoricoxib than in placebo recipients in two studies. Etoricoxib was also significantly more effective than naproxen in one of these studies. In patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee, etoricoxib was significantly more effective than placebo and had similar efficacy to naproxen with regards to improvements in pain and physical function scores and patient global assessment of disease status scores in two studies. Etoricoxib had similar efficacy to diclofenac in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee. Single-dose etoricoxib relieved pain in patients with postoperative dental pain in two studies. Similar scores assessing total pain relief over 8 hours (TOPAR8) were reported in etoricoxib and naproxen sodium or ibuprofen recipients, and higher TOPAR8 scores were reported with etoricoxib than with paracetamol (acetaminophen)/codeine. Pain relief was significantly better with etoricoxib than placebo in two studies in patients with chronic low back pain. Etoricoxib had similar efficacy to indomethacin in a study in patients with acute gout, and single-dose etoricoxib had similar efficacy to naproxen sodium in a study in women with primary dysmenorrhoea. Compared with non-COX-selective NSAIDs, etoricoxib was associated with significantly fewer upper gastrointestinal (GI) perforations, ulcers or bleeds, and was significantly less likely to result in treatment discontinuation because of NSAID-type GI symptoms or any GI symptoms.
Valdecoxib (Bextra tablets of 10 mg and 20 mg) is a new non steroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) that selectively inhibits COX-2 isoform of cyclo-oxygenase. It is indicated for the symptomatic treatment of osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis (10 to 20 mg once a day) and for the treatment of primary dysmenorrhea (40 mg once a day). Valdecoxib is as efficacious as conventional non-COX-2 selective NSAIDs, but offers the advantage of a much better gastrointestinal tolerance. Valdecoxib has a prodrug that can be administered intravenously or intramuscularly (parecoxib, Dynastat) and has been developed for the short-term treatment of postsurgical pain.
Rofecoxib (Vioxx) was one of the first selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors (coxibs) to be approved for use in humans. Within five years after its release to the public, Vioxx was withdrawn from the market owing to the adverse cardiovascular effects of the drug. Despite the widespread knowledge of the development and withdrawal of Vioxx, relatively little is known at the molecular level about how the inhibitor binds to COX-2. Vioxx is unique in that the inhibitor contains a methyl sulfone moiety in place of the sulfonamide moiety found in other coxibs such as celecoxib and valdecoxib. Here, new crystallization conditions were identified that allowed the structural determination of human COX-2 in complex with Vioxx and the structure was subsequently determined to 2.7 A resolution. The crystal structure provides the first atomic level details of the binding of Vioxx to COX-2. As anticipated, Vioxx binds with its methyl sulfone moiety located in the side pocket of the cyclooxygenase channel, providing support for the isoform selectivity of this drug.
BACKGROUND: Selecting drugs for pain control in dentistry should be based on scientific research rather than clinical impressions. This article highlights the scientific attributes of analgesic medications that make them practical for treating postoperative dental pain. METHODS: This article is based on a review of the general characteristics of double-blind, controlled clinical studies compared with clinical observation in dental practice. The literature reviewed included all recent published clinical studies in refereed journals pertinent to the use of rofecoxib, a selective cyclo-oxygenase-2, or COX-2, inhibitor, in treating postoperative dental pain. The author focuses on some pharmacokinetic parameters of this agent as they compare with those of nonselective COX-2 inhibitors used to control dental pain. (The other selective COX-2 inhibitors, celecoxib and valdecoxib, do not carry label indications for short-term management of postoperative pain.) RESULTS: The findings of this literature review show that the COX-2-selective inhibitor rofecoxib is no more effective than conventional, nonselective, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or NSAIDs, for the relief of postoperative dental pain. Rofecoxib does, however, have the disadvantage of requiring rescue medication from a different class of drugs in a significant number of patients. CONCLUSIONS: The currently available COX-2-selective inhibitors do not replace conventional NSAIDs for the short-term treatment of postoperative dental pain. However, they are useful for treating chronic pain conditions because they produce fewer adverse effects when taken long-term than do conventional NSAIDs. CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Selecting drugs for the short-term relief of postoperative dental pain should be based on a careful assessment of all relevant pharmacological characteristics of a given agent, especially those related to maximum dosage, duration of action and efficacy.
INTRODUCTION: Valdecoxib is a cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) selective anti-inflammatory drug. It is associated with a reduced incidence of gastrointestinal complications and is potentially useful for patients with rheumatological diseases requiring longer term anti-inflammatory treatment. AREAS COVERED: Due to a perceived increased risk of thrombotic events, particularly cardiovascular hazards and reports of unpredictable, potentially life threatening skin reactions, valdecoxib has been voluntarily withdrawn from the market since 2005. This review manuscript examines the therapeutic potential and the adverse events of valdecoxib utilising a pubmed and web of sciences search to select literature on this subject. EXPERT OPINION: While valdecoxib did have reduced incidence of gastrointestinal complications due to a perceived increased risk of thrombotic events it was withdrawn. The limitations of the research supporting the withdrawal of this potential are discussed.
Although adverse effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) occur in only a small proportion of users, the widespread use of these drugs has resulted in a substantial overall number of affected persons who experience serious gastrointestinal complications. Dyspeptic symptoms are estimated to occur in 10-60% of NSAID users and lead to discontinuation of treatment in 5-15% of rheumatoid arthritis patients taking NSAIDs. It is now well established that the point prevalence of peptic ulcer disease in patients receiving conventional NSAID therapy ranges between 10 and 30%, representing a 10-30-fold increase over that found in the general population. One of 175 users of conventional NSAIDs in the USA will be hospitalized each year for NSAID-induced gastrointestinal damage. The mortality of hospitalized patients remains about 5-10%, with an expected annual death rate of 0.08%. The selective COX-II inhibitors (rofecoxib, celecoxib, parecoxib, etoricoxib, valdecoxib, lumiracoxib) show consistently comparable efficacy to that of conventional non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, but have a significantly reduced propensity to cause gastrointestinal toxicity. In many cases, the gastric effects of therapeutically active doses of COX-II inhibitors are indistinguishable from placebo. The safety benefits of COX-2 inhibitors given alone appear similar to combined therapy with conventional NSAIDs and gastroprotective agents. These findings warrant the consideration of COX-II inhibitors as first-line therapy in patients requiring long-term pain control.
This paper discusses the treatment of pain in the palliative care patient, specifically the use of meloxicam and recent advances in agents with cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) selectivity. Meloxicam is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that preferentially inhibits COX-2 more than cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), especially at low doses, thereby offering advantages over traditional nonselective NSAIDs. New COX-2 selective agents are discussed, including valdecoxib, parecoxib, etoricoxib, and COX-189.
Gateways to Clinical Trials is a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables have been retrieved from the Clinical Trials Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: 3-AP, Adalimumab, adefovir dipivoxil, AeroDose albuterol inhaler, agalsidase alfa, alemtuzumab, aminolevulinic acid methyl ester, anidulafungin, anthrax vaccine, anti-CTLA-4 MAb, azimilide hydrochloride; Bevacizumab, BG-12, bimatoprost, bortezomib, bosentan, botulinum toxin type B; Caspofungin acetate, ceftobiprole, certolizumab pegol, CG-53135, cilansetron; Darbepoetin alfa, degarelix acetate, dimethylfumarate, duloxetine hydrochloride, dutasteride; Eicosapentaenoic acid/docosahexaenoic acid, eletriptan, entecavir, esomeprazole magnesium, exatecan mesilate, exenatide, ezetimibe; Falecalcitriol, fampridine, fondaparinux sodium, fontolizumab; Gefitinib, gepirone hydrochloride; Human insulin; IDEA-070, imatinib mesylate, iodine (I131) tositumomab; Lanthanum carbonate, lubiprostone; Mafosfamide cyclohexylamine salt, melatonin; NC-531, nemifitide ditriflutate, neridronic acid, nolatrexed dihydrochloride; Oral insulin; Palifermin, parecoxib sodium, PEG-filgrastim, peginterferon alfa-2a, peginterferon alfa-2b, plerixafor hydrochloride, posaconazole, pramlintide acetate, pregabalin, PT-141; Quercetin; Ranibizumab, renzapride hydrochloride, RSD-1235; Sabarubicin hydrochloride, semapimod hydrochloride, Semax, SHL-749; Tegaserod maleate, tenatoprazole, tetrodotoxin, tolevamer sodium, trabectedin, travoprost, travoprost/timolol; Valdecoxib, visilizumab, Xcellerated T cells, XP-828L; Zoledronic acid monohydrate.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been used in the treatment of pain, including pain of dental origin, for many years. Even though they are effective in relieving symptoms, they are not without adverse events, most notably upper gastrointestinal toxicity. To prevent this side effect, the pharmaceutical industry developed NSAIDs that selectively inhibit the cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) isoenzyme, which is inducible and expressed at sites of inflammation, while sparing the COX-1 isoenzyme, which is associated with gastric protection. On September 30, 2004, the company that produced rofecoxib (Vioxx), a COX-2 inhibitor, voluntarily withdrew this product from the market based on the discovery of its association with increased risk of adverse cardiovascular events reported in an ongoing large clinical trial. This unexpected event caused the medical community to review existing literature regarding this and related medications and also led to the emergence of novel research to improve understanding of the potential mechanisms for this serious side effect. However, instead of clarifying the situation, reports created confusion and controversy regarding the safety of all types of NSAIDs. The major concern is an increase in adverse cardiovascular events with the use of individual drugs as well as the potential for a class effect. In this article, we review recent events and findings and discuss the implications for dentistry.
Valdecoxib, parecoxib, etoricoxib and lumiracoxib represent the second generation of selective COX-2 inhibitors. In comparison to the first generation, they show an at least equivalent efficacy in the treatment of pain and inflammation. However, the postulated gain of safety is yet difficult to determine and seems to be, if any, small.
There are many theories about why selective inhibitors of the second isoform of cyclooxygenase (COX-2) increase cardiovascular risk. Although torcetrapib raises blood pressure and cardiovascular risk, it has been difficult to prove such a link for COX-2 inhibitors in randomized clinical trials. This review shows a significant correlation in placebo-controlled trials between the five agents' elevations in blood pressures and their rate ratios for cardiovascular events. A larger body of evidence arises from randomized clinical trial comparisons of selective versus nonselective inhibitors of COX-2, but these results are heterogeneous for naproxen versus other traditional agents. The best current trial evidence comes from the centrally adjudicated placebo-controlled trials of celecoxib for colonic polyps: If the blood pressure did not rise at 1 or 3 years after randomization, cardiovascular risk did not significantly increase. Many more data will become available in 2013, after the only prospective clinical trial involving cardiovascular end points is completed.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: In macrophages, transient receptor potential vanilloid 2 (TRPV2) channel contributes to various cellular processes such as cytokine production, differentiation, phagocytosis and migration. Due to a lack of selective pharmacological tools, its function in immunological processes is not well understood and the identification of novel and selective TRPV2 modulators is highly desirable. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Novel and selective TRPV2 modulators were identified by screening a compound library using Ca(2+) influx assays with human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells heterologously expressing rat TRPV2. Hits were further characterized and validated with Ca(2+) influx and electrophysiological assays. Phagocytosis and migration of macrophages were analysed and the contribution of TRPV2 to the generation of Ca(2+) microdomains was studied by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM). KEY RESULTS: The compound IV2-1, a dithiolane derivative (1,3-dithiolan-2-ylidene)-4-methyl-5-phenylpentan-2-one), is a potent inhibitor of heterologously expressed TRPV2 channels (IC(50)  = 6.3 +/- 0.7 muM) but does not modify TRPV1, TRPV3 or TRPV4 channels. IV2-1 also inhibits TRPV2-mediated Ca(2+) influx in macrophages. IV2-1 inhibits macrophage phagocytosis along with valdecoxib and after siRNA-mediated knockdown. Moreover, TRPV2 inhibition inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced migration of macrophages whereas TRPV2 activation promotes migration. After activation, TRPV2 shapes Ca(2+) microdomains predominantly at the margin of macrophages, which are important cellular regions to promote phagocytosis and migration. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: IV2-1 is a novel TRPV2-selective blocker and underline the role of TRPV2 in macrophage-mediated phagocytosis and migration. Furthermore, we provide evidence that TRPV2 activation generates Ca(2+) microdomains, which may be involved in phagocytosis and migration of macrophages.
