Sugammadex is the first selective relaxant binding agent. It allows rapid reversal of any degree of neuromuscular blockade induced by steroidal neuromuscular blocking agents. Sugammadex acts by encapsulation of the neuromuscular blocking agent. This prevents the drug from acting on prejunctional and postjunctional nicotinic receptors, allowing acetylcholine to activate these receptors, and resulting in reversal of the neuromuscular blockade. Objective monitoring of the degree of neuromuscular blockade is strongly recommended to determine the optimal dose of sugammadex. A good understanding of the concept behind sugammadex is essential in order to use this reversal agent in clinical practice.
Rapacuronium bromide (Raplon; Organon Inc, West Orange, NJ) is a new, fast-onset, short-duration surgical muscle relaxant. While anesthesia providers are learning how to use this new relaxant, PACU nurses must become aware of the potential problems associated with rapacuronium. This article compares and contrasts the effects of succinylcholine and rapacuronium.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Sugammadex is a new reversal agent with a unique mechanism of action in anaesthesia. Because of its rapid onset of action and its efficacy in determining neuromuscular blockade at any time, it opens up new perspectives in anaesthesia. RECENT FINDINGS: During the last few years, a lot of phase II and III studies have been published, investigating various groups of patients and clinical situations. Sugammadex has been shown to be a well tolerated drug, which appears to meet every challenge it is presented with in daily clinical practice. SUMMARY: Sugammadex binds amino-steroidal muscle relaxants by encapsulation. It enables rapid reversal of neuromuscular blockade at any time point and at any depth of block. Its effects are predictable and very reliable, in contrast to cholinesterase inhibitors. This opens up new perspectives in anaesthesia. Even an emergency reversal of high-dose rocuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade is possible with sugammadex and times to full recovery (TOF 0.9) are faster than after spontaneous recovery from suxamethonium.
Sugammadex, a cyclodextrin, is a novel agent designed to encapsulate selectively steroidal neuromuscular blocking agents such as rocuronium and vecuronium as well. One molecule of sugammadex is able to encapsulate only one molecule of muscle relaxant. This original pharmacological property allows a very rapid reversal of muscle paralysis. After sugammadex injection, a train of four ratio higher than 0.9 is obtained in less than 5 minutes in all the patients whatever the degree of muscle paralysis at the time of reversal and even when anesthesia is maintained with halogenated agents. However, in order to preserve this efficacy, the dose of sugammadex needs to be adjusted to the degree of muscle paralysis at the time of reversal : 2 mg/kg after obtaining 2 responses at the adductor pollicis muscle after a train of four stimulation, 4 mg/kg with a post-tetanic count between 1 and 3 responses, and 12 to 16 mg/kg in case of rescue reversal (3 to 15 minutes after 0.6 to 1.2 mg/kg rocuronium). Even if the original property of sugammadex lets us think that per-operative neuromuscular transmission monitoring would not be furthermore useful, the assessment of the exact degree of muscle paralysis before reversal is mandatory for choosing the right dose of sugammadex.
The need for a rapid-acting non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent with a short duration of action resulted in the synthesis of rapacuronium. The onset of maximum block with rapacuronium occurs in 60-90 s with doses of 1.5-2.5 mg kg-1 with a duration of clinical relaxation of 15-30 min. Rapacuronium provides clinically acceptable intubating conditions in 60 s in a majority of patients with these doses, although the conditions are somewhat inferior to those obtained with succinylcholine in lightly anaesthetized patients, such as those undergoing a rapid-sequence induction. The main drawbacks of rapacuronium are the occurrence of dose-related pulmonary side-effects (increased airway pressure and/or overt bronchospasm) and hypotension and tachycardia. The cause of pulmonary side-effects is not certain but these have been serious enough to make its worldwide introduction doubtful.
A 19-year-old epileptic patient taking carbamazepine was anaesthetised for a sigmoid colectomy. Such patients are reported to show a resistance to the actions of competitive neuromuscular blocking drugs, and a conventional dose of vecuronium (0.1 mg.kg-1) produced relaxation for only 18 min. Subsequently she received vecuronium 6.7 mg.h-1 which kept the first twitch of the train-of-four response at 30% of the control value. Antagonism with neostigmine 1.25 mg produced a rapid and full recovery. The report illustrates the usefulness of monitoring neuromuscular transmission whenever there is an anticipation of an altered response.
The aim of this study was to examine differences in prejunctional effects of different relaxants by measuring the train-of-four (TOF) fade during the onset and recovery of neuromuscular block. The relaxants studied were atracurium (225 micrograms.kg-1), mivacurium (65 micrograms.kg-1) rocuronium (300 micrograms.kg-1) and vecuronium (40 micrograms.kg-1). The TOF ratios were measured at approximate heights of T1 (first response in the TOF) of 90, 75, 50, and 25%. The TOF fade (as shown by lower TOF ratios) increased with a decrease in the T1 during onset of neuromuscular block. Although there was a slightly greater fade with atracurium and rocuronium during the onset of block, the differences among the relaxants were insignificant. It is concluded that the relative prejunctional effects of these relaxants are similar.
Neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) are utilized frequently in the emergency department (ED). We begin with a brief history of neuromuscular blockade, then review the indications and guidelines for its use in the emergency department setting. The relevant agents will be discussed focusing on dosage, side effects, and adverse reactions. Special attention will be paid to succinylcholine, the drug most commonly employed in the ED setting, followed by a summary of the nondepolarizing agents currently available, in particular the four shorter-acting agents that are most appropriate for administration in the ED.
Significant progress in the management of aminosteroid nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockers will follow the introduction of sugammadex (Org 25969). Safety and rapid recovery of muscle force will improve and the adverse effects of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors will be avoided. Sugammadex is a modified gamma-cyclodextrin agent developed for the specific reversal of rocuronium and, to a lesser extent, vecuronium. This novel drug functions by means of encapsulation (chelation). Sugammadex was recently approved by the European Medicines Evaluation Agency and became available in Spain in 2009, leading to a series of changes related to patient safety and surgical conditions. We review the literature on sugammadex published to date.
Six unpremedicated patients who had given their informed consent were given vecuronium 0.08 mg kg-1 before elective surgery. Recovery from neuromuscular blockade was measured electrically and mechanically. Neuromuscular blockade was antagonized 1 h after the administration of vecuronium with two doses of neostigmine 2.5 mg (three patients) or edrophonium 0.5 mg kg-1 (three patients). Although the onset of initial recovery was similar, subsequent recovery was faster when measured electrically (EMG) than when measured mechanically. Recovery appeared to be faster in younger patients. Reintroduction of neuromuscular blockade occurred after the second dose of neostigmine 2.5 mg, given to antagonize the block. This did not occur after either dose of edrophonium 0.5 mg kg-1.
The ability of alfentanil 15 micrograms kg-1 or 30 micrograms kg-1 to improve intubating conditions was studied in four groups of 25 ASA class 1 patients. Induction of anaesthesia was with thiopentone 5 mg kg-1. Neuromuscular blockade was induced with vecuronium using the priming principle. The priming dose, priming interval and intubating dose were 0.01 mg kg-1, 4 min, and 0.1 mg kg-1, respectively. Intubation was attempted 1 min after the intubating dose. Intubating conditions were judged unacceptable in about 30% of the patients belonging to the control groups. Alfentanil 15 micrograms kg-1, when administered 65 s before intubation, reduced the incidence of coughing and diaphragmatic movement (P less than 0.05) but did not reduce the incidence of overall unacceptable intubating conditions. Alfentanil 30 micrograms kg-1, however, reduced the incidence of vocal cord movement (P less than 0.005) as well as coughing and diaphragmatic movement (P less than 0.002). Alfentanil 30 micrograms kg-1 reduced the incidence of unacceptable intubating conditions from about 30% to 4% (P less than 0.02).
The drug vecuronium bromide, a short acting, non-depolarising agent with little side-effects, has brought much promise in the field of muscle relaxants. Fifth healthy patients were induced with injection thiopentone sodium 4 mg/kg and vecuronium bromide, 0.1 mg/kg was given IV. The earliest time at which the largest percentage of patients could be intubated satisfactorily was noted. The intubating conditions were estimated by scoring method. The duration of clinical relaxation was decided from the time of IV injection of vecuronium bromide to the return of muscle power of the non-respiratory muscles requiring repeat dose of the drug. The ideal intubating condition was achieved at 120 seconds and the duration of clinical relaxation ranged from 11-15 minutes.
We report a case of accidental epidural injection of vecuronium in a female patient who underwent hemorrhoidectomy using epidural anesthesia. Because epidural injection of muscle relaxants may have serious side effects, immediate establishment of airway protection, monitoring of muscle relaxation, and follow-up for clinical signs of neurotoxicity are recommended.
A case history is presented which records bronchospasm due to vecuronium. Immunological investigations, including basophil degranulation tests, indicated that the bronchospasm was not caused by direct histamine release and was not IgE mediated. It was of interest that intradermal testing gave a positive wheal response against neuromuscular agents other than those involved in the anaesthetic procedure under investigation. A positive reaction to vecuronium was only obtained when given in a high concentration and accords with the general belief that vecuronium has extremely low potential for histamine release.
Bronchospasm represents the clinical manifestation of bronchial muscles contraction resulting in reduced alveolar air flow. Non-allergic mechanisms or anaphylaxis underlie the genesis of perioperative bronchospasm, a potential anaesthetic disaster. Early recognition and treatment are crucial. We report a rare incident of anaphylactic bronchospasm without hypotension during general anaesthesia. Urticaria appeared in chest and abdomen suggesting anaphylaxis. After the event resolved with bronchodilators, surgery continued uneventfully. Vecuronium was the most probable culprit but confirmation was not possible as the patient was lost to follow up. Rarely, perioperative anaphylaxis presents only with bronchospasm that requires prompt attention to avoid adverse outcome. Keywords: allergy; anaphylaxis; bronchial spasm; general anesthesia.
Neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) are used in many critically ill patients, although their use is declining. NMBAs are designed for short term use in the operating theatre, and there are few studies in the critical care setting of either efficacy or safety, in particular their metabolism may be impaired by organ dysfunction. Weakness associated with critical illness is multifactorial, but in many cases is associated with myopathies and neuropathies. The possible role of NMBAs in the development of weakness is unclear, but there is no proven link between the use of NMBAs and neuropathy or myopathy.
The priming principle suggests that the onset of neuromuscular block may be accelerated if an intubating dose is preceded by a priming dose administered a few minutes earlier. We thought it would be instructive to use a pharmacodynamic/pharmacokinetic model to estimate the risk associated with different priming doses and intervals. In any normal population, there is wide variability in the response to neuromuscular blocking drugs. For most relaxants, the coefficient of variation for the 50% effective dose (ED(50)) approximates 20%-25%. Thus, 1 patient in 50 (-2.05 SD) may have an ED(50) only half of the commonly cited value. By using published pharmacodynamic/pharmacokinetic data, we calculated the effect of administering 10%, 20%, or 30% of the ED(95) on the response of the adductor pollicis muscle in a population normally distributed with respect to drug sensitivity. A dose equivalent to 10% of the ED(95) will rarely produce a measurable neuromuscular effect. As this dose is increased, the potential for clinical weakness rapidly escalates. In 1 in 50 individuals, the usual recommendation of 10% of the intubation dose will produce measurable neuromuscular depression. For vecuronium, the optimal priming interval is 5 min. The safety and dependability of the priming principle is very much subject to the laws of probability. IMPLICATIONS: When using the priming principle to accelerate the onset of neuromuscular block, the initial dose should not exceed 10% the drug's ED(95). For drugs other than rocuronium, the optimal priming interval is not <5 min.
Recovery from the effects of muscle relaxants can occur either spontaneously by their metabolism in the body or by elimination via the normal excretion pathways, or by the administration of pharmacologic antagonists. The decision as to whether spontaneous recovery should be allowed to take place or pharmacologic reversal should be induced depends upon several factors, principal among them being the duration of action of the muscle relaxant used, its dose, and the time that is available. The recovery times of most relaxants, including atracurium and vecuronium, are such as to require antagonism if adequate recovery is to be attained quickly. An agent such as mivacurium may, however, allow complete spontaneous recovery to take place without the use of antagonists.
Recovery from neuromuscular block produced by vecuronium was studied in 50 patients using electromyography and the train-of-four technique. Twenty patients received neostigmine 2.5 mg, 10 when the initial response of the train-of-four was 50% of control and 10 when it was 10%. Neostigmine 5 mg was investigated in a similar manner and in 10 patients spontaneous recovery was studied. In all patients the time to 70% recovery of the initial response and of the train-of-four ratio was followed. Neostigmine significantly reduced the time to 70% recovery of both ratios with both degrees of block, but neostigmine 5.0 mg did not give a substantially more rapid recovery than 2.5 mg. No evidence of a neostigmine-induced block was encountered. neostigmine 2.5 mg was rapidly effective in antagonizing vecuronium-induced block, even when initial recovery was only slight: there was no advantage in using neostigmine 5.0 mg.
The authors compared tracheal intubating conditions using three techniques for rapid-sequence orotracheal intubation. Sixty patients were randomly assigned to one of three groups: priming with vecuronium (0.01 mg/kg priming dose, 4-min priming interval, 0.14-mg/kg intubating dose along with thiopental 4-6 mg iv); timing with vecuronium (0.15-mg/kg intubating dose given before thiopental and timed to weakness of hand grip); and succinylcholine (1.5 mg/kg). Blinded intubators graded intubating conditions 60 s after the induction of anesthesia with thiopental. Intubation scores in the succinylcholine group were significantly better than in the priming group (P = 0.009). Intubation scores of the succinylcholine and the timing groups were not significantly different. Use of the timing principle for rapid-sequence orotracheal intubation is a reliable alternative in cases where succinylcholine is contraindicated.
