IMPORTANCE: Menopause, due to loss of ovarian follicular activity without another pathological or physiological cause, typically occurs between the ages of 45 years and 56 years. During the menopausal transition, approximately 50% to 75% of women have hot flashes, night sweats, or both (vasomotor symptoms) and more than 50% have genitourinary symptoms (genitourinary syndrome of menopause [GSM]). OBSERVATIONS: Vasomotor symptoms typically last more than 7 years and GSM is often chronic. Efficacious treatments for women with bothersome vasomotor symptoms or GSM symptoms include hormonal and nonhormonal options. Systemic estrogen alone or combined with a progestogen reduces the frequency of vasomotor symptoms by approximately 75%. Oral and transdermal estrogen have similar efficacy. Conjugated equine estrogens (CEE) with or without medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) were the only hormonal treatments for which clinical trials were designed to examine cardiovascular events, venous thromboembolism, and breast cancer risk. Compared with placebo, the increased risk of stroke and venous thromboembolism associated with CEE (with or without MPA) and breast cancer (with use of CEE plus MPA) is approximately 1 excess event/1000 person-years. Low-dose CEE plus bazedoxifene is not associated with increased risk of breast cancer (0.25%/year vs 0.23%/year with placebo). Bioidentical estrogens approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (with identical chemical structure to naturally produced estrogens, and often administered transdermally) also are available to treat vasomotor symptoms. For women who are not candidates for hormonal treatments, nonhormonal approaches such as citalopram, desvenlafaxine, escitalopram, gabapentin, paroxetine, and venlafaxine are available and are associated with a reduction in frequency of vasomotor symptoms by approximately 40% to 65%. Low-dose vaginal estrogen is associated with subjective improvement in GSM symptom severity by approximately 60% to 80%, with improvement in severity by 40% to 80% for vaginal prasterone, and with improvement in severity by 30% to 50% for oral ospemifene. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: During the menopausal transition, approximately 50% to 75% of women have vasomotor symptoms and GSM symptoms. Hormonal therapy with estrogen is the first-line therapy for bothersome vasomotor symptoms and GSM symptoms, but nonhormonal medications (such as paroxetine and venlafaxine) also can be effective. Hormone therapy is not indicated for the prevention of cardiovascular disease.
Antidepressant response could be from 42 to 50% genetically determined. Venlafaxine (VEN) was the sixth most-prescribed antidepressant in the USA in 2017. Therefore, we reviewed studies which focused on the pharmacogenetics of VEN and found that there is a lack of guidelines for pharmacogenetic testing for VEN. Within investigated genetic polymorphisms, few of them can be indicated as potential predictors of VEN efficacy and tolerance. However, additional pharmacogenetic studies of VEN should be performed to reproduce already obtained results or explain contradictory ones. The individualization of pharmacotherapy is a key issue in providing patients with the highest possible quality of treatment, therefore pharmacogenetic studies should be one of the components of therapy optimization.
BACKGROUND: Depression is the single largest contributor to non-fatal health loss worldwide. Second-generation antidepressants are the first-line option for pharmacological management of depression. Optimising their use is crucial in reducing the burden of depression; however, debate about their dose dependency and their optimal target dose is ongoing. We have aimed to summarise the currently available best evidence to inform this clinical question. METHODS: We did a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of double-blind, randomised controlled trials that examined fixed doses of five selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and sertraline), venlafaxine, or mirtazapine in the acute treatment of adults (aged 18 years or older) with major depression, identified from the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, CINAHL, Embase, LILACS, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, AMED, PSYNDEX, websites of drug licensing agencies and pharmaceutical companies, and trial registries. We imposed no language restrictions, and the search was updated until Jan 8, 2016. Doses of SSRIs were converted to fluoxetine equivalents. Trials of antidepressants for patients with depression and a serious concomitant physical illness were excluded. The main outcomes were efficacy (treatment response defined as 50% or greater reduction in depression severity), tolerability (dropouts due to adverse effects), and acceptability (dropouts for any reasons), all after a median of 8 weeks of treatment (range 4-12 weeks). We used a random-effects, dose-response meta-analysis model with flexible splines for SSRIs, venlafaxine, and mirtazapine. FINDINGS: 28 554 records were identified through our search (24 524 published and 4030 unpublished records). 561 published and 121 unpublished full-text records were assessed for eligibility, and 77 studies were included (19 364 participants; mean age 42.5 years, SD 11.0; 7156 [60.9%] of 11 749 reported were women). For SSRIs (99 treatment groups), the dose-efficacy curve showed a gradual increase up to doses between 20 mg and 40 mg fluoxetine equivalents, and a flat to decreasing trend through the higher licensed doses up to 80 mg fluoxetine equivalents. Dropouts due to adverse effects increased steeply through the examined range. The relationship between the dose and dropouts for any reason indicated optimal acceptability for the SSRIs in the lower licensed range between 20 mg and 40 mg fluoxetine equivalents. Venlafaxine (16 treatment groups) had an initially increasing dose-efficacy relationship up to around 75-150 mg, followed by a more modest increase, whereas for mirtazapine (11 treatment groups) efficacy increased up to a dose of about 30 mg and then decreased. Both venlafaxine and mirtazapine showed optimal acceptability in the lower range of their licensed dose. These results were robust to several sensitivity analyses. INTERPRETATION: For the most commonly used second-generation antidepressants, the lower range of the licensed dose achieves the optimal balance between efficacy, tolerability, and acceptability in the acute treatment of major depression. FUNDING: Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Swiss National Science Foundation, and National Institute for Health Research.
BACKGROUND: Serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRI) are widely used in medical practice. Their discontinuation has been associated with a wide range of symptoms. The aim of this paper is to identify the occurrence, frequency, and features of withdrawal symptoms after SNRI discontinuation. METHODS: PRISMA guidelines were followed to conduct a systematic review. Electronic databases included PubMed, the Cochrane Library, Web of Science, and MEDLINE from the inception of each database to June 2017. Titles, abstracts, and topics were searched using a combination of the following terms: "duloxetine" OR "venlafaxine" OR "desvenlafaxine" OR "milnacipran" OR "levomilnacipran" OR "SNRI" OR "second generation antidepressant" OR "serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor" AND "discontinuation" OR "withdrawal" OR "rebound." Only published trials in the English language were included. RESULTS: Sixty-one reports met the criteria for inclusion. There were 22 double-blind randomized controlled trials, 6 studies where patients were treated in an open fashion and then randomized to a double-blind controlled phase, 8 open trials, 1 prospective naturalistic study, 1 retrospective study, and 23 case reports. Withdrawal symptoms occurred after discontinuation of any type of SNRI. The prevalence of withdrawal symptoms varied across reports and appeared to be higher with venlafaxine. Symptoms typically ensued within a few days from discontinuation and lasted a few weeks, also with gradual tapering. Late onset and/or a longer persistence of disturbances occurred as well. CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians need to add SNRI to the list of drugs potentially inducing withdrawal symptoms upon discontinuation, together with other types of psychotropic drugs. The results of this study challenge the use of SNRI as first-line treatment for mood and anxiety disorders.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is common, with a lifetime prevalence of approximately 6%. PTSD may develop at least one month after a traumatic event involving the threat of death or harm to physical integrity, although earlier symptoms may represent an acute stress disorder. Symptoms typically involve trauma-related intrusive thoughts, avoidant behaviors, negative alterations of cognition or mood, and changes in arousal and reactivity. Assessing for past trauma in patients with anxiety or other psychiatric illnesses may aid in diagnosing and treating PTSD. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed., text revision provides diagnostic criteria, and the PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 uses these diagnostic criteria to help physicians diagnose PTSD and determine severity. First-line treatment of PTSD involves psychotherapy, such as trauma-focused cognitive behavior therapy. Pharmacotherapy is useful for patients who have residual symptoms after psychotherapy or are unable or unwilling to access psychotherapy. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (i.e., fluoxetine, paroxetine, and sertraline) and the serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor venlafaxine effectively treat primary PTSD symptoms. The addition of other pharmacotherapy, such as atypical antipsychotics or topiramate, may be helpful for residual symptoms. Patients with PTSD often have sleep disturbance related to hyperarousal or nightmares. Prazosin is effective for the treatment of PTSD-related sleep disturbance. Clinicians should consider testing patients with PTSD for obstructive sleep apnea because many patients with PTSD-related sleep disturbance have this condition. Psychiatric comorbidities, particularly mood disorders and substance use, are common in PTSD and are best treated concurrently.
Venlafaxine (VEN) is an antidepressant agent widely used nowadays as an alternative to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), particularly for the treatment of SSRI-resistant depression. As the co-administration of antidepressant drugs with other medications is very common in clinical practice, the potential risk for pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic drug interactions that may be clinically meaningful increases. Bearing in mind that VEN has exhibited large variability in antidepressant response, besides the individual genetic background, several other factors may contribute to those variable clinical outcomes, such as the occurrence of significant drug-drug interactions. Indeed, the presence of drug interactions is possibly one of the major reasons for interindividual variability, and their anticipation should be considered in conjugation with other specific patients' characteristics to optimize the antidepressant therapy. Hence, a comprehensive overview of the pharmacokinetic- and pharmacodynamic-based drug interactions involving VEN is herein provided, particularly addressing their clinical relevance.
The results of large clinical trials have led physicians and patients to question the safety of hormone therapy for menopause. In the past, physicians prescribed hormone therapy to improve overall health and prevent cardiac disease, as well as for symptoms of menopause. Combined estrogen/progestogen therapy, but not estrogen alone, increases the risk of breast cancer when used for more than three to five years. Therefore, in women with a uterus, it is recommended that physicians prescribe combination therapy only to treat menopausal symptoms such as vasomotor symptoms (hot flashes) and vaginal atrophy, using the smallest effective dosage for the shortest possible duration. Although estrogen is the most effective treatment for hot flashes, nonhormonal alternatives such as low-dose paroxetine, venlafaxine, and gabapentin are effective alternatives. Women with a uterus who are using estrogen should also take a progestogen to reduce the risk of endometrial cancer. Women who cannot tolerate adverse effects of progestogens may benefit from a combined formulation of estrogen and the selective estrogen receptor modulator bazedoxifene. There is no highquality, consistent evidence that yoga, paced respiration, acupuncture, exercise, stress reduction, relaxation therapy, and alternative therapies such as black cohosh, botanical products, omega-3 fatty acid supplements, and dietary Chinese herbs benefit patients more than placebo. One systematic review suggests modest improvement in hot flashes and vaginal dryness with soy products, and small studies suggest that clinical hypnosis significantly reduces hot flashes. Patients with genitourinary syndrome of menopause may benefit from vaginal estrogen, nonhormonal vaginal moisturizers, or ospemifene (the only nonhormonal treatment approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for dyspareunia due to menopausal atrophy). The decision to use hormone therapy depends on clinical presentation, a thorough evaluation of the risks and benefits, and an informed discussion with the patient.
The perception of the media is that chemotherapy is mainly associated with nausea, vomiting and hair loss. In the longer term the development of peripheral neuropathy, i.e. chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is often more important for patients. The CIPN represents a side effect of many antineoplastic substances with severe functional impairment and its prevention and treatment is an important task. In addition to many interventions, which have been shown to be ineffective, physiotherapeutic measures and possibly the prophylactic application of cold are helpful for prevention. Randomized studies on the treatment of painful CIPN provided positive data for duloxetine and to a lesser extent for venlafaxine.
A 41-year-old amenorrheic woman started taking venlafaxine 37.5 mg/day for treatment of depression; 7 days later, she experienced vaginal bleeding, which ceased 1 day after she stopped taking the drug. On rechallenge with venlafaxine, she again experienced vaginal bleeding that resolved after discontinuation. We found no published reports describing vaginal bleeding associated with venlafaxine. However, premarketing and postmarketing data report similar adverse effects in patients taking the agent. In addition, several cases of menstrual irregularities have occurred with two other antidepressants: fluoxetine and bupropion. This case report supports previous surveillance data indicating that venlafaxine may cause vaginal bleeding.
BACKGROUND: About one-third of patients with depression fail to achieve remission despite treatment with multiple antidepressants and are considered to have treatment-resistant depression. METHODS: This Phase 3, double-blind, multicenter study enrolled adults with moderate-to-severe depression and nonresponse to >/=2 antidepressants in the current depression episode. Eligible patients (N = 346) were randomized (1:1:1) to twice-weekly nasal spray treatment (esketamine [56 or 84 mg] or placebo) plus a newly initiated, open-label, oral antidepressant taken daily for 4 weeks. The primary efficacy endpoint was change from baseline to day 28 in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale total score, performed by blinded, remote raters. Based on the predefined statistical testing sequence, esketamine 84 mg/antidepressant had to be significant for esketamine 56 mg/antidepressant to be formally tested. RESULTS: Statistical significance was not achieved with esketamine 84 mg/antidepressant compared with antidepressant/placebo (least squares [LS] means difference [95% CI]: -3.2 [-6.88, 0.45]; 2-sided P value = .088). Although esketamine 56 mg/antidepressant could not be formally tested, the LS means difference was -4.1 [-7.67, -0.49] (nominal 2-sided P value = .027). The most common (>20%) adverse events reported for esketamine/antidepressant were nausea, dissociation, dizziness, vertigo, and headache. CONCLUSIONS: Statistical significance was not achieved for the primary endpoint; nevertheless, the treatment effect (Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale) for both esketamine/antidepressant groups exceeded what has been considered clinically meaningful for approved antidepressants vs placebo. Safety was similar between esketamine/antidepressant groups and no new dose-related safety concerns were identified. This study provides supportive evidence for the safety and efficacy of esketamine nasal spray as a new, rapid-acting antidepressant for patients with treatment-resistant depression. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02417064.
Venlafaxine (VEN) is considered to be one of the most effective antidepressants. It belongs to the group of serotonin (5-HT) and noradrenaline (NA) reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). NA and 5-HT have receptors on the surface of platelets and are involved in platelet aggregation. In this case study, we present the case of a patient treated for one of the types of myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN), essential thrombocythemia (ET), in whom VEN was added to pharmacotherapy during the treatment of a severe episode of depression with psychotic symptoms. We observed a gradual reduction in platelet count when increasing the dose of VEN. We also present a narrative review of literature about the effect of VEN on platelet counts and activity. We conclude that, in the group of patients taking VEN, attention should be paid to the rare adverse effect of a decrease in the number of platelets.
BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder is one of the most common mental disorders in children and adolescents. However, whether to use pharmacological interventions in this population and which drug should be preferred are still matters of controversy. Consequently, we aimed to compare and rank antidepressants and placebo for major depressive disorder in young people. METHODS: We did a network meta-analysis to identify both direct and indirect evidence from relevant trials. We searched PubMed, the Cochrane Library, Web of Science, Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, LiLACS, regulatory agencies' websites, and international registers for published and unpublished, double-blind randomised controlled trials up to May 31, 2015, for the acute treatment of major depressive disorder in children and adolescents. We included trials of amitriptyline, citalopram, clomipramine, desipramine, duloxetine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, imipramine, mirtazapine, nefazodone, nortriptyline, paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine. Trials recruiting participants with treatment-resistant depression, treatment duration of less than 4 weeks, or an overall sample size of less than ten patients were excluded. We extracted the relevant information from the published reports with a predefined data extraction sheet, and assessed the risk of bias with the Cochrane risk of bias tool. The primary outcomes were efficacy (change in depressive symptoms) and tolerability (discontinuations due to adverse events). We did pair-wise meta-analyses using the random-effects model and then did a random-effects network meta-analysis within a Bayesian framework. We assessed the quality of evidence contributing to each network estimate using the GRADE framework. This study is registered with PROSPERO, number CRD42015016023. FINDINGS: We deemed 34 trials eligible, including 5260 participants and 14 antidepressant treatments. The quality of evidence was rated as very low in most comparisons. For efficacy, only fluoxetine was statistically significantly more effective than placebo (standardised mean difference -0.51, 95% credible interval [CrI] -0.99 to -0.03). In terms of tolerability, fluoxetine was also better than duloxetine (odds ratio [OR] 0.31, 95% CrI 0.13 to 0.95) and imipramine (0.23, 0.04 to 0.78). Patients given imipramine, venlafaxine, and duloxetine had more discontinuations due to adverse events than did those given placebo (5.49, 1.96 to 20.86; 3.19, 1.01 to 18.70; and 2.80, 1.20 to 9.42, respectively). In terms of heterogeneity, the global I(2) values were 33.21% for efficacy and 0% for tolerability. INTERPRETATION: When considering the risk-benefit profile of antidepressants in the acute treatment of major depressive disorder, these drugs do not seem to offer a clear advantage for children and adolescents. Fluoxetine is probably the best option to consider when a pharmacological treatment is indicated. FUNDING: National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program).
No. Exercise doesn't decrease the frequency or severity of vasomotor menopausal symptoms in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women (strength of recommendation: A, systematic review of randomized controlled trials [RCTs] and consistent RCT).
Frequently, patients suffering from depressive disorders discontinue antidepressant treatment due to the unpleasant side effects of these medications, particularly in the first month of therapy. Good tolerability (particularly in the early stages of treatment), patient education, and the quality of the relationship between physicians and patients are all common determining factors of patient adherence. Controlled-release antidepressant agents have the potential to improve tolerability early in the course of therapy, one of the most likely periods of dropout from treatment. Side effects for controlled-release formulations are often more favorable because controlled-release formulations exhibit lower peak plasma drug concentrations when compared with immediate-release formulations. Venlafaxine extended-release (XR), bupropion sustained-release (SR), and paroxetine controlled-release (CR) are 3 commonly utilized controlled-release antidepressants that have demonstrated improvement over their immediate-release predecessors in reducing certain adverse effects.
A 49-year-old male with major depressive disorder well-managed with venlafaxine [serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI)] and no history of manic episodes developed his first manic episode following use of tramadol. Tramadol-induced mania has been described with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors but not SNRIs. In addition, mania is not listed as a potential clinical side effect-further illustrating this relative rarity. Due to tramadol's SNRI activity, there is definitive risk for mood lability in individuals managed with tramadol and other serotonergic medications as seen in this patient. The authors findings suggest the need for greater risk consideration when prescribing tramadol with other related agents such as venlafaxine.
There is strong research evidence to support the pharmacological treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as a second line to trauma-focused psychological interventions. Fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline and venlafaxine are the best-evidenced drugs, with lower-level evidence for other medications. It is important that prescribing for PTSD is evidence-based.
In persons with narcolepsy type 1, sudden withdrawal of antidepressants can cause status cataplecticus. We describe a 77-year-old female patient with long-standing history of narcolepsy type 1 complaining of recurrent short sudden episodes of whole-body paralysis, with preserved consciousness and memory. Episodes started an hour after her family invited her to celebrate Mother's Day. One week prior, patient had abruptly discontinued duloxetine. Cataplectic episodes resolved within 24 hours after resumption of duloxetine and treatment of hypokalemia. Status cataplecticus has been reported after withdrawal of venlafaxine, fluoxetine, and clomipramine. This is the first report of status cataplecticus due to duloxetine withdrawal. We review the pathophysiology of antidepressant withdrawal-induced status cataplecticus. In persons with narcolepsy type 1, physicians discontinuing any antidepressant should counsel on adverse effects of antidepressant withdrawal and reduce the dose in tapering manner.
Oral anticoagulants are among the drugs with the greatest number of drug interactions. The concomitant use of several medications is a common practice in patients with cardiovascular problems, who often also present with depression; therefore, the probability of an interaction occurring between warfarin and the antidepressants is high, and may result in increased or decreased anticoagulant activity. Since the possible interactions between these two classes of drugs have been poorly explored in literature, with a risk to the patients who use them, we reviewed the pharmacology of warfarin and its possible interactions with antidepressants. Of the antidepressants analyzed, those that showed relevant effects on the interaction with warfarin were, in decreasing order: paroxetine, venlafaxine, fluoxetine, and duloxetine.
Pyogenic granulomas are benign vascular lesions that can result from a large number of etiological factors. Drugs are one etiological factor involved in pyogenic granuloma development. In this study we present our experience of multiple pyogenic granulomas following levothyroxine administration suggesting that levothyroxine hormone replacement therapy might play an important role in the formation of pyogenic granuloma. We also reviewed the literatures regarding drug-induced pyogenic granulomas.
The aim of this study was to investigate attrition (dropout) during a second antidepressant trial in treatment-resistant depression. Three hundred forty-two outpatients with major depressive disorder and lack of response to a prior antidepressant were treated with venlafaxine for 6 weeks. Sociodemographic and clinical characteristics were compared between the attrition and non-attrition groups. Attrition was reported in 65 patients (19%), of whom 30 patients (46%) dropped out within week 4. The characteristics of dropout patients included a longer duration of depressive episode (P = 0.011) and lower antidepressant doses (P < 0.0001) as a consequence of a faster decrease (week 2) in depressive symptoms (P = 0.028). However, by controlling for early improvement, dropout subjects were associated with a smaller probability of antidepressant response (odds ratio = 0.16blacksquare, square, filled.83). A decrease of at least 30% in Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale on day 14 predicted subsequent dropout with high specificity (81.9%blacksquare, square, filled1.0%) but lower sensitivity (19.6%blacksquare, square, filled2.8%) for clinical use. Patients who have been depressed for a longer period and show an initial improvement of symptoms after changing their antidepressant may be at increased risk for drop out. Further studies are necessary to ascertain the usefulness of these characteristics for predicting attrition.
