Most antihypertensive drugs have known side effects that are elicited by the careful clinician taking care of hypertensive patients. However, many antihypertensive medications utilize drug delivery systems that prolong the duration of blood pressure reduction. The gastrointestinal therapeutic system that is used with nifedipine, isradipine, and verapamil has a unique side effect. Obstruction may occur at the site of a previous surgical repair (pyloric stenosis or gastroplasty) or stenosis of the esophagus, small intestine, or colon. The same delivery system is used with methylphenidate, oxybutynin, glipizide, and doxazosin. Although this complication is rare, physicians who prescribe and care for hypertensive patients should recognize this potential problem.
Verapamil is a slow-channel calcium-blocking agent that has been released recently by the Food and Drug Administration for treatment of cardiac dysrhythmias in all age groups. Its primary action is to slow conduction in the atrioventricular node, thereby abolishing those types of supraventricular tachycardia using the atrioventricular node as a part of the reentry circuit or slowing the ventricular rate in someone with atrial flutter. Other investigations have shown that it is likely to relieve left ventricular outflow obstruction in patients with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. Because of its potential widespread usefulness in the pediatric population, all pediatricians should be more aware of how it is used and the potential hazards. The methods of administration and treatment of overdoses as well as indications for usage, contraindications, and adverse reactions will be explained.
The role of calcium in the cardiovascular system, and the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, and studies evaluating the clinical use of three calcium-channel blocking agents--verapamil hydrochloride, nifedipine, and diltiazem hydrochloride--are reviewed. Inhibition of calcium conductance and alteration of calcium availability cause profound changes in: slow inward current of the cardiac action potential, myocardial contractility and metabolism, blood pressure regulation, and smooth-muscle activity. Calcium-channel blocking agents affect the movement of calcium through these channels in smooth and cardiac muscle; the specific agents in this class differ markedly in their inhibitory effects. Verapamil hydrochloride is useful intravenously for treating supraventricular rhythm disturbances. It is absorbed well when taken orally, but there is an extensive first-pass effect, so that about 20% enters the systemic circulation. The incidence of side effects in patients receiving verapamil is 9-10%; about 1% require discontinuation of therapy. Verapamil is contraindicated in patients with sinus-node disease, unstable atrioventricular block, and shock. Nifedipine has proven useful for hypertension, coronary-artery spasm, and exertional angina; it has little negative inotropic effect. Approximately 90% of an oral dose is absorbed, and 65-70% reaches the systemic circulation after first-pass metabolism. Protein binding of nifedipine ranges from 92 to 98%. Side effects of nifedipine, usually associated with the peripheral vasodilatory action, occur in approximately 15% of patients, requiring discontinuance in 2-5%. Diltiazem hydrochloride has been shown effective in the treatment of coronary-artery spasm; limited studies indicate it may be useful in treating exertional angina, hypertension, and possibly arrhythmias. Diltiazem's oral bioavailability is good (90% reaches systemic circulation), but there is significant interindividual variability between administered dose and resulting plasma concentration. Geriatric patients have delayed absorption and reduced clearance of diltiazem given in sustained-release tablets. Studies of diltiazem are limited at this time. The exact role of calcium-channel blocking agents has not yet been elucidated. However, their ability to influence the calcium channel greatly expands the therapeutic armamentarium for cardiovascular disease and other disorders.
Patients with heart failure are particularly susceptible to the negative effects of calcium channel blockers because the failing heart demonstrates a defect in the delivery of calcium to the contractile proteins, and an attenuation of the normal sympathetic reflexes. Currently these drugs have no place in the treatment of heart failure caused by systolic dysfunction of the left ventricle. Calcium channel blockers should probably not be described for patients with coronary artery disease and left ventricular dysfunction. When the patient needs additional treatment for angina and beta-blockers or nitrates have not given satisfactory results, it may be appropriate to prescribe amlodipine or felodipine.
An 11-month-old male infant with recurrent supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) was treated with oral verapamil. Shortly thereafter he developed marked changes in behavior including lethargy, intensely increased thirst and urination, and irritability when denied fluids. "Primary" polydipsia was diagnosed following an evaluation which showed no evidence of adrenal insufficiency, diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, hypercalcemia, hyperosmolality, or renal disease. The symptoms resolved 1 week after verapamil was discontinued.
The various forms of supraventricular tachycardia can be differentiated by careful review of a patient's electrocardiogram. If reentrant tachycardia involves the atrioventricular node, intravenous adenosine (Adenocard) provides a rapid means of converting the tachycardia to sinus rhythm. Adverse effects of adenosine, though common, are mild and of brief duration. Wide QRS complex tachycardia of ventricular origin is usually not affected by the drug.
Oral verapamil approved for use in all forms of angina, with its additional heart rate-controlling properties has undergone extensive clinical investigation and use since its initial development and has been demonstrated to be safe, well-tolerated and effective over a broad range of cardiovascular disorders. Further potential therapeutic indications for verapamil use remain to be assessed. Additional research with this exciting drug is ongoing.
Bedaquiline is a newly approved drug for the treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, but there are concerns about its safety in humans. We found that the coadministration of verapamil with subinhibitory doses of bedaquiline gave the same bactericidal effect in mice as did the full human bioequivalent bedaquiline dosing. Adding verapamil to bedaquiline monotherapy also protected against the development of resistant mutants in vivo. The adjunctive use of verapamil may permit use of lower doses of bedaquiline to be used and thereby reduce its dose-related toxicities in tuberculosis patients.
This study examined the frequency of atrioventricular (AV) dissociation and accelerated junctional rhythms in 59 patients receiving oral verapamil. Accelerated junctional rhythms and AV dissociation were frequent in patients with supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, particularly AV nodal reentry. Verapamil administration to these patients led to an asymptomatic increase in activity of these junctional pacemakers. In patients with various chest pain syndromes, verapamil neither increased the frequency of junctional rhythms nor suppressed their role as escape rhythms under physiologically appropriate circumstances.
The mechanisms of action and clinical application of verapamil--a calcium ion antagonist--are reviewed. Verapamil is effective and has important application in the treatment of coronary artery spasm, hypertensive crises, and supraventricular tachyarrhythmias.
Acute withdrawal of calcium channel blockers can lead to the so-called calcium channel blocker withdrawal phenomenon, in particular, when high dosages are used. In the case presented, inadequate drug substitution led to this phenomenon which resulted in a serious course of events. Careful monitoring the process of drug substitution with respect to equal therapeutic dosages is therefore a necessity, especially in vulnerable patients.
Cardiogenic shock due to acute myocardial infarction is commonly seen in the accident and emergency department. Refractory cardiogenic shock has been reported after a therapeutic dose of modified release verapamil with concomitant use of beta blocker, metoprolol, but not after a single therapeutic oral dose of modified release verapamil alone. We report what we believe to be the first case of potentially life threatening cardiogenic shock resulting from the myocardial depressant effect of a single therapeutic oral dose of modified release verapamil. The patient made a dramatic recovery minutes after an injection of intravenous calcium chloride. The case is a reminder of the negative inotropic effect of verapamil and how it should be treated.
In this paper, hyaluronic acid (HA) functionalized uniform mesoporous carbon spheres (UMCS) were synthesized for targeted enzyme responsive drug delivery using a facile electrostatic attraction strategy. This HA modification ensured stable drug encapsulation in mesoporous carbon nanoparticles in an extracellular environment while increasing colloidal stability, biocompatibility, cell-targeting ability, and controlled cargo release. The cellular uptake experiments of fluorescently labeled mesoporous carbon nanoparticles, with or without HA functionalization, demonstrated that HA-UMCS are able to specifically target cancer cells overexpressing CD44 receptors. Moreover, the cargo loaded doxorubicin (DOX) and verapamil (VER) exhibited a dual pH and hyaluronidase-1 responsive release in the tumor microenvironment. In addition, VER/DOX/HA-UMCS exhibited a superior therapeutic effect on an in vivo HCT-116 tumor in BALB/c nude mice. In summary, it is expected that HA-UMCS will offer a new method for targeted co-delivery of drugs to tumors overexpressing CD44 receptors.
We studied the long-term effects of oral verapamil (240-720 mg) daily on 10 patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Symptomatic improvement of chest pain or shortness of breath occurred in all the patients although 4 deteriorated after 1 year. Side effects occurred in 3 patients. The electrocardiogram improved in 4 subjects. Quantitative echocardiography showed a significant (P less than 0.05) decrease in left ventricular contractility (% delta S decreased from 44 +/- 9 to 38 +/- 9, mean +/- SD), septal hypertrophy (1.6 +/- 0.5 to 1.4 +/- 0.5 cm) and % thickening of the left ventricular free wall (79 +/- 29 to 57 +/- 22). There was also moderate evidence of improvement in left ventricular compliance; mitral valve EF slope increased from 38 to 55 mm/sec and left atrial diameter decreased.
Relative bioavailability and bioequivalence of two oral verapamil preparations were investigated (dosage 80 mg, film-coated tablets as reference, dragees as test formulation). The clinical study was performed in a 2-period-cross-over design with 16 male healthy volunteers (mean age 28.8 +/- 3 years). The active metabolite norverapamil was included in the investigation. To assess bioequivalence several pharmacokinetic characteristics (i.e. AUC(o-oo), Cmax, tmax) were taken into account. Shortest 90% confidence intervals were calculated based on parametric (ANOVA, ANOVAlog) and non-parametric (Wilcoxon, Mann-Whitney) statistical tests. A positive decision for bioequivalence was accepted if the confidence intervals did not exceed the limits of 80-120% for AUC and 70-130% for Cmax. A mean relative bioavailability of 127% for the test preparation was found. Thus, bioavailability of the dragees is marked higher than bioavailability of the film-coated tablets.
The possibility that verapamil might increase the sensibility of colorectal carcinomas to doxorubicin was studied in 24 patients without previous cytotoxic chemotherapy. The treatment started with oral verapamil, which was escalated up to the individual maximum tolerable dose (defined by prolongation of P-Q in ECG, fall in blood pressure, or dizziness). The median maximum tolerable dose was 600 mg (range 320-1,440 mg). During continued verapamil administration the patients then got weekly infusions of doxorubicin, 25 mg/m2. The median number of doxorubicin courses was 8 (range 2-22). Among 21 patients evaluable for response and toxicity two partial remissions occurred but no complete remission. The study did not indicate enhanced cardiac, hematological or non-hematological toxicity from the combined treatment.
The efficacy, safety and toleration of sustained release verapamil (Securon SR, Knoll) and long acting propranolol (Inderal LA, ICI) in the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension were compared in a randomized, double-blind, parallel group study. Both drugs were of similar efficacy and were well tolerated in the majority of patients. However, in the verapamil SR treated group side-effects resulted in significantly fewer drug-related withdrawals.
Verapamil is widely used in the treatment of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias as well as for hypertension and control of symptoms in angina pectoris. Unlike other calcium antagonists, detailed pharmacokinetic data are available for verapamil. Plasma concentrations of verapamil appear to correlate with both electrophysiological and haemodynamic activity after either intravenous or oral drug administration, although considerable intra- and intersubject variation has been found in the intensity of pharmacological effects resulting at specific plasma drug levels. Verapamil is widely distributed throughout body tissues; animal studies suggest that drug distribution to target organs and tissues is different with parenteral administration from that found after oral administration. The drug is eliminated by hepatic metabolism, with excretion of inactive products in the urine and/or faeces. An N-demethylated metabolite, norverapamil, has been shown to have a fraction of the vasodilator effect of the parent compound in in vitro studies. After intravenous administration, the systemic clearance of verapamil appears to approach liver blood flow. The high hepatic extraction results in low systemic bioavailability (20%) after oral drug administration. Multicompartmental kinetics are observed after single doses; accumulation occurs during multiple-dose oral administration with an associated decrease in apparent oral clearance. Norverapamil plasma concentrations approximate those of verapamil following single or multiple oral doses of the parent drug. Because of the complex pharmacokinetics associated with multiple-dose administration and the variation in individual patient responsiveness to the drug, 'standard' dosing recommendations are difficult to determine; use of verapamil must be titrated to a clinical end-point. Further, the potential for alteration in verapamil's disposition by the presence of hepatic dysfunction or cardiovascular disorders which result in altered hepatic blood flow is only now becoming apparent. A potentially toxic interaction has been reported between verapamil and digoxin, in which renal excretion of the glycoside is impaired, but the true clinical significance of this remains debatable. Combination therapy with verapamil and beta-adrenoceptor blocking compounds has been advocated by some investigators, but may be hazardous because of the additive negative inotropic and chronotropic effects inherent in both agents.
An open study of verapamil in cluster headache is reported. Forty-eight patients participated in the study of whom 33 (= 69%) improved more than 75%. No significant differences in response were observed between episodic and chronic cluster headache.
Timely delivered coronary revascularization with no residual anatomical stenosis does not always lead to prompt restoration of anterograde coronary flow and complete myocardial reperfusion. This condition is known as coronary no-reflow and is associated with major clinical adverse events and poor prognosis. The pathophysiology of no-reflow phenomenon is still poorly understood. Proposed mechanisms include distal microembolization of thrombus and plaque debris, ischemic injury, endothelial dysfunction and individual susceptibility to microvascular dysfunction/obstruction. Older age, diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, prolonged ischemic time, hemodynamic instability, high thrombus burden, complex angiographic lesions and multivessel disease are frequently reported to be associated with the no-reflow phenomenon. There is no general consensus on the correct prevention and management of no-reflow. Non-pharmacological measures such as distal embolic protection devices and manual thrombus aspiration did not result in improved flow or reduction of infarct size. Current preventive measures include reduction of time from symptoms onset to reperfusion therapy, and intracoronary administration of vasodilators such as adenosine, verapamil or nitroprusside.
