Hodgkin lymphoma is a rare lymphoid malignancy affecting  approximately 9,200 new patients in the United States annually. Progress in the management of this disease over the past 50 years has been remarkable and the prognosis of this malignancy has changed from a uniformly fatal process to one in which the vast majority of patients are expected to be cured. This remarkable progress has been due to the use of combination approaches incorporating chemotherapy and radiation therapy, and now more recently antibody-drug conjugates and immune checkpoint inhibitors. The goal for the future is to develop treatment combinations that successfully treat all patients and markedly decrease the long-term side effects.
BACKGROUND: Modern intensive chemotherapy regimens have improved the prognosis for patients with adult acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). With these regimens, the complete response rates are now reported to be > 80%, and the long-term survival rates range from 30% to 45%. The current analysis updated the long-term results with the original hyperfractionated cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone (Hyper-CVAD) program, with a median follow-up time of 63 months. METHODS: Between 1992 and 2000, 288 patients were treated with Hyper-CVAD. The median age of the patients was 40 years, and 59 patients (20%) were > or = age 60 years. The incidence of Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-positive ALL was 17%, and the incidence of of T-cell ALL was 13%. RESULTS: A complete response (CR) was achieved in 92% of patients. The induction mortality rate was 5% (2% if the patient's age was < 60 years, and 15% if the patient's age was > or = 60 years). With a median follow-up time of 63 months, the 5-year survival rate was 38% and the 5-year CR duration rate was 38%. Multivariate analysis of prognostic factors for CR duration identified the following adverse factors: age > or = 45 years, leukocytosis > or = 50 x 10(9)/L, poor performance status (an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group score of 3-4), Ph-positive disease, French-American-British L2 morphology, > 1 course to achieve CR, and Day 14 bone marrow blasts > 5%. Patients were divided into low-risk (risk score 0-1; 37%), intermediate risk (risk score 2-3; 36%), and poor-risk groups (risk score > or = 4; 27%) with 5-year CR duration rates of 52%, 37%, and 10%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with the previous VAD regimens, Hyper-CVAD was associated with significantly better CR rates, CR duration, and survival. The long-term follow-up results of Hyper-CVAD were favorable. Comparison of Hyper-CVAD with other established adult ALL regimens is warranted.
Dysphagia was observed in two patients receiving combination chemotherapy for metastatic carcinoma of the breast. Results of esophagogram and esophagoscopy were unremarkable. Vincristine, an anticancer drug, was incriminated as the causative agent. Cessation of vincristine therapy resulted in definite improvement. In one patient, inadvertent administration of vincristine caused prompt recurrence of dysphagia, which again disappeared upon discontinuation of the drug. The major toxicity of vincristine is neurologic. The exact mechanism for vincristine-induced dysphagia is unknown, but it does appear to be reversible.
Adult patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia frequently relapse or are refractory to conventional treatments. The vincristine sulfate liposome injection (Marqibo((R))) encapsulates the drug in a liposome composed of sphingomyelin and cholesterol to improve tumor drug exposure. At a dose of 2.25 mg/m(2) once weekly, this formulation was associated with an overall response rate of 35 % in adults with Philadelphia chromosome-negative relapsed or refractory disease. There were no new or unexpected toxicities.
This paper summarizes the clinical results achieved at the Milan Cancer Institute in advanced Hodgkin's disease through successive randomized studies performed during the last two decades. Long-term results confirm the therapeutic activity of a regimen containing bleomycin and doxorubicin, such as ABVD (doxorubicin/bleomycin/vinblastine/dacarbazine), as salvage treatment and as primary chemotherapy, either when combined with radiation or cyclically alternated with MOPP (mechlorethamine/vincristine/procarbazine/prednisone). Delayed iatrogenic morbidity (namely, sterility and leukemogenesis) was less frequently documented in ABVD-treated patients compared with MOPP-treated patients. Nevertheless, bleomycin- and anthracycline-containing regimens can be refined in the attempt to further decrease iatrogenic toxicity.
We report a case of detrusor areflexia caused by vincristine neurotoxicity and documented by urodynamic testing. Vincristine commonly induces peripheral neuropathy but rarely causes voiding dysfunction. Neurourological evaluation aided in monitoring and understanding this problem.
Vinblastine, bleomycin, methotrexate (VBM) combination chemotherapy (CT) with involved field radiotherapy (IFRT) was first described by the Stanford group as an active regimen in early stage Hodgkin's disease (HD). Here, we report our retrospective experience of a modified VBM schedule + IFRT in a similar group of patients. From 1988, 49 patients with stage I-IIA HD received vinblastine (VBL) 6 mg/m2, bleomycin (BLM) 10 IU/m2, methotrexate (MTX) 30 mg/m2 day 1,8 every four weeks for three cycles; IFRT was delivered four weeks later followed by three additional cycles of VBM with a dose reduction of BLM (6 IU/m2). The regimen was well tolerated, with grade 3-4 neutropenia occurring in 20 patients. No acute or late pulmonary toxicity was recorded in our series. Estimated Freedom from Progression (FFP) and Overall Survival (OS) at five years are 75% (95% CI, 60.1%-92.2%) and 85% (95% CI, 73.6%-98.1%), respectively. In this retrospective analysis, VBM + IFRT treatment with bleomycin dose reduction seems safe and active. Such combination could be considered as first line treatment for early stage HD patients with favorable prognosis and/or not suitable for anthracyclines-containing regimens.
Anthracyclines, including doxorubicin, are widely used in the treatment of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). However, their clinical potential is limited by their cardiotoxic adverse effects, which include cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure. Anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity is cumulative and irreversible. Liposomal doxorubicin has been developed with the aim of improving the therapeutic index of doxorubicin by reducing the drug's cardiotoxicity. Nevertheless, liposomal conjugation of doxorubicin results in preferential distribution of the drug in the tumor compared with normal tissue, maintaining its anti-tumor efficacy. Nonpegylated liposomal doxorubicin produced a promising response rate when substituted for conventional doxorubicin in the cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone regimen in the treatment of patients with NHL either at diagnosis or at relapse. The ability of nonpegylated liposomal doxorubicin to overcome excessive drug efflux due to P-glycoprotein (MDR-1) overexpression in NHL might confer on this drug a curative potential for patients with a bad prognosis (e.g., MDR-1 overexpressing, the elderly or frail).
Vincristine (VCR) has been used clinically in so-called 'tumour cell synchronization therapy schedules'. These schedules are based on the assumption that cells, arrested in metaphase by low doses of VCR, subsequently re-enter the proliferative cycle synchronously. However, the evidence that tumour cell synchrony can be achieved under clinical conditions or that 'cell synchronization therapy schedules' yield a better therapeutic response than other efficient combination schemes, is scanty. Further, even in experimental systems, the efficacy of VCR as a cell synchronizing agent is disputed. Indeed, in some systems, cells arrested in metaphase by low doses of VCR, do not re-enter a normal proliferative cycle at all following arrest. In addition, the complex nature of the VCR-tumour interaction and the heterogeneous nature of the tumour cell populations against which it is used augurs badly for the successful application of cell synchronization therapy schedules.
Vincristine is a chemotherapeutic agent used in the treatment of various neoplastic diseases. Its neurotoxicity after therapeutic and pharmacologic doses has been well documented. We report a case of accidental intrathecal administration of vincristine in order to describe the complications seen, discuss possible means of therapeutic intervention, and serve as a reminder that preventive measures are mandatory to avoid such accidents in the future.
One of the most well-known drug interactions in pediatric oncology concerns the co-administration of itraconazole, an antifungal triazole, and vincristine, an antileukemic agent, which seems to enhance the risk of neurotoxicity of the latter, mediated through the cytochrome CYP450 enzyme system. The aim of this article is to review the metabolism of these two drugs, to analyze the published cases with severe triazole-enhanced vincristine neurotoxicity, to discuss the pathophysiological mechanisms of this adverse effect, and to contribute in understanding the differences in triazole-vincristine interaction severity.
Fifteen adults with refractory or recurrent Hodgkin's disease were treated with a combination of: vincristine, prednisolone, etoposide and chlorambucil (OPEC). All had previously received mustine, vinblastine, procarbazine and prednisolone (MVPP) and seven had subsequently been treated with alternative regimens. Responses were achieved in four, but complete remission in only one. Toxicity was considerable and five died of treatment related complications. Only two are alive (one in complete remission) more than three years after therapy. The toxicity of the OPEC regimen outweighed its benefit in this group of poor prognosis patients.
Tumor responsiveness to vincristine (VCR) was determined in xenografts of human rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), in sublines of RMS selected in vivo for VCR resistance, in a KB line (KB-ChR8-5) selected in vitro for colchicine resistance, and in a colon adenocarcinoma (GC3). Sensitivity to VCR was associated with prolonged retention of VCR by the tumors after a single i.p. injection, whereas in tumors with acquired or intrinsic VCR resistance the drug was eliminated more rapidly. The sensitive tumors with prolonged retention of drug also showed increased levels of mitotic accumulation for up to 72 hr following VCR administration. There were good correlations between VCR sensitivity, VCR retention and the proposed mechanism of VCR cytotoxicity-mitotic arrest. A model has been developed consistent with data obtained that can explain the responsiveness to VCR of a series of human tumor xenografts irrespective of their tissue of origin.
Half-and-half nail, characterized by a reddish brown distal band with a sharply demarcated white proximal band, is a specific manifestation of chronic kidney disease, but it is unusual to occur after chemotherapy. We report a seven-year-old girl who developed half-and-half nails in her fingers one month after treatment with modified Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster protocol followed by maintenance therapy with oral methotrexate and 6-mercaptopurine for pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Eight consecutive children with biopsy-proven cerebellar medulloblastoma were treated with a combination of whole neuraxis radiation and prolonged chemotherapy using vincristine and cyclophosphamide. There was no evidence of tumor recurrence in the follow-up period, which ranged from 16 months to 7 years and 8 months following diagnosis. Morbidity associated with this regimen has been infrequent and easily reversible.
Twenty-nine patients with advanced refractory multiple myeloma were treated with intermittent high-dose dexamethasone in combination with four-day infusions of vincristine and doxorubicin. Rapid and marked tumor-mass reduction (greater than 75 per cent) was noted in 14 of 20 patients whose disease was resistant to alkylating agents and in 3 of 9 patients with additional resistance to doxorubicin--a result far superior to those in previous trials with similar patients. In responsive patients, remissions were of excellent quality, and survival was significantly longer than in unresponsive patients.
Vincristine (VCR) is a vinca alkaloid and common chemotherapeutic that is used to treat multiple pediatric and adult malignancies. Despite its common use, cases of anaphylaxis to VCR are rare and typically isolated to a single individual. We report a series of eight patients with adverse reactions to VCR over the course of 11 months at a single institution, four of which progressed to anaphylaxis and one of which resulted in cardiac arrest. Mass spectrometry analysis of medication lots was performed to test for possible contaminant(s). Our findings highlight the risk of anaphylaxis during therapy with VCR.
Introduction: One of the most common side effects during vincristine (VCR) use is the establishment of VCR-induced peripheral neuropathy (VIPN). Among several risk factors that can influence the development of VIPN, such as cumulative dose and patient's age, sex, ethnicity, and genetic variants, this review is focused on the genetic variability. Areas covered: A literature research was performed firstly using the following PubMed search string ((((CIPN OR (vincristine AND neurotoxicity OR (vincristine AND neuropathy))) AND (polymorphisms OR (genetic variants OR (genetic factors OR (genetic profile OR (pharmacogenetics OR (genome-wide OR (genetic risk OR (expression genotype))))))))))) but also other relevant papers cited by the selected articles were included. Based on the obtained results, we identified two main categories of genes: genes involved in pharmacokinetics (genes related to metabolism and transport) or pharmacodynamics (genes related to mechanism of action) of VCR. Expert opinion: Despite several clinical retrospective studies investigating the possible correlations between patient genotype and VIPN onset, contrasting and inconsistent results are reported. In conclusion, given the clinical relevance of VIPN, further and more focused research would be fundamental in order to identify genetic variants able to predict its development and to allow a safer management of treated patients.
Four children with vincristine (VCR)-induced neuropathy are being reported. All cases were followed with the diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Two were boys aged between 2 and 13 year. Electromyographic examination consisted of sensoriomotor polyneuropathy with axonal involvement in three patients. In another patient, it consisted of motor axonal polyneuropathy. In all patients, pyridoxine and pyridostigmine were successfully used in the treatment of VCR-induced neuropathy. They recovered completely with this drug combination. Recovering period of symptoms was between 1-2 week.
Vincristine sulfate (VIN) is commonly employed as a cytotoxic agent in the treatment of hematological malignancies, particularly acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL). However, its maximum therapeutic benefits have been hindered due to the dose-dependent neurotoxic effects it can induce, which traditionally manifest as autonomic and peripheral sensory-motor neuropathy. The innovative approach aimed to address VIN's neurotoxic limitations while preserving its therapeutic efficacy in combating hematological malignancies, including ALL. The liposomes were prepared using the reverse-phase evaporation method. This method involved the encapsulation of VIN within liposomes through a controlled evaporation process. Secondly, PEGylated liposomes were synthesized through PEGylation. The liposomes were examined using scanning electron spectroscopy, revealing a smooth and spherical surface morphology. The particle size of the liposomes ranged from 90+/-0.5 to 120+/-0.4 nm. The encapsulation efficiency of the liposomes was found to be 77.24% and the highest drug release reached 95% over 50 hours. Cytotoxicity studies demonstrated that the liposomal formulation exhibited a non-toxic nature. Furthermore, in an in-vivo cellular uptake study, the PEGylated liposomes showed efficient accumulation within tumor cells. The liposomal formulation demonstrated superior effectiveness in treating ALL compared to the pure form of the drug.
