Verteporfin, a benzoporphyrin derivative monoacid ring A, is a photosensitising drug for photodynamic therapy (PDT) activated by low-intensity, nonheat-generating light of 689nm wavelength. Activation generates cytotoxic oxygen free radicals. The specificity and uptake of verteporfin for target cells with a high expression of low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptors, such as tumour and neovascular endothelial cells, is enhanced by the use of a liposomal formulation and its rapid uptake by plasma LDL. Verteporfin therapy (at light doses < 150 J/cm) selectively damages neovascular endothelial cells leading to thrombus formation and specific occlusion of choroidal neovascular vessels in subfoveal lesions in patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Repeated applications of verteporfin therapy 6 mg/m2 improved or maintained visual acuity in the majority of patients with some classic subfoveal choroidal neovascularisation (CNV) secondary to AMD at 1 year's follow-up in 2 large multicentre, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials. Furthermore. in a subgroup of these patients with predominantly classic CNV secondary to AMD, there was a significantly more marked visual acuity (VA) benefit with 67.3% of verteporfin-treated eyes experiencing less than a 15-letter loss of VA versus 39.3% with placebo treatment. Multiple applications of verteporfin therapy were well tolerated in patients with subfoveal CNV secondary to AMD. The most common adverse events were visual disturbances, injection site reactions, photosensitivity reactions and infusion-related back pain.
The photodynamic reaction involves the light-induced generation of an excited state in a photosensitizer molecule (PS), which then results in the formation of reactive oxygen species in the presence of oxygen, or a direct modification of a cellular molecule. Most PSs are porphyrinoids, which are highly lipophilic, and are administered usually in liposomes to facilitate their effective delivery to target cells. The currently available liposomal formulations are Visudyne((R)) and Fospeg((R)). Novel PSs were developed and tested for their photodynamic activity against cancer cells. Several compounds were highly phototoxic to oral cancer cells both in free and liposome-encapsulated form, with nanomolar IC(50) values. The lowest IC(50)s (7-13 nM) were obtained with a PS encapsulated in cationic liposomes.
In recent years, with the aging of the population and the frequent use of electronic devices, many eye diseases have shown a linear upward trend, such as dry eye disease, glaucoma, cataract, age-related macular degeneration, and diabetic retinopathy. These diseases are often chronic and difficult to cure. Based on the structure and barrier of the human eye, this review describes the pathogenesis and treatments of several intractable eye diseases and summarizes the advanced ocular drug delivery systems to provide new treatment ideas for these diseases. Finally, we also look forward to the prospect of RNAi therapy in the treatment of eye diseases.
Modulating mechanotransduction by inhibiting yes-associated protein (YAP) in mice yields wound regeneration without scarring. However, rodents are loose-skinned and fail to recapitulate key aspects of human wound repair. We sought to elucidate the effects of YAP inhibition in red Duroc pig wounds, the most human-like model of scarring. We show that one-time treatment with verteporfin, a YAP inhibitor, immediately after wounding is sufficient to prevent scarring and to drive wound regeneration in pigs. By performing single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) on porcine wounds in conjunction with spatial proteomic analysis, we found perturbations in fibroblast dynamics with verteporfin treatment and the presence of putative pro-regenerative/profibrotic fibroblasts enriched in regenerating/scarring pig wounds, respectively. We also identified differences in enriched myeloid cell subpopulations after treatment and linked this observation to increased elaboration of interleukin-33 (IL-33) in regenerating wounds. Finally, we validated our findings in a xenograft wound model containing human neonatal foreskin engrafted onto nude mice and used scRNA-seq of human wound cells to draw parallels with fibroblast subpopulation dynamics in porcine wounds. Collectively, our findings provide support for the clinical translation of local mechanotransduction inhibitors to prevent human skin scarring, and they clarify a YAP/IL-33 signaling axis in large animal wound regeneration.
BACKGROUND: Verteporfin is a porphyrinic photosensitizer clinically used for the photodynamic treatment of age-related macular degeneration. It has been identified almost simultaneously as a YAP/TEAD and an autophagosome inhibitor. Over the last few years, YAP (TAZ), the downstream effectors of the Hippo pathway, have emerged as promising anticancer targets, as shown by several experimental lines of evidence, showing the overproduction of YAP in several cancers. However, YAP was also found to be closely connected to autophagy, mitochondria and reactive oxygen/nitrogen species. We herein, review the recent studies where VP was used without photoactivation as a YAP/TEAD inhibitor or protein oligomerization promoter, focusing on its effects on the YAP/TEAD gene targets and other biomarkers related to autophagy. RESULTS: Since the identification of VP as YAP/TEAD inhibitor, several in vitro and in vivo studies have revealed the new potential of this molecule in different cancers, where YAP is overexpressed. However, detailed structural information about its interaction with YAP is still lacking. Concomitantly, VP was identified as autophagosome inhibitor by promoting oligomerization of p62. Moreover, VP proves to be tumor-selective proteotoxic (by oligomerization of p62, STAT3) in colorectal cancer. Knowledge on the biological properties of the only YAP inhibitor available to date is vital for its pharmacological use on cellular and animal models. CONCLUSION: VP is a multi-target drug interacting with several proteins implicated in major cellular processes. Although this does not impact its clinical use, VP does not seem to be the ideal drug for pharmacological inhibitions of YAP/TEAD.
BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma (GBM) remains a largely incurable disease as current therapy fails to target the invasive nature of glioma growth in disease progression and recurrence. Here, we use the FDA-approved drug and small molecule Hippo inhibitor Verteporfin (VP) to target YAP-TEAD activity, known to mediate convergent aspects of tumor invasion/metastasis, and assess the drug's efficacy and survival benefit in GBM models. METHODS: Up to 8 low-passage patient-derived GBM cell lines with distinct genomic drivers, including 3 primary/recurrent pairs, were treated with VP or vehicle (VEH) to assess in vitro effects on proliferation, migration, invasion, YAP-TEAD activity, and transcriptomics. Patient-derived orthotopic xenograft (PDX) models were used to assess VP's brain penetrance and effects on tumor burden and survival. RESULTS: VP treatment disturbed YAP/TAZ-TEAD activity; disrupted transcriptome signatures related to invasion, epithelial-to-mesenchymal, and proneural-to-mesenchymal transition, phenocopying TEAD1-knockout effects; and impaired tumor migration/invasion dynamics across primary and recurrent GBM lines. In an aggressive orthotopic PDX GBM model, short-term VP treatment consistently diminished core and infiltrative tumor burden, which was associated with decreased tumor expression of Ki67, nuclear YAP, TEAD1, and TEAD-associated targets EGFR, CDH2, and ITGB1. Finally, long-term VP treatment appeared nontoxic and conferred survival benefit compared to VEH in 2 PDX models: as monotherapy in primary (de novo) GBM and in combination with Temozolomide chemoradiation in recurrent GBM, where VP treatment associated with increased MGMT methylation. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate combined anti-invasive and anti-proliferative efficacy for VP with survival benefit in preclinical GBM models, indicating potential therapeutic value of this already FDA-approved drug if repurposed for GBM patients.
Hippo pathway has been initially recognized as a regulatory mechanism for modulation of organ size in fruitfly. Subsequently, its involvement in the regulation of homeostasis and tumorigenesis has been identified. This pathway contains some tumor suppressor genes such as hippo (hpo) and warts (wts), as well as a number of oncogenic ones such as yorkie (yki). Recent studies have shown participation of Hippo pathway in the lung carcinogenesis. This pathway can affect lung cancer via different mechanisms. The interaction between some miRNAs and Hippo pathway is a possible mechanism for carcinogenic processes. Moreover, some other types of non-coding RNAs including PVT1, SFTA1P, NSCLCAT1 and circ_0067741 are implicated in this process. Besides, anti-cancer effects of gallic acid, icotinib hydrochloride, curcumin, ginsenoside Rg3, cryptotanshinone, nitidine chloride, cucurbitacin E, erlotinib, verteporfin, sophoridine, cisplatin and verteporfin in lung cancer are mediated through modulation of Hippo pathway. Here, we summarize the results of recent studies that investigated the role of Hippo signaling in the progression of lung cancer, the impact of non-coding RNAs on this pathway and the effects of anti-cancer agents on Hippo signaling in the context of lung cancer.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) using verteporfin Visudyne(R)(Novartis International AG, Basel, Switzerland) is widely used to treat various chorio-retinal diseases. PDT targets choroidal vascular abnormalities and induces selective occlusion of vessels. PDT was originally used in combination with full-dose verteporfin to treat neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Currently, the clinical targets of PDT have shifted to other chorioretinal conditions such as central serous chorioretinopathy, polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy and choroidal hemangioma. Clinical studies have also facilitated the optimization of treatment outcomes in choroidal hemangiomas through changes in protocols including the introduction of reduced treatment settings; such as PDT with half-dose verteporfin and half-fluence PDT. Here, we review various evolving trends in clinical application of PDT and its use for choroidal hemangiomas from a practical perspective.
Choroidal neovascularization (CNV) is the key pathological event of wet age-related macular degeneration (wAMD) leading to irreversible vision loss. Currently, anti-angiogenic therapy with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents has become the standard treatment for wAMD, while it is still subject to several limitations, including the safety concerns of monthly intravitreal administration and insufficient efficacy for neovascular occlusion. Combined therapy with photodynamic therapy (PDT) and anti-angiogenic agents has emerged as a novel treatment paradigm. Herein, a novel and less-invasive approach is reported to achieve anti-angiogenic and photodynamic combination therapy of wAMD by intravenous administration of a photoactivatable nanosystem (Di-DAS-VER NPs). The nanosystem is self-assembled by reactive oxygen species (ROS)-sensitive dasatinib (DAS) prodrug and photosensitizer verteporfin (VER). After red-light irradiation to the diseased eyes, intraocular release of anti-angiogenic DAS is observed, together with selective neo-vessels occlusion by VER-generated ROS. Notably, Di-DAS-VER NPs demonstrates promising therapeutic efficacy against CNV with minimized systemic toxicity. The study enables an efficient intravenous wAMD therapy by integrating a photoactivation process with combinational therapeutics into one simple nanosystem.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the outcome of photodynamic therapy (PDT) in the management of extrafoveolar choroidal osteoma. METHODS: The authors performed a retrospective chart review of all patients with choroidal osteoma that did not involve the foveola and were treated with standard-fluence PDT. RESULTS: Nine eyes with extrafoveolar choroidal osteoma were studied. Mean logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution best-corrected visual acuity at initial examination was 0.07 (Snellen  approximately 20/25). The osteoma was treated with 1 (8/9) or 2 (1/9) PDT sessions using 50 J/cm. After a mean follow-up of 49 months, the treated area of osteoma demonstrated complete (4/9) or partial (5/9) regression, with a mean of 73% regression in the PDT-treated areas. Tumor growth in the region of PDT was noted in 3 cases (3/9) (one tumor toward the foveola and two tumors at the margin away from the foveola), but in no case did the tumor reach the foveola. Therefore, PDT controlled tumor growth in 8 of 9 cases with only 1 of 9 cases showing growth through the PDT scar into foveola. Mean logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution visual acuity at last follow-up was 0.04 (Snellen  approximately 20/20) (P = 0.59). CONCLUSION: Photodynamic therapy is an effective modality for the management of extrafoveolar choroidal osteoma, minimizing tumor growth toward the foveola and preserving visual acuity.
Photodamage to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) can initiate a death pathway termed paraptosis. The "canonical" model of paraptosis, initiated by certain drugs and other stimuli, requires a brief interval of protein synthesis, involves the action of MAP kinases and can be followed by biochemical markers. The latter include changes in expression of AIP-1/Alix and IGF-1R proteins and translocation of HMGB-1 from nucleus to plasma membrane. There is also a report indicating that an enhanced level of autophagy can impair death by paraptosis. The pathway to paraptosis follows the canonical pathway when ER photodamage is minor (<LD(50) ). When the extent of ER photodamage approaches LD(90) levels, there are deviations from the "canonical" pathway: interfering with protein synthesis does not prevent paraptosis nor does a brief chilling of cells after irradiation, MAP kinases are not involved, and stimulation of autophagy was not cytoprotective. We had previously speculated that ER protein cross-linking might potentiate paraptosis (Photochem. Photobiol. 95, 2019, 1239) but this appears to be incorrect. At higher PDT doses, substantial cross-linking of a typical ER protein (BiP, binding immunoglobin protein, an HSP chaperone) was detected and paraptosis was impaired. This may relate to decreased mobility of cross-linked proteins. Other pathways to cell death were then observed.
Vascular targeted photodynamic therapy (VTP), with use of verteporfin as a photosensitizer is one of the few therapies, which has been shown to effectively slow the progression of the "wet" form of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), and even to stabilize visual acuity over many years. Although, due to considerable advance of AMD treatment, it is currently not recommended in monotherapy of AMD, however, its combination with steroids and anti-angiogenic biologic drugs may reveal high therapeutic potential in the treatment of neovascular AMD. The future of VTP as a method of AMD treatment is development of new selective and targeted photosensitizer and combination of this method with other therapeutic strategies targeting cellular structures or pathways involved in AMD progression.
This article reviews the pharmacotherapeutics of verteporfin (Visudyne), Novartis Pharma AG) used in ocular photodynamic therapy. The chemistry, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the drug are reviewed. The article highlights and summarises the results of the multi-centre, randomised, controlled clinical trials with verteporfin to treat subfoveal choroidal neovascularisation in age-related macular degeneration, ocular histoplasmosis syndrome and pathologic myopia. In addition, the safety profile and side effects of verteporfin are discussed.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is based on the use of light-sensitive molecules called photosensitizers. Photoactivation causes the formation of singlet oxygen, which produces peroxidative reactions that can cause cell damage and death. Porfimer sodium (Photofrin, manufactured by Lederle Parenterals, Carolina, Puerto Rico, under license from Quadra Logic Technologies, Inc, Vancouver, BC, Canada) is the photosensitizer that has been studied most extensively. Patients generally have to be hospitalized for 2 days prior to light treatment after administration of porfimer sodium; it takes approximately 48 hours after injection to reach optimal concentration in tumor tissue. The tumoricidal capacity of PDT with porfimer sodium is determined in part by the maximum depth of penetration of light having a wavelength of 630 nm. Porfimer sodium causes cutaneous photosensitivity that may last for up to 6 weeks. Benzoporphyrin derivative (BPD verteporfin; BPD-Quadra Logic Technologies, Inc, Vancouver, BC, Canada), another photosensitizer, accumulates more rapidly in tumor tissue, permitting optimal PDT 30 to 150 minutes following intravenous administration. It is rapidly cleared from the body, and skin photosensitivity does not extend beyond a few days. The primary mechanism of action of PDT is related to the selective accumulation of photosensitizers in cancer tissue. Photodynamic therapy also shows promise in the treatment of a number of nonneoplastic conditions, including psoriasis, macular degeneration of the retina, atherosclerotic plaque and restenosis, bone marrow purging for treatment of leukemias with autologous bone marrow transplantation, inactivation of viruses in blood or blood products, and several autoimmune conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis. Physiologic characteristics shared by this disparate group of diseases, and the mechanisms by which they may mediate photoactivation, are discussed.
Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling plays a crucial role in pathogenesis, such as accelerating tissue fibrosis and promoting tumor development at the later stages of tumorigenesis by promoting epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), cancer cell migration, and invasion. Targeting TGF-beta signaling is a promising therapeutic approach, but nonspecific inhibition may result in adverse effects. In this study, we focus on the Smad2/3-Smad4 complex, a key component in TGF-beta signaling transduction, as a potential target for cancer therapy. Through a phase-separated condensate-aided biomolecular interaction system, we identified verteporfin (VP) as a small-molecule inhibitor that specifically targets the Smad2/3-Smad4 interaction. VP effectively disrupted the interaction between Smad2/3 and Smad4 and thereby inhibited canonical TGF-beta signaling, but not the interaction between Smad1 and Smad4 in bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling. Furthermore, VP exhibited inhibitory effects on TGF-beta-induced EMT and cell migration. Our findings indicate a novel approach to develop protein-protein interaction inhibitors of the canonical TGF-beta signaling pathway for treatments of related diseases.
OBJECTIVE: The inhibition of the Hippo pathway through targeting the Yes-associated protein (YAP) presents a novel and promising approach for treating tumors. However, the efficacy of YAP inhibitors in the context of breast cancer (BC) remains incompletely understood. Here, we aimed to investigate the involvement of YAP in BC's metabolic reprogramming and reveal the potential underlying mechanisms. To this end, we assessed the function of verteporfin (VP), a YAP-TEAD complex inhibitor, on the glycolytic activity of BC cells. METHODS: We evaluated the expression of YAP by utilizing immunohistochemistry (IHC) in BC patients who have undergone (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography ((18)F-FDG PET/CT) prior to biopsy/surgery. We employed RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) assays to assess the interaction between YAP mRNA and human antigen R (HuR) in BC cells. The biological importance of YAP in the metabolism and malignancy of BC was evaluated in vitro. Finally, the effect of VP on glycolysis was determined by using (18)F-FDG uptake, glucose consumption, and lactate production assays. RESULTS: Our studies revealed that high expression of YAP was positively correlated with the maximum uptake value (SUV(max)) determined by (18)F-FDG PET/CT imaging in BC samples. Inhibition of YAP activity suppressed glycolysis in BC. The mechanism underlying this phenomenon could be the binding of YAP to HuR, which promotes glycolysis in BC cells. Treatment with VP effectively suppressed glycolysis induced by YAP overexpression in BC cells. CONCLUSION: VP exhibited anti-glycolytic effect on BC cells, indicating its therapeutic value as an FDA-approved drug.
Abnormal activation of fibroblasts plays a crucial role in keloid development. However, the mechanism of fibroblast activation remains to be determined. YAP/TAZ are key molecules in the Hippo signalling pathway that promote cell proliferation and inhibit apoptosis. Here, we show that keloid fibroblasts have higher levels of YAP/TAZ mRNA and proteins on primary culture. Targeted knockdown of endogenous YAP or TAZ significantly inhibited cell proliferation, reduced cell migration, induced cell apoptosis and down-regulated collagen1a1 production by keloid fibroblasts. Moreover, we demonstrate that verteporfin, an inhibitor of YAP/TAZ, has similar but stronger inhibitory effects on fibroblasts compared to YAP/TAZ knockdown. Our study provides evidence that YAP/TAZ may be involved in the pathogenesis of keloids. Targeted inhibition of YAP/TAZ could change the biological behaviours of fibroblasts and can potentially be used as therapy for keloids.
BACKGROUND: Stummer et al. established fluorescence-guided surgery (FGS) for glioblastoma (GBM) using 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA). Its metabolite, protoporphyrin IX (PPIX), is also a photosensitizer and can be used for photodynamic therapy (PDT) using a laser beam of 635 nm. The porphyrin derivate verteporfin (VP) was discovered to have properties to penetrate the brain, pharmacologically target glioma cells, and is approved for PDT of choroidal neovascularization in wet age-related macular degeneration at 689 nm. OBJECTIVE: To elucidate whether GBM cell lines are susceptible to PDT with second-generation photosensitizer VP. METHODS: Human glioma cell lines LN229, HSR-GBM1, and a low-passage patient-derived GBM cell line P1 were treated with variable concentrations of VP for 24 h, followed by PDT at 689 nm using a diode laser light. Cell viability was measured using the MTT assay and VP uptake was measured using a desktop cytometer. RESULTS: Significantly higher cell death following PDT with VP compared to VP treatment alone or no treatment was detected in all cell models (LN229, HSR-GBM1, P1). Flowcytometric measurements revealed a concentration-dependent cellular uptake of VP after 24 h incubation up to 99% at 10 microM (HSR-GBM1). CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that PDT with VP causes cell death in GBM cells at marginal concentrations. Additionally, red spectrum fluorescence was detected at therapeutic concentrations in all cell lines, validating the cellular uptake of VP in GBM cells. VP, therefore, is not only a potential drug for targeting GBM pharmacologically but can be used as an optical imaging dye in surgery and photosensitizer to make GBM susceptible to PDT.
The present review examines the importance of improving photosensitizer delivery for choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in light of the clinical impact of photodynamic therapy (PDT) for CNV. An overview of the classes of available photosensitizers is provided and the properties governing photosensitizer uptake and circulation in serum are discussed. Current delivery systems, for example liposomal formulations as well as the use of the promising strategy of antibody targeted delivery as a strategy to improve PDT selectivity and efficiency for CNV treatment are described. A summary of the work using Verteporfin, tin ethyl purpurin and Lu-Tex--photosensitizers currently in clinical trials for CNV--is given.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) with verteporfin (Visudyne), a photosensitising protoporphyrin derivative, is used in the management of subfoveal choroidal neovascularisation (CNV) secondary to age-related macular degeneration (AMD) or pathological myopia (PM). PDT with verteporfin over 1 and 2 years reduces the decline in visual acuity in patients with classic-containing subfoveal CNV secondary to AMD. Verteporfin is generally well tolerated by most patients. Verteporfin is also effective in patients with CNV secondary to PM, although data in this indication are limited and further controlled studies are required. Although verteporfin has shown efficacy in patients with occult AMD-related subfoveal CNV lesions in early trials, data are currently limited on its first-line use in this indication; fully published data from the Verteporfin In Occult (VIO) trial are therefore awaited with interest. Verteporfin should be considered as a first-line treatment in patients with predominantly classic subfoveal CNV secondary to AMD, and in patients with smaller minimally classic subfoveal CNV lesions. It may also be considered an option for the treatment of patients with occult AMD-related subfoveal CNV in whom visual acuity decreases or predominantly classic features develop over time.
