BACKGROUND: Isavuconazole is a novel triazole with broad-spectrum antifungal activity. The SECURE trial assessed efficacy and safety of isavuconazole versus voriconazole in patients with invasive mould disease. METHODS: This was a phase 3, double-blind, global multicentre, comparative-group study. Patients with suspected invasive mould disease were randomised in a 1:1 ratio using an interactive voice-web response system, stratified by geographical region, allogeneic haemopoietic stem cell transplantation, and active malignant disease at baseline, to receive isavuconazonium sulfate 372 mg (prodrug; equivalent to 200 mg isavuconazole; intravenously three times a day on days 1 and 2, then either intravenously or orally once daily) or voriconazole (6 mg/kg intravenously twice daily on day 1, 4 mg/kg intravenously twice daily on day 2, then intravenously 4 mg/kg twice daily or orally 200 mg twice daily from day 3 onwards). We tested non-inferiority of the primary efficacy endpoint of all-cause mortality from first dose of study drug to day 42 in patients who received at least one dose of the study drug (intention-to-treat [ITT] population) using a 10% non-inferiority margin. Safety was assessed in patients who received the first dose of study drug. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00412893. FINDINGS: 527 adult patients were randomly assigned (258 received study medication per group) between March 7, 2007, and March 28, 2013. All-cause mortality from first dose of study drug to day 42 for the ITT population was 19% with isavuconazole (48 patients) and 20% with voriconazole (52 patients), with an adjusted treatment difference of -1.0% (95% CI -7.8 to 5.7). Because the upper bound of the 95% CI (5.7%) did not exceed 10%, non-inferiority was shown. Most patients (247 [96%] receiving isavuconazole and 255 [98%] receiving voriconazole) had treatment-emergent adverse events (p=0.122); the most common were gastrointestinal disorders (174 [68%] vs 180 [69%]) and infections and infestations (152 [59%] vs 158 [61%]). Proportions of patients with treatment-emergent adverse events by system organ class were similar overall. However, isavuconazole-treated patients had a lower frequency of hepatobiliary disorders (23 [9%] vs 42 [16%]; p=0.016), eye disorders (39 [15%] vs 69 [27%]; p=0.002), and skin or subcutaneous tissue disorders (86 [33%] vs 110 [42%]; p=0.037). Drug-related adverse events were reported in 109 (42%) patients receiving isavuconazole and 155 (60%) receiving voriconazole (p<0.001). INTERPRETATION: Isavuconazole was non-inferior to voriconazole for the primary treatment of suspected invasive mould disease. Isavuconazole was well tolerated compared with voriconazole, with fewer study-drug-related adverse events. Our results support the use of isavuconazole for the primary treatment of patients with invasive mould disease. FUNDING: Astellas Pharma Global Development, Basilea Pharmaceutica International.
Isavuconazole is the newest of the clinically available advanced generation triazole antifungals and is active against a variety of yeasts, molds, and dimorphic fungi. Its current FDA-approved indications include the management of invasive aspergillosis as well as mucormycosis, though the latter indication is supported by limited clinical data. Isavuconazole did not achieve noninferiority to caspofungin for the treatment of invasive candidiasis and therefore lacks an FDA-approved indication for this invasive disease. Significant advantages of isavuconazole, primarily over voriconazole but in some circumstances posaconazole as well, make it an appealing option for the management of complex patients with invasive fungal infections. These potential advantages include lack of QTc interval prolongation, more predictable pharmacokinetics, a less complicated drug interaction profile, and improved tolerability, particularly when compared to voriconazole. This review discusses these topics in addition to addressing the in vitro activity of the compound against a variety of fungi and provides insight into other distinguishing factors among isavuconazole, voriconazole, and posaconazole. The review concludes with an opinion section in which the authors provide the reader with a framework for the current role of isavuconazole in the antifungal armamentarium and where further data are required.
Voriconazole is the first available second-generation triazole with potent activity against a broad spectrum of clinically significant fungal pathogens, including Aspergillus,Candida, Cryptococcus neoformans, and some less common moulds. Voriconazole is rapidly absorbed within 2 hours after oral administration and the oral bioavailability is over 90%, thus allowing switching between oral and intravenous formulations when clinically appropriate. Voriconazole shows nonlinear pharmacokinetics due to its capacity-limited elimination, and its pharmacokinetics are therefore dependent upon the administered dose. With increasing dose, voriconazole shows a superproportional increase in area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC). In doses used in children (age < 12 years) voriconazole pharmacokinetics appear to be linear. Steady-state plasma concentrations are reached approximately 5 days after both intravenous and oral administration; however, steady state is reached within 24 hours with voriconazole administered as an intravenous loading dose. The volume of distribution of voriconazole is 2-4.6 L/kg, suggesting extensive distribution into extracellular and intracellular compartments. Voriconazole was measured in tissue samples of brain, liver, kidney, heart, lung as well as cerebrospinal fluid. The plasma protein binding is about 60% and independent of dose or plasma concentrations. Clearance is hepatic via N-oxidation by the hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoenzymes, CYP2C19, CYP2C9 and CYP3A4. The elimination half-life of voriconazole is approximately 6 hours, and approximately 80% of the total dose is recovered in the urine, almost completely as metabolites. As with other azole drugs, the potential for drug interactions is considerable. Voriconazole shows time-dependent fungistatic activity against Candida species and time-dependent slow fungicidal activity against Aspergillus species. A short post-antifungal effect of voriconazole is evident only for Aspergillus species. The predictive pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic parameter for voriconazole treatment efficacy in Candida infections is the free drug AUC from 0 to 24 hour : minimum inhibitory concentration ratio.
BACKGROUND: Invasive aspergillosis (IA) is associated with poor outcomes in patients with hematologic malignancies (HMs) and hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). Small studies suggest a role for combination antifungal therapy. OBJECTIVE: To assess the safety and efficacy of voriconazole and anidulafungin compared with voriconazole monotherapy for treatment of IA. DESIGN: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter trial. (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00531479). SETTING: 93 international sites. PATIENTS: 454 patients with HM or HCT and suspected or documented IA were randomly assigned to treatment with voriconazole and anidulafungin or placebo. Primary analysis was done in the modified intention-to-treat population of 277 patients in whom IA was confirmed. MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcome was 6-week mortality; secondary outcomes included 12-week mortality, mortality in major subgroups, and safety measures. RESULTS: Mortality rates at 6 weeks were 19.3% (26 of 135) for combination therapy and 27.5% (39 of 142) for monotherapy (difference, -8.2 percentage points [95% CI, -19.0 to 1.5]; P  = 0.087). Secondary mortality outcomes favored combination therapy. Multivariable regression analysis suggested that maximum galactomannan value, Karnofsky score, and baseline platelet count had prognostic significance. Most patients (218 of 277 [78.7%]) had IA diagnosis established by radiographic findings and maximum galactomannan positivity. In a post hoc analysis of this dominant subgroup, 6-week mortality was lower in combination therapy than monotherapy (15.7% [17 of 108] vs. 27.3% [30 of 110]; difference, -11.5 percentage points [CI, -22.7 to -0.4]; P = 0.037). Safety measures, including hepatotoxicity, were not different. LIMITATIONS: Mortality at 6 weeks was higher than expected, and the difference in mortality was lower than expected, which reduced power to detect a treatment effect. Enrollment was restricted to patients with HM or HCT, which limited generalizability. CONCLUSION: Compared with voriconazole monotherapy, combination therapy with anidulafungin led to higher survival in subgroups of patients with IA. Limitations in power preclude definitive conclusions about superiority. PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: Pfizer.
BACKGROUND: Voriconazole has been recommended as primary treatment for patients with invasive aspergillosis. Intravenous and tablet formulations of posaconazole that have improved systemic absorption could be an effective alternative to voriconazole. We aimed to assess non-inferiority of posaconazole to voriconazole for the primary treatment of invasive aspergillosis. METHODS: We did a randomised, prospective, double-blind, double-dummy, controlled trial comparing posaconazole (intravenous or oral posaconazole 300 mg twice on day 1, followed by 300 mg once a day for days 2-84) with voriconazole (6 mg/kg intravenous or 300 mg oral twice on day 1 followed by 4 mg/kg intravenously or 200 mg orally twice a day for days 2-84) for 12 weeks or less in the primary treatment of invasive aspergillosis. Participants were from 91 study sites in 26 countries, were aged 13 years or older, weighed at least 40 kg, and met criteria for proven, probable, or possible fungal disease. Participants were randomly assigned (1:1) via a computer-generated randomisation schedule with stratification by risk status. The primary endpoint was cumulative all-cause mortality up until day 42 in the intention-to-treat (ITT) population (defined as randomly assigned participants who received >/=1 dose of study drug), with a 10% non-inferiority margin. The ITT population was also evaluated for safety. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01782131, and EudraCT, 2011-003938-14. FINDINGS: Between Oct 25, 2013, and Sept 10, 2019, of 653 individuals assessed for eligibility, 575 ITT participants were randomly assigned and received one or more doses of study drug (n=288 [50%] posaconazole, n=287 [50%] voriconazole). Mortality up until day 42 was 15% (44 of 288) in the posaconazole group and 21% (59 of 287) in the voriconazole group (treatment difference -5.3% [95% CI -11.6 to 1.0]; p<0.0001). Mortality up until day 42 in the full-analysis-set subpopulation (ITT participants with proven or probable invasive aspergillosis) supported this conclusion: 31 (19%) of 163 participants in the posaconazole group and 32 (19%) of 171 participants in the voriconazole group (treatment difference 0.3% [95% CI -8.2 to 8.8]). The most frequently reported treatment-related adverse events (incidence >3%) were increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT), nausea, hypokalaemia, and vomiting in the posaconazole group and increased ALT, AST, or alkaline phosphatase, hallucination, increased gamma-glutamyltransferase peptidase, nausea, and blurred vision in the voriconazole group. The overall incidence of treatment-related adverse event rates in the ITT population was 30% for posaconazole and 40% for voriconazole (treatment difference -10.2% [95% CI -17.9 to -2.4]). INTERPRETATION: Posaconazole was non-inferior to voriconazole for all-cause mortality up until day 42 in participants with invasive aspergillosis. Posaconazole was well tolerated, and participants had fewer treatment-related adverse events than in the voriconazole group. This study supports the use of posaconazole as a first-line treatment for the condition. FUNDING: Merck Sharp & Dohme, a subsidiary of Merck & Co, Inc.
PURPOSE: Antimicrobial stewardship programs are important for reducing antimicrobial resistance because they can readjust antibiotic prescriptions to local guidelines, switch intravenous to oral administration, and reduce hospitalization times. Pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics (PK-PD) empirically based prescriptions and therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) programs are essential for antimicrobial stewardship, but there is a need to fit protocols according to cost benefits. The cost benefits can be demonstrated by reducing toxicity and hospital stay, decreasing the amount of drug used per day, and preventing relapses in infection. Our aim was to review the data available on whether PK-PD empirically based prescriptions and TDM could improve the cost benefits of an antimicrobial stewardship program to decrease global hospital expenditures. METHODS: A narrative review based on PubMed search with the relevant studies of vancomycin, aminoglycosides, beta-lactams, and voriconazole. RESULTS: TDM protocols demonstrated important cost benefit for patients treated with vancomycin, aminoglycosides, and voriconazole mainly due to reduce toxicities and decreasing the hospital length of stay. In addition, PK-PD strategies that used infusion modifications to meropenem, piperacillin-tazobactam, ceftazidime, and cefepime, such as extended or continuous infusion, demonstrated important cost benefits, mainly due to reducing daily drug needs and lengths of hospital stays. CONCLUSIONS: TDM protocols and PK-PD empirically based prescriptions improve the cost-benefits and decrease the global hospital expenditures.
Posaconazole is widely used in lung transplant recipients as pre-emptive therapy or universal fungal prophylaxis. In this patient group, posaconazole is increasingly used instead of voriconazole due to the concerns of an increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) with voriconazole, particularly with its long-term use. Dose dependent toxicity has not been identified for posaconazole in the registration trials of intravenous (IV) and modified-release tablet formulations. This is supported by post-marketing experience. We describe a lung transplant recipient who experienced dementia-like symptoms almost 3 years after commencing posaconazole for treatment of Aspergillus fumigatus complex and Lomentospora prolificans (formerly Scedosporium prolificans) fungal infections. Symptoms resolved upon discontinuation of posaconazole, but recurred when re-challenged at a lower dose more than a year later. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case reporting a dementia-like state with posaconazole.
BACKGROUND: Isavuconazole is a novel triazole antifungal agent. However, the previous outcomes were highlighted by statistical heterogeneity. This meta-analysis aimed to validate the efficacy and safety of isavuconazole for the treatment and prophylaxis of invasive fungal infections (IFIs) compared with other antifungal agents (amphotericin B, voriconazole and posaconazole). METHODS: Scopus, EMBASE, PubMed, CINAHL and Ichushi databases were searched for relevant articles that met the inclusion criteria through February 2023. Mortality, IFI rate, discontinuation rate of antifungal therapy and incidence of abnormal hepatic function were evaluated. The discontinuation rate was defined as the percentage of therapy discontinuations due to adverse events. The control group included patients who received other antifungal agents. RESULTS: Of the 1784 citations identified for screening, 10 studies with an overall total of 3037 patients enrolled. Isavuconazole was comparable with the control group in mortality and IFI rate in the treatment and prophylaxis of IFIs, respectively (mortality, odds rate (OR) 1.11, 95% confidential interval (CI) 0.82-1.51; IFI rate, OR 1.02, 95% CI 0.49-2.12). Isavuconazole significantly reduced the discontinuation rate in the treatment (OR 1.96, 95% CI 1.26-3.07) and incidence of hepatic function abnormalities in the treatment and prophylaxis, compared with the control group (treatment, OR 2.31, 95% CI 1.41-3.78; prophylaxis, OR 3.63, 95% CI 1.31-10.05). CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analysis revealed that isavuconazole was not inferior to other antifungal agents for the treatment and prophylaxis of IFIs, with substantially fewer drug-associated adverse events and discontinuations. Our findings support the use of isavuconazole as the primary treatment and prophylaxis for IFIs.
Anidulafungin is the newest addition to the antifungal arsenal. It possesses fungicidal activity against Candida spp., including isolates that are azole and polyene resistant. In addition, it is fungistatic against Aspergillus spp. Anidulafungin is unique in that it possesses no clinically relevant drug interactions and does not require dosage adjustment in renal or hepatic impairment. Anidulafungin was well tolerated in clinical trials and its clinical efficacy has been demonstrated in the treatment of candidemia and other forms of candidiasis.
PURPOSE: Voriconazole, an antifungal drug, is metabolized by a cytochrome P450 isozyme. Increased adverse effects are observed in Asians because of the high rate of poor metabolizers. In this therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) guideline, recommendations were made according to ethnic group. METHODS: Five clinical questions were used. For the preparation of the guideline, the performance of TDM in multicenter studies was surveyed (study 1). We also conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis (study 2) to establish recommendations for non-Asians and Asians. FINDINGS: In study 1, 401 patients were surveyed. A risk of supratherapeutic concentrations was found in Japanese patients who adhered to the recommended dose. Target trough levels were achieved in 87% of patients with dose reductions. Although the trough level measured at the onset of adverse effects (AEs) was significantly associated with hepatotoxicity, no significant correlation was found between the initial trough level and hepatotoxicity, which indicated that hepatotoxicity was successfully prevented by the trough-guided dosing. In study 2, 22 studies (11 Asian locations and 11 non-Asian locations) were included in meta-analysis for the relationship between trough cutoff level (3, 4, 5, 5.5, and 6 microg/mL) and AEs. Significant differences were found for all cutoff levels, with the highest odds ratio for 4.0 microg/mL in Asian locations. In contrast, in non-Asian locations, no more than 1 study was available for any trough cutoff level, except for 5.5 microg/mL, at which level a significant increase in AEs was found. These findings indicate that TDM is strongly recommended to prevent AEs in Asians, and TDM is generally recommended for non-Asians to address subtherapeutic concentrations. TDM on day 3 is recommended to assess pharmacokinetic properties, including loading and maintenance doses. If the patient condition permits, delaying until day 5 is suggested for Asians because of the prolonged t((1/2)) in poor metabolizers. A trough level >/=1.0 microg/mL is strongly recommended to improve efficacy. Trough levels >/=2.0 microg/mL are suggested for invasive aspergillosis. To decrease adverse effects, trough levels <4.0 microg/mL are strongly recommended in Asians, whereas trough levels <5.5 microg/mL are generally recommended in non-Asians. Maintenance doses of 4 and 3 mg/kg twice daily are recommended in non-Asians and Asians, respectively. IMPLICATIONS: Different indications, timings, and target trough levels for TDM and different regimens are suggested for Asians and non-Asians.
Both invasive fungal infection with Aspergillus fumigatus and blood stream infection with methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) have a significant incidence in the critically ill. Voriconazole and, more recently, isavuconazole and high dose flucloxacillin are the standard first line treatments for these respective serious infections. However, an underestimated risk of a significant interaction needs to be taken into consideration, when both co-occur. We wish to highlight this important issue in the management of these patients through two case reports and to point to the inconsistency between different validated databases regarding this significant interaction as well the importance of a strict protocol for readily available therapeutic drug monitoring.
IMPORTANCE: Several antifungal drugs are available for antifungal prophylaxis in patients with hematological disease or who are undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). OBJECTIVE: To summarize the evidence on the efficacy and adverse effects of antifungal agents using an integrated comparison. DATA SOURCES: Medline, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Clinical Trials were searched to collect all relevant evidence published in randomized clinical trials that assessed antifungal prophylaxis in patients with hematological disease. Sources were search from inception up to October 2019. STUDY SELECTION: Studies that compared any antifungal agent with a placebo, no antifungal agent, or another antifungal agent among patients with hematological disease or undergoing HSCT were included. Of 39 709 studies identified, 69 met the criteria for inclusion. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: The outcome from each study was estimated using the relative risk (RR) with 95% CIs. The Mantel-Haenszel random-effects model was used. The reliability and validity of the networks were estimated by addressing inconsistencies in the evidence from comparative studies of different treatments. Data were analyzed from December 2019 to February 2020. Reporting followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses for Network Meta-analysis (PRISMA-NMA) guideline. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcomes were invasive fungal infections (IFIs) and mortality. The secondary outcomes were fungal infections, proven IFIs, invasive candidiasis, invasive aspergillosis, fungi-related death, and withdrawal owing to adverse effects of the drug. RESULTS: We identified 69 randomized clinical trials that reported comparisons of 12 treatments with at total of 14 789 patients. Posaconazole was the treatment associated with the best probability of success against IFIs (surface under the cumulative ranking curve, 86.7%; mean rank, 2.5). Posaconazole treatment was associated with a significant reduction in IFIs (RR, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.42-0.79) and invasive aspergillosis (RR, 0.36; 95% CI, 0.15-0.85) compared with placebo. Voriconazole was associated with a significant reduction in invasive candidiasis (RR, 0.15; 95% CI, 0.09-0.26) compared with placebo. However, posaconazole was associated with a higher incidence of withdrawal because of the adverse effects of the drug (surface under the cumulative ranking curve, 17.5%; mean rank, 9.2). In subgroup analyses considering efficacy and tolerance, voriconazole might be the best choice for patients undergoing HSCT, especially allogenic HSCT; however, posaconazole was ranked as the best choice for patients with acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These findings suggest that voriconazole may be the best prophylaxis option for patients undergoing HSCT, and posaconazole may be the best prophylaxis option for patients with acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Primary antifungal prophylaxis with mold-active azoles is used to prevent invasive fungal infections in patients with high-risk hematological disorders; however, breakthrough infections occur, and the reasons for treatment failure are still not fully understood. To help inform clinical decisions, we sought to define microbiological, clinical, and pharmacological characteristics of proven and probable breakthrough invasive fungal infections (bIFIs) in patients with high-risk hematological disorders receiving voriconazole or posaconazole prophylaxis. METHODS: We performed a systematic review of the literature following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. The search strategy was last conducted on 19 April 2023. RESULTS: We assessed 5293 studies for eligibility, and 300 were selected for data extraction. These studies described 1076 cases of bIFIs occurring under voriconazole (42.5%) or posaconazole (57.5%). The most commonly found pathogens were Aspergillus (40%), Mucorales (20%), Candida (18%), and Fusarium (9%) species. Mucorales were more frequent among voriconazole-emerging cases, whereas Aspergillus and Fusarium were more prevalent among posaconazole-emerging cases. Definitive, putative, or probable antifungal resistance was found in 31% of cases. Therapeutic drug monitoring showed subtherapeutic azole concentration in 32 of 90 (36%) cases. Infection-related mortality was reported in 117 cases and reached 35%. CONCLUSIONS: In our systemic review, the most common bIFIs were aspergillosis, mucormycosis, candidiasis, and fusariosis. Antifungal resistance explains only a minority of cases. Subtherapeutic prophylaxis was frequent but rarely reported. Prospective studies are needed to better understand these infections and to establish optimal management.
Solid organ transplant (SOT) recipients have a higher risk of developing invasive mould diseases (IMD). Isavuconazole is a novel broad-spectrum azole active against Aspergillus spp. and Mucor, well tolerated, with an excellent bioavailability and predictable pharmacokinetics, that penetrates in most tissues rapidly, and has few serious adverse effects, including hepatic toxicity. Contrary to other broad-spectrum azoles, such as voriconazole and posaconazole, isavuconazole appears to show significant smaller drug-drug interactions with anticalcineurin drugs. We have performed an extensive literature review of the experience with the use of isavuconazole in SOT, which included the SOTIS and the ISASOT studies, and published case reports. More than 140 SOT recipients treated with isavuconazole for IMD were included. Most patients were lung and kidney recipients treated for an Aspergillus infection. Isavuconazole was well tolerated (less than 10% of patients required treatment discontinuation). The clinical responses appeared comparable to that found in other high-risk patient populations. Drug-drug interactions with immunosuppressive agents were manageable after the reduction of tacrolimus and the adjustment of mTOR inhibitors at the beginning of treatment. In conclusion, isavuconazole appears to be a reasonable option for the treatment of IMD in SOT. More clinical studies are warranted.
PURPOSE: To study the clinical profile and management of a case of fungal postoperative endophthalmitis caused by fusarium solani. CASE REPORT: A 40-year-old male underwent an uneventful cataract surgery developed postoperative endophthalmitis. The infection was fulminant and was treated aggressively with pars plana vitrectomy with intravitreal and oral antifungals. The microbiology culture of vitreous sample showed fusarium solani. There was a late recurrence in the form of a fungal ball behind the iris after 6 months of the initial episode. This fungal ball was then managed by transscleral cryotherapy. The eye became hypotonus due to chronic inflammation and silicone oil was instilled to salvage the eye. CONCLUSION: Fusarium endophthalmitis needs an aggressive management. Due to late recurrence regular follow-up is mandatory. Early vitrectomy with oral and intravitreal voriconazole is the treatment of choice. Transscleral cryotherapy is a useful option to treat fungal balls behind the iris tissue.
Invasive aspergillosis (IA) is one of the most common life-threatening complications in immunocompromised patients. Voriconazole is currently the drug of choice for IA treatment. However, some patients with IA suffer clinical deterioration despite voriconazole therapy. Management of voriconazole-refractory IA remains challenging; no useful recommendations have yet been made. Voriconazole-refractory IA can be further categorized as disease attributable to misdiagnosis or co-infection with another mold; inadequate blood voriconazole blood; inadequate tissue drug concentrations attributable to angioinvasion; immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome; or infection with voriconazole-resistant Aspergillus. Hence, when encountering a case of voriconazole-refractory IA, it is necessary to schedule sequential tests to decide whether medical treatment or surgical intervention is appropriate; to adjust the voriconazole dose via drug monitoring; to seek CYP2C19 polymorphisms; to monitor serum galactomannan levels; and to examine the drug susceptibility of the causative Aspergillus species.
OBJECTIVES: Voriconazole therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) is recommended based on retrospective data and limited prospective studies. This study aimed to investigate whether TDM-guided voriconazole treatment is superior to standard treatment for invasive aspergillosis. METHODS: A multicentre (n = 10), prospective, cluster randomised, crossover clinical trial was performed in haematological patients aged >/=18 years treated with voriconazole. All patients received standard voriconazole dose at the start of treatment. Blood/serum/plasma was periodically collected after treatment initiation of voriconazole and repeated during treatment in both groups. The TDM group had measured voriconazole concentrations reported back, with dose adjustments made as appropriate, while the non-TDM group had voriconazole concentrations measured only after study completion. The composite primary endpoint included response to treatment and voriconazole treatment discontinuation due to an adverse drug reaction related to voriconazole within 28 days after treatment initiation. RESULTS: In total, 189 patients were enrolled in the study. For the composite primary endpoint, 74 patients were included in the non-TDM group and 68 patients in the TDM group. Here, no significant difference was found between both groups (P = 0.678). However, more trough concentrations were found within the generally accepted range of 1-6 mg/L for the TDM group (74.0%) compared with the non-TDM group (64.0%) (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In this trial, TDM-guided dosing of voriconazole did not show improved treatment outcome compared with standard dosing. We believe that these findings should open up the discussion for an approach to voriconazole TDM that includes drug exposure, pathogen susceptibility and host defence. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov registration no. NCT00893555.
Endophthalmitis is a rare infection of the vitreous and/or aqueous. It can be bacterial or fungal. Exogenous endophthalmitis is the most common form and results from direct inoculation of a pathogen after eye surgery or penetrating trauma. Endophthalmitis can also be endogenous, secondary to disseminated infection. Fungal endophthalmitis is associated with poor prognosis and treatment is difficult given the low penetration of most of the antifungal agents available and the emergence of resistant filamentous fungi like Fusarium. To our knowledge, we describe the first endogenous fungal endophthalmitis due to Fusarium dimerum, a ubiquitous pathogen found in soil and plants. A 71-year-old woman, diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia, was hospitalized for surveillance after induction chemotherapy. Prophylaxis by antibiotics and posaconazole was ongoing when she complained of pain and decreased vision in the left eye. A voluminous chorioretinal abscess developed and after multiple sterile aqueous humour samples, only vitrectomy allowed diagnosis with fungal hyphae seen on May-Grunwald Giemsa stained smear and positive cultures. The fungus was identified as Fusarium dimerum. The treatment, that included intravitreal injections of voriconazole and amphotericin B associated with systemic administration of voriconazole, allowed complete control of the infection. The source of this infection could not be confirmed despite the discovery of several possible infection sites including a periungual whitlow on the left hand and a lesion on a nail, from which samples were negative in microbiology laboratories. Unfortunately, damages of the retina were too important and the patient did not recover sight of her left eye.
BACKGROUND: Liver transplantation is increasing worldwide with underlying pathologies dominated by metabolic and alcoholic diseases in developed countries. METHODS: We provide a narrative review of invasive aspergillosis (IA) in liver transplant (LT) recipients. We searched PubMed and Google Scholar for references without language and time restrictions. RESULTS: The incidence of IA in LT recipients is low (1.8%), while mortality is high ( approximately 50%). It occurs mainly early (<3 months) after LT. Some risk factors have been identified before (corticosteroid, renal, and liver failure), during (massive transfusion and duration of surgical procedure), and after transplantation (intensive care unit stay, re-transplantation, re-operation). Diagnosis can be difficult and therefore requires full radiological and clinicobiological collaboration. Accurate identification of Aspergillus species is recommended due to the cryptic species, and susceptibility testing is crucial given the increasing resistance of Aspergillus fumigatus to azoles. It is recommended to reduce the dose of tacrolimus (50%) and to closely monitor the trough level when introducing voriconazole, isavuconazole, and posaconazole. Surgery should be discussed on a case-by-case basis. Antifungal prophylaxis is recommended in high-risk patients. Environmental preventative measures should be implemented to prevent outbreaks of nosocomial aspergillosis in LT recipient units. CONCLUSION: IA remains a very serious disease in LT patients and should be promptly sought and, if possible, prevented by clinicians when risk factors are identified.
Strong cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 inhibitors may induce Cushing syndrome and subsequent adrenal insufficiency when administered concurrently with corticosteroids. This drug-drug interaction has been well described with HIV protease inhibitors. A similar drug-drug interaction with corticosteroids and other strong CYP 3A4 inhibitors (antifungals [imidazoles]) has recently been reported but remains less well known. To our knowledge, we report the first case of probable drug-induced Cushing syndrome with subsequent adrenal insufficiency as a result of concomitant oral voriconazole with intranasal mometasone and inhaled fluticasone administration as well as a review of the current literature supporting this drug-drug interaction.
