The antileukotriene agents, the first new class of asthma medications introduced in two decades, represent a promising new alternative in the continuing search for effective and safe therapy for chronic inflammation in asthma. The leukotrienes are inflammatory mediators whose effects on asthma include bronchoconstriction, increased vascular permeability, and increased mucus production. In chronic asthma, regular use of either leukotriene synthesis inhibitors or leukotriene receptor antagonists has improved pulmonary function and clinical symptoms significantly. Antileukotriene agents appear to be safe and well tolerated, although long-term studies will be needed to confirm this.
Hepatotoxicity is the most common cause of fulminant hepatic failure in the United States and the main indication for market withdrawal of drugs. This condition has been increasingly recognized as a problem of enormous medical, financial legal, and regulatory importance. It is in context of this heightened awareness of hepatotoxicity, particularly associated with new high profile drugs, that the authors reviews the published data regarding liver injury related to a novel group of asthma drugs.
Leukotriene-receptor antagonists are the first novel class of antiasthma drugs to become available over the past three decades. They have an unique profile in that they are a hybrid of an anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator drug, and they can be taken as a tablet once or twice daily. The published data with leukotriene-receptor antagonists such as montelukast or zafirlukast show good antiasthmatic activity over a wide spectrum of asthma severity either as monotherapy or with inhaled steroids. Another potential spin-off of leukotriene-receptor antagonists is that they also seem to be effective in treating allergic rhinitis, which commonly coexists in patients with asthma. Here I overview the clinical pharmacology of leukotriene antagonists and appraise the published data from clinical trials, and look at the appropriate position of these agents in asthma management guidelines.
Leukotrienes (LTs) are potent biological proinflammatory mediators. LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4 are more frequently involved in chronic inflammatory responses and exert their actions binding to a cysteinyl-LT 1 (CysLT1) receptor and a cysteinyl-LT 2 (CysLT2) receptor. LTs receptor antagonists available for clinical use demonstrate high-affinity binding to the CysLT1 receptor. In this paper the employment of anti-LTs in allergic cutaneous diseases is analyzed showing that several studies have recently reported a beneficial effects of these agents (montelukast and zafirlukast as well as zileuton) for the treatment of some allergic cutaneous related diseases-like chronic urticaria and atopic eczema although their proper application remains to be established.
BACKGROUND: Since the 1960s, silicone implants have been successfully used for breast augmentation and reconstruction. However, safety issues regarding the use of silicone have led to a moratorium by the US Food and Drug Administration between 1992 and 2006. DESIGN: To date, although the moratorium has been removed and women overwhelmingly prefer silicone over saline implants, local and systemic adverse effects still remain a concern. RESULTS: Silicone-elicited inflammatory fibro-proliferative response and capsular contracture is irrefutable. Studies on silicone breast implants have not supported a relationship to carcinogenesis, whereas that to autoimmunity mainly to nondefined autoimmune phenomena seems very plausible. These silicone-related autoimmune adverse events termed 'siliconosis' are probably limited to a small minority of implanted patients. CONCLUSIONS: Risk factors, such as characteristic environmental exposure and/or genetic predisposition, still require further elucidation. Similarly to antibacterial agents, texturized implants and Zafirlukast that were found to be beneficial in inhibiting fibro-proliferative response and capsular contracture, elucidating autoimmune-related risk factors might subsequently enable physicians to accurately predict long-term health status of silicone implant recipients.
Churg-Strauss syndrome is a systemic necrotizing vasculitis involving small and medium-sized vessels. Classic features include asthma and hypereosinophilia. Antineutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCA) are detected in about 40% of patients. Churg-Strauss syndrome has been reported in patients receiving leukotriene modifiers for asthma, in particular, leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA) (montelukast, zafirlukast or pranlukast). Clinical manifestations cases do not differ in these cases from those in Churg-Strauss syndrome without antileukotriene exposure. It is increasingly less likely that LTRA is the direct cause of this syndrome in those patients, although this hypothesis has not been completely ruled out. In many patients, LTRA treatment is prescribed because of worsening asthma, which is an early sign of Churg-Strauss syndrome. LTRA for asthma patients should be prescribed with great care, especially in cases of atypical or rapidly aggravated asthma. The onset of Churg-Strauss syndrome in patients treated with LTRA usually requires that they stop this treatment. Prescription of LTRA In patients with Churg-Strauss syndrome should be discussed with specialists.
Leukotriene inhibitors are the first new class of medications for the treatment of persistent asthma that have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in more than two decades. They also have been approved for the treatment of allergic rhinitis. Prescriptions of leukotriene inhibitors have outpaced the evidence supporting their use, perhaps because of perceived ease of use compared with other asthma medications. In the treatment of persistent asthma, randomized controlled trials have shown leukotriene inhibitors to be more effective than placebo but less effective than inhaled corticosteroids. The use of leukotriene inhibitors has not consistently shown an inhaled-steroid-sparing effect, a reduction in need for systemic steroid treatment, or a cost savings. For exercise-induced asthma, leukotriene inhibitors are as effective as long-acting beta2-agonist bronchodilators and are superior to placebo; they have not been compared with short-acting bronchodilators. Leukotriene inhibitors are as effective as antihistamines but are less effective than intranasal steroids for the treatment of allergic rhinitis. The use of leukotriene inhibitors in treating atopic dermatitis, aspirin-intolerant asthma, and chronic idiopathic urticaria appears promising but has not been studied thoroughly. Leukotriene inhibitors have minimal side effects and are well tolerated in most populations.
Recent advances in research have led to the identification of an inflammatory component to asthma. Although many endogenous mediators are involved in inflammation, leukotrienes appear to play an especially important role in asthma. The leukotrienes produce tissue edema, mucus secretion, and smooth-muscle proliferation, along with a powerful bronchoconstriction. In addition, antileukotriene drugs have emerged as potential therapeutic agents for asthma. This study was designed to review the current information on these new agents. In this review, full-length articles of antileukotriene agents are examined. These articles were found through MEDLINE under the following medical headings: asthma, inflammation, leukotriene, leukotriene-receptor antagonist, and leukotriene-synthesis inhibitor. Most clinical studies cited are placebo-controlled trials involving healthy individuals and patients with asthma. These studies indicate that antileukotriene agents improve lung function and reduce the symptoms of asthma and the need for additional medication. Drugs that inhibit leukotriene-receptor binding and leukotriene synthesis hold promise as new additions to the armamentarium of clinicians who treat asthma. Furthermore, these drugs have already helped to elucidate some details of the pathophysiological features of asthma.
Multitarget design offers access to bioactive small molecules with potentially superior efficacy and safety. Particularly multifactorial chronic inflammatory diseases demand multiple pharmacological interventions for stable treatment. By minor structural changes, we have developed a close analogue of the cysteinyl-leukotriene receptor antagonist zafirlukast that simultaneously inhibits soluble epoxide hydrolase and activates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma. The triple modulator exhibits robust anti-inflammatory activity in vivo and highlights the therapeutic potential of designed multitarget agents.
The past decade has seen significant advances in the available treatments for asthma. These include longer-acting bronchodilating agents, high topical potency inhaled corticosteroids, and agents that interfere with leukotriene production or action. Table 3 summarizes the clinical effects of the newer therapeutic agents reviewed. Experimental therapies for the steroid-dependent patient have also been discussed. Although clinical trials to date have established many of these as effective in asthma, the results of ongoing, large, multicenter studies investigating the relative merits of these therapies, alone and in combination, will further clarify how to maximize the utility of these agents in the treatment of asthma.
Anti-inflammatory agents are the first-line treatment for controlling mild persistent, moderate persistent, and severe persistent asthma. The choice of drug and dosage must be individualized to the patient. In general, the glucocorticoids are widely accepted as the most potent and preferred asthma treatment in most adults and some children. Cromolyn, because of its safety and availability in a nebulized form, is the first-line treatment in most young children. The leukotriene inhibitors appear to be effective in mild asthma, but further clinical studies are needed to determine their role more precisely. As the mechanisms of inflammation in asthma are further defined, new pharmaceutical products will be developed to aid in arresting this process.
BACKGROUND: The benefits and harms of adding antileukotrienes to H(1) antihistamines (AHs) for the management of urticaria (hives, itch, and/or angioedema) remain unclear. OBJECTIVE: We sought to systematically synthesize the treatment outcomes of antileukotrienes in combination with AHs versus AHs alone for acute and chronic urticaria. METHODS: As part of updating American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology and American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters urticaria guidelines, we searched Medline, Embase, Central, LILACS, WPRIM, IBECS, ICTRP, CBM, CNKI, VIP, Wanfang, US Food and Drug Administration, and European Medicines Agency databases from inception to December 18, 2023, for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating antileukotrienes and AHs versus AHs alone in patients with urticaria. Paired reviewers independently screened citations, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias. Random effects models pooled effect estimates for urticaria activity, itch, wheal, sleep, quality of life, and harms. The GRADE approach informed certainty of evidence ratings. The study was registered at the Open Science Framework (osf.io/h2bfx/). RESULTS: Thirty-four RCTs enrolled 3324 children and adults. Compared to AHs alone, the combination of a leukotriene receptor antagonist with AHs probably modestly reduces urticaria activity (mean difference, -5.04; 95% confidence interval, -6.36 to -3.71; 7-day urticaria activity score) with moderate certainty. We made similar findings for itch and wheal severity as well as quality of life. Adverse events were probably not different between groups (moderate certainty); however, no RCT reported on neuropsychiatric adverse events. CONCLUSION: Among patients with urticaria, adding leukotriene receptor antagonists to AHs probably modestly improves urticaria activity with little to no increase in overall adverse events. The added risk of neuropsychiatric adverse events in this population with leukotriene receptor antagonists is small and uncertain.
It has been recognized for many years that leukotrienes play an important role in mediating various effects of the allergic reaction. Recent evidence has shown that they play a role in other diseases. Leukotrienes can be separated into the fairly well-characterized cysteinyl leukotrienes and the less well-characterized leukotriene B(4). Effects of the leukotrienes are mediated through receptors that are expressed on a variety of cell types and can be modulated based on the inflammatory environment present. The pharmaceutical industry has long been interested in blocking leukotriene action. As such, two approaches have been developed that led to drugs approved for treating allergic disease. The most widely used class is the cysteinyl type 1 receptor antagonists, which block binding of the cysteinyl leukotrienes to the cell. The second class is an inhibitor of the 5-lipoxygenase enzyme that prevents synthesis of both the cysteinyl leukotrienes and leukotriene B(4). This review focuses on the role that leukotrienes play in various diseases, with the emphasis on allergic diseases, and considers the rationale for choosing either a leukotriene antagonist or synthesis inhibitor as a treatment option.
INTRODUCTION: Post-market monitoring has shown a potential link between the use of leukotriene-modifying agents (LTRAs) and an increased risk of neuropsychiatric events, such as depression. However, observational studies have produced inconsistent findings, offering no definitive conclusions. OBJECTIVE: To assess the potential correlation between LTRAs exposure and depression in US adults. METHOD: This cross-sectional study, based on population data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2007-2016 cycle. The Patient Health Questionnaire-9 was used to assess depression. Multivariable regression was used to evaluate the association between LTRAs exposure and depression. Sensitivity and subgroup analyses were conducted, with the calculation of the E-value. Network pharmacology was employed to investigate the influence of LTRAs on mechanisms of depression. RESULTS: Among the 9414 participants, 595 (6.3 %) were classified as having depression. LTRAs exposure was associated with a higher prevalence of depression (16.9 % vs. 6.0 %). The multivariable logistic regression results showed that LTRAs use increased the risk of depression (OR = 1.70; 95 % CI, 1.05-2.75). An association between LTRAs exposure and depression was found in sensitivity analyses conducted regardless of multivariable linear regression with the PHQ-9 score as a continuous variable (beta = 0.97; 95 % CI, 0.44-1.50) or multivariable logistic regression with the PHQ-9 cut-off of 5 (OR = 1.52; 95 % CI, 1.08-2.14). The association between LTRAs and depression was stable in the different subgroups. CONCLUSION: LTRAs exposure is positively associated with depression in US adults. Therefore, the risk for depression in patients receiving long-term LTRAs treatment should be considered.
We assessed the use of antileukotrienes for treating adenotonsillar hypertrophy. We reviewed the current literature on the anatomy of adenotonsillar tissue, adenotonsillar hypertrophy/hyperplasia (and the associated pathophysiology and symptoms), and the effects of antileukotrienes used to treat adenotonsillar hypertrophy. Leukotrienes (LTs) are inflammatory mediators produced by a number of cell types, including mast cells, eosinophils, basophils, macrophages, and monocytes. There are several types (e.g., LTA4, LTB4, LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4). By competitive binding to the cysLT1 receptor, LT-receptor antagonist drugs such as montelukast, zafirlukast, and pranlukast block the effects of cySHLTs, improving the symptoms of some chronic respiratory diseases. High numbers of LT receptors have been found in the tonsils of children with obstructive sleep apnea. Antileukotrienes reduce the apnea-hypopnea index and adenotonsillar inflammation. Antileukotrienes may be useful for children with adenotonsillar hypertrophy due to their anti-inflammatory effects, which help to reduce adenotonsillar inflammation.
As one of the candidates of the therapeutic strategy for asthma in addition to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs) are known to be useful for long-term management of asthma patients complicated by allergic rhinitis (AR) or exercise-induced asthma (EIA). Currently available LTRAs are pranlukast hydrate, zafirlukast, and montelukast. These LTRAs have a bronchodilator action and inhibit airway inflammation, resulting in a significant improvement of asthma symptoms, respiratory function, inhalation frequency of as-needed inhaled beta2-agonist, airway inflammation, airway hyperresponsiveness, dosage of ICSs, asthma exacerbations, and patients' QOL. Although cys-LTs are deeply associated with the pathogenesis of asthma, LTRAs alone are less effective compared with ICS. However, the effects of LTRAs in combination with ICS are the same as those of LABAs in combination with ICS in steroid-naive asthmatic patients. Concerning antiallergy drugs other than LTRAs, some mediator-release suppressants, H1 histamine receptor antagonists (H1RAs), thromboxane A2 (TXA2) inhibitors/antagonists, and Th2 cytokine inhibitor had been used mainly in Japan until the late 1990s. However, the use of these agents rapidly decreased after ICS/long acting beta agonist (LABA) combination was introduced and recommended for the management of asthma in the early 2000s. The effectiveness of other antiallergic agents on asthma management seems to be quite limited, and the safety of oral antiallergic agents has not been demonstrated in fetuses during pregnancy. Further effectiveness studies are needed to determine the true value of these orally administered agents in combination with ICS as an anti-asthma treatment.
Introduction: Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways with a large heterogeneity of clinical phenotypes. There has been increasing interest regarding the role of cysteinyl leukotriene (LT) and leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA) in asthma treatment.Areas covered: This review summarized the data (published in PubMed during 1984-2019) regarding LTRA treatment in asthma and LTs-related airway inflammation mechanisms. Involvement of LTs C(4)/D(4)/E(4) has been demonstrated in the several aspects of airway inflammation and remodeling. Novel pathways related to LTE(4), the most potent mediator, and its respective receptors have recently been studied. Antagonists against cysteinyl leukotriene receptor (CysLTR) type 1, including montelukast, pranlukast and zafirlukast, have been widely prescribed in clinical practices; however, some clinical trials have shown insignificant responses to LTRAs in adult asthmatics, while some phenotypes of adult asthma showed more favorable responses to LTRAs including aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease, elderly asthma, asthma associated with smoking, obesity and allergic rhinitis.Expert opinion: Further investigations are needed to understand the role of LTs in airway inflammation and remodeling of the asthmatic airways. There is a lack of biomarkers to predict responsiveness to LTRA, especially in adult asthmatics. Besides CysLTR1 antagonists, targets aiming other LT pathways should be considered.
Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is a condition characterized by persistent inflammation due to intrinsic mucosal hypersensitivity or persistent infection. Proper medical treatment with antibiotic, leukotriene modifiers, oral corticosteroids, or even aspirin desensitization for the sinus inflammation can prevent the need for surgical intervention. The key to delineating the specific medical application is to determine the cause of the sinus mucosa dysfunction and its specific inflammatory pathway. Such targeted antiinflammatory medical therapy will lead to improved efficacy in the management of CRS. Even if surgical intervention is required, postoperative medical treatment is essential to minimizing the intrinsic mucosal inflammation and therefore preventing revision endoscopic procedures.
