Insomnia is a distinct disorder that is common, yet underrecognized and undertreated in primary care. Treating insomnia has been shown to improve outcomes, including reduced risk of developing cardiovascular and mental health disorders. Insomnia is influenced by the brain's regulation of sleep and wake, which are mutually exclusive events. Insomnia should be treated as a distinct condition, even when occurring with a comorbid diagnosis such as depression or anxiety. Clinicians should implement a multimodal approach to insomnia management, including nonpharmacologic interventions and pharmacologic therapy (when indicated). Pharmacologic agents that are approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for insomnia include benzodiazepine receptor agonists (zolpidem, eszopiclone, and zaleplon), low-dose doxepin (tricyclic antidepressant), ramelteon (melatonin receptor agonist), and dual orexin receptor agonists (DORAs, daridorexant, lemborexant, and suvorexant). Unlike other pharmacologic agents, DORAs inhibit wakefulness rather than induce sedation. Additionally, these medications have no evidence of rebound insomnia or withdrawal, and little to no abuse potential. Daridorexant is the newest DORA, has an ideal half-life of 8 hours, and has demonstrated continued efficacy over a 12-month period. Selection of pharmacologic agent should be based on the patient's comorbid conditions, treatment goals and preferences, and other clinical characteristics.
BACKGROUND: Behavioural, cognitive, and pharmacological interventions can all be effective for insomnia. However, because of inadequate resources, medications are more frequently used worldwide. We aimed to estimate the comparative effectiveness of pharmacological treatments for the acute and long-term treatment of adults with insomnia disorder. METHODS: In this systematic review and network meta-analysis, we searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, PubMed, Embase, PsycINFO, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, ClinicalTrials.gov, and websites of regulatory agencies from database inception to Nov 25, 2021, to identify published and unpublished randomised controlled trials. We included studies comparing pharmacological treatments or placebo as monotherapy for the treatment of adults (>/=18 year) with insomnia disorder. We assessed the certainty of evidence using the confidence in network meta-analysis (CINeMA) framework. Primary outcomes were efficacy (ie, quality of sleep measured by any self-rated scale), treatment discontinuation for any reason and due to side-effects specifically, and safety (ie, number of patients with at least one adverse event) both for acute and long-term treatment. We estimated summary standardised mean differences (SMDs) and odds ratios (ORs) using pairwise and network meta-analysis with random effects. This study is registered with Open Science Framework, https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/PU4QJ. FINDINGS: We included 170 trials (36 interventions and 47 950 participants) in the systematic review and 154 double-blind, randomised controlled trials (30 interventions and 44 089 participants) were eligible for the network meta-analysis. In terms of acute treatment, benzodiazepines, doxylamine, eszopiclone, lemborexant, seltorexant, zolpidem, and zopiclone were more efficacious than placebo (SMD range: 0.36-0.83 [CINeMA estimates of certainty: high to moderate]). Benzodiazepines, eszopiclone, zolpidem, and zopiclone were more efficacious than melatonin, ramelteon, and zaleplon (SMD 0.27-0.71 [moderate to very low]). Intermediate-acting benzodiazepines, long-acting benzodiazepines, and eszopiclone had fewer discontinuations due to any cause than ramelteon (OR 0.72 [95% CI 0.52-0.99; moderate], 0.70 [0.51-0.95; moderate] and 0.71 [0.52-0.98; moderate], respectively). Zopiclone and zolpidem caused more dropouts due to adverse events than did placebo (zopiclone: OR 2.00 [95% CI 1.28-3.13; very low]; zolpidem: 1.79 [1.25-2.50; moderate]); and zopiclone caused more dropouts than did eszopiclone (OR 1.82 [95% CI 1.01-3.33; low]), daridorexant (3.45 [1.41-8.33; low), and suvorexant (3.13 [1.47-6.67; low]). For the number of individuals with side-effects at study endpoint, benzodiazepines, eszopiclone, zolpidem, and zopiclone were worse than placebo, doxepin, seltorexant, and zaleplon (OR range 1.27-2.78 [high to very low]). For long-term treatment, eszopiclone and lemborexant were more effective than placebo (eszopiclone: SMD 0.63 [95% CI 0.36-0.90; very low]; lemborexant: 0.41 [0.04-0.78; very low]) and eszopiclone was more effective than ramelteon (0.63 [0.16-1.10; very low]) and zolpidem (0.60 [0.00-1.20; very low]). Compared with ramelteon, eszopiclone and zolpidem had a lower rate of all-cause discontinuations (eszopiclone: OR 0.43 [95% CI 0.20-0.93; very low]; zolpidem: 0.43 [0.19-0.95; very low]); however, zolpidem was associated with a higher number of dropouts due to side-effects than placebo (OR 2.00 [95% CI 1.11-3.70; very low]). INTERPRETATION: Overall, eszopiclone and lemborexant had a favorable profile, but eszopiclone might cause substantial adverse events and safety data on lemborexant were inconclusive. Doxepin, seltorexant, and zaleplon were well tolerated, but data on efficacy and other important outcomes were scarce and do not allow firm conclusions. Many licensed drugs (including benzodiazepines, daridorexant, suvorexant, and trazodone) can be effective in the acute treatment of insomnia but are associated with poor tolerability, or information about long-term effects is not available. Melatonin, ramelteon, and non-licensed drugs did not show overall material benefits. These results should serve evidence-based clinical practice. FUNDING: UK National Institute for Health Research Oxford Health Biomedical Research Centre.
Insomnia is one of the most common and burdensome disorders in adults. We compared and ranked insomnia medication on the basis of their efficacy and tolerability. We performed a systematic review and network meta-analysis of placebo-controlled or head-to-head randomized controlled trials for primary insomnia in adults comparing 20 drugs. We searched eight databases and seven trial registers from inception to March 1st, 2022. Primary outcomes included sleep latency (SL), awake time after sleep onset (WASO) and discontinuation for adverse events (AED), and secondary outcomes included total sleep time (TST), sleep efficiency (SE), sleep quality (SQ) and adverse events (ADE). Pooled standardized mean differences or odds ratios with 95% credible intervals were estimated using pairwise and network meta-analysis with random-effects. Differences among trial findings were explored in subgroup and sensitivity analyses. Confidence in evidence was assessed using GRADE. The PROSPERO registered number is CRD42020182144. We identified 22,538 records and included 69 studies (17,319 patients). Orexin receptor antagonists (ORAs) are more efficacious than benzodiazepine-like drugs (Z-drugs) and placebo for WASO and SE, and better than melatonin receptor agonists (MRAs) for SL, WASO and SE. ORAs ranked the best in SL (SUCRA value: 0.84), WASO (0.93), TST (0.86) and SE (0.96). Lemborexant and daridorexant (two ORAs) showed greater efficacy than placebo for SL, WASO, and TST, with good tolerability. Z-drugs were more efficacious than placebo for SL, WASO, TST and SE, but with higher risk to safety. Zaleplon and eszopiclone had better efficacy than placebo for TST and SQ respectively. MRAs may also be efficacious for sleep-onset insomnia with good safety. However, the long-term adverse effects of all medications are unclear. Insomnia medications differ in their efficacy and tolerability. ORAs have superior efficacy and tolerability. These findings should aid clinicians in matching risk/benefits of drugs available in their countries to insomnia symptoms.
Although the GABAergic benzodiazepines (BZDs) and Z-drugs (zolpidem, zopiclone, and zaleplon) are FDA-approved for insomnia disorders with a strong evidence base, they have many side effects, including cognitive impairment, tolerance, rebound insomnia upon discontinuation, car accidents/falls, abuse, and dependence liability. Consequently, the clinical use of off-label drugs and novel drugs that do not target the GABAergic system is increasing. The purpose of this review is to analyze the neurobiological and clinical evidence of pharmacological treatments of insomnia, excluding the BZDs and Z-drugs. We analyzed the melatonergic agonist drugs, agomelatine, prolonged-release melatonin, ramelteon, and tasimelteon; the dual orexin receptor antagonist suvorexant; the modulators of the alpha(2)delta subunit of voltage-sensitive calcium channels, gabapentin and pregabalin; the H(1) antagonist, low-dose doxepin; and the histamine and serotonin receptor antagonists, amitriptyline, mirtazapine, trazodone, olanzapine, and quetiapine. The pharmacology and mechanism of action of these treatments and the evidence-base for the use of these drugs in clinical practice is outlined along with novel pipelines. There is evidence to recommend suvorexant and low-dose doxepin for sleep maintenance insomnia; there is also sufficient evidence to recommend ramelteon for sleep onset insomnia. Although there is limited evidence for the use of the quetiapine, trazodone, mirtazapine, amitriptyline, pregabalin, gabapentin, agomelatine, and olanzapine as treatments for insomnia disorder, these drugs may improve sleep while successfully treating comorbid disorders, with a different side effect profile than the BZDs and Z-drugs. The unique mechanism of action of each drug allows for a more personalized and targeted medical management of insomnia.
Insomnia accounts for more than 5.5 million visits to family physicians each year. Although behavioral interventions are the mainstay of treatment, pharmacologic therapy may be necessary for some patients. Understanding the risks and benefits of insomnia medications is critical. Controlled-release melatonin and doxepin are recommended as first-line agents in older adults; the so-called z-drugs (zolpidem, eszopiclone, and zaleplon) should be reserved for use if the first-line agents are ineffective. For the general population with difficulty falling asleep, controlled-release melatonin and the z-drugs can be considered. For those who have difficulty staying asleep, low-dose doxepin and the z-drugs should be considered. Benzodiazepines are not recommended because of their high abuse potential and the availability of better alternatives. Although the orexin receptor antagonist suvorexant appears to be relatively effective, it is no more effective than the z-drugs and much more expensive. Sedating antihistamines, antiepileptics, and atypical antipsychotics are not recommended unless they are used primarily to treat another condition. Persons with sleep apnea or chronic lung disease with nocturnal hypoxia should be evaluated by a sleep specialist before sedating medications are prescribed.
INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this guideline is to establish clinical practice recommendations for the pharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia in adults, when such treatment is clinically indicated. Unlike previous meta-analyses, which focused on broad classes of drugs, this guideline focuses on individual drugs commonly used to treat insomnia. It includes drugs that are FDA-approved for the treatment of insomnia, as well as several drugs commonly used to treat insomnia without an FDA indication for this condition. This guideline should be used in conjunction with other AASM guidelines on the evaluation and treatment of chronic insomnia in adults. METHODS: The American Academy of Sleep Medicine commissioned a task force of four experts in sleep medicine. A systematic review was conducted to identify randomized controlled trials, and the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) process was used to assess the evidence. The task force developed recommendations and assigned strengths based on the quality of evidence, the balance of benefits and harms, and patient values and preferences. Literature reviews are provided for those pharmacologic agents for which sufficient evidence was available to establish recommendations. The AASM Board of Directors approved the final recommendations. RECOMMENDATIONS: The following recommendations are intended as a guideline for clinicians in choosing a specific pharmacological agent for treatment of chronic insomnia in adults, when such treatment is indicated. Under GRADE, a STRONG recommendation is one that clinicians should, under most circumstances, follow. A WEAK recommendation reflects a lower degree of certainty in the outcome and appropriateness of the patient-care strategy for all patients, but should not be construed as an indication of ineffectiveness. GRADE recommendation strengths do not refer to the magnitude of treatment effects in a particular patient, but rather, to the strength of evidence in published data. Downgrading the quality of evidence for these treatments is predictable in GRADE, due to the funding source for most pharmacological clinical trials and the attendant risk of publication bias; the relatively small number of eligible trials for each individual agent; and the observed heterogeneity in the data. The ultimate judgment regarding propriety of any specific care must be made by the clinician in light of the individual circumstances presented by the patient, available diagnostic tools, accessible treatment options, and resources. We suggest that clinicians use suvorexant as a treatment for sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians use eszopiclone as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians use zaleplon as a treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians use zolpidem as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians use triazolam as a treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians use temazepam as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians use ramelteon as a treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians use doxepin as a treatment for sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians not use trazodone as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians not use tiagabine as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians not use diphenhydramine as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians not use melatonin as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians not use tryptophan as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK). We suggest that clinicians not use valerian as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK).
Pharmacological therapy has an important role in the management of insomnia. Although older drugs are highly effective for initiating and maintaining sleep, tolerance and withdrawal effects as well as impairment of daytime performance are commonly troublesome and limit their use. Aided by increased knowledge of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and its receptors, new hypnotic sedatives have been developed that are increasingly selective for the various subunits of the GABA receptor. This development has produced newer agents with very favourable hypnotic profiles and side-effect profiles that provide better treatment options for medical practitioners. The pyrazolopyrimidines, the latest in this area, seem to offer some advantages over other agents.
There has been a search for more effective and safe hypnotic drugs in the last decades. Zolpidem, zaleplon, zopiclone, eszopiclone (the z-drugs) and indiplon are GABA-A modulators which bind selectively alpha1 subunits, thus, exhibiting similar mechanisms of action, although recent evidence suggests that eszopiclone is not as selective for alpha1 subunit as zolpidem is. Ramelteon and tasimelteon are new chrono-hypnotic agents, selective for melatonin MT1 and MT2 receptors. On the other hand, the consumption of sedative antidepressant drugs is significantly increasing for the treatment of insomnia, in the last years. As an experimental drug, eplivanserin is being tested as a potent antagonist of serotonin 2-A receptors (ASTAR) with a potential use in sleep maintenance difficulty. Another recent pharmacological agent for insomnia is almorexant, which new mechanism of action involves antagonism of hypocretinergic system, thus inducing sleep. Finally we also discuss the potential role of other gabaergic drugs for insomnia.
PURPOSE: Insomnia is problematic for older adults. After behavioral modifications fail to show adequate response, pharmacologic options are used. The pharmacokinetics of agents used to treat insomnia may be altered. This review focuses on the safety and efficacy of medications used to treat insomnia. METHODS: A literature search of Medline, PubMed, and Embase was conducted (January 1966-June 2016). It included systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials, observational studies, and case series that had an emphasis on insomnia in an older population. Search terms included medications approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for insomnia: benzodiazepines (triazolam, estazolam, temazepam, flurazepam, and quazepam), nonbenzodiazepine receptor agonists (non-BzRAs; zaleplon, zolpidem, and eszopiclone), suvorexant, ramelteon, doxepin and trazodone. Off-label drugs such as other antidepressants, antihistamines, antipsychotics, gabapentin, pramipexole, tiagabine, valerian, and melatonin were also included. FINDINGS: Cognitive behavioral therapy and sleep hygiene are considered initial therapy for insomnia. Benzodiazepines are discouraged in the geriatric population, especially for long-term use. Although non-BzRAs have improved safety profiles compared with benzodiazepines, their side effects include dementia, serious injury, and fractures, which should limit their use. Ramelteon has a minimal adverse effect profile and is effective for sleep-onset latency and increased total sleep time, making it a valuable first-line option. Although the data on suvorexant are limited, this drug improves sleep maintenance and has mild adverse effects, including somnolence; residual daytime sedation has been reported, however. Sedating low-dose antidepressants should only be used for insomnia when the patient has comorbid depression. Antipsychotic agents, pramipexole, and tiagabine have all been used for insomnia, but none has been extensively studied in an older population, and all have considerable adverse effects. Gabapentin may be useful in patients with restless leg syndrome or chronic neuropathic pain and insomnia. Diphenhydramine should be avoided in the elderly. Valerian and melatonin are unregulated products that have a small impact on sleep latency and can produce residual sedation. IMPLICATIONS: An ideal treatment for insomnia should help to improve sleep latency and sleep duration with limited awakenings and be without significant adverse effects such as daytime somnolence or decreased alertness. Cognitive behavioral therapy should always be first line treatment. Clinical inertia regarding previous prominent use of benzodiazepines and non-BzRAs will be a significant challenge for patients accustomed to their issuance. The future direction of insomnia treatment should have an emphasis on nonpharmacologic interventions, treating comorbid conditions, and focusing therapy on using benzodiazepines and non-BzRAs as last resorts.
BACKGROUND: Insomnia is a common disorder associated with a substantial burden of illness, particularly in older adults. OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of lemborexant with specified other insomnia treatments through a systematic literature review and network meta-analysis (NMA). METHODS: Medline and Embase were systematically searched from inception to February 2019 and updated with a targeted search of PubMed for pivotal trials in March 2021. Randomized controlled trials in adults with primary insomnia were included if they reported results following at least 1 week of treatment. Interventions of interest were specified as lemborexant, suvorexant, benzodiazepines, benzodiazepine receptor agonists (also called Z-drugs [zolpidem, eszopiclone, zaleplon, zopiclone]), trazodone, and ramelteon. Efficacy outcomes included wake after sleep onset (WASO), sleep efficiency (SE), latency to persistent sleep (LPS)/sleep onset latency (SOL), total sleep time (TST) and Insomnia Severity Index (ISI). Bayesian NMA were performed at predetermined time intervals approximating 4 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months. Safety outcomes included serious adverse events (SAEs), withdrawals due to adverse events (AEs), and specified AEs (dizziness, somnolence, and falls). Subgroup analysis was conducted in the older population. RESULTS: 45 studies were included in the NMA. At 4 weeks, lemborexant had the highest probability of being the best treatment for 3 of the 4 outcomes measured objectively by polysomnography-TST, LPS, and SE-and was ranked second to suvorexant on WASO. Eszopiclone was highly ranked for subjectively measured SOL and ISI at 4 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months. Lemborexant was rated more highly than suvorexant in subjective measures of WASO, TST, and SOL at 4 weeks (the differences were not statistically significant). No statistically significant interactions between treatment effect and older subpopulations were found, indicating that the treatment effect was similar in older and adult populations. The safety profile of lemborexant was broadly similar to the other treatments for SAEs and withdrawals due to AEs. A limitation is the age of some of the included studies (3 were published in 1990 or earlier). A further limitation is the lack of stratification of recommended doses. If the doses used in the study publications do not reflect doses used in clinical practice, this could potentially bias the results. CONCLUSIONS: Lemborexant was ranked highest of the treatments studied on 3 out of the 4 objectively measured insomnia efficacy outcomes, with a safety profile broadly similar to other insomnia treatments. DISCLOSURES: This work was funded by Eisai Inc., which was involved with all stages of the study and analysis. McElroy, O'Leary, and Adena are consultants with Datalytics Pty Ltd., which was paid by Eisai Inc. for conducting the literature review and analysis. They were not financially compensated for collaborative efforts on publication-related activities. Campbell, Tahami Monfared, and Meier are employed by Eisai Inc. This study was presented as a poster at AMCP Nexus Virtual, October 20-23, 2020 and at the AGS Virtual Annual Scientific Meeting 2021, May 13-15, 2021.
Based on electrophysiological, neurochemical, genetic and neuropharmacological approaches, it is currently accepted that serotonin (5-HT) functions predominantly to promote wakefulness (W) and to inhibit REM (rapid eye movement) sleep (REMS). Yet, under certain circumstances the neurotransmitter contributes to the increase in sleep propensity. Most of the serotonergic innervation of the cerebral cortex, amygdala, basal forebrain (BFB), thalamus, preoptic and hypothalamic areas, raphe nuclei, locus coeruleus and pontine reticular formation comes from the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN). The 5-HT receptors can be classified into at least seven classes, designated 5-HT(1-7). The 5-HT(1A) and 5-HT(1B) receptor subtypes are linked to the inhibition of adenylate cyclase, and their activation evokes a membrane hyperpolarization. The actions of the 5-HT(2A), 5-HT(2B) and 5-HT(2C) receptor subtypes are mediated by the activation of phospholipase C, with a resulting depolarization of the host cell. The 5-HT(3) receptor directly activates a 5-HT-gated cation channel which leads to the depolarization of monoaminergic, aminoacidergic and cholinergic cells. The primary signal transduction pathway of 5-HT(6) and 5-HT(7) receptors is the stimulation of adenylate cyclase which results in the depolarization of the follower neurons. Mutant mice that do not express 5-HT(1A) or 5-HT(1B) receptor exhibit greater amounts of REMS than their wild-type counterparts, which could be related to the absence of a postsynaptic inhibitory effect on REM-on neurons of the laterodorsal and pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei (LDT/PPT). 5-HT(2A) and 5-HT(2C) receptor knock-out mice show a significant increase of W and a reduction of slow wave sleep (SWS) which has been ascribed to the increase of catecholaminergic neurotransmission involving mainly the noradrenergic and dopaminergic systems. Sleep variables have been characterized, in addition, in 5-HT(7) receptor knock-out mice; the mutants spend less time in REMS that their wild-type counterparts. Direct infusion of the 5-HT(1A) receptor agonists 8-OH-DPAT and flesinoxan into the DRN significantly enhances REMS in the rat. In contrast, microinjection of the 5-HT(1B) (CP-94253), 5-HT(2A/2C) (DOI), 5-HT(3) (m-chlorophenylbiguanide) and 5-HT(7) (LP-44) receptor agonists into the DRN induces a significant reduction of REMS. Systemic injection of full agonists at postsynaptic 5-HT(1A) (8-OH-DPAT, flesinoxan), 5-HT(1B) (CGS 12066B, CP-94235), 5-HT(2C) (RO 60-0175), 5-HT(2A/2C) (DOI, DOM), 5-HT(3) (m-chlorophenylbiguanide) and 5-HT(7) (LP-211) receptors increases W and reduces SWS and REMS. Of note, systemic administration of the 5-HT(2A/2C) receptor antagonists ritanserin, ketanserin, ICI-170,809 or sertindole at the beginning of the light period has been shown to induce a significant increase of SWS and a reduction of REMS in the rat. Wakefulness was also diminished in most of these studies. Similar effects have been described following the injection of the selective 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonists volinanserin and pruvanserin and of the 5-HT(2A) receptor inverse agonist nelotanserin in rodents. In addition, the effects of these compounds have been studied on the sleep electroencephalogram of subjects with normal sleep. Their administration was followed by an increase of SWS and, in most instances, a reduction of REMS. The administration of ritanserin to poor sleepers, patients with chronic primary insomnia and psychiatric patients with a generalized anxiety disorder or a mood disorder caused a significant increase in SWS. The 5-HT(2A) receptor inverse agonist APD-125 induced also an increase of SWS in patients with chronic primary insomnia. It is known that during the administration of benzodiazepine (BZD) hypnotics to patients with insomnia there is a further reduction of SWS and REMS, whereas both variables tend to remain decreased during the use of non-BZD derivatives (zolpidem, zopiclone, eszopiclone, zaleplon). Thus, the association of 5-HT(2A) antagonists or 5-HT(2A) inverse agonists with BZD and non-BZD hypnotics could be a valid alternative to normalize SWS in patients with primary or comorbid insomnia.
Insomnia is the most common type of sleep disorder in the family medicine population. It is defined as a persistent difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or a report of nonrestorative sleep, accompanied by related daytime impairment. Insomnia is a significant public health problem because of its high prevalence and management challenges. There is increasing evidence of a strong association between insomnia and various medical and psychiatric comorbidities. Diagnosis of insomnia and treatment planning rely on a thorough sleep history to address contributing and precipitating factors as well as maladaptive behaviors resulting in poor sleep. Using a sleep diary or sleep log is more accurate than patient recall to determine sleep patterns. A sleep study is not routinely indicated for evaluation of insomnia. Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) is the mainstay of treatment and is a safe and effective approach. The key challenge of CBT-I is the lack of clinicians to implement it. The newer generation nonbenzodiazepines (eg, zolpidem, zaleplon) are used as first-line pharmacotherapy for chronic insomnia. Newer drugs active on targets other than the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor are now available, but clear treatment guidelines are needed.
Insomnia is a cardinal symptom for many psychiatric disorders, especially depressive disorders. Treatment of the underlying psychiatric disorder may be sufficient to relieve the accompanying insomnia. If the insomnia fails to respond, then consideration should be given to the possibility of inadequate treatment of the primary psychiatric disorder, iatrogenic insomnia, insomnia related to a medical disorder, or learned/habit insomnia. Persistent insomnia should be aggressively pursued, since it has been associated with a variety of adverse outcomes in samples of depressed patients. The physician should always inquire about and encourage healthy sleeping behaviors, even if hypnotic medication is contemplated. Benzodiazepines and nonbenzodiazepine benzodiazepine receptor agonists (BzRAs) have the best evidence for efficacy as hypnotics, although sedating antidepressants are popularly prescribed. Although all benzodiazepine hypnotics and nonbenzodiazepine BzRAs are comparably efficacious in inducing sleep, they vary markedly in their potential for residual side effects.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity worldwide. Because of the chronic nature of the disease, optimal care for patients includes successful treatment of comorbidities that accompany COPD, including insomnia. Insomnia symptoms and associated disruption of sleep are prevalent in COPD patients but treatment with traditional benzodiazepines may compromise respiratory function. This review summarizes the efficacy and safety consideration of current drugs available for the treatment of insomnia in COPD patients including benzodiazepines, non-benzodiazepine receptor agonists such as eszopiclone, zolpidem, and zaleplon, sedating antidepressants such as trazodone, and the melatonin receptor agonist ramelteon.
PURPOSE: Crewmembers aboard the International Space Station (ISS) have free access to an increasing number of medications within medical kits. The aim of the current study was to assess the number, severity and reliability of potential drug-drug interactions (DDIs) involving those medications. METHODS: We evaluated the information obtained from clinical decision support systems. Searches for potential DDIs were applied to published lists of medications available to US astronauts in medical kits aboard the ISS. RESULTS: A total of 311 potential DDIs were identified by Lexi-Interact, of which approximately half were recognized by Micromedex as well. Major, moderate and minor interactions consisted 23.5%, 68.5% and 8.0% of entries, respectively. The reliability of 71.1% of alerts was fair. Commonly used drugs, including zolpidem and zaleplon, were involved in multiple potential interactions that were classified as major based on additive CNS depression. CONCLUSIONS: Most potential DDIs likely to be encountered in space are unestablished even in terrestrial medicine and their assignment is based on class-effects. Yet, some drug combinations may be associated with clinically-relevant consequences. Future DDI rating should be adjusted to space-related outcomes. Until that happens, it would be advisable to avoid non-established drug combinations in space when possible.
Complaints of poor sleep are very common in people with chronic respiratory disorders. In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), poor sleep may be due to many causes, including cough, excess mucous production, and frequent arousals from sleep caused by hypercapnia, as well as secondary to medications used to manage the lung disease. Patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) also complain of excessive daytime sleepiness and fatigue due to poor-quality sleep, although the mechanism of sleep disruption is somewhat different from that in patients with COPD. Although benzodiazepines are often the drugs of choice for the management of insomnia, caution is suggested with the use of these agents in patients with chronic obstructive respiratory disease due to the reduction in upper airway muscle tone and blunting of the arousal response to hypercapnia. However, controlled trials with short-acting benzodiazepine receptor antagonists, including triazolam, zolpidem, and zaleplon, suggest that these agents may be safely used in selected patients who have mild to moderate COPD without daytime hypercapnia. Less data are available on the use of these agents for patients with OSA, but a preliminary trial using zaleplon suggests that respiratory function is not adversely affected in patients with mild to moderate OSA. Studies are needed to further define the benefit-risk ratio of the use of benzodiazepine receptor agonists for the management of insomnia in patients with chronic obstructive lung disease.
Insomnia is a prevalent problem in late life. Sleep problems in the elderly are often mistakenly considered a normal part of aging. Insomnia, the most common sleep disorder, is a subjective report of insufficient or nonrestorative sleep despite adequate opportunity to sleep. Despite the fact that more than 50% of elderly people have insomnia, it is typically undertreated, and nonpharmacologic interventions are underused by health care practitioners. This article will review the causes of insomnia in the elderly, the approach to patient evaluation, and the nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic treatment of insomnia.
Insomnia has a number of clinically significant associations. In particular, patients with chronic insomnia have higher rates of psychiatric and medical illnesses, and insomnia is an important risk factor in the development of depression. Insomniacs also have higher rates of health care utilization and reduced quality of life. This article reviews important clinical correlates of insomnia and evidence for possible causal relationships between sleep and health.
Insomnia is defined as difficulty with the initiation, maintenance, duration, or quality of sleep that results in the impairment of daytime functioning, despite adequate opportunity and circumstances for sleep. In most countries approximately every third inhabitant has insomnia. Insomnia can be classified as primary and secondary. The pathogenesis of primary insomnia is unknown, but available evidence suggests a state of hyperarousal. Insomnia secondary to other causes is more common than primary insomnia. Cerebral hypoperfusion can be the cause of insomnia in some cases. In such patients the cerebral blood flow should be improved using parenteral vascular therapy. If insomnia persists despite treatment, then therapy for primary insomnia should be instituted using benzodiazepine-receptor agonists such as Zolpidem, Zopiclone, or Zaleplon. In those cases Midazolam cannot be used for the treatment of insomnia due to its marked negative effect on cerebral blood flow. In Hungary there is a need to organize multidisciplinary Insomnia Clinics because insomnia is more than a disease, it is a public health problem in this century.
