Both first-generation and second-generation antipsychotic medications can lower the seizure threshold, increasing the chances of seizure induction. This article reviews the published literature concerning the seizure-lowering effects of first- and second-generation antipsychotic medication. Unfortunately, rigorously controlled studies are relatively infrequent, and case reports form a large part of the available literature, limiting the confidence with which firm conclusions can be drawn. Of the first-generation antipsychotic medications, chlorpromazine appears to be associated with the greatest risk of seizure provocation, although other first-generation antipsychotics also lower seizure threshold. Conversely, molindone, haloperidol, fluphenazine, pimozide and trifluoperazine are associated with a lower risk of seizure induction. Clozapine is the second-generation antipsychotic most frequently associated with seizures, with risperidone appearing to confer a relatively low risk. Other factors such as history of seizure activity, concurrent use of other drugs that lower seizure threshold, rapid dose titration, slow drug metabolism, metabolic factors and drug-drug interactions appear to increase the chances of an antipsychotic medication inducing seizure activity.
BACKGROUND: There are conflicting data on the effects of antipsychotic medications on delirium in patients in the intensive care unit (ICU). METHODS: In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, we assigned patients with acute respiratory failure or shock and hypoactive or hyperactive delirium to receive intravenous boluses of haloperidol (maximum dose, 20 mg daily), ziprasidone (maximum dose, 40 mg daily), or placebo. The volume and dose of a trial drug or placebo was halved or doubled at 12-hour intervals on the basis of the presence or absence of delirium, as detected with the use of the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU, and of side effects of the intervention. The primary end point was the number of days alive without delirium or coma during the 14-day intervention period. Secondary end points included 30-day and 90-day survival, time to freedom from mechanical ventilation, and time to ICU and hospital discharge. Safety end points included extrapyramidal symptoms and excessive sedation. RESULTS: Written informed consent was obtained from 1183 patients or their authorized representatives. Delirium developed in 566 patients (48%), of whom 89% had hypoactive delirium and 11% had hyperactive delirium. Of the 566 patients, 184 were randomly assigned to receive placebo, 192 to receive haloperidol, and 190 to receive ziprasidone. The median duration of exposure to a trial drug or placebo was 4 days (interquartile range, 3 to 7). The median number of days alive without delirium or coma was 8.5 (95% confidence interval [CI], 5.6 to 9.9) in the placebo group, 7.9 (95% CI, 4.4 to 9.6) in the haloperidol group, and 8.7 (95% CI, 5.9 to 10.0) in the ziprasidone group (P=0.26 for overall effect across trial groups). The use of haloperidol or ziprasidone, as compared with placebo, had no significant effect on the primary end point (odds ratios, 0.88 [95% CI, 0.64 to 1.21] and 1.04 [95% CI, 0.73 to 1.48], respectively). There were no significant between-group differences with respect to the secondary end points or the frequency of extrapyramidal symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: The use of haloperidol or ziprasidone, as compared with placebo, in patients with acute respiratory failure or shock and hypoactive or hyperactive delirium in the ICU did not significantly alter the duration of delirium. (Funded by the National Institutes of Health and the VA Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center; MIND-USA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01211522 .).
OBJECTIVE: Antipsychotics play a crucial role in the management of behavioral problems in patients undergoing hemodialysis. Oral and injectable antipsychotics are routinely prescribed to control emergent delirium or exacerbation of previous psychiatric symptoms. However scanty literature is available on the pharmacokinetics of antipsychotics in such patients. Avoiding amisulpride and warning against increasing the dosage in renal failure is the only recommendation by drug manufacturers and clinical guidelines. Hemodialysis affects the volume of distribution (V(d)) and blood levels of antipsychotics in a complex manner. It is hence difficult to equate data on renal failure with hemodialysis to reliably predict the treatment response. METHOD: We systematically analyzed online data from 1981 to 2019 on the use of antipsychotics in hemodialysis. The outcome was defined as the safety and efficacy of AP, measured in terms of adverse effects and relapse of existing or new onset of behavioral symptoms in Hemodialysis. RESULTS: The data from 182 studies revealed that only 14 case reports and 1 case series met the review criteria. Oral Risperidone, Clozapine, Aripiprazole, Ziprasidone, Haloperidol, and Long-acting Risperidone, Flupenthixol, and Paliperidone were the antipsychotics studied in terms of pharmacokinetics during hemodialysis. AP levels in the blood were found to be unaffected in two studies during HD while the other two studies recommended scheduling of AP regimen w.r.t HD session. Six reports mentioned exacerbation of pre-existing psychiatric ailments in patients undergoing HD, the most common being schizophrenia. CONCLUSION: Findings of the review reveals modest evidence favoring multiple dosing regimens of oral aripiprazole, ziprasidone, olanzapine, and risperidone. Long-acting risperidone and paliperidone are well tolerated and half of the conventional dose may be effective in the case of paliperidone. Though CYP-3A4 remains relatively and transiently unaltered during hemodialysis, none of the antipsychotics are compromised in HD. While selecting an AP during HD, one has to consider the protein binding, clearance by dialysis, duration of an HD session, route of administration of AP, and impaired bowel absorption in HD.
Therapeutic drug monitoring studies have generally concentrated on controlling compliance and avoiding side effects by maintaining long-term exposure to minimally effective blood concentrations. The rationale for using therapeutic drug monitoring in relation to second-generation antipsychotics is still being discussed at least with regard to the real clinical utility, but there is evidence that it can improve efficacy, especially when patients do not respond or develop side effects using therapeutic doses. Furthermore, drug plasma concentration determinations can be of some utility in medico-legal problems. This review concentrates on the clinical pharmacokinetic data related to clozapine, risperidone, paliperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, amisulpride, ziprasidone, aripiprazole, sertindole, asenapine, iloperidone, lurasidone, brexpiprazole and cariprazine and briefly considers the main aspects of their pharmacodynamics. Optimal plasma concentration ranges are proposed for clozapine, risperidone, paliperidone and olanzapine because the studies of quetiapine, amisulpride, asenapine, iloperidone and lurasidone provide only limited information and there is no direct evidence concerning ziprasidone, aripiprazole, sertindole, brexpiprazole and cariprazine: the few reported investigations need to be confirmed and extended.
BACKGROUND: The relative effectiveness of second-generation (atypical) antipsychotic drugs as compared with that of older agents has been incompletely addressed, though newer agents are currently used far more commonly. We compared a first-generation antipsychotic, perphenazine, with several newer drugs in a double-blind study. METHODS: A total of 1493 patients with schizophrenia were recruited at 57 U.S. sites and randomly assigned to receive olanzapine (7.5 to 30 mg per day), perphenazine (8 to 32 mg per day), quetiapine (200 to 800 mg per day), or risperidone (1.5 to 6.0 mg per day) for up to 18 months. Ziprasidone (40 to 160 mg per day) was included after its approval by the Food and Drug Administration. The primary aim was to delineate differences in the overall effectiveness of these five treatments. RESULTS: Overall, 74 percent of patients discontinued the study medication before 18 months (1061 of the 1432 patients who received at least one dose): 64 percent of those assigned to olanzapine, 75 percent of those assigned to perphenazine, 82 percent of those assigned to quetiapine, 74 percent of those assigned to risperidone, and 79 percent of those assigned to ziprasidone. The time to the discontinuation of treatment for any cause was significantly longer in the olanzapine group than in the quetiapine (P<0.001) or risperidone (P=0.002) group, but not in the perphenazine (P=0.021) or ziprasidone (P=0.028) group. The times to discontinuation because of intolerable side effects were similar among the groups, but the rates differed (P=0.04); olanzapine was associated with more discontinuation for weight gain or metabolic effects, and perphenazine was associated with more discontinuation for extrapyramidal effects. CONCLUSIONS: The majority of patients in each group discontinued their assigned treatment owing to inefficacy or intolerable side effects or for other reasons. Olanzapine was the most effective in terms of the rates of discontinuation, and the efficacy of the conventional antipsychotic agent perphenazine appeared similar to that of quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone. Olanzapine was associated with greater weight gain and increases in measures of glucose and lipid metabolism.
Kounis syndrome (KS), described by Kounis and Zavras in 1991, is the manifestation of an allergic reaction preceding and leading to an acute coronary syndrome (ACS). There are three variants of Kounis Syndrome. Here we describe a novel case report of a type 1 variant secondary to Ziprasidone.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: Agitation in the emergency department (ED) can pose a threat to patient and provider safety; therefore, treatment is indicated. The purpose of this study is to compare haloperidol, olanzapine, midazolam, and ziprasidone to treat agitation. METHODS: This was a prospective observational study of consecutive patients receiving intramuscular medication to treat agitation in the ED. Medications were administered according to an a priori protocol in which the initial medication given was predetermined in the following 3-week blocks: haloperidol 5 mg, ziprasidone 20 mg, olanzapine 10 mg, midazolam 5 mg, and haloperidol 10 mg. The primary outcome was the proportion of patients adequately sedated at 15 minutes, assessed with the Altered Mental Status Scale. RESULTS: Seven hundred thirty-seven patients were enrolled (median age 40 years; 72% men). At 15 minutes, midazolam resulted in a greater proportion of patients adequately sedated (Altered Mental Status Scale <1) compared with ziprasidone (difference 18%; 95% confidence interval [CI] 6% to 29%), haloperidol 5 mg (difference 30%; 95% CI 19% to 41%), haloperidol 10 mg (difference 28%; 95% CI 17% to 39%), and olanzapine (difference 9%; 95% CI -1% to 20%). Olanzapine resulted in a greater proportion of patients adequately sedated at 15 minutes compared with haloperidol 5 mg (difference 20%; 95% CI 10% to 31%), haloperidol 10 mg (difference 18%; 95% CI 7% to 29%), and ziprasidone (difference 8%; 95% CI -3% to 19%). Adverse events were uncommon: cardiac arrest (0), extrapyramidal adverse effects (2; 0.3%), hypotension (5; 0.5%), hypoxemia (10; 1%), and intubation (4; 0.5%), and occurred at similar rates in each group. CONCLUSION: Intramuscular midazolam achieved more effective sedation in agitated ED patients at 15 minutes than haloperidol, ziprasidone, and perhaps olanzapine. Olanzapine provided more effective sedation than haloperidol. No differences in adverse events were identified.
BACKGROUND: Different effectiveness profiles among antipsychotics may be a key point to optimize treatment in patients suffering a first episode of psychosis to impact on long-term outcome. The aim of this study is to compare the clinical effectiveness of olanzapine, risperidone, haloperidol, aripiprazole, ziprasidone, and quetiapine in the treatment of first episode of psychosis at 3-year follow-up. METHOD: From February 2001 to January 2011, 2 phases of a prospective, randomized, open-label study were undertaken. A total of 376 first-episode drug-naive patients were randomly assigned to olanzapine (n = 55), risperidone (n = 63), haloperidol (n = 56), aripiprazole (n = 78), ziprasidone (n = 62), or quetiapine (n = 62) and followed up for 3 years. The primary effectiveness measure was all cause of treatment discontinuation. In addition, an analysis based on intention-to-treat principle was conducted in the analysis for clinical efficacy. RESULTS: The overall dropout rate at 3 years reached 20.75%. Treatment discontinuation rates were significantly different among treatment groups (olanzapine = 69.09, risperidone = 71.43, aripiprazole = 73.08%, ziprasidone = 79.03%, haloperidol = 89.28%, and quetiapine = 95.53%) (chi2 = 79.86; P = .000). Statistically significant differences in terms of lack of efficacy, adherence, and tolerability were observed among treatment groups along the 3-year follow-up, determining significant differences in time to all-cause discontinuation (log-rank = 92.240; P = .000). Significant differences between treatments were found in the categories of sleepiness/sedation, increased sleep duration, akinesia, weight gain, ejaculatory dysfunction, extrapyramidal-symptoms, and amenorrhea. CONCLUSIONS: Olanzapine, risperidone, and aripiprazole presented advantages for the first-line treatment of first episode of psychosis in terms of effectiveness. Identifying different discontinuation patterns may contribute to optimize treatment selection after first episode of psychosis.ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02526030 https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02526030.
The aim of this study was to review the efficacy and safety of atypical antipsychotics, comparing within class, placebo, or compared to another active treatment for delirium. A literature search was conducted using PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane database (1 January 1990-5 November 2012). Selection criteria for review were prospective, controlled studies (comparison studies), using validated delirium rating scales as outcome measures. A total of six prospective, randomized controlled studies were included in the review. It was found that atypical antipsychotics are effective and safe in treating delirium, even though there seemed to be no difference between each agent. In particular, comparison studies with haloperidol showed that the efficacy of atypical antipsychotics was similar to that of low-dose haloperidol. It was concluded that atypical antipsychotics appear to be effective and tolerable in the management of delirium, even though the evidence is limited.
BACKGROUND: Delirium is common during critical illness and is associated with long-term cognitive impairment and disability. Antipsychotics are frequently used to treat delirium, but their effects on long-term outcomes are unknown. We aimed to investigate the effects of antipsychotic treatment of delirious, critically ill patients on long-term cognitive, functional, psychological, and quality-of-life outcomes. METHODS: This prespecified, long-term follow-up to the randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 MIND-USA Study was conducted in 16 hospitals throughout the USA. Adults (aged >/=18 years) who had been admitted to an intensive care unit with respiratory failure or septic or cardiogenic shock were eligible for inclusion in the study if they had delirium. Participants were randomly assigned-using a computer-generated, permuted-block randomisation scheme with stratification by trial site and age-in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive intravenous placebo, haloperidol, or ziprasidone for up to 14 days. Investigators and participants were masked to treatment group assignment. 3 months and 12 months after randomisation, we assessed survivors' cognitive, functional, psychological, quality-of-life, and employment outcomes using validated telephone-administered tests and questionnaires. This trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01211522, and is complete. FINDINGS: Between Dec 7, 2011, and Aug 12, 2017, we screened 20 914 individuals, of whom 566 were eligible and consented or had consent provided to participate. Of these 566 patients, 184 were assigned to the placebo group, 192 to the haloperidol group, and 190 to the ziprasidone group. 1-year survival and follow-up rates were similar between groups. Cognitive impairment was common in all three treatment groups, with a third of survivors impaired at both 3-month and 12-month follow-up in all groups. More than half of the surveyed survivors in each group had cognitive or physical limitations (or both) that precluded employment at both 3-month and 12-month follow-up. At both 3 months and 12 months, neither haloperidol (adjusted odds ratio 1.22 [95% CI 0.73-2.04] at 3 months and 1.12 [0.60-2.11] at 12 months) nor ziprasidone (1.07 [0.59-1.96] at 3 months and 0.94 [0.62-1.44] at 12 months) significantly altered cognitive outcomes, as measured by the Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status T score, compared with placebo. We also found no evidence that functional, psychological, quality-of-life, or employment outcomes improved with haloperidol or ziprasidone compared with placebo. INTERPRETATION: In delirious, critically ill patients, neither haloperidol nor ziprasidone had a significant effect on cognitive, functional, psychological, or quality-of-life outcomes among survivors. Our findings, along with insufficient evidence of short-term benefit and frequent inappropriate continuation of antipsychotics at hospital discharge, indicate that antipsychotics should not be used routinely to treat delirium in critically ill adults. FUNDING: National Institutes of Health and the US Department of Veterans Affairs.
Delirium, described as an acute neuropsychiatric syndrome, occurs commonly in critically ill patients and leads to many negative outcomes including increased mortality and long-term cognitive deficits. Despite the lack of clinical data supporting the use of antipsychotics for the management of intensive care unit (ICU) delirium, pharmacological interventions are often needed to control acutely agitated patients. Given that the most current guidelines do not advocate the use of haloperidol for either the prevention or treatment of ICU delirium due to a lack of evidence, second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) have been commonly used as alternatives to haloperidol for ICU patients with delirium. Nonetheless, the evidence supporting the use of SGAs to treat ICU delirium remains limited. This review is designed to assess the available clinical evidence and highlights the different neuropharmacological and safety properties of SGAs in order to guide the rational use of SGAs for the treatment of ICU delirium.
Weight overload and obesity became these last years a major health problem. However gain weight is a frequent side effect of a large number of psychotropics. This article proposes to discuss this potential while reviewing various molecules. This reveals that the atypical antipsychotics are most likely to induce weight gain, in particular clozapine and olanzapine. The tricyclic antidepressants and mirtazapine come next, with the majority of the mood stabilizers. The old antipsychotics seem to involve less gain of weight. The SSRI make lose weight in the first weeks of treatment, but induce a moderate weight gain on the long term.
This article reviews the receptor pharmacology of neuroleptics, with a focus on newer drugs (e.g., risperidone, olanzapine, sertindole, quetiapine, and ziprasidone) in contrast to older compounds. All these newer compounds are considered to be atypical neuroleptics based upon certain criteria, which are reviewed. Several hypotheses about the molecular mechanisms that explain atypicality are considered. Finally, the in vitro receptor binding data presented for these compounds are related to the therapeutic and adverse effects of these drugs.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a well-recognized neurologic emergency. It presents with classic features including hyperthermia, autonomic instability, muscle hypertonia, and mental status changes. The syndrome is potentially fatal and is associated with significant morbidity due to complications such as rhabdomyolysis, acute kidney injury, and ventricular arrhythmias due to the trans-cellular electrolyte shift. NMS is conventionally associated with the first-generation antipsychotic agents, however, has been described with the use of atypical and novel antipsychotics including Ziprasidone. A case of NMS with Ziprasidone use at the therapeutic dose is reported here.
Second generation antipsychotic agents are increasingly used in the management of acute mania. A systematic review of the efficacy and safety of these agents, as both monotherapy and in combination with mood stabilisers, was performed to establish the evidence for their use. Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were critically appraised in more detail than studies that presented lower levels of evidence such as case reports, case series and open label follow up studies. We found 11 RCTs reporting on patients treated with second generation antipsychotics for acute bipolar mania, of which three included randomisation between the second generation antipsychotic and placebo, and eight between a mood stabiliser combined with either the second generation antipsychotic or placebo. Data from non-randomised trials is also presented.
The discovery of antipsychotic medications has revolutionized the treatment of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. However, side effects such as extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) and tardive dyskinesia (TD), electrocardiogram (ECG) changes, weight gain, and metabolic disturbances indicate the continued need to develop new agents. The introduction of atypical drugs such as clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, and ziprasidone has widened our choices. This article provides an overview of the pharmacology, efficacy, and techniques for the clinical use of aripiprazole, a novel agent with a unique pharmacological profile.
Neuroleptic treatment in schizophrenic patients has been associated with sexual dysfunction, including impotence and decreased libido. Spontaneous ejaculation without sexual arousal during typical antipsychotic treatment is a rare condition that has been described with zuclopentixol, trifluoperazine, and thiothixene. Here, we are reporting a case of spontaneous orgasm with ziprasidone in a bipolar patient. This patient began to repeatedly experience spontaneous sexual arousal and orgasm, which she had never experienced in the past. Ziprasidone might be causing an increase in sexual orgasm by 5-HT2 receptor antagonism, which preclinical evidence suggests that it facilitates dopamine release in the cortex.
Based on information from clinical trials, both the efficacy and adverse effects of conventional antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia are dose related. The overlapping nature of these dose-response profiles limits the use of these agents. Atypical antipsychotics provide greater relief across the comorbid symptom domains of schizophrenia, but dose-response studies and clinical experience have revealed that some of these drugs also have dose limitations. This article reviews the dose-response relationships of the atypical antipsychotics as presented predominantly in pivotal, randomised studies (double-blind and otherwise). Limited data indicate that clozapine shows dose-related efficacy up to 600 mg/day in patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenia. However, higher dosages of clozapine may be associated with the risk of seizures. Risperidone demonstrates dose-related adverse events that compromise efficacy. The dose-response relationships for ziprasidone, quetiapine and aripiprazole are less well established. The efficacy of olanzapine appears to be dose related within the recommended dosage range of 10-20 mg/day, but clinical trials that have explored higher dosages suggest improved efficacy. Furthermore, the higher doses are not associated with a significantly increased incidence of adverse events. Further studies are clearly needed to fully characterise the dose-response relationships of atypical antipsychotics.
Traditionally, haloperidol has been the recommended antipsychotic drug for pharmacological treatment of delirium, which is a frequent complication in the critical care setting. Due to a less frequent occurrence of extrapyramidal adverse effects, second-generation antipsychotic drugs have been evaluated. In the present paper we review the current randomized prospective studies of second-generation antipsychotics as treatment for delirium in hospitalized patients and conclude that so far the evidence in favour of these drugs compared with haloperidol is still sparse.
According to current medical opinion chronic mental diseases such as schizophrenia require life-long treatment. The choice of antipsychotics is an important treatment factor, since their side-effects often influence patients' compliance with treatment. Severe side-effects may cause the patients to reject such treatment, the latter being their right. In case a psychiatrist does not agree with the patient's decision to interrupt his antipsychotic treatment regardless its serious side-effects, the former should be persistent in convincing the patient to replace such drug with a more appropriate therapy.
