BACKGROUND: Behavioural, cognitive, and pharmacological interventions can all be effective for insomnia. However, because of inadequate resources, medications are more frequently used worldwide. We aimed to estimate the comparative effectiveness of pharmacological treatments for the acute and long-term treatment of adults with insomnia disorder. METHODS: In this systematic review and network meta-analysis, we searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, PubMed, Embase, PsycINFO, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, ClinicalTrials.gov, and websites of regulatory agencies from database inception to Nov 25, 2021, to identify published and unpublished randomised controlled trials. We included studies comparing pharmacological treatments or placebo as monotherapy for the treatment of adults (>/=18 year) with insomnia disorder. We assessed the certainty of evidence using the confidence in network meta-analysis (CINeMA) framework. Primary outcomes were efficacy (ie, quality of sleep measured by any self-rated scale), treatment discontinuation for any reason and due to side-effects specifically, and safety (ie, number of patients with at least one adverse event) both for acute and long-term treatment. We estimated summary standardised mean differences (SMDs) and odds ratios (ORs) using pairwise and network meta-analysis with random effects. This study is registered with Open Science Framework, https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/PU4QJ. FINDINGS: We included 170 trials (36 interventions and 47 950 participants) in the systematic review and 154 double-blind, randomised controlled trials (30 interventions and 44 089 participants) were eligible for the network meta-analysis. In terms of acute treatment, benzodiazepines, doxylamine, eszopiclone, lemborexant, seltorexant, zolpidem, and zopiclone were more efficacious than placebo (SMD range: 0.36-0.83 [CINeMA estimates of certainty: high to moderate]). Benzodiazepines, eszopiclone, zolpidem, and zopiclone were more efficacious than melatonin, ramelteon, and zaleplon (SMD 0.27-0.71 [moderate to very low]). Intermediate-acting benzodiazepines, long-acting benzodiazepines, and eszopiclone had fewer discontinuations due to any cause than ramelteon (OR 0.72 [95% CI 0.52-0.99; moderate], 0.70 [0.51-0.95; moderate] and 0.71 [0.52-0.98; moderate], respectively). Zopiclone and zolpidem caused more dropouts due to adverse events than did placebo (zopiclone: OR 2.00 [95% CI 1.28-3.13; very low]; zolpidem: 1.79 [1.25-2.50; moderate]); and zopiclone caused more dropouts than did eszopiclone (OR 1.82 [95% CI 1.01-3.33; low]), daridorexant (3.45 [1.41-8.33; low), and suvorexant (3.13 [1.47-6.67; low]). For the number of individuals with side-effects at study endpoint, benzodiazepines, eszopiclone, zolpidem, and zopiclone were worse than placebo, doxepin, seltorexant, and zaleplon (OR range 1.27-2.78 [high to very low]). For long-term treatment, eszopiclone and lemborexant were more effective than placebo (eszopiclone: SMD 0.63 [95% CI 0.36-0.90; very low]; lemborexant: 0.41 [0.04-0.78; very low]) and eszopiclone was more effective than ramelteon (0.63 [0.16-1.10; very low]) and zolpidem (0.60 [0.00-1.20; very low]). Compared with ramelteon, eszopiclone and zolpidem had a lower rate of all-cause discontinuations (eszopiclone: OR 0.43 [95% CI 0.20-0.93; very low]; zolpidem: 0.43 [0.19-0.95; very low]); however, zolpidem was associated with a higher number of dropouts due to side-effects than placebo (OR 2.00 [95% CI 1.11-3.70; very low]). INTERPRETATION: Overall, eszopiclone and lemborexant had a favorable profile, but eszopiclone might cause substantial adverse events and safety data on lemborexant were inconclusive. Doxepin, seltorexant, and zaleplon were well tolerated, but data on efficacy and other important outcomes were scarce and do not allow firm conclusions. Many licensed drugs (including benzodiazepines, daridorexant, suvorexant, and trazodone) can be effective in the acute treatment of insomnia but are associated with poor tolerability, or information about long-term effects is not available. Melatonin, ramelteon, and non-licensed drugs did not show overall material benefits. These results should serve evidence-based clinical practice. FUNDING: UK National Institute for Health Research Oxford Health Biomedical Research Centre.
Akinetic mutism (AM) is a rare neurological disorder characterized by the presence of an intact level of consciousness and sensorimotor capacity, but with a simultaneous decrease in goal-directed behavior and emotions. Patients are in a wakeful state of profound apathy, seemingly indifferent to pain, thirst, or hunger. It represents the far end within the spectrum of disorders of diminished motivation. In recent years, more has become known about the functional roles of neurocircuits and neurotransmitters associated with human motivational behavior. More specific, there is an increasing body of behavioral evidence that links specific damage of functional frontal-subcortical organization to the occurrence of distinct neurological deficits. In this review, we combine evidence from lesion studies and neurophysiological evidence in animals, imaging studies in humans, and clinical investigations in patients with AM to form an integrative theory of its pathophysiology. Moreover, the specific pharmacological interventions that have been used to treat AM and their rationales are reviewed, providing a comprehensive overview for use in clinical practice.
Zolpidem is currently the global market leader in the hypnotic arena. Recently several novel zolpidem formulations have been launched in the U.S. or are in the preregistration development phase. These comprise an extended-release form, two types of sublingual formulations and an oral spray. The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic effects of these formulations are reviewed.
IMPORTANCE: Insomnia disorder is prevalent and associated with health risks in older adults; however, efficacy and safety issues with existing treatments create significant unmet needs in this patient population. OBJECTIVE: To compare treatment with the orexin receptor antagonist lemborexant with placebo and zolpidem tartrate extended release in participants with insomnia disorder. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The Study of the Efficacy and Safety of Lemborexant in Subjects 55 Years and Older With Insomnia Disorder (SUNRISE 1) clinical trial was a global randomized double-blind parallel-group placebo-controlled active-comparator phase 3 study conducted at 67 sites in North America and Europe from May 31, 2016, to January 30, 2018. Data analyses were conducted from January 31, 2018, to September 10, 2018. Participants were 55 years and older with insomnia disorder characterized by reported sleep maintenance difficulties and confirmed by sleep history, sleep diary, and polysomnography. Participants could have also had sleep onset difficulties. INTERVENTIONS: Participants received placebo, zolpidem tartrate extended release (6.25 mg), or lemborexant (5 mg or 10 mg) for 1 month at bedtime. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Paired polysomnograms were collected at baseline, the first 2 nights, and the last 2 nights of treatment. The primary end point was the change from baseline in latency to persistent sleep for lemborexant therapy vs placebo. Key secondary end points were changes from baseline in sleep efficiency and wake-after-sleep onset compared with placebo, and wake-after-sleep onset in the second half of the night compared with zolpidem therapy. RESULTS: Among 1006 participants randomized (placebo, n = 208; zolpidem, n = 263; lemborexant 5 mg, n = 266; and lemborexant 10 mg, n = 269), 869 (86.4%) were women and the median age was 63 years (range, 55-88 years). Both doses of lemborexant therapy demonstrated statistically significant greater changes from baseline on objective sleep onset as assessed by latency to persistent sleep (log transformed) that was measured using polysomnography at the end of 1 month of treatment (nights 29 and 30) compared with placebo (primary end point for least squares geometric means treatment ratio vs placebo: for lemborexant 5 mg, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.67-0.89; P < .001; for lemborexant 10 mg, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.63-0.83; P < .001). For nights 29 and 30, as measured using polysomnography, the mean change from baseline in sleep efficiency (LSM treatment difference vs placebo for lemborexant 5 mg, 7.1%; 95% CI, 5.6%-8.5%; P < .001 and for lemborexant 10 mg, 8.0%; 95% CI, 6.6%-9.5%; P < .001) and wake-after-sleep onset (least squares mean treatment ratio vs placebo for lemborexant 5 mg, -24.0 min; 95% CI, -30.0 to -18.0 min; P < .001 and for lemborexant 10 mg, -25.4 min; 95% CI, -31.4 to -19.3 min; P < .001) were significantly greater for both doses of lemborexant therapy compared with placebo. Also, for nights 29 and 30, wake-after-sleep onset in the second half of the night (least squares mean treatment difference vs zolpidem for lemborexant 5 mg, -6.7 min; 95% CI, -11.2 to -2.2 min; P = .004 and for lemborexant 10 mg, -8.0 min; 95% CI, -12.5 to -3.5 min; P < .001) was significantly greater for both doses of lemborexant therapy compared with zolpidem therapy measured using polysomnography. Six participants (4 in the zolpidem group and 2 in the lemborexant 5 mg group) reported serious adverse events; none were treatment-related. Other adverse events were mostly mild or moderate in severity. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial, lemborexant therapy significantly improved both sleep onset and sleep maintenance, including in the second half of the night, compared with both placebo and zolpidem measured objectively using polysomnography. Lemborexant therapy was well tolerated. TRIAL REGISTRATIONS: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02783729; EudraCT identifier: 2015-001463-39.
IMPORTANCE: Daytime functional impairments are the primary reasons for patients with insomnia to seek treatment, yet little is known about what the optimal treatment is for improving daytime functions and how best to proceed with treatment for patients whose insomnia has not remitted. OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy of behavioral therapy (BT) and zolpidem as initial therapies for improving daytime functions among patients with insomnia and evaluate the added value of a second treatment for patients whose insomnia has not remitted. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this sequential multiple-assignment randomized clinical trial conducted at institutions in Canada and the US, 211 adults with chronic insomnia disorder were enrolled between May 1, 2012, and December 31, 2015, and followed up for 12 months. Statistical analyses were performed on an intention-to-treat basis in April and October 2023. INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomly assigned to either BT or zolpidem as first-stage therapy, and those whose insomnia had not remitted received a second-stage psychological therapy (BT or cognitive therapy) or medication therapy (zolpidem or trazodone). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Study outcomes were daytime symptoms of insomnia, including mood disturbances, fatigue, functional impairments of insomnia, and scores on the 36-item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36) physical and mental health components. RESULTS: Among 211 adults with insomnia (132 women [63%]; mean [SD] age, 45.6 [14.9] years), 104 were allocated to BT and 107 to zolpidem at the first stage. First-stage treatment with BT or zolpidem yielded significant and equivalent benefits for most of the daytime outcomes, including depressive symptoms (Beck Depression Inventory-II mean score change, -3.5 [95% CI, -4.7 to -2.3] vs -4.3 [95% CI, -5.7 to -2.9]), fatigue (Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory mean score change, -4.7 [95% CI, -7.3 to -2.2] vs -5.2 [95% CI, -7.9 to -2.5]), functional impairments (Work and Social Adjustment Scale mean score change, -5.0 [95% CI, -6.7 to -3.3] vs -5.1 [95% CI, -7.2 to -2.9]), and mental health (SF-36 mental health subscale mean score change, 3.5 [95% CI, 1.9-5.1] vs 2.5 [95% CI, 0.4-4.5]), while BT produced larger improvements for anxiety symptoms relative to zolpidem (State-Trait Anxiety Inventory mean score change, -4.1 [95% CI, -5.8 to -2.4] vs -1.2 [95% CI, -3.0 to 0.5]; P = .02; Cohen d = 0.55). Second-stage therapy produced additional improvements for the 2 conditions starting with zolpidem at posttreatment in fatigue (Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory mean score change: zolpidem plus BT, -3.8 [95% CI, -7.1 to -0.4]; zolpidem plus trazodone, -3.7 [95% CI, -6.3 to -1.1]), functional impairments (Work and Social Adjustment Scale mean score change: zolpidem plus BT, -3.7 [95% CI, -6.4 to -1.0]; zolpidem plus trazodone, -3.3 [95% CI, -5.9 to -0.7]) and mental health (SF-36 mental health subscale mean score change: zolpidem plus BT, 5.3 [95% CI, 2.7-7.9]; zolpidem plus trazodone, 2.0 [95% CI, 0.1-4.0]). Treatment benefits achieved at posttreatment were well maintained throughout the 12-month follow-up, and additional improvements were noted for patients receiving the BT treatment sequences. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial of adults with insomnia disorder, BT and zolpidem produced improvements for various daytime symptoms of insomnia that were no different between treatments. Adding a second treatment offered an added value with further improvements of daytime functions. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01651442.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the dose-response relationship of daridorexant, a new dual orexin receptor antagonist, on sleep variables in subjects with insomnia disorder. METHODS: Adults (</=64 years) with insomnia disorder were randomized (1:1:1:1:1:1) to receive daily oral placebo, daridorexant (5, 10, 25, or 50mg), or 10mg zolpidem for 30 days. The primary efficacy outcome was the change in wake time after sleep onset from baseline to days 1 and 2. Secondary outcome measures were change in latency to persistent sleep from baseline to days 1 and 2, change in subjective wake time after sleep onset, and subjective latency to sleep onset from baseline to week 4. Safety was also assessed. RESULTS: Of 1,005 subjects screened, 359 (64% female) were randomized and received >/=1 dose. A significant dose-response relationship (multiple comparison procedure-modeling, 2-sided p < 0.001) was found in the reduction of wake after sleep onset and latency to persistent sleep from baseline to days 1 and 2 with daridorexant. These reductions were sustained through to days 28 and 29 (p = 0.050 and p = 0.042, respectively). Similar dose-dependent relationships were observed for subjective wake after sleep onset and subjective latency to sleep onset. The incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events was 35%, 38%, 38%, and 34% in subjects treated with 5, 10, 25, and 50mg daridorexant, respectively, compared with 30% for placebo, and 40% for 10mg zolpidem. There were no clinically relevant treatment-related serious adverse events. Four subjects withdrew due to adverse events. INTERPRETATION: Daridorexant induced a dose-dependent reduction in wake time after sleep onset in subjects with insomnia disorder (Clinicaltrials.gov NCT02839200). Ann Neurol 2020;87:347-356.
IMPORTANCE: Although insomnia guidelines recommend the use of several individual hypnotics, the most useful hypnotic for treating insomnia in a clinical setting remains unclear. OBJECTIVE: To determine which guideline-recommended hypnotics have lower risks of monotherapy failure and which hypnotics have a higher risk of long-term prescription for insomnia treatment. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This retrospective observational cohort study used data from the Japan Medical Data Center Claims Database from April 1, 2005, to March 31, 2021. Participants included adults whose first prescribed pharmaceutical treatment for insomnia was guideline-recommended hypnotic monotherapy. Data were analyzed from December 24, 2022, to September 26, 2023. EXPOSURES: Suvorexant, ramelteon, eszopiclone, zolpidem, and triazolam monotherapy. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was monotherapy failure, defined as a change in hypnotic or having an additional hypnotic prescribed for insomnia within 6 months of the first prescription of a guideline-recommended hypnotic monotherapy. The secondary outcome was monotherapy discontinuation, defined as no prescription of any hypnotic for 2 consecutive months within 6 months after prescribing a guideline-recommended hypnotic in patients for whom monotherapy did not fail. Monotherapy failure and discontinuation were compared using Cox proportional hazards and logistic regression models, respectively. RESULTS: The study included 239 568 adults (median age, 45 [IQR, 34-55] years; 50.2% women) whose first prescription for insomnia was guideline-recommended hypnotic monotherapy. During the 6-month follow-up period, 24 778 patients (10.3%) experienced failure of monotherapy with a guideline-recommended hypnotic. In comparison with eszopiclone, there were more cases of monotherapy failure for ramelteon (adjusted hazard ratio [AHR], 1.23 [95% CI], 1.17-1.30; P < .001), fewer cases for zolpidem (AHR, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.81-0.87]; P < .001) and triazolam (AHR, 0.82 [95% CI, 0.78-0.87]; P < .001), and no significant difference between suvorexant and eszopiclone. Among those without monotherapy failure, monotherapy was discontinued in 84.6% of patients, with more discontinuations for ramelteon (adjusted odds ratio [AOR], 1.31 [95% CI, 1.24-1.40]; P < .001) and suvorexant (AOR, 1.20 [95% CI, 1.15-1.26]; P < .001) than for eszopiclone and no significant difference between zolpidem or triazolam and eszopiclone. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Due to uncontrolled confounding factors in this cohort study, no conclusions regarding the pharmacologic properties of guideline-recommended hypnotics can be drawn based on these results. Further studies accounting for confounding factors, including diagnoses of chronic vs acute insomnia disorder, insomnia and psychiatric symptom severity, and physician attitudes toward hypnotic prescription, are needed.
Zolpidem is a selective agonist of the benzodiazepine subtype receptor BZ1. The highest density of this receptor is in the output structures of the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia are pathologically involved in many movements disorders. Thus, zolpidem has accumulated attention for a possible drug to treat neurological signs and symptoms in Parkinsonian diseases. In this mini-review, I reviewed effects of zolpidem as movement disorders including Parkinson's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, dystonia and so on. In addition, I reviewed a possible mechanism of zolpidem for movement disorders.
Pharmacologic treatment of disorders of consciousness remains a critical but challenging task for clinicians. Amantadine has been shown to promote the rate of neurologic recovery for patients with traumatic disorders of consciousness when administered between 4 and 16 weeks, as demonstrated by a well-designed randomized control trial. While there are no large, randomized controlled trials to support the use of other dopaminergic medicines (bromocriptine, levodopa, apomorphine), there is a large body of literature implicating their role in improving alertness and responsiveness in disorders of consciousness. Zolpidem can increase the level of consciousness in a small subset of patients. Zolpidem and intrathecal baclofen likely increase the level of consciousness via the mesocircuit pathway. Psychostimulant medications can be initiated in patients, even without strong evidence to support their use, as long as basic principles of brain injury medicine are followed, and there are systems in place to evaluate therapeutic response.
This review aims at providing a critical assessment of the effects of the most widely used benzodiazepine (flurazepam, flunitrazepam, temazepam, triazolam) and non-benzodiazepine (zopiclone and zolpidem) hypnotic drugs, based on the recording of polysomnographic variables. In the light of newly acquired neurophysiological data on the microstructure of sleep, this paper reconsiders the problem of insomnia and the current ideas on polysomnography and hypnotic drugs.
To obtain fundamental information on the drug incorporation into hair, time-course changes in drug distribution along single-strand hair were observed after a single oral administration of zolpidem (ZP), one of the most frequently used hypnotic agents. Quantitative sectional hair analyses of 1-mm segments were performed for each single-strand hair using a validated LC-MS/MS procedure. ZP was detected in all specimens plucked at 10 and 24 hours after a single dose, and the distribution ranged over the whole hair root (4-5 mm in length). A significantly high concentration of ZP was detected in the hair bulb region, whereas much lower concentrations were widely observed in the upper part of the hair root of those samples; this suggested that the incorporation of ZP occurred in two regions, mainly in the hair bulb and to a lesser extent in the upper dermis zone. The ZP-positive area formed lengths of up to 10-12 mm after a single administration, indicating that its incorporation from the hair bulb would continue for about 2 weeks. Time-course changes in the ZP concentration in the hair root additionally revealed that only a small portion of ZP that initially concentrated in the bulb was successively incorporated into the hair matrix and moved toward the keratinized region as hair grew. These findings should be taken into account upon discussing individual drug-use history based on hair analysis. The matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging of ZP in the same kinds of hair specimens was also successfully achieved.
Zolpidem (Ambien, Stilnox, Myslee, an imidazopyridine, is a nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic indicated for the short-term treatment of insomnia. Zolpidem improves sleep in patients with insomnia. Its overall tolerability is favourable when administered according to the manufacturer's prescribing information, with a low propensity to cause clinical residual effects, withdrawal, dependence or tolerance. In addition, most evidence suggests that the drug is associated with minimal rebound insomnia. In the only clinical trials that investigated the use of a hypnosedative drug in an 'as-needed' regimen, zolpidem produced a global improvement in sleep. Thus, zolpidem continues to be a useful therapeutic option in the pharmacological treatment of patients with insomnia.
► Chronic insomnia ► Nightly zolpidem use ► Concern for tapering withdrawals.
INTRODUCTION: The imidazopyridine derivative zolpidem , which acts as a benzodiazepine (BZ) receptor agonist, is the most widely prescribed hypnotic drug in the US. AREAS COVERED: This review addresses the neuroreceptor properties of zolpidem; clinical pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and drug interactions; efficacy as a hypnotic; adverse effects; tolerance, dependence and withdrawal; relation to motor vehicle accidents and complex sleep behaviors; and new dosage forms. EXPERT OPINION: Approved doses of zolpidem (10 mg for adults, 5 mg for the elderly) are consistently effective in reducing sleep latency and consequently increasing sleep duration in patients with insomnia. However, favorable effects on sleep maintenance are observed less consistently. Residual daytime effects are unlikely with recommended doses, and provided that at least 8 h elapse prior to arising. Hypnotic efficacy is maintained with repeated nightly use, and the risk of rebound insomnia is low. Dependence and abuse of zolpidem are no more likely to occur than with typical benzodiazepines. Newly available novel dosage forms of zolpidem have increased therapeutic options for patients with insomnia variants such as sleep maintenance insomnia and middle-of-the-night awakening.
A 28-year-old male sustained anoxic brain damage following aborted cardiac arrest, and subsequently developed severe muscular rigidity and spasticity involving all extremities. The spasticity was refractory to the standard regimens used for spastic hypertonia. Zolpidem dramatically inhibited muscular rigidity, spasticity, and dystonic posturing in a dose-dependent manner, resulting in a sustained improvement of his global performance over four years. The authors postulate a central mechanism of action by selective inhibition of GABAergic inhibitory neurons, and suggest a controlled clinical study to investigate the potential efficacy of zolpidem in relieving spasticity related to postanoxic brain injury.
The effect of 10 mg of zolpidem (ZLP) on memory function was evaluated in healthy male adults using word recall test, passage recall test, and Sternberg's memory scanning task. This study was carried out as a double-blind cross-over study with 7.5 mg of zopiclone (ZPC) and a placebo. No difference was noted between the active drugs and placebo in the number of words recalled from the word list presented before administration. No evidence of retrograde amnesia was suggested. However, encoding ability was slightly affected as indicated by a decrease in the number of words recalled from the list presented after administration. Slight impairment of a delayed recall was noted for both of the active drugs, but the effect disappeared the next morning. In the memory scanning task, ZLP prolonged a non-specific component of reaction time 1.5 h after administration, but the effect disappeared after 12.5 h. ZPC did not prolong the reaction time. The two active drugs showed no specific effects on either memory scanning or response-selection stage in short-term memory at any time. The findings suggest that residual effects did not reach clinical significance at the standard dosage, although the active drugs slightly affected encoding ability and retention soon after administration.
Zolpidem extended-release, or controlled-release (CR), is a new formulation of zolpidem, a nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic. It is indicated in the US for the treatment of insomnia, characterised by difficulties with sleep onset and/or sleep maintenance. Zolpidem CR is a dual-layered tablet; one layer releases zolpidem immediately and a second layer provides a slower release of additional zolpidem for maintenance of plasma zolpidem concentrations. Efficacy of zolpidem CR was assessed in two 3-week, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III polysomnography trials in younger adult (aged 18-64 years) or elderly (aged > or =65 years) patients with primary insomnia. Patients received nightly zolpidem CR (12.5mg in younger adult and 6.25mg in elderly patients). Efficacy was assessed objectively on nights 1, 2, 15 and 16. Patients who received zolpidem CR had significantly improved objective latency to persistent sleep, wake time after sleep onset and sleep efficiency on assessment nights compared with placebo recipients. In subjective assessments of sleep quality on day 2 and nights 15 and 22, significantly more zolpidem CR than placebo recipients gave favourable responses on a Patient Global Impression scale in the study in younger adult patients. In the other study, significantly more elderly patients in the zolpidem CR group rated their sleep as improved compared with the placebo group. Zolpidem CR was generally well tolerated and appears to have a tolerability profile similar to that of the original formulation of zolpidem.
BACKGROUND: Catatonic syndrome is no longer considered a subtype of schizophrenia but is more frequently associated with mood disorders (mania, melancholia, and psychotic depression) as well as general medical conditions (neurological disorders, drug-induced and toxic-induced conditions, metabolic conditions). A case of catatonia is reported which occurred after alcohol withdrawal. CASE REPORT: Catatonia occurred 48 hours after alcohol withdrawal in a 54-year-old woman who had stopped all her treatment (in the context of a type II bipolar disorder). A dramatic improvement of symptoms was observed after oral administration of zolpidem. CONCLUSIONS: This case seems to confirm that catatonia can represents a nonspecific response to stress factors. The withdrawal of multiple medications was already described as a basis for catatonia. Alcohol withdrawal could constitute an additional risk factor for catatonia. The zolpidem test is a useful diagnostic and therapeutic test.
Zolpidem is a short-acting non-benzodiazepine hypnotic drug that belongs to the imidazopyridine class. In addition to immediate-release (IR) and extended-release (ER) formulations, the new delivery forms including two sublingual tablets [standard dose (SD) and low dose (LD)], and an oral spray form have been recently developed which bypass the gastrointestinal tract. So far, Zolpidem has been studied in several clinical populations: cases poor sleepers, transient insomnia, elderly and non-elderly patients with chronic primary insomnia, and in comorbid insomnia. Peak plasma concentration (Tmax) of zolpidem-IR occurs in 45 to 60min, with the terminal elimination half-life (t(1/2)) equating to 2.4h. The extended-release formulation results in a higher concentration over a period of more than 6h. Peak plasma concentration is somewhat shorter for the sublingual forms and the oral spray, while their t(1/2) is comparable to that of zolpidem-IR. Zolpidem-IR reduces sleep latency (SL) at recommended doses of 5mg and 10mg in elderly and non-elderly patients, respectively. Zolpidem-ER at doses of 6.25mg and 12.5mg, improves sleep maintenance in elderly and non-elderly patients, respectively, 4h after its administration. Sublingual zolpidem-LD (5mg) and zolpidem oral spray are indicated for middle-of-the-night (MOTN) wakefulness and difficulty returning to sleep, while sublingual zolpidem-SD (10mg) is marketed for difficulty falling asleep. With their array of therapeutic uses and their popularity among physicians and patients; this review describes the clinical pharmacology, indications and uses, identifying withdrawal symptoms, abuse and dependence potentials, and adverse drug reactions are discussed.
OBJECTIVES: Problems with sleep are a common and detrimental occurrence among individuals who receive methadone maintenance for opioid use disorder (OUD). METHODS: We enrolled ten methadone-maintained persons with insomnia (60% female, mean age 40) in a double-blind trial using actigraphy to confirm daily sleep reports. After a no-medication week to establish baseline sleep patterns, each participant received 1 week each of mirtazapine (30 mg), zolpidem (sustained-release 12.5 mg), mirtazapine (30 mg IR) plus zolpidem (10 mg), and placebo, with a washout week between each medication week. Study medication order was randomized so that the order of each 1-week medication treatment was different for each participant, but all participants received all 4 regimens. RESULTS: We found that mirtazapine alone improved total sleep (mean 23 minutes), sleep latency (mean 23 minutes), and sleep efficiency (mean 3%), surpassing the other regiments. CONCLUSIONS: This pilot work suggests that mirtazapine is worthy of further testing as a sleep aid for persons with OUD receiving methadone maintenance.
