Zonisamide (ZNS) is a broad-spectrum antiepileptic drug in both animal models of epilepsy and patients with epilepsy. It is effective for both localization-related and generalized epilepsies and appears to be particularly potent in progressive myoclonic epilepsy syndromes. Its pharmokinetic profile is favorable, with a long half-life and low protein binding. However, its insolubility may make the development of a parenteral formulation difficult. Its safety profile is good, although teratogenicity in animal models is of concern. Adult doses of 400-600 mg per day in two doses, with blood levels from 20 to 30 mg/ml, appear to be effective.
The developmental and epileptic encephalopathies encompass a group of rare syndromes characterised by severe drug-resistant epilepsy with onset in childhood and significant neurodevelopmental comorbidities. The latter include intellectual disability, developmental delay, behavioural problems including attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder, psychiatric problems including anxiety and depression, speech impairment and sleep problems. Classical examples of developmental and epileptic encephalopathies include Dravet syndrome, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and tuberous sclerosis complex. The mainstay of treatment is with multiple anti-seizure medications (ASMs); however, the ASMs themselves can be associated with psychobehavioural adverse events, and effects (negative or positive) on cognition and sleep. We have performed a targeted literature review of ASMs commonly used in the treatment of developmental and epileptic encephalopathies to discuss the latest evidence on their effects on behaviour, mood, cognition, sedation and sleep. The ASMs include valproate (VPA), clobazam, topiramate (TPM), cannabidiol (CBD), fenfluramine (FFA), levetiracetam (LEV), brivaracetam (BRV), zonisamide (ZNS), perampanel (PER), ethosuximide, stiripentol, lamotrigine (LTG), rufinamide, vigabatrin, lacosamide (LCM) and everolimus. Bromide, felbamate and other sodium channel ASMs are discussed briefly. Overall, the current evidence suggest that LEV, PER and to a lesser extent BRV are associated with psychobehavioural adverse events including aggressiveness and irritability; TPM and to a lesser extent ZNS are associated with language impairment and cognitive dulling/memory problems. Patients with a history of behavioural and psychiatric comorbidities may be more at risk of developing psychobehavioural adverse events. Topiramate and ZNS may be associated with negative effects in some aspects of cognition; CBD, FFA, LEV, BRV and LTG may have some positive effects, while the remaining ASMs do not appear to have a detrimental effect. All the ASMs are associated with sedation to a certain extent, which is pronounced during uptitration. Cannabidiol, PER and pregabalin may be associated with improvements in sleep, LTG is associated with insomnia, while VPA, TPM, LEV, ZNS and LCM do not appear to have detrimental effects. There was variability in the extent of evidence for each ASM: for many first-generation and some second-generation ASMs, there is scant documented evidence; however, their extensive use suggests favourable tolerability and safety (e.g. VPA); second-generation and some third-generation ASMs tend to have the most robust evidence documented over several years of use (TPM, LEV, PER, ZNS, BRV), while evidence is still being generated for newer ASMs such as CBD and FFA. Finally, we discuss how a variety of factors can affect mood, behaviour and cognition, and untangling the associations between the effects of the underlying syndrome and those of the ASMs can be challenging. In particular, there is enormous heterogeneity in cognitive, behavioural and developmental impairments that is complex and can change naturally over time; there is a lack of standardised instruments for evaluating these outcomes in developmental and epileptic encephalopathies, with a reliance on subjective evaluations by proxy (caregivers); and treatment regimes are complex involving multiple ASMs as well as other drugs.
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a complex disease that involves a variety of cognitive, behavioral and neurological symptoms, including progressive memory loss, visual hallucinations, parkinsonism, cognitive fluctuations and rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD). These symptoms may appear in varying combinations and levels of severity in each patient who is seen in the clinic, making diagnosis and treatment a challenge. DLB is the third most common of all the neurodegenerative diseases behind both Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease (PD). The median age of onset for DLB (76.3 years) is younger than that seen in PD dementia (81.4 years). New pathological studies have shown that most DLB patients have variable amounts of Alzheimer's changes in their brains, explaining the wide variability in this disease's clinical presentation and clinical course. This review discusses the three cholinesterase inhibitors that have been shown to be effective in managing the cognitive and behavioral symptoms of DLB: rivastigmine, galantamine and donepezil. Memantine is able to improve clinical global impression of change in those with mild to moderate DLB. Levodopa can treat the parkinsonism of some DLB patients, but the dose is often limited due to the fact that it can cause agitation or worsening of visual hallucinations. A recent phase 2 clinical trial showed the benefit of zonisamide when it is added as an adjunct to levodopa for treating DLB parkinsonism. While atypical antipsychotic drugs may not always be helpful as monotherapy in managing the agitation associated with DLB, low doses of valproic acid can be effective when added as an adjunct to drugs like quetiapine. Pimavanserin may prove to be a useful treatment for psychosis in DLB patients, but like other antipsychotic drugs that are used in dementia patients, there is a small increased risk of mortality. RBD, which is a common core clinical feature of DLB, can be managed with either melatonin or clonazepam. Two agents targeting alpha-synuclein (NPT200-11 and ambroxol) currently hold promise as disease-modifying therapies for DLB, but they are yet to be tested in clinical trials. An agent (E2027) that offers hope of neuroprotection by increasing central cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) levels is currently being examined in clinical trials in DLB patients.
PURPOSE: To investigate the risk of teratogenesis occurring in relation to intrauterine exposure to infrequently used antiseizure medications in Australia. METHODS: Analysis of data contained in the Raoul Wallenberg Australian Pregnancy Register of Antiepileptic Drugs. RESULTS: There was statistically significant evidence that zonisamide, but not any other of nine infrequently used antiseizure medications in Australia, was associated with a risk of teratogenesis related to the maternal dose of the drug taken in at least the earlier half of pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: The teratogenesis associated with zonisamide, like that associated with topiramate and possibly acetazolamide, may be an expression of a class effect shared among sulphonamide-derived carbonic anhydrase inhibitors that possess anti-seizure activity.
BACKGROUND: Levetiracetam and zonisamide are licensed as monotherapy for patients with focal epilepsy, but there is uncertainty as to whether they should be recommended as first-line treatments because of insufficient evidence of clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness. We aimed to assess the long-term clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of levetiracetam and zonisamide compared with lamotrigine in people with newly diagnosed focal epilepsy. METHODS: This randomised, open-label, controlled trial compared levetiracetam and zonisamide with lamotrigine as first-line treatment for patients with newly diagnosed focal epilepsy. Adult and paediatric neurology services across the UK recruited participants aged 5 years or older (with no upper age limit) with two or more unprovoked focal seizures. Participants were randomly allocated (1:1:1) using a minimisation programme with a random element utilising factor to receive lamotrigine, levetiracetam, or zonisamide. Participants and investigators were not masked and were aware of treatment allocation. SANAD II was designed to assess non-inferiority of both levetiracetam and zonisamide to lamotrigine for the primary outcome of time to 12-month remission. Anti-seizure medications were taken orally and for participants aged 12 years or older the initial advised maintenance doses were lamotrigine 50 mg (morning) and 100 mg (evening), levetiracetam 500 mg twice per day, and zonisamide 100 mg twice per day. For children aged between 5 and 12 years the initial daily maintenance doses advised were lamotrigine 1.5 mg/kg twice per day, levetiracetam 20 mg/kg twice per day, and zonisamide 2.5 mg/kg twice per day. All participants were included in the intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis. The per-protocol (PP) analysis excluded participants with major protocol deviations and those who were subsequently diagnosed as not having epilepsy. Safety analysis included all participants who received one dose of any study drug. The non-inferiority limit was a hazard ratio (HR) of 1.329, which equates to an absolute difference of 10%. A HR greater than 1 indicated that an event was more likely on lamotrigine. The trial is registered with the ISRCTN registry, 30294119 (EudraCt number: 2012-001884-64). FINDINGS: 990 participants were recruited between May 2, 2013, and June 20, 2017, and followed up for a further 2 years. Patients were randomly assigned to receive lamotrigine (n=330), levetiracetam (n=332), or zonisamide (n=328). The ITT analysis included all participants and the PP analysis included 324 participants randomly assigned to lamotrigine, 320 participants randomly assigned to levetiracetam, and 315 participants randomly assigned to zonisamide. Levetiracetam did not meet the criteria for non-inferiority in the ITT analysis of time to 12-month remission versus lamotrigine (HR 1.18; 97.5% CI 0.95-1.47) but zonisamide did meet the criteria for non-inferiority in the ITT analysis versus lamotrigine (1.03; 0.83-1.28). The PP analysis showed that 12-month remission was superior with lamotrigine than both levetiracetam (HR 1.32 [97.5% CI 1.05 to 1.66]) and zonisamide (HR 1.37 [1.08-1.73]). There were 37 deaths during the trial. Adverse reactions were reported by 108 (33%) participants who started lamotrigine, 144 (44%) participants who started levetiracetam, and 146 (45%) participants who started zonisamide. Lamotrigine was superior in the cost-utility analysis, with a higher net health benefit of 1.403 QALYs (97.5% central range 1.319-1.458) compared with 1.222 (1.110-1.283) for levetiracetam and 1.232 (1.112, 1.307) for zonisamide at a cost-effectiveness threshold of  pound20 000 per QALY. Cost-effectiveness was based on differences between treatment groups in costs and QALYs. INTERPRETATION: These findings do not support the use of levetiracetam or zonisamide as first-line treatments for patients with focal epilepsy. Lamotrigine should remain a first-line treatment for patients with focal epilepsy and should be the standard treatment in future trials. FUNDING: National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.
Zonisamide (ZNS), a second-generation antiepileptic drug, indicated as add-on treatment of focal epilepsy, has been recently approved as monotherapy for the treatment of partial seizures in adults affected by newly diagnosed epilepsy in Europe. Evidence on the efficacy and tolerability of antiepileptic drugs in the elderly is still lacking as these patients are frequently excluded from clinical trials. Here, a comprehensive overview of available data regarding the use of ZNS in the treatment of epilepsy in elderly people is provided. In a pooled analysis conducted in patients aged >/=65 years, no new/unexpected safety findings have emerged. Few data from uncontrolled investigations suggest that ZNS may be effective and well tolerated when administered as monotherapy or adjunctive antiepileptic treatment in the elderly. However, evidence from these observational studies is less than satisfactory, and randomized controlled trials focused on these patients are still needed.
Diminished inhibitory control of spinal nociception is one of the major culprits of chronic pain states. Restoring proper synaptic inhibition is a well-established rational therapeutic approach explored by several pharmaceutical companies. A particular challenge arises from the need for site-specific intervention to avoid deleterious side effects such as sedation, addiction, or impaired motor control, which would arise from wide-range facilitation of inhibition. Specific targeting of glycinergic inhibition, which dominates in the spinal cord and parts of the hindbrain, may help reduce these side effects. Selective targeting of the alpha3 subtype of glycine receptors (GlyRs), which is highly enriched in the superficial layers of the spinal dorsal horn, a key site of nociceptive processing, may help to further narrow down pharmacological intervention on the nociceptive system and increase tolerability. This review provides an update on the physiological properties and functions of alpha3 subtype GlyRs and on the present state of related drug discovery programs.
Development of new antiepileptic drugs has continued to progress, with both the evolution of new drugs, as well as new formulations of old drugs. It is hoped that, with advances in the understanding of the molecular basis of epilepsy, novel antiepileptic drugs will come about through design rather than serendipity. This article concentrates on a selection of the more promising antiepileptic drugs and reviews their recent progress. Felbamate, lamotrigine, vigabatrin, zonisamide, and gabapentin are already in clinical use in certain countries. Stiripentol and other potential antiepileptic drugs are also reviewed. In addition, there have been strategies to improve the pharmacokinetics of currently used antiepileptic drugs and we have concentrated on controlled-release carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine, both available in certain countries. It is, however, increasingly apparent that good comparative studies are needed before definitive advice can be given in the drug treatment of epilepsy.
BACKGROUND: Levetiracetam (Keppra((R)), UCB Pharma Ltd, Slough, UK) and zonisamide (Zonegran((R)), Eisai Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) are licensed as monotherapy for focal epilepsy, and levetiracetam is increasingly used as a first-line treatment for generalised epilepsy, particularly for women of childbearing age. However, there is uncertainty as to whether or not they should be recommended as first-line treatments owing to a lack of evidence of clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness. OBJECTIVES: To compare the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of lamotrigine (Lamictal((R)), GlaxoSmithKline plc, Brentford, UK) (standard treatment) with levetiracetam and zonisamide (new treatments) for focal epilepsy, and to compare valproate (Epilim((R)), Sanofi SA, Paris, France) (standard treatment) with levetiracetam (new treatment) for generalised and unclassified epilepsy. DESIGN: Two pragmatic randomised unblinded non-inferiority trials run in parallel. SETTING: Outpatient services in NHS hospitals throughout the UK. PARTICIPANTS: Those aged >/= 5 years with two or more spontaneous seizures that require anti-seizure medication. INTERVENTIONS: Participants with focal epilepsy were randomised to receive lamotrigine, levetiracetam or zonisamide. Participants with generalised or unclassifiable epilepsy were randomised to receive valproate or levetiracetam. The randomisation method was minimisation using a web-based program. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was time to 12-month remission from seizures. For this outcome, and all other time-to-event outcomes, we report hazard ratios for the standard treatment compared with the new treatment. For the focal epilepsy trial, the non-inferiority limit (lamotrigine vs. new treatments) was 1.329. For the generalised and unclassified epilepsy trial, the non-inferiority limit (valproate vs. new treatments) was 1.314. Secondary outcomes included time to treatment failure, time to first seizure, time to 24-month remission, adverse reactions, quality of life and cost-effectiveness. RESULTS: Focal epilepsy. A total of 990 participants were recruited, of whom 330 were randomised to receive lamotrigine, 332 were randomised to receive levetiracetam and 328 were randomised to receive zonisamide. Levetiracetam did not meet the criteria for non-inferiority (hazard ratio 1.329) in the primary intention-to-treat analysis of time to 12-month remission (hazard ratio vs. lamotrigine 1.18, 97.5% confidence interval 0.95 to 1.47), but zonisamide did meet the criteria (hazard ratio vs. lamotrigine 1.03, 97.5% confidence interval 0.83 to 1.28). In the per-protocol analysis, lamotrigine was superior to both levetiracetam (hazard ratio 1.32, 95% confidence interval 1.05 to 1.66) and zonisamide (hazard ratio 1.37, 95% confidence interval 1.08 to 1.73). For time to treatment failure, lamotrigine was superior to levetiracetam (hazard ratio 0.60, 95% confidence interval 0.46 to 0.77) and zonisamide (hazard ratio 0.46, 95% confidence interval 0.36 to 0.60). Adverse reactions were reported by 33% of participants starting lamotrigine, 44% starting levetiracetam and 45% starting zonisamide. In the economic analysis, both levetiracetam and zonisamide were more costly and less effective than lamotrigine and were therefore dominated. Generalised and unclassifiable epilepsy. Of 520 patients recruited, 260 were randomised to receive valproate and 260 were randomised to receive to levetiracetam. A total of 397 patients had generalised epilepsy and 123 had unclassified epilepsy. Levetiracetam did not meet the criteria for non-inferiority in the primary intention-to-treat analysis of time to 12-month remission (hazard ratio 1.19, 95% confidence interval 0.96 to 1.47; non-inferiority margin 1.314). In the per-protocol analysis of time to 12-month remission, valproate was superior to levetiracetam (hazard ratio 1.68, 95% confidence interval 1.30 to 2.15). Valproate was superior to levetiracetam for time to treatment failure (hazard ratio 0.65, 95% confidence interval 0.50 to 0.83). Adverse reactions were reported by 37.4% of participants receiving valproate and 41.5% of those receiving levetiracetam. Levetiracetam was both more costly (incremental cost of  pound104, 95% central range - pound587 to  pound1234) and less effective (incremental quality-adjusted life-year of -0.035, 95% central range -0.137 to 0.032) than valproate, and was therefore dominated. At a cost-effectiveness threshold of  pound20,000 per quality-adjusted life-year, levetiracetam was associated with a probability of 0.17 of being cost-effective. LIMITATIONS: The SANAD II trial was unblinded, which could have biased results by influencing decisions about dosing, treatment failure and the attribution of adverse reactions. FUTURE WORK: SANAD II data could now be included in an individual participant meta-analysis of similar trials, and future similar trials are required to assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of other new treatments, including lacosamide and perampanel. CONCLUSIONS: Focal epilepsy - The SANAD II findings do not support the use of levetiracetam or zonisamide as first-line treatments in focal epilepsy. Generalised and unclassifiable epilepsy - The SANAD II findings do not support the use of levetiracetam as a first-line treatment for newly diagnosed generalised epilepsy. For women of childbearing potential, these results inform discussions about the benefit (lower teratogenicity) and harm (worse seizure outcomes and higher treatment failure rate) of levetiracetam compared with valproate. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN30294119 and EudraCT 2012-001884-64. FUNDING: This project was funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment programme and will be published in full in Health Technology Assessment; Vol. 25, No. 75. See the NIHR Journals Library website for further project information.
We carried out a systematic review of published information on transfer of antiseizure medications (ASMs) into breastmilk, ASM serum concentrations in breastfed infants, and the wellbeing of infants breastfed by mothers on ASM treatment. Information was extracted from 85 relevant articles. No data on ASM levels in breastmilk or in breastfed infants was identified for cannabidiol, cenobamate, clobazam, eslicarbazepine-acetate, everolimus, felbamate, fenfluramine, retigabine, rufinamide, stiripentol, tiagabine, and vigabatrin. For ASMs, with available information on levels in breastfed infants, very low concentrations (in the order of 10% or less of maternal serum concentrations) were reported for carbamazepine, gabapentin, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, valproate, and clonazepam. Slightly higher levels (up to approximately 30% of maternal serum concentrations) have been observed with lamotrigine and topiramate, and in single case reports for brivaracetam, lacosamide, and perampanel. High infant levels (30% up to 100% of maternal serum concentrations) have been reported with ethosuximide, phenobarbital and zonisamide. Adverse infant effects during breastfeeding by mothers on ASMs appear to be rare regardless of the type of ASM, but systematic study is limited. Prospective long-term follow-up studies of developmental outcomes among children who have been breastfed by mothers taking ASMs are sparse and have mainly involved children whose mothers were taking carbamazepine, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, phenytoin or valproate as monotherapy while breastfeeding. Although these studies have not indicated poorer outcome among breastfed children compared with those who were not breastfed, further data on long-term outcomes are needed to draw firm conclusions. It is concluded that breastfeeding should in general be encouraged in women taking ASMs, given the well-established benefits of breastfeeding with regard to both short- and long-term infant health in the general population. Counselling needs to be individualized including information on the current knowledge regarding the woman's specific ASM treatment.
Although the majority of people with epilepsy have a good prognosis and their seizures can be well controlled with pharmacotherapy, up to one-third of patients can develop drug-resistant epilepsy, especially those patients with partial seizures. This unmet need has driven considerable efforts over the last few decades aimed at developing and testing newer antiepileptic agents to improve seizure control. One of the most promising antiepileptic drugs of the new generation is zonisamide, a benzisoxazole derivative chemically unrelated to other anticonvulsant agents. In this article, the authors present the results of a systematic literature review summarizing the current evidence on the efficacy and tolerability of zonisamide for the treatment of partial seizures. Of particular interest within this updated review are the recent data on the use of zonisamide as monotherapy, as they might open new therapeutic avenues.
IMPORTANCE: During pregnancy in women with epilepsy, lower blood concentrations of antiseizure medications can have adverse clinical consequences. OBJECTIVE: To characterize pregnancy-associated concentration changes for several antiseizure medications among women with epilepsy. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Enrollment in this prospective, observational cohort study, Maternal Outcomes and Neurodevelopmental Effects of Antiepileptic Drugs (MONEAD), occurred from December 19, 2012, to February 11, 2016, at 20 US sites. Enrolled cohorts included pregnant women with epilepsy and nonpregnant control participants with epilepsy. Inclusion criteria were women aged 14 to 45 years, an intelligence quotient greater than 70 points, and, for the cohort of pregnant women, a fetal gestational age younger than 20 weeks. A total of 1087 women were assessed for eligibility; 397 were excluded and 230 declined. Data were analyzed from May 1, 2014, to June 30, 2021. EXPOSURE: Medication plasma concentrations in women taking monotherapy or in combination with noninteracting medications. The cohort of pregnant women was monitored through 9 months post partum, with similar time points for control participants. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Dose-normalized concentrations were calculated as total or unbound plasma medication concentrations divided by total daily dose. Phlebotomy was performed during 4 pregnancy study visits and 3 postpartum visits for the pregnant women and 7 visits over 18 months for control participants. The primary hypothesis was to test pregnancy changes of dose-normalized concentrations from nonpregnant postpartum samples compared with those of control participants. RESULTS: Of the 351 pregnant women and 109 control participants enrolled in MONEAD, 326 pregnant women (median [range] age, 29 [19-43] years) and 104 control participants (median [range] age, 29 [16-43] years) met eligibility criteria for this analysis. Compared with postpartum values, dose-normalized concentrations during pregnancy were decreased by up to 56.1% for lamotrigine (15.60 mug/L/mg to 6.85 mug/L/mg; P < .001), 36.8% for levetiracetam (11.33 mug/L/mg to 7.16 mug/L/mg; P < .001), 17.3% for carbamazepine (11.56 mug/L/mg to 7.97 mug/L/mg; P = .03), 32.6% for oxcarbazepine (11.55 mug/L/mg to 7.79 mug/L/mg; P < .001), 30.6% for unbound oxcarbazepine (6.15 mug/L/mg to 4.27 mug/L/mg; P < .001), 39.9% for lacosamide (26.14 mug/L/mg to 15.71 mug/L/mg; P < .001), and 29.8% for zonisamide (40.12 mug/L/mg to 28.15 mug/L/mg; P < .001). No significant changes occurred for unbound carbamazepine, carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide, and topiramate, although a decrease was observed for topiramate (29.83 mug/L/mg to 13.77 mug/L/mg; P = .18). Additionally, compared with dose-normalized concentrations from control participants, pregnancy dose-normalized median (SE) concentrations decreased significantly by week of gestational age: carbamazepine, -0.14 (0.06) mug/L/mg (P = .02); carbamazepine unbound, -0.04 (0.01) mug/L/mg (P = .01); lacosamide, -0.23 (0.07) mug/L/mg (P < .001); lamotrigine, -0.20 (0.02) mug/L/mg (P < .001); levetiracetam, -0.06 (0.03) mug/L/mg (P = .01); oxcarbazepine, -0.14 (0.04) mug/L/mg (P < .001); oxcarbazepine unbound, -0.11 (0.03) mug/L/mg (P < .001); and zonisamide, -0.53 (0.14) mug/L/mg (P < .001) except for topiramate (-0.35 [0.20] mug/L/mg per week) and carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide (0.02 [0.01] mug/L/mg). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Study results suggest that therapeutic drug monitoring should begin early in pregnancy and that increasing doses of these anticonvulsants may be needed throughout the course of pregnancy.
Since 1994, 10 new antiepileptics drugs have been developed and many others will be available in a near future. Effectiveness of theses new antiepileptic drugs is similar to the old ones but they have a better side-effect profile. This article updates their clinical use, taking into account the recent studies. These new antiepileptics drugs improve quality of life of the patients, but their use is not entirely safe, including the possible aggravation of certain forms of epilepsy. A better physiopathological knowledge of the epilepsy will help in the future to choose the most adequate drug(s) for each patient.
Tardive dyskinesia is a serious, disabling and potentially permanent, neurological hyperkinetic movement disorder that occurs after months or years of taking psychotropic drugs. The pathophysiology of tardive dyskinesia is complex, multifactorial and still not fully understood. A number of drugs were tried for the management of this motor disturbance, yet until now no effective and standard treatment has been found. It is very disappointing to realize that the introduction of antipsychotics from the second generation has not significantly decreased the prevalence and incidence of tardive dyskinesia. Therefore, the management of this motor disturbance remains an actual topic as well as a challenge for clinicians. This review summarizes recent relevant publications concerning the treatment of tardive dyskinesia.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this review was to evaluate current literature for dosing recommendations for the use of antiepileptic medications in patients receiving renal replacement therapy (RRT). DATA SOURCES: With the assistance of an experienced medical librarian specialized in pharmacy and toxicology, we searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, Web of Science, WorldCat, and Scopus through May 2016. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Four hundred three articles were screened for inclusion, of which 130 were identified as potentially relevant. Micromedex(R) DRUGDEX as well as package inserts were used to obtain known pharmacokinetic properties and dosage adjustment recommendations in RRT if known. DATA SYNTHESIS: Data regarding antiepileptic drug use in RRT are limited and mostly consist of case reports limiting our proposed dosing recommendations. Known pharmacokinetic parameters should guide dosing, and recommendations are provided where possible. CONCLUSION: Additional studies are necessary before specific dosing recommendations can be made for most antiepileptic drugs in critically ill patients receiving RRT, specifically with newer agents.
The antiepileptic drugs can effect fertility, development of gynecological diseases and occurence of sexual problems. They can cause a number of "cosmetic" problem and also influence the selection of safe contraceptive method. Many antiepileptic drugs can cause congenital malformations or affect the new-born child's psychomotor and cognitive development, therefore during pregnancy should be treated with extreme caution in women with epilepsy. Most types of epilepsies accompany the patient through their whole life. Women spend almost the third of their lives after menopause and - due to the formation of associated diseases as well - this period is also special. According to the 2013 recommendation of International League Epilepsy (ILAE), zonisamide is one of the first-line antiepileptic drugs in focal epilepsy. In my review I discuss women's epilepsy in the viewpoint of the application of zonisamid.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Valproate should be avoided in pregnancy, but it is the most effective drug for generalized epilepsies. Alternative treatment may require combinations of other drugs. Our objectives were to describe first trimester use of antiseizure medication (ASM) combinations that are relevant alternatives to valproate and determine whether specific combinations were associated with a lower risk of major congenital malformations (MCM) compared with valproate monotherapy. METHODS: We conducted a population-based cohort study using linked national registers from Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden and administrative health care data from the United States and New South Wales, Australia. We described first trimester use of ASM combinations among pregnant people with epilepsy from 2000 to 2020. We compared the risk of MCM after first trimester exposure to ASM combinations vs valproate monotherapy and low-dose valproate plus lamotrigine or levetiracetam vs high-dose valproate (>/=1,000 mg/d). We used log-binomial regression with propensity score weights to calculate adjusted risk ratios (aRRs) and 95% CIs for each dataset. Results were pooled using fixed-effects meta-analysis. RESULTS: Among 50,905 pregnancies in people with epilepsy identified from 7.8 million total pregnancies, 788 used lamotrigine and levetiracetam, 291 used lamotrigine and topiramate, 208 used levetiracetam and topiramate, 80 used lamotrigine and zonisamide, and 91 used levetiracetam and zonisamide. After excluding pregnancies with use of other ASMs, known teratogens, or a child diagnosed with MCM of infectious or genetic cause, we compared 587 exposed to lamotrigine-levetiracetam duotherapy and 186 exposed to lamotrigine-topiramate duotherapy with 1959 exposed to valproate monotherapy. Pooled aRRs were 0.41 (95% CI 0.24-0.69) and 1.26 (0.71-2.23), respectively. Duotherapy combinations containing low-dose valproate were infrequent, and comparisons with high-dose valproate monotherapy were inconclusive but suggested a lower risk for combination therapy. Other combinations were too rare for comparative safety analyses. DISCUSSION: Lamotrigine-levetiracetam duotherapy in first trimester was associated with a 60% lower risk of MCM than valproate monotherapy, while lamotrigine-topiramate was not associated with a reduced risk. Duotherapy with lamotrigine and levetiracetam may be favored to treat epilepsy in people with childbearing potential compared with valproate regarding MCM, but whether this combination is as effective as valproate remains to be determined. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class II evidence that in people with epilepsy treated in the first trimester of pregnancy, the risk of major congenital malformations is lower with lamotrigine-levetiracetam duotherapy than with valproate alone, but similar with lamotrigine-topiramate.
We present a female patient in her early twenties with global development delay, progressive ataxia, epilepsy, and myoclonus caused by a stop mutation in the SEMA6B gene. Truncating DNA variants located in the last exon of SEMA6B have recently been identified as a cause of autosomal dominant progressive myoclonus epilepsy. In many cases, myoclonus in the context of progressive myoclonic epilepsy is refractory to medical treatment. In the present case, treatment with zonisamide caused clinical improvement, particularly of positive and negative truncal myoclonus, considerably improving patient's gait and thus mobility.
Principles of complex mechanisms of action of anticonvulsants including latest reports concerning new antiepileptic drugs (AED) are considered. Different aspects of new anticonvulsant drugs (2nd generation) from preclinical and clinical testing, pharmacokinetics, and mono or combination therapy in children and adults are summarized. In the following condensed synopsis pharmacological and clinical characteristics of gabapentin (GBP), lamotrigine (LTG), levetiracetam (LEV), oxcarbazepine (OXC), pregabalin (PGB) and tiagabine (TGB) as well as topiramate (TPM) and zonisamide (ZNS) are discussed. In addition to the mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetics, interactions, indications and dosages as well as side effects are considered. Important data concerning the effect and tolerability of anticonvulsant drugs can be obtained from controlled studies. In comparison to drugs of the first generation (phenobarbital [PB], primidon [PRD], phenytoin [PHT], carbamazepine [CBZ] and valproic acid [VPA]) the potential for interactions and side effects due to enzyme induction or inhibition is reduced by most of the anticonvulsant drugs of the second generation. New anticonvulsant drugs increase the spectrum of treatment and represent further steps with regard to the optimization of an individual therapy of the epilepsies.
We serendipitously found that zonisamide (ZNS), an antiepileptic agent, has beneficial effects on Parkinson disease. A 25 mg once a day of ZNS (200-600 mg/day for epilepsy), significantly improves motor function of advanced patients with Parkinson disease. Its effects maintained at least one year even in patients with advanced stage. It was finally approved as an anti parkinsonian agent in Japan on January 2009. As the mechanism of antiparkinsonian effects of ZNS, we showed that ZNS increases dopamine contents in the striatum by activating dopamine synthesis through increasing the levels of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) mRNA and TH protein. It moderately inhibits monoamine oxydase (MAO) activity. ZNS shows significant inhibition on T-type Ca++ channel. It may also affect the beneficial effects of ZNS on Parkinson disease. ZNS also showed neuroprotective effects on several parkinsonian models. It markedly inhibited quinoprotein formation and increased the level of glutathione by enhancing the astroglial cystine transport system and/or astroglial proliferation through S100beta. We will verify the neuroprotective effects of ZNS on patients with Parkinson disease and study the factors responsible for the individual difference of the effects of ZNS by using genome wide association study (GWAS) in the near feature.
