BACKGROUND: Behavioural, cognitive, and pharmacological interventions can all be effective for insomnia. However, because of inadequate resources, medications are more frequently used worldwide. We aimed to estimate the comparative effectiveness of pharmacological treatments for the acute and long-term treatment of adults with insomnia disorder. METHODS: In this systematic review and network meta-analysis, we searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, PubMed, Embase, PsycINFO, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, ClinicalTrials.gov, and websites of regulatory agencies from database inception to Nov 25, 2021, to identify published and unpublished randomised controlled trials. We included studies comparing pharmacological treatments or placebo as monotherapy for the treatment of adults (>/=18 year) with insomnia disorder. We assessed the certainty of evidence using the confidence in network meta-analysis (CINeMA) framework. Primary outcomes were efficacy (ie, quality of sleep measured by any self-rated scale), treatment discontinuation for any reason and due to side-effects specifically, and safety (ie, number of patients with at least one adverse event) both for acute and long-term treatment. We estimated summary standardised mean differences (SMDs) and odds ratios (ORs) using pairwise and network meta-analysis with random effects. This study is registered with Open Science Framework, https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/PU4QJ. FINDINGS: We included 170 trials (36 interventions and 47 950 participants) in the systematic review and 154 double-blind, randomised controlled trials (30 interventions and 44 089 participants) were eligible for the network meta-analysis. In terms of acute treatment, benzodiazepines, doxylamine, eszopiclone, lemborexant, seltorexant, zolpidem, and zopiclone were more efficacious than placebo (SMD range: 0.36-0.83 [CINeMA estimates of certainty: high to moderate]). Benzodiazepines, eszopiclone, zolpidem, and zopiclone were more efficacious than melatonin, ramelteon, and zaleplon (SMD 0.27-0.71 [moderate to very low]). Intermediate-acting benzodiazepines, long-acting benzodiazepines, and eszopiclone had fewer discontinuations due to any cause than ramelteon (OR 0.72 [95% CI 0.52-0.99; moderate], 0.70 [0.51-0.95; moderate] and 0.71 [0.52-0.98; moderate], respectively). Zopiclone and zolpidem caused more dropouts due to adverse events than did placebo (zopiclone: OR 2.00 [95% CI 1.28-3.13; very low]; zolpidem: 1.79 [1.25-2.50; moderate]); and zopiclone caused more dropouts than did eszopiclone (OR 1.82 [95% CI 1.01-3.33; low]), daridorexant (3.45 [1.41-8.33; low), and suvorexant (3.13 [1.47-6.67; low]). For the number of individuals with side-effects at study endpoint, benzodiazepines, eszopiclone, zolpidem, and zopiclone were worse than placebo, doxepin, seltorexant, and zaleplon (OR range 1.27-2.78 [high to very low]). For long-term treatment, eszopiclone and lemborexant were more effective than placebo (eszopiclone: SMD 0.63 [95% CI 0.36-0.90; very low]; lemborexant: 0.41 [0.04-0.78; very low]) and eszopiclone was more effective than ramelteon (0.63 [0.16-1.10; very low]) and zolpidem (0.60 [0.00-1.20; very low]). Compared with ramelteon, eszopiclone and zolpidem had a lower rate of all-cause discontinuations (eszopiclone: OR 0.43 [95% CI 0.20-0.93; very low]; zolpidem: 0.43 [0.19-0.95; very low]); however, zolpidem was associated with a higher number of dropouts due to side-effects than placebo (OR 2.00 [95% CI 1.11-3.70; very low]). INTERPRETATION: Overall, eszopiclone and lemborexant had a favorable profile, but eszopiclone might cause substantial adverse events and safety data on lemborexant were inconclusive. Doxepin, seltorexant, and zaleplon were well tolerated, but data on efficacy and other important outcomes were scarce and do not allow firm conclusions. Many licensed drugs (including benzodiazepines, daridorexant, suvorexant, and trazodone) can be effective in the acute treatment of insomnia but are associated with poor tolerability, or information about long-term effects is not available. Melatonin, ramelteon, and non-licensed drugs did not show overall material benefits. These results should serve evidence-based clinical practice. FUNDING: UK National Institute for Health Research Oxford Health Biomedical Research Centre.
Hypnotics are commonly use in the treatment of insomnia, and hypnotic use among older adults is more prevalent than with younger adults. Unfortunately, the use of hypnotics is not well studied in the ever-growing geriatric population and the magnitude of the medication benefit is usually not impressive. Insomnia in older adults is usually treated with benzodiazepines, nonbenzodiazepines, and other agents, such as trazodone, valerian, and melatonin. Using appropriately selected agents and therapy initiated with a low dose and careful monitoring of the patient could minimize common unwanted side effects.
Our patient presented with repetitive, self-limited bouts of forceful hiccups in sleep. Eszopiclone, a commonly prescribed hypnotic, appeared to cause these intermittent hiccups. This case is a reminder that eszopiclone may cause this adverse effect, and that it may be the bed partner and not the patient who furnishes critical sleep medicine history.
Stress is one of the main factors influencing sleep. Sleep could be considered as the adaptive mechanism including the stress defence. In the article, changes of the human night structure under the influence of stress are discussed. Specific and unspecific reaction of sleep parameters reflecting stress influences of different modalities, the pole of personality factors, and the methods of increasing the adaptive forces of the human through sleep normalization are described.
(S)-Zopiclone, a cyclopyrrolone sharing activity with benzodiazepines in the CNS, is a short-acting sedative being developed by Sepracorfor the potential treatment of sleeping disorders. In August 2000, the company had completed phase II trials of (S)-zopiclone for insomnia [380377]; by September 2000, patient enrollmentfor phase III studies for insomnia was completed and the trial initiation was planned for October 2000 [381361]. Merrill Lynch expects US filing to take place in the second half of 2001 [383230]. Sepracor was granted US-05786357 in August 1998 covering methods and compositions of (S)-zopiclone in the treatment of sleeping disorders [342938]. In August 2000, Merrill Lynch predicted (S)-zopiclone sales of US $30 million in 2002, rising to US $150 million in 2004 [383230].
PURPOSE: Insomnia is problematic for older adults. After behavioral modifications fail to show adequate response, pharmacologic options are used. The pharmacokinetics of agents used to treat insomnia may be altered. This review focuses on the safety and efficacy of medications used to treat insomnia. METHODS: A literature search of Medline, PubMed, and Embase was conducted (January 1966-June 2016). It included systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials, observational studies, and case series that had an emphasis on insomnia in an older population. Search terms included medications approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for insomnia: benzodiazepines (triazolam, estazolam, temazepam, flurazepam, and quazepam), nonbenzodiazepine receptor agonists (non-BzRAs; zaleplon, zolpidem, and eszopiclone), suvorexant, ramelteon, doxepin and trazodone. Off-label drugs such as other antidepressants, antihistamines, antipsychotics, gabapentin, pramipexole, tiagabine, valerian, and melatonin were also included. FINDINGS: Cognitive behavioral therapy and sleep hygiene are considered initial therapy for insomnia. Benzodiazepines are discouraged in the geriatric population, especially for long-term use. Although non-BzRAs have improved safety profiles compared with benzodiazepines, their side effects include dementia, serious injury, and fractures, which should limit their use. Ramelteon has a minimal adverse effect profile and is effective for sleep-onset latency and increased total sleep time, making it a valuable first-line option. Although the data on suvorexant are limited, this drug improves sleep maintenance and has mild adverse effects, including somnolence; residual daytime sedation has been reported, however. Sedating low-dose antidepressants should only be used for insomnia when the patient has comorbid depression. Antipsychotic agents, pramipexole, and tiagabine have all been used for insomnia, but none has been extensively studied in an older population, and all have considerable adverse effects. Gabapentin may be useful in patients with restless leg syndrome or chronic neuropathic pain and insomnia. Diphenhydramine should be avoided in the elderly. Valerian and melatonin are unregulated products that have a small impact on sleep latency and can produce residual sedation. IMPLICATIONS: An ideal treatment for insomnia should help to improve sleep latency and sleep duration with limited awakenings and be without significant adverse effects such as daytime somnolence or decreased alertness. Cognitive behavioral therapy should always be first line treatment. Clinical inertia regarding previous prominent use of benzodiazepines and non-BzRAs will be a significant challenge for patients accustomed to their issuance. The future direction of insomnia treatment should have an emphasis on nonpharmacologic interventions, treating comorbid conditions, and focusing therapy on using benzodiazepines and non-BzRAs as last resorts.
PHARMACOTHERAPIES FOR INSOMNIA. The first line of treatment in adult chronic insomnia is cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). However, its difficult accessibility limited its use and medications are still often prescribed. Considering the drugs with marketing authorization, Z-drugs (zolpidem and zopiclone) if taken at the right hour and dosage promote sleep initiation and have less deleterious effects than benzodiazepines, especially the long-acting ones which should be avoided. This class of drugs cannot be prescribed longer than 28 days. Some antihistaminic licensed drugs are authorized as hypnotics, with a low proof of efficacy and a risk of adverse event as sedation and somnolence the next day. Their prescription should be avoided in old subjects. Some clinicians used antidepressant sedative medications, at low dosage, as hypnotic drugs but "off label", outside authorization. Now melatonin, an endogenous synchronizer of biologic rhythms, has obtained the authorization for the treatment of insomniac troubles, in subjects of at least 55 years old, in its slow- release formula, replacing the physiological decline of this hormone with aging. Melatonin is not a hypnotic, but has soporific properties, inducing sleep, improving sleep efficacy, sometimes sleep duration and morning alertness. When discontinued, it induced no withdrawal syndrome. It has shown no risk of abuse potential and no deleterious side-effects, if used at the right dose and in the absence of hepatic interaction with other compounds. Finally, a new class of hypnotics, "the orexin antagonists" has its first representative on the French market: daridorexant. The place of these molecules in the therapeutic strategy for chronic insomnia needs to be clarified.
The launch of eszopiclone by Sepracor Inc in April 2005 in the US has marked the long-anticipated advent of a new generation of hypnotics that promise safer treatment for chronic insomnia. Over the coming years more compounds are expected to be launched, offering improved daytime well being and fewer side effects compared with their predecessors that were launched in the early 1990s. This article examines the factors that will drive the uptake of the new insomnia drugs by the public, describes potential barriers to adoption of these drugs and provides ideas for future treatment approaches that may offer better targeting and management of possible underlying conditions rather than merely controlling a symptom.
The pharmacological treatment of patients with an eating disorder (ED) often includes medications to treat their ED, comorbid mental health problems, malnutrition and the physical health problems resulting from it. The currently approved pharmacological treatment options for EDs are limited to fluoxetine for bulimia nervosa (BN) and - in some countries - lisdexamfetamine for binge eating disorder (BED). Thus, there are no approved pharmacological options for anorexia nervosa (AN), even though study results for olanzapine and dronabinol are promising. Topiramate might be an additional future option for the treatment of BN and BED. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), mirtazapine and bupropion could be considered for the treatment of comorbid unipolar depression. However, AN and BN are contraindications for bupropion. For ED patients with a manic episode, we recommend olanzapine in AN and risperidone in BN and BED; whereas for bipolar depression, olanzapine (plus fluoxetine) seems appropriate in AN and lamotrigine in BN and BED. Acute anxiety or suicidality may warrant benzodiazepine treatment with lorazepam. Proton-pump inhibitors, gastroprokinetic drugs, laxatives and hormones can alleviate certain physical health problems caused by EDs. Therapeutic drug monitoring, pharmacogenomic testing, a more restrictive use of "pro re nata" (PRN) medication, an interdisciplinary treatment approach, shared decision making (SDM) and the formulation of common treatment goals by the patients, their family or carers and clinicians could improve treatment success and safety. Novel genetic, immunological, microbiome and brain imaging research as well as new pharmacological developments like the use of psychedelics, stimulants, novel monoaminergic drugs, hormone analogues and drugs which enhance the effects of psychotherapy may extend our therapeutic options in the near future.
Eszopiclone is the single (S)-enantiomer of the cyclopyrrolone hypnotic zopiclone. It was marketed in the U.S. in December 2004. Its kinetics and possible mode of action, pivotal regulatory trials and its use in insomnia comorbid with other conditions are reviewed, together with trials in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndromes. Safety and tolerability aspects are discussed, including its dysgeusic profile and effects on memory, cognitive and psychomotor function. U.S.-based pharmacoeconomic data are included together with the design features of key regulatory studies submitted for regulatory approval in Japan.
BACKGROUND: Insomnia is a major public health issue affecting between 6% to 10% of the adult population in Western countries. Eszopiclone is a hypnotic drug belonging to a newer group of hypnotic agents, known as new generation hypnotics, which was marketed as being just as effective as benzodiazepines for this condition, while being safer and having a lower risk for abuse and dependence. It is the aim of the review to integrate evidence from randomised controlled trials and to draw conclusions on eszopiclone's efficacy and safety profile, while taking methodological features and bias risks into consideration. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of eszopiclone for the treatment of insomnia compared to placebo or active control. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, PSYNDEX and registry databases (WHO trials portal, ClinicalTrials.gov) with results incorporated from searches to 10 February 2016. To identify trials not registered in electronic databases, we contacted key informants and searched reference lists of identified studies. We ran an update search (21 February 2018) and have placed studies of interest in awaiting classification/ongoing studies. These will be incorporated into the next version of the review, as appropriate. SELECTION CRITERIA: Parallel group randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing eszopiclone with either placebo or active control were included in the review. Participants were adults with insomnia, as diagnosed with a standardised diagnostic system, including primary insomnia and comorbid insomnia. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently extracted outcome data; one reviewer assessed trial quality and the second author cross-checked it. MAIN RESULTS: A total of 14 RCTs, with 4732 participants, were included in this review covering short-term (</= 4 weeks; 6 studies), medium-term (> 4 weeks </= 6 months; 6 studies) and long-term treatment (> 6 months; 2 studies) with eszopiclone. Most RCTs included in the review included participants aged between 18 and 64 years, three RCTs only included elderly participants (64 to 85 years) and one RCT included participants with a broader age range (35 to 85 years). Seven studies considered primary insomnia; the remaining studies considered secondary insomnia comorbid with depression (2), generalised anxiety (1), back pain (1), Parkinson's disease (1), rheumatoid arthritis (1) and menopausal transition (1).Meta-analytic integrations of participant-reported data on sleep efficacy outcomes demonstrated better results for eszopiclone compared to placebo: a 12-minute decrease of sleep onset latency (mean difference (MD) -11.94 min, 95% confidence interval (CI) -16.03 to -7.86; 9 studies, 2890 participants, moderate quality evidence), a 17-minute decrease of wake time after sleep onset (MD -17.02 min, 95% CI -24.89 to -9.15; 8 studies, 2295 participants, moderate quality evidence) and a 28-minute increase of total sleep time (MD 27.70 min, 95% CI 20.30 to 35.09; 10 studies, 2965 participants, moderate quality evidence). There were no significant changes from baseline to the first three nights after drug discontinuation for sleep onset latency (MD 17.00 min, 95% CI -4.29 to 38.29; 1 study, 291 participants, low quality evidence) and wake time after sleep onset (MD -6.71 min, 95% CI -21.25 to 7.83; 1 study, 291 participants, low quality evidence). Adverse events during treatment that were documented more frequently under eszopiclone compared to placebo included unpleasant taste (risk difference (RD) 0.18, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.21; 9 studies, 3787 participants), dry mouth (RD 0.04, 95% CI 0.02 to 0.06; 6 studies, 2802 participants), somnolence (RD 0.04, 95% CI 0.02 to 0.06; 8 studies, 3532 participants) and dizziness (RD 0.03, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.05; 7 studies, 2933 participants). According to the GRADE criteria, evidence was rated as being of moderate quality for sleep efficacy outcomes and adverse events and of low quality for rebound effects and next-day functioning. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Eszopiclone appears to be an efficient drug with moderate effects on sleep onset and maintenance. There was no or little evidence of harm if taken as recommended. However, as certain patient subgroups were underrepresented in RCTs included in the review, findings might not have displayed the entire spectrum of possible adverse events. Further, increased caution is required in elderly individuals with cognitive and motor impairments and individuals who are at increased risk of using eszopiclone in a non-recommended way.
IMPORTANCE: Although insomnia guidelines recommend the use of several individual hypnotics, the most useful hypnotic for treating insomnia in a clinical setting remains unclear. OBJECTIVE: To determine which guideline-recommended hypnotics have lower risks of monotherapy failure and which hypnotics have a higher risk of long-term prescription for insomnia treatment. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This retrospective observational cohort study used data from the Japan Medical Data Center Claims Database from April 1, 2005, to March 31, 2021. Participants included adults whose first prescribed pharmaceutical treatment for insomnia was guideline-recommended hypnotic monotherapy. Data were analyzed from December 24, 2022, to September 26, 2023. EXPOSURES: Suvorexant, ramelteon, eszopiclone, zolpidem, and triazolam monotherapy. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was monotherapy failure, defined as a change in hypnotic or having an additional hypnotic prescribed for insomnia within 6 months of the first prescription of a guideline-recommended hypnotic monotherapy. The secondary outcome was monotherapy discontinuation, defined as no prescription of any hypnotic for 2 consecutive months within 6 months after prescribing a guideline-recommended hypnotic in patients for whom monotherapy did not fail. Monotherapy failure and discontinuation were compared using Cox proportional hazards and logistic regression models, respectively. RESULTS: The study included 239 568 adults (median age, 45 [IQR, 34-55] years; 50.2% women) whose first prescription for insomnia was guideline-recommended hypnotic monotherapy. During the 6-month follow-up period, 24 778 patients (10.3%) experienced failure of monotherapy with a guideline-recommended hypnotic. In comparison with eszopiclone, there were more cases of monotherapy failure for ramelteon (adjusted hazard ratio [AHR], 1.23 [95% CI], 1.17-1.30; P < .001), fewer cases for zolpidem (AHR, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.81-0.87]; P < .001) and triazolam (AHR, 0.82 [95% CI, 0.78-0.87]; P < .001), and no significant difference between suvorexant and eszopiclone. Among those without monotherapy failure, monotherapy was discontinued in 84.6% of patients, with more discontinuations for ramelteon (adjusted odds ratio [AOR], 1.31 [95% CI, 1.24-1.40]; P < .001) and suvorexant (AOR, 1.20 [95% CI, 1.15-1.26]; P < .001) than for eszopiclone and no significant difference between zolpidem or triazolam and eszopiclone. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Due to uncontrolled confounding factors in this cohort study, no conclusions regarding the pharmacologic properties of guideline-recommended hypnotics can be drawn based on these results. Further studies accounting for confounding factors, including diagnoses of chronic vs acute insomnia disorder, insomnia and psychiatric symptom severity, and physician attitudes toward hypnotic prescription, are needed.
This review aims at providing a critical assessment of the effects of the most widely used benzodiazepine (flurazepam, flunitrazepam, temazepam, triazolam) and non-benzodiazepine (zopiclone and zolpidem) hypnotic drugs, based on the recording of polysomnographic variables. In the light of newly acquired neurophysiological data on the microstructure of sleep, this paper reconsiders the problem of insomnia and the current ideas on polysomnography and hypnotic drugs.
Insomnia, the most common sleep disturbance in later life, affects 20%-50% of older adults. Eszopiclone, a short-acting nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic agent developed for the treatment of insomnia, has been available in Europe since 1992 and in the US since 2005. Although not yet evaluated for transient insomnia in older adults, eszopiclone has been shown to be safe and efficacious for short-term treatment (2 weeks) of chronic, primary insomnia in older adults (64-91 years). Clinical studies in younger adults (mean = 44 years) have shown eszopiclone can be used for 6-12 months without evidence of problems. Because the oldest participant in these longer-term trials was 69, it not known whether eszopiclone is effective for older adults [particularly the old old (75-84 years) and oldest old (85+)] when used over longer periods. This is unfortunate, because older individuals frequently suffer from chronic insomnia. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia, which effectively targets the behavioral factors that maintain chronic insomnia, represents an attractive treatment alternative or adjuvant to eszopiclone for older adults. To date, no studies have compared eszopiclone to other hypnotic medications or to nonpharmacological interventions, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia, in older adults. All of the clinical trials reported herein were funded by Sepracor. This paper provides an overview of the literature on eszopiclone with special emphasis on its use for the treatment of late-life insomnia. Specific topics covered include pharmacology, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, clinical trial data, adverse events, drug interactions, tolerance/dependence, and economics/cost considerations for older adults.
OBJECTIVE: A large proportion of paediatric patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) have associated sleep problems which not only affect the child's wellbeing but also impact family functioning. Management of sleep problems is consequently an important aspect of overall ADHD management in paediatric patients. Although some drugs are being used off-label for the management of paediatric insomnia, there is scant clinical evidence supporting their use. Our aim was to identify and assess the quality of published studies reporting the safety, tolerability and efficacy of drugs used for treating behavioural insomnia in children with ADHD. METHODS: After an initial screen to determine which drugs were most commonly used, we conducted a systematic review of English-language publications from searches of PubMed, EMBASE, PsycINFO and two trial register databases to February 2017, using keywords 'clonidine', 'melatonin', 'zolpidem', 'eszopiclone', 'L-theanine', 'guanfacine', 'ADHD', 'sleep disorder' and 'children'. For quality assessment of included studies, we used the CONSORT checklist for randomised control trials (RCTs) and the Downs and Black checklist for non-RCTs. RESULTS: Twelve studies were included. Two case series for clonidine, two RCTs and four observational studies for melatonin and one RCT each for zolpidem, eszopiclone, L-theanine and guanfacine. Of the 12 included studies, only one on eszopiclone scored excellent for quality. The quality of the rest of the studies varied from moderate to low. For clonidine, melatonin and L-theanine, improvements in sleep-onset latency and total sleep duration were reported; however, zolpidem, eszopiclone and guanfacine failed to show any improvement when compared with placebo. Clonidine, melatonin, L-theanine, eszopiclone and guanfacine were well tolerated with mild to moderate adverse events; zolpidem was associated with neuropsychiatric adverse effects. CONCLUSION: There is generally poor evidence for prescribing drugs for behavioural insomnia in children with ADHD. Further controlled studies are warranted.
We describe a case of a man with chronic myeloid leukaemia who achieved remission through dasatinib therapy after being unable to tolerate several tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) regimens due to severe physical side effects. However, this coincided with the onset of distressing agitation, insomnia and motor restlessness leading him to take a large zopiclone overdose. Start of appropriate therapy with a clonazepam, venlafaxine and mirtazapine combination led to a rapid improvement in symptomatology. We discuss the differential diagnosis and review the literature of neuropsychiatric complications of TKIs. This case serves as an illustrative reminder that in cases of complicated agitation referral to specialist mental health teams for rational psychopharmacological management is advised.
Insomnia is a prevalent problem in late life. Sleep problems in the elderly are often mistakenly considered a normal part of aging. Insomnia, the most common sleep disorder, is a subjective report of insufficient or nonrestorative sleep despite adequate opportunity to sleep. Despite the fact that more than 50% of elderly people have insomnia, it is typically undertreated, and nonpharmacologic interventions are underused by health care practitioners. This article will review the causes of insomnia in the elderly, the approach to patient evaluation, and the nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic treatment of insomnia.
Given the well-established problems with sleep at high altitude, it is not uncommon for people planning trips to the mountains to seek advice from clinicians regarding pharmacologic options for improving sleep during their trip. This review article considers the various medications that have been studied for this purpose at high altitude with an emphasis on both their efficacy and safety. The available data support the use of either acetazolamide, temazepam, zolpidem or zaleplon in this environment. Other agents commonly used at sea-level such as eszopiclone and diphenhydramine have not been studied at high altitude but are likely safe to use given their mechanism of action and known side effects. Limited evidence suggests diazepam may cause hypoventilation at high altitude and its use in this environment should be discouraged. Insufficient data exist to determine which agent is most effective at altitude nor do we know whether combination therapy with acetazolamide and a hypnotic agent offers any benefits over monotherapy.
To date the mainstay of the pharmacological treatment of insomnia has involved the modulation of the gabaminergic system via benzodiazepines or the Z-drugs, zolpidem, zopiclone or zaleplon. A new approach has explored the melatoninergic system, namely activation of MT1 and MT2 receptors in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus. Ramelteon (TAK-375) is a novel sleep-promoting agent that acts as an agonist at these receptors; its preclinical pharmacology, mode of action, pharmacokinetics, drug interactions, clinical efficacy, and safety and tolerability are reviewed here.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity worldwide. Because of the chronic nature of the disease, optimal care for patients includes successful treatment of comorbidities that accompany COPD, including insomnia. Insomnia symptoms and associated disruption of sleep are prevalent in COPD patients but treatment with traditional benzodiazepines may compromise respiratory function. This review summarizes the efficacy and safety consideration of current drugs available for the treatment of insomnia in COPD patients including benzodiazepines, non-benzodiazepine receptor agonists such as eszopiclone, zolpidem, and zaleplon, sedating antidepressants such as trazodone, and the melatonin receptor agonist ramelteon.
