ATP-binding cassette sub-family B member 5; Drug efflux transporter present in a number of stem cells that acts as a regulator of cellular differentiation. Able to mediate efflux from cells of the rhodamine dye and of the therapeutic drug doxorubicin. Specifically present in limbal stem cells, where it plays a key role in corneal development and repair.
BACKGROUND: While rapid healing of diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) is highly desirable to avoid infections, amputations and life-threatening complications, DFUs often respond poorly to standard treatment. GMP-manufactured skin-derived ABCB5(+) mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) might provide a new adjunctive DFU treatment, based on their remarkable skin wound homing and engraftment potential, their ability to adaptively respond to inflammatory signals, and their wound healing-promoting efficacy in mouse wound models and human chronic venous ulcers. METHODS: The angiogenic potential of ABCB5(+) MSCs was characterized with respect to angiogenic factor expression at the mRNA and protein level, in vitro endothelial trans-differentiation and tube formation potential, and perfusion-restoring capacity in a mouse hindlimb ischemia model. Finally, the efficacy and safety of ABCB5(+) MSCs for topical adjunctive treatment of chronic, standard therapy-refractory, neuropathic plantar DFUs were assessed in an open-label single-arm clinical trial. RESULTS: Hypoxic incubation of ABCB5(+) MSCs led to posttranslational stabilization of the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and upregulation of HIF-1alpha mRNA levels. HIF-1alpha pathway activation was accompanied by upregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) transcription and increase in VEGF protein secretion. Upon culture in growth factor-supplemented medium, ABCB5(+) MSCs expressed the endothelial-lineage marker CD31, and after seeding on gel matrix, ABCB5(+) MSCs demonstrated formation of capillary-like structures comparable with human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Intramuscularly injected ABCB5(+) MSCs to mice with surgically induced hindlimb ischemia accelerated perfusion recovery as measured by laser Doppler blood perfusion imaging and enhanced capillary proliferation and vascularization in the ischemic muscles. Adjunctive topical application of ABCB5(+) MSCs onto therapy-refractory DFUs elicited median wound surface area reductions from baseline of 59% (full analysis set, n = 23), 64% (per-protocol set, n = 20) and 67% (subgroup of responders, n = 17) at week 12, while no treatment-related adverse events were observed. CONCLUSIONS: The present observations identify GMP-manufactured ABCB5(+) dermal MSCs as a potential, safe candidate for adjunctive therapy of otherwise incurable DFUs and justify the conduct of a larger, randomized controlled trial to validate the clinical efficacy. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03267784, Registered 30 August 2017, https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03267784.
The cancer stem cell (CSC) concept emerged from the recognition of inherent tumor heterogeneity and suggests that within a given tumor, in analogy to normal tissues, there exists a cellular hierarchy composed of a minority of more primitive cells with enhanced longevity (ie, CSCs) that give rise to shorter-lived, more differentiated cells (ie, cancer bulk populations), which on their own are not capable of tumor perpetuation. CSCs can be responsible for cancer therapeutic resistance to conventional, targeted, and immunotherapeutic treatment modalities, and for cancer progression through CSC-intrinsic molecular mechanisms. The existence of CSCs in colorectal cancer (CRC) was first established through demonstration of enhanced clonogenicity and tumor-forming capacity of this cell subset in human-to-mouse tumor xenotransplantation experiments and subsequently confirmed through lineage-tracing studies in mice. Surface markers for CRC CSC identification and their prospective isolation are now established. Therefore, the application of single-cell omics technologies to CSC characterization, including whole-genome sequencing, RNA sequencing, and epigenetic analyses, opens unprecedented opportunities to discover novel targetable molecular pathways and hence to develop novel strategies for CRC eradication. We review recent advances in this field and discuss the potential implications of next-generation CSC analyses for currently approved and experimental targeted CRC therapies.
BACKGROUND: Sinonasal mucosal melanoma (SNMM) is a lethal malignancy with poor prognosis. Treatment outcomes of SNMM are poor. Novel prognostic or progression markers are needed to help adjust therapy. METHODS: RNA-seq was used to analyze the mRNA expression of tumor tissues and normal nasal mucosa from primary SNMM patients (n= 3). Real-time fluorescent quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to validate the results of RNA-seq (n= 3), while protein expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC, n= 31) and western blotting (n= 3). Retrospective studies were designed to determine the clinical parameters and the total survival rate, and correlation between the protein expression levels of the most significant key genes and prognosis was analyzed. RESULTS: In total, 668 genes were upregulated and 869 genes were downregulated in SNMM (fold change ⩾ 2, adjusted p value < 0.01). Both mRNA and protein expression levels of the key genes in SNMM tumor tissues were higher than those in the normal control nasal mucosal tissues. The expression rates of TYRP1, ABCB5, and MMP17 in 31 primary SNMM cases were 90.32%, 80.65%, and 64.52%, respectively. In addition, age, typical symptoms, and AJCC stage were related to overall survival rate of patients with SNMM (p< 0.05). Furthermore, the expression of ABCB5 was age-related (p= 0.002). Compared with individuals with negative ABCB5 expression, those with positive expression exhibited significantly poor overall survival (p= 0.02). CONCLUSION: The expression levels of TYRP1, ABCB5, and MMP17 were significantly upregulated in SNMM tissues, and the expression of ABCB5 was related to poor prognosis in SNMM. Thus, ABCB5 may serve as a progression marker and can predict unfavorable prognosis in patients with SNMM.
"...in light of the result that ABCB5 helps to amplify a PAX6-positive limbal stem cell population ... it will now be important to test whether ABCB5 selection could also enhance the conversion of skin epithelial stem cells to corneal epithelial stem cells."
Melanoma stem cells, also known as malignant melanoma-initiating cells, are identifiable through expression of specific biomarkers such as ABCB5 (ATP-binding cassette, sub-family B (MDR/TAP), member 5), NGFR (nerve growth factor receptor, CD271) and ALDH (aldehyde dehydrogenase), and drive melanoma initiation and progression based on prolonged self-renewal capacity, vasculogenic differentiation and immune evasion. As we will review here, specific roles of these aggressive subpopulations have been documented in tumorigenic growth, metastatic dissemination, therapeutic resistance, and malignant recurrence. Moreover, recent findings have provided pre-clinical proof-of-concept for the potential therapeutic utility of the melanoma stem cell concept. Therefore, melanoma stem cell-directed therapeutic approaches represent promising novel strategies to improve therapy of this arguably most virulent human cancer.
Current cancer therapy can be effective, but the development of drug resistant disease is the usual outcome. These drugs can eliminate most of the tumor burden but often fail to eliminate the rare, "Drug Tolerant Persister" (DTP) cell subpopulations in residual tumors, which can be referred to as "Persister" cells. Therefore, novel therapeutic agents specifically targeting or preventing the development of drug-resistant tumors mediated by the remaining persister cells subpopulations are needed. Since approximately ninety percent of cancer-related deaths occur because of the eventual development of drug resistance, identifying, and dissecting the biology of the persister cells is essential for the creation of drugs to target them. While there remains uncertainty surrounding all the markers identifying DTP cells in the literature, this review summarizes the drugs and therapeutic approaches that are available to target the persister cell subpopulations expressing the cellular markers ATP-binding cassette sub-family B member 5 (ABCB5), CD133, CD271, Lysine-specific histone demethylase 5 (KDM5), and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). Persister cells expressing these markers were selected as the focus of this review because they have been found on cells surviving following drug treatments that promote recurrent drug resistant cancer and are associated with stem cell-like properties, including self-renewal, differentiation, and resistance to therapy. The limitations and obstacles facing the development of agents targeting these DTP cell subpopulations are detailed, with discussion of potential solutions and current research areas needing further exploration.
The ATP-binding cassette superfamily member ABCB5 identifies a subset of skin-resident mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) that exhibit potent immunomodulatory and wound healing-promoting capacities along with superior homing ability. The ABCB5(+) MSCs can be easily accessed from discarded skin samples, expanded, and delivered as a highly homogenous medicinal product with standardized potency. A range of preclinical studies has suggested therapeutic efficacy of ABCB5(+) MSCs in a variety of currently uncurable skin and non-skin inflammatory diseases, which has been substantiated thus far by distinct clinical trials in chronic skin wounds or recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. Therefore, skin-derived ABCB5(+) MSCs have the potential to provide a breakthrough at the forefront of MSC-based therapies striving to fulfill current unmet medical needs. The most recent milestones in this regard are the approval of a phase III pivotal trial of ABCB5(+) MSCs for treatment of recessive dystrophic and junctional epidermolysis bullosa by the US Food and Drug Administration, and national market access of ABCB5(+) MSCs (AMESANAR((R))) for therapy-refractory chronic venous ulcers under the national hospital exemption pathway in Germany.
Malignant melanoma represents a neoplasm stemming from melanocytes or the cells that develop from melanocytes. Melanocytes, pigment-producing cells, arise from the neural crest and migrate to their final destinations in the skin, uveal tract, meninges, and mucosa. Most melanocytes are found at the epidermal-dermal junction of the skin, and the vast majority of melanocytes arise from cutaneous sites. Cancerous growths develop when unrepaired DNA damage to skin cells (most often caused by ultraviolet radiation from sunshine or tanning beds) triggers mutations (genetic defects) that lead the skin cells to multiply rapidly and form malignant tumours. Malignant tumours consist of heterogeneous populations of tumour cells. Cancer stem cells (CSC) represent a population of cells within a tumour with highly tumorigenic and chemoresistant properties. These cells may be identified by the expression of CSC markers and also by functional assays as tumour-initiating properties in vivo, high aldehyde dehydrogenase activity tested by Aldefluor assay. There are several key stem cells markers specified for malignant melanoma: CD20, CD133, ABCB5, CD271 and ALDH1A. The review provides a detailed overview of risk factors, diagnosis, treatment possibilities and specific properties of cancer stem cells in malignant melanoma.
ABC transporters are ubiquitous in the human body and are responsible for the efflux of drugs. They are present in the placenta, intestine, liver and kidney, which are the major organs that can affect the pharmacokinetic and pharmacologic properties of drugs. P-gp and BCRP transporters are the best-characterized transporters in the ABC superfamily, and they have a pivotal role in the barrier tissues due to their efflux mechanism. Moreover, during pregnancy, drug efflux is even more important because of the developing fetus. Recent studies have shown that placental and intestinal ABC transporters have great importance in drug absorption and distribution. Placental and intestinal P-gp and BCRP show gestational-age-dependent expression changes, which determine the drug concentration both in the mother and the fetus during pregnancy. They may have an impact on the efficacy of antibiotic, antiviral, antihistamine, antiemetic and oral antidiabetic therapies. In this review, we would like to provide an overview of the pharmacokinetically relevant expression alterations of placental and intestinal ABC transporters during pregnancy.
The cornea is our window to the world and our vision is critically dependent on corneal clarity and integrity. Its epithelium represents one of the most rapidly regenerating mammalian tissues, undergoing full-turnover over the course of approximately 1-2 weeks. This robust and efficient regenerative capacity is dependent on the function of stem cells residing in the limbus, a structure marking the border between the cornea and the conjunctiva. Limbal stem cells (LSC) represent a quiescent cell population with proliferative capacity residing in the basal epithelial layer of the limbus within a cellular niche. In addition to LSC, this niche consists of various cell populations such as limbal stromal fibroblasts, melanocytes and immune cells as well as a basement membrane, all of which are essential for LSC maintenance and LSC-driven regeneration. The LSC niche's components are of diverse developmental origin, a fact that had, until recently, prevented precise identification of molecularly defined LSC. The recent success in prospective LSC isolation based on ABCB5 expression and the capacity of this LSC population for long-term corneal restoration following transplantation in preclinical in vivo models of LSC deficiency underline the considerable potential of pure LSC formulations for clinical therapy. Additional studies, including genetic lineage tracing of the developmental origin of LSC will further improve our understanding of this critical cell population and its niche, with important implications for regenerative medicine. WIREs Dev Biol 2018, 7:e303. doi: 10.1002/wdev.303 This article is categorized under: Adult Stem Cells, Tissue Renewal, and Regeneration > Stem Cells and Disease Adult Stem Cells, Tissue Renewal, and Regeneration > Tissue Stem Cells and Niches Adult Stem Cells, Tissue Renewal, and Regeneration > Regeneration.
BACKGROUND: Previously, we have demonstrated that human ABCB5 is a full-sized ATP-binding cassette transporter that shares strong homology with ABCB1/P-glycoprotein. ABCB5-transfected cells showed resistance to taxanes and anthracyclines. Herein, we further screened ABCB5 substrates, and explored the mechanism of resistance. METHODS: Sensitivity of the cells to test compounds was evaluated using cell growth inhibition assay. Cellular levels of buthionine sulfoximine (BSO), glutathione and amino acids were measured using HPLC and an enzyme-based assay. Cellular and vesicular transport of glutathione was evaluated by a radiolabeled substrate. Expression levels of glutathione-metabolizing enzymes were assessed by RT-PCR. RESULTS: Human ABCB5-transfected 293/B5-11 cells and murine Abcb5-transfected 293/mb5-8 cells showed 6.5- and 14-fold higher resistance to BSO than the mock-transfected 293/mock cells, respectively. BSO is an inhibitor of gamma-glutamylcysteine ligase (GCL), which is a key enzyme of glutathione synthesis. 293/B5-11 and 293/mb5-8 cells also showed resistance to methionine sulfoximine, another GCL inhibitor. A cellular uptake experiment revealed that BSO accumulation in 293/B5-11 and 293/mb5-8 cells was similar to that in 293/mock cells, suggesting that BSO is not an ABCB5 substrate. The cellular glutathione content in 293/B5-11 and 293/mb5-8 cells was significantly higher than that in 293/mock cells. Evaluation of the BSO effect on the cellular glutathione content showed that compared with 293/mock cells the BSO concentration required for a 50 % reduction in glutathione content in 293/B5-11 and 293/mb5-8 cells was approximately 2- to 3-fold higher. This result suggests that the BSO resistance of the ABCB5- and Abcb5-transfected cells can be attributed to the reduced effect of BSO on the transfectants. Cellular and vesicular transport assays showed that the transport of radiolabeled glutathione in 293/B5-11 cells was similar to that in 293/mock cells. The mRNA expression of genes encoding glutathione-metabolizing enzymes in 293/B5-11 cells was similar to that in 293/mock cells. The cellular content of Glu, a precursor of glutathione, in 293/B5-11 and 293/mb5-8 cells was higher than that in 293/mock cells. CONCLUSIONS: ABCB5/Abcb5-transfected cells showed resistance to BSO, which is not a substrate of ABCB5. Our results suggest that ABCB5/Abcb5 upregulates cellular glutathione levels to protect cells from various poisons.
Defining markers of different phenotypic states in melanoma is important for understanding disease progression, determining the response to therapy, and defining the molecular mechanisms underpinning phenotype-switching driven by the changing intratumor microenvironment. The ABCB5 transporter is implicated in drug-resistance and has been identified as a marker of melanoma-initiating cells. Indeed ongoing studies are using ABCB5 to define stem cell populations. However, we show here that the ABCB5 is a direct target for the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor MITF and its expression can be induced by beta-catenin, a key activator and co-factor for MITF. Consequently, ABCB5 mRNA expression is primarily associated with melanoma cells exhibiting differentiation markers. The results suggest first that ABCB5 is unlikely to represent a marker of de-differentiated melanoma stem cells, and second that ABCB5 may contribute to the non-genetic drug-resistance associated with highly differentiated melanoma cells. To reconcile the apparently conflicting observations in the field, we propose a model in which ABCB5 may mark a slow-cycling differentiated population of melanoma cells.
During the first hours after stroke onset, neurological deficits can be highly unstable: some patients rapidly improve, while others deteriorate. This early neurological instability has a major impact on long-term outcome. Here, we aimed to determine the genetic architecture of early neurological instability measured by the difference between the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) within 6 h of stroke onset and NIHSS at 24 h. A total of 5876 individuals from seven countries (Spain, Finland, Poland, USA, Costa Rica, Mexico and Korea) were studied using a multi-ancestry meta-analyses. We found that 8.7% of NIHSS at 24 h of variance was explained by common genetic variations, and also that early neurological instability has a different genetic architecture from that of stroke risk. Eight loci (1p21.1, 1q42.2, 2p25.1, 2q31.2, 2q33.3, 5q33.2, 7p21.2 and 13q31.1) were genome-wide significant and explained 1.8% of the variability suggesting that additional variants influence early change in neurological deficits. We used functional genomics and bioinformatic annotation to identify the genes driving the association from each locus. Expression quantitative trait loci mapping and summary data-based Mendelian randomization indicate that ADAM23 (log Bayes factor = 5.41) was driving the association for 2q33.3. Gene-based analyses suggested that GRIA1 (log Bayes factor = 5.19), which is predominantly expressed in the brain, is the gene driving the association for the 5q33.2 locus. These analyses also nominated GNPAT (log Bayes factor = 7.64) ABCB5 (log Bayes factor = 5.97) for the 1p21.1 and 7p21.1 loci. Human brain single-nuclei RNA-sequencing indicates that the gene expression of ADAM23 and GRIA1 is enriched in neurons. ADAM23, a presynaptic protein and GRIA1, a protein subunit of the AMPA receptor, are part of a synaptic protein complex that modulates neuronal excitability. These data provide the first genetic evidence in humans that excitotoxicity may contribute to early neurological instability after acute ischaemic stroke.
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is characterized by a rapid reduction in renal function and glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The broadly used anti-cancer chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin often induces AKI as an adverse drug side effect. Therapies targeted at the reversal of AKI and its potential progression to chronic kidney disease or end-stage renal disease are currently insufficiently effective. Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) possess diverse immunomodulatory properties that confer upon them significant therapeutic potential for the treatment of diverse inflammatory disorders. Human dermal MSCs expressing ATP-Binding Cassette member B5 (ABCB5) have shown therapeutic efficacy in clinical trials in chronic skin wounds or recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. In preclinical studies, ABCB5+ MSCs have also shown to reverse metabolic reprogramming in polycystic kidney cells, suggesting a capacity for this cell subset to improve also organ function in kidney diseases. Here, we aimed to explore the therapeutic capacity of ABCB5+ MSCs to improve renal function in a preclinical rat model of cisplatin-induced AKI. First, the anti-apoptotic and immunomodulatory capacity was compared against research-grade adipose stromal cells (ASCs). Then, cross-species immunomodulatory capacity was checked, testing first inhibition of mitogen-driven peripheral blood mononuclear cells and then modulation of macrophage function. Finally, therapeutic efficacy was evaluated in a cisplatin AKI model. First, ABCB5+ MSCs suppressed cisplatin-induced apoptosis of human conditionally-immortalized proximal tubular epithelial cells in vitro, most likely by reducing oxidative stress. Second, ABCB5+ MSCs inhibited the proliferation of either human or rat peripheral blood mononuclear cells, in the human system via the Indoleamine/kynurenine axis and in the murine context via nitric oxide/nitrite. Third, ABCB5+ MSCs decreased TNF-alpha secretion after lipopolysaccharide stimulation and modulated phagocytosis and in both human and rat macrophages, involving prostaglandin E2 and TGF-beta1, respectively. Fourth, clinical-grade ABCB5+ MSCs grafted intravenously and intraperitoneally to a cisplatin-induced AKI murine model exerted modulatory effects on mRNA expression patterns toward an anti-inflammatory and pro-regenerative state despite an apparent lack of amelioration of renal damage at physiologic, metabolic, and histologic levels. Our results demonstrate anti-inflammatory and pro-regenerative effects of clinical grade ABCB5+ MSCs in vitro and in vivo and suggest potential therapeutic utility of this cell population for treatment or prevention of cisplatin chemotherapy-induced tissue toxicity.
BACKGROUND: The role of CD133 und ABCB5 is discussed in treatment resistance in several types of cancer. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether CD133(+)/ABCB5(+) colocalization differs in untreated, in beam radiation treated, and in chemotherapy treated retinoblastoma specimens. Additionally, CD133, ABCB5, sphingosine kinase 1, and sphingosine kinase 2 gene expression was analyzed in WERI-RB1 (WERI RB1) and etoposide-resistant WERI RB1 subclones (WERI ETOR). METHODS: Active human untreated retinoblastoma specimens (n = 12), active human retinoblastoma specimens pretreated with beam radiation before enucleation (n = 8), and active human retinoblastoma specimens pretreated with chemotherapy before enucleation (n = 7) were investigated for localization and expression of CD133 and ABCB5 by immunohistochemistry. Only specimens with IIRC D, but not E, were included in this study. Furthermore, WERI RB1 and WERI ETOR cell lines were analyzed for CD133, ABCB5, sphingosine kinase 1, and sphingosine kinase 2 by the real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis revealed the same amount of CD133(+)/ABCB5(+) colocalization islets in untreated and treated human retinoblastoma specimens. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed a statistically significant upregulation of CD133 in WERI ETOR (p = 0.002). No ABCB5 expression was detected in WERI RB1 and WERI ETOR. On the other hand, SPHK1 (p = 0.0027) and SPHK2 (p = 0.017) showed significant downregulation in WERI ETOR compared to WERI RB1. CONCLUSIONS: CD133(+)/ABCB5(+) co-localization islets were noted in untreated and treated human retinoblastoma specimens. Therefore, we assume that CD133(+)/ABCB5(+) islets might play a role in retinoblastoma genesis, but not in retinoblastoma treatment resistance.
The link between inflammation, immunity and cancer is well established. In the last decade, there has been considerable excitement over cancer stem cells, believed to be a subset of tumour cells responsible for their initiation, propagation and resistance to conventional chemoradiotherapy. In this review, we discuss the characterization of cancer stem cells and describe their modulation by inflammation with a focus on melanoma.
Corneal transparency and avascularity are essential for vision. The avascular cornea transitions into the vascularized conjunctiva at the limbus. Here, we explore a limbal stromal cell sub-population that expresses ABCB5 and has mesenchymal stem cell characteristics. Human primary corneal stromal cells were enriched for ABCB5 by using FACS sorting. ABCB5+ cells expressed the MSC markers CD90, CD73, and CD105. ABCB5+ but not ABCB5- cells from the same donor displayed evidence of pluripotency with a significantly higher colony-forming efficiency and the ability of trilineage differentiation (osteogenic, adipogenic, and chondrogenic). The ABCB5+ cell secretome demonstrated lower levels of the pro-inflammatory protein MIF (macrophage migration inhibitory factor) as well as of the pro-(lymph)angiogenic growth factors VEGFA and VEGFC, which correlated with reduced proliferation of Jurkat cells co-cultured with ABCB5+ cells and decreased proliferation of blood and lymphatic endothelial cells cultured in ABCB5+ cell-conditioned media. These data support the hypothesis that ABCB5+ limbal stromal cells are a putative MSC population with potential anti-inflammatory and anti-(lymph)angiogenic effects. The therapeutic modulation of ABCB5+ limbal stromal cells may prevent cornea neovascularization and inflammation and, if transplanted to other sites in the body, provide similar protective properties to other tissues.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs), also known as tumor-initiating cells, have been identified in several human malignancies, including human malignant melanoma. The frequency of malignant melanoma-initiating cells (MMICs), which are identified by their expression of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family member ABCB5, correlates with disease progression in human patients. Furthermore, targeted MMIC ablation through ABCB5 inhibits tumor initiation and growth in preclinical xenotransplantation models, pointing to potential therapeutic promise of the CSC concept. Recent advances also show that CSCs can exert pro-angiogenic roles in tumor growth and serve immunomodulatory functions related to the evasion of host anti-tumor immunity. Thus, MMICs might initiate and sustain tumorigenic growth not only as a result of CSC-intrinsic self-renewal, differentiation and proliferative capacity, but also based on pro-tumorigenic interactions with the host environment.
Uveal melanoma (UM), the most common adult ocular tumor, is aggressive and resistant to treatment, posing threat to patients' lives. The novel, effective therapies and the exploration of chemosensitizer for UM are imperative. The anticancer efficacy was evaluated with and without JQ1 treatment or ABCB5 gene silencing or overexpression. RNA sequencing identified downstream effectors in JQ1-treated cells. Integrated analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas data (TCGA) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed the oncogenic role of ABCB5. Functional analyses of JQ1 and defective ABCB5 were conducted using flow cytometry, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), IHC and western blot. The effects of JQ1 were validated in a heterotopic tumor model derived from OCM-1 cells. JQ1 inhibited cell proliferation, migration and invasion, induced cell cycle arrest and promoted apoptosis. JQ1 also suppressed the survival of UM in heterotopic tumor model. RNA sequencing indicated that JQ1 down-regulated the expressions of ABCB5 and autophagy-related genes, which was confirmed in vitro and in vivo by western blot. ABCB5, a marker associated with cancer stem cells and chemo-resistance, exhibited heightened expression in UM tissues, linked to immune infiltration. Notably, disrupting ABCB5 expression impeded UM cell proliferation and interfered with autophagy. Moreover, the overexpression of ABCB5 promoted cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and rescued autophagy related gene expression. Of note, JQ1 enhanced the sensitivity of OCM-1 cells to chemotherapy. Thus JQ1 inhibits UM survival via ABCB5-mediated autophagy and enhances chemo-sensitivity, suggesting potential for BET-based approaches in UM clinical management.
