Phosphatidylcholine translocator ABCB4; Energy-dependent phospholipid efflux translocator that acts as a positive regulator of biliary lipid secretion. Functions as a floppase that translocates specifically phosphatidylcholine (PC) from the inner to the outer leaflet of the canalicular membrane bilayer into the canaliculi of hepatocytes. Translocation of PC makes the biliary phospholipids available for extraction into the canaliculi lumen by bile salt mixed micelles and therefore protects the biliary tree from the detergent activity of bile salts. Plays a role in the recruitment of pho [...] 
Cholestasis is a clinical condition resulting from the imapairment of bile flow. This condition could be caused by defects of the hepatocytes, which are responsible for the complex process of bile formation and secretion, and/or caused by defects in the secretory machinery of cholangiocytes. Several mutations and pathways that lead to cholestasis have been described. Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) is a group of rare diseases caused by autosomal recessive mutations in the genes that encode proteins expressed mainly in the apical membrane of the hepatocytes. PFIC 1, also known as Byler's disease, is caused by mutations of the ATP8B1 gene, which encodes the familial intrahepatic cholestasis 1 protein. PFIC 2 is characterized by the downregulation or absence of functional bile salt export pump (BSEP) expression via variations in the ABCB11 gene. Mutations of the ABCB4 gene result in lower expression of the multidrug resistance class 3 glycoprotein, leading to the third type of PFIC. Newer variations of this disease have been described. Loss of function of the tight junction protein 2 protein results in PFIC 4, while mutations of the NR1H4 gene, which encodes farnesoid X receptor, an important transcription factor for bile formation, cause PFIC 5. A recently described type of PFIC is associated with a mutation in the MYO5B gene, important for the trafficking of BSEP and hepatocyte membrane polarization. In this review, we provide a brief overview of the molecular mechanisms and clinical features associated with each type of PFIC based on peer reviewed journals published between 1993 and 2020.
BACKGROUND: Jaundice is a common symptom of inherited or acquired liver diseases or a manifestation of diseases involving red blood cell metabolism. Recent progress has elucidated the molecular mechanisms of bile metabolism, hepatocellular transport, bile ductular development, intestinal bile salt reabsorption, and the regulation of bile acids homeostasis. MAIN BODY: The major genetic diseases causing jaundice involve disturbances of bile flow. The insufficiency of bile salts in the intestines leads to fat malabsorption and fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies. Accumulation of excessive bile acids and aberrant metabolites results in hepatocellular injury and biliary cirrhosis. Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) is the prototype of genetic liver diseases manifesting jaundice in early childhood, progressive liver fibrosis/cirrhosis, and failure to thrive. The first three types of PFICs identified (PFIC1, PFIC2, and PFIC3) represent defects in FIC1 (ATP8B1), BSEP (ABCB11), or MDR3 (ABCB4). In the last 5 years, new genetic disorders, such as TJP2, FXR, and MYO5B defects, have been demonstrated to cause a similar PFIC phenotype. Inborn errors of bile acid metabolism also cause progressive cholestatic liver injuries. Prompt differential diagnosis is important because oral primary bile acid replacement may effectively reverse liver failure and restore liver functions. DCDC2 is a newly identified genetic disorder causing neonatal sclerosing cholangitis. Other cholestatic genetic disorders may have extra-hepatic manifestations, such as developmental disorders causing ductal plate malformation (Alagille syndrome, polycystic liver/kidney diseases), mitochondrial hepatopathy, and endocrine or chromosomal disorders. The diagnosis of genetic liver diseases has evolved from direct sequencing of a single gene to panel-based next generation sequencing. Whole exome sequencing and whole genome sequencing have been actively investigated in research and clinical studies. Current treatment modalities include medical treatment (ursodeoxycholic acid, cholic acid or chenodeoxycholic acid), surgery (partial biliary diversion and liver transplantation), symptomatic treatment for pruritus, and nutritional therapy. New drug development based on gene-specific treatments, such as apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT) inhibitor, for BSEP defects are underway. SHORT CONCLUSION: Understanding the complex pathways of jaundice and cholestasis not only enhance insights into liver pathophysiology but also elucidate many causes of genetic liver diseases and promote the development of novel treatments.
Genetic cholestasis has been dissected through genetic investigation. The major PFIC genes are now described. ATP8B1 encodes FIC1, ABCB11 encodes BSEP, ABCB4 encodes MDR3, TJP2 encodes TJP2, NR1H4 encodes FXR, and MYO5B encodes MYO5B. The full spectra of phenotypes associated with mutations in each gene are discussed, along with our understanding of the disease mechanisms. Differences in treatment response and targets for future treatment are emerging.
Low-Phospholipid Associated Cholelithiasis (LPAC) is a genetic disease responsible for the development of intrahepatic lithiasis. It is associated with a mutation of the ABCB4 gene which codes for protein MDR3, a biliary carrier. As a nosological entity, it is defined by presence of two of the three following criteria: age less than 40 years at onset of biliary symptoms, recurrence of biliary symptoms after cholecystectomy, and intrahepatic hyperechogenic foci detected by ultrasound. While the majority of clinical forms are simple, there also exist complicated forms, involving extended intrahepatic lithiasis and its consequences: lithiasis migration, acute cholangitis, intrahepatic abscess. Chronic evolution can lead to secondary sclerosing cholangitis or secondary biliary cirrhosis. In unusual cases, degeneration into cholangiocarcinoma may occur. Treatment is built around ursodeoxycholic acid, which yields dissolution of biliary calculi. Complicated forms may call for interventional, radiological, endoscopic or surgical treatment. This synthetic review illustrates and summarizes the different aspects of this entity, from simple gallbladder lithiasis to cholangiocarcinoma, as well as secondary biliary cirrhosis requiring liver transplant, on the basis of clinical cases and the iconography of patients treated in our ward.
BACKGROUND: Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis is a rare, heterogeneous group of liver disorders of autosomal recessive inheritance, characterised by an early onset of cholestasis with pruritus and malabsorption, which rapidly progresses, eventually culminating in liver failure. For children and their parents, PFIC is an extremely distressing disease. Significant pruritus can lead to severe cutaneous mutilation and may affect many activities of daily living through loss of sleep, irritability, poor attention, and impaired school performance. METHODS: Databases including MEDLINE and Embase were searched for publications on PFIC prevalence, incidence or natural history, and the economic burden or health-related quality of life of patients with PFIC. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines were followed. RESULTS: Three systematic reviews and twenty-two studies were eligible for inclusion for the epidemiology of PFIC including a total of 2603 patients. Study periods ranged from 3 to 33 years. Local population prevalence of PFIC was reported in three studies, ranging from 9.0 to 12.0% of children admitted with cholestasis, acute liver failure, or splenomegaly. The most detailed data come from the NAPPED study where native liver survival of >15 years is predicted in PFIC2 patients with a serum bile  acid concentration below 102 micromol/L following bile diversion surgery. Burden of disease was mainly reported through health-related quality of life (HRQL), rates of surgery and survival. Rates of biliary diversion and liver transplant varied widely depending on study period, sample size and PFIC type, with many patients have multiple surgeries and progressing to liver transplant. This renders data unsuitable for comparison. CONCLUSION: Using robust and transparent methods, this systematic review summarises our current knowledge of PFIC. The epidemiological overview is highly mixed and dependent on presentation and PFIC subtype. Only two studies reported HRQL and mortality results were variable across different subtypes. Lack of data and extensive heterogeneity severely limit understanding across this disease area, particularly variation around and within subtypes.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is characterized by chronic inflammation and progressive fibrosis of the biliary tree. The bile acid receptor TGR5 (GPBAR1) is found on biliary epithelial cells (BECs), where it promotes secretion, proliferation and tight junction integrity. Thus, we speculated that changes in TGR5-expression in BECs may contribute to PSC pathogenesis. METHODS: TGR5-expression and -localization were analyzed in PSC livers and liver tissue, isolated bile ducts and BECs from Abcb4(-/-), Abcb4(-/-)/Tgr5(Tg) and ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA)- or 24-norursodeoxycholic acid (norUDCA)-fed Abcb4(-/-) mice. The effects of IL8/IL8 homologues on TGR5 mRNA and protein levels were studied. BEC gene expression was analyzed by single-cell transcriptomics (scRNA-seq) from distinct mouse models. RESULTS: TGR5 mRNA expression and immunofluorescence staining intensity were reduced in BECs of PSC and Abcb4(-/-) livers, in Abcb4(-/-) extrahepatic bile ducts, but not in intrahepatic macrophages. No changes in TGR5 BEC fluorescence intensity were detected in liver tissue of other liver diseases, including primary biliary cholangitis. Incubation of BECs with IL8/IL8 homologues, but not with other cytokines, reduced TGR5 mRNA and protein levels. BECs from Abcb4(-/-) mice had lower levels of phosphorylated Erk and higher expression levels of Icam1, Vcam1 and Tgfbeta2. Overexpression of Tgr5 abolished the activated inflammatory phenotype characteristic of Abcb4(-/-) BECs. NorUDCA-feeding restored TGR5-expression levels in BECs in Abcb4(-/-) livers. CONCLUSIONS: Reduced TGR5 levels in BECs from patients with PSC and Abcb4(-/-) mice promote development of a reactive BEC phenotype, aggravate biliary injury and thus contribute to the pathogenesis of sclerosing cholangitis. Restoration of biliary TGR5-expression levels represents a previously unknown mechanism of action of norUDCA. LAY SUMMARY: Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease-associated with progressive inflammation of the bile duct, leading to fibrosis and end-stage liver disease. Bile acid (BA) toxicity may contribute to the development and disease progression of PSC. TGR5 is a membrane-bound receptor for BAs, which is found on bile ducts and protects bile ducts from BA toxicity. In this study, we show that TGR5 levels were reduced in bile ducts from PSC livers and in bile ducts from a genetic mouse model of PSC. Our investigations indicate that lower levels of TGR5 in bile ducts may contribute to PSC development and progression. Furthermore, treatment with norUDCA, a drug currently being tested in a phase III trial for PSC, restored TGR5 levels in biliary epithelial cells.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review focuses on recent developments of histopathology in the most common biliary disorders affecting adults. The reader is referred to other sources for the specialized topics on paediatric populations and post liver transplantation. RECENT FINDINGS: Fibrosis stage at diagnosis is an independent predictor of liver transplant-free survival in patients with primary biliary cholangitis. Immunohistochemistry might have an important role in predicting response to treatment. New histological scoring systems with excellent correlation with long-term clinical outcomes are being developed in primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). Quantification of fibrosis with collagen proportionate area can improve risk stratification and could be particularly useful to assess treatment response in PSC.Gene sequencing on cytology and intrabiliary biopsy may improve risk stratification for cholangiocarcinoma. Genetic variants of ATP8B1, ABCB11 and ABCB4 are relatively common in adults with cholestatic liver disease. New causes of cholestatic liver injury have recently been described. SUMMARY: Histology is often not necessary for the diagnosis of biliary disease, but can provide important information that may assist the clinician in patients' management. Histopathology remains crucial to confirm a diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma, and to identify the pattern of biliary injury in immune-mediated cholangiopathies and rarer pathological entities.
Several ABC transporters of the human liver are responsible for the secretion of bile salts, lipids and cholesterol. Their interplay protects the biliary tree from the harsh detergent activity of bile salts. Among these transporters, ABCB4 is essential for the translocation of phosphatidylcholine (PC) lipids from the inner to the outer leaflet of the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes. ABCB4 deficiency can result in altered PC to bile salt ratios, which led to intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, low phospholipid associated cholelithiasis, drug induced liver injury or even progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3. Although PC lipids only account for 30-40% of the lipids in the canalicular membrane, 95% of all phospholipids in bile are PC lipids. We discuss this discrepancy in the light of PC synthesis and bile salts favoring certain lipids. Nevertheless, the in vivo extraction of PC lipids from the outer leaflet of the canalicular membrane by bile salts should be considered as a separate step in bile formation. Therefore, methods to characterize disease causing ABCB4 mutations should be considered carefully, but such an analysis represents a crucial point in understanding the currently unknown transport mechanism of this ABC transporter.
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) subfamily B member 4 (ABCB4), also known as multidrug resistance protein 3 (MDR3), encoded by ABCB4, is involved in biliary phospholipid secretion, protecting hepatobiliary system from deleterious detergent and lithogenic properties of the bile. ABCB4 mutations altering canalicular ABCB4 protein function and expression may have variable clinical presentation and predispose to several human liver diseases. Well-established phenotypes of ABCB4 deficit are: progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3, gallbladder disease 1 (syn. low phospholipid associated cholelithiasis syndrome), high ɣ-glutamyl transferase intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, chronic cholangiopathy, and adult biliary fibrosis/cirrhosis. Moreover, ABCB4 aberrations may be involved in some cases of drug induced cholestasis, transient neonatal cholestasis, and parenteral nutrition-associated liver disease. Recently, genome-wide association studies have documented occurrence of malignant tumours, predominantly hepatobiliary malignancies, in patients with ABCB4/MDR3 deficit. The patient's age at the time of the first presentation of cholestatic disease, as well as the severity of liver disorder and response to treatment are related to the ABCB4 allelic status. Mutational analysis of ABCB4 in patients and their families should be considered in all individuals with cholestasis of unknown aetiology, regardless of age and/or time of onset of the first symptoms.
The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters expressed at the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes mediate the secretion of several compounds into the bile canaliculi and therefore play a key role in bile secretion. Among these transporters, ABCB11 secretes bile acids, ABCB4 translocates phosphatidylcholine and ABCG5/G8 is responsible for cholesterol secretion, while ABCB1 and ABCC2 transport a variety of drugs and other compounds. The dysfunction of these transporters leads to severe, rare, evolutionary biliary diseases. The development of new therapies for patients with these diseases requires a deep understanding of the biology of these transporters. In this review, we report the current knowledge regarding the regulation of canalicular ABC transporters' folding, trafficking, membrane stability and function, and we highlight the role of molecular partners in these regulating mechanisms.
During the last 11 years, advances in molecular genetics have changed our approach to children with intrahepatic cholestasis. Progress in identification of mutated genes now allows genetic diagnosis for several forms of cholestasis previously grouped into PFIC (progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis). Three distinct forms: PFIC1, PFIC2, and PFIC3 are the result of mutations in the ATP8B1, ABCB11, and ABCB4 genes. The diagnosis is supported on clinical, biochemical and histological features. The therapeutic goals in theses diseases are alleviate symptoms and improve quality of life. Inborn errors of bile acid synthesis represent a subset of familial intrahepatic cholestasis. Replacement therapy with ursodeoxycholic acid and cholic acid avoids progression of the liver injury.
Gallstones are a common and costly disease with a projected increase in prevalence due to the increasing ageing population. Numerous endogenous and environmental factors are aetiologically related to this multifactorial disease, and genetic studies continue to unravel the pathobiological mechanisms related to gallstone formation. In particular, variants of genes encoding hepatobiliary transporters have been implicated in gallstone disease and, given their ability to influence biliary lipid composition, have undergone considerable investigation. Here we summarize the role of enterohepatic transporters in cholelithogenesis with a particular focus on pertinent ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABCB4, ABCB11, ABCC7, and ABCG5/G8).
Clinical studies have revealed that the ABCB4 gene encodes the phospholipid transporter on the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes, and its mutations and variants are the genetic basis of low phospholipid-associated cholelithiasis (LPAC), a rare type of gallstone disease caused by a single-gene mutation or variation. The main features of LPAC include a reduction or deficiency of phospholipids in bile, symptomatic cholelithiasis at <40 years of age, intrahepatic sludge and microlithiasis, mild chronic cholestasis, a high cholesterol/phospholipid ratio in bile, and recurrence of biliary symptoms after cholecystectomy. Needle-like cholesterol crystals, putatively "anhydrous" cholesterol crystallization at low phospholipid concentrations in model and native bile, are characterized in ABCB4 knockout mice, a unique animal model for LPAC. Gallbladder bile with only trace amounts of phospholipids in these mice is supersaturated with cholesterol, with lipid composition plotting in the left two-phase zone of the ternary phase diagram, consistent with "anhydrous" cholesterol crystallization. In this review, we summarize the molecular biology and physiological functions of ABCB4 and comprehensively discuss the latest advances in the genetic analysis of ABCB4 mutations and variations and their roles in the pathogenesis and pathophysiology of LPAC in humans, based on the results from clinical studies and mouse experiments. To date, approximately 158 distinct LPAC-causing ABCB4 mutations and variants in humans have been reported in the literature, indicating that it is a monogenic risk factor for LPAC. The elucidation of the ABCB4 function in the liver, the identification of ABCB4 mutations and variants in LPAC patients, and the exploration of gene therapy for ABCB4 deficiency in animal models can help us to better understand the cellular, molecular, and genetic mechanisms underlying the onset of the disease, and will pave the way for early diagnosis and prevention of susceptible subjects and effective intervention for LPAC in patients.
BACKGROUND: Gallstone disease (GD) belongs to the most frequent disorders in gastroenterology and causes high costs in our health-care systems. Gallstones are uncommon in children but frequent in adults, in particular in women, and are triggered by exogenous risk factors. Here, we summarize the current knowledge concerning the contribution of inherited predisposition to gallstone risk. DESIGN: In this review, we present the current data and recent research on the genetics of gallstone disease. RESULTS: Several GD-predisposing gene variants have been reported, with most prominent effects being conferred by a common variant (p.D19H) of the hepatic and intestinal cholesterol transporter ABCG5/G8. A smaller group of patients might develop gallstones primarily due low phosphatidylcholine concentrations in bile as a result of loss-of-function mutations of the ABCB4 transporter (low phospholipid-associated cholelithiasis syndrome). Regardless of the origin, the risk factors for gallstones lead to the supersaturation of bile with insoluble compounds, in particular cholesterol. As result, cholesterol stones develop and present the most frequent type of gallstones. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy with low morbidity and mortality is currently the most common and effective method for the therapy of symptomatic gallbladder stones. CONCLUSIONS: Gallstone disease represents a multifactorial condition and previous studies have identified the major genetic contributors to gallstone formation. The increasing knowledge about the pathomechanisms of hepatobiliary metabolism and GD as well as the identification of additional risk factors might help to overcome the current invasive therapy by specific lifestyle intervention and precise molecular treatment.
Clinical and epidemiological findings implicate genetic predisposition and the effects of elevated steroids in pregnancy in the pathogenesis of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. To date, a number of studies have identified polymorphisms encoding biliary canalicular transporters, including those encoded by ABCB4 and ABCB11, which are associated with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. Questions remain regarding divergent findings between populations and the relative contributions of these polymorphisms. In a large study of Western European women with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, Dixon et al. (this issue) provide further insights into the genetics of this cholestatic syndrome, which contribute to ongoing evaluation of cholestasis generally.
Bile is synthesized in the liver and is essential for the emulsification of dietary lipids and lipid-soluble vitamins. It is a complex mixture of amphiphilic bile acids (BAs; which act as detergent molecules), the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylcholine (PC), cholesterol and a variety of endogenous metabolites and waste products. Over the last 20 years, the combined effort of clinicians, geneticists, physiologists and biochemists has shown that each of these bile components is transported across the canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte by its own specific ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter. The bile salt export pump (BSEP) ABCB11 transports the BAs and drives bile flow from the liver, but it is now clear that two lipid transporters, ABCB4 (which flops PC into the bile) and the P-type ATPase ATP8B1/CDC50 (which flips a different phospholipid in the opposite direction) play equally critical roles that protect the biliary tree from the detergent activity of the bile acids. Understanding the interdependency of these lipid floppases and flippases has allowed the development of an assay to measure ABCB4 function. ABCB4 harbours numerous mis-sense mutations which probably reflects the spectrum of liver disease rooted in ABCB4 aetiology. Characterization of the effect of these mutations at the protein level opens the possibility for the development of personalized prognosis and treatment.
Glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) play a key role in glioblastoma (GBM) resistance to temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy. With the increase in research on the tumour microenvironment, exosomes secreted by GSCs have become a new focus in GBM research. However, the molecular mechanism by which GSCs affect drug resistance in GBM cells via exosomes remains unclear. Using bioinformatics analysis, we identified the specific expression of ABCB4 in GSCs. Subsequently, we established GSC cell lines and used ultracentrifugation to extract secreted exosomes. We conducted in vitro and in vivo investigations to validate the promoting effect of ABCB4 and ABCB4-containing exosomes on TMZ resistance. Finally, to identify the transcription factors regulating the transcription of ABCB4, we performed luciferase assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation-quantitative PCR. Our results indicated that ABCB4 is highly expressed in GSCs. Moreover, high expression of ABCB4 promoted the resistance of GSCs to TMZ. Our study found that GSCs can also transmit their highly expressed ABCB4 to differentiated glioma cells (DGCs) through exosomes, leading to high expression of ABCB4 in these cells and promoting their resistance to TMZ. Mechanistic studies have shown that the overexpression of ABCB4 in GSCs is mediated by the transcription factor ATF3. In conclusion, our results indicate that GSCs can confer resistance to TMZ in GBM by transmitting ABCB4, which is transcribed by ATF3, through exosomes. This mechanism may lead to drug resistance and recurrence of GBM. These findings contribute to a deeper understanding of the mechanisms underlying drug resistance in GBM and provide novel insights into its treatment.
The prevalence of cholesterol gallstone disease is increasing, primarily due to the global epidemic of obesity associated with insulin resistance, and this trend leads to a considerable healthcare, financial, and social burden worldwide. Although phospholipids play an essential role in maintaining cholesterol solubility in bile through both mixed micelles and vesicles, little attention has been paid to the impact of biliary phospholipids on the pathogenesis of cholesterol gallstone formation. A reduction or deficiency of biliary phospholipids results in a distinctly abnormal metastable physical-chemical state of bile predisposing to supersaturation with cholesterol. Changes in biliary phospholipid concentrations influence cholesterol crystallization by yielding both liquid crystalline and "anhydrous" crystalline metastable intermediates, evolving into classical parallelogram-shaped cholesterol monohydrate crystals in supersaturated bile. As a result, five distinct crystallization pathways, A-E, have been defined, mainly based on the prime habits of liquid and solid crystals in the physiological or pathophysiological cholesterol saturation of gallbladder and hepatic bile. This review concisely summarizes the chemical structures and physical-chemical properties of biliary phospholipids and their physiological functions in bile formation and cholesterol solubility in bile, as well as comprehensively discusses the latest advances in the role of biliary phospholipids in cholesterol crystallization and growth in gallstone formation, largely based on the findings from clinical and animal studies and in vitro experiments. The insights gleaned from uncovering the cholelithogenic mechanisms are expected to form a fundamental framework for investigating the hitherto elusive events in the earliest stage of cholesterol nucleation and crystallization. This may help to identify better measures for early diagnosis and prevention in susceptible subjects and effective treatment of patients with gallstones.
