Canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter 1; Mediates hepatobiliary excretion of numerous organic anions and conjugated organic anions such as methotrexate, 17beta-estradiol 17-glucosiduronic acid and leukotriene C4. Also transports sulfated bile salt such as taurolithocholate sulfate. May function as a cellular cisplatin transporter. Belongs to the ABC transporter superfamily. ABCC family. Conjugate transporter (TC 3.A.1.208) subfamily.
Sex-determining region Y-box2 (SOX2), a master regulator of embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells, drives cancer stem cells (CSCs) properties, fuels tumor initiation, and contributes to tumor aggressiveness. Our previous study has demonstrated the oncogenic role of SOX2 in colorectal cancer (CRC). In this study, we sought to elucidate the underlying mechanisms. Cell function experiments were performed to detect chemoresistance, proliferation, stemness, migration, and invasion in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation, co-immunoprecipitation, luciferase reporter assay, and immunofluorescence were performed to explore the regulation of ABCC2, beta-catenin, and Beclin1 by SOX2. The carcinogenic role of SOX2-beta-catenin/Beclin1-ABCC2 axis in vivo was analyzed by CRC tissues and xenograft models. Here, we reported that SOX2 sustained chemoresistance by transcriptional activation of ABCC2 expression. Suppressing either beta-catenin or autophagy signaling curbed SOX2-driven chemoresistance, stemness, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Mechanistically, SOX2 combined with beta-catenin and increased its nuclear expression and transcriptional activity. Transcriptional activation of Beclin1 expression by SOX2 consequently activating autophagy and inducing malignant phenotype. Furthermore, overexpression of beta-catenin or Beclin1 facilitated ABCC2 expression. The clinical analyses showed that high expression of ABCC2 and Beclin1 were positively correlated with SOX2 and were associated with poor prognosis in CRC patients. Finally, xenograft models revealed that inhibition of SOX2 expression and autophagy restrained tumor growth and chemoresistance in vivo. Conclusively, we demonstrated a novel mechanism by which the SOX2-beta-catenin/Beclin1/autophagy signaling axis regulates chemoresistance, stemness, and EMT in CRC. Our findings provide novel insights into CRC carcinogenesis and may help develop potential therapeutic candidates for CRC.
Irinotecan is a camptothecin analog used as an anticancer drug. Severe, potentially life-threatening toxicities can occur from irinotecan treatment. Although multiple genes may play a role in irinotecan activity, the majority of evidence to date suggests that variation in expression of UGT1A1 caused by a common promoter polymorphism (UGT1A1*28) is strongly associated with toxicity; however, this link is dose dependent. Variations in other pharmacokinetic genes, particularly the transporter ABCC2, also contribute to irinotecan toxicity. In addition, recent studies have shown that pharmacodynamic genes such as TDP1 and XRCC1 can also play a role in both toxicity and response.
The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters expressed at the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes mediate the secretion of several compounds into the bile canaliculi and therefore play a key role in bile secretion. Among these transporters, ABCB11 secretes bile acids, ABCB4 translocates phosphatidylcholine and ABCG5/G8 is responsible for cholesterol secretion, while ABCB1 and ABCC2 transport a variety of drugs and other compounds. The dysfunction of these transporters leads to severe, rare, evolutionary biliary diseases. The development of new therapies for patients with these diseases requires a deep understanding of the biology of these transporters. In this review, we report the current knowledge regarding the regulation of canalicular ABC transporters' folding, trafficking, membrane stability and function, and we highlight the role of molecular partners in these regulating mechanisms.
Bilirubin, a breakdown product of heme, is normally glucuronidated and excreted by the liver into bile. Failure of this system can lead to a buildup of conjugated bilirubin in the blood, resulting in jaundice. Hyperbilirubinemia is an important clinical sign that needs to be investigated under a stepwise evaluation. Inherited non-hemolytic conjugated hyperbilirubinemic conditions include Dubin-Johnson syndrome (caused by mutations affecting ABCC2 gene) and Rotor syndrome (caused by the simultaneous presence of mutations in SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3 genes). Although classically viewed as benign conditions requiring no treatment, they lately gained an increased interest since recent studies suggested that mutations in the responsible genes leading to hyperbilirubinemia, as well as minor genetic variants, may result in an increased susceptibility to drug toxicity. This article provides a comprehensive review on the pathophysiology of Dubin-Johnson and Rotor syndromes, presenting the current knowledge concerning the molecular details and basis of these conditions.
The treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been a challenge. The efficacy of several drugs has been evaluated and variability in drug response has been observed. Pharmacogenetics could explain this variation and improve patients' outcomes with this complex disease; nevertheless, several disease-related issues must be carefully reviewed in the pharmacogenetic study of COVID-19 treatment. We aimed to describe the pharmacogenetic variants reported for drugs used for COVID-19 treatment (remdesivir, oseltamivir, lopinavir, ritonavir, azithromycin, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, ivermectin, and dexamethasone). In addition, other factors relevant to the design of pharmacogenetic studies were mentioned. Variants in CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP2C8, CY2D6, ABCB1, ABCC2, and SLCO1B1, among other variants, could be included in pharmacogenetic studies of COVID-19 treatment. Besides, nongenetic factors such as drug-drug interactions and inflammation should be considered in the search for personalized therapy of COVID-19.
Human ABCC2 is an ATP-binding cassette transporter involved in the export of endobiotics and xenobiotics. It is involved in cisplatin resistance in cancer cells, particularly in ovarian cancer. The few known ABCC2 modulators are poorly efficient, so it is necessary to explore new ways to select and optimize efficient compounds ABCC2. Natural products offer an original scaffold for such a strategy and brings hope for this aim. This review covers basic knowledge about ABCC2, from distribution and topology aspects to physiological and pathological functions. It summarizes the effect of natural products as ABCC2 modulators. Certain plant metabolites act on different ABCC2 regulation levels and therefore are promising candidates to block the multidrug resistance mediated by ABCC2 in cancer cells.
Over the last 25 years, our understanding of the driving forces for hepatobiliary elimination and knowledge of the molecular basis of uptake and efflux transport in hepatocytes have undergone fundamental changes. This refers to bile acids and many other endogenous substances as well as to drugs that are eliminated on the hepatobiliary route. In this development, not only molecular cloning, functional characterization, and localization of transporters were decisive, but also the discovery of hereditary mutations in genes encoding sinusoidal uptake transporters and canalicular export pumps in humans and rodents. Uptake by passive diffusion and elimination into bile driven by the electrochemical gradient are no longer considered relevant for hepatobiliary elimination in the intact organism. Furthermore, insights into the relative roles of uptake transporters and unidirectional ATP-driven efflux pumps were obtained when we established double-transfected polarized cell lines stably expressing, as an example, the hepatocellular uptake transporter OATP1B3 and the apical (canalicular) efflux pump multidrug resistance protein 2 (MRP2; ABCC2). ATP-dependent efflux transporters localized to the basolateral (sinusoidal) hepatocyte membrane, particularly MRP3 (ABCC3) and MRP4 (ABCC4), pump substances from hepatocytes into sinusoidal blood. Bile acids are substrates for human MRP4 in the presence of physiological concentrations of reduced glutathione, which undergoes co-transport. These efflux pumps have been recognized in recent years to play an important compensatory role in cholestasis and to contribute to the balance between uptake and efflux of bile acids and other organic anions during the vectorial transport from blood into bile. This sinusoidal efflux not only enables subsequent renal elimination but also facilitates the re-uptake of substances into neighboring hepatocytes located more centrally and downstream in the sinusoid.
Aluminum is the third most common element on Earth s crust and despite its wide use in our workaday life it has been associated with several health risks after overexposure. In the present study the impact of aluminum salts upon ABC transporter activity was studied in the P-GP-expressing human blood-brain barrier cell line hCMEC/D3, in MDCKII cells overexpressing BCRP and MRP2, respectively, and in freshly isolated, functionally intact kidney tubules from Atlantic killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus), which express the analog ABC transporters, P-gp, Bcrp and Mrp2. In contrast to previous findings with heavy metals salts (cadmium(II) chloride or mercury(II) chloride), which have a strong inhibitory effect on ABC transporter activity, or zinc(II) chloride and sodium arsenite, which have a stimulatory effect upon ABC transport function, the results indicate no modulatory effect of aluminum salts on the efflux activity of the human ABC transporters P-GP, BCRP and MRP2 nor on the analog transporters P-gp, Bcrp and Mrp2.
BACKGROUND: Although it is traditionally believed that ATP binding cassette subfamily C member 2 (ABCC2) is a multidrug resistance-associated protein correlated with a worse prognosis, our previous and several other studies demonstrated the contrary to be true in gastric cancer (GC). We aim to explore the underlying mechanism of this discovery. METHODS: Our study utilized whole-exome sequencing (WES), RNA sequencing, and droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) analysis of 80 gastric cancer samples, along with comprehensive immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of 1044 human GC tissue samples.By utilizing CRISPRCas9 to genetically modify cell lines with the ABCC2-24C > T (rs717620) point mutation and conducting dual-luciferase reporter assays, we identified that transcription factors SOX9 and ETS1 serve as negative regulators of ABCC2 expression. Seahorse assay and mass spectrometry were used to discover altered metabolic patterns. Gain and loss-of-function experiments in GC cell lines and preclinical models were carried out to validate ABCC2 biological function. RESULTS: ABCC2 high expression correlated with better prognosis, and rs717620 can influence ABCC2 expression by disrupting the binding of ETS1 and SOX9. Gain and loss-of-function experiments in GC cell lines demonstrated amino acid deprivation reduces proliferation, migration, and drug resistance in ABCC2-high GC cells. ABCC2 leads to reduced intracellular amino acid pools and disruption of cellular energy metabolism. This phenomenon depended on ABCC2-mediated GSH extrusion, resulting in alterations in redox status, thereby increasing the cell's susceptibility to ferroptosis. Furthermore, patient-derived organoids and patient-derived tumor-like cell clusters were used to observe impact of ABCC2 on therapeutic effect. In the xenograft model with high ABCC2 expression, we observed that constricting amino acid intake in conjunction with GPX4 inactivation resulted in notable tumor regression. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate a significant role of ABCC2 in amino acid metabolism and ferroptosis by mediating GSH efflux in GC. This discovery underlines the potential of combining multiple ferroptosis targets as a promising therapeutic strategy for GC with high ABCC2 expression. HIGHLIGHTS: ABCC2 plays a crucial role in inducing metabolic vulnerability and ferroptosis in gastric cancer through enhanced glutathione efflux. The ABCC2 24C > T polymorphism is a key factor influencing its expression. These results highlight the potential of ABCC2 as a predictive biomarker and therapeutic target in gastric cancer.
AIM: To investigate the potential involvement of the hepatic ATP-binding cassette transporters MRP2 and MDR1 in the disposition of lumefantrine (LUM) among patients with uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. MATERIALS & METHODS: The tag SNPs MDR1/ABCB1 C3435T and MRP2/ABCC2 C1515Y were determined in two artemether-LUM clinical trials, including a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic study focused on the treatment phase (72 h), and an efficacy trial where day 7 (D(7)) LUM levels were measured. RESULTS: The 1515YY genotype was significantly associated with higher (p < 0.01) LUM D(7) concentrations (median 1.42 muM), compared with 0.77 muM for 1515CY and 0.59 muM for 1515CC. No significant influence of the MDR1/ABCB1 C3435T was found. CONCLUSION: LUM body disposition may be influenced by MRP2/ABCC2 genotype.
Several studies examined a possible link between multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (ABCC2) gene variants and the risk of resistance to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) in epilepsy, but the results were contradictory. In this study, a meta-analysis was conducted to assess the relevance of ABCC2 common variants (c.-24C>T, c.1249G>A, c.3972C>T) with the response risk of AEDs. We searched Embase, PubMed, the Cochrane Library and CNKI databases for case-control studies published through May 2016 that evaluated the role of ABCC2 gene variants in pharmacoresistance to AEDs. Odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated to assess the strength of associations between the ABCC2 c.-24C>T, c.1249G>A and c.3972C>T variants and the risk of resistance to AEDs using an allele frequency model, dominant model and recessive model. Subgroup analyses were performed by ethnicity and the definition of drug-resistance. A total of 13 published studies involving 4300 patients (2261 patients with drug-resistant epilepsy and 2039 controls with drug-responsive epilepsy) met the selection criteria. We observed that the variant c.-24C>T was associated with a significantly increased risk of AED resistance (TT+CT vs CC: OR=1.24, 95%CI=1.06-1.46, p=0.009; TT vs CT+CC: OR=1.90, 95%CI=1.31-2.76, p=0.0008; T vs C: OR=1.27, 95%CI=1.11-1.46, p=0.0006). However, we identified no significant association of the ABCC2 c.1249G>A, c.3972C>T variants and haplotypes with the response to anticonvulsant drug in the overall population. In summary, these observations suggest that the ABCC2 c.-24C>T polymorphism is a likely risk factor for resistance to AEDs.
Silymarin, the extract of milk thistle, and its major active flavonolignan silybin, are common products widely used in the phytotherapy of liver diseases. They also have promising effects in protecting the pancreas, kidney, myocardium, and the central nervous system. However, inconsistent results are noted in the different clinical studies due to the low bioavailability of silymarin. Extensive studies were conducted to explore the metabolism and transport of silymarin/silybin as well as the impact of its consumption on the pharmacokinetics of other clinical drugs. Here, we aimed to summarize and highlight the current knowledge of the metabolism and transport of silymarin. It was concluded that the major efflux transporters of silybin are multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP2) and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) based on results from the transporter-overexpressing cell lines and MRP2-deficient (TR(-)) rats. Nevertheless, compounds that inhibit the efflux transporters MRP2 and BCRP can enhance the absorption and activity of silybin. Although silymarin does inhibit certain drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters, such effects are unlikely to manifest in clinical settings. Overall, silymarin is a safe and well-tolerated phytomedicine.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette (ABC) transporters may play an important role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerotic vascular diseases due to their involvement in cholesterol homeostasis, blood pressure regulation, endothelial function, vascular inflammation, as well as platelet production and aggregation. In this regard, ABC transporters, such as ABCA1, ABCG5 and ABCG8, were initially found to be responsible for genetically-inherited syndromes like Tangier diseases and sitosterolemia. These findings led to the understanding of those transporter's function in cellular cholesterol efflux and thereby also linked them to atherosclerosis and cardiovascular diseases (CVD). Subsequently, further ABC transporters, i.e., ABCG1, ABCG4, ABCB6, ABCC1, ABCC6 or ABCC9, have been shown to directly or indirectly affect cellular cholesterol efflux, the inflammatory response in macrophages, megakaryocyte proliferation and thrombus formation, as well as vascular function and blood pressure, and may thereby contribute to the pathogenesis of CVD and its complications. Furthermore, ABC transporters, such as ABCB1, ABCC2 or ABCG2, may affect the safety and efficacy of several drug classes currently in use for CVD treatment. This review will give a brief overview of ABC transporters involved in the process of atherogenesis and CVD pathology. It also aims to briefly summarize the role of ABC transporters in the pharmacokinetics and disposition of drugs frequently used to treat CVD and CVD-related complications.
Bilirubin is mainly generated from the breakdown of heme when red blood cells reach the end of their lifespan. Accumulation of bilirubin in human body usually leads to various disorders, including jaundice and liver disease. Bilirubin is conjugated in hepatocytes and excreted to bile duct via the ATP-binding cassette transporter ABCC2, dysfunction of which would lead to Dubin-Johnson syndrome. Here we determine the structures of ABCC2 in the apo, substrate-bound and ATP/ADP-bound forms using the cryo-electron microscopy, exhibiting a full transporter with a regulatory (R) domain inserted between the two half modules. Combined with substrate-stimulated ATPase and transport activity assays, structural analysis enables us to figure out transport cycle of ABCC2 with the R domain adopting various conformations. At the rest state, the R domain binding to the translocation cavity functions as an affinity filter that allows the substrates of high affinity to be transported in priority. Upon substrate binding, the R domain is expelled from the cavity and docks to the lateral of transmembrane domain following ATP hydrolysis. Our findings provide structural insights into a transport mechanism of ABC transporters finely tuned by the R domain.
INTRODUCTION: For the elimination of environmental chemicals and metabolic waste products, the body is equipped with a range of broad specificity transporters that are present in excretory organs as well as in several epithelial blood-tissue barriers. AREAS COVERED: ABCC2 and ABCC3 (also known as MRP2 and MRP3) mediate the transport of various conjugated organic anions, including many drugs, toxicants and endogenous compounds. This review focuses on the physiology of these transporters, their roles in drug disposition and how they affect drug sensitivity and toxicity. It also examines how ABCC2 and ABCC3 are coordinately regulated at the transcriptional level by members of the nuclear receptor (NR) family of ligand-modulated transcription factors and how this can be therapeutically exploited. EXPERT OPINION: Mutations in both ABCC2 and ABCC3 have been associated with changes in drug disposition, sensitivity and toxicity. A defect in ABCC2 is associated with Dubin-Johnson syndrome, a recessively inherited disorder characterized by conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Pharmacological manipulation of the activity of these transporters can potentially improve the pharmacokinetics and thus therapeutic activity of substrate drugs but also affect the physiological function of these transporters and consequently ameliorate associated disease states.
The multi-drug resistance protein 2 (MRP2; ABCC2) is an ATP-binding cassette transporter playing an important role in detoxification and chemoprotection by transporting a wide range of compounds, especially conjugates of lipophilic substances with glutathione, glucuronate and sulfate, which are collectively known as phase II products of biotransformation. In addition, MRP2 can also transport uncharged compounds in cotransport with glutathione, and thus can modulate the pharmacokinetics of many drugs. The other way around, its expression and activity are also altered by certain drugs and disease states. Unlike other members of the MRP/ABCC family, MRP2 is specifically expressed on the apical membrane domain of polarised cells as hepatocytes, renal proximal tubular cells, enterocytes and syncytiotrophoblasts of the placenta. Several naturally occurring mutations leading to the absence of functional MRP2 protein from the apical membrane have been described causing the human Dubin-Johnson syndrome associated with conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. Experimental mutation studies have revealed critical amino acids for substrate binding in the MRP2 molecule. This review is, therefore, focused on the structure and function of MRP2, the substrates transported and the clinical relevance of MRP2.
This review provides an overview of the pharmacogenetics of membrane transporters including selected ABC transporters (ABCB1, ABCC1, ABCC2, and ABCG2) and OATPs (OATP1B1 and OATP1B3). Membrane transporters are heavily involved in drug clearance and alters drug disposition by actively transporting substrate drugs between organs and tissues. As such, polymorphisms in the genes encoding these proteins may have significant effects on the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion of compounds, and may alter pharmacodynamics of many agents. This review discusses the techniques used to identify substrates and inhibitors of these proteins and subsequently to assess the effect of genetic mutation on transport, both in vitro and in vivo. A comprehensive list of substrates for the major drug transporters is included. Finally, studies linking transporter genotype with clinical outcomes are discussed.
Conventionally adjustments of the dose of chemotherapeutic treatment could be uneffective in preventing toxicity and response variability. New strategies for individualization of treatment in cancer patients are becoming an emerging issue in the clinical practice. Pharmacogenetics is undoubtedly an important source of information in this respect deepening the complex correlation existing between individual genetic profile and the response to therapy in terms of toxicity and activity. Several polymorphisms, i.e. genetic mutations with a frequency > 1% in a given population, have been described for genes encoding proteins involved in the metabolism of the drugs employed in the treatment of gastric cancer. TS (thymidilate synthase) and DPD (dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase) polymorphisms are implicated in the development of toxicity and in the efficacy of 5-fluorouracil (5FU). XRCC1 (X-ray cross-complementing group 1), ERCC1 (excision cross-complementing gene) and GSTP1 (glutathione S-transferase) have a role in the development of pharmacoresistance to platinum derivatives. MTHFR (5, 10 methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase) C677T polymorphism is important in methotrexate (MTX) metabolism. UGT1A1 (uridine diphoshate-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1) is involved on irinotecan metabolism. MRP2 (multi-drug resistance associated protein) and MDR1 (multi-drug resistance gene) are involved in irinotecan as well as anthracyclines transport. In conclusion, the clinical applications of pharmacogenetics could represent a new insight to accurately determine the proper drug and dose to be used in each individual patient.
ABCC2/Abcc2 is a member of the ABC transporter family expressed mainly in the liver bile canalicular membrane and involved in the excretion of various kinds of organic anions from hepatocytes into bile. During the drug development process, species differences in the pharmaco- and toxicokinetics of candidate drugs are a major problem. It is possible that ABCC2/Abcc2 transport activity as well as inhibitor sensitivity could lead to a number of phenomena (e.g. a difference in the biliary excretion clearance, a delay in the elimination half-life from the circulating blood and toxic side effects on ABCC2 -mediated drug-drug interactions, such as drug-induced hyperbilirubinemia). From this point of view, it is useful to be able to predict during preclinical development if certain compounds of interest are substrates and/or modulators of ABCC2. Although an in vivo animal model or an in vitro model expressing ABCC2 are useful assay systems, these have some limitations as far as predicting the transport profile of compounds in vivo is concerned. I will present an overview of the species differences in the tissue distribution, function, and also characteristic transport properties of ABCC2/Abcc2 mainly in an in vitro experimental model.
ABCC2/Abcc2 (MRP2/Mrp2) is expressed at major physiological barriers, such as the canalicular membrane of liver cells, kidney proximal tubule epithelial cells, enterocytes of the small and large intestine, and syncytiotrophoblast of the placenta. ABCC2/Abcc2 always localizes in the apical membranes. Although ABCC2/Abcc2 transports a variety of amphiphilic anions that belong to different classes of molecules, such as endogenous compounds (e.g., bilirubin-glucuronides), drugs, toxic chemicals, nutraceuticals, and their conjugates, it displays a preference for phase II conjugates. Phenotypically, the most obvious consequence of mutations in ABCC2 that lead to Dubin-Johnson syndrome is conjugate hyperbilirubinemia. ABCC2/Abcc2 harbors multiple binding sites and displays complex transport kinetics.
