Tyrosine-protein kinase ABL1; Non-receptor tyrosine-protein kinase that plays a role in many key processes linked to cell growth and survival such as cytoskeleton remodeling in response to extracellular stimuli, cell motility and adhesion, receptor endocytosis, autophagy, DNA damage response and apoptosis. Coordinates actin remodeling through tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins controlling cytoskeleton dynamics like WASF3 (involved in branch formation); ANXA1 (involved in membrane anchoring); DBN1, DBNL, CTTN, RAPH1 and ENAH (involved in signaling); or MAPT and PXN (microtubule-bindin [...] 
Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), also referred to as BCR-ABL1-like ALL, is a high-risk subset with a gene expression profile that shares significant overlap with that of Ph-positive (Ph(+)) ALL and is suggestive of activated kinase signaling. Although Ph(+) ALL is defined by BCR-ABL1 fusion, Ph-like ALL cases contain a variety of genomic alterations that activate kinase and cytokine receptor signaling. These alterations can be grouped into major subclasses that include ABL-class fusions involving ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, and PDGFRB that phenocopy BCR-ABL1 and alterations of CRLF2, JAK2, and EPOR that activate JAK/STAT signaling. Additional genomic alterations in Ph-like ALL activate other kinases, including BLNK, DGKH, FGFR1, IL2RB, LYN, NTRK3, PDGFRA, PTK2B, TYK2, and the RAS signaling pathway. Recent studies have helped to define the genomic landscape of Ph-like ALL and how it varies across the age spectrum, associated clinical features and outcomes, and genetic risk factors. Preclinical studies and anecdotal reports show that targeted inhibitors of relevant signaling pathways are active in specific Ph-like ALL subsets, and precision medicine trials have been initiated for this high-risk ALL subset.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In this review, we emphasize up-to-date practical cytogenetic and molecular aspects of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and summarize current knowledge on tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) resistance and treatment response monitoring of CML. RECENT FINDINGS: The introduction of TKIs has changed the natural course of CML and markedly improved patient survival. Over the past decades, many research efforts were devoted to elucidating the leukemogenic mechanisms of BCR-ABL1 and developing novel TKIs. More recent studies have attempted to answer new questions that have emerged in the TKI era, such as the cytogenetic and molecular bases of treatment failure and disease progression, the clinical impact of genetic aberrations in Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-positive and Ph-negative cells, and the biological significance of Ph secondarily acquired during therapy of other hematological neoplasms. Recent progresses in the understanding of the cytogenetic and molecular mechanisms underlying therapeutic failure and disease progression have improved the risk stratification of CML and will be helpful in the design of novel therapeutic strategies.
BACKGROUND: Philadelphia chromosome-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph-like ALL) is characterized by a gene-expression profile similar to that of BCR-ABL1-positive ALL, alterations of lymphoid transcription factor genes, and a poor outcome. The frequency and spectrum of genetic alterations in Ph-like ALL and its responsiveness to tyrosine kinase inhibition are undefined, especially in adolescents and adults. METHODS: We performed genomic profiling of 1725 patients with precursor B-cell ALL and detailed genomic analysis of 154 patients with Ph-like ALL. We examined the functional effects of fusion proteins and the efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in mouse pre-B cells and xenografts of human Ph-like ALL. RESULTS: Ph-like ALL increased in frequency from 10% among children with standard-risk ALL to 27% among young adults with ALL and was associated with a poor outcome. Kinase-activating alterations were identified in 91% of patients with Ph-like ALL; rearrangements involving ABL1, ABL2, CRLF2, CSF1R, EPOR, JAK2, NTRK3, PDGFRB, PTK2B, TSLP, or TYK2 and sequence mutations involving FLT3, IL7R, or SH2B3 were most common. Expression of ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, JAK2, and PDGFRB fusions resulted in cytokine-independent proliferation and activation of phosphorylated STAT5. Cell lines and human leukemic cells expressing ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, and PDGFRB fusions were sensitive in vitro to dasatinib, EPOR and JAK2 rearrangements were sensitive to ruxolitinib, and the ETV6-NTRK3 fusion was sensitive to crizotinib. CONCLUSIONS: Ph-like ALL was found to be characterized by a range of genomic alterations that activate a limited number of signaling pathways, all of which may be amenable to inhibition with approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Trials identifying Ph-like ALL are needed to assess whether adding tyrosine kinase inhibitors to current therapy will improve the survival of patients with this type of leukemia. (Funded by the American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities and others.).
Tremendous strides have been made in the molecular and cytogenetic classification of acute lymphoblastic leukemia based on gene expression profiling data, leading to an expansion of entities in the recent International Consensus Classification (ICC) of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemias and 2022 WHO Classification of Tumours: Haematolymphoid Tumors, 5th edition. This increased diagnostic and therapeutic complexity can be overwhelming, and this review compares nomenclature differences between the ICC and WHO 5th edition publications, compiles key features of each entity, and provides a diagnostic algorithmic approach. In covering B-lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL), we divided the entities into established (those present in the revised 4th edition WHO) and novel (those added to either the ICC or WHO 5th edition) groups. The established B-ALL entities include B-ALL with BCR::ABL1 fusion, BCR::ABL1-like features, KMT2A rearrangement, ETV6::RUNX1 rearrangement, high hyperdiploidy, hypodiploidy (focusing on near haploid and low hypodiploid), IGH::IL3 rearrangement, TCF3::PBX1 rearrangement, and iAMP21. The novel B-ALL entities include B-ALL with MYC rearrangement; DUX4 rearrangement; MEF2D rearrangement; ZNF384 or ZNF362 rearrangement, NUTM1 rearrangement; HLF rearrangement; UBTF::ATXN7L3/PAN3,CDX2; mutated IKZF1 N159Y; mutated PAX5 P80R; ETV6::RUNX1-like features; PAX5 alteration; mutated ZEB2 (p.H1038R)/IGH::CEBPE; ZNF384 rearranged-like; KMT2A-rearranged-like; and CRLF2 rearrangement (non-Ph-like). Classification of T-ALL is complex with some variability in how the subtypes are defined in recent literature. It was classified as early T-precursor lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma and T-ALL, NOS in the WHO revised 4th edition and WHO 5th edition. The ICC added an entity into early T-cell precursor ALL, BCL11B-activated, and also added provisional entities subclassified based on transcription factor families that are aberrantly activated.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) has been regarded as the paradigmatic example of a malignancy defined by a unique molecular event, the BCR-ABL1 oncogene. Decades of research zeroing in on the role of BCR-ABL1 kinase in the pathogenesis of CML have culminated in the development of highly efficacious therapeutics that, like imatinib mesylate, target the oncogenic kinase activity of BCR-ABL1. In recent years, most research efforts in CML have been devoted to developing novel tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) as well as to elucidating the mechanisms of resistance to imatinib and other TKIs. Nonetheless, primordial aspects of the pathogenesis of CML, such as the mechanisms responsible for the transition from chronic phase to blast crisis, the causes of genomic instability and faulty DNA repair, the phenomenon of stem cell quiescence, the role of tumor suppressors in TKI resistance and CML progression, or the cross-talk between BCR-ABL1 and other oncogenic signaling pathways, still remain poorly understood. Herein, we synthesize the most relevant and current knowledge on such areas of the pathogenesis of CML.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is driven by a translocation event between chromosomes 9 and 22, leading to the formation of a constitutively active BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein. Approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for CML inhibit BCR-ABL1 by competitively targeting its adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding site, which significantly improves patient outcomes. However, resistance to and intolerance of TKIs remains a clinical challenge. Asciminib is a promising investigational agent in development that allosterically targets BCR-ABL1 in a non-ATP-competitive manner. It binds to the ABL1 myristoyl-binding pocket and is effective against most ABL1 kinase domain mutations that confer resistance to ATP-competitive TKIs, including the T315I mutation. This review discusses unmet needs in the current CML treatment landscape, reports clinical data from asciminib trials that support the use of single-agent asciminib as third-line therapy and beyond, and explores the potential benefit of asciminib in combination with approved TKIs in earlier lines.
Philadelphia chromosome-like (Ph-like) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a high-risk subtype characterized by genomic alterations that activate cytokine receptor and kinase signaling. We examined the frequency and spectrum of targetable genetic lesions in a retrospective cohort of 1389 consecutively diagnosed patients with childhood B-lineage ALL with high-risk clinical features and/or elevated minimal residual disease at the end of remission induction therapy. The Ph-like gene expression profile was identified in 341 of 1389 patients, 57 of whom were excluded from additional analyses because of the presence of BCR-ABL1 (n = 46) or ETV6-RUNX1 (n = 11). Among the remaining 284 patients (20.4%), overexpression and rearrangement of CRLF2 (IGH-CRLF2 or P2RY8-CRLF2) were identified in 124 (43.7%), with concomitant genomic alterations activating the JAK-STAT pathway (JAK1, JAK2, IL7R) identified in 63 patients (50.8% of those with CRLF2 rearrangement). Among the remaining patients, using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction or transcriptome sequencing, we identified targetable ABL-class fusions (ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, and PDGFRB) in 14.1%, EPOR rearrangements or JAK2 fusions in 8.8%, alterations activating other JAK-STAT signaling genes (IL7R, SH2B3, JAK1) in 6.3% or other kinases (FLT3, NTRK3, LYN) in 4.6%, and mutations involving the Ras pathway (KRAS, NRAS, NF1, PTPN11) in 6% of those with Ph-like ALL. We identified 8 new rearrangement partners for 4 kinase genes previously reported to be rearranged in Ph-like ALL. The current findings provide support for the precision-medicine testing and treatment approach for Ph-like ALL implemented in Children's Oncology Group ALL trials.
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is driven by the activity of the BCR-ABL1 fusion oncoprotein. ABL1 kinase inhibitors have improved the clinical outcomes for patients with CML, with over 80% of patients treated with imatinib surviving for more than 10 years. Second-generation ABL1 kinase inhibitors induce more potent molecular responses in both previously untreated and imatinib-resistant patients with CML. Studies in patients with chronic-phase CML have shown that around 50% of patients who achieve and maintain undetectable BCR-ABL1 transcript levels for at least 2 years remain disease-free after the withdrawal of treatment. Here we characterize ABL001 (asciminib), a potent and selective allosteric ABL1 inhibitor that is undergoing clinical development testing in patients with CML and Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph(+)) acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. In contrast to catalytic-site ABL1 kinase inhibitors, ABL001 binds to the myristoyl pocket of ABL1 and induces the formation of an inactive kinase conformation. ABL001 and second-generation catalytic inhibitors have similar cellular potencies but distinct patterns of resistance mutations, with genetic barcoding studies revealing pre-existing clonal populations with no shared resistance between ABL001 and the catalytic inhibitor nilotinib. Consistent with this profile, acquired resistance was observed with single-agent therapy in mice; however, the combination of ABL001 and nilotinib led to complete disease control and eradicated CML xenograft tumours without recurrence after the cessation of treatment.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for BCR::ABL1 is the most common and widely accepted method of measurable residual disease (MRD) assessment in Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL); however, RT-PCR may not be an optimal measure of MRD in many cases of Ph+ ALL. We evaluated the clinical impact of a highly sensitive next-generation sequencing (NGS) MRD assay (sensitivity of 10(-6) ) and its correlation with RT-PCR for BCR::ABL1 in patients with Ph+ ALL. Overall, 32% of patients had a discordance between MRD assessment by RT-PCR and NGS, and 31% of patients who achieved NGS MRD negativity were PCR+ at the same timepoint. Among eight patients with long-term detectable BCR::ABL1 by PCR, six were PCR+/NGS-. These patients generally had stable PCR levels that persisted despite therapeutic interventions, and none subsequently relapsed; in contrast, patients who were PCR+/NGS+ had more variable PCR values that responded to therapeutic intervention. In a separate cohort of prospectively collected clinical samples, 11 of 65 patients (17%) with Ph+ ALL who achieved NGS MRD negativity had detectable BCR::ABL1 by PCR, and none of these patients relapsed. Relapse-free survival and overall survival were similar in patients who were PCR+/NGS- and PCR-/NGS-, suggesting that PCR for BCR::ABL1 did not provide additional prognostic information in patients who achieved NGS MRD negativity. NGS-based assessment of MRD is prognostic in Ph+ ALL and identifies patients with low-level detectable BCR::ABL1 who are unlikely to relapse nor to benefit from therapeutic interventions.
Asciminib is a potent, orally bioavailable, investigational drug that specifically and potently inhibits the tyrosine kinase activity of native ABL1, together with that of the chimeric BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein which causes chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). In contrast to ATP-competitive BCR-ABL1 kinase inhibitors employed to treat CML that target multiple kinases, asciminib binds to the myristate binding pocket on the kinase domains of ABL1 and BCR-ABL1. Hitherto no drugs have been developed whose mechanism of action involves interacting with myristate binding pockets on proteins, and analysis of the structures of such binding sites in proteins other than ABL1/ABL2/BCR-ABL1 strongly suggest that asciminib will not bind to these with high affinity. Accordingly, the drug has no known safety liabilities resulting from any off-target activity, as illustrated by its specificity towards cells expressing BCR-ABL1 and lack of effects on non-kinase targets in biochemical screens. Because asciminib does not bind to the ATP-binding site it maintains substantial activity against kinase domain mutations that impart acquired drug resistance to ATP-competitive drugs. However, in vitro studies in cells have identified BCR-ABL1 mutations that reduce the anti-proliferative activity of asciminib, some of which are associated with clinical resistance towards the drug in patients. Here we review effects of asciminib on mutant forms of BCR-ABL1, analyse their sensitivity towards the drug from a structural perspective and affirm support for employing combinations with ATP-competitive inhibitors to impede the reactivation of BCR-ABL1 kinase activity in patients receiving monotherapy.
In BCR-ABL1 lymphoblastic leukemia, treatment heterogeneity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), especially in the absence of kinase domain mutations in BCR-ABL1, is poorly understood. Through deep molecular profiling, we uncovered three transcriptomic subtypes of BCR-ABL1 lymphoblastic leukemia, each representing a maturation arrest at a stage of B-cell progenitor differentiation. An earlier arrest was associated with lineage promiscuity, treatment refractoriness and poor patient outcomes. A later arrest was associated with lineage fidelity, durable leukemia remissions and improved patient outcomes. Each maturation arrest was marked by specific genomic events that control different transition points in B-cell development. Interestingly, these events were absent in BCR-ABL1(+) preleukemic stem cells isolated from patients regardless of subtype, which supports that transcriptomic phenotypes are determined downstream of the leukemia-initialing event. Overall, our data indicate that treatment response and TKI efficacy are unexpected outcomes of the differentiation stage at which this leukemia transforms.
PURPOSE: BCR::ABL1 quantification is widely regarded as the standard for monitoring measurable residual disease (MRD) in Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph+) ALL. However, recent evidence of BCR::ABL1 multilineage involvement questions the significance of BCR::ABL1 MRD. We aimed to define the prognostic role of MRD as assessed by BCR::ABL1 or lymphoid-specific immunoglobulin/T-cell receptor (IG/TR) gene markers. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted BCR::ABL1 and IG/TR quantification after each treatment cycle in 264 patients treated in the GRAAPH-2014 trial, which used four cycles of reduced-intensity chemotherapy with nilotinib, followed by hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation (HSCT). RESULTS: Comparing BCR::ABL1 and IG/TR MRD revealed residual BCR::ABL1-positive non-ALL cells in 98 (43%) of 228 patients, defining multilineage Ph+ ALL. Despite poorer BCR::ABL1 responses, patients with multilineage Ph+ ALL had similar disease-free survival (DFS; hazard ratio [HR], 0.83 [95% CI, 0.49 to 1.41]; P = .50). Although BCR::ABL1 response failed to predict outcomes, IG/TR positivity (>/=0.01%) was strongly associated with lower DFS (after cycle 2, HR, 2.49 [95% CI, 1.40 to 4.40]; P = .002; after cycle 4, HR, 4.13 [95% CI, 1.82 to 9.38]; P = .001). In multivariable analysis, both IG/TR positivity after cycle 2 and initial WBC count >/=30 x 10(9)/L predicted poorer DFS, enabling to define a high-risk group having a 4-year DFS of 56.5% compared with 87.6% (HR, 3.72 [95% CI, 1.93 to 7.15]; P < .001). Moreover, allogeneic HSCT significantly improved DFS in the high-risk group (HR, 0.33 [95% CI, 0.18 to 0.60]; P < .001), whereas the standard-risk group had favorable outcomes regardless of allogeneic HSCT. CONCLUSION: Our findings challenge the significance of BCR::ABL1 monitoring in adult Ph+ ALL and demonstrate the prognostic role of IG/TR MRD. This study provides a framework for using MRD to guide treatment strategies in adults with Ph+ ALL.
Distinct diagnostic entities within BCR::ABL1-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are currently defined by the International Consensus Classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemias (ICC): "lymphoid only", with BCR::ABL1 observed exclusively in lymphatic precursors, vs "multilineage", where BCR::ABL1 is also present in other hematopoietic lineages. Here, we analyzed transcriptomes of 327 BCR::ABL1-positive patients with ALL (age, 2-84 years; median, 46 years) and identified 2 main gene expression clusters reproducible across 4 independent patient cohorts. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of fluorescence-activated cell-sorted hematopoietic compartments showed distinct BCR::ABL1 involvement in myeloid cells for these clusters (n = 18/18 vs n = 3/16 patients; P < .001), indicating that a multilineage or lymphoid BCR::ABL1 subtype can be inferred from gene expression. Further subclusters grouped samples according to cooperating genomic events (multilineage: HBS1L deletion or monosomy 7; lymphoid: IKZF1-/- or CDKN2A/PAX5 deletions/hyperdiploidy). A novel HSB1L transcript was highly specific for BCR::ABL1 multilineage cases independent of HBS1L genomic aberrations. Treatment on current German Multicenter Study Group for Adult ALL (GMALL) protocols resulted in comparable disease-free survival (DFS) for multilineage vs lymphoid cluster patients (3-year DFS: 70% vs 61%; P = .530; n = 91). However, the IKZF1-/- enriched lymphoid subcluster was associated with inferior DFS, whereas hyperdiploid cases showed a superior outcome. Thus, gene expression clusters define underlying developmental trajectories and distinct patterns of cooperating events in BCR::ABL1-positive ALL with prognostic relevance.
Secondary kinase domain mutations in BCR::ABL1 represent the most common cause of resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. The first 5 approved BCR::ABL1 TKIs target the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding pocket. Mutations confer resistance to these ATP-competitive TKIs and those approved for other malignancies by decreasing TKI affinity and/or increasing ATP affinity. Asciminib, the first highly active allosteric TKI approved for any malignancy, targets an allosteric regulatory pocket in the BCR::ABL1 kinase C-lobe. As a non-ATP-competitive inhibitor, the activity of asciminib is predicted to be impervious to increases in ATP affinity. Here, we report several known mutations that confer resistance to ATP-competitive TKIs in the BCR::ABL1 kinase N-lobe that are distant from the asciminib binding pocket yet unexpectedly confer in vitro resistance to asciminib. Among these is BCR::ABL1 M244V, which confers clinical resistance even to escalated asciminib doses. We demonstrate that BCR::ABL1 M244V does not impair asciminib binding, thereby invoking a novel mechanism of resistance. Molecular dynamic simulations of the M244V substitution implicate stabilization of an active kinase conformation through impact on the alpha-C helix as a mechanism of resistance. These N-lobe mutations may compromise the clinical activity of ongoing combination studies of asciminib with ATP-competitive TKIs.
BCR-ABL1 point mutation-mediated resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy in Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph(+)) leukemia is effectively managed with several approved drugs, including ponatinib for BCR-ABL1(T315I)-mutant disease. However, therapy options are limited for patients with leukemic clones bearing multiple BCR-ABL1 mutations. Asciminib, an allosteric inhibitor targeting the myristoyl-binding pocket of BCR-ABL1, is active against most single mutants but ineffective against all tested compound mutants. We demonstrate that combining asciminib with ATP site TKIs enhances target inhibition and suppression of resistant outgrowth in Ph(+) clinical isolates and cell lines. Inclusion of asciminib restores ponatinib's effectiveness against currently untreatable compound mutants at clinically achievable concentrations. Our findings support combining asciminib with ponatinib as a treatment strategy for this molecularly defined group of patients.
Philadelphia chromosome-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph-like ALL), or BCR-ABL1-like ALL, is a high-risk subtype of B-cell precursor ALL characterized by a gene expression profile similar to Ph-positive ALL, a high frequency of IKZF1 alterations, and poor outcome. The prevalence of Ph-like ALL is common among all ages, ranging from 10% to 15% in children to over 25% in young adults. Patients with Ph-like ALL harbor a diverse range of genetic alterations that activate cytokine receptor and kinase signaling and can be targeted with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The majority of Ph-like ALL alterations are divided into two main groups based on activation of ABL-class or JAK-STAT alterations. Accordingly, preclinical studies and anecdotal reports suggest patients harboring ABL-class fusions are candidates for ABL1-inhibitors, whilst alterations activating the JAK-STAT pathway may be amenable to treatment with JAK inhibitors. Diagnostic screening approaches and precision medicine trials are now being developed and implemented to test the efficacy of targeted therapy with a backbone of chemotherapy, similar to the treatment of Ph-positive ALL.
BCR-ABL1 is in the center of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) pathology, diagnosis and treatment, as confirmed by the success of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy. However, additional mechanisms and events, many of which function independently of BCR-ABL1, play important roles, particularly in terms of leukemic stem cell (LSC) persistence, primary and secondary resistance, and disease progression. Promising therapeutic approaches aim to disrupt pathways which mediate LSC survival during successful TKI treatment, in the hope of improving long-term treatment-free-remission and perhaps provide a functional cure for some patients. Over the years through advances in sequencing technology frequent molecular aberrations in addition to BCR-ABL1 have been identified not only in advanced disease but also in chronic phase CML, often affecting epigenetic regulators such as ASXL1, DNMT3A and TET2. Analyses of serial samples have revealed various patterns of clonal evolution with some mutations preceding the BCR-ABL1 acquisition. Such mutations can be considered to be important co-factors in the pathogenesis of CML and could potentially influence therapeutic strategies in the future.
The truncated chromosome 22 that results from the reciprocal translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11) is known as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is a hallmark of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). In leukemia cells, Ph not only impairs the physiological signaling pathways but also disrupts genomic stability. This aberrant fusion gene encodes the breakpoint cluster region-proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase (BCR-ABL1) oncogenic protein with persistently enhanced tyrosine kinase activity. The kinase activity is responsible for maintaining proliferation, inhibiting differentiation, and conferring resistance to cell death. During the progression of CML from the chronic phase to the accelerated phase and then to the blast phase, the expression patterns of different BCR-ABL1 transcripts vary. Each BCR-ABL1 transcript is present in a distinct leukemia phenotype, which predicts both response to therapy and clinical outcome. Besides CML, the Ph is found in acute lymphoblastic leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, and mixed-phenotype acute leukemia. Here, we provide an overview of the clinical presentation and cellular biology of different phenotypes of Ph-positive leukemia and highlight key findings regarding leukemogenesis.
BCR::ABL1-independent pathways contribute to primary resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and play a role in leukemic stem cell persistence. Here, we perform ex vivo drug screening of CML CD34(+) leukemic stem/progenitor cells using 100 single drugs and TKI-drug combinations and identify sensitivities to Wee1, MDM2, and BCL2 inhibitors. These agents effectively inhibit primitive CD34(+)CD38(-) CML cells and demonstrate potent synergies when combined with TKIs. Flow-cytometry-based drug screening identifies mepacrine to induce differentiation of CD34(+)CD38(-) cells. We employ genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening for six drugs, and mediator complex, apoptosis, and erythroid-lineage-related genes are identified as key resistance hits for TKIs, whereas the Wee1 inhibitor AZD1775 and mepacrine exhibit distinct resistance profiles. KCTD5, a consistent TKI-resistance-conferring gene, is found to mediate TKI-induced BCR::ABL1 ubiquitination. In summary, we delineate potential mechanisms for primary TKI resistance and non-BCR::ABL1-targeting drugs, offering insights for optimizing CML treatment.
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disorder arising in the haemopoietic stem cell (HSC) compartment. This disease is characterised by a reciprocal t(9;22) chromosomal translocation, resulting in the formation of the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome containing the BCR-ABL1 gene. As such, diagnosis and monitoring of disease involves detection of BCR-ABL1. It is the BCR-ABL1 protein, in particular its constitutively active tyrosine kinase activity, that forges the pathogenesis of CML. This aberrant kinase signalling activates downstream targets that reprogram the cell to cause uncontrolled proliferation and results in myeloid hyperplasia and 'indolent' symptoms of chronic phase (CP) CML. Without successful intervention, the disease will progress into blast crisis (BC), resembling an acute leukaemia. This advanced disease stage takes on an aggressive phenotype and is almost always fatal. The cell biology of CML is also centred on BCR-ABL1. The presence of BCR-ABL1 can explain virtually all the cellular features of the leukaemia (enhanced cell growth, inhibition of apoptosis, altered cell adhesion, growth factor independence, impaired genomic surveillance and differentiation). This article provides an overview of the clinical and cell biology of CML, and highlights key findings and unanswered questions essential for understanding this disease.
