Atypical chemokine receptor 3; Atypical chemokine receptor that controls chemokine levels and localization via high-affinity chemokine binding that is uncoupled from classic ligand-driven signal transduction cascades, resulting instead in chemokine sequestration, degradation, or transcytosis. Also known as interceptor (internalizing receptor) or chemokine-scavenging receptor or chemokine decoy receptor. Acts as a receptor for chemokines CXCL11 and CXCL12/SDF1. Chemokine binding does not activate G-protein- mediated signal transduction but instead induces beta-arrestin recruitment, lead [...] 
Chemokines are an indispensable component of our immune system through the regulation of directional migration and activation of leukocytes. CXCL8 is the most potent human neutrophil-attracting chemokine and plays crucial roles in the response to infection and tissue injury. CXCL8 activity inherently depends on interaction with the human CXC chemokine receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2, the atypical chemokine receptor ACKR1, and glycosaminoglycans. Furthermore, (hetero)dimerization and tight regulation of transcription and translation, as well as post-translational modifications further fine-tune the spatial and temporal activity of CXCL8 in the context of inflammatory diseases and cancer. The CXCL8 interaction with receptors and glycosaminoglycans is therefore a promising target for therapy, as illustrated by multiple ongoing clinical trials. CXCL8-mediated neutrophil mobilization to blood is directly opposed by CXCL12, which retains leukocytes in bone marrow. CXCL12 is primarily a homeostatic chemokine that induces migration and activation of hematopoietic progenitor cells, endothelial cells, and several leukocytes through interaction with CXCR4, ACKR1, and ACKR3. Thereby, it is an essential player in the regulation of embryogenesis, hematopoiesis, and angiogenesis. However, CXCL12 can also exert inflammatory functions, as illustrated by its pivotal role in a growing list of pathologies and its synergy with CXCL8 and other chemokines to induce leukocyte chemotaxis. Here, we review the plethora of information on the CXCL8 structure, interaction with receptors and glycosaminoglycans, different levels of activity regulation, role in homeostasis and disease, and therapeutic prospects. Finally, we discuss recent research on CXCL12 biochemistry and biology and its role in pathology and pharmacology.
The CXC chemokine CXCL12 is an important factor in physiological and pathological processes, including embryogenesis, hematopoiesis, angiogenesis and inflammation, because it activates and/or induces migration of hematopoietic progenitor and stem cells, endothelial cells and most leukocytes. Therefore, CXCL12 activity is tightly regulated at multiple levels. CXCL12 has the unique property of existing in six splice variants in humans, each having a specific tissue distribution and in vivo activity. Controlled splice variant transcription and mRNA stability determine the CXCL12 expression profile. CXCL12 fulfills its functions in homeostatic and pathological conditions by interacting with its receptors CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) and atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3) and by binding to glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) in tissues and on the endothelium to allow a proper presentation to passing leukocytes. Homodimerizaton and heterodimerization of CXCL12 and its receptors can alter their signaling activity, as exemplified by the synergy between CXCL12 and other chemokines in leukocyte migration assays. Receptor binding may also initiate CXCL12 internalization and its subsequent removal from the environment. Furthermore, CXCL12 activity is regulated by posttranslational modifications. Proteolytic removal of NH(2)- or COOH-terminal amino acids, citrullination of arginine residues by peptidyl arginine deiminases or nitration of tyrosine residues reduce CXCL12 activity. This review summarizes the interactions of CXCL12 with the cellular environment and discusses the different levels of CXCL12 activity regulation.
Cancer is a multi-step disease caused by the accumulation of genetic mutations and/or epigenetic changes, and is the biggest challenge around the world. Cytokines, including chemokines, exhibit expression changes and disorders in all human cancers. These cytokine abnormalities can disrupt homeostasis and immune function, and make outstanding contributions to various stages of cancer development such as invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis. Chemokines are a superfamily of small molecule chemoattractive cytokines that mediate a variety of cellular functions. Importantly, the interactions of chemokine members CXCL12 and its receptors CXCR4 and CXCR7 have a broad impact on tumor cell proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, metastasis, and tumor microenvironment, and thus participate in the onset and development of many cancers including leukemia, breast cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer and multiple myeloma. Therefore, this review aims to summarize the latest research progress and future challenges regarding the role of CXCL12-CXCR4/CXCR7 signaling axis in cancer, and highlights the potential of CXCL12-CXCR4/CXCR7 as a biomarker or therapeutic target for cancer, providing essential strategies for the development of novel targeted cancer therapies.
Single agent checkpoint inhibitor therapy has not been effective for most gastrointestinal solid tumors, but combination therapy with drugs targeting additional immunosuppressive pathways is being attempted. One such pathway, the CXCL12-CXCR4/CXCR7 chemokine axis, has attracted attention due to its effects on tumor cell survival and metastasis as well as immune cell migration. CXCL12 is a small protein that functions in normal hematopoietic stem cell homing in addition to repair of damaged tissue. Binding of CXCL12 to CXCR4 leads to activation of G protein signaling kinases such as P13K/mTOR and MEK/ERK while binding to CXCR7 leads to beta-arrestin mediated signaling. While some gastric and colorectal carcinoma cells have been shown to make CXCL12, the primary source in pancreatic cancer and peritoneal metastases is cancer-associated fibroblasts. Binding of CXCL12 to CXCR4 and CXCR7 on tumor cells leads to anti-apoptotic signaling through Bcl-2 and survivin upregulation, as well as promotion of the epithelial-to-mesechymal transition through the Rho-ROCK pathway and alterations in cell adhesion molecules. High levels of CXCL12 seen in the bone marrow, liver, and spleen could partially explain why these are popular sites of metastases for many tumors. CXCL12 is a chemoattractant for lymphocytes at lower levels, but becomes chemorepellant at higher levels; it is unclear exactly what gradient exists in the tumor microenvironment and how this influences tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. AMD3100 (Plerixafor or Mozobil) is a small molecule CXCR4 antagonist and is the most frequently used drug targeting the CXCL12-CXCR4/CXCR7 axis in clinical trials for gastrointestinal solid tumors currently. Other small molecules and monoclonal antibodies against CXCR4 are being trialed. Further understanding of the CXCL12- CXCR4/CXCR7 chemokine axis in the tumor microenvironment will allow more effective targeting of this pathway in combination immunotherapy.
Chemokines are chemotactic cytokines that promote cancer growth, metastasis, and regulate resistance to chemotherapy. Stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF1) also known as C-X-C motif chemokine 12 (CXCL12), a prognostic factor, is an extracellular homeostatic chemokine that is the natural ligand for chemokine receptors C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4), also known as fusin or cluster of differentiation 184 (CD184) and chemokine receptor type 7 (CXCR7). CXCR4 is the most widely expressed rhodopsin-like G protein coupled chemokine receptor (GPCR). The CXCL12-CXCR4 axis is involved in tumor growth, invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis in colorectal cancer (CRC). CXCR7, recently termed as atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3), is amongst the G protein coupled cell surface receptor family that is also commonly expressed in a large variety of cancer cells. CXCR7, like CXCR4, regulates immunity, angiogenesis, stem cell trafficking, cell growth and organ-specific metastases. CXCR4 and CXCR7 are expressed individually or together, depending on the tumor type. When expressed together, CXCR4 and CXCR7 can form homo- or hetero-dimers. Homo- and hetero-dimerization of CXCL12 and its receptors CXCR4 and CXCR7 alter their signaling activity. Only few drugs have been approved for clinical use targeting CXCL12-CXCR4/CXCR7 axis. Several CXCR4 inhibitors are in clinical trials for solid tumor treatment with limited success whereas CXCR7-specific inhibitors are still in preclinical studies for CRC. This review focuses on current knowledge of chemokine CXCL12 and its receptors CXCR4 and CXCR7, with emphasis on targeting the CXCL12-CXCR4/CXCR7 axis as a treatment strategy for CRC.
The reciprocal modulation between the CXCL12/CXCR4/ACKR3 axis and the STAT3 signaling pathway plays a crucial role in the progression of various diseases and neoplasms. Activation of the CXCL12/CXCR4/ACKR3 axis triggers the STAT3 pathway through multiple mechanisms, while the STAT3 pathway also regulates the expression of CXCL12. This review offers a thorough and systematic analysis of the reciprocal regulatory mechanisms between the CXCL12/CXCR4/ACKR3 signaling axis and the STAT3 signaling pathway in the context of diseases, particularly tumors. It explores the potential clinical applications in tumor treatment, highlighting possible therapeutic targets and novel strategies for targeted tumor therapy.
Chemokines are named and best known for their chemotactic cytokine activity in the hematopoietic system; however, their importance extends far beyond leukocytes, cell movement and immunoregulation. CXCL12, the most protean of chemokines, regulates development in multiple systems, including the hematopoietic, cardiovascular and nervous systems, and regulates diverse cell functions, including differentiation, distribution, activation, immune synapse formation, effector function, proliferation and survival in the immune system alone. The broad importance of CXCL12 is revealed by the complex lethal developmental phenotypes in mice lacking either Cxcl12 or either one of its two known 7-transmembrane domain receptors Cxcr4 and Ackr3, as well as by gain-of-function mutations in human CXCR4, which cause WHIM syndrome, a multisystem and combined immunodeficiency disease and the only Mendelian condition caused by a chemokine system mutation. In addition, wild type CXCR4 is important in the pathogenesis of HIV/AIDS and cancer. Thus, CXCL12 and its receptors CXCR4 and ACKR3 provide extraordinary examples of multisystem multitasking in the chemokine system in both health and disease.
BACKGROUND: The Hippo pathway is crucial in organ size control and tumorigenesis. Dysregulation of the Hippo/YAP axis is commonly observed in gastric cancer, while effective therapeutic targets for the Hippo/YAP axis are lacking. Identification of reliable drug targets and the underlying mechanisms that could inhibit the activity of the Hippo/YAP axis and gastric cancer progression is urgently needed. METHODS: We used several gastric cancer cell lines and xenograft models and performed immunoblotting, qPCR, and in vivo studies to investigate the function of CXCR7 in gastric cancer progression. RESULTS: In our current study, we demonstrate that the membrane receptor CXCR7 (C-X-C chemokine receptor 7) is an important modulator of the Hippo/YAP axis. The activation of CXCR7 could stimulate gastric cancer cell progression through the Hippo/YAP axis in vitro and in vivo, while pharmaceutical inhibition of CXCR7 via ACT-1004-1239 could block tumorigenesis in gastric cancer. Molecular studies revealed that the activation of CXCR7 could dephosphorylate YAP and facilitate YAP nuclear accumulation and transcriptional activation in gastric cancer. CXCR7 functions via G-protein Galpha(q/11) and Rho GTPase to activate YAP activity. Interestingly, ChIP assays showed that YAP could bind to the promoter region of CXCR7 and facilitate its gene transcription, which indicates that CXCR7 is both the upstream signalling and downstream target of the Hippo/YAP axis in gastric cancer. CONCLUSION: In general, we identified a novel positive feedback loop between CXCR7 and the Hippo/YAP axis, and blockade of CXCR7 could be a plausible strategy for gastric cancer.
The two G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) and atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3) are part of the class A chemokine GPCR family and represent important drug targets for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, cancer, and inflammation diseases. CXCR4 is one of only three chemokine receptors with a US Food and Drug Administration approved therapeutic agent, the small-molecule modulator AMD3100. In this review, known modulators of the two receptors are discussed in detail. Initially, the structural relationship between receptors and ligands is reviewed on the basis of common structural motifs and available crystal structures. To date, no atypical chemokine receptor has been crystallized, which makes ligand design and predictions for these receptors more difficult. Next, the selectivity, receptor activation, and the resulting ligand-induced signaling output of chemokines and other peptide ligands are reviewed. Binding of pepducins, a class of lipid-peptides whose basis is the internal loop of a GPCR, to CXCR4 is also discussed. Finally, small-molecule modulators of CXCR4 and ACKR3 are reviewed. These modulators have led to the development of radio- and fluorescently labeled tool compounds, enabling the visualization of ligand binding and receptor characterization both in vitro and in vivo. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: To investigate the pharmacological modulation of CXCR4 and ACKR3, significant effort has been focused on the discovery and development of a range of ligands, including small-molecule modulators, pepducins, and synthetic peptides. Imaging tools, such as fluorescent probes, also play a pivotal role in the field of drug discovery. This review aims to provide an overview of the aforementioned modulators that facilitate the study of CXCR4 and ACKR3 receptors.
Atypical Chemokine Receptor 3 (ACKR3) belongs to the G protein-coupled receptor family but it does not signal through G proteins. The structural properties that govern the functional selectivity and the conformational dynamics of ACKR3 activation are poorly understood. Here, we combined hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, site-directed mutagenesis, and molecular dynamics simulations to examine the binding mode and mechanism of action of ACKR3 ligands of different efficacies. Our results show that activation or inhibition of ACKR3 is governed by intracellular conformational changes of helix 6, intracellular loop 2, and helix 7, while the DRY motif becomes protected during both processes. Moreover, we identified the binding sites and the allosteric modulation of ACKR3 upon beta-arrestin 1 binding. In summary, this study highlights the structure-function relationship of small ligands, the binding mode of beta-arrestin 1, the activation dynamics, and the atypical dynamic features in ACKR3 that may contribute to its inability to activate G proteins.
The manifold actions of the pro-inflammatory and regenerative chemokine CXCL12/SDF-1alpha are executed through the canonical GProteinCoupledReceptor CXCR4, and the non-canonical ACKR3/CXCR7. Platelets express CXCR4, ACKR3/CXCR7, and are a vital source of CXCL12/SDF-1alpha themselves. In recent years, a regulatory impact of the CXCL12-CXCR4-CXCR7 axis on platelet biogenesis, i.e., megakaryopoiesis, thrombotic and thrombo-inflammatory actions have been revealed through experimental and clinical studies. Platelet surface expression of ACKR3/CXCR7 is significantly enhanced following myocardial infarction (MI) in acute coronary syndrome (ACS) patients, and is also associated with improved functional recovery and prognosis. The therapeutic implications of ACKR3/CXCR7 in myocardial regeneration and improved recovery following an ischemic episode, are well documented. Cardiomyocytes, cardiac-fibroblasts, endothelial lining of the blood vessels perfusing the heart, besides infiltrating platelets and monocytes, all express ACKR3/CXCR7. This review recapitulates ligand induced differential trafficking of platelet CXCR4-ACKR3/CXCR7 affecting their surface availability, and in regulating thrombo-inflammatory platelet functions and survival through CXCR4 or ACKR3/CXCR7. It emphasizes the pro-thrombotic influence of CXCL12/SDF-1alpha exerted through CXCR4, as opposed to the anti-thrombotic impact of ACKR3/CXCR7. Offering an innovative translational perspective, this review also discusses the advantages and challenges of utilizing ACKR3/CXCR7 as a potential anti-thrombotic strategy in platelet-associated cardiovascular disorders, particularly in coronary artery disease (CAD) patients post-MI.
Dysregulation of the chemokine system is implicated in a number of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, as well as cancer. Modulation of chemokine receptor function is a very promising approach for therapeutic intervention. Despite interest from academic groups and pharmaceutical companies, there are currently few approved medicines targeting chemokine receptors. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and antibody-based molecules have been successfully applied in the clinical therapy of cancer and represent a potential new class of therapeutics targeting chemokine receptors belonging to the class of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Besides conventional mAbs, single-domain antibodies and antibody scaffolds are also gaining attention as promising therapeutics. In this review, we provide an extensive overview of mAbs, single-domain antibodies, and other antibody fragments targeting CXCR4 and ACKR3, formerly referred to as CXCR7. We discuss their unique properties and advantages over small-molecule compounds, and also refer to the molecules in preclinical and clinical development. We focus on single-domain antibodies and scaffolds and their utilization in GPCR research. Additionally, structural analysis of antibody binding to CXCR4 is discussed. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Modulating the function of GPCRs, and particularly chemokine receptors, draws high interest. A comprehensive review is provided for monoclonal antibodies, antibody fragments, and variants directed at CXCR4 and ACKR3. Their advantageous functional properties, versatile applications as research tools, and use in the clinic are discussed.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are pivotal therapeutic targets, but their complex structure poses challenges for effective drug design. Nanobodies, or single-domain antibodies, have emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy to target GPCRs, offering advantages over traditional small molecules and antibodies. However, an incomplete understanding of the structural features enabling GPCR-nanobody interactions has limited their development. In this study, we investigate VUN701, a nanobody antagonist targeting the atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3). We determine that an extended CDR3 loop is required for ACKR3 binding. Uncommon in most nanobodies, an extended CDR3 is prevalent in GPCR-targeting nanobodies. Combining experimental and computational approaches, we map an inhibitory ACKR3-VUN701 interface and define a distinct conformational mechanism for GPCR inactivation. Our results provide insights into class A GPCR-nanobody selectivity and suggest a strategy for the development of these new therapeutic tools.
The C-X-C motif chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) and the atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3/CXCR7) are class A G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Accumulating evidence indicates that GPCR subcellular localization, trafficking, transduction properties, and ultimately their pathophysiological functions are regulated by both interacting proteins and post-translational modifications. This has encouraged the development of novel techniques to characterize the GPCR interactome and to identify residues subjected to post-translational modifications, with a special focus on phosphorylation. This review first describes state-of-the-art methods for the identification of GPCR-interacting proteins and GPCR phosphorylated sites. In addition, we provide an overview of the current knowledge of CXCR4 and ACKR3 post-translational modifications and an exhaustive list of previously identified CXCR4- or ACKR3-interacting proteins. We then describe studies highlighting the importance of the reciprocal influence of CXCR4/ACKR3 interactomes and phosphorylation states. We also discuss their impact on the functional status of each receptor. These studies suggest that deeper knowledge of the CXCR4/ACKR3 interactomes along with their phosphorylation and ubiquitination status would shed new light on their regulation and pathophysiological functions.
Next to its classical role in MHC II-mediated antigen presentation, CD74 was identified as a high-affinity receptor for macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), a pleiotropic cytokine and major determinant of various acute and chronic inflammatory conditions, cardiovascular diseases and cancer. Recent evidence suggests that CD74 is expressed in T cells, but the functional relevance of this observation is poorly understood. Here, we characterized the regulation of CD74 expression and that of the MIF chemokine receptors during activation of human CD4(+) T cells and studied links to MIF-induced T-cell migration, function, and COVID-19 disease stage. MIF receptor profiling of resting primary human CD4(+) T cells via flow cytometry revealed high surface expression of CXCR4, while CD74, CXCR2 and ACKR3/CXCR7 were not measurably expressed. However, CD4(+) T cells constitutively expressed CD74 intracellularly, which upon T-cell activation was significantly upregulated, post-translationally modified by chondroitin sulfate and could be detected on the cell surface, as determined by flow cytometry, Western blot, immunohistochemistry, and re-analysis of available RNA-sequencing and proteomic data sets. Applying 3D-matrix-based live cell-imaging and receptor pathway-specific inhibitors, we determined a causal involvement of CD74 and CXCR4 in MIF-induced CD4(+) T-cell migration. Mechanistically, proximity ligation assay visualized CD74/CXCR4 heterocomplexes on activated CD4(+) T cells, which were significantly diminished after MIF treatment, pointing towards a MIF-mediated internalization process. Lastly, in a cohort of 30 COVID-19 patients, CD74 surface expression was found to be significantly upregulated on CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in patients with severe compared to patients with only mild disease course. Together, our study characterizes the MIF receptor network in the course of T-cell activation and reveals CD74 as a novel functional MIF receptor and MHC II-independent activation marker of primary human CD4(+) T cells.
Atherosclerosis is one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity worldwide. Chemokines and their receptors are implicated in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. CXCL12 is a member of the chemokine family exerting a myriad role in atherosclerosis through its classical CXCR4 and atypical ACKR3 (CXCR7) receptors. The modulatory and regulatory functional spectrum of CXCL12/CXCR4/ACKR3 axis in atherosclerosis spans from proatherogenic, prothrombotic and proinflammatory to atheroprotective, plaque stabilizer and dyslipidemia rectifier. This diverse continuum is executed in a wide range of biological units including endothelial cells (ECs), progenitor cells, macrophages, monocytes, platelets, lymphocytes, neutrophils and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) through complex heterogeneous and homogenous coupling of CXCR4 and ACKR3 receptors, employing different downstream signalling pathways, which often cross-talk among themselves and with other signalling interactomes. Hence, a better understanding of this structural and functional heterogeneity and complex phenomenon involving CXCL12/CXCR4/ACKR3 axis in atherosclerosis would not only help in formulation of novel therapeutics, but also in elucidation of the CXCL12 ligand and its receptors, as possible diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers.Key messagesThe role of CXCL12 per se is proatherogenic in atherosclerosis development and progression.The CXCL12 receptors, CXCR4 and ACKR3 perform both proatherogenic and athero-protective functions in various cell typesDue to functional heterogeneity and cross talk of CXCR4 and ACKR3 at receptor level and downstream pathways, regional boosting with specific temporal and spatial modulators of CXCL12, CXCR4 and ACKR3 need to be explored.
Chemokines, and their receptors play a crucial role in the pathophysiology of cardiovascular diseases (CVD). Chemokines classically mediate their effects by binding to G-protein-coupled receptors. The discovery that chemokines can also bind to atypical chemokine receptors (ACKRs) and initiate alternative signaling pathways has changed the paradigm regarding chemokine-related functions. Among these ACKRs, several studies have highlighted the exclusive role of ACKR3, previously known as C-X-C chemokine receptor type 7 (CXCR7), in CVD. Indeed, ACKR3 exert atheroprotective, cardioprotective and anti-thrombotic effects through a wide range of cells including endothelial cells, platelets, inflammatory cells, fibroblasts, vascular smooth muscle cells and cardiomyocytes. ACKR3 functions as a scavenger receptor notably for the pleiotropic chemokine CXCL12, but also as a activator of different pathways such as beta-arrestin-mediated signaling or modulator of CXCR4 signaling through the formation of ACKR3-CXCR4 heterodimers. Hence, a better understanding of the precise roles of ACKR3 may pave the way towards the development of novel and improved therapeutic strategies for CVD. Here, we summarize the structural determinant characteristic of ACKR3, the molecules targeting this receptor and signaling pathways modulated by ACKR3. Finally, we present and discuss recent findings regarding the role of ACKR3 in CVD.
Recent reports regarding the significance of chemokine receptors in disease have put a spotlight on atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3). This atypical chemokine receptor is overexpressed in numerous cancer types and has been involved in the modulation of tumor cell proliferation and migration, tumor angiogenesis, or resistance to drugs, thus contributing to cancer progression and metastasis occurrence. Here, we focus on the clinical significance and potential mechanisms underlying the pathologic role of ACKR3 in breast, lung, and brain cancer and discuss its possible relevance as a prognostic factor and potential therapeutic target in these contexts.
The CXCL12 system is central to the development of many organs and is further crucially engaged in pathophysiological processes underlying cancer, inflammation, and cardiovascular disorders. This disease-associated role presently focuses major interest on the two CXCL12 receptors, CXCR4 and atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3)/CXCR7, as promising therapeutic targets. Major obstacles in these ongoing efforts are confusing reports on the differential use of either ACKR3/CXCR7 and/or CXCR4 across various cells as well as on the specific function(s) of ACKR3/CXCR7. Although basically no doubts remain that CXCR4 represents a classic chemokine receptor, functions assigned to ACKR3/CXCR7 range from those of a strictly silent scavenger receptor eventually modulating CXCR4 signaling to an active and independent signaling receptor. In this review, we depict a thorough analysis of our present knowledge on different modes of organization and functions of the cellular CXCL12 system. We further highlight the potential role of ACKR3/CXCR7 as a "crosslinker" of different receptor systems. Finally, we discuss mechanisms with the potency to impinge on the cellular organization of the CXCL12 system and hence might represent additional future therapeutic targets. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Delineating the recognized functions of atypical chemokine receptor 3 and CXCR4 in CXCL12 signaling is central to the more detailed understanding of the role of the CXCL12 system in health and disease and will help to guide future research efforts.
The anti-tumor activities of some members of the chemokine family are often overcome by the functions of many chemokines that are strongly and causatively linked with increased tumor progression. Being key leukocyte attractants, chemokines promote the presence of inflammatory pro-tumor myeloid cells and immune-suppressive cells in tumors and metastases. In parallel, chemokines elevate additional pro-cancerous processes that depend on cell motility: endothelial cell migration (angiogenesis), recruitment of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and site-specific metastasis. However, the array of chemokine activities in cancer expands beyond such "typical" migration-related processes and includes chemokine-induced/mediated atypical functions that do not activate directly motility processes; these non-conventional chemokine functions provide the tumor cells with new sets of detrimental tools. Within this scope, this review article addresses the roles of chemokines and their receptors at atypical levels that are exerted on the cancer cell themselves: promoting tumor cell proliferation and survival; controlling tumor cell senescence; enriching tumors with cancer stem cells; inducing metastasis-related functions such as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and elevated expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs); and promoting resistance to chemotherapy and to endocrine therapy. The review also describes atypical effects of chemokines at the tumor microenvironment: their ability to up-regulate/stabilize the expression of inhibitory immune checkpoints and to reduce the efficacy of their blockade; to induce bone remodeling and elevate osteoclastogenesis/bone resorption; and to mediate tumor-stromal interactions that promote cancer progression. To illustrate this expanding array of atypical chemokine activities at the cancer setting, the review focuses on major metastasis-promoting inflammatory chemokines-including CXCL8 (IL-8), CCL2 (MCP-1), and CCL5 (RANTES)-and their receptors. In addition, non-conventional activities of CXCL12 which is a key regulator of tumor progression, and its CXCR4 receptor are described, alongside with the other CXCL12-binding receptor CXCR7 (RDC1). CXCR7, a member of the subgroup of atypical chemokine receptors (ACKRs) known also as ACKR3, opens the gate for discussion of atypical activities of additional ACKRs in cancer: ACKR1 (DARC, Duffy), ACKR2 (D6), and ACKR4 (CCRL1). The mechanisms involved in chemokine activities and the signals delivered by their receptors are described, and the clinical implications of these findings are discussed.
