Adenylate cyclase type 2; Catalyzes the formation of the signaling molecule cAMP in response to G-protein signaling. Down-stream signaling cascades mediate changes in gene expression patterns and lead to increased IL6 production. Functions in signaling cascades downstream of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (By similarity). Belongs to the adenylyl cyclase class-4/guanylyl cyclase family.
Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are recognized as one of the commonest congenital heart diseases (CHD), accounting for up to 40% of all cardiac malformations, and occur as isolated CHDs as well as together with other cardiac and extracardiac congenital malformations in individual patients and families. The genetic etiology of VSD is complex and extraordinarily heterogeneous. Chromosomal abnormalities such as aneuploidy and structural variations as well as rare point mutations in various genes have been reported to be associated with this cardiac defect. This includes both well-defined syndromes with known genetic cause (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome and Holt-Oram syndrome) and so far undefined syndromic forms characterized by unspecific symptoms. Mutations in genes encoding cardiac transcription factors (e.g., NKX2-5 and GATA4) and signaling molecules (e.g., CFC1) have been most frequently found in VSD cases. Moreover, new high-resolution methods such as comparative genomic hybridization enabled the discovery of a high number of different copy number variations, leading to gain or loss of chromosomal regions often containing multiple genes, in patients with VSD. In this chapter, we will describe the broad genetic heterogeneity observed in VSD patients considering recent advances in this field.
The single nucleotide polymorphism rs13166360, causing a substitution of valine (Val) 147 to leucine (Leu) in the adenylyl cyclase 2 (ADCY2), has previously been associated with bipolar disorder (BD). Here we show that the disease-associated ADCY2 missense mutation diminishes the enzyme s capacity to generate the second messenger 3',5'-cylic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) by altering its subcellular localization. We established mice specifically carrying the Val to Leu substitution using CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing. Mice homozygous for the Leu variant display symptoms of a mania-like state accompanied by cognitive impairments. Mutant animals show additional characteristic signs of rodent mania models, i.e., they are hypersensitive to amphetamine, the observed mania-like behaviors are responsive to lithium treatment and the Val to Leu substitution results in a shifted excitatory/inhibitory synaptic balance towards more excitation. Exposure to chronic social defeat stress switches homozygous Leu variant carriers from a mania- to a depressive-like state, a transition which is reminiscent of the alternations characterizing the symptomatology in BD patients. Single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) revealed widespread Adcy2 mRNA expression in numerous hippocampal cell types. Differentially expressed genes particularly identified from glutamatergic CA1 neurons point towards ADCY2 variant-dependent alterations in multiple biological processes including cAMP-related signaling pathways. These results validate ADCY2 as a BD risk gene, provide insights into underlying disease mechanisms, and potentially open novel avenues for therapeutic intervention strategies.
Adenylyl cyclases (Adcys) catalyze the formation of cAMP, a secondary messenger essential for cell survival and neurotransmission pathways in the CNS. Adcy2, one of ten Adcy isoforms, is highly expressed in the CNS. Abnormal Adcy2 expression and mutations have been reported in various neurological disorders in both rodents and humans. However, due to the lack of genetic tools, loss-of-function studies of Adcy2 are scarce. In this review, we summarize recent findings on Adcy2 expression and function in neurological diseases. Specifically, we first introduce the biochemistry, structure, and function of Adcy2 briefly. Next, the expression and association of Adcy2 in human patients and rodent models of neurodegenerative diseases (Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease), psychiatric disorders (Tourette syndrome, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder), and other neurological conditions (stress-associated disorders, stroke, epilepsy, and Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome) are elaborated. Furthermore, we discuss the pros and cons of current studies as well as key questions that need to be answered in the future. We hope to provide a focused review on Adcy2 that promotes future research in the field.
OBJECTIVE: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) poses a serious threat to human health. ADCY2 gene polymorphisms may be related to HCC susceptibility. Therefore, we investigated whether ADCY2 gene polymorphisms are correlated to the risk of HCC in a Chinese Han population. METHODS: In a case-control study, we examined the associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ADCY2 and HCC risk. In 434 HCC cases and 442 healthy controls, we used the Agena MassARRAY platform to select and genotype four tag SNPs in ADCY2. We used logistic regression after adjusting for age and sex to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RESULTS: The results showed that ADCY2 rs10059539 polymorphism was associated with a reduced susceptibility to HCC in women under the dominant model (TC/TT vs. CC; OR = 0.32; 95% CI = 0.13-0.83; P = 0.018) and the log-additive model (OR = 0.32; 95% CI = 0.13-0.83; P = 0.018). CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the hypothesis that ADCY2 gene polymorphisms influence the genetic susceptibility to HCC.
Though uncommon in melanoma, gene fusions may have therapeutic implications. Next generation sequencing-based clinical assays, designed to detect relevant gene fusions, mutations, and copy number changes, were performed on 750 melanomas (375 primary and 375 metastases) at our institution from 2014-2021. These included 599 (80%) cutaneous, 38 (5%) acral, 11 (1.5%) anorectal, 23 (3%) sinonasal, 27 (3.6%) eye (uveal/ conjunctiva), 11 (1.5%) genital (vulva/penile), and 41 (5.5%) melanomas of unknown primary. Sixteen fusions (2%) were detected in samples from 16 patients: 12/599 (2%) cutaneous, 2/38 (5%) acral, 1/9 (11%) vulva, 1/23(4.3%) sinonasal; and 12/16 (75%) fusions were potentially targetable. We identified two novel rearrangements: NAGS::MAST2 and NOTCH1::GNB1; and two fusions that have been reported in other malignancies but not in melanoma: CANT1::ETV4 (prostate cancer) and CCDC6::RET (thyroid cancer). Additional fusions, previously reported in melanoma, included: EML4::ALK, MLPH::ALK, AGAP3::BRAF, AGK::BRAF, CDH3::BRAF, CCT8::BRAF, DIP2B::BRAF, EFNB1::RAF1, LRCH3::RAF1, MAP4::RAF1, RUFY1::RAF1, and ADCY2::TERT. Fusion positive melanomas harbored recurrent alterations in TERT and CDKN2A, among others. Gene fusions were exceedingly rare (0.2%) in BRAF/RAS/NF1-mutant tumors and were detected in 5.6% of triple wild-type melanomas. Interestingly, gene rearrangements were significantly enriched within the subset of triple wild-type melanomas that harbor TERT promoter mutations (18% versus 2%, p < 0.0001). Thirteen (81%) patients were treated with immunotherapy for metastatic disease or in the adjuvant setting. Six of 12 (50%) patients with potentially actionable fusions progressed on immunotherapy, and 3/6 (50%) were treated with targeted agents (ALK and MEK inhibitors), 2 off-label and 1 as part of a clinical trial. One patient with an AGAP3::BRAF fusion positive melanoma experienced a 30-month long response to trametinib. We show that, detecting fusions, especially in triple wild-type melanomas with TERT promoter mutations, may have a clinically significant impact in patients with advanced disease who have failed front-line immunotherapy.
Adenylyl cyclase 2 (ADCY2), a class B member of adenylyl cyclases, is important in accelerating phosphor-acidification as well as glycogen synthesis and breakdown. Given its distinct role in flesh tenderization after butchering, we cloned and sequenced the ADCY2 gene from Yanbian cattle and assessed its expression in bovine tissues. A 2947 bp nucleotide sequence representing the full-length cDNA of bovine ADCY2 gene was obtained by 5' and 3' remote analysis computations for gene expression. Analyses of the putative protein sequence showed that ADCY2 had high homology among species, except with the non-mammal Oreochromis niloticus. Gene structural domain analyses in humans and rats indicated that the ADCY2 protein had no flaw; only the transmembrane domain was reduced and the CYCc structure domain was shortened. Assessment of ADCY2 expression in bovine tissues by real-time PCR showed that the highest expression was in the testes, followed by the longissimus dorsi, tensor fasciae latae, and latissimus dorsi. These data will serve as a foundation for further insight into the cattle ADCY2 gene.
Circular RNAs (circRNAs), a type of endogenous noncoding RNA (ncRNA), exert vital roles in leukemia progression and are promising prognostic factors. Here, we report a novel circRNA, circSLC25A13 (hsa_circ_0081188), which was increased in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients with poor overall survival (OS) comparing to patients with good prognosis. Knockdown of circSLC25A13 in AML cells inhibited proliferation and increased cell apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Enhanced circSLC25A13 expression promoted the survival of AML cells. Mechanistically, circSLC25A13 played as a microRNA sponge of miR-616-3p, which inhibited the expression of adenylate cyclase 2 (ADCY2). Downregulation of miR-616-3p and overexpression of ADCY2 partially rescued circSLC25A13 deficient induced cell growth arrest. In summary, through competitive absorption of miR-616-3p and thereby upregulating ADCY2 expression, circSLC25A13 promoted AML progression. Moreover, circSLC25A13 may represent a potential novel biomarker for the prognosis of AML and offer a potential therapeutic target for AML treatment.
OBJECTIVES: To systematically review findings of GWAS in schizophrenia (SZ) and in bipolar disorder (BD); and to interpret findings, with a focus on identifying independent replications. METHOD: PubMed search, selection and review of all independent GWAS in SZ or BD, published since March 2011, i.e. studies using non-overlapping samples within each article, between articles, and with those of the previous review (Li et al., 2012). RESULTS: From the 22 GWAS included in this review, the genetic associations surviving standard GWAS-significance were for genetic markers in the regions of ACSL3/KCNE4, ADCY2, AMBRA1, ANK3, BRP44, DTL, FBLN1, HHAT, INTS7, LOC392301, LOC645434/NMBR, LOC729457, LRRFIP1, LSM1, MDM1, MHC, MIR2113/POU3F2, NDST3, NKAPL, ODZ4, PGBD1, RENBP, TRANK1, TSPAN18, TWIST2, UGT1A1/HJURP, WHSC1L1/FGFR1 and ZKSCAN4. All genes implicated across both reviews are discussed in terms of their function and implication in neuropsychiatry. CONCLUSION: Taking all GWAS to date into account, AMBRA1, ANK3, ARNTL, CDH13, EFHD1 (albeit with different alleles), MHC, PLXNA2 and UGT1A1 have been implicated in either disorder in at least two reportedly non-overlapping samples. Additionally, evidence for a SZ/BD common genetic basis is most strongly supported by the implication of ANK3, NDST3, and PLXNA2.
OBJECTIVE: Free fatty acid receptor 1 (FFAR1) is highly expressed in enteroendocrine cells of the small intestine and pancreatic beta cells, where FFAR1 agonists function as GLP-1 and insulin secretagogues, respectively. Most efficacious are so-called second-generation synthetic agonists such as AM5262, which, in contrast to endogenous long-chain fatty acids are able to signal through both IP(3)/Ca(2+) and cAMP pathways. Whereas IP(3) signaling is to be expected for the mainly Gq-coupled FFAR1, the mechanism behind FFAR1-induced cAMP accumulation remains unclear, although originally proposed to be Gs mediated. METHODS AND RESULTS: When stimulated with AM5262, we observe that FFAR1 can activate the majority of the Galpha proteins, except - surprisingly - members of the Gs family. AM5262-induced FFAR1-mediated transcriptional activation through cAMP response element (CREB) was blocked by the specific Gq inhibitor, YM253890. Furthermore, in Gq-deficient cells no CREB signal was observed unless Gq or G11 was reintroduced by transfection. By qPCR we determined that adenylate cyclase 2 (Adcy2) was highly expressed and enriched relative to the nine other Adcys in pro-glucagon expressing enteroendocrine cells. Co-transfection with ADCY2 increased the FFAR1-induced cAMP response 4-5-fold in WT HEK293 cells, an effect fully inhibited by YM253890. Moreover, co-transfection with ADCY2 had no effect in Gq-deficient cells without reintroduction of either Gq or G11. Importantly, although both AM5262/FFAR1 and isoproterenol/beta2 adrenergic receptor (beta2AR) induced cAMP production was lost in Gs-deficient cells, only the beta2AR response was rescued by Gs transfection, whereas co-transfection with ADCY2 was required to rescue the FFAR1 cAMP response. In situ hybridization demonstrated a high degree of co-expression of ADCY2 and FFAR1 in enteroendocrine cells throughout the intestine. Finally, in the enteroendocrine STC-1 and GLUTag cell lines AM5262-induced cAMP accumulation and GLP-1 secretion were both blocked by YM253890. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that Gq signaling is responsible not only for the IP(3)/Ca(2+) but also the cAMP response, which together are required for the highly efficacious hormone secretion induced by second-generation FFAR1 agonists - and that ADCY2 presumably mediates the Gq-driven cAMP response.
High rates of mortality due to both suicide and medical comorbidities in bipolar patients can be decreased through the administration of lithium, which affects the cerebral endothelium as well as neurons. To investigate the role of ADCY2 in risk of bipolar disorder, we genotyped the ADCY2 rs2290910 in bipolar patients and healthy controls using amplification refractory mutation system PCR. This polymorphism was associated with risk of bipolar disorder (odds ratio [OR]: 0.430; 95% CI: 0.296-0.624; p = 0.001). The C allele was more frequent in suicide ideation group compared other groups (OR: 2.7; 95% CI: 1.386-5.302; p = 0.004). The T allele was more frequent in suicide attempt group compared with suicide ideation group (OR: 0.238; 95% CI: 0.111-0.509; p = 0.001).
We examined the association between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and/or lung function with COPD and COPD-related phenotypes in a novel cohort of patients with severe to very severe COPD. We examined 315 cases of COPD and 330 Caucasian control smokers from Poland. We included three SNPs previously associated with COPD: rs7671167 (FAM13A), rs13180 (IREB2), and rs8034191 (CHRNA 3/5), and four SNPs associated with lung function in a genome-wide association study of general population samples: rs2070600 (AGER), rs11134242 (ADCY2), rs4316710 (THSD4), and rs17096090 (INTS12). We tested for associations with severe COPD and COPD-related phenotypes, including lung function, smoking behavior, and body mass index. Subjects with COPD were older (average age 62 versus 58 years, P < 0.01), with more pack-years of smoking (45 versus 33 pack-years, P < 0.01). CHRNA3/5 (odds ratio [OR], 1.89; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.5-2.4; P = 7.4 x 10(-7)), IREB2 (OR, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.5-0.9; P = 3.4 x 10(-3)), and ADCY2 (OR, 1.35; 95% CI, 1.1-1.7; P = 0.01) demonstrated significant associations with COPD. FAM13A (OR, 0.8; 95% CI, 0.7-1.0; P = 0.11) approached statistical significance. FAM13A and ADCY2 also demonstrated a significant association with lung function. Thus, in severe to very severe COPD, we demonstrate a replication of association between two SNPs previously associated with COPD (CHRNA3/5 and IREB2), as well as an association with COPD of one locus initially associated with lung function (ADCY2).
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) shows genetic predisposition, and large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are emerging, based on heterogeneous disease definitions. We investigated the genetic architecture of IBS defined according to gold standard Rome Criteria. METHODS: We conducted GWAS meta-analyses of Rome III IBS and its subtypes in 24,735 IBS cases and 77,149 asymptomatic control subjects from 2 independent European cohorts (UK Biobank and Lifelines). Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based heritability (h(2)(SNP)) and genetic correlations (r(g)) with other traits were calculated. IBS risk loci were functionally annotated to identify candidate genes. Sensitivity and conditional analyses were conducted to assess impact of confounders. Polygenic risk scores were computed and tested in independent datasets. RESULTS: Rome III IBS showed significant SNP-heritability (up to 13%) and similar genetic architecture across subtypes, including those with manifestations at the opposite ends of the symptom spectrum (r(g) = 0.48 between IBS-D and IBS-C). Genetic correlations with other traits highlighted commonalities with family history of heart disease and hypertension, coronary artery disease, and angina pectoris (r(g) = 0.20-0.45), among others. Four independent GWAS signals (P < 5x10(-8)) were detected, including 2 novel loci for IBS (rs2035380) and IBS-mixed (rs2048419) that had been previously associated with hypertension and coronary artery disease. Functional annotation of GWAS risk loci revealed genes implicated in circadian rhythm (BMAL1), intestinal barrier (CLDN23), immunomodulation (MFHAS1), and the cyclic adenosine monophosphate pathway (ADCY2). Polygenic risk scores allowed the identification of individuals at increased risk of IBS (odds ratio, 1.34; P = 1.1x10(-3)). CONCLUSIONS: Rome III Criteria capture higher SNP-heritability than previously estimated for IBS. The identified link between IBS and cardiovascular traits may contribute to the delineation of alternative therapeutic strategies, warranting further investigation.
Oral cancer (OC) ranked as eleventh malignancy worldwide, with the increasing incidence among young patients. Limited understanding of complications in cancer progression, its development system, and their interactions are major restrictions towards the progress of optimal and effective treatment strategies. The system-level approach has been designed to explore genetic complexity of the disease and to identify novel oral cancer related genes to detect genomic alterations at molecular level, through cDNA differential analysis. We analyzed 21 oral cancer-related cDNA datasets and listed 30 differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Among 30, we found 6 significant DEGs including CYP1A1, CYP1B1, ADCY2, C7, SERPINB5, and ANAPC13 and studied their functional role in OC. Our genomic and interactive analysis showed significant enrichment of xenobiotics metabolism, p53 signaling pathway and microRNA pathways, towards OC progression and development. We used human proteomic data for post-translational modifications to interpret disease mutations and inter-individual genetic variations. The mutational analysis revealed the sequence predicted disordered region of 14%, 12.5%, 10.5% for ADCY2, CYP1B1, and C7 respectively. The MiRNA target prediction showed functional molecular annotation including specific miRNA-targets hsa-miR-4282, hsa-miR-2052, hsa-miR-216a-3p, for CYP1B1, C7, and ADCY2 respectively associated with oral cancer. We constructed the system level network and found important gene signatures. The drug-gene interaction of OC source genes with seven FDA approved OC drugs help to design or identify new drug target or establishing novel biomedical linkages regarding disease pathophysiology. This investigation demonstrates the importance of system genetics for identifying 6 OC genes (CYP1A1, CYP1B1, ADCY2, C7, SERPINB5, and ANAPC13) as potential drugs targets. Our integrative network-based system-level approach would help to find the genetic variants of OC that can accelerate drug discovery outcomes to develop a better understanding regarding treatment strategies for many cancer types.
Essentials Knowledge of genetic regulators of plasma factor VII activating protease (FSAP) levels is limited. We performed a genome-wide analysis of variants influencing FSAP activity in Scandinavian cohorts. We replicated an association for Marburg-1 and identified an association for a HABP2 stop variant. We identified a novel locus near ADCY2 as a potential additional regulator of FSAP activity. SUMMARY: Background Factor VII-activating protease (FSAP) has roles in both coagulation and fibrinolysis. Recent data indicate its involvement in several other processes, such as vascular remodeling and inflammation. Plasma FSAP activity is highly variable among healthy individuals and, apart from the low-frequency missense variant Marburg-I (rs7080536) in the FSAP-encoding gene HABP2, determinants of this variation are unclear. Objectives To identify novel genetic variants within and outside of the HABP2 locus that influence circulating FSAP activity. Patients/Methods We performed an exploratory genome-wide association study (GWAS) on plasma FSAP activity amongst 3230 Swedish subjects. Directly genotyped rare variants were also analyzed with gene-based tests. Using GWAS, we confirmed the strong association between the Marburg-I variant and FSAP activity. HABP2 was also significant in the gene-based analysis, and remained significant after exclusion of Marburg-I carriers. This was attributable to a rare HABP2 stop variant (rs41292628). Carriers of this stop variant showed a similar reduction in FSAP activity as Marburg-I carriers, and this finding was replicated. A secondary genome-wide significant locus was identified at a 5p15 locus (rs35510613), and this finding requires future replication. This common variant is located upstream of ADCY2, which encodes a protein catalyzing the formation of cAMP. Results and Conclusions This study verified the Marburg-I variant to be a strong regulator of FSAP activity, and identified an HABP2 stop variant with a similar impact on FSAP activity. A novel locus near ADCY2 was identified as a potential additional regulator of FSAP activity.
Bipolar disorder (BD) is a common and highly heritable mental illness and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have robustly identified the first common genetic variants involved in disease aetiology. The data also provide strong evidence for the presence of multiple additional risk loci, each contributing a relatively small effect to BD susceptibility. Large samples are necessary to detect these risk loci. Here we present results from the largest BD GWAS to date by investigating 2.3 million single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a sample of 24,025 patients and controls. We detect 56 genome-wide significant SNPs in five chromosomal regions including previously reported risk loci ANK3, ODZ4 and TRANK1, as well as the risk locus ADCY2 (5p15.31) and a region between MIR2113 and POU3F2 (6q16.1). ADCY2 is a key enzyme in cAMP signalling and our finding provides new insights into the biological mechanisms involved in the development of BD.
BACKGROUND: Recently, ADCY9 has been found to be highly expressed in colon cancer, and high ADCY9 expressionis a poor prognostic factor of colon cancer. However, no study has reported on the relationship between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of ADCY9 and colorectal cancer risk in the Chinese Han population. METHODS: To evaluate the association between four ADCY9 SNPs and colorectal cancer risk, we performed a case-control study including 511 colorectal cancer patients and 511 healthy controls. SNPs were genotyped using the Agena MassARRAY platform (Agena Bioscience, San Diego, CA, USA). The distributions of alleles and genotypes frequencies between the case and control groups were compared using chi-squared. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated by logistic regression adjusted for age and gender to assess the association between SNPs and colorectal cancer risk. RESULTS: The overall analysis found that rs2230742 was associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer (AA versus GG: OR = 3.54, 95% CI = 1.16-10.86, p = 0.027; recessive model: OR = 3.55, 95% CI = 1.16-10.85, p = 0.027). Stratification analysis showed that rs2230742 was associated with an increased rectal cancer risk; rs11076810 was associated with a reduced colorectal cancer risk for age > 59 years. No association was observed between other two SNPs and colorectal cancer risk. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that ADCY9 polymorphisms (rs2230742 and rs11076810) have an effect on colorectal cancer risk in the Chinese Han population. Future association and functional studies are required to confirm our findings and explore the mechanism of ADCY2 in colorectal cancer.
Bipolar disorder (BPD) is genetically heterogeneous with a growing list of BPD associated genes reported in recent years resulting from increased genetic testing using advanced genetic technology, expanded genomic databases, and better awareness of the disorder. We compiled a master list of recognized susceptibility and genes associated with BPD identified from peer-reviewed medical literature sources using PubMed and by searching online databases, such as OMIM. Searched keywords were related to bipolar disorder and genetics. Our compiled list consisted of 290 genes with gene names arranged in alphabetical order in tabular form with source documents and their chromosome location and gene symbols plotted on high-resolution human chromosome ideograms. The identified genes impacted a broad range of biological pathways and processes including cellular signaling pathways particularly cAMP and calcium (e.g., CACNA1C, CAMK2A, CAMK2D, ADCY1, ADCY2); glutamatergic (e.g., GRIK1, GRM3, GRM7), dopaminergic (e.g., DRD2, DRD4, COMT, MAOA) and serotonergic (e.g., HTR1A, HTR2A, HTR3B) neurotransmission; molecular transporters (e.g., SLC39A3, SLC6A3, SLC8A1); and neuronal growth (e.g., BDNF, IGFBP1, NRG1, NRG3). The increasing prevalence of BPD calls for better understanding of the genetic etiology of this disorder and associations between the observed BPD phenotype and genes. Visual representation of genes for bipolar disorder becomes a tool enabling clinical and laboratory geneticists, genetic counselors, and other health care providers and researchers easy access to the location and distribution of currently recognized BPD associated genes. Our study may also help inform diagnosis and advance treatment developments for those affected with this disorder and improve genetic counseling for families.
RATIONALE: The evidence supporting an association between traffic-related air pollution exposure and incident childhood asthma is inconsistent and may depend on genetic factors. OBJECTIVES: To identify gene-environment interaction effects on childhood asthma using genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data and air pollution exposure. Identified loci were further analyzed at epigenetic and transcriptomic levels. METHODS: We used land use regression models to estimate individual air pollution exposure (represented by outdoor NO(2) levels) at the birth address and performed a genome-wide interaction study for doctors' diagnoses of asthma up to 8 years in three European birth cohorts (n = 1,534) with look-up for interaction in two separate North American cohorts, CHS (Children's Health Study) and CAPPS/SAGE (Canadian Asthma Primary Prevention Study/Study of Asthma, Genetics and Environment) (n = 1,602 and 186 subjects, respectively). We assessed expression quantitative trait locus effects in human lung specimens and blood, as well as associations among air pollution exposure, methylation, and transcriptomic patterns. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In the European cohorts, 186 SNPs had an interaction P < 1 x 10(-4) and a look-up evaluation of these disclosed 8 SNPs in 4 loci, with an interaction P < 0.05 in the large CHS study, but not in CAPPS/SAGE. Three SNPs within adenylate cyclase 2 (ADCY2) showed the same direction of the interaction effect and were found to influence ADCY2 gene expression in peripheral blood (P = 4.50 x 10(-4)). One other SNP with P < 0.05 for interaction in CHS, rs686237, strongly influenced UDP-Gal:betaGlcNAc beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase, polypeptide 5 (B4GALT5) expression in lung tissue (P = 1.18 x 10(-17)). Air pollution exposure was associated with differential discs, large homolog 2 (DLG2) methylation and expression. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicated that gene-environment interactions are important for asthma development and provided supportive evidence for interaction with air pollution for ADCY2, B4GALT5, and DLG2.
To identify genes involving in the pathogenesis of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). In this study, the comprehensive analysis of GSE8157 was downloaded. Overlapping genes of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, and enrichment analysis for these genes was performed. A modular network of differentially expressed genes was constructed by weighted gene co-expression network analyses (WGCNA), and a total of 322 differentially expressed genes in 5 stable modules were screened. The correlations of genes of the stable modules in BioGRID 3.4, STRING 10.5, HPRD9 databases were screened, and the interaction network of 104 DEGs was constructed. In addition, some genes and the key words were searched in CTD. A total of 596 differentially expressed genes were screened, including 379 genes that were up-regulated in case group and down-regulated in control group and treat group, and 217 genes that were down-regulated in case group and up-regulated in control group and treat group. The differentially expressed genes were enriched in PPAR signaling pathway, Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, cAMP signaling pathway, of which pathways were involved in the cancer development. Finally, 7 important target genes were identified, such as APOC3 was interacted with pioglitazone, ADCY2 involved in cAMP signaling pathway, and the genes (C3AR1, HRH2, GRIA1, MLNR and TAAR2) involved in neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. In addition, the important target genes were significantly differential expression. These results implied that the 7 important target genes were played an important role in the development and progression of PCOS. Our study implied that genes had played a key role in the development and progression of PCOS, the results showed that microarray can be use as a method for the discovery of new biomarkers and therapeutic targets for PCOS.
BACKGROUND: Congenital heart disease (CHD) occurs in almost 1% of newborn children and is considered a multifactorial disorder. CHD may segregate in families due to significant contribution of genetic factors in the disease etiology. The aim of the study was to identify pathophysiological mechanisms in families segregating CHD. METHODS: We used whole exome sequencing to identify rare genetic variants in ninety consenting participants from 32 Danish families with recurrent CHD. We applied a systems biology approach to identify developmental mechanisms influenced by accumulation of rare variants. We used an independent cohort of 714 CHD cases and 4922 controls for replication and performed functional investigations using zebrafish as in vivo model. RESULTS: We identified 1785 genes, in which rare alleles were shared between affected individuals within a family. These genes were enriched for known cardiac developmental genes, and 218 of these genes were mutated in more than one family. Our analysis revealed a functional cluster, enriched for proteins with a known participation in calcium signaling. Replication in an independent cohort confirmed increased mutation burden of calcium-signaling genes in CHD patients. Functional investigation of zebrafish orthologues of ITPR1, PLCB2, and ADCY2 verified a role in cardiac development and suggests a combinatorial effect of inactivation of these genes. CONCLUSIONS: The study identifies abnormal calcium signaling as a novel pathophysiological mechanism in human CHD and confirms the complex genetic architecture underlying CHD.
