Adenylate cyclase type 7; Catalyzes the formation of cAMP in response to activation of G protein-coupled receptors (Probable). Functions in signaling cascades activated namely by thrombin and sphingosine 1-phosphate and mediates regulation of cAMP synthesis through synergistic action of the stimulatory G alpha protein with GNA13. Also, during inflammation, mediates zymosan-induced increase intracellular cAMP, leading to protein kinase A pathway activation in order to modulate innate immune responses through heterotrimeric G proteins G(12/13) (By similarity). Functions in signaling casc [...] 
BACKGROUND: The potency of T cell-mediated responses is a determinant of immunotherapy effectiveness in treating malignancies; however, the clinical efficacy of T-cell therapies has been limited in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) owing to the extensive immunosuppressive microenvironment. OBJECTIVE: Here, we aimed to investigate the key genes contributing to immune escape in HCC and raise a new therapeutic strategy for remoulding the HCC microenvironment. DESIGN: The genome-wide in vivo clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) screen library was conducted to identify the key genes associated with immune tolerance. Single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq), flow cytometry, HCC mouse models, chromatin immunoprecipitation and coimmunoprecipitation were used to explore the function and mechanism of adenylate cyclase 7 (ADCY7) in HCC immune surveillance. RESULTS: Here, a genome-wide in vivo CRISPR screen identified a novel immune modulator-ADCY7. The transmembrane protein ADCY7 undergoes subcellular translocation via caveolae-mediated endocytosis and then translocates to the nucleus with the help of leucine-rich repeat-containing protein 59 (LRRC59) and karyopherin subunit beta 1 (KPNB1). In the nucleus, it functions as a transcription cofactor of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (CEBPA) to induce CCL5 transcription, thereby increasing CD8(+) T cell infiltration to restrain HCC progression. Furthermore, ADCY7 can be secreted as exosomes and enter neighbouring tumour cells to promote CCL5 induction. Exosomes with high ADCY7 levels promote intratumoural infiltration of CD8(+) T cells and suppress HCC tumour growth. CONCLUSION: We delineate the unconventional function and subcellular location of ADCY7, highlighting its pivotal role in T cell-mediated immunity in HCC and its potential as a promising treatment target.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a highly heterogeneous and genetically complex endocrine disorder. Although the etiology remains mostly elusive, growing evidence suggests that abnormal changes of DNA methylation correlate well with systemic and tissue-specific dysfunctions in PCOS. Herein, a dehydroepiandrosterone-induced PCOS-like mouse model which has a similar metabolic and reproductive phenotype as human patients with PCOS was generated. It was used to experimentally validate the potential role of aberrant DNA methylation in PCOS in this study. Integrated DNA methylation and transcriptome analysis revealed the potential role of genomic DNA hypomethylation in transcription regulation of PCOS and identified several key candidate genes, including BMP4, Adcy7, Tnfaip3, and Fas, which were regulated by aberrant DNA hypomethylation. Moreover, i.p. injection of S-adenosylmethionine increased the overall DNA methylation level of PCOS-like mice and restored expression of the candidate genes to similar levels as the control, alleviating reproductive and metabolic abnormalities in PCOS-like mice. These findings provide direct evidence showing the importance of normal DNA methylation in epigenetic regulation of PCOS and potential targets for diagnosis and treatment of the disease.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common adult acute leukemia. Despite treatment, the majority of the AML patients relapse within 5 years. In silico analysis of several available databases of AML patients showed that the expression of adenylate cyclase 7 (ADCY7) significantly inversely correlates with the overall survival of AML patients. To determine whether ADCY7 supports AML development, we employed an shRNA-encoding lentivirus system to inhibit adcy7 expression in human AML cells including U937, MV4-11, and THP-1 cells. The ADCY7 deficiency resulted in decreased cell growth, elevated apoptosis, and lower c-Myc expression of these leukemia cells. This indicates that G protein-coupled receptor signaling contributes to AML pathogenesis. Our study suggests that inhibition of ADCY7 may be novel strategy for treating leukemia.
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is the second most common skin malignant tumor with 25-50% of 5-year survival. There exist urgent needs for the identification of novel biomarkers for the diagnostic and therapeutic strategies of cSCC. The differentially expressed circRNAs in cSCC tissues and non-lesional skin tissues were obtained through analyzing the circular RNAs (circRNAs) microarray dataset GSE74758. The expression pattern of the indicated circRNAs in cSCC tissues was confirmed by qRT-PCR. FISH analysis was used to detect the location of hsa_circ_0008234 in cells. RIP experiment was used to detect the interaction between hsa_circ_0008234 and miR-127-5p. CCK-8 analysis and colony formation assay were used to detect the proliferation of cSCC cells. qRT-PCR and western blot were adopted to detect the expression of ACDY7. Three differential expressed circRNAs were obtained from the microarray data (GSE74758), and hsa_circ_0008234 was confirmed to be highly expressed in cSCC tissues by qRT-PCR. Hsa_circ_0008234 was mainly located in cytoplasm and stable in cSCC cells. RIP experiment revealed that hsa_circ_0008234 directly interacts with miR-127-5p in cSCC cells. Hsa_circ_0008234 increased the cell viability and colony formation of cSCC cells through acting as the sponge of miR-127-5p. MiR-127-5p inhibited the expression of ADCY7 in cSCC cells through binding the 3'UTR of ADCY7. Hsa_circ_0008234 was positively associated with ADCY7 expression in cSCC tissues. Hsa_circ_0008234 facilitates the proliferation of cSCC through targeting miR-127-5p to regulate ADCY7 expression and has the potential to be a novel therapeutic target for cSCC.
Complex diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which consists of ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, are a significant medical burden-70 000 new cases of IBD are diagnosed in the United States annually. In this review, we examine the history of genetic variant discovery in complex disease with a focus on IBD. We cover methods that have been applied to microsatellite, common variant, targeted resequencing and whole-exome and -genome data, specifically focusing on the progression of technologies towards rare-variant discovery. The inception of these methods combined with better availability of population level variation data has led to rapid discovery of IBD-causative and/or -associated variants at over 200 loci; over time, these methods have grown exponentially in both power and ascertainment to detect rare variation. We highlight rare-variant discoveries critical to the elucidation of the pathogenesis of IBD, including those in NOD2, IL23R, CARD9, RNF186 and ADCY7. We additionally identify the major areas of rare-variant discovery that will evolve in the coming years. A better understanding of the genetic basis of IBD and other complex diseases will lead to improved diagnosis, prognosis, treatment and surveillance.
BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis is now the main cause of cardiac-cerebral vascular diseases around the world. Disturbances in lipid metabolism have an essential role in the development and progression of atherosclerosis. Thus, we aimed to investigate lipid metabolism-related molecular clusters and develop a diagnostic model for atherosclerosis. METHODS: First, we used the GSE100927 and GSE43292 datasets to screen differentially expressed lipid metabolism-related genes (LMRGs). Subsequent enrichment analysis of these key genes was performed using the Metascape database. Using 101 atherosclerosis samples, we investigated the LMRG-based molecular clusters and the corresponding immune cell infiltration. After that, a diagnostic model for atherosclerosis was constructed using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) and multivariate logistic regression. Finally, a series of bioinformatics techniques, including CIBERSORT, gene set variation analysis, and single-cell data analysis, were used to analyze the potential mechanisms of the model genes in atherosclerosis. RESULTS: A total of 29 LMRGs were found to be differentially expressed between atherosclerosis and normal samples. Functional and DisGeNET enrichment analyses indicated that 29 LMRGs are primarily engaged in cholesterol and lipid metabolism, the PPAR signaling pathway, and regulation of the inflammatory response and are also closely associated with atherosclerotic lesions. Two LMRG-related molecular clusters with significant biological functional differences are defined in atherosclerosis. A three-gene diagnostic model containing ADCY7, SCD, and CD36 was subsequently constructed. Receiver operating characteristic curves, decision curves, and an external validation dataset showed that our model exhibits good predictive performance. In addition, three model genes were found to be closely associated with immune cell infiltration, especially macrophage infiltration. CONCLUSIONS: Our study comprehensively highlighted the intricate association between lipid metabolism and atherosclerosis and created a three-gene model for future clinical diagnosis.
AIM: Despite the enormous efforts to understand Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI), up to 50% of the patients are genetically unexplained. We aimed to functionally characterize a novel candidate gene in CHI. PATIENT: A 4-month-old boy presented severe hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. A routine CHI genetic panel was negative. METHODS: A trio-based whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed. Gene knockout in the RIN-m cell line was established by CRISPR/Cas9. Gene expression was performed using real-time PCR. RESULTS: Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia with diffuse beta-cell involvement was demonstrated in the patient, who was diazoxide-responsive. By WES, compound heterozygous variants were identified in the adenylyl cyclase 7, ADCY7 gene p.(Asp439Glu) and p.(Gly1045Arg). ADCY7 is calcium-sensitive, expressed in beta-cells and converts ATP to cAMP. The variants located in the cytoplasmic domains C1 and C2 in a highly conserved and functional amino acid region. RIN-m((-/-)(Adcy7)()) cells showed a significant increase in insulin secretion reaching 54% at low, and 49% at high glucose concentrations, compared to wild-type. In genetic expression analysis Adcy7 loss of function led to a 34.1-fold to 362.8-fold increase in mRNA levels of the insulin regulator genes Ins1 and Ins2 (p </= 0.0002), as well as increased glucose uptake and sensing indicated by higher mRNA levels of Scl2a2 and Gck via upregulation of Pdx1, and Foxa2 leading to the activation of the glucose stimulated-insulin secretion (GSIS) pathway. CONCLUSION: This study identified a novel candidate gene, ADCY7, to cause CHI via activation of the GSIS pathway.
BACKGROUND: Epilepsy is one of the most common brain disorders worldwide. It is usually hard to be identified properly, and a third of patients are drug-resistant. Genes related to the progression and prognosis of epilepsy are particularly needed to be identified. METHODS: In our study, we downloaded the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) microarray expression profiling dataset GSE143272. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with a fold change (FC) >1.2 and a P-value <0.05 were identified by GEO2R and grouped in male, female and overlapping DEGs. Functional enrichment analysis and Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network analysis were performed. RESULTS: In total, 183 DEGs overlapped (77 ups and 106 downs), 302 DEGs (185 ups and 117 downs) in the male dataset, and 750 DEGs (464 ups and 286 downs) in the female dataset were obtained from the GSE143272 dataset. These DEGs were markedly enriched under various Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) terms. 16 following hub genes were identified based on PPI network analysis: ADCY7, C3AR1, DEGS1, CXCL1 in male-specific DEGs, TOLLIP, ORM1, ELANE, QPCT in female-specific DEGs and FCAR, CD3G, CLEC12A, MOSPD2, CD3D, ALDH3B1, GPR97, PLAUR in overlapping DEGs. CONCLUSION: This discovery-driven study may be useful to provide a novel insight into the diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy. However, more experiments are needed in the future to study the functional roles of these genes in epilepsy.
A novel form of human adenylyl cyclase (ADCY7) has been discovered in the human erythroleukemia cell line (HEL). This cell line has been widely used as a model for studies of the characteristics of human platelets. Data from HEL cells suggests that ADCY7 may be the major AC form in human platelets. In the current study polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques coupled with use of human/rodent somatic hybrid panels and a yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) library were used to determine the chromosomal localization of the gene (adcy7) for ADCY7 enzyme. A 251-bp product from the 3' untranslated region of human adcy7 was amplified for PCR mapping and the results localize the adcy7 gene to region 16q12-16q13 of the human genome. The AC enzyme family is characterized by the presence of 12 membrane-spanning domains in its sequences, and this chromosomal region is known to contain other genes coding for proteins characterized by 12 membrane-spanning domains.
One of the causes of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is the apoptosis of vascular smooth muscle cells. Many long noncoding RNA (lncRNAs) have been implicated in AAA formation. However, the mechanism of growth arrest-specific 5 (GAS5) in AAA formation is not yet clear. The expression levels of GAS5, microRNA-185-5p (miR-185-5p) and adenylate cyclase 7 (ADCY7) were determined by quantitative real-time PCR. Angiotensin II (ANGII) was used to induce AAA cell models. Cell viability was detected by MTT assay, and cell apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry. Western blot analysis was used to test the protein expression levels. Besides, a dual-luciferase reporter assay was used to identify the mechanism of GAS5. GAS5 was upregulated in AAA tissues and ANGII-induced human aortic smooth muscle cells (HASMCs). GAS5 overexpression inhibited proliferation and promoted apoptosis and inflammatory response in ANGII-induced HASMCs, while its knockdown had the opposite effects. MiR-185-5p could be absorbed by GAS5, and its inhibitor could invert the effects of GAS5 silencing on proliferation, apoptosis and inflammatory response in ANGII-induced HASMCs. ADCY7 was a target of miR-185-5p. ADCY7 knockdown increased proliferation, while decreased apoptosis and inflammatory response in ANGII-induced HASMCs. Also, overexpressed ADCY7 reversed the effect of miR-185-5p overexpression on proliferation, apoptosis and inflammatory response in ANGII-induced HASMCs. GAS5 positively regulated the ADCY7 expression to inhibit the activity of the AKT signaling pathway by sponging miR-185-5p. LncRNA GAS5 contributed to AAA formation through regulating HASMCs proliferation, apoptosis and inflammatory response, which might provide new ideas for the treatment of AAA.
BACKGROUND: The pathophysiology of cerebral aneurysm formation remains to be elucidated. Estrogen is thought to be protective against the development of aneurysms. The aim of this study is to identify differentially expressed genes in the estrogen receptor pathway that may be linked to the development of cerebral aneurysms. METHODS: Data from 6 Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases with gene expression profiles of cerebral aneurysm tissue were analyzed (GSE6551, GSE15629, GSE26969, GSE46337, GSE54083, and GSE75436). Ninety-four genes associated with the estrogen receptor pathway were identified from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway database. A meta-analysis using a random-effects model was used to evaluate the association of the estrogen receptor pathway genes with aneurysm formation. RESULTS: Four genes related to the estrogen receptor pathway were significantly associated with intracranial aneurysms, 2 of which were downregulated (PIK3R1: fold change [FC] = 0.41, false discovery rate [FDR] = 6.1 x 10(-5), ADCY9: FC = 0.55, FDR = 2.3 x 10(-4)) and 2 of which were upregulated (HBEGF: FC = 1.46, FDR = 4.9 x 10(-4); ADCY7: FC = 2.11, FDR = 6.0 x 10(-3)). Furthermore, subgroup analysis of 2 GEO databases with information provided about sex demonstrated PIK3R1 to be significant independently in both men (FC = 0.46, FDR = 6.3 x 10(-5)) and women (FC = 0.46, FDR = 2.3 x 10(-4)), whereas JUN, ADCY5, and MMP9 were significant in women only. CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of 6 GEO databases revealed 4 differentially expressed genes (PIK3R1, HBEGF, ADCY7, and ADCY9) in cerebral aneurysm tissue that are associated with the estrogen receptor pathway. Further analysis of estrogen-associated differentially expressed genes may provide information about the protective effects of estrogen on cerebral aneurysm development.
To further resolve the genetic architecture of the inflammatory bowel diseases ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, we sequenced the whole genomes of 4,280 patients at low coverage and compared them to 3,652 previously sequenced population controls across 73.5 million variants. We then imputed from these sequences into new and existing genome-wide association study cohorts and tested for association at  approximately 12 million variants in a total of 16,432 cases and 18,843 controls. We discovered a 0.6% frequency missense variant in ADCY7 that doubles the risk of ulcerative colitis. Despite good statistical power, we did not identify any other new low-frequency risk variants and found that such variants explained little heritability. We detected a burden of very rare, damaging missense variants in known Crohn's disease risk genes, suggesting that more comprehensive sequencing studies will continue to improve understanding of the biology of complex diseases.
BACKGROUND: Evolutionarily conserved genes and their associated molecular pathways can serve as a translational bridge between human and mouse research, extending our understanding of biological pathways mediating individual differences in behavior and risk for psychopathology. METHODS: Comparative gene array analysis in the amygdala and cingulate cortex between the serotonin transporter knockout mouse, a genetic animal model replicating features of human depression, and existing brain transcriptome data from postmortem tissue derived from clinically depressed humans was conducted to identify genes with similar changes across species (i.e., conserved) that may help explain risk of depressive-like phenotypes. Human neuroimaging analysis was then used to investigate the impact of a common single-nucleotide polymorphism (rs1064448) in a gene with identified conserved human-mouse changes, adenylate cyclase 7 (ADCY7), on threat-associated amygdala reactivity in two large independent samples. RESULTS: Comparative analysis identified genes with conserved transcript changes in amygdala (n = 29) and cingulate cortex (n = 19), both critically involved in the generation and regulation of emotion. Selected results were confirmed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction, including upregulation in the amygdala of transcripts for ADCY7, a gene previously implicated in human depression and associated with altered emotional responsiveness in mouse models. Translating these results back to living healthy human subjects, we show that genetic variation (rs1064448) in ADCY7 biases threat-related amygdala reactivity. CONCLUSIONS: This converging cross-species evidence implicates ADCY7 in the modulation of mood regulatory neural mechanisms and, possibly, risk for and pathophysiology of depression, together supporting a continuous dimensional approach to major depressive disorder and other affective disorders.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified hundreds of susceptibility genes, including shared associations across clinically distinct autoimmune diseases. We performed an inverse chi(2) meta-analysis across ten pediatric-age-of-onset autoimmune diseases (pAIDs) in a case-control study including more than 6,035 cases and 10,718 shared population-based controls. We identified 27 genome-wide significant loci associated with one or more pAIDs, mapping to in silico-replicated autoimmune-associated genes (including IL2RA) and new candidate loci with established immunoregulatory functions such as ADGRL2, TENM3, ANKRD30A, ADCY7 and CD40LG. The pAID-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were functionally enriched for deoxyribonuclease (DNase)-hypersensitivity sites, expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), microRNA (miRNA)-binding sites and coding variants. We also identified biologically correlated, pAID-associated candidate gene sets on the basis of immune cell expression profiling and found evidence of genetic sharing. Network and protein-interaction analyses demonstrated converging roles for the signaling pathways of type 1, 2 and 17 helper T cells (TH1, TH2 and TH17), JAK-STAT, interferon and interleukin in multiple autoimmune diseases.
BACKGROUND: A series of modifiable lifestyle factors, such as diet quality, physical activity, alcohol intake, and smoking, may drive the rising burden of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) among sub-Saharan Africans globally. It is unclear whether epigenetic changes play a mediatory role in the associations between these lifestyle factors and T2DM. We assessed the associations between a comprehensive lifestyle index, DNA methylation and T2DM among Ghanaian adults. METHODS: We used whole-blood Illumina 450 k DNA methylation data from 713 Ghanaians from the Research on Obesity and Diabetes among African Migrants (RODAM) study. We constructed a comprehensive lifestyle index based on established cut-offs for diet quality, physical activity, alcohol intake, and smoking status. In the T2DM-free discovery cohort (n = 457), linear models were fitted to identify differentially methylated positions (DMPs) and differentially methylated regions (DMRs) associated with the lifestyle index after adjustment for age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and technical covariates. Associations between the identified DMPs and the primary outcome (T2DM), as well as secondary outcomes (fasting blood glucose (FBG) and HbA1c), were determined via logistic and linear regression models, respectively. RESULTS: In the present study population (mean age: 52 +/- 10 years; male: 42.6%), the comprehensive lifestyle index showed a significant association with one DMP annotated to an intergenic region on chromosome 7 (false discovery rate (FDR) = 0.024). Others were annotated to ADCY7, SMARCE1, AHRR, LOXL2, and PTBP1 genes. One DMR was identified and annotated to the GFPT2 gene (familywise error rate (FWER) from bumphunter bootstrap = 0.036). None of the DMPs showed significant associations with T2DM; directions of effect were positive for the DMP in the AHRR and inverse for all the other DMPs. Higher methylation of the ADCY7 DMP was associated with higher FBG (p = 0.024); LOXL2 DMP was associated with lower FBG (p = 0.023) and HbA1c (p = 0.049); and PTBP1 DMP was associated with lower HbA1c (p = 0.002). CONCLUSIONS: In this explorative epigenome-wide association study among Ghanaians, we identified one DMP and DMR associated with a comprehensive lifestyle index not previously associated with individual lifestyle factors. Based on our findings, we infer that lifestyle factors in combination, affect DNA methylation, thereby influencing the risk of T2DM among Ghanaian adults living in different contexts.
Although ethanol has been considered to be an anxiolytic agent, consumption of ethanol has also been shown to increase plasma adrenocorticotropin and glucocorticoids. The corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF) receptor 1alpha (CRF-R1) is a G protein-coupled receptor that activates adenylyl cyclase (AC), leading to adrenocorticotropin (and subsequently glucocorticoid) release into the circulation. There are nine members of the membrane-bound AC family, and the type 7 AC (AC7) is most sensitive to ethanol, which enhances the responsiveness of AC7 to G protein-coupled receptor activation. We determined the time course of ethanol's effect on plasma adrenocorticotropin and corticosterone levels in male and female AC7 transgenic (Adcy7(huTG)) mice (in which AC7 is overexpressed in neural tissue) and AC7 heterozygous knockdown [Adcy7(+/-)] mice (in which AC7 is underexpressed in neural tissue), and their respective littermate controls [wild type (WT)]. CRF-R1 mRNA and mRNA and protein for different forms of ACs were measured by using gene expression arrays, quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and immunoblotting in pituitaries of all animals. Our results demonstrated increased levels of AC7 in pituitary of Adcy7(huTG) mice and decreased levels in pituitary of Adcy7(+/-) mice compared with WT animals. Male and female Adcy7(huTG) mice displayed higher plasma adrenocorticotropin and corticosterone levels than WT and/or Adcy7(+/-) mice after ethanol injection. Female mice displayed higher adrenocorticotropin and corticosterone levels after ethanol injection than males, regardless of genotype. The data provide evidence for an integral role of AC7 in the increase of plasma adrenocorticotropin and corticosterone levels during alcohol intoxication.
BACKGROUND: Alcohol has been shown to critically modulate cyclic adenosine-3',5' monophosphate (cAMP) signaling. A number of downstream effectors that respond to the cAMP signals (e.g., protein kinase A, cAMP response element binding protein) have, in turn, been examined in relation to alcohol consumption. These studies did not, however, delineate the point at which the actions of alcohol on the cAMP cascade might translate into differences in drinking behavior. To further understand the role of cAMP synthesis in alcohol drinking and dependence, we investigated a specific adenylyl cyclase isoform, adenylyl cyclase (AC) Type 7, whose activity is selectively enhanced by ethanol. METHODS: We measured alcohol consumption and preference in mice in which one copy of the Adcy7 gene was disrupted (Adcy7(+/-)). To demonstrate relevance of this gene for alcohol dependence in humans, we tested the association of polymorphisms in the ADCY7 gene with alcohol dependence in a sample of 1703 alcohol-dependent individuals and 1347 control subjects. RESULTS: We show that Adcy7(+/-) female mice have higher preference for alcohol than wild-type mice, whereas there is little difference in alcohol consumption or preference between Adcy7(+/-) male mice and wild-type control subjects. In the human sample, we found that single nucleotide polymorphisms in ADCY7 associate with alcohol dependence in women, and these markers are also associated with ADCY7 expression (messenger RNA) levels. CONCLUSIONS: These findings implicate adenylyl cyclase Type 7 as a critical component of the molecular pathways contributing to alcohol drinking and the development of alcohol dependence.
BACKGROUND: Recurrent Miscarriage (RM) affects 1% to 5% of couples, and the mechanisms still stay unclear. In this study, we explored the underlying molecular mechanism and potential molecular biomarkers of RM as well as constructed a miRNA-mRNA regulation network. METHODS: The microarray datasets GSE73025 and GSE22490, which represent mRNA and miRNA profiles, respectively, were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) with p-value < 0.05 and fold-change > 2 were identified while the miRNAs with p-value < 0.05 and fold-change > 1.3 were considered as significant differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs). RESULTS: A total of 373 DEGs, including 218 up-regulated genes and 155 down-regulated genes, were identified, while 138 up-regulated and 68 down-regulated DEMs were screened out. After functional enrichment analysis, we found GO Biological Process (BP) terms significantly enriched in the Fc-gamma receptor signaling pathway involved in phagocytosis. Moreover, signaling pathway analyses indicated that the neurotrophin signaling pathway (hsa04722) was the top KEGG enrichment. 6 hub genes (FPR1, C5AR1, CCR1, ADCY7, CXCR2, NPY) were screened out to construct a complex regulation network in RM because they had the highest degree of affecting the network. Besides, we constructed miRNA-mRNA network between DEMs target genes and DEGs in RM, including hsa-miR-1297- KLHL24 and hsa-miR-548a-5p-KLHL24 pairs. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, the novel differentially expressed molecules in the present study could provide a new sight to explore the pathogenesis of RM as well as potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for RM diagnosis and treatment.
BACKGROUND/AIM: This study aimed to identify biomarkers for predicting the prognosis of advanced gastric cancer patients who received docetaxel, cisplatin, and S-1 (DCS). MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gene expression profiles were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database (GSE31811). Gene-Ontology-enrichment and KEGG-pathway analysis were used for evaluating the biological functions of differentially-expressed genes. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and Kaplan-Meier survival analyses were employed to assess the prognostic values of hub genes. RESULTS: A total of 1,486 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, including 13 up-regulated and 1,473 down-regulated genes. KEGG pathways such as metabolic pathways, cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), PI3K-Akt signaling pathway and pathways in cancer were significantly represented. In the PPI network, the top ten hub genes ranked by degree were GNG7, PLCB1, CALML5, FGFR4, GRB2, JAK3, ADCY7, ADCY9, GNAS and KDR. Five DEGs, including ANTXR1, EFNA5, GAMT, E2F2 and NRCAM, were associated with relapse-free survival and overall survival. CONCLUSION: ANTXR1, EFNA5, GAMT, E2F2 and NRCAM are potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for DCS treatment in GC.
