Amine oxidase [flavin-containing] A; Catalyzes the oxidative deamination of biogenic and xenobiotic amines and has important functions in the metabolism of neuroactive and vasoactive amines in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues. MAOA preferentially oxidizes biogenic amines such as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), norepinephrine and epinephrine.
We performed the first proteogenomic characterization of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) using paired tumor and adjacent liver tissues from 159 patients. Integrated proteogenomic analyses revealed consistency and discordance among multi-omics, activation status of key signaling pathways, and liver-specific metabolic reprogramming in HBV-related HCC. Proteomic profiling identified three subgroups associated with clinical and molecular attributes including patient survival, tumor thrombus, genetic profile, and the liver-specific proteome. These proteomic subgroups have distinct features in metabolic reprogramming, microenvironment dysregulation, cell proliferation, and potential therapeutics. Two prognostic biomarkers, PYCR2 and ADH1A, related to proteomic subgrouping and involved in HCC metabolic reprogramming, were identified. CTNNB1 and TP53 mutation-associated signaling and metabolic profiles were revealed, among which mutated CTNNB1-associated ALDOA phosphorylation was validated to promote glycolysis and cell proliferation. Our study provides a valuable resource that significantly expands the knowledge of HBV-related HCC and may eventually benefit clinical practice.
The worst-case scenario related to alcoholic liver disease (ALD) arises after a long period of exposure to the harmful effect of alcohol consumption along with other hepatotoxics. ALD encompasses a broad spectrum of liver-associated disorders, such as steatosis, steatohepatitis, fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Based on the chronic administration of different hepatotoxics, including ethanol, sucrose, lipopolysaccharide, and low doses of diethylnitrosamine over a short period, here we aimed to develop a multiple hepatotoxic (MHT)-ALD model in the mouse that recapitulates the human ALD-associated disorders. We demonstrated that the MHT-ALD model induces ADH1A and NXN, an ethanol metabolizer and a redox-sensor enzyme, respectively; promotes steatosis associated with the induction of the lipid droplet forming FSP27, inflammation identified by the infiltration of hepatic neutrophils-positive to LY-6G marker, and the increase of MYD88 level, a protein involved in inflammatory response; and stimulates the early appearance of cellular senescence identified by the senescence markers SA-beta-gal activity and p-H2A.X(Ser139). It also induces fibrosis associated with increased desmin, a marker of hepatic stellate cells whose activation leads to the deposition of collagen fibers, accompanied by cell death and compensatory proliferation revealed by increased CASP3-mediated apoptosis, and KI67- and PCNA-proliferation markers, respectively. It also induces histopathological traits of malignancy and the level of the HCC marker, GSTP1. In conclusion, we provide a useful model for exploring the chronological ALD-associated alterations and stages, and addressing therapeutic approaches.
The identification of biomarkers for predicting inter-individual sorafenib response variability could allow hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patient stratification. SNPs in angiogenesis- and drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME)-related genes were evaluated to identify new potential predictive biomarkers of sorafenib response in HCC patients. Five known SNPs in angiogenesis-related genes, including VEGF-A, VEGF-C, HIF-1a, ANGPT2, and NOS3, were investigated in 34 HCC patients (9 sorafenib responders and 25 non-responders). A subgroup of 23 patients was genotyped for SNPs in ADME genes. A machine learning classifier method was used to discover classification rules for our dataset. We found that only the VEGF-A (rs2010963) C allele and CC genotype were significantly associated with sorafenib response. ADME-related gene analysis identified 10 polymorphic variants in ADH1A (rs6811453), ADH6 (rs10008281), SULT1A2/CCDC101 (rs11401), CYP26A1 (rs7905939), DPYD (rs2297595 and rs1801265), FMO2 (rs2020863), and SLC22A14 (rs149738, rs171248, and rs183574) significantly associated with sorafenib response. We have identified a genetic signature of predictive response that could permit non-responder/responder patient stratification. Angiogenesis- and ADME-related genes correlation was confirmed by cumulative genetic risk score and network and pathway enrichment analysis. Our findings provide a proof of concept that needs further validation in follow-up studies for HCC patient stratification for sorafenib prescription.
We initiate the Westlake BioBank for Chinese (WBBC) pilot project with 4,535 whole-genome sequencing (WGS) individuals and 5,841 high-density genotyping individuals, and identify 81.5 million SNPs and INDELs, of which 38.5% are absent in dbSNP Build 151. We provide a population-specific reference panel and an online imputation server ( https://wbbc.westlake.edu.cn/ ) which could yield substantial improvement of imputation performance in Chinese population, especially for low-frequency and rare variants. By analyzing the singleton density of the WGS data, we find selection signatures in SNX29, DNAH1 and WDR1 genes, and the derived alleles of the alcohol metabolism genes (ADH1A and ADH1B) emerge around 7,000 years ago and tend to be more common from 4,000 years ago in East Asia. Genetic evidence supports the corresponding geographical boundaries of the Qinling-Huaihe Line and Nanling Mountains, which separate the Han Chinese into subgroups, and we reveal that North Han was more homogeneous than South Han.
ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Hua Zhuo Ning Fu Decoction (HZD) is an empirical prescription from traditional Chinese medicine that shows excellent clinical results for psoriasis patients. Uncertainty lingered over HZD's potential anti-psoriasis mechanisms. AIM OF THE STUDY: The study's objective is to investigate the pharmacological processes and therapeutic effects of HZD on psoriasis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the initial phase of the study, an investigation was conducted to assess the effects of HZD on psoriasis-afflicted mice using an imiquimod (IMQ)-induced murine model. The experimental mice were randomly allocated to different groups, including the IMQ-induced model group, the control group, the HZD therapy groups with varying dosage levels (low, medium, and high), and Dexamethasone (DEX, the positive control medicine) group. Bioinformatics analysis and molecular docking were subsequently employed to identify the primary components and molecular targets associated with the therapeutic action of HZD in the context of psoriasis. Additionally, to find the impacts on metabolite regulation, plasma metabolomics based on ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC-QTOF/MS) was used. It's interesting to note that the combined mechanisms from metabolomics were examined in tandem with the targets. In vivo tests were the last step in validating the potential mechanism. Throughout the trial, the following data were recorded: body weight, psoriasis area and severity index (PASI). The molecular targets connected to HZD's anti-psoriasis activities were revealed using histological examination, western blot (WB), and ELISA investigation. RESULTS: In mice induced with IMQ, HZD shown good anti-psoriasis effects in terms of PASI score and epidermal acanthosis. 95 HZD targets and 77 bioactive chemicals connected to psoriasis were found by bioinformatics research; of these, 7 key targets (EPHX2, PLA2G2A, TBXAS1, MAOA, ALDH1A3, ADH1A, and ADH1B) were linked to the mechanisms of HZD, the combination degree of which was finally expressed by the score of docking. In addition, HZD regulated nine metabolites. In line with this, HZD modified three metabolic pathways. Additionally, a combined examination of 7 key targets and 9 metabolites suggested that the metabolism of arachidonic acid might be the key metabolic route, which was identified by ELISA analysis. The in vivo investigation shown that HZD could control cytokines associated to inflammation (IL-10, TGF-beta, IL-17A, and IL-23), as well as important antioxidant system markers (ROS, GSH, and MDA). Moreover, HZD controlled iron levels and the expression of ferroptosis-related proteins (ACSL4 and GPX4), suggesting that ferroptosis played a crucial role in this process. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrated the whole mechanism and anti-psoriasis effectiveness of HZD, which will promote its clinical application and aid in the investigation of new bioactive components of HZD against psoriasis.
BACKGROUND: Excessive alcohol consumption is a major public health problem in East Asian countries. Alcohol use leads to a cascade of problems including increased chances of risky behavior and a wide range of negative health consequences, from alcoholic liver disease to upper gastric and liver cancer. These alcohol effects are known to be influenced by ethnic variability and genetics. METHODS: In this study, subjects were administered a single dose of alcohol (0.6 g/kg for men or 0.4 g/kg for women), and blood alcohol and acetaldehyde concentrations were measured eight times over 5 hours. To investigate genetically susceptible factors to alcohol metabolism, we selected single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of genes identified by prior genetic association studies for alcohol metabolism, alcohol consumption, alcohol dependence, and related traits, and performed genotyping on all subjects (n = 104). RESULTS: We identified variations in the ADH1A, SRPRB, and PGM1 genes, which are directly associated with blood alcohol or acetaldehyde concentrations. Namely, the T allele of SRPRB rs17376019 and the C allele of PGM1 rs4643 were associated with lower blood alcohol levels, while the ADH1 rs1229976 C allele group exhibited markedly higher blood acetaldehyde levels than those of the ADH1 rs1229976 T allele group. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that genetic variations in ADH1A, SRPRB, and PGM1 are associated with variations in blood alcohol and acetaldehyde concentration after alcohol intake.
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an aggressive and heterogeneous disease characterized by high morbidity and mortality. The liver is the vital organ that participates in tyrosine catabolism, and abnormal tyrosine metabolism could cause various diseases, including HCC. Besides, the tumor immune microenvironment is involved in carcinogenesis and can influence the patients' clinical outcomes. However, the potential role of tyrosine metabolism pattern and immune molecular signature is poorly understood in HCC. METHODS: Gene expression, somatic mutations, copy number variation data, and clinicopathological information of HCC were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. GSE14520 from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases was used as a validation dataset. We performed unsupervised consensus clustering of tyrosine metabolism-related genes (TRGs) and classified patients into distinct molecular subtypes. We used ESTIMATE algorithms to evaluate the immune infiltration. We then applied LASSO Cox regression to establish the TRGs risk model and validated its predictive performance. RESULTS: In this study, we first described the alterations of 42 TRGs in HCC cohorts and characterized the clinicopathological characteristics and tumor microenvironmental landscape of the two distinct subtypes. We then established a tyrosine metabolism-related scoring system and identified five TRGs, which were highly correlated with prognosis and representative of this gene set, namely METTL6, GSTZ1, ADH4, ADH1A, and LCMT1. Patients in the high-risk group had an inferior prognosis. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis also showed that the tyrosine metabolism-related signature was an independent prognostic indicator. Besides, receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis demonstrated the predictive accuracy of the TRGs signature that could reliably predict 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival in both TCGA and GEO cohorts. We also got consistent results by performing clone formation and invasion analysis, and immunohistochemical (IHC) assays. Moreover, we also discovered that the TRGs signature was significantly associated with the different immune landscapes and therapeutic drug sensitivity. CONCLUSION: Our comprehensive analysis revealed the potential molecular signature and clinical utilities of TRGs in HCC. The model based on five TRGs can accurately predict the survival outcomes of HCC, improving our knowledge of TRGs in HCC and paving a new path for guiding risk stratification and treatment strategy development for HCC patients.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have discovered numerous genetic susceptibility loci including a cluster of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) gene family for esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, the underlying mechanism has not fully been elucidated. In this study, we integrated the GWAS data, gene-drinking interaction, expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) analysis and biochemical experiments to clarify the specific mechanism of the polymorphisms in ADH loci. By imputation and eQTL analysis, we identified rs1154402C>G in intron 1 of ADH5 substantially associated with the expression levels of ADH1A. Association analysis showed that the rs1154402[G] allele was significantly associated with ESCC risk in drinkers (OR = 1.44, 95% CI = 1.20-1.73; P = 7.74 x 10(-5)) but not in nondrinkers (OR = 1.14, 95% CI = 0.93-1.37; P = .220). Furthermore, the ADH5 variant showed a significant interaction with drinking and the genetic variant near ALDH2 encoding the enzyme oxidizing acetaldehyde, a carcinogenic product resulted from alcohol oxidation catalyzed by ADHs. We demonstrated for the first time that rs1154402C>G change might create a silencer, repressing ADH1A transcription via long-range interaction with ADH1A promoter. These results suggest that genetic variant in ADH5 might confer alcohol drinkers susceptible to ESCC by down-regulation of ADH1A, which weakens alcohol catabolism.
Human personality traits are strong predictors or characteristics of many psychiatric disorders including substance dependence (SD). Recently, significant associations between alcohol dehydrogenase type 1A gene (ADH1A) and SD have been reported, which led us to investigate the impact of ADH1A variation on personality traits and risk of SD. Five hundred fifty-eight subjects with SD [398 European-Americans (EAs) and 160 African-Americans (AAs)], 517 college students (384 EAs and 133 European-origin Hispanics), and 448 healthy subjects (385 EAs, 48 AAs, and 15 European-origin Hispanics) participated. Personality traits were assessed in 247 subjects with SD (179 EAs and 68 AAs), all 517 college students, and 332 healthy subjects (285 EAs, 40 AAs, and 7 European-origin Hispanics). The relationships between ADH1A and personality traits were comprehensively examined using stepwise multivariate analysis of covariance (MANCOVA), and then decomposed by stepwise analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). The relationship between ADH1A and SD was examined using stepwise logistic regression analysis. Admixture effects on analyses were considered. Overall, Agreeableness and Conscientiousness were associated with the diplotypes, haplotypes, genotypes, and/or alleles of ADH1A in three of four phenotype groups including EA SD subjects, healthy subjects, and AA SD subjects (1.7 x 10(-4) <or= P <or= 0.055), but not college students. Neuroticism was associated with diplotype, haplotypes and genotypes in AA SD subjects (0.001 <or= P <or= 0.031). In addition, SD was associated with diplotypes, haplotypes, genotypes, and/or alleles of ADH1A (0.008 <or= P <or= 0.060). The present study demonstrates that the ADH1A variation may contribute to the genetic component of variation in personality traits and SD.
Studies that have examined the association between alcohol consumption and gastric cancer (GC) risk have been inconsistent. We conducted an investigation of 29 genetic variants in alcohol metabolism loci (alcohol dehydrogenase, ADH1 gene cluster: ADH1A, ADH1B and ADH1C; ADH7 and aldehyde dehydrogenase, ALDH2), alcohol intake and GC risk. We analyzed data from a nested case-control study (364 cases and 1272 controls) within the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition cohort. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped using a customized array. We observed a statistically significant association between a common 3'-flanking SNP near ADH1A (rs1230025) and GC risk [allelic odds ratio (OR)(A v T) = 1.30, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.07-1.59]. Two intronic variants, one in ADH1C (rs283411) and one in ALDH2 (rs16941667), also were associated with GC risk (OR(T v C) = 0.59; 95% CI = 0.38-0.91 and OR(T v C) = 1.34; 95% CI = 1.00-1.79, respectively). Individuals carrying variant alleles at both ADH1 (rs1230025) and ALDH2 (rs16941667) were twice as likely to develop GC (OR(A+T) = 2.0; 95% CI = 1.25-3.20) as those not carrying variant alleles. The association between rs1230025 and GC was modified by alcohol intake (<5 g/day: OR(A) = 0.89, 95% CI = 0.57-1.39; >/=5 g/day: OR(A) = 1.45, 95% CI = 1.08-1.94, P-value = 0.05). The association was also modified by ethanol intake from beer. A known functional SNP in ADH1B (rs1229984) was associated with alcohol intake (P-value = 0.04) but not GC risk. Variants in ADH7 were not associated with alcohol intake or GC risk. In conclusion, genetic variants at ADH1 and ALDH2 loci may influence GC risk, and alcohol intake may further modify the effect of ADH1 rs1230025. Additional population-based studies are needed to confirm our results.
Presently exciton activation of enzymatic oxidation of ethanol by human alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) 1A enzyme is reported. The ADH1A enzyme was activated by infrared (IR) excitons transferred over Muller cell (MC) intermediate filaments (IFs). These IR excitons were generated by energy liberated upon enzymatic ATP hydrolysis and transferred to IFs. Also, the emission spectrum was recorded of the electronically excited ADH1A...NAD(+)...EtOH complexes obtained by energy transfer from IR excitons that traveled along IFs. These results support the hypothesis that ATP hydrolysis energy may be transmitted in vivo in the form of IR excitons, over the network of IFs, both within and between cells.
The third leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the world, colorectal cancer (CRC) is a global health issue that should be addressed in both diagnostics and therapeutics to improve patient survival rate. Today, microarray data analysis is increasingly being used as a novel and effective method for classification of malignancies and making prognostic assessments. Built upon the concept of microarray data analysis and aimed at the identification of CRC-associated genes, our study has adopted an integrative analysis for the gene expression patterns of four microarray datasets in gene expression omnibus (GEO) and microRNAs (miRNAs) expression profiles. We downloaded four gene expression profiles, i.e., GSE37182, GSE25070, GSE10950, and GSE113513, miRNAs gene expression profiles and differentially expressed genes (DEGs). We used R software, the DAVID database, protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks, the Cytoscape program and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for data analysis. Out of the four gene expression profiles, a total of 43 common DEGs were identified, including 10 hub genes, SLC26A3, CLCA1, GUCA2A, MS4A12, CLCA4, GUCA2B, KRT20, AQP8, MAOA, and ADH1A, and four differentially expressed miRNAs, miR-552, miR-423-5p, miR-502-3p, and miR-490-5p. The highly enriched modes of the signaling pathways among these DEGs were speculated to be involved in various processes including nitrogen metabolism, mineral absorption, pancreatic secretions, and tyrosine metabolism in Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) database. According to our bioinformatics analysis, the DEGs identified in the present study could be considered as significant hallmarks in the molecular mechanisms of CRC development. Our findings may assist scientists with developing novel strategies not only for prediction of CRC, but also for screening and early diagnosis, and treatment of CRC patients.
Alcohol metabolism is a well-characterized biological process that is dominated by the alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) families. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is the advanced inflammatory stage of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and is known to alter the metabolism and disposition of numerous drugs. The purpose of this study was to investigate the alterations in alcohol metabolism processes in response to human NASH progression. Expression and function of ADHs, ALDHs, and catalase were examined in normal, steatosis, NASH (fatty) and NASH (not fatty) human liver samples. ALDH4A1 mRNA was significantly decreased in both NASH groups, while no significant changes were observed in the mRNA levels of other alcohol-related enzymes. The protein levels of ADH1A, ADH1B, and ADH4 were each decreased in the NASH groups, which was consistent with a decreased overall ADH activity. The protein level of ALDH2 was significantly increased in both NASH groups, while ALDH1A1 and ALDH1B1 were only decreased in NASH (fatty) samples. ALDH activity represented by oxidation of acetaldehyde was decreased in the NASH (fatty) group. The protein level of catalase was decreased in both NASH groups, though activity was unchanged. Furthermore, the significant accumulation of 4-hydroxynonenal protein adduct in NASH indicated significant oxidative stress and a potential reduction in ALDH activity. Collectively, ADH and ALDH expression and function are profoundly altered in the progression of NASH, which may have a notable impact on ADH- and ALDH-associated cellular metabolism processes and lead to significant alterations in drug metabolism mediated by these enzymes.
INTRODUCTION: Increasing evidence indicated that miR-2682-5p acted as a tumor suppressor in various cancers. The current study aimed to investigate the biological function of exosomal miR-2682-5p in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). METHODS: The expression of miR-2682-5p in NSCLC tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues, NSCLC cell lines and human embryonic lung fibroblast, as well as serum and serum exosomes of NSCLC patients and healthy donors was detected by RT-qPCR. The effects of miR-2682-5p on the viability, migration, and apoptosis of NSCLC cells were detected by CCK-8, Transwell, and flow cytometry assays. Dual-luciferase reporter gene and RNA immunoprecipitation assays were used to evalutate the relationship between miR-2682-5p and HDAC1. RESULTS: Low expressed miR-2682-5p was found in tumor tissues, cell lines, serum, and serum exosomes of NSCLC patients. MiR-2682-5p overexpression suppressed NSCLC cell viability and migration and promoted apoptosis, while miR-2682-5p knockdown showed the opposite results. Furthermore, exosomes from healthy donor serum inhibited NSCLC cell viability and migration and promoted apoptosis. Dual-luciferase reporter gene and RNA immunoprecipitation assays verified that HDAC1 was a target of miR-2682-5p. HDAC1 overexpression abolished the effects of miR-2682-5p mimic on NSCLC cell viability, migration, and apoptosis. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay indicated that HDAC1 bound to the promoter region of ADH1A. Upregulation of ADH1A counteracted the effects of HDAC1 overexpression on NSCLC cell viability, migration, and apoptosis. CONCLUSION: Taken together, exosomal miR-2682-5p inhibited NSCLC cell viability and migration and promoted apoptosis by the HDAC1/ADH1A axis, and this result might provide a novel therapeutic target for NSCLC.
In contrast with other animal species, humans possess three distinct genes for class I alcohol dehydrogenase and show polymorphic variation in the ADH1B and ADH1C genes. The three class I alcohol dehydrogenase isoenzymes share approximately 93% sequence identity but differ in their substrate specificity and their developmental expression. We report here the first three-dimensional structures for the ADH1A and ADH1C*2 gene products at 2.5 and 2.0 A, respectively, and the structure of the ADH1B*1 gene product in a binary complex with cofactor at 2.2 A. Not surprisingly, the overall structure of each isoenzyme is highly similar to the others. However, the substitution of Gly for Arg at position 47 in the ADH1A isoenzyme promotes a greater extent of domain closure in the ADH1A isoenzyme, whereas substitution at position 271 may account for the lower turnover rate for the ADH1C*2 isoenzyme relative to its polymorphic variant, ADH1C*1. The substrate-binding pockets of each isoenzyme possess a unique topology that dictates each isoenzyme's distinct but overlapping substrate preferences. ADH1*B1 has the most restrictive substrate-binding site near the catalytic zinc atom, whereas both ADH1A and ADH1C*2 possess amino acid substitutions that correlate with their better efficiency for the oxidation of secondary alcohols. These structures describe the nature of their individual substrate-binding pockets and will improve our understanding of how the metabolism of beverage ethanol affects the normal metabolic processes performed by these isoenzymes.
BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation patterns play a critical role in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the molecular mechanisms associated with these aberrantly methylated genes remain unclear. This study aimed to comprehensively investigate the methylation-driven gene expression alterations in HCC using a multi-omics dataset. METHODS: Whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) techniques were used to assess the methylation and gene expression profiles of HCC tissues (HCCs) and normal adjacent tissues (NATs). The candidate genes' potential function was further investigated using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA seq) data. RESULTS: We observed widespread hypomethylation in HCCs compared to NATs. Methylation levels in distinct genomic regions exhibited significant differences between HCCs and NATs. We identified 247,632 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) and 4,926 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between HCCs and NATs. Integrated analysis of DNA methylation and RNA-seq data identified 987 methylation-driven candidate genes, with 970 showing upregulation and 17 showing downregulation. Four genes involved in the retinol metabolic pathway, namely ADH1A, CYP2A6, CYP2C8, and CYP2C19, were identified as hyper-downregulated genes. Their expression levels could stratify HCCs into three subgroups with distinct survival outcomes, immune cell infiltration, and tumor microenvironments. Validation of these findings in an independent dataset yielded similar outcomes, confirming the high concordance and potential prognostic value of these genes. ScRNA seq data revealed the low expression of these genes in immune cells, emphasizing their role in promoting malignant cell proliferation and migration. In conclusion, this study provides insights into the molecular characteristics of HCC, revealing the involvement of retinol metabolism-related genes in the development and progression of HCC. These findings have implications for HCC diagnosis, prognosis prediction, and the development of therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND: Adjuvant chemotherapy (ACT) is widely accepted in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) after surgery; however, effective models for predicting ACT response are scarce. Thus, the objective of this study was to develop a novel signature for predicting its response and overall survival (OS) in resected PDAC patients. METHODS: A total of 50 PDAC patients with the transcriptome expression profiles, information about chemotherapy, and relevant clinical data were retrieved from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and twenty-nine patients with tissue specimens and clinical data from our hospital were included as a validation. A novel gene signature was developed using bioinformatic differentially expressed genes (DEGs) analysis, Lasso-penalized Cox regression, and multivariate Cox regression studies. RESULTS: Between chemotherapy-resistant and chemotherapy-sensitive cohorts, 569 DEGs were identified, with 490 upregulated and 79 downregulated genes mainly specialized in the regulation of peptide/protein/hormone secretion, calcium ion homeostasis, and T cell activation regulation in biological processes. After Lasso-penalized Cox and multivariate Cox regression analysis, BAT (BCHE, ADH1A, and TNS4) signature was established to predict ACT response and OS. Moreover, BAT signature was verified as an independent risk factor for ACT response (p = 0.042) and OS (median OS: 17.5 months vs. 34.8 months, p = 0.040) and significantly associated with immune infiltrations (p < 0.05). Then, this signature was further validated as the independent risk factor for recurrence-free survival (RFS) in PDAC patients receiving postoperative ACT (median RFS: 9.0 months vs. not reached, p = 0.014), and tumor-infiltrating CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells were further validated to be significantly decreased in tissues with higher BAT signature scores (p = 0.015 and 0.021, respectively). CONCLUSION: The BAT signature is a novel formulated and independent risk factor for predicting ACT response and long-term survival in patients with resected PDAC. This signature could comprehensively reflect local immune-related response, tumor purity, potential biological behavior, and chemo drug susceptibility.
Two commonly accepted theories about enzymes were revisited. The first states that adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-stored energy is only released when the substrate is in place, because the substrate changes the enzyme structure when it is bound to the enzyme. In fact, as demonstrated and discussed presently, no structural changes are required, and ATP-stored energy is released when it can be used. The second states that ATP-released energy moves along the enzyme molecule in the form of molecular vibrations (Davydov's vibrational solitons). In fact, as reported presently, energy released upon ATP hydrolysis moves in the form of excited-state electrons (excitons), with no molecular vibrations involved. The relevant experimental evidence was obtained for the human ADH1A alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme. Spontaneous ATP hydrolysis in the absence of substrate was apparently prevented by electronically excited enzyme + adenosine diphosphate (ADP) + inorganic phosphate (P) complex (exciplex) formed upon ATP hydrolysis. This exciplex kept ADP + P bound and in place for the inverse reaction, until the excess energy was dissipated in the enzyme-catalyzed reaction or by energy transfer to a suitable acceptor. Additionally, and contrary to textbooks, ADH1A has required ATP, working orders of magnitude faster in its presence.
The application of steatotic liver graft has been increased significantly due to the severe donor shortage and prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. However, steatotic donor livers are vulnerable to acute phase inflammatory injury, which may result in cancer recurrence. Alternative splicing events (ASEs) are critical for diverse transcriptional variants in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Here, we aimed to depict the landscape of ASEs, as well as to identify the differential ASEs in steatotic liver graft and their association with tumor recurrence after transplantation. The overall portrait of intragraft transcripts and ASEs were elucidated through RNA sequencing with the liver graft biopsies from patients and rat transplant models. Various differential ASEs were identified in steatotic liver grafts. CYP2E1, ADH1A, CYP2C8, ADH1C, and HGD, as corresponding genes to the common pathways involved differential ASEs in human and rats, were significantly associated with HCC patients' survival. The differential ASEs related RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) were enriched in metabolic pathways. The altered immune cell distribution, particularly macrophages and neutrophils, were perturbated by differential ASEs. The cancer hallmarks were enriched in steatotic liver grafts and closely associated with differential ASEs. Our work identified the differential ASE network with metabolic RBPs, immune cell distribution, and cancer hallmarks in steatotic liver grafts. We verified the link between steatotic liver graft injury and tumor recurrence at post-transcriptional level, offered new evidence to explore metabolism and immune responses, and provided the potential prognostic and therapeutic markers for tumor recurrence.
Previous studies have reported that aspirin significantly reduced the first-pass metabolism (FPM) of ethanol in humans thereby increasing adverse effects of alcohol. The underlying causes, however, remain poorly understood. Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), principal enzymes responsible for metabolism of ethanol, are complex enzyme families that exhibit functional polymorphisms among ethnic groups and distinct tissue distributions. We investigated the inhibition profiles by aspirin and its major metabolite salicylate of ethanol oxidation by recombinant human ADH1A, ADH1B1, ADH1B2, ADH1B3, ADH1C1, ADH1C2, ADH2, and ADH4, and acetaldehyde oxidation by ALDH1A1 and ALDH2, at pH 7.5 and 0.5 mM NAD(+). Competitive inhibition pattern was found to be a predominant type among the ADHs and ALDHs studied, although noncompetitive and uncompetitive inhibitions were also detected in a few cases. The inhibition constants of salicylate for the ADHs and ALDHs were considerably lower than that of aspirin with the exception of ADH1A that can be ascribed to a substitution of Ala-93 at the bottom of substrate pocket as revealed by molecular docking experiments. Kinetic inhibition equation-based simulations show at higher therapeutic levels of blood plasma salicylate (1.5 mM) that the decrease of activities at 2-10 mM ethanol for ADH1A/ADH2 and ADH1B2/ADH1B3 are predicted to be 75-86% and 31-52%, respectively, and that the activity decline for ALDH1A1 and ALDH2 at 10-50 muM acetaldehyde to be 62-73%. Our findings suggest that salicylate may substantially inhibit hepatic FPM of alcohol at both the ADH and ALDH steps when concurrent intaking aspirin.
