Adenosine receptor A2b; Receptor for adenosine. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Acinar to ductal metaplasia (ADM) occurs in the pancreas in response to tissue injury and is a potential precursor for adenocarcinoma. The goal of these studies was to define the populations arising from ADM, the associated transcriptional changes, and markers of disease progression. METHODS: Acinar cells were lineage-traced with enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) to follow their fate post-injury. Transcripts of more than 13,000 EYFP+ cells were determined using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). Developmental trajectories were generated. Data were compared with gastric metaplasia, Kras(G12D)-induced neoplasia, and human pancreatitis. Results were confirmed by immunostaining and electron microscopy. Kras(G12D) was expressed in injury-induced ADM using several inducible Cre drivers. Surgical specimens of chronic pancreatitis from 15 patients were evaluated by immunostaining. RESULTS: scRNA-seq of ADM revealed emergence of a mucin/ductal population resembling gastric pyloric metaplasia. Lineage trajectories suggest that some pyloric metaplasia cells can generate tuft and enteroendocrine cells (EECs). Comparison with Kras(G12D)-induced ADM identifies populations associated with disease progression. Activation of Kras(G12D) expression in HNF1B+ or POU2F3+ ADM populations leads to neoplastic transformation and formation of MUC5AC+ gastric-pit-like cells. Human pancreatitis samples also harbor pyloric metaplasia with a similar transcriptional phenotype. CONCLUSIONS: Under conditions of chronic injury, acinar cells undergo a pyloric-type metaplasia to mucinous progenitor-like populations, which seed disparate tuft cell and EEC lineages. ADM-derived EEC subtypes are diverse. Kras(G12D) expression is sufficient to drive neoplasia when targeted to injury-induced ADM populations and offers an alternative origin for tumorigenesis. This program is conserved in human pancreatitis, providing insight into early events in pancreas diseases.
The Werner syndrome RecQ helicase WRN was identified as a synthetic lethal target in cancer cells with microsatellite instability (MSI) by several genetic screens(1-6). Despite advances in treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors(7-10), there is an unmet need in the treatment of MSI cancers(11-14). Here we report the structural, biochemical, cellular and pharmacological characterization of the clinical-stage WRN helicase inhibitor HRO761, which was identified through an innovative hit-finding and lead-optimization strategy. HRO761 is a potent, selective, allosteric WRN inhibitor that binds at the interface of the D1 and D2 helicase domains, locking WRN in an inactive conformation. Pharmacological inhibition by HRO761 recapitulated the phenotype observed by WRN genetic suppression, leading to DNA damage and inhibition of tumour cell growth selectively in MSI cells in a p53-independent manner. Moreover, HRO761 led to WRN degradation in MSI cells but not in microsatellite-stable cells. Oral treatment with HRO761 resulted in dose-dependent in vivo DNA damage induction and tumour growth inhibition in MSI cell- and patient-derived xenograft models. These findings represent preclinical pharmacological validation of WRN as a therapeutic target in MSI cancers. A clinical trial with HRO761 (NCT05838768) is ongoing to assess the safety, tolerability and preliminary anti-tumour activity in patients with MSI colorectal cancer and other MSI solid tumours.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a highly aggressive tumor that is almost uniformly lethal in humans. Activating mutations of KRAS are found in >90% of human PDACs and are sufficient to promote acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM) during tumor initiation. The roles of miRNAs in oncogenic Kras-induced ADM are incompletely understood. METHODS: The Ptf1a(Cre/+)LSL-Kras(G12D/+) and Ptf1a(Cre/+)LSL-Kras(G12D/+)LSL-p53R172H/(+) and caerulein-induced acute pancreatitis mice models were used. mir-802 was conditionally ablated in acinar cells to study the function of miR-802 in ADM. RESULTS: We show that miR-802 is a highly abundant and acinar-enriched pancreatic miRNA that is silenced during early stages of injury or oncogenic Kras(G12D)-induced transformation. Genetic ablation of mir-802 cooperates with Kras(G12D) by promoting ADM formation. miR-802 deficiency results in de-repression of the miR-802 targets Arhgef12, RhoA, and Sdc4, activation of RhoA, and induction of the downstream RhoA effectors ROCK1, LIMK1, COFILIN1, and EZRIN, thereby increasing F-actin rearrangement. mir-802 ablation also activates SOX9, resulting in augmented levels of ductal and attenuated expression of acinar identity genes. Consistently with these findings, we show that this miR-802-RhoA-F-actin network is activated in biopsies of pancreatic cancer patients and correlates with poor survival. CONCLUSIONS: We show miR-802 suppresses pancreatic cancer initiation by repressing oncogenic Kras-induced ADM. The role of miR-802 in ADM fills the gap in our understanding of oncogenic Kras-induced F-actin reorganization, acinar reprogramming, and PDAC initiation. Modulation of the miR-802-RhoA-F-actin network may be a new strategy to interfere with pancreatic carcinogenesis.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM) is crucial in the development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. However, our understanding of the induction and resolution of ADM remains limited. We conducted comparative transcriptome analyses to identify conserved mechanisms of ADM in mouse and human. METHODS: We identified Sox4 among the top up-regulated genes. We validated the analysis by RNA in situ hybridization. We performed experiments in mice with acinar-specific deletion of Sox4 (Ptf1a: CreER; Rosa26(-LSL-YFPLSL-YFP); Sox4(fl/fl)) with and without an activating mutation in Kras (Kras(LSL-G12D/+)). Mice were given caerulein to induce pancreatitis. We performed phenotypic analysis by immunohistochemistry, tissue decellularization, and single-cell RNA sequencing. RESULTS: We demonstrated that Sox4 is reactivated in ADM and pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias. Contrary to findings in other tissues, Sox4 actually counteracts cellular dedifferentiation and helps maintain tissue homeostasis. Moreover, our investigations unveiled the indispensable role of Sox4 in the specification of mucin-producing cells and tuft-like cells from acinar cells. We identified Sox4-dependent non-cell-autonomous mechanisms regulating the stromal reaction during disease progression. Notably, Sox4-inferred targets are activated upon KRAS inactivation and tumor regression. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that our transcriptome analysis can be used to investigate conserved mechanisms of tissue injury. We demonstrate that Sox4 restrains acinar dedifferentiation and is necessary for the specification of acinar-derived metaplastic cells in pancreatic injury and cancer initiation and is activated upon Kras ablation and tumor regression in mice. By uncovering novel potential strategies to promote tissue homeostasis, our findings offer new avenues for preventing the development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) evolution has resulted in viral escape from clinically authorized monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), creating a need for mAbs that are resilient to epitope diversification. Broadly neutralizing coronavirus mAbs that are sufficiently potent for clinical development and retain activity despite viral evolution remain elusive. We identified a human mAb, designated VIR-7229, which targets the viral receptor-binding motif (RBM) with unprecedented cross-reactivity to all sarbecovirus clades, including non-ACE2-utilizing bat sarbecoviruses, while potently neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 variants since 2019, including the recent EG.5, BA.2.86, and JN.1. VIR-7229 tolerates extraordinary epitope variability, partly attributed to its high binding affinity, receptor molecular mimicry, and interactions with RBM backbone atoms. Consequently, VIR-7229 features a high barrier for selection of escape mutants, which are rare and associated with reduced viral fitness, underscoring its potential to be resilient to future viral evolution. VIR-7229 is a strong candidate to become a next-generation medicine.
Adrenomedullin (ADM) is a recently discovered peptide with potent vasorelaxing and natriuretic properties originally isolated from human pheochromocytoma. Adrenomedullin has been reported to be present in normal adrenal medulla, heart, lung and kidney as well as in plasma and urine. ADM shares some structural homology with calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP). ADM acts on target cells through its unique receptors and CGRP1 receptors. In both cases cyclic AMP seems to be the main second messenger. ADM may function as a circulating hormone and as an autocrine/paracrine mediator involved in the regulation of cardiovascular system and renal function. Plasma concentration of ADM is elevated in patients with congestive heart failure, arterial hypertension, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure and sepsis suggesting its role in pathophysiology of these disorders. Recently another product od adrenomedullin gene, proadrenomedullin N-terminal 20-peptide (PAMP) has been described. This peptide has also vasodilating activity resulting from its inhibitory action on norepinephrine release from sympathetic endings and adrenal medulla.
Metabolic reprogramming is a hallmark of cancer and is crucial for cancer progression, making it an attractive therapeutic target. Understanding the role of metabolic reprogramming in cancer initiation could help identify prevention strategies. To address this, we investigated metabolism during acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM), the first step of pancreatic carcinogenesis. Glycolytic markers were elevated in ADM lesions compared with normal tissue from human samples. Comprehensive metabolic assessment in three mouse models with pancreas-specific activation of KRAS, PI3K, or MEK1 using Seahorse measurements, nuclear magnetic resonance metabolome analysis, mass spectrometry, isotope tracing, and RNA sequencing analysis revealed a switch from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis in ADM. Blocking the metabolic switch attenuated ADM formation. Furthermore, mitochondrial metabolism was required for de novo synthesis of serine and glutathione (GSH) but not for ATP production. MYC mediated the increase in GSH intermediates in ADM, and inhibition of GSH synthesis suppressed ADM development. This study thus identifies metabolic changes and vulnerabilities in the early stages of pancreatic carcinogenesis. Significance: Metabolic reprogramming from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis mediated by MYC plays a crucial role in the development of pancreatic cancer, revealing a mechanism driving tumorigenesis and potential therapeutic targets. See related commentary by Storz, p. 2225.
PURPOSE: Metabolic reprogramming and cancer stem cells drive the aggressiveness of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). However, the metabolic and stemness programs of pancreatic precursor lesions (PPL), considered early PDAC development events, have not been thoroughly explored. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Meta-analyses using gene expression profile data from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus and IHC on tissue microarrays (TMA) were performed. The following animal and cellular models were used: cerulean-induced KrasG12D; Pdx1 Cre (KC) acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM) mice, KrasG12D; Smad4Loss; Pdx-1 Cre (KCSmad4-) intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) mice, LGKC1 cell line derived from the doxycycline-inducible Gnas IPMN model, and human IPMN organoids. Flow cytometry, Seahorse extracellular flux analyzer, qRT-PCR, and sphere assay were used to analyze metabolic and stemness features. SR18292 was used to inhibit PGC1alpha, and short hairpin RNA was used to knockdown (KD) PGC1alpha. RESULTS: The meta-analysis revealed a significant upregulation of specific stemness genes in ADM-mediated pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms (PanIN) and IPMN. Meta- and TMA analyses followed by in vitro and in vivo validation revealed that ADM/PanIN exhibit increased PGC1alpha and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPhos) but reduced CPT1A. IPMN showed elevated PGC1alpha, fatty acid beta-oxidation (FAO) gene expression, and FAO-OXPhos. PGC1alpha was co-overexpressed with its coactivator NRF1 in ADM/PanINs and with PPARgamma in IPMN. PGC1alpha KD or SR18292 inhibited the specific metabolic and stemness features of PPLs and repressed IPMN organoid growth. CONCLUSIONS: ADM/PanINs and IPMNs show specific stemness signatures with unique metabolisms. Inhibition of PGC1alpha using SR18292 diminishes the specific stemness by targeting FAO-independent and FAO-dependent OXPhos of ADM/PanINs and IPMNs, respectively.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the most common malignant and incurable brain tumors. The identification of a gene signature for GBM may be helpful for its diagnosis, treatment, prediction of prognosis and even the development of treatments. In this study, we used the GSE108474 database to perform GSEA and machine learning analysis, and identified a 33-gene signature of GBM by examining astrocytoma or non-GBM glioma differential gene expression. The 33 identified signature genes included the overexpressed genes COL6A2, ABCC3, COL8A1, FAM20A, ADM, CTHRC1, PDPN, IBSP, MIR210HG, GPX8, MYL9 and PDLIM4, as well as the underexpressed genes CHST9, CSDC2, ENHO, FERMT1, IGFN1, LINC00836, MGAT4C, SHANK2 and VIPR2. Protein functional analysis by CELLO2GO implied that these signature genes might be involved in regulating various aspects of biological function, including anatomical structure development, cell proliferation and adhesion, signaling transduction and many of the genes were annotated in response to stress. Of these 33 signature genes, 23 have previously been reported to be functionally correlated with GBM; the roles of the remaining 10 genes in glioma development remain unknown. Our results were the first to reveal that GBM exhibited the overexpressed GPX8 gene and underexpressed signature genes including CHST9, CSDC2, ENHO, FERMT1, IGFN1, LINC00836, MGAT4C and SHANK2, which might play crucial roles in the tumorigenesis of different gliomas.
Axonal fusion is an efficient means of repair following axonal transection, whereby the regenerating axon fuses with its own separated axonal fragment to restore neuronal function. Despite being described over 50 years ago, its molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that the Caenorhabditis elegans metalloprotease ADM-4, an ortholog of human ADAM17, is essential for axonal fusion. We reveal that animals lacking ADM-4 cannot repair their axons by fusion, and that ADM-4 has a cell-autonomous function within injured neurons, localizing at the tip of regrowing axon and fusion sites. We demonstrate that ADM-4 overexpression enhances fusion to levels higher than wild type, and that the metalloprotease and phosphatidylserine-binding domains are essential for its function. Last, we show that ADM-4 interacts with and stabilizes the fusogen EFF-1 to allow membranes to merge. Our results uncover a key role for ADM-4 in axonal fusion, exposing a molecular target for axonal repair.
Brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF) is involved in the development of the brain, and likely influences the neuroplasticity in schizophrenia. BDNF is also believed to interact with other neurotransmitter systems implicated in schizophrenia, such as dopamine, glutamate, serotonin and GABA. Therefore, BDNF is a candidate gene for schizophrenia. In past decades, the blood (serum or plasma) BDNF protein levels and BDNF gene alleles and genotypes to the clinical features of schizophrenia, such as age of onset, clinical subtypes, symptom severity, and drug response, have been evaluated among different populations. However, the results are still inconsistent. Further, different drugs have been reported to have different effects on BDNF protein levels. A cross-sectional survey revealed that serum BDNF levels in chronic schizophrenic patients treated with clozapine exceeded those of patients treated with risperidone or with typical antipsychotics. In recent times, BDNF epigenetic studies have also been conducted in clinical studies of schizophrenia to address the question of why patients with the same gene genotype and alleles have different clinical presentations. In addition, the effects of different antipsychotic drugs on gene methylation and protein acetylation have also been reported. In conclusion, more data are needed regarding BDNF in the brain and in peripheral blood, including protein levels, single nucleotide polymorphisms, epigenetic regulation, and clinical data in order to understand the role of BDNF in schizophrenia.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is caused by many intertwining pathologies involving metabolic aberrations. Patients with metabolic syndrome (MetS) generally show hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia, which can lead to the formation of aldehydic adducts such as acrolein on peptides in the brain and blood. However, the pathogenesis from MetS to AD remains elusive. METHODS: An AD cell model expressing Swedish and Indiana amyloid precursor protein (APP-Swe/Ind) in neuro-2a cells and a 3xTg-AD mouse model were used. Human serum samples (142 control and 117 AD) and related clinical data were collected. Due to the involvement of MetS in AD, human samples were grouped into healthy control (HC), MetS-like, AD with normal metabolism (AD-N), and AD with metabolic disturbance (AD-M). APP, amyloid-beta (Ass), and acrolein adducts in the samples were analyzed using immunofluorescent microscopy, histochemistry, immunoprecipitation, immunoblotting, and/or ELISA. Synthetic Ass(1-16) and Ass(17-28) peptides were modified with acrolein in vitro and verified using LC-MS/MS. Native and acrolein-modified Ass peptides were used to measure the levels of specific autoantibodies IgG and IgM in the serum. The correlations and diagnostic power of potential biomarkers were evaluated. RESULTS: An increased level of acrolein adducts was detected in the AD model cells. Furthermore, acrolein adducts were observed on APP C-terminal fragments (APP-CTFs) containing Ass in 3xTg-AD mouse serum, brain lysates, and human serum. The level of acrolein adducts was correlated positively with fasting glucose and triglycerides and negatively with high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, which correspond with MetS conditions. Among the four groups of human samples, the level of acrolein adducts was largely increased only in AD-M compared to all other groups. Notably, anti-acrolein-Ass autoantibodies, especially IgM, were largely reduced in AD-M compared to the MetS group, suggesting that the specific antibodies against acrolein adducts may be depleted during pathogenesis from MetS to AD. CONCLUSIONS: Metabolic disturbance may induce acrolein adduction, however, neutralized by responding autoantibodies. AD may be developed from MetS when these autoantibodies are depleted. Acrolein adducts and the responding autoantibodies may be potential biomarkers for not only diagnosis but also immunotherapy of AD, especially in complication with MetS.
OBJECTIVES: Chronic nausea and vomiting may be associated with gastroparesis or other conditions. Poor mechanistic understanding of symptoms often precludes targeted therapy. Numerous case series suggest that intrapyloric botulinum toxin injection (IPBI) may be beneficial in treating gastroparesis and dyspepsia in children. We hypothesized that nausea, vomiting, and other symptoms, independent of gastroparesis, may improve with IPBI. We sought to identify gastric emptying (GE) and manometric patterns in IPBI responders versus nonresponders. METHODS: Electronic records of 25 pediatric patients who received IPBI for refractory nausea, vomiting, or both were retrospectively reviewed. We assessed symptom improvement post-IPBI and compared symptoms, GE, and antroduodenal manometry (ADM) findings between IPBI responders and nonresponders. RESULTS: At least one major symptom improved in 19 patients (76%) after IPBI. Of 22 patients completing a GE study, 14 had delayed GE with no significant difference between IPBI responders and nonresponders. Of 22 patients who underwent ADM, 18 had normal fasting peristalsis, 5 had postprandial antral hypomotility, 4 had neuropathic findings, and 19 had pylorospasm. IPBI responders, compared to nonresponders, demonstrated higher antral pressures with feeding ( P < 0.0001) and shorter duration of pylorospasm ( P = 0.0036). Antral pressures did not differ significantly with fasting or following motilin agonists. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that IPBI may have therapeutic benefit in pediatric patients with chronic nausea and/or vomiting, independent of gastroparesis. ADM findings of intact antral peristalsis and elevated antral pressures, in conjunction with efficacy of IPBI, support pyloric non-relaxation as a potential contributor to nausea and/or vomiting in pediatric patients.
Adrenomedullin (ADM) is a 52-amino acid multifunctional peptide, which belongs to the calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) superfamily of vasoactive peptide hormones. ADM exhibits a significant vasodilatory potential and plays a key role in various regulatory mechanisms, predominantly in the cardiovascular and lymphatic system. It exerts its effects by activation of the calcitonin receptor-like receptor associated with one of the receptor activity-modifying proteins 2 or 3. ADM was first isolated from human phaeochromocytoma in 1993. Numerous studies revealed a widespread distribution in various tissues and organs, which is reflected by its multiple physiological roles in health and disease. Because of its anti-inflammatory, anti-apoptotic and proliferative properties, ADM exhibits potent protective functions under diverse pathological conditions, but it is also critically involved in tumor progression. ADM has therefore raised great interest in therapeutic applications and several clinical trials already revealed promising results. However, because the receptor activation mode has not yet been fully elucidated, a rational design of potent and selective ligands is still challenging. Detailed information on the binding mode of ADM from a recently reported crystal structure as well as efforts to improve its plasma stability and bioavailability may help to overcome these limitations in the future. Copyright (c) 2017 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Tumors of the parathyroid glands are highly vascularized and display a microRNA (miRNA) profile divergent from normal parathyroid glands (PaNs). Angiogenic miRNAs, namely miR-126-3p, miR-126-5p, and miR-296-5p, have been found downregulated in parathyroid tumors. Here, we show that miR-126-3p expression levels are reduced in parathyroid adenomas (PAds; n = 12) compared with PaNs (n = 4). In situ hybridization (ISH) of miR-126-3p and miR-296-5p in 10 PAds show that miR-126-3p is expressed by endothelial cells lining the walls of great vessels and by cells within the thin stroma surrounding acinar structures. At variance, miR-296-5p was detectable in most PAd epithelial cells. Combining ISH for miR-126-3p with immunohistochemistry for the endothelial and mesenchymal markers CD34, CD31 and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alphaSMA), we could identify that miR-126-3p is localized in the alphaSMA-positive thin stroma. Further, miR-126-3p-expressing cells are enriched in the CD34-positive stromal cells surrounding epithelial cell acinar structures, a cellular pattern consistent with tumor-associated myofibroblasts (TAMs). In line with this, CD34-positive cells, sorted by FACS from PAds tissues, express miR-126-3p at higher levels than CD34-negative cells, suggesting that miR-126-3p downregulation promotes the endothelial-to-alphaSMA+ mesenchymal transition. In human mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone marrow (hBM-MSCs), a model of TAMs, the co-culture with PAds-derived cells for 5 days decreases miR-126-3p, while it increases VEGFA expression. At variance, adrenomedullin (ADM) expression is unaffected. Finally, overexpression of the miR-126-3p mimic in both hBM-MSCs and PAds-derived explants downregulates VEGFA expression levels. In conclusion, miR-126-3p is expressed by both endothelial cells and TAMs in PAds, and its downregulation promotes neoangiogenesis, possibly through VEGFA overexpression.
BACKGROUND: The pathophysiology of adipose proliferation or differentiation in extremity lymphedema has not been thoroughly studied. This study investigated the impacts of the lymph harvested from lymphedematous limbs on the adipogenesis of adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs). METHODS: ASCs were isolated from the adipose tissue of normal extremities and cultured with lymph collected from Cheng lymphedema grade III to IV patients or adipogenic differentiation medium (ADM) and further subjected to differentiation and proliferation assay. The expression of adipogenesis genes was examined by real-time polymerase chain reaction to investigate the effect of lymph on ASCs. The level of adipogenic cytokines in the lymph was also evaluated. RESULTS: The adipocytes were significantly larger in lymphedema fat tissue compared with that in normal fat tissues ( P < 0.00). The adipogenesis of ASCs cultured in lymph was significantly enhanced compared with in ADM ( P = 0.008) on day 10, suggesting that the adipogenesis of ASCs was promoted under the lymph-cultured environment. The expression of adipogenesis genes, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ( P = 0.02), CAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha ( P = 0.008); fatty-acid binding protein ( P = 0.004), and lipoprotein lipase ( P = 0.003), was statistically elevated when the ASCs were cultured with lymph. The insulin content in lymph was statistically higher in lymph ( P < 0.001) than in plasma. CONCLUSIONS: The adipogenesis of ASCs was promoted under the lymph-cultured environment with statistically increased adipogenesis genes of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor, CAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha, fatty-acid binding protein, and lipoprotein lipase. The excess lymph accumulated in the lymphedematous extremity contained a greater insulin/insulin-like growth factor-2. These adipogenic factors promoted the expression of early adipogenesis genes and led ASCs to undergo adipogenesis and differentiated into adipocytes. CLINICAL RELEVANCE STATEMENT: The accumulation of adipose tissue in the lymphedema region was contributed from the content of excess lymph.
Preeclampsia (PE) is a placental disorder caused by endothelial dysfunction via trophoblast inadequate invasion activity. Adrenomedullin (ADM) and ADM2 are multifunctional peptides that can support vascular activity and placental growth. However, correlation between ADMs and trophoblast functions is currently unclear. The objective of this study was to analyze changes in expression of ADMs in placenta and HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast cells under hypoxia and their effects on invasion activity of trophoblast cells and expression of HLA-G. In placental tissues of PE, expression levels of ADM and HLA-G were significantly increased (P < 0.05) whereas expression of ADM2 was decreased compared to that in normal term placenta. Under hypoxia, expression levels of ADM, ADM2, and HLA-G and invasion ability of trophoblast cells were increased in hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1alpha)- dependent manner (P < 0.05). Treatment with ADMs agonists reduced HIF-1alpha activity whereas enhanced invasion ability under hypoxia. However, they were not changed after cotreatment of ADMs and HIF-1alpha inhibitor, YC-1, although expression levels of invasion-related genes MMP2, MMP9, and Rac1 were altered (P < 0.05). ADMs also increased HLA-G expression under normoxia whereasADM2 or cotreatment of ADMs under hypoxia attenuated HLA-G expression (P < 0.05). Our findings demonstrate that altered expression of ADMs plays a critical role in placental physiology, especially in trophoblast invasion and immune-modulation under hypoxia.
Thyroglobulin (Tg) is a large molecule containing 2750 amino acids with a molecular weight of 330 kD and twenty putative N-linked glycosylation sites. Tg gene expression is regulated by thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and human paired box 8 (Pax-8). Iodinated Tg is stored in the lumen of the thyroid follicles and is released in response to specific hormonal stimulation by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). Following Tg reabsorption by thyrocytes and subsequent degradation, thyroid hormones triiodothryronine (T(3)) and thyroxine (T(4)) are secreted in the bloodstream. Mutations within the Tg gene cause defective thyroid hormone synthesis, resulting in congenital hypothyroidism. Thyroid carcinoma may develop from dyshormonogenic goiters due to Tg mutation. Post-thyroidectomy Tg levels are apparently associated with prognosis of papillary and follicular thyroid carcinomas and may predict tumor recurrence and metastastic potential. The detection of Tg by biochemical and molecular means has important diagnostic significance due to its pleiotropic roles in identification of tissue of thyroid origin, differentiation, and post-operative follow-up.
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common tumor subtype of thyroid cancer. However, not all PTCs are responsive to current surgical and radioiodine treatment. The well-established clinical prognostic factors include tumor size, lymph node/distal metastasis, and extrathyroidal invasion. The RET/PTC-RAS-BRAF linear molecular signaling cascade is known to mediate PTC pathogenesis. However, whether presence of BRAF mutation, the most common genetic alteration in PTC, can affect PTC behavior and prognosis is controversial. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been labeled as promising molecular prognostic markers in several tumor types. Our recent studies demonstrated that microRNA-146b (miR-146b) deregulation is associated with PTC aggressiveness and prognosis. Here we summarize the current knowledge related to the functional roles, regulated target genes, and clinical applications of miR-146b in PTC and discuss how these studies provide insights into the key role of miR-146b as an oncogenic regulator promoting cellular transformation as well as a prognosis marker for tumor recurrence in PTC. In conjunction with the current perspectives on miRNAs in a wide variety of human cancers, this review will hopefully translate these updated findings on miR-146b into more comprehensive diagnostic or prognostic information regarding treatment in PTC patients before surgical intervention and follow up strategies.
Pancreatic acinar cells undergo acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM), a necessary process for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) initiation. However, the regulatory role of POH1, a deubiquitinase linked to several types of cancer, in ADM and PDAC is unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of POH1 in ADM and PDAC using murine models. Our findings suggest that pancreatic-specific deletion of Poh1 alleles attenuates ADM and impairs pancreatic carcinogenesis, improving murine survival. Mechanistically, POH1 deubiquitinates and stabilizes the MYC protein, which potentiates ADM and PDAC. Furthermore, POH1 is highly expressed in PDAC samples, and clinical evidence establishes a positive correlation between aberrantly expressed POH1 and poor prognosis in PDAC patients. Targeting POH1 with a specific small-molecule inhibitor significantly reduces pancreatic tumor formation, highlighting POH1 as a promising therapeutic target for PDAC treatment. Overall, POH1-mediated MYC deubiquitination is crucial for ADM and PDAC onset, and targeting POH1 could be an effective strategy for PDAC treatment, offering new avenues for PDAC targeted therapy.
