Adenosine receptor A2b; Receptor for adenosine. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Vascular calcification (VC) is regarded as an independent risk factor for cardiovascular events in type 2 diabetic patients. Glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) involves VC. Intermedin/Adrenomedullin-2 (IMD/ADM2) is a cardiovascular protective peptide that can inhibit multiple disease-associated VC. However, the role and mechanism of IMD in diabetic VC remain unclear. Here, we investigated whether IMD inhibits diabetic VC by inhibiting GLUT1. METHODS AND RESULTS: It was found that plasma IMD concentration was significantly decreased in type 2 diabetic patients and in fructose-induced diabetic rats compared with that in controls. Plasma IMD content was inversely correlated with fasting blood glucose level and VC severity. IMD alleviated VC in fructose-induced diabetic rats. Deficiency of Adm2 aggravated and Adm2 overexpression attenuated VC in high-fat diet-induced diabetic mice. In vitro, IMD mitigated high glucose-induced calcification of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Mechanistically, IMD reduced advanced glycation end products (AGEs) content and the level of receptor for AGEs (RAGE). IMD decreased glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) levels. The inhibitory effect of IMD on RAGE protein level was blocked by GLUT1 knockdown. GLUT1 knockdown abolished the effect of IMD on alleviating VSMC calcification. IMD receptor antagonist IMD(17-47) and cyclic adenosine monophosphate/protein kinase A (cAMP/PKA) inhibitor H89 abolished the inhibitory effects of IMD on GLUT1 and VSMC calcification. CONCLUSIONS: These findings revealed that IMD exerted its anti-calcification effect by inhibiting GLUT1, providing a novel therapeutic target for diabetic VC.
Preeclampsia (PE) is a placental disorder caused by endothelial dysfunction via trophoblast inadequate invasion activity. Adrenomedullin (ADM) and ADM2 are multifunctional peptides that can support vascular activity and placental growth. However, correlation between ADMs and trophoblast functions is currently unclear. The objective of this study was to analyze changes in expression of ADMs in placenta and HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast cells under hypoxia and their effects on invasion activity of trophoblast cells and expression of HLA-G. In placental tissues of PE, expression levels of ADM and HLA-G were significantly increased (P < 0.05) whereas expression of ADM2 was decreased compared to that in normal term placenta. Under hypoxia, expression levels of ADM, ADM2, and HLA-G and invasion ability of trophoblast cells were increased in hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1alpha)- dependent manner (P < 0.05). Treatment with ADMs agonists reduced HIF-1alpha activity whereas enhanced invasion ability under hypoxia. However, they were not changed after cotreatment of ADMs and HIF-1alpha inhibitor, YC-1, although expression levels of invasion-related genes MMP2, MMP9, and Rac1 were altered (P < 0.05). ADMs also increased HLA-G expression under normoxia whereasADM2 or cotreatment of ADMs under hypoxia attenuated HLA-G expression (P < 0.05). Our findings demonstrate that altered expression of ADMs plays a critical role in placental physiology, especially in trophoblast invasion and immune-modulation under hypoxia.
Bitter taste receptors (taste 2 receptors, TAS2Rs) serve as warning sensors in the lingual system against the ingestion of potentially poisonous food. Here, we investigated the functional role of TAS2Rs in the human gut and focused on their potential to trigger an additional host defense pathway in the intestine. Human jejunal crypts, especially those from individuals with obesity, responded to bitter agonists by inducing the release of antimicrobial peptides (alpha-defensin 5 and regenerating islet-derived protein 3 alpha [REG3A]) but also regulated the expression of other innate immune factors (mucins, chemokines) that affected E. coli growth. We found that the effect of aloin on E. coli growth and on the release of the mucus glycoprotein CLCA1, identified via proteomics, was affected by TAS2R43 deletion polymorphisms and thus confirmed a role for TAS2R43. RNA-Seq revealed that denatonium benzoate induced an NRF2-mediated nutrient stress response and an unfolded protein response that increased the expression of the mitokine GDF15 but also ADM2 and LDLR, genes that are involved in anorectic signaling and lipid homeostasis. In conclusion, TAS2Rs in the intestine constitute a promising target for treating diseases that involve disturbances in the innate immune system and body weight control. TAS2R polymorphisms may be valuable genetic markers to predict therapeutic responses.
CONTEXT: It is not known whether decreases in trophoblast invasion promoting the peptide, adrenomedullin2 (ADM2) system is associated with preeclampsia (PreE). OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to assess the changes in ADM2 levels in plasma, placenta, and amniotic fluid (AF) and its receptor components in placenta from PreE pregnancy compared with the age-matched normal and study the effect of ADM2 on the synthesis of nitric oxide (NO), endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), and matrix-metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 in trophoblast cells. RESULTS: PreE is associated with a decreased expression of ADM2 in plasma and placenta (P < .05); ADM2 interacts with a seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor, calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CRLR) in HTR-8/SVneo cells; placental expression of ADM2/CRLR complex is lower in PreE; mRNA for CRLR and receptor activity-modifying protein-3 are lower, whereas receptor activity-modifying protein-2 is higher in the PreE placenta (P < .05); ADM2 levels in the second trimester are lower in the AF from pregnant women who develop PreE later in gestation (P < .05); ADM2 is localized to the epithelium of the amnion and the ectoderm and mesoderm of the chorion in term fetal membranes; ADM2 increases NO production, eNOS, and MMP2/9-immunoreactivity, whereas ADM2 knockdown inhibits the expression of eNOS and MMP2/9 mRNA and S-nitrosylation in HTR-8/SVneo cells; and ADM2-induced increases in MMP2/9 activity is inhibited by L-nitro-arginine methyl ester in HTR-8SV/neo cells. CONCLUSION: Decreases in the ADM2 system in PreE at term, in AF from pregnant women during the second trimester who develop PreE later in gestation, and ADM2-induced increases in the NO and MMP-2/9 levels in trophoblast cells suggest a potential role for ADM2 via the NO-MMP system in the pathophysiology of PreE.
Adrenomedullin 2 (AM2) or intermedin is a member of the calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)/calcitonin family of peptides and was discovered in 2004. Unlike other members of this family, no unique receptor has yet been identified for it. It is extensively distributed throughout the body. It causes hypotension when given peripherally, but when given into the CNS, it increases blood pressure and causes sympathetic activation. It also increases prolactin release, is anti-diuretic and natriuretic and reduces food intake. Whilst its effects resemble those of AM, it is frequently more potent. Some characterization of AM2 has been done on molecularly defined receptors; the existing data suggest that it preferentially activates the AM(2) receptor formed from calcitonin receptor-like receptor and receptor activity modifying protein 3. On this complex, its potency is generally equivalent to that of AM. There is no known receptor-activity where it is more potent than AM. In tissues and in animals it is frequently antagonised by CGRP and AM antagonists; however, situations exist in which an AM2 response is maintained even in the presence of supramaximal concentrations of these antagonists. Thus, there is a partial mismatch between the pharmacology seen in tissues and that on cloned receptors. The only AM2 antagonists are peptide fragments, and these have limited selectivity. It remains unclear as to whether novel AM2 receptors exist or whether the mismatch in pharmacology can be explained by factors such as metabolism.
Unravelling how energy metabolism and stress responses are regulated in human scalp hair follicles could reveal novel insights into the controls of hair growth and provide new targets to manage hair loss disorders. The Mitochondrial Pyruvate Carrier (MPC) imports pyruvate, produced via glycolysis, into the mitochondria, fuelling the TCA cycle. Previous work has shown that MPC inhibition promotes lactate generation, which activates murine epithelial hair follicle stem cells (eHFSCs). However, by pharmacologically targeting the MPC in short-term human hair follicle ex vivo organ culture experiments using UK-5099, we induced metabolic stress-responsive proliferative arrest throughout the human hair follicle epithelium, including within Keratin 15+ eHFSCs. Through transcriptomics, MPC inhibition was shown to promote a gene expression signature indicative of disrupted FGF, IGF, TGFbeta and WNT signalling, mitochondrial dysfunction, and activation of the integrated stress response (ISR), which can arrest cell cycle progression. The ISR, mediated by the transcription factor ATF4, is activated by stressors including amino acid deprivation and ER stress, consistent with MPC inhibition within our model. Using RNAScope, we confirmed the upregulation of both ATF4 and the highly upregulated ATF4-target gene ADM2 on human hair follicle tissue sections in situ. Moreover, treatment with the ISR inhibitor ISRIB attenuated both the upregulation of ADM2 and the proliferative block imposed via MPC inhibition. Together, this work reveals how the human hair follicle, as a complex and metabolically active human tissue system, can dynamically adapt to metabolic stress.
Adrenomedullin (ADM) 2/intermedin (IMD) is a short peptide that belongs to the CGRP superfamily. Although it shares receptors with CGRP, ADM and amylin, ADM2 has significant and unique functions in the cardiovascular system. In the past decade, the cardiovascular effect of ADM2 has been carefully analysed. In this review, progress in understanding the effects of ADM2 on the cardiovascular system and its protective role in cardiometabolic diseases are summarized. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed section on Spotlight on Small Molecules in Cardiovascular Diseases. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v175.8/issuetoc.
RATIONALE: Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and its family members adrenomedullin (ADM) and adrenomedullin 2 (ADM2; also known as intermedin) support vascular adaptions in rat pregnancy. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to assess the relaxation response of uterine artery (UA) for CGRP, ADM, and ADM2 in nonpregnant and pregnant women and identify the involved mechanisms. FINDINGS: (1) Segments of UA from nonpregnant women that were precontracted with U46619 (1muM) in vitro are insensitive to the hypotensive effects of CGRP, ADM, and ADM2; (2) CGRP, ADM, and ADM2 (0.1-100nM) dose dependently relax UA segments from pregnant women with efficacy for CGRP > ADM = ADM2; (3) the relaxation responses to CGRP, ADM, and ADM2 are differentially affected by the inhibitors of nitric oxide (NO) synthase (L-NAME), adenylyl cyclase (SQ22536), apamin, and charybdotoxin; (4) UA smooth muscle cells (UASMC) express mRNA for calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CRLR) and receptor activity modifying protein (RAMP)1 and RAMP2 but not RAMP3; (5) receptor heterodimer comprising CRLR/RAMP1 and CRLR/RAMP2 but not CRLR/RAMP3 is present in UA; (6) soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase (sFLT-1) and TNF-alpha treatment decrease the expression of RAMP1 mRNA (P < 0.05) in UASMC; and (7) sFLT-1 treatment impairs the association of CRLR with all 3 peptides while TNF-alpha inhibits the interaction of CGRP but not ADM or ADM2 with CRLR in UASMC (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Relaxation sensitivity of UA for CGRP, ADM, and ADM2 is increased during pregnancy via peptide-specific involvement of NO system and endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factors; vascular disruptors such as sFLT-1 and TNFalpha adversely impact their receptor system in UASMC.
Association of an altered expression of placental mucin 1 (MUC1) with first-trimester spontaneous abortion and its regulation in placenta by an invasion-promoting peptide, adrenomedullin 2 (ADM2), is not known. The objective of this study was to assess 1) the association of MUC1 mRNA expression in the placental villi and decidua with first-trimester spontaneous abortion, 2) the effects of ADM2 on the expression of MUC1 in trophoblast cells in the presence or absence of hypoxia, 3) the effects of ADM2 on expression of MUC1 in decidual stromal cells (DSCs), and 4) if ADM2 regulates the expression of MUC1 and MMP2 protein in trophoblastic spheroids. Data demonstrate that 1) expression of MUC1 mRNA in villous tissue is higher in spontaneous abortion compared to age-matched electively terminated pregnancies (P > 0.05), 2) ADM2 decreases the expression of MUC1 mRNA and protein in trophoblast cells and spheroids with concomitant increases in MMP2 immunoreactivity in the spheroids, 3) ADM2 decreases hypoxia-induced increases in MUC1 immunoreactivity in trophoblast cells, 4) decidual MUC1 mRNA expression is lower in spontaneous compared to elective abortions (P < 0.05), and 5) DSCs express MUC1 mRNA and protein and ADM2 decreases the expression of MUC1 mRNA and protein in DSCs. Taken together, this study demonstrates that first-trimester spontaneous abortion is associated with increases in MUC1 expression in villi and decreases in the decidual tissues, and suggests that ADM2 may contribute to the physiology of embryo implantation and placental growth via increasing MMP2 and decreasing MUC1 expression to facilitate trophoblast invasion.
Adrenomedullin 2/intermedin (AM2/IMD), adrenomedullin (AM), and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) have functions in the cardiovascular, lymphatic, and nervous systems by activating three heterodimeric receptors comprising the class B GPCR CLR and a RAMP1, -2, or -3 modulatory subunit. CGRP and AM prefer the RAMP1 and RAMP2/3 complexes, respectively, whereas AM2/IMD is thought to be relatively nonselective. Accordingly, AM2/IMD exhibits overlapping actions with CGRP and AM, so the rationale for this third agonist for the CLR-RAMP complexes is unclear. Here, we report that AM2/IMD is kinetically selective for CLR-RAMP3, known as the AM(2)R, and we define the structural basis for its distinct kinetics. In live cell biosensor assays, AM2/IMD-AM(2)R elicited longer-duration cAMP signaling than the other peptide-receptor combinations. AM2/IMD and AM bound the AM(2)R with similar equilibrium affinities, but AM2/IMD had a slower off-rate and longer receptor residence time, thus explaining its prolonged signaling capacity. Peptide and receptor chimeras and mutagenesis were used to map the regions responsible for the distinct binding and signaling kinetics to the AM2/IMD mid-region and the RAMP3 extracellular domain (ECD). Molecular dynamics simulations revealed how the former forms stable interactions at the CLR ECD-transmembrane domain interface and how the latter augments the CLR ECD binding pocket to anchor the AM2/IMD C terminus. These strong binding components only combine in the AM(2)R. Our findings uncover AM2/IMD-AM(2)R as a cognate pair with unique temporal features, reveal how AM2/IMD and RAMP3 collaborate to shape CLR signaling, and have significant implications for AM2/IMD biology.
Thyroid cancer is associated with genetic alterations, e.g. BRAF(V600E) , which may cause carcinomatous changes in hormone-secreting epithelial cells. Epidemiological studies have shown that overnutrition is related to the development and progression of cancer. In this study, we attempted to identify the cell nonautonomous factor responsible for the progression of BRAF(V600E) thyroid cancer under overnutrition conditions. We developed a mouse model for inducible thyrocyte-specific activation of BRAF(V600E) , which showed features similar to those of human papillary thyroid cancer. LSL-Braf(V600E) ;TgCreER(T2) showed thyroid tumour development in the entire thyroid, and the tumour showed more abnormal cellular features with mitochondrial abnormalities in mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD). Transcriptomics revealed that adrenomedullin2 (Adm2) was increased in LSL-Braf(V600E) ;TgCreER(T2) mice fed HFD. ADM2 was upregulated on the addition of a mitochondrial complex I inhibitor or palmitic acid with integrated stress response (ISR) in cancer cells. ADM2 stimulated protein kinase A and extracellular signal-regulated kinase in vitro. The knockdown of ADM2 suppressed the proliferation and migration of thyroid cancer cells. We searched The Cancer Genome Atlas and Genotype-Tissue Expression databases and found that increased ADM2 expression was associated with ISR and poor overall survival. Consistently, upregulated ADM2 expression in tumour cells and circulating ADM2 molecules were associated with aggressive clinicopathological parameters, including body mass index, in thyroid cancer patients. Collectively, we identified that ADM2 is released from cancer cells under mitochondrial stress resulting from overnutrition and acts as a secretory factor determining the progressive properties of thyroid cancer. (c) 2022 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and adrenomedullin 2/intermedin (AM2/IMD) play important roles in several pathologies, including cardiovascular disease, migraine and cancer. The efficacy of drugs targeting CGRP signalling axis for the treatment of migraine patients is sometimes offset by side effects (e.g. inflammation and microvascular complications, including aberrant neovascularisation in the skin). Recent studies using animal models implicate CGRP in lymphangiogenesis and lymphatic vessel function. However, whether CGRP or AM2/IMD can act directly on lymphatic endothelial cells is unknown. Here, we found that CGRP and AM2/IMD induced p44/42 MAPK phosphorylation in a time- and dose-dependent manner in primary human dermal lymphatic endothelial cells (HDLEC) in vitro, and thus directly affected these cells. These new findings reveal CGRP and AM2/IMD as novel regulators of LEC biology and warrant further investigation of their roles in the context of pathologies associated with lymphatic function in the skin and other organs, and therapies targeting CGRP signalling axis.
Intermedin (IMD) or adrenomedullin 2 is a novel peptide related to the calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) family. Via calcitonin receptor-like receptor/receptor activity modifying proteins, the common receptor complexes of CGRP, IMD exerts a wide range of biological effects, especially regulation of cardiovascular homeostasis. Proteolytic processing of a larger IMD precursor yields a series of biologically active C-terminal fragments, IMD1-53, IMD1-47 and IMD8-47. IMD and its receptors are present in the cardiovascular system, and IMD is present at low levels in plasma. In the cardiovascular system, IMD has multiple functions such as regulation of blood pressure and cardiac function, pro-angiogenesis, endothelial barrier function protection, anti-oxidative stress, and anti-endoplasmic reticulum stress. IMD participates widely in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, hypertension, pulmonary arterial hypertension and vascular calcification. It is a vascular regulatory factor of homeostasis and a vital endogenous protective factor against vascular diseases.
Adrenomedullin 2 (ADM2), also referred to as intermedin (IMD), is expressed in trophoblast cells in human placenta and enhances the invasion and migration of first-trimester HTR-8SV/neo cells. Further infusion of ADM2 antagonist in pregnant rat causes fetoplacental growth restriction, suggesting a role for ADM2 in maintaining a successful pregnancy. This study was undertaken to assess whether ADM2 protein is present in decidual tissue and colocalized with HLA-G-positive cytotrophoblast cells and natural killer cells; to assess whether ADM2 regulates expression of HLA-G in trophoblast cells; and to identify whether mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway is involved in ADM2-induced trophoblast cell invasion and migration. Using immunohistochemical methods and RT-PCR, this study shows that ADM2 protein is colocalized with HLA-G-expressing cytotrophoblast cells as well as with NCAM1 (CD56) immunoreactivity in human first-trimester decidual tissue, and that ADM2 mRNA is expressed in peripheral blood natural killer cells. Further, ADM2 dose dependently increases the expression of HLA-G antigen in HTR-8SV/neo cells as well as in term placental villi explants, suggesting involvement of ADM2 in the regulation of HLA-G in trophoblast cells. In addition, interference with the activity of RAF and MAPK3/1 by their inhibitors, manumycin and U0126, respectively, reduces ADM2-induced HTR-8SV/neo cell invasion and migration. In summary, this study suggests a potential involvement for ADM2 in regulating HLA-G antigen at the maternal-fetal interface in human pregnancy and facilitating trophoblast invasion and migration via MAPK3/1 phosphorylation.
Intermedin or adrenomedullin 2 is a set of calcitonin-related peptides with a putative tumor angiogenesis promoting activity that are formed by proteolytic processing of the ADM2 gene product. It has been proposed that the ADM2 gene is regulated by the estrogen response element (ERE) and hypoxia response elements (HRE) found within its promoter region. In the present study we reveal a functional mechanism by which ADM2 participates in the unfolded protein response (UPR) and in responses to the mitochondrial respiration chain inhibition. We show that the ADM2 gene is controlled by activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), the principal regulator of the integrated stress response (ISR). The upregulation of ADM2 mRNA could be prevented by the pharmacological ISR inhibitor ISRIB and by the downregulation of ATF4 with specific shRNA, while ectopic expression of ATF4 cDNA resulted in a notable increase in ADM2 gene transcription. A potential ATF4-binding site was identified in the coding region of the ADM2 gene and the requirement of this site during the ATF4-mediated ADM2 gene promoter activation was validated by the luciferase reporter assay. Mutagenesis of the putative ATF4-response element prevented the induction of luciferase activity in response to ATF4 overproduction, as well as in response to mitochondrial electron transfer chain inhibition by piericidin A and ER stress induction by tunicamycin and brefeldin A. Since ADM2 was shown to inhibit ATF4 expression during myocardial ER stress, a feedback mechanism could be proposed for the ADM2 regulation under ER stress conditions.
BACKGROUND: Tumor angiogenesis has been demonstrated to have an important role in the development, progression, and metastasis of pancreas cancer. Adrenomedullin-2 (ADM2) is a calcitonin gene-related peptide that has recently been shown to be a novel tumor angiogenesis factor, acting via mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase, phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt, and vascular endothelial growth factor/vascular endothelial growth factor-2 signaling pathways. Through the use of tissue microarray (TMA) technology, we hypothesize that ADM2 is an important tumor angiogenesis factor in pancreatic cancer. METHODS: Multiple TMAs were created using tissue from pancreatic cancer patients resected between January 1996 and December 2006. Core tissue samples of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks of pancreatic cancer tissue were collected through an institutional review board-approved protocol and linked to available clinicopathologic data. Two TMAs consisting of 112 and 60 patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma were studied for ADM2 protein expression using a quantitative, automated immunofluorescent microscopy system, a technology that removes potential observer bias in TMA analysis. The results were analyzed using independent Student t-test, chi-square, log-rank regression, and Kaplan-Meier methods. RESULTS: One hundred sixteen patients were identified for complete analysis, and 56 patients had complete survival data. Median follow-up for survivors was 14.5 mo. Total cellular levels of ADM2 were found to be a predictor of survival in pancreatic cancer. Low ADM2 levels were associated with a higher 5-y survival compared with high ADM2 levels (18% versus 6%, P = 0.05). Median survival was also worse in high ADM2 expressers (18.7 versus 8.6 mo). In accordance with prior-published pancreatic cancer data, a worse histologic grade (P = 0.001), tumor (T) stage (P = 0.009), and overall disease stage (P = 0.004), all portended a worse survival. CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, we have demonstrated that high levels of ADM2 expression predict a poorer survival in patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. This suggests a possible role of ADM2 in pancreas cancer and as a novel biomarker that predicts poorer survival. Additional study of ADM2 in pancreatic cancer will help reveal its true angiogenic role in pancreas cancer and its potential role as a novel therapeutic target.
Adrenomedullin (ADM), calcitonin gene-related peptides (alpha- and beta-CGRPs), and intermedin/adrenomedullin 2 (IMD/ADM2) are major regulators of vascular tone and cardiovascular development in vertebrates. Recent research into their functions in reproduction has illuminated the role of these peptides and their cognate receptors (calcitonin receptor-like receptor/receptor activity-modifying protein (CLR/RAMP) receptors) in fetal-maternal blood circulation, fetoplacental development, female gamete development, and gamete movement in the oviduct. Although ADM family peptides function in a temporally and spatially specific manner in various reproductive processes, they appear to act via a similar set of second messengers, including nitric oxide, cyclic GMP, cyclic AMP, and calcium-activated potassium channels in different tissues. These discoveries supported the view that CLR/RAMP receptors were recruited to perform a variety of newly evolved reproductive functions during the evolution of internal reproduction in mammals. These advances also provided insight into how CLR/RAMP receptor signaling pathways coordinate with other physiological adaptions to accommodate the extra metabolic needs during pregnancy, and captured some important details as to how fetal-maternal vascular communications are generated in the first place. Furthermore, these findings have revealed novel, promising opportunities for the prevention and treatment of aberrant pregnancies such as pregnancy-induced hypertension, preeclampsia, and tubal ectopic pregnancy. However, significant efforts are still needed to clarify the relationships between certain components of the CLR/RAMP signaling pathway and aberrant pregnancies before CLR/RAMP receptors can become targets for clinical management. With this understanding, this review summarizes recent progresses with particular focus on clinical implications.
Rho GDP-dissociation inhibitor (RhoGDI), a downregulator of Rho family GTPases, prevents nucleotide exchange and membrane association. It is responsible for the activation of Rho GTPases, which regulate a variety of cellular processes, such as migration. Although RhoGDI2 has been identified as a tumor suppressor gene involved in cellular migration and invasion, little is known about its role in vascular endothelial cell (EC) migration. CR6-interacting factor 1 (CRIF1) is a CR6/GADD45-interacting protein with important mitochondrial functions and regulation of cell growth. We examined the expression of RhoGDI2 in CRIF1-deficient human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and its role in cell migration. Expression of RhoGDI2 was found to be considerably higher in CRIF1-deficient HUVECs along with suppression of cell migration. Moreover, the phosphorylation levels of Akt and CREB were decreased in CRIF1-silenced cells. The Akt-CREB signaling pathway was implicated in the changes in endothelial cell migration caused by CRIF1 downregulation. In addition to RhoGDI2, we identified another factor that promotes migration and invasion of ECs. Adrenomedullin2 (ADM2) is an autocrine/paracrine factor that regulates vascular tone and other vascular functions. Endogenous ADM2 levels were elevated in CRIF1-silenced HUVECs with no effect on cell migration. However, siRNA-mediated depletion of RhoGDI2 or exogenous ADM2 administration significantly restored cell migration via the Akt-CREB signaling pathway. In conclusion, RhoGDI2 and ADM2 play important roles in the migration of CRIF1-deficient endothelial cells.
The peptide hormone adrenomedullin (ADM) consists of 52 amino acids and plays a pivotal role in the regulation of many physiological processes, particularly those of the cardiovascular and lymphatic system. Like calcitonin (CT), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), intermedin (IMD) and amylin (AMY), it belongs to the CT/CGRP family of peptide hormones, which despite their low little sequence identity share certain characteristic structural features as well as a complex multicomponent receptor system. ADM, IMD and CGRP exert their biological effects by activation of the calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CLR) as a complex with one of three receptor activity-modifying proteins (RAMP), which alter the ligand affinity. Selectivity within the receptor system is largely mediated by the amidated C-terminus of the peptide hormones, which bind to the extracellular domains of the receptors. This enables their N-terminus consisting of a disulfide-bonded ring structure and a helical segment to bind within the transmembrane region and to induce an active receptor confirmation. ADM is expressed in a variety of tissues in the human body and is fundamentally involved in multitude biological processes. Thus, it is of interest as a diagnostic marker and a promising candidate for therapeutic interventions. In order to fully exploit the potential of ADM, it is necessary to improve its pharmacological profile by increasing the metabolic stability and, ideally, creating receptor subtype-selective analogs. While several successful attempts to prolong the half-life of ADM were recently reported, improving or even retaining receptor selectivity remains challenging.
