Adenosine receptor A2b; Receptor for adenosine. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase.
The microenvironment that surrounds pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is profoundly desmoplastic and immunosuppressive. Understanding triggers of immunosuppression during the process of pancreatic tumorigenesis would aid in establishing targets for effective prevention and therapy. Here, we interrogated differential molecular mechanisms dependent on cell of origin and subtype that promote immunosuppression during PDAC initiation and in established tumors. Transcriptomic analysis of cell-of-origin-dependent epithelial gene signatures revealed that Nt5e/CD73, a cell-surface enzyme required for extracellular adenosine generation, is one of the top 10% of genes overexpressed in murine tumors arising from the ductal pancreatic epithelium as opposed to those rising from acinar cells. These findings were confirmed by IHC and high-performance liquid chromatography. Analysis in human PDAC subtypes indicated that high Nt5e in murine ductal PDAC models overlaps with high NT5E in human PDAC squamous and basal subtypes, considered to have the highest immunosuppression and worst prognosis. Multiplex immunofluorescent analysis showed that activated CD8+ T cells in the PDAC tumor microenvironment express high levels of CD73, indicating an opportunity for immunotherapeutic targeting. Delivery of CD73 small-molecule inhibitors through various delivery routes reduced tumor development and growth in genetically engineered and syngeneic mouse models. In addition, the adenosine receptor Adora2b was a determinant of adenosine-mediated immunosuppression in PDAC. These findings highlight a molecular trigger of the immunosuppressive PDAC microenvironment elevated in the ductal cell of origin, linking biology with subtype classification, critical components for PDAC immunoprevention and personalized approaches for immunotherapeutic intervention. SIGNIFICANCE: Ductal-derived pancreatic tumors have elevated epithelial and CD8+GZM+ T-cell CD73 expression that confers sensitivity to small-molecule inhibition of CD73 or Adora2b to promote CD8+ T-cell-mediated tumor regression. See related commentary by DelGiorno, p. 977.
Plasma IL-6 is elevated after myocardial infarction (MI) and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Which cardiac cell type preferentially contributes to IL-6 expression and how its production is regulated are largely unknown. Here, we studied the cellular source and purinergic regulation of IL-6 formation in a murine MI model. We found that IL-6, measured in various cell types in post-MI hearts at the protein level and by quantitative PCR and RNAscope, was preferentially formed by cardiac fibroblasts (CFs). Single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) in infarcted mouse and human hearts confirmed this finding. We found that adenosine stimulated fibroblast IL-6 formation via the adenosine receptor A2bR in a Gq-dependent manner. CFs highly expressed Adora2b and rapidly degraded extracellular ATP to AMP but lacked CD73. In mice and humans, scRNA-Seq revealed that Adora2B was also mainly expressed by fibroblasts. We assessed global IL-6 production in isolated hearts from mice lacking CD73 on T cells (CD4-CD73-/-), a condition known to be associated with adverse cardiac remodeling. The ischemia-induced release of IL-6 was strongly attenuated in CD4-CD73-/- mice, suggesting adenosine-mediated modulation. Together, these findings demonstrate that post-MI IL-6 was mainly derived from activated CFs and was controlled by T cell-derived adenosine. We show that purinergic metabolic cooperation between CFs and T cells is a mechanism that modulates IL-6 formation by the heart and has therapeutic potential.
The mechanisms of adenosine and specific adenosine receptor subtypes in promoting penile rehabilitation remain unclear. Single-cell RNA sequencing of human corpus cavernosum,  adenosine deaminase (ADA) and adenosine receptors knock-out mice (ADA(-/-), A1(-/-), A2a(-/-), A2b(-/-), and A3(-/-)), and primary corpus cavernosum smooth muscle cells are used to determine receptor subtypes responsible for adenosine-induced erection. Three rat models are established to characterize refractory erectile dysfunction (ED): age-related ED, bilateral cavernous nerve crush related ED (BCNC), and diabetes mellitus-induced ED. In single-cell RNA sequencing data, the corpus cavernosum of ED patients show a decrease in adenosine A1, A2a and A2b receptors. In vivo, A2b receptor knock-out abolishes adenosine-induced erection but not that of A1, A2a, or A3 receptor. Under hypoxic conditions in vitro, activating the A2b receptor increases HIF-1alpha and decreases PDE5 expression. In refractory ED models, activating the A2b receptor with Bay 60-6583 improves erectile function and down-regulates HIF-1alpha and TGF-beta. Administering Dipyridamole (40 mg Kg(-1)) to BCNC rats improve penile adenosine levels and erectile function. Our study reveals that the A2b receptor mediates adenosine-induced penile erection. Activating the A2b receptor promotes penile rehabilitation of refractory ED by alleviating hypoxia and fibrosis.
Irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea (IBS-D) is a common and chronic gastrointestinal disorder that is characterized by abdominal discomfort and occasional diarrhea. The pathogenesis of IBS-D is thought to be related to a combination of factors, including psychological stress, abnormal muscle contractions, and inflammation and disorder of the gut microbiome. However, there is still a lack of comprehensive analysis of the logical regulatory correlation among these factors. In this study, we found that stress induced hyperproduction of xanthine and altered the abundance and metabolic characteristics of Lactobacillus murinus in the gut. Lactobacillus murinus-derived spermidine suppressed the basal expression of type I interferon (IFN)-alpha in plasmacytoid dendritic cells by inhibiting the K63-linked polyubiquitination of TRAF3. The reduction in IFN-alpha unrestricted the contractile function of colonic smooth muscle cells, resulting in an increase in bowel movement. Our findings provided a theoretical basis for the pathological mechanism of, and new drug targets for, stress-exposed IBS-D.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by a dense desmoplastic stroma that impedes drug delivery, reduces parenchymal blood flow, and suppresses the anti-tumor immune response. The extracellular matrix and abundance of stromal cells result in severe hypoxia within the tumor microenvironment (TME), and emerging publications evaluating PDAC tumorigenesis have shown the adenosine signaling pathway promotes an immunosuppressive TME and contributes to the overall low survival rate. Hypoxia increases many elements of the adenosine signaling pathway, resulting in higher adenosine levels in the TME, further contributing to immune suppression. Extracellular adenosine signals through 4 adenosine receptors (Adora1, Adora2a, Adora2b, Adora3). Of the 4 receptors, Adora2b has the lowest affinity for adenosine and thus, has important consequences when stimulated by adenosine binding in the hypoxic TME. We and others have shown that Adora2b is present in normal pancreas tissue, and in injured or diseased pancreatic tissue, Adora2b levels are significantly elevated. The Adora2b receptor is present on many immune cells, including macrophages, dendritic cells, natural killer cells, natural killer T cells, gammadelta T cells, B cells, T cells, CD4(+) T cells, and CD8(+) T cells. In these immune cell types, adenosine signaling through Adora2b can reduce the adaptive anti-tumor response, augmenting immune suppression, or may contribute to transformation and changes in fibrosis, perineural invasion, or the vasculature by binding the Adora2b receptor on neoplastic epithelial cells, cancer-associated fibroblasts, blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves. In this review, we discuss the mechanistic consequences of Adora2b activation on cell types in the tumor microenvironment. As the cell-autonomous role of adenosine signaling through Adora2b has not been comprehensively studied in pancreatic cancer cells, we will also discuss published data from other malignancies to infer emerging therapeutic considerations for targeting the Adora2b adenosine receptor to reduce the proliferative, invasive, and metastatic potential of PDAC cells.
Myocardial ischemia is associated with profound tissue hypoxia due to an imbalance in oxygen supply and demand, and studies of hypoxia-elicited adaptive responses during myocardial ischemia revealed a cardioprotective role for the signaling molecule adenosine. In ischemic human hearts, the A2B adenosine receptor (ADORA2B) is selectively induced. Functional studies in genetic models show that ADORA2B signaling attenuates myocardial infarction by adapting metabolism towards more oxygen efficient utilization of carbohydrates. This adenosine-mediated cardio-adaptive response involves the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor HIF1alpha and the circadian rhythm protein PER2. In this article, we discuss advances in the understanding of adenosine-elicited cardioprotection with particular emphasis on ADORA2B, its downstream targets, and the implications for novel strategies to prevent or treat myocardial ischemia.
AIMS: Prior evidence has shown a significant link between inflammation and the development of myocarditis. This study aimed to investigate the causal relationship between inflammation-related genes (IRGs) and myocarditis. METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, the causal relationship between 167 IRGs and myocarditis were investigated using datasets from the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis and Integrative Epidemiology Unit open genome-wide association study (IEU OpenGWAS) databases. The GWAS data (finn-b-I9 MYOCARD) contained single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) data from 117 755 myocarditis samples (16 379 455 SNPs, 829 cases vs. 116 926 controls). Five algorithms [MR-Egger, weighted median, inverse variance weighted (IVW), simple mode, and weighted mode regression] were employed for the MR analysis, with IVW as the primary method, and sensitivity analysis was conducted. Subcellular localization and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analyses were performed for selected biomarkers. Results were verified in ebi-a-GCST90018882 (24 180 570 SNPs, 633 cases vs. 427 278 controls) and finn-b-I9 MYOCARD EXNONE (16 380 466 SNPs, 829 cases vs. 217 963 controls) to enhance reliability. RESULTS: IRF7 and ADORA2B were shown to be two exposure factors after screening. Univariable MR (UVMR) analysis revealed that IRF7 was a risk factor for myocarditis [IVW: odd ratio (OR) = 1.041, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.018-1.955, P = 0.039], while ADORA2B was a protective factors for myocarditis (IVW: OR = 0.799, 95% CI = 0.640-0.997, P = 0.047). Sensitivity analysis confirmed the robustness of these findings. Multivariable MR (MVMR) analysis further demonstrated a direct causal role of ADORA2B in preventing myocarditis. Subcellular localization analysis indicated predominant cytoplasmic expression and limited mitochondrial expression for both genes. The results of PPI analysis showed that 20 genes were predicted to be associated with IRF7 function, such as response to type I interferon, pattern recognition receptor signalling pathway, and toll-like receptor signalling pathway. The results in finn-b-I9 MYOCARD EXNONE were consistent with MR analysis. CONCLUSIONS: The findings indicated there was a causal connection between IRGs (IRF7 and ADORA2B) and myocarditis, which offered a crucial point of reference and guidance for future studies and myocarditis treatment.
BACKGROUND: Adenosine A2b receptor (ADORA2B) encodes an adenosine receptor that is a member of the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. This integral membrane protein stimulates adenylate cyclase activity in the presence of adenosine. Little is known about the relevance of ADORA2B to human malignancy including oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). We aimed to characterize the expression state and function of ADORA2B in OSCC. METHODS: The ADORA2B expression levels in nine OSCC-derived cells were analyzed by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and immunoblotting analyses. Using an ADORA2B knockdown model, we assessed cellular proliferation and expression of hypoxia-inducible factor1alpha (HIF-1alpha). We examined the adenosine receptor expression profile under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions in the OSCC-derived cells. In addition to in vitro data, the clinical correlation between the ADORA2B expression levels in primary OSCCs (n = 100 patients) and the clinicopathological status by immunohistochemistry (IHC) also was evaluated. RESULTS: ADORA2B mRNA and protein were up-regulated significantly (p < 0.05) in seven OSCC-derived cells compared with human normal oral keratinocytes. Suppression of ADORA2B expression with shRNA significantly (p < 0.05) inhibited cellular proliferation compared with the control cells. HIF-1alpha also was down-regulated in ADORA2B knockdown OSCC cells. During hypoxia, ADORA2B expression was induced significantly (p < 0.05) in the mRNA and protein after 24 hours of incubation in OSCC-derived cells. IHC showed that ADORA2B expression in primary OSCCs was significantly (p < 0.05) greater than in the normal oral counterparts and that ADORA2B-positive OSCCs were correlated closely (p < 0.05) with tumoral size. CONCLUSION: Our results suggested that ADORA2B controls cellular proliferation via HIF-1alpha activation, indicating that ADORA2B may be a key regulator of tumoral progression in OSCCs.
Autophagy facilitates the degradation of cellular content via the lysosome and is involved in cellular homeostasis and stress response pathways. As such, malfunction of autophagy is linked to a variety of diseases ranging from organ-specific illnesses like cardiomyopathy to systemic illnesses such as cancer or metabolic syndromes. Given the variety of autophagic functions within a cell and tissue, regulation of autophagy is complex and contains numerous positive and negative feedback loops. While our knowledge of mechanisms for cargo selectivity has significantly improved over the last decade, our understanding of signaling routes activating individual autophagy pathways remains rather sparse. In this resource study, we report on a well-characterized chemical library containing 77 GPCR-targeting ligands that was used to systematically analyze LC3B-based autophagy as well as ER-phagy flux upon compound treatment. Upon others, compounds TC-G 1004, BAY 60-6583, PSNCBAM-1, TC-G 1008, LPA2 Antagonist 1, ML-154, JTC-801 and ML-290 targeting adenosine receptor A2a (ADORA2A), adenosine receptor A2b (ADORA2B), cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1), G-protein coupled receptor 39 (GPR39), lysophosphatidic acid receptor 2 (LPAR2), neuropeptide S receptor 1 (NPSR1), opioid related nociceptin receptor 1 (OPRL1), and relaxin receptor 1 (RXFP1), respectively, were hit compounds for general autophagy flux. From these compounds, only JTC-801 markly increased ER-phagy flux. In addition, the global impact of these selected hit compounds were analyzed by TMT-based mass spectrometry and demonstrated the differential impact of targeting GPCRs on autophagy-associated proteins. This chemical screening exercise indicates to a significant cross-talk between GPCR signaling and regulation of autophagy pathways.
Pregnant women that are obese may develop gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) configuring a new metabolic condition referred to as gestational diabesity. The metabolic alterations seen in gestational diabesity include a combination of an exacerbated pro-inflammatory state and fetoplacental endothelial dysfunction. Also, gestational diabesity associates with supra-physiological extracellular concentration of adenosine in the foetoplacental blood. Since adenosine plays a central role in the inflammatory response in GDM and obesity, it is likely that this nucleoside will play a similar role in gestational diabesity. However, the effect of adenosine in the foetoplacental vasculature in this condition is not yet addressed. Adenosine exerts its biological actions via four adenosine receptors. Activation of A(2B) adenosine receptors (A(2B)AR) subtype associates with an anti-inflammatory response in several tissue and diseases. In tissues from pregnant women with GDM, there is an overexpression of A(2B)AR, and higher mRNA expression of ADORA2B (for A(2B)AR) was shown to correlate with hyperglycaemia and oxidative stress. A(2B)AR shows low affinity for adenosine (micromolar) and its activation results in triggering intracellular signalling cascades lowering the inflammatory response. This phenomenon requires a high level of extracellular adenosine in diseases of pregnancy such as GDM or gestational diabesity. In this review, we focused on the role of A(2B)AR involvement in the biological actions of adenosine on inflammation in the foetoplacental vasculature in gestational diabesity. Some factors including oxidative stress and hypoxia in this phenomenon are discussed.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The erythrocyte is the most abundant cell type in our body, acting as both a carrier/deliverer and sensor of oxygen (O2). Erythrocyte O2 delivery capacity is finely regulated by sophisticated metabolic control. In recent years, unbiased and robust human metabolomics screening and mouse genetic studies have advanced erythroid research revealing the differential role of erythrocyte hypoxic metabolic reprogramming in normal individuals at high altitudes and patients facing hypoxia, such as sickle cell disease (SCD) and chronic kidney disease (CKD). Here we summarize recent progress and highlight potential therapeutic possibilities. RECENT FINDINGS: Initial studies showed that elevated soluble CD73 (sCD73, converts AMP to adenosine) results in increased circulating adenosine that activates the A2B adenosine receptor (ADORA2B). Signaling through this axis is co-operatively strengthened by erythrocyte-specific synthesis of sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P). Ultimately, these mechanisms promote the generation of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG), an erythrocyte-specific allosteric modulator that decreases haemoglobin--O2-binding affinity, and thus, induces deoxygenated sickle Hb (deoxyHbS), deoxyHbS polymerization, sickling, chronic inflammation and tissue damage in SCD. Similar to SCD, plasma adenosine and erythrocyte S1P are elevated in humans ascending to high altitude. At high altitude, these two metabolites are beneficial to induce erythrocyte metabolic reprogramming and the synthesis of 2,3-BPG, and thus, increase O2 delivery to counteract hypoxic tissue damage. Follow-up studies showed that erythrocyte equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 (eENT1) is a key purinergic cellular component controlling plasma adenosine in humans at high altitude and mice under hypoxia and underlies the quicker and higher elevation of plasma adenosine upon re-ascent because of prior hypoxia-induced degradation of eENT1. More recent studies demonstrated the beneficial role of erythrocyte ADORA2B-mediated 2,3-BPG production in CKD. SUMMARY: Taken together, these findings revealed the differential role of erythrocyte hypoxic metabolic reprogramming in normal humans at high altitude and patients with CKD vs. SCD patients and immediately suggest differential and precision therapies to counteract hypoxia among these groups.
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a debilitating hemolytic genetic disorder with high morbidity and mortality affecting millions of individuals worldwide. Although SCD was discovered more than a century ago, no effective mechanism-based prevention and treatment are available due to poorly understood molecular basis of sickling, the fundamental pathogenic process of the disease. SCD patients constantly face hypoxia. One of the best-known signaling molecules to be induced under hypoxic conditions is adenosine. Recent studies demonstrate that hypoxia-mediated elevated adenosine signaling plays an important role in normal erythrocyte physiology. In contrast, elevated adenosine signaling contributes to sickling and multiple life threatening complications including tissue damage, pulmonary dysfunction and priapism. Here, we summarize recent research on the role of adenosine signaling in normal and sickle erythrocytes, progression of the disease and therapeutic implications. In normal erythrocytes, both genetic and pharmacological studies demonstrate that adenosine can enhance 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG) production via A(2B) receptor (ADORA2B) activation, suggesting that elevated adenosine has an unrecognized role in normal erythrocytes to promote O(2) release and prevent acute ischemic tissue injury. However, in sickle erythrocytes, the beneficial role of excessive adenosine-mediated 2,3-BPG induction becomes detrimental by promoting deoxygenation, polymerization of sickle hemoglobin and subsequent sickling. Additionally, adenosine signaling via the A(2A) receptor (ADORA2A) on invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells inhibits iNKT cell activation and attenuates pulmonary dysfunction in SCD mice. Finally, elevated adenosine coupled with ADORA2BR activation is responsible for priapism, a dangerous complication seen in SCD. Overall, the research reviewed here reveals a differential role of elevated adenosine in normal erythrocytes, sickle erythrocytes, iNK cells and progression of disease. Thus, adenosine signaling represents a potentially important therapeutic target for the treatment and prevention of disease.
B lymphocytes play an important role in the regulation of immune response in both normal and pathological conditions. Traditionally, the main functions of B cells were considered to be antibody production and antigen presentation, but in recent decades there have been discovered several subpopulations of regulatory B lymphocytes (Bregs), which maintain immunological tolerance and prevent overactivation of the immune system. Memory (mBregs, CD19(+)CD24(hi)CD27(+)) and transitional (tBregs, CD19(+)CD24(hi)CD38(hi)) subpopulations of Bregs are usually considered in the context of studying the role of these B cells in various human pathologies. However, the mechanisms by which these Breg subpopulations exert their immunosuppressive activity remain poorly understood. In this work, we used bioinformatic analysis of open-source RNA sequencing data to propose potential mechanisms of B cell-mediated immunosuppression. Analysis of differential gene expression before and after activation of these subpopulations allowed us to identify six candidate molecules that may determine the functionality of mBregs and tBregs. IL4I1-, SIRPA-, and SLAMF7-dependent mechanisms of immunosuppression may be characteristic of both Breg subsets, while NID1-, CST7-, and ADORA2B-dependent mechanisms may be predominantly characteristic of tBregs. In-depth understanding of the molecular mechanisms of anti-inflammatory immune response of B lymphocytes is an important task for both basic science and applied medicine and could facilitate the development of new approaches to the therapy of complex diseases.
BACKGROUND: We recently reported a role for the circadian rhythm protein Period 2 (PER2) in midazolam induced cognitive dysfunction. Based on previous studies showing a critical role for the adenosine A2B receptor (ADORA2B) in PER2 regulation, we hypothesized that hippocampal ADORA2B is crucial for cognitive function. METHODS: Midazolam treated C57BL/6J mice were analyzed for Adora2b hippocampal mRNA expression levels, and spontaneous T-maze alternation was determined in Adora2b-/- mice. Using the specific ADORA2B agonist BAY-60-6583 in midazolam treated C57BL/6J mice, we analyzed hippocampal Per2 mRNA expression levels and spontaneous T-maze alternation. Finally, Adora2b-/- mice were assessed for mRNA expression of markers for inflammation or cognitive function in the hippocampus. RESULTS: Midazolam treatment significantly downregulated Adora2b or Per2 mRNA in the hippocampus of C57BL/6J mice, and hippocampal PER2 protein expression or T-maze alternation was significantly reduced in Adora2b-/- mice. ADORA2B agonist BAY-60-6583 restored midazolam mediated reduction in spontaneous alternation in C57BL/6J mice. Analysis of hippocampal Tnf-alpha or Il-6 mRNA levels in Adora2b-/- mice did not reveal an inflammatory phenotype. However, C-fos, a critical component of hippocampus-dependent learning and memory, was significantly downregulated in the hippocampus of Adora2b-/- mice. CONCLUSION: These results suggest a role of ADORA2B in midazolam induced cognitive dysfunction. Further, our data demonstrate that BAY-60-6583 treatment restores midazolam induced cognitive dysfunction, possibly via increases of Per2. Additional mechanistic studies hint towards C-FOS as another potential underlying mechanism of memory impairment in Adora2b-/- mice. These findings suggest the ADORA2B agonist as a potential therapy in patients with midazolam induced cognitive dysfunction.
Adenosine (ADO) is a retaliatory metabolite that is expressed in conditions of injury or stress. During these conditions ATP is released at the extracellular level and is metabolized to adenosine. For this reason, adenosine is defined as a "danger signal" for cells and organs, in addition to its important role as homeostatic regulator. Its physiological functions are mediated through interaction with four specific transmembrane receptors called ADORA1, ADORA2A, ADORA2B and ADORA3. In the lungs of mice and humans all four adenosine receptors are expressed with different roles, having pro- and anti-inflammatory roles, determining bronchoconstriction and regulating lung inflammation and airway remodeling. Adenosine receptors can also promote differentiation of lung fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, typical of the fibrotic event. This last function suggests a potential involvement of adenosine in the fibrotic lung disease processes, which are characterized by different degrees of inflammation and fibrosis. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is the pathology with the highest degree of fibrosis and is of unknown etiology and burdened by lack of effective treatments in humans.
Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (CPFE) is a syndrome that predominantly affects male smokers or ex-smokers and it has a mortality rate of 55% and a median survival of 5 years. Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a frequently fatal complication of CPFE. Despite this dismal prognosis, no curative therapies exist for patients with CPFE outside of lung transplantation and no therapies are recommended to treat PH. This highlights the need to develop novel treatment approaches for CPFE. Studies from our group have demonstrated that both adenosine and its receptor ADORA2B are elevated in chronic lung diseases. Activation of ADORA2B leads to elevated levels of hyaluronan synthases (HAS) and increased hyaluronan, a glycosaminoglycan that contributes to chronic lung injury. We hypothesize that ADORA2B and hyaluronan contribute to CPFE. Using isolated CPFE lung tissue, we characterized expression levels of ADORA2B and HAS. Next, using a unique mouse model of experimental lung injury that replicates features of CPFE, namely airspace enlargement, PH and fibrotic deposition, we investigated whether 4MU, a HAS inhibitor, was able to inhibit features of CPFE. Increased protein levels of ADORA2B and HAS3 were detected in CPFE and in our experimental model of CPFE. Treatment with 4MU was able to attenuate PH and fibrosis but not airspace enlargement. This was accompanied by a reduction of HAS3-positive macrophages. We have generated pre-clinical data demonstrating the capacity of 4MU, an FDA-approved drug, to attenuate features of CPFE in an experimental model of chronic lung injury.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.
OBJECTIVES: Long-term outcomes in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) depend on early and effective disease control. Methotrexate (MTX) remains the first-line disease modifying therapy, however there are no biomarkers with which to identify those most likely to achieve remission. To address this unmet need we explored metabolic pathways involved in MTX mechanism of action within circulating CD4+T cells in a cohort of treatment naive patients with early RA. METHODS: Purified CD4+T cells were isolated from peripheral blood of 68 patients with early RA commencing MTX. The expression of a range of putative MTX metabolism and mechanism of action targets were explored by flow-cytometry and transcriptional analysis. From these data significant predictors of Disease Activity Score 28-C reactive protein (DAS28-CRP) remission (<2.4 at 6 months) were determined by logistic regression (clinical; flow-cytometry data) and linear modelling (gene expression data). RESULTS: Low baseline DAS28-CRP was associated with remission at 6 months (p=0.02). Expression of the ectonucleotidase CD39, involved in ATP-ADP conversion during adenosine synthesis, was higher on CD4+CD25 High regulatory T cells at baseline in those achieving remission (molecules of equivalent fluorescence 1264 vs 847; p=0.007). Expression of other adenosine signalling elements in CD4+T cells were also upregulated at baseline in patients achieving remission: AMPD1 (p<0.001), ADORA2b (p=0.039) and ADORA3 (p=0.047). When combined into a single predictive metric, a combination of these variables outperformed baseline DAS28-CRP in prediction of early remission (area under the curve 0.92 vs 0.67, p=0.001) CONCLUSIONS: Adenosine signalling is important in the achievement of early remission with MTX in RA and biomarkers of adenosine activity may hold utility for the stratification of therapy in early disease.
Adenosine is a signaling molecule induced under stress such as energy insufficiency and ischemic/hypoxic conditions. Adenosine controls multiple physiological and pathological cellular and tissue function by activation of four G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR). Functional role of adenosine signaling in acute pain has been widely studied. However, the role of adenosine signaling in chronic pain is poorly understood. At acute levels, adenosine can be beneficial to anti-pain whereas a sustained elevation of adenosine can be detrimental to promote chronic pain. In recent years, extensive progress has been made to define the role of adenosine signaling in chronic pain and to dissect molecular new insight underlying the development of chronic pain. In this review, we summarize the differential role of adenosine signaling cascade in acute and chronic pain with a major focus on recent studies revealing adenosine ADORA2B receptor activation in the pathology of chronic pain. We further provide a therapeutic outlook of how multiple adenosine signaling components can be useful to treat chronic pain.
Inflammatory lesions, ischemic tissues, or solid tumors are characterized by the occurrence of severe tissue hypoxia within the diseased tissue. Subsequent stabilization of hypoxia-inducible transcription factors-particularly of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1A)--results in significant alterations of gene expression of resident cells or inflammatory cells that have been recruited into such lesions. Interestingly, studies of hypoxia-induced changes of gene expression identified a transcriptional program that promotes extracellular adenosine signaling. Adenosine is a signaling molecule that functions through the activation of four distinct adenosine receptors--the ADORA1, ADORA2A, ADORA2B, and ADORA3 receptors. Extracellular adenosine is predominantly derived from the phosphohydrolysis of precursor nucleotides, such as adenosine triphosphate or adenosine monophosphate. HIF1A-elicited alterations in gene expression enhance the enzymatic capacity within inflamed tissues to produce extracellular adenosine. Moreover, hypoxia-elicited induction of adenosine receptors--particularly of ADORA2B--results in increased signal transduction. Functional studies in genetic models for HIF1A or adenosine receptors implicate this pathway in an endogenous feedback loop that dampens excessive inflammation and promotes injury resolution, while at the same time enhancing ischemia tolerance. Therefore, pharmacological strategies to enhance HIF-elicited adenosine production or to promote adenosine signaling through adenosine receptors are being investigated for the treatment of acute inflammatory or ischemic diseases characterized by tissue hypoxia.
Adenosine receptor (ADOR) antagonists, such as 7-methylxanthine (7-MX), have been shown to slow myopia progression in humans and animal models. Adenosine receptors are found throughout the body, and regulate the release of neurotransmitters such as dopamine and glutamate. However, the role of adenosine in eye growth is unclear. Evidence suggests that 7-MX increases scleral collagen fibril diameter, hence preventing axial elongation. This study used immunohistochemistry (IHC) and reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) to examine the distribution of the four ADORs in the normal monkey eye to help elucidate potential mechanisms of action. Eyes were enucleated from six Rhesus monkeys. Anterior segments and eyecups were separated into components and flash-frozen for RNA extraction or fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and processed for immunohistochemistry against ADORA1, ADORA2a, ADORA2b, and ADORA3. RNA was reverse-transcribed, and qPCR was performed using custom primers. Relative gene expression was calculated using the DeltaDeltaCt method normalizing to liver expression, and statistical analysis was performed using Relative Expression Software Tool. ADORA1 immunostaining was highest in the iris sphincter muscle, trabecular meshwork, ciliary epithelium, and retinal nerve fiber layer. ADORA2a immunostaining was highest in the corneal epithelium, trabecular meshwork, ciliary epithelium, retinal nerve fiber layer, and scleral fibroblasts. ADORA2b immunostaining was highest in corneal basal epithelium, limbal stem cells, iris sphincter, ciliary muscle, ciliary epithelium, choroid, isolated retinal ganglion cells and scattered scleral fibroblasts. ADORA3 immunostaining was highest in the iris sphincter, ciliary muscle, ciliary epithelium, choroid, isolated retinal ganglion cells, and scleral fibroblasts. Compared to liver mRNA, ADORA1 mRNA was significantly higher in the brain, retina and choroid, and significantly lower in the iris/ciliary body. ADORA2a expression was higher in brain and retina, ADORA2b expression was higher in retina, and ADORA3 was higher in the choroid. In conclusion, immunohistochemistry and RT-qPCR indicated differential patterns of expression of the four adenosine receptors in the ocular tissues of the normal non-human primate. The presence of ADORs in scleral fibroblasts and the choroid may support mechanisms by which ADOR antagonists prevent myopia. The potential effects of ADOR inhibition on both anterior and posterior ocular structures warrant investigation.
