Alpha-2C adrenergic receptor; Alpha-2 adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine- induced inhibition of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRA2C sub-subfamily.
Beta-blockers are widely used medications for a variety of indications, including heart failure, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmias, and hypertension. Genetic variability in pharmacokinetic (e.g., CYP2D6) and pharmacodynamic (e.g., ADRB1, ADRB2, ADRA2C, GRK4, GRK5) genes have been studied in relation to beta-blocker exposure and response. We searched and summarized the strength of the evidence linking beta-blocker exposure and response with the six genes listed above. The level of evidence was high for associations between CYP2D6 genetic variation and both metoprolol exposure and heart rate response. Evidence indicates that CYP2D6 poor metabolizers experience clinically significant greater exposure and lower heart rate in response to metoprolol compared with those who are not poor metabolizers. Therefore, we provide therapeutic recommendations regarding genetically predicted CYP2D6 metabolizer status and metoprolol therapy. However, there was insufficient evidence to make therapeutic recommendations for CYP2D6 and other beta-blockers or for any beta-blocker and the other five genes evaluated (updates at www.cpicpgx.org).
Molecular heterosis occurs when subjects heterozygous for a specific genetic polymorphism show a significantly greater effect (positive heterosis) or lesser effect (negative heterosis) for a quantitative or dichotomous trait than subjects homozygous for either allele. At a molecular level heterosis appears counterintuitive to the expectation that if the 1 allele of a two-allele polymorphism is associated with a decrease in gene expression, those carrying the 11 genotype should show the greatest effect, 12 heterozygotes should be intermediate, and 22 homozygotes should show the least effect. We review the accumulating evidence that molecular heterosis is common in humans and may occur in up to 50% of all gene associations. A number of examples are reviewed, including those for the following genes: ADRA2C, C3 complement, DRD1, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4, ESR1, HP, HBB, HLA-DR DQ, HTR2A, properdin B, SLC6A4, PNMT, and secretor. Several examples are given in which the heterosis is gender-specific. Three explanations for molecular heterosis are proposed. The first is based on an inverted U-shaped response curve in which either to little or too much gene expression is deleterious, with optimal gene expression occurring in 12 heterozygotes. The second proposes an independent third factor causing a hidden stratification of the sample such that for in one set of subjects 11 homozygosity is associated with the highest phenotype score, while in the other set, 22 homozygosity is associated with the highest phenotype score. The third explanation suggests greater fitness in 12 heterozygotes because they show a broader range of gene expression than 11 or 22 homozygotes. Allele-based linkage techniques usually miss heterotic associations. Because up to 50% of association studies show a heterosis effect, this can significantly diminish the power of family-based linkage and association studies.
The release of excessive amounts of catecholamine by pheochromocytoma-paragangliomas (PPGL) can lead to life-threatening catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy (CIC). Single-nucleotide polymorphisms of the beta1 and alpha-2c adrenergic receptors alter myocyte receptor function and enhanced norepinephrine release. We tested the hypothesis that such genetic variations may impact the risk of developing CIC in the context of PPGL. Thirty-one patients with PPGL, including nine with a history of CIC, were analyzed for alpha-2-adrenergic receptors: ADRA2C, beta-1 and beta-2 adrenergic receptors: ADRB1 and ADRB2 genotyping. CIC was defined either by a history of heart failure or cardiogenic shock associated with dilated or Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. Subjects were genotyped for ADRA2C (rs61767072 for del322_325), ADRB1 (rs1801252 for Ser49Gly and rs1801253 for Arg389Gly) and ADRB2 (rs1042713 for Arg16Gly and rs1042714 for Gln27Glu). Single-locus analysis revealed that variant in ADRA2C (alpha 2CDel322-325) was more common among patients with CIC than among controls (allele frequency, 0.44 vs 0.05; P< 0.001). The lack of alpha 2CDel322-325 polymorphism has a negative predictive value of 95% for the onset of CIC. In a replication cohort including 26 patients with PPGL whom eight have developed a CIC, the association between Alpha 2CDel322-325 and CIC was confirmed (allele frequency, 0.33 vs 0.; P= 0.0001). In conclusion, Alpha 2CDel322-325 through the identification of patients at low risk of developing CIC can help physicians to better determine the most appropriate therapeutic approach, notably in patients at high risk of surgical complications.
Postsynaptic alpha(2A)-adrenoceptor density is enhanced in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) of antipsychotic-treated schizophrenia subjects. This alteration might be due to transcriptional activation, and could be regulated by epigenetic mechanisms such as histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs). The aim of this study was to evaluate ADRA2A and ADRA2C gene expression (codifying for alpha(2)-adrenoceptor subtypes), and permissive and repressive histone PTMs at gene promoter regions in the DLPFC of subjects with schizophrenia and matched controls (n = 24 pairs). We studied the effect of antipsychotic (AP) treatment in AP-free (n = 12) and AP-treated (n = 12) subgroups of schizophrenia subjects and in rats acutely and chronically treated with typical and atypical antipsychotics. ADRA2A mRNA expression was selectively upregulated in AP-treated schizophrenia subjects (+93%) whereas ADRA2C mRNA expression was upregulated in all schizophrenia subjects (+53%) regardless of antipsychotic treatment. Acute and chronic clozapine treatment in rats did not alter brain cortex Adra2a mRNA expression but increased Adra2c mRNA expression. Both ADRA2A and ADRA2C promoter regions showed epigenetic modification by histone methylation and acetylation in human DLPFC. The upregulation of ADRA2A expression in AP-treated schizophrenia subjects might be related to observed bivalent chromatin at ADRA2A promoter region in schizophrenia (depicted by increased permissive H3K4me3 and repressive H3K27me3) and could be triggered by the enhanced H4K16ac at ADRA2A promoter. In conclusion, epigenetic predisposition differentially modulated ADRA2A and ADRA2C mRNA expression in DLPFC of schizophrenia subjects.
Recurrent implantation failure (RIF) is defined as the failed pregnancy after good embryo transfer over 3 cycles during in vitro fertilization (IVF).The human endometrium plays a vital role in providing the site for embryo implantation, with several factors implicated in unsatisfactory endometrial receptivity in RIF. Our present results revealed that women with pregnancy loss or infertility have a higher serum epinephrine level, indicating a potential correlation between psychological stress and pregnancy failure. RNA-sequencing of the tissues collected at the endometrial receptive phase in normal and RIF women showed that stress hormones could affect the functional status of endometrial receptivity. Subsequent analysis revealed that the epinephrine signaling acts as an important regulator of endometrial receptivity through the PI3K-AKT and FOXO1 signaling pathways. We also found that patients with RIF show attenuated expression of the alpha-2C-adrenergic receptor (ADRA2C) and that its down regulation induced by high level epinephrine could inhibit the decidualization. Early pregnant mice treated with stress showed high serum epinephrine levels, defective uterine adrenergic receptor expression, and low pregnancy rates. Altogether, our findings indicate that mental stress during early pregnancy can alter the functional status of endometrial receptivity.
Background Cardiac adrenergic receptor gene polymorphisms have the potential to influence risk of developing ventricular fibrillation (VF) during ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction, but no previous study has comprehensively investigated those most likely to alter norepinephrine release, signal transduction, or biased signaling. Methods and Results In a case-control study, we recruited 953 patients with ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction without previous cardiac history, 477 with primary VF, and 476 controls without VF, and genotyped them for ADRB1 Arg389Gly and Ser49Gly, ADRB2 Gln27Glu and Gly16Arg, and ADRA2C Ins322-325Del. Within each minor allele-containing genotype, haplotype, or 2-genotype combination, patients with incident VF were compared with non-VF controls by odds ratios (OR) of variant frequencies referenced against major allele homozygotes. Of 156 investigated genetic constructs, 19 (12.2%) exhibited significantly (P<0.05) reduced association with incident VF, and none was associated with increased VF risk except for ADRB1 Gly389 homozygotes in the subset of patients not receiving beta-blockers. ADRB1 Gly49 carriers (prevalence 23.0%) had an OR (95% CI) of 0.70 (0.49-0.98), and the ADRA2C 322-325 deletion (Del) carriers (prevalence 13.5%) had an OR of 0.61 (0.39-0.94). When present in genotype combinations (8 each), both ADRB1 Gly49 carriers (OR, 0.67 [0.56-0.80]) and ADRA2C Del carriers (OR, 0.57 [0.45- 0.71]) were associated with reduced VF risk. Conclusions In ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction, the adrenergic receptor minor alleles ADRB1 Gly49, whose encoded receptor undergoes enhanced agonist-mediated internalization and beta-arrestin interactions leading to cardioprotective biased signaling, and ADRA2C Del322-325, whose receptor causes disinhibition of norepinephrine release, are associated with a lower incidence of VF. Registration URL: https://clinicaltrials.gov; Unique identifier: NCT00859300.
Cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Pharmacogenomics is the study of genetic determinants of interindividual variation in drug response and aims to facilitate personalized medicine, through genotype-informed drug and dose selection, to maximize drug efficacy and/or minimize adverse drug reactions. Despite high expectations, no cardiovascular pharmacogenomic association is currently in widespread clinical practice; evidential, logistical, financial, and knowledge implementation barriers exist. Nevertheless, VKORC1, CYP2C9, and CYP4F2 variants have been associated with warfarin dose requirements, and CYP2C19 variants have been associated with perturbed antiplatelet response to clopidogrel. However, at present, controversy exists over the clinical utility of these genetic associations. There is an increased risk of simvastatin-induced muscle toxicity in SLCO1B1*5 carriers, ADRB1 and ADRA2C polymorphisms are associated with differential response to bucindolol, and rare congenital arrhythmia gene variants have been identified in drug-induced torsade de pointes. Practical benefits are still anticipated, but much work remains.
As heritability is high in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), genetic factors must play a significant role in the development and course of this disorder. In recent years a large number of studies on different candidate genes for ADHD have been published, most have focused on genes involved in the dopaminergic neurotransmission system, such as DRD4, DRD5, DAT1/SLC6A3, DBH, DDC. Genes associated with the noradrenergic (such as NET1/SLC6A2, ADRA2A, ADRA2C) and serotonergic systems (such as 5-HTT/SLC6A4, HTR1B, HTR2A, TPH2) have also received considerable interest. Additional candidate genes related to neurotransmission and neuronal plasticity that have been studied less intensively include SNAP25, CHRNA4, NMDA, BDNF, NGF, NTF3, NTF4/5, GDNF. This review article provides an overview of these candidate gene studies, and summarizes findings from recently published genome-wide association studies (GWAS). GWAS is a relatively new tool that enables the identification of new ADHD genes in a hypothesis-free manner. Although these latter studies could be improved and need to be replicated they are starting to implicate processes like neuronal migration and cell adhesion and cell division as potentially important in the aetiology of ADHD and have suggested several new directions for future ADHD genetics studies.
ADHD is a polygenic disorder due to the additive effect of genes affecting dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, GABA, and other neurotransmitters. Some of the specific loci involved are dopamine genes--DRD2, DRD4, DRD5, and the dopamine transporter; norepinephrine (NE) and epinephrine (EPI) genes--dopamine beta-hydroxylase, ADRA2A, ADRA2C, PNMT, norepinephrine transporter, MAOA, COMT; serotonin genes--TDO2, HTR1A, HTR1DA, serotonin transporter; GABA genes--GABRB3; androgen receptor and other genes. This model is consistent with all of the present knowledge about ADHD including (a) the increased frequency of ADHD in the relatives of ADHD probands, (b) the presence of a wide spectrum of comorbid behaviors (depression, anxiety, learning, conduct, oppositional-defiant, conduct and substance abuse disorders) in ADHD probands and their relatives on both parental sides, (c) the close relationship to Tourette syndrome (TS), (d) the failure to find the genes for TS using linkage analysis, (e) the brain imaging studies showing hypometabolism of the frontal lobes, (f) the relationship between dopamine D2 receptor density and regional blood flow, (g) the correlation between tics and dopamine D2 receptor density in TS, (h) the motor hyperactivity of dopamine transporter and dopamine D3 receptor gene knockout mice, (i) the LeMoal and Shaywitz dopamine deficiency animal models of ADHD, (j) the NE models of ADHD, (k) the failure to explain ADHD on the basis of any single neurotransmitter defect, (l) the response of ADHD to dopamine and alpha 2-adrenergic agonists, (m) the small percentage of the variance of specific behaviors accounted for by each gene, and numerous other aspects of ADHD. The implications of the polygenic model for the understanding, diagnosis and treatment of ADHD and TS, as well as other psychiatric disorders, are reviewed.
Adrenergic alpha2C receptor (ADRA2C) is an inhibitory modulator of the sympathetic nervous system. Knockout mice for this gene show physiological and behavioural alterations that are associated with the fight-or-flight response. There is evidence of positive selection on the regulation of this gene during chicken domestication. Here, we find that the neuronal expression of ADRA2C is lower in human and chimpanzee than in other primates. On the basis of three-dimensional chromatin structure, we identified a cis-regulatory region whose DNA sequences have been significantly accelerated in human and chimpanzee. Active histone modification marks this region in rhesus macaque but not in human and chimpanzee; instead, repressive marks are enriched in various human brain samples. This region contains two neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF) binding motifs, each of which harbours a polymorphism. Our genotyping and analysis of population genome data indicate that at both polymorphic sites, the derived allele has reached fixation in humans and chimpanzees but not in bonobos, whereas only the ancestral allele is present among macaques. Our CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing and reporter assays show that both derived nucleotides repress ADRA2C, most likely by increasing NRSF binding. In addition, we detected signatures of recent positive selection for lower neuronal ADRA2C expression in humans. Our findings indicate that there has been selective pressure for enhanced sympathetic nervous activity in the evolution of humans and chimpanzees.
AIMS: Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed and leading cause of cancer death among women worldwide. It was classified within molecular intrinsic subtypes: luminal A, luminal B, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-enriched and basal-like. Epinephrine and norepinephrine, released during stress, bind to adrenoceptors. alpha(2) -adrenoceptors are encoded by the ADRA2A, ADRA2B and ADRA2C genes and beta(2) by ADRB2. METHODS: We compiled several publicly available Affymetrix gene expression datasets, obtaining a large cohort of 1924 patients with distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS) data and evaluated the association between adrenoceptor expression, clinicopathological markers and outcome. RESULTS: ADRA2A high expressing tumours also expressed hormone receptors and presented diminished tumour size, grade and not compromised lymph nodes. ADRB2 high expression was found in smaller, low grade, oestrogen receptor-positive tumours. Both were significantly associated with the absence of metastasis. High expression of ADRA2C was positively associated with increased tumour size and metastatic relapse. We observed a significant increase in DMFS of patients with high ADRA2A (hazard ratio 0.54, 95% CI 0.45-0.65, P < .001) and ADRB2 (0.77, 0.64-0.93, P = .006) expression and a decrease with ADRA2C high expression (1.45, 1.16-1.81, P = .001). For patients with luminal tumours, ADRA2A was the only factor that retained its significance as an independent predictor of DMFS while ADRA2C expression was an independent predictor for worse prognosis in basal-like tumours. CONCLUSIONS: We herein provide new insight for a potential role of ADRA2A and ADRA2C in breast cancer. In low- and medium-income countries, their incorporation to routine immunohistochemistry analysis of biopsies or tumour samples, could provide additional low-cost prognostic factors.
OBJECTIVE: The alpha2C adrenoreceptor deletion 322-325 (ADRA2C del 322-325) polymorphism has been associated with autonomic activity and thermoregulation, which are implicated in the vasomotor symptom (VMS) mechanism. The ADRA2C del (322-325) has higher prevalence in African American women, a group known to experience more frequent and bothersome VMS. We assessed whether the ADRA2C del (322-325) genotype is associated with increased frequency of VMS in African American women. METHODS: DNA samples from African American (N = 400) women participating in the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN) were genotyped for the ADRA2C del (322-325) polymorphism. Longitudinal data on VMS were obtained from the SWAN repository. The relation of ADRA2C del (322-325) genotypes (deletion/deletion [D/D]; insertion/deletion [I/D]; insertion/insertion [I/I]) with VMS over the menopausal transition for up to 12 years of follow-up was examined using generalized estimating equations. Primary models considered the outcome of frequent VMS (6 or more days in the prior 2 wk vs VMS <6 d in the prior 2 wk) by stage of menopause. RESULTS: Four hundred DNA samples from African American women were included. Seventy-five women (18.8%) were found to carry the homozygous variant allele (D/D). There was no significant difference in the trajectory of frequent VMS over the menopausal transition between women with D/D and I/I + I/D genotypes (P = 0.39). CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary study among African American women in SWAN, ADRA2C del (322-325) was not significantly related to self-reported VMS. Further studies are warranted to help us understand the role of the adrenergic system in the physiology of VMS to tailor medical therapy to patient needs.
The physiology of males and females can be vastly different, complicating interpretation of toxicological and physiological data. The objectives of this study were to elucidate the sex differences in the microbiome-gastrointestinal (GI) transcriptome of adult zebrafish. We compared microbial composition and diversity in both males and females fed the same diet and housed in the same environment. There were no sex-specific differences in weight gain nor gastrointestinal morphology based on histopathology. There was no difference in gut microbial diversity, richness (Shannon and Chao1 index) nor predicted functional composition of the microbiome between males and females. Prior to post-hoc correction, male zebrafish showed higher abundance for the bacterial families Erythrobacteraceae and Lamiaceae, both belonging to the phyla Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria. At the genus level, Lamia and Altererythrobacter were more dominant in males and an unidentified genus in Bacteroidetes was more abundant in females. There were 16 unique differentially expressed transcripts in the gastrointestinal tissue between male and female zebrafish (FDR corrected, p < 0.05). Relative to males, the mRNA expression for trim35-9, slc25a48, chchd3b, csad, and hsd17b3 were lower in female GI while cyp2k6, adra2c, and bckdk were higher in the female GI. Immune and lipid-related gene network expression differed between the sexes (i.e., cholesterol export and metabolism) as well as networks related to gastric motility, gastrointestinal system absorption and digestion. Such data provide clues as to putative differences in gastrointestinal physiology between male and female zebrafish. This study identifies host-transcriptome differences that can be considered when interpreting the microgenderome of zebrafish in studies investigating GI physiology and toxicology of fishes.
alpha 2-Adrenergic receptors (alpha 2-ARs) regulate a wide range of physiological functions and are targets for clinically important antihypertensive and anesthetic agents. Three genes encoding alpha 2-AR subtypes have been cloned in humans and mice, but the physiological significance of each subtype has not been completely characterized. The available agonist and antagonist compounds are not sufficiently subtype selective to allow the unambiguous dissection of these receptors in vivo. As an alternative approach, we have used gene targeting in embryonic stem cells to disrupt the Adra2c gene, which encodes the alpha 2c-AR subtype in mice. Adra2c-/Adra2c- animals do not express a functional alpha 2c-AR transcript, as detected by Northern blotting or reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis. In addition, these mice have markedly reduced [3H]rauwolscine binding in their caudate putamen and in other brain regions normally expressing Adra2c binding sites. Adra2c-/Adra2c- mice, however, are viable and fertile and appear grossly normal. Expression levels of Adra2a and Adra2b mRNA in brain and kidney are not altered by the Adra2c knockout. These data suggest that up-regulation of Adra2a or Adra2b does not compensate for the Adra2c deficiency and that the receptor encoded by Adra2c is not required for normal mouse development or for survival in a laboratory environment.
Background In heart failure (HF) with reduced ejection fraction, 2 clinical trials, the BEST (beta-Blocker Evaluation of Survival Trial) and HF-ACTION (Heart Failure: A Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exercise Training), have reported an effectiveness interaction between the ADRB1 (beta-1 adrenergic receptor) Arg389Gly polymorphism and beta-blockers (BBs). HF-ACTION additionally reported a dose-related interaction of unclear origin. If confirmed and pharmacogenetically resolved, these findings may have important implications for HF with reduced ejection fraction precision therapy. We used uniform methodology to investigate BB dose-ADRB1 Arg389Gly polymorphism interaction with major clinical end points in BEST/bucindolol and HF-ACTION/other BB databases. Methods This was a retrospective analysis of prospectively designed DNA substudies from BEST (N=1040) and HF-ACTION (N=957). Subjects were genotyped for ADRB1 Arg389Gly and ADRA2C (alpha2C adrenergic receptor) Ins322-325Del. BB dose was defined as either no/low dose or high dose, according to total daily dose of either bucindolol (BEST subjects) or other BB (HF-ACTION subjects) standardized to carvedilol equivalents. The main outcome of interest was all-cause mortality, and CV mortality/HF hospitalization was a secondary outcome. Results Subjects in each trial had less all-cause mortality with high- versus no/low-dose BB if they had ADRB1 Arg389Arg (BEST: hazard ratio [HR]=0.40, P=0.002; HF-ACTION: HR=0.45, P=0.005) but not Arg389Gly genotype (both P>0.2). Among gene-dose groups, there was a differential favorable treatment effect of 46% for high-dose bucindolol with ADRB1 Arg389Arg versus Gly carrier genotype (HR, 0.54; P=0.018), but not for no/low-dose bucindolol. In contrast, HF-ACTION Arg389Arg genotype subjects taking no/low-dose BB had greater all-cause mortality compared with 389Gly carriers (HR, 1.83; P=0.015), whereas all-cause mortality did not vary by genotype among subjects taking high-dose BB (HR, 0.84; P=0.55). Conclusions The enhanced HF with reduced ejection fraction efficacy of bucindolol in the ADRB1 Arg389Arg versus 389Gly carrier genotypes occurs at high dose. Other BBs taken at low dose have reduced efficacy for Arg389Arg genotype subjects compared with 389Gly carriers, suggesting a greater relative treatment effect at high dose. These data support guideline recommendations to use high, clinical trial target doses of all BBs to treat HF with reduced ejection fraction.
Findings from preclinical and clinical research support the involvement of central noradrenergic dysregulation in the etiology of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Previous studies have suggested that the alpha-2C-adrenergic receptor gene (ADRA2C) is associated with ADHD. The aims of this study were to examine the association between the ADRA2C (GT)n repeat polymorphism (STR marker adra2c1) and ADHD in a Korean sample. In this case-control and family-based association study, we assessed 184 ADHD probands, 150 normal controls, and 98 trios. There were no significant differences in the allele frequencies of the ADRA2C polymorphism between the ADHD and control groups (p > 0.05). The overall allele-wise transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) analysis showed statistical significance (chi2 = 19.07, p = 0.025). We found a trend for preferential transmission of the 183-bp allele (chi2 = 3.72, p = 0.054), and a significantly lower-than-expected rate of transmission of the 187-bp allele (chi2 = 6.26, p = 0.012). With regard to the temperament profiles of the Junior Temperament and Character Inventory (JTCI), the ADHD subjects with the 183/183 genotype at the ADRA2C polymorphism showed a trend toward a lower score in the Novelty Seeking (p = 0.020) profile than did those with the other genotypes. Our findings provide important evidence that the ADRA2C polymorphism is involved in the etiology of ADHD in Korean subjects. In addition, our results provide evidence that the temperament of Novelty Seeking and ADHD might share molecular genetic characteristics related to the noradrenergic system.
AIM: Accumulating evidence suggests that lncRNAs are potential biomarkers and key regulators of tumor development and progression. However, the precise function of most lncRNAs in glioma remains unknown. In this study, we explored the role of long intergenic non-protein coding RNA 1018 (LINC01018) in human glioma. METHODS: Expression levels of LINC01018 and miR-182-5p in clinical glioma tissues and cell lines were detected by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Cell proliferation, migration, and invasion were determined by Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay and Transwell assay. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) related proteins were measured by Western blotting. Direct relationship between LINC01018 and miR-182-5p was tested by dual-luciferase reporter assay, RNA immunoprecipitation assay (RIP), and rescue assays. Lastly, bioinformatics analyses were conducted to predict the downstream factors of LINC01018/miR-182-5p axis in glioma. RESULTS: LINC01018 was significantly down-regulated in glioma tissues and cell lines. Overexpression of LINC01018 dramatically inhibited cell proliferation, migration, and invasion and reverse EMT process in glioma. LINC01018 directly target to miR-182-5p. Forced up-regulation of miR-182-5p reversed the inhibitory effects on proliferative and metastatic abilities of glioma cells with LINC01018 overexpression. Lastly, the bioinformatics analyses revealed that LINC01018/miR-182-5p axis mediated a cluster of downstream genes (ADRA2C, RAB6B, RAB27B, RAPGEF5, STEAP2, TAGLN3, and UNC13C), which were potential key factors in the development of glioma. CONCLUSION: LINC01018 inhibits cell proliferation and metastasis in human glioma by targeting miR-182-5p, and should be considered as a potential therapeutic target in this cancer.
Arterial tone is regulated by multiple ligand-receptor interactions, and its dysregulation is involved in ischemic conditions such as acute coronary spasm or syndrome. Understanding the distribution of vasoactive receptors on different arteries may help guide the development of tissue-specific vasoactive treatments against arterial dysfunction. Tissues were harvested from coronary, mesenteric, pulmonary, renal and peripheral human artery (n = 6 samples of each) and examined using a human antibody array to determine the expression of 29 vasoactive receptors and 3 endothelin ligands. Across all types of arteries, outer diameter ranged from 2.24 +/- 0.63 to 3.65 +/- 0.40 mm, and AVPR1A was the most abundant receptor. The expression level of AVPR1A in pulmonary artery was similar to that in renal artery, 2.2 times that in mesenteric artery, 1.9 times that in peripheral artery, and 2.2 times that in coronary artery. Endothelin-1 was expressed at significantly higher levels in pulmonary artery than peripheral artery (8.8 times), mesenteric artery (5.3 times), renal artery (7.9 times), and coronary artery (2.4 times). Expression of ADRA2B was significantly higher in coronary artery than peripheral artery. Immunohistochemistry revealed abundant ADRA2B in coronary artery, especially vessels with diameters below 50 mum, but not in myocardium. ADRA2C, in contrast, was expressed in both myocardium and blood vessels. The high expression of ADRA2B in coronary artery but not myocardium highlights the need to further characterize its function. Our results help establish the distribution and relative levels of tone-related receptors in different types of arteries, which may guide artery-specific treatments.
The ischemic etiology of heart failure is an independent prognostic factor associated with worse long-term outcome. Recent evidence indicates a role for genetic susceptibility to ischemic heart failure. The authors systematically reviewed all known case-control studies that investigated the association between genetic variants and ischemic heart failure. Twenty-two articles, which examined 24 gene polymorphisms, were identified. In 22 polymorphisms, the variant form had a functional effect. Twenty-two polymorphisms were variants of genes involved in the maladaptive neurohormonal activation. Seven polymorphisms (ACE I/D, AGT M235T, ADRA2C Del322-325, ADRB2 Arg16Gly, ADRB2 Gln27Glu, EDN1 Lys198Asn, VEGF G-405C) showed a significant association in individual studies. Five polymorphisms (ACE I/D, ADRB1 Arg389Gly, ADRB2 Arg16Gly, ADRB2 Gln27Glu, TNF G308A) were examined by more than one study, and meta-analyses were performed. The meta-analyses showed no significant sign of heterogeneity. In all settings, there was no significant association, except for polymorphism ADRB2 Arg16Gly under a recessive model (fixed-effects odds ratio = 1.32, 95% confidence interval: 1.05, 1.65). Taking into account that ischemic heart failure is a complex disease with multifactorial etiology, a minor contributing pathogenetic role of the investigated gene polymorphisms cannot be totally excluded. Case-control studies that investigate gene-gene and gene-environment interactions might further elucidate the genetics of ischemic heart failure.
Previous evidence suggests that alpha(2)-adrenoceptors (alpha(2)-AR) may be involved in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. However, postmortem brain studies on alpha(2)-AR expression and functionality in schizophrenia are scarce. The aim of our work was to evaluate alpha(2A)-AR and alpha(2C)-AR expression in different subcellular fractions of prefrontal cortex postmortem tissue from antipsychotic-free (absence of antipsychotics in blood at the time of death) (n = 12) and antipsychotic-treated (n = 12) subjects with schizophrenia, and matched controls (n = 24). Functional coupling of alpha(2)-AR to G(alpha) proteins induced by the agonist UK14304 was also tested. Additionally, G(alpha) protein expression was also evaluated. In antipsychotic-free schizophrenia subjects, alpha(2A)-AR and alpha(2C)-AR protein expression was similar to controls in all the subcellular fractions. Conversely, in antipsychotic-treated schizophrenia subjects, increased alpha(2A)-AR expression was found in synaptosomal plasma membrane and postsynaptic density (PSD) fractions (+60% and +79% vs controls, respectively) with no significant changes in alpha(2C)-AR. [(35)S]GTPgammaS SPA experiments showed a significant lower stimulation of G(alphai2) and G(alphai3) proteins by UK14304 in antipsychotic-treated schizophrenia subjects, whereas stimulation in antipsychotic-free schizophrenia subjects remained unchanged. G(alphao) protein stimulation was significantly decreased in both antipsychotic-free and antipsychotic-treated schizophrenia subjects compared to controls. Expression of G(alphai3) protein did not differ between groups, whereas G(alphai2) levels were increased in PSD of schizophrenia subjects, both antipsychotic-free and antipsychotic-treated. G(alphao) protein expression was increased in PSD of antipsychotic-treated subjects and in the presynaptic fraction of antipsychotic-free schizophrenia subjects. The present results suggest that antipsychotic treatment is able to modify in opposite directions both the protein expression and the functionality of alpha(2A)-AR in the cortex of schizophrenia patients.
