Alpha-1A adrenergic receptor; This alpha-adrenergic receptor mediates its action by association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol- calcium second messenger system. Its effect is mediated by G(q) and G(11) proteins. Nuclear ADRA1A-ADRA1B heterooligomers regulate phenylephrine(PE)-stimulated ERK signaling in cardiac myocytes. Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRA1A sub-subfamily.
Takotsubo syndrome (TTS) is an enigmatic disease with a multifactorial and still unresolved pathogenesis. A genetic predisposition has been suggested based on the few familial TTS cases. Conflicting results have been published regarding the role of functional polymorphisms in relevant candidate genes, such as alpha1-, beta1-, and beta2-adrenergic receptors; G protein-coupled receptor kinase 5; and estrogen receptors. Further research is required to help clarify the role of genetic susceptibility in TTS.
Cardiac hypertrophy is a crucial risk factor for hypertensive disorders during pregnancy, but its progression during pregnancy remains unclear. We previously showed cardiac hypertrophy in a pregnancy-associated hypertensive (PAH) mouse model, in which an increase in angiotensin II (Ang II) levels was induced by human renin and human angiotensinogen, depending on pregnancy conditions. Here, to elucidate the factors involved in the progression of cardiac hypertrophy, we performed a comprehensive analysis of changes in gene expression in the hearts of PAH mice and compared them with those in control mice. We found that alpha-1A adrenergic receptor (Adra1a) mRNA levels in the heart were significantly reduced under PAH conditions, whereas the renin-angiotensin system was upregulated. Furthermore, we found that Adra1a-deficient PAH mice exhibited more severe cardiac hypertrophy than PAH mice. Our study suggests that Adra1a levels are regulated by renin-angiotensin system and that changes in Adra1a expression are involved in progressive cardiac hypertrophy in PAH mice.
Fibromyalgia (FM) is a chronic pain syndrome that affects the central nervous system and generates disability, which is characterized by generalized pain, fatigue, and functional decline. In this review, we aimed to identify the polymorphisms related to the pathophysiology of FM and the clinical characteristics generated by genetic influence. Only original studies with genes related to FM were considered, totaling 27 articles. The genes found were: MTHFR, RGS4, MYT1L, TACR1, SCN9A, DRD3, ADRB2, IL-4, HLA-DRB1, EDN1, CNR1, TAAR1, OPRM1, ADRA1A, ADRB3, BDNF, GRIA4, HTR3A, HTR3B, HTR2A, SERPINA 1 or A1AT, NRXN3, GCH1, MEFV, TRPV3, SLC6A4, ACE I/D, TSPO, COMT, and MAOA. Several genes related to different pain syndromes and altered pain thresholds have been identified and some polymorphisms were related to susceptibility to FM. It was observed that 73.33% of the genes related to FM were also associated with some psychological disorders, such as anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, and obsessive and compulsive disorder, and 40.00% with pain sensitivity and/or migraine, besides other disorders associated (drug addiction, autoimmune disorders, circulatory problems, and metabolic alterations). This review demonstrated an association of FM and genetic polymorphisms that can expand our knowledge about the pathophysiology of this disease.
alpha1-Adrenergic receptors (ARs) are catecholamine-activated G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that are expressed in mouse and human myocardium and vasculature, and play essential roles in the regulation of cardiovascular physiology. Though alpha1-ARs are less abundant in the heart than beta1-ARs, activation of cardiac alpha1-ARs results in important biologic processes such as hypertrophy, positive inotropy, ischemic preconditioning, and protection from cell death. Data from the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT) indicate that nonselectively blocking alpha1-ARs is associated with a twofold increase in adverse cardiac events, including heart failure and angina, suggesting that alpha1-AR activation might also be cardioprotective in humans. Mounting evidence implicates the alpha1A-AR subtype in these adaptive effects, including prevention and reversal of heart failure in animal models by alpha1A agonists. In this review, we summarize recent advances in our understanding of cardiac alpha1A-ARs.
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate miR-3682 as a biomarker in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: MiRNA and RNA profiles of 375 HCC tissues and 50 normal liver samples were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Multivariate Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier analyses were applied to examine the prognostic value of factors. Target genes of miR-3682 were analyzed by TargetScan and dual-luciferase reporter assay. Online Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) to perform KEGG pathway enrichment. Cell counting kit-8, colony formation and migration and invasion assays were performed to analyze biological behaviors of HCC cells. RESULTS: MiR-3682 was identified to be highly expressed in HCC tissues and cell lines. And miR-3682 was negatively and independently associated with the outcome of HCC patients. Inhibition of miR-3682 suppressed HCC cell viability and mobility. ADRA1A, predicted and confirmed as the novel target of miR-3682, was an independent and positive prognostic predictor for HCC. In addition, the knockdown of ADRA1A partially offset the inhibitory effect of miR-3682 inhibitor on the growth and mobility of HCC cells. DAVID enrichment and western blot of key signaling-related proteins analyses revealed that miR-3682 inactivated 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signaling by negatively regulating ADRA1A. Mechanically, it was partially through suppressing AMPK signaling via targeting ADRA1A that miR-3682 supported the HCC cell malignant phenotype. CONCLUSIONS: This study implicates that miR-3682 plays an oncogenetic role in HCC and can be considered a novel therapeutic target and prognostic indicator of HCC.
The aim of our study was to explore the relationship between the methylation status of the alpha-1A adrenergic receptor (ADRA1A) gene and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We combined our in-house data-set with the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data-set to screen and identify the methylation status and expression of adrenergic receptor (AR) genes in HCC. Immunohistochemistry and western blot were performed to assess the expression of ADRA1A in HCC cell lines and tissues. We further evaluated the methylation levels of the ADRA1A promoter region in 160 HCC patients using the Sequenom MassARRAY(R) platform and investigated the association between methylation of ADRA1A and clinical characteristics. The expression levels of ADRA1A mRNA and protein were significantly decreased in HCC tissues. Compared with that in paired normal tissues, the mean methylation level of the ADRA1A promoter region was significantly increased in tumour tissues from 160 HCC patients (25.2% vs. 17.0%, P < 0.0001). We found that a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor (decitabine) could increase the expression of ADRA1A mRNA in HCC cell lines. Moreover, hypermethylation of the ADRA1A gene in HCC samples was associated with clinical characteristics, including alcohol intake (P = 0.0097) and alpha-fetoprotein (P = 0.0411). Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve analysis demonstrated that the mean methylation levels of ADRA1A could discriminate between HCC tissues and adjacent non-cancerous tissues (AUC = 0.700, P < 0.0001). mRNA sequencing indicated that the main enriched pathways were pathways in cancer, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and metabolic pathways (P < 0.01). ADRA1A gene hypermethylation might contribute to HCC initiation and is a promising biomarker for the diagnosis of HCC.
BACKGROUND: Hypertensive heart disease (HHD) is one of the most important causes of disease-related deaths worldwide and brings great painful for patients. In recent years, increasingly evidences support the role of miRNAs in various physiology processes and human diseases. In the present study, we investigated whether ADRA1A regulated by miR-19b and miR-16 was involved in the pathogenic mechanism of HHD. METHODS: HHD mice models were established with injection of Deoxycorticosterone acetate (Doca). Real-time PCR was used to detect miRNAs and ADRA1A expression. Western blot was used to detect ADRA1A expression. Cell apoptosis was determined by assaying caspase3/7 activation. RESULTS: ADRA1A was the target gene of miR-19b and miR-16, the expression of miR-19b, miR-16 and ADRA1A were significantly increased in Doca-induced HHD cells. MiRNAs (miR-19b, miR-16) inhibitor significantly increased the expression of ADRA1A but decreased relative activity of caspase 3/7. MiRNA antagomir significantly increased the expression of ADRA1A and heart rate (HR), but significantly decreased systolic blood pressure (SBP), artery diastolic blood pressure (ADBP), fibrosis of ventriculus sinister and cell apoptosis of myocardial tissue that induced by Doca. However, the cooperation of miR-19b and miR-16 showed the better effect than either miR-19b or miR-16. CONCLUSION: ADRA1A mediated by miR-19b and miR-16 played an important role in HHD, which functioned as a target gene for HHD therapy.
Opioid use disorder is a chronic brain disease influenced by genetic and epigenetic factors, accounting for approximately 50% of the liability. Adrenergic signaling is involved in opioid use disorder. To demonstrate the associations between methylation alterations in the alpha-1-adrenergic receptor (ADRA1A) gene and opioid use disorder, in the present study, we first examined and compared the methylation levels of 97 CpG sites in the promoter region of the ADRA1A gene in the peripheral blood in 120 patients with heroin use disorder and 111 healthy controls. Correlations between methylation levels and duration of heroin/methadone use were then analyzed. Finally, the predicted binding transcription factors (TFs) and their target sequences in the promoter region of the ADRA1A gene, which include the selected CpG sites, were screened in the JASPAR database. Our results demonstrated that hypermethylation in the promoter region of the ADRA1A gene in the blood was associated with opioid use disorder. Correlations between methylation levels of several CpG sites and duration of heroin/methadone use were observed. TFs TFAP2A and RUNX1 were predicted to bind to the target sequences, which include the CpG sites selected in the current study, in the promoter region of the ADRA1A gene. Our findings further extend the associations between methylation alterations in the ADRA1A gene and opioid use disorder potentially through mechanisms of gene expression regulations in the ADRA1A gene.
Second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs), such as risperidone, clozapine and olanzapine, are the most common drug treatments for schizophrenia. SGAs presented an advantage over first-generation antipsychotics (FGAs), particularly regarding avoidance of extrapyramidal symptoms. However, most SGAs, and to a lesser degree FGAs, are linked to substantial weight gain. This substantial weight gain is a leading factor in patient non-compliance and poses significant risk of diabetes, lipid abnormalities (that is, metabolic syndrome) and cardiovascular events including sudden death. The purpose of this article is to review the advances made in the field of pharmacogenetics of antipsychotic-induced weight gain (AIWG). We included all published association studies in AIWG from December 2006 to date using the Medline and ISI web of knowledge databases. There has been considerable progress reaffirming previous findings and discovery of novel genetic factors. The HTR2C and leptin genes are among the most promising, and new evidence suggests that the DRD2, TNF, SNAP-25 and MC4R genes are also prominent risk factors. Further promising findings have been reported in novel susceptibility genes, such as CNR1, MDR1, ADRA1A and INSIG2. More research is required before genetically informed, personalized medicine can be applied to antipsychotic treatment; nevertheless, inroads have been made towards assessing genetic liability and plausible clinical application.
OBJECTIVES: It is widely acknowledged that the experience of pain is promoted by both genetic susceptibility and environmental factors such as engaging in physical activity (PA), and that pain-related cognitions are also important. Thus, the purpose of the present study was to test the association of 64 polymorphisms (34 candidate genes) and the gene-gene, gene-PA and gene-sedentary behaviour interactions with pain and pain-related cognitions in women with FM. METHODS: Saliva samples from 274 women with FM [mean (s.d.) age 51.7 (7.7) years] were collected for extracting DNA. We measured PA and sedentary behaviour by accelerometers for a week, pain with algometry and questionnaires, and pain-related cognitions with questionnaires. To assess the robustness of the results, a meta-analysis was also performed. RESULTS: The rs6311 and rs6313 polymorphisms (5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2A, HTR2A) were individually related to algometer scores. The interaction of rs4818 (catechol-O-methyltransferase, COMT) and rs1799971 (opioid receptor mu gene, OPRM1) was related to pain catastrophizing. Five gene-behaviour interactions were significant: the interactions of sedentary behaviour with rs1383914 (adrenoceptor alpha 1A, ADRA1A), rs6860 (charged multivesicular body protein 1A, CHMP1A), rs4680 (COMT), rs165599 (COMT) and rs12994338 (SCN9A) on bodily pain subscale of the Short Form 36. Furthermore, the meta-analysis showed an association between rs4680 (COMT) and severity of FM symptoms (codominant model, P-value 0.032). CONCLUSION: The HTR2A gene (individually), COMT and OPRM1 gene-gene interaction, and the interactions of sedentary behaviour with ADRA1A, CHMP1A, COMT and SCN9A genes were associated with pain-related outcomes. Collectively, findings from the present study indicate a modest contribution of genetics and gene-sedentary behaviour interaction to pain and pain catastrophizing in women with FM. Future research should examine whether reducing sedentary behaviour is particularly beneficial for reducing pain in women with genetic susceptibility to pain.
The diving reflex is an oxygen-saving mechanism which is accompanied by apnea, reflex bradycardia development, peripheral vasoconstriction, spleen erythrocyte release, and selective redistribution of blood flow to the organs most vulnerable to lack of oxygen, such as the brain, heart, and lungs. However, this is a poorly studied form of hypoxia, with a knowledge gap on physiological and biochemical adaptation mechanisms. The reflective sympathetic constriction of the resistive vessels is realized via ADRA1A. It has been shown that ADRA1A SNP (p.Arg347Cys; rs1048101) is associated with changes in tonus in vessel walls. Moreover, the Cys347 allele has been shown to regulate systolic blood pressure. The aim of this work was to evaluate whether the ADRA1A polymorphism affected the pulmonary vascular reactions in men and women in response to the diving reflex. Men (n = 52) and women (n = 50) untrained in diving aged 18 to 25 were recruited into the study. The vascular reactions and blood flow were examined by integrated rheography and rheography of the pulmonary artery. Peripheral blood circulation was registered by plethysmography. The ADRA1A gene polymorphism (p.Arg347Cys; rs1048101) was determined by PCR-RFLP. In both men and women, reflective pulmonary vasodilation did occur in response to the diving reflex, but in women this vasodilation was more pronounced and was accompanied by a higher filling of the lungs with blood.. Additionally, ADRA1A SNP (p.Arg347Cys; rs1048101) is associated with sex. Interestingly, women with the Arg347 allele demonstrated the highest vasodilation of the lung vessels. Therefore, our data may help to indicate women with the most prominent adaptive reactions to the diving reflex. Our data also indicate that women and men with the Cys allele of the ADRA1A gene polymorphism have the highest risk of developing lung hypertension in response to the diving reflex. The diving reflex is an oxygen-saving mechanism which is accompanied by apnea, reflex bradycardia development, peripheral vasoconstriction, spleen erythrocyte release, and selective redistribution of blood flow to the organs most vulnerable to lack of oxygen, such as the brain, heart, and lungs. However, this is a poorly studied form of hypoxia, with a knowledge gap on physiological and biochemical adaptation mechanisms.
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) participate in the progression of human cancers and have been broadly elucidated. Here, we aimed to elucidate the roles and functional mechanisms of hsa_circ_0080608 (circ_0080608) in lung cancer. Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was performed to assess the mRNA expression levels of circ_0080608, miR-661, and adrenoceptor alpha 1A (ADRA1A). Western blotting was performed to measure ADRA1A protein levels. CCK-8, colony formation, and Transwell assays were performed to determine the effect of circ_0080608 on cell proliferation and migration. Animal models were used to assess how circ_0080608 influences tumor progression in vivo. The binding relationships of miR-661's with circ_0080608 and ADRA1A was confirmed using dual-luciferase reporter and RIP assays. Circ_0080608 exhibited relatively low expression in lung cancer samples and cells. Lung cancer cells overexpressing circ_0080608 exhibited reduced migratory and proliferative abilities. Additionally, circ_0080608 binds to miR-661 and operates as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) and shares a miR-661 binding site with the 3' UTR of ADRA1A. Furthermore, circ_0080608 inversely regulates miR-661 expression, consequently restraining the aggressive behavior of lung cancer cells. Lung cancer cells overexpressing ADRA1A also exhibit repressed migratory and proliferative abilities. However, reintroduction of miR-661 led to a decline in ADRA1A expression, thereby attenuating the functional effects of ADRA1A. Circ_0080608 impedes lung cancer progression by regulating the miR-661/ADRA1A pathway. Our findings provide new insights into the progression of lung cancer.
AIMS: Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS), a common and debilitating cardiovascular disorder, is characterized by an exaggerated heart rate increase during orthostasis and a wide spectrum of adrenergic-related symptoms. To determine the aetiology of POTS, we examined a possible pathophysiological role for autoantibodies against alpha1-adrenergic (alpha1AR) and beta1/2-adrenergic receptors (beta1/2AR). METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunoglobulin G (IgG) derived from 17 POTS patients, 7 with recurrent vasovagal syncope (VVS), and 11 normal controls was analysed for its ability to modulate activity and ligand responsiveness of alpha1AR and beta1/2AR in transfected cells and to alter contractility of isolated rat cremaster arterioles in vitro. Immunoglobulin G activation of alpha1AR and beta1/2AR was significantly higher in POTS compared with VVS and controls in cell-based assays. Eight, 11, and 12 of the 17 POTS patients possessed autoantibodies that activated alpha1AR, beta1AR and beta2AR, respectively. Pharmacological blockade suppressed IgG-induced activation of alpha1AR and beta1/2AR. Eight of 17 POTS IgG decreased the alpha1AR responsiveness to phenylephrine and 13 of 17 POTS IgG increased the beta1AR responsiveness to isoproterenol irrespective of their ability to directly activate their receptors. Postural tachycardia syndrome IgG contracted rat cremaster arterioles, which was reversed by alpha1AR blockade. The upright heart rate correlated with IgG-mediated beta1AR and alpha1AR activity but not with beta2AR activity. CONCLUSION: These data confirm a strong relationship between adrenergic autoantibodies and POTS. They support the concept that allosteric-mediated shifts in the alpha1AR and beta1AR responsiveness are important in the pathophysiology of postural tachycardia.
INTRODUCTION: Ritodrine is one of the most commonly used tocolytics in preterm labor, acting as a ss2-adrenergic agonist that reduces intracellular calcium levels and prevents myometrial activation. Ritodrine infusion can result in serious maternal complications, and pulmonary edema is a particular concern among these. The cause of pulmonary edema following ritodrine treatment is multifactorial; however, the contributing genetic factors remain poorly understood. This study investigates the genetic variants associated with ritodrine-induced pulmonary edema. METHODS: In this case-control study, 16 patients who developed pulmonary edema during ritodrine infusion [case], and 16 pregnant women who were treated with ritodrine and did not develop pulmonary edema [control] were included. The control pregnant women were selected after matching for plurality and gestational age at the time of tocolytic use. Maternal blood was collected during admission for tocolytic treatment, and whole exome sequencing was performed with the stored blood samples. RESULTS: Gene-wise variant burden (GVB) analysis resulted in a total of 71 candidate genes by comparing the cumulative effects of multiple coding variants for 19729 protein-coding genes between the patients with pulmonary edema and the matched controls. Subsequent data analysis selected only the statistically significant and deleterious variants compatible with ritodrine-induced pulmonary edema. Two final candidate variants in CPT2 and ADRA1A were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. CONCLUSIONS: We identified new potential variants in genes that play a role in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA) regulation, which supports their putative involvement in the predisposition to ritodrine-induced pulmonary edema in pregnant women.
Objective To explore the potential biological functions and prognostic prediction values of non-apoptotic regulated cell death genes (NARCDs) in lung adenocarcinoma.Methods Transcriptome data of lung adenocarcinoma were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas and Gene Expression Omnibus databases. We identified differentially expressed NARCDs between lung adenocarcinoma tissues and normal tissues with R software. NARCDs signature was constructed with univariate Cox regression analysis and the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator Cox regression. The prognostic predictive capacity of NARCDs signature was assessed by Kaplan-Meier survival curve, receiver operating characteristic curve, and univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses. Functional enrichment of NARCDs signature was analyzed with gene set variation analysis, Gene Ontology, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. In addition, differences in tumor mutational burden, tumor microenvironment, tumor immune dysfunction and exclusion score, and chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity were analyzed between the high and low NARCDs score groups. Finally, a protein-protein interaction network of NARCDs and immune-related genes was constructed by STRING and Cytoscape software. Results We identified 34 differentially expressed NARCDs associated with the prognosis, of which 16 genes (ATIC, AURKA, CA9, ITGB4, DDIT4, CDK5R1, CAV1, RRM2, GAPDH, SRXN1, NLRC4, GLS2, ADRB2, CX3CL1, GDF15, and ADRA1A) were selected to construct a NARCDs signature. NARCDs signature was identified as an independent prognostic factor (P < 0.001). Functional analysis showed that there were significant differences in mismatch repair, p53 signaling pathway, and cell cycle between the high NARCDs score group and low NARCDs score group (all P < 0.05). The NARCDs low score group had lower tumor mutational burden, higher immune score, higher tumor immune dysfunction and exclusion score, and lower drug sensitivity (all P < 0.05). In addition, the 10 hub genes (CXCL5, TLR4, JUN, IL6, CCL2, CXCL2, ILA, IFNG, IL33, and GAPDH) in protein-protein interaction network of NARCDs and immune-related genes were all immune-related genes. Conclusion The NARCDs prognostic signature based on the above 16 genes is an independent prognostic factor, which can effectively predict the clinical prognosis of patients of lung adenocarcinoma and provide help for clinical treatment.
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is highly comorbid with chronic pain (CP). Evidence has suggested that neuroadaptive processes characterized by reward deficit and stress surfeit are involved in the development of AUD and pain chronification. Neurological data suggest that shared genetic architecture associated with the reward and stress systems may contribute to the comorbidity of AUD and CP. This monograph first delineates the prevailing theories of the development of AUD and pain chronification focusing on the reward and stress systems. It then provides a brief summary of relevant neurological findings followed by an evaluation of evidence documented by molecular genetic studies. Candidate gene association studies have provided some initial support for the genetic overlap between AUD and CP; however, these results must be interpreted with caution until studies with sufficient statistical power are conducted and replications obtained. Genomewide association studies have suggested a number of genes (e.g., TBX19, HTR7, and ADRA1A) that are either directly or indirectly related to the reward and stress systems in the AUD and CP literature. Evidence reviewed in this monograph suggests that shared genetic liability underlying the comorbidity between AUD and CP, if present, is likely to be complex. As the advancement in molecular genetic methods continues, future studies may show broader central nervous system involvement in AUD-CP comorbidity.
Postprandial orthostasis activates mechanisms of cardiovascular homeostasis to maintain normal blood pressure (BP) and adequate blood flow to vital organs. The underlying mechanisms of cardiovascular homeostasis in postprandial orthostasis still require elucidation. Fourteen healthy volunteers were recruited to investigate the effect of an orthostatic challenge (60 degrees -head-up-tilt for 20 min) on splanchnic and systemic hemodynamics before and after ingesting an 800-kcal composite meal. The splanchnic circulation was assessed by ultrasonography of the superior mesenteric and hepatic arteries and portal vein. Systemic hemodynamics were assessed noninvasively by continuous monitoring of BP, heart rate (HR), cardiac output (CO), and the pressor response to an intravenous infusion on increasing doses of phenylephrine, an alpha(1)-adrenoceptor agonist. Neurohumoral regulation was assessed by spectral analysis of HR and BP, plasma catecholamine and aldosterone levels and plasma renin activity. Postprandial mesenteric hyperemia was associated with an increase in CO, a decrease in SVR and cardiac vagal tone, and reduction in baroreflex sensitivity with no change in sympathetic tone. Arterial alpha(1)-adrenoceptor responsiveness was preserved and reduced in hepatic sinusoids. Postprandial orthostasis was associated with a shift of 500 mL of blood from mesenteric to systemic circulation with preserved sympathetic-mediated vasoconstriction. Meal ingestion provokes cardiovascular hyperdynamism, cardiac vagolysis, and resetting of the baroreflex without activation of the sympathetic nervous system. Meal ingestion also alters alpha(1)-adrenoceptor responsiveness in the hepatic sinusoids and participates in the redistribution of blood volume from the mesenteric to the systemic circulation to maintain a normal BP during orthostasis.NEW & NOTEWORTHY A unique integrated investigation on the effect of meal on neurohumoral mechanisms and blood flow redistribution of the mesenteric circulation during orthostasis was investigated. Food ingestion results in cardiovascular hyperdynamism, reduction in cardiac vagal tone, and baroreflex sensitivity and causes a decrease in alpha(1)-adrenoceptor responsiveness only in the venous intrahepatic sinusoids. About 500-mL blood shifts from the mesenteric to the systemic circulation during orthostasis. Accordingly, the orthostatic homeostatic mechanisms are better understood.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified some variants for movement-related adverse antipsychotic effects (MAAE), while how these variants confer MAAE remains unclear. We used the probabilistic Mendelian randomization (PMR) method to identify candidate proteins for MAAE by integrating MAAE GWASs and protein quantitative trait loci (pQTL) data. An independent pQTL data from the Banner project and brain-derived eQTL data were used to perform confirmatory PMR. A total of 56 proteins were identified as candidate targets for MAAE after false discovery rates (FDR) correction, such as GRIN2B, ADRA1A, and PED4B. 12 genes were replicated in the confirmatory PMR, and 18 genes had consistent evidence at the transcript level. Furthermore, we investigated the associations between candidate proteins and the motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD). There were 24, 38, and 10 candidate proteins that were significantly associated with PD, PD motor subtypes, and PD motor progression, respectively. Enrichment analysis identified 34 GO terms and 17 pathways that may be involved in MAAE, such as glutamatergic synapse, glutamate receptor complex, and GABAergic synapse. Our study identified multiple candidate genes and pathways that were associated with MAAE, providing new insights into the biological mechanism of MAAE and targets for further mechanistic and therapeutic studies.
BACKGROUND: Silodosin is a new alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor antagonist that is selective for the alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptor. It was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2008 for the treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, adverse effects, drug interactions, and dosage and administration of silodosin in adult male patients with BPH. METHODS: A search of MEDLINE (1950-October 8, 2009), International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970-October 8, 2009), and the Iowa Drug Information Service database (1966-October 8, 2009) was conducted using the terms silodosin, KMD-3213, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor antagonist. Reports of research and review articles published in English were identified and evaluated, and the bibliographies of these articles were reviewed for additional relevant publications. A search of the FDA Web site was performed, and abstracts and posters presented at scientific meetings of the American Urological Association were reviewed. RESULTS: By antagonizing alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptors in the prostate and urethra, silodosin causes smooth muscle relaxation in the LUT. Silodosin has greater affinity for the alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptor than for the alpha(1B)-adrenergic receptor (by a factor of 583), minimizing the propensity for blood pressure-related adverse effects mediated by alpha(1B) blockade. In 3 controlled clinical studies in patients with BPH-related LUTS (1 published; 2 presented in the prescribing information and published in a pooled analysis), patients receiving silodosin at a total daily dose of 8 mg had significant improvements in the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) and maximum urinary flow rate (Q(max)) compared with those receiving placebo (both, P < 0.05). The most commonly reported adverse effect was abnormal or retrograde ejaculation (>22%), and the incidence of orthostatic hypotension was low (<3%). CONCLUSIONS: In the small number of clinical trials reviewed, silodosin was associated with significant reductions in IPSS and Q(max) compared with placebo. To determine whether silodosin's selectivity for the alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptor translates into a clinical advantage relative to other available agents, long-term studies evaluating the comparative efficacy and tolerability of silodosin and other alpha(1)-blockers (specifically tamsulosin) are necessary.
Schizophrenia is a chronic psychiatry disorder with a strong genetic component. A recent association study of alpha(1A)-adrenoceptor gene (ADRA1A) involving an isolated Spanish population, focusing on the promoter region of the ADRA1A, genotyped eight single SNPs at the promoter region of ADRA1A and found that two SNPs, -563G/A and -9625G/A, were associated with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders. We were interested in the two positive sites reported and selected five variants among the promoter region of ADRA1A, namely -563G/A, -9625G/A, -2760C/A, -4155G/C and a new substitution we detected between -508bp and -530bp upstream of the translation initiation site. Our sample consisted of 480 schizophrenia and 480 control subjects. All recruits were Han Chinese in Shanghai origin. However, neither individual SNP nor any haplotype was associated with schizophrenia in our study. These results suggest that the variants among the promoter of ADRA1A gene are unlikely to play a major role in the susceptibility to schizophrenia in the Chinese population.
