Alpha-1B adrenergic receptor; This alpha-adrenergic receptor mediates its action by association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol- calcium second messenger system. Its effect is mediated by G(q) and G(11) proteins. Nuclear ADRA1A-ADRA1B heterooligomers regulate phenylephrine (PE)-stimulated ERK signaling in cardiac myocytes. Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRA1B sub-subfamily.
Neuroblastoma (NB) is an aggressive childhood tumor, with high-risk cases having a 5-year overall survival probability of approximately 50%. The multimodal therapeutic approach for NB includes treatment with the retinoid isotretinoin (13-cis retinoic acid; 13cRA), which is used in the post-consolidation phase as an antiproliferation and prodifferentiation agent to minimize residual disease and prevent relapse. Through small-molecule screening, we identified isorhamnetin (ISR) as a synergistic compound with 13cRA in inhibiting up to 80% of NB cell viability. The synergistic effect was accompanied by a marked increase in the expression of the adrenergic receptor alpha1B (ADRA1B) gene. Genetic knockout of ADRA1B or its specific blockade using alpha1/alpha1B adrenergic antagonists led to selective sensitization of MYCN-amplified NB cells to cell viability reduction and neural differentiation induced by 13cRA, thus mimicking ISR activity. Administration of doxazosin, a safe alpha1-antagonist used in pediatric patients, in combination with 13cRA in NB xenografted mice exerted marked control of tumor growth, whereas each drug alone was ineffective. Overall, this study identified the alpha1B adrenergic receptor as a pharmacologic target in NB, supporting the evaluation of adding alpha1-antagonists to the post-consolidation therapy of NB to more efficiently control residual disease. SIGNIFICANCE: Targeting alpha-adrenergic receptors synergizes with isotretinoin to suppress growth and to promote differentiation of neuroblastoma, revealing a combinatorial approach for more effective management of the disease and prevention of relapse.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) are a superfamily of receptors that are vital in a wide array of physiological processes. Modulation of GPCR signaling has been an intensive area of therapeutic study, mainly due to the diverse pathophysiological significance of GPCRs. Pepducins are cell-penetrating lipidated peptides designed to target the intracellular loops of the GPCR of interest. Pepducins can function as agonists or antagonists of their cognate receptor, making them highly useful compounds for the study of GPCR signaling. Pepducins have been used to control platelet-dependent hemostasis and thrombosis, tumor growth, invasion, and angiogenesis, as well as to improve sepsis outcomes in mice. Pepducins have been successfully designed against a wide variety of GPCRs including the protease-activated receptors (PAR1, 2, 4), the chemokine receptors (CXCR1, 2, 4), the sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor (S1P3), the adrenergic receptor (ADRA1B), and have the potential to help reveal the functions of intractable GPCRs. Pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and biodistribution studies have showed that pepducins are widely distributed throughout the body except the brain and possess appropriate drug-like properties for use in vivo. Here, we discuss the delivery, pharmacology, and biodistribution of pepducins, as well as the effects of pepducins in models of inflammation, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and angiogenesis.
AIM: A genomic region on 5q33.3 lies between and encompasses the IL12B and PTTG1 genes, and contains many potential psoriasis causal variants. We aimed to further examine the influence of variants in and around this region. MATERIALS & METHODS: We used least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO)-based regression analysis to assess independent contributions of 2171 variants to psoriasis susceptibility and tested them for association with different clinical psoriasis subtypes. RESULTS: We found that ADRA1B gene variants contribute to psoriasis in Chinese population. ADRA1B gene variants have a stronger association with moderate-to-severe disease group and an earlier age at onset of psoriasis than IL-12B and PTTG1 variants. CONCLUSION: The association of variants in the ADRA1B gene with psoriasis could explain why variants in the IL-12B, ADRA1B and PTTG1 gene regions are associated with psoriasis.
Adrenergic receptors (ADRs) are widely distributed in the peripheral and central nervous systems. We previously reported that L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA), the precursor of dopamine, sensitizes adrenergic alpha(1) receptor (ADRA1) through a G protein-coupled receptor GPR143. Chimeric analysis, in which the transmembrane (TM) domains of GPR143 were replaced with those of GPR37, revealed that the second TM region was essential for the potentiation of phenylephrine-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation by GPR143. In HEK293T cells expressing ADRA1B, phenylephrine-induced ERK phosphorylation was augmented by the co-expression of GPR143, compared to the mock vector. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that a synthetic transactivator of the transcription peptide fused with TM2 of GPR143 (TAT-TM2) disrupts the interaction between GPR143 and ADRA1B. This TAT-TM2 peptide suppressed the augmentation of phenylephrine-induced ERK phosphorylation by GPR143 in HEK293T cells co-expressing ADRA1B and GPR143. These results indicate that the interaction between GPR143 and ADRA1B is required for the potentiation of ADRA1B-mediated signaling by GPR143. The TM2 region of GPR143 is a crucial dimeric interface for the functional coupling between ADRA1B and GPR143.
Lung cancer, a life-threatening disease primarily affecting lung tissue, remains a significant contributor to mortality in both developed and developing nations. Accurate biomarker identification is imperative for effective cancer diagnosis and therapeutic strategies. This study introduces the Voting-Based Enhanced Binary Ebola Optimization Search Algorithm (VBEOSA), an innovative ensemble-based approach combining binary optimization and the Ebola optimization search algorithm. VBEOSA harnesses the collective power of the state-of-the-art classification models through soft voting. Moreover, our research applies VBEOSA to an extensive lung cancer gene expression dataset obtained from TCGA, following essential preprocessing steps including outlier detection and removal, data normalization, and filtration. VBEOSA aids in feature selection, leading to the discovery of key hub genes closely associated with lung cancer, validated through comprehensive protein-protein interaction analysis. Notably, our investigation reveals ten significant hub genes-ADRB2, ACTB, ARRB2, GNGT2, ADRB1, ACTG1, ACACA, ATP5A1, ADCY9, and ADRA1B-each demonstrating substantial involvement in the domain of lung cancer. Furthermore, our pathway analysis sheds light on the prominence of strategic pathways such as salivary secretion and the calcium signaling pathway, providing invaluable insights into the intricate molecular mechanisms underpinning lung cancer. We also utilize the weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) method to identify gene modules exhibiting strong correlations with clinical attributes associated with lung cancer. Our findings underscore the efficacy of VBEOSA in feature selection and offer profound insights into the multifaceted molecular landscape of lung cancer. Finally, we are confident that this research has the potential to improve diagnostic capabilities and further enrich our understanding of the disease, thus setting the stage for future advancements in the clinical management of lung cancer. The VBEOSA source codes is publicly available at https://github.com/TEHNAN/VBEOSA-A-Novel-Feature-Selection-Algorithm-for-Identifying-hub-Genes-in-Lung-Cancer .
Polygonum perfoliatum L. is an herbal medicine that has been extensively used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat various health conditions ranging from ancient internal to surgical and gynecological diseases. Numerous studies suggest that P. perfoliatum extract elicits significant anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial, and anti-viral effects. Nevertheless, the underlying mechanisms of its anti-liver cancer effects remain poorly understood. Our study suggests that P. perfoliatum stem extract (PPLA) has a favorable safety profile and exhibits a significant anti-liver cancer effect both in vitro and in vivo. We identified that PPLA activates the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, and key regulatory genes including ADRA1B, PLCB2, PRKG2, CALML4, and GLO1 involved in this activation. Moreover, PPLA modulates the expression of genes responsible for the cell cycle. Additionally, we identified four constituents of PPLA, namely taxifolin, myricetin, eriodictyol, and pinocembrin, that plausibly act via the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments confirmed that PPLA, along with its constituting compounds taxifolin, myricetin, and eriodictyol, exhibit potent anti-cancer activities and hold the promise of being developed into therapeutic agents.
The structural basis of the quaternary organization of rhodopsin has recently been explored and modeled. Because information obtained from studying rhodopsin has frequently been directly applicable to other G protein-coupled receptors we wished to ascertain if dimeric and/or oligomeric forms of the alpha(1b)-adrenoceptor could be observed and if so whether rhodopsin might provide insights into the quaternary structure of this receptor. Co-immunoprecipitation and both conventional and time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer studies demonstrated quaternary structure of the alpha(1b)-adrenoceptor and, in concert with the reconstitution of fragments of this receptor, provided information on the molecular basis of these interactions. Development of three color fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) allowed the imaging of alpha(1b)-adrenoceptor oligomers in single living cells. Mutation of hydrophobic residues in transmembrane domains I and IV of the receptor resulted in marked reduction in three color FRET suggesting an alteration in oligomeric organization and potential similarities with rhodopsin. The mutated alpha(1b)-adrenoceptor was unable to reach the cell surface, did not become terminally N-glycosylated and was unable to signal.
Recent studies have suggested that epigenetic inactivation of tumour-related genes by promoter methylation participates in the development of gastric cancer. We newly identified the frequently aberrant promoter methylation of alpha-1B-adrenergic receptor (ADRA1B) in colorectal cancer by methylation-sensitive representational difference analysis (MS-RDA) and examined the methylation status of the ADRA1B promoter in 34 paired samples of colorectal cancer and surrounding epithelial tissue, and 34 paired samples of gastric cancer and surrounding epithelial tissue. In colorectal cancers, only four of 34 (11.8%) tumours showed ADRA1B promoter methylation. In contrast, ADRA1B promoter methylation was detected in 24 of 34 (70.6%) gastric cancers and in 14 of 34 (41.2%) surrounding epithelial tissues. The frequency of ADRA1B promoter methylation was higher in gastric epithelial tissues with intestinal metaplasia (41.6%) than in those without intestinal metaplasia (25.0%). Reverse transcription-PCR detected reduced ADRA1B expression in 12 of 18 (66.7%) gastric cancers, and its promoter methylation was detected in 11 of these 12 (91.7%) gastric cancers with reduced ADRA1B expression. Thus, ADRA1B promoter is frequently methylated in gastric cancer. Our results suggest that the ADRA1B gene is an important tumour-related gene frequently involved in the development and progression of gastric cancer.
The alpha(1B) (alpha(1B))-adrenergic receptors contribute to vasoconstriction in humans. We tested the hypothesis that variation in the ADRA1B gene contributes to interindividual variability and ethnic differences in adrenergic vasoconstriction. We measured dorsal hand vein responses to increasing doses of phenylephrine in 64 Caucasians and 41 African Americans and genotyped 34 ADRA1B variants. We validated findings in another model of catecholamine-induced vasoconstriction, the increase in mean arterial pressure (DeltaMAP) during a cold pressor test (CPT). One ADRA1B variant, rs10070745, present in 14 African-American heterozygotes but not in Caucasians, was associated with a lower phenylephrine ED(50) (geometric mean (95% confidence interval), 144 (69-299) ng ml(-1)) compared with 27 African-American non-carriers (208 (130-334) ng ml(-1); P=0.015) and contributed to the ethnic differences in ED(50). The same variant was also associated with a greater DeltaMAP during CPT (P=0.008). In conclusion, ADRA1B rs10070745 was significantly associated with vasoconstrictor responses after adrenergic stimulation and contributed to the ethnic difference in phenylephrine sensitivity.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic progressive fibrotic disease of the lung with poor prognosis. Fibrosis results from remodeling of the interstitial tissue. A wide range of gene expression changes are observed, but the role of micro RNAs (miRNAs) and circular RNAs (circRNA) is still unclear. Therefore, this study aimed to establish an messenger RNA (mRNA)-miRNA-circRNA competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) regulatory network to uncover novel molecular signatures using systems biology tools. Six datasets were used to determine differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and miRNAs (DEmiRNA). Accordingly, protein-protein, mRNA-miRNA, and miRNA-circRNA interactions were constructed. Modules were determined and further analyzed in the Drug Gene Budger platform to identify potential therapeutic compounds. We uncovered common 724 DEGs and 278 DEmiRNAs. In the protein-protein interaction network, TMPRSS4, ESR2, TP73, CLEC4E, and TP63 were identified as hub protein coding genes. The mRNA-miRNA interaction network revealed two modules composed of ADRA1A, ADRA1B, hsa-miR-484 and CDH2, TMPRSS4, and hsa-miR-543. The DEmiRNAs in the modules further analyzed to propose potential circRNA regulators in the ceRNA network. These results help deepen the understanding of the mechanisms of IPF. In addition, the molecular leads reported herein might inform future innovations in diagnostics and therapeutics research and development for IPF.
BACKGROUND: The pathway-focused association approach offers a hypothesis driven alternative to the agnostic genome-wide association study. Here we apply the pathway-focused approach to an association study of hypertension, systolic blood pressure (SBP), and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) in 1614 Nigerians with genome-wide data. METHODS AND RESULTS: Testing of 28 pathways with biological relevance to hypertension, selected a priori, containing a total of 101 unique genes and 4,349 unique single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) showed an association for the adrenergic alpha 1 (ADRA1) receptor pathway with hypertension (p<0.0009) and diastolic blood pressure (p<0.0007). Within the ADRA1 pathway, the genes PNMT (hypertension P(gene)<0.004, DBP P(gene)<0.004, and SBP P(gene)<0.009, and ADRA1B (hypertension P(gene)<0.005, DBP P(gene)<0.02, and SBP P(gene)<0.02) displayed the strongest associations. Neither ADRA1B nor PNMT could be the sole mediator of the observed pathway association as the ADRA1 pathway remained significant after removing ADRA1B, and other pathways involving PNMT did not reach pathway significance. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that multiple variants in several genes in the ADRA1 pathway led to associations with hypertension and DBP. SNPs in ADRA1B and PNMT have not previously been linked to hypertension in a genome-wide association study, but both genes have shown associations with hypertension through linkage or model organism studies. The identification of moderately significant (10(-2)>p>10(-5)) SNPs offers a novel method for detecting the "missing heritability" of hypertension. These findings warrant further studies in similar and other populations to assess the generalizability of our results, and illustrate the potential of the pathway-focused approach to investigate genetic variation in hypertension.
Smoking is a leading cause of preventable morbidity and mortality. Smoking is heritable, and genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of smoking behaviors have identified hundreds of significant loci. Most GWAS-identified variants are noncoding with unknown neurobiological effects. We used genome-wide genotype, DNA methylation, and RNA sequencing data in postmortem human nucleus accumbens (NAc) to identify cis-methylation/expression quantitative trait loci (meQTLs/eQTLs), investigate variant-by-cigarette smoking interactions across the genome, and overlay QTL evidence at smoking GWAS-identified loci to evaluate their regulatory potential. Active smokers (N = 52) and nonsmokers (N = 171) were defined based on cotinine biomarker levels and next-of-kin reporting. We simultaneously tested variant and variant-by-smoking interaction effects on methylation and expression, separately, adjusting for biological and technical covariates and correcting for multiple testing using a two-stage procedure. We found >2 million significant meQTL variants (p(adj )< 0.05) corresponding to 41,695 unique CpGs. Results were largely driven by main effects, and five meQTLs, mapping to NUDT12, FAM53B, RNF39, and ADRA1B, showed a significant interaction with smoking. We found 57,683 significant eQTL variants for 958 unique eGenes (p(adj )< 0.05) and no smoking interactions. Colocalization analyses identified loci with smoking-associated GWAS variants that overlapped meQTLs/eQTLs, suggesting that these heritable factors may influence smoking behaviors through functional effects on methylation/expression. One locus containing MUSTN1 and ITIH4 colocalized across all data types (GWAS, meQTL, and eQTL). In this first genome-wide meQTL map in the human NAc, the enriched overlap with smoking GWAS-identified genetic loci provides evidence that gene regulation in the brain helps explain the neurobiology of smoking behaviors.
We have developed a novel reporter assay that leverages SNAP-epitope tag/near-infrared (NIR) imaging technology to monitor G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) degradation in human cell lines. N-terminal SNAP-tagged GPCRs were subcloned and expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells and then subjected to 24 h of cycloheximide (CHX)-chase degradation assays to quantify receptor degradation half-lives (t(1/2)) using LICOR NIR imaging-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) analysis. Thus far, we have used this method to quantify t(1/2) for all nine adrenergic (ADRA1A, ADRA1B, ADRA1D, ADRA2A, ADRA2B, ADRA2C, ADRB1, ADRB2, ADRB3), five somatostatin (SSTR1, SSTR2, SSTR3, SSTR4, SSTR5), four chemokine (CXCR1, CXCR2, CXCR3, CXCR5), and three 5-HT2 (5HT2A, 5HT2B, 5HT2C) receptor subtypes. SNAP-GPCR-CHX degradation t(1/2) values ranged from 0.52 h (ADRA1D) to 5.5 h (SSTR3). On the contrary, both the SNAP-tag alone and SNAP-tagged and endogenous beta-actin were resistant to degradation with CHX treatment. Treatment with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib produced significant but variable increases in SNAP-GPCR protein expression levels, indicating that SNAP-GPCR degradation primarily occurs through the proteasome. Remarkably, endogenous beta2-adrenergic receptor/ADRB2 dynamic mass redistribution functional responses to norepinephrine were significantly decreased following CHX treatment, with a time course equivalent to that observed with the SNAP-ADRB2 degradation assay. We subsequently adapted this assay into a 96-well glass-bottom plate format to facilitate high-throughput GPCR degradation screening. t(1/2) values quantified for the alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor subtypes (ADRA1A, ADRA1B, ADR1D) using the 96-well-plate format correlated with t(1/2) values quantified using NIR-PAGE imaging analysis. In summary, this novel assay permits precise quantitative analysis of GPCR degradation in human cells and can be readily adapted to quantify degradation for any membrane protein of interest.
Previous studies have focused on the role of norepinephrine on arrhythmias, generalized anxiety disorder, and cancer. This study aimed to investigate the effect of norepinephrine on endometrial decidualization. Artificial decidualization and norepinephrine-treated mice were established in vivo. In vitro, human endometrial stromal cells were treated with MPA and cAMP to induce decidualization. Decidual markers and important signaling molecules during decidualization were detected using quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot. RNA sequencing was performed to determine related signaling pathways. Exposure to excess norepinephrine significantly restricted the induced expression of decidualized markers Dtprp, BMP2, WNT4, and Hand2 in mice. In vitro, 10 microM norepinephrine markedly downregulated the expressions of prolactin, IGFBP1, and PLZF, which are the specifical markers of decidual stromal cells during decidualization. The gene set enrichment analysis showed a significant enrichment in neuroactive ligand-receptor interactions of norepinephrine treatment group. The alpha1b-adrenergic receptor expression was upregulated by norepinephrine. Interestingly, norepinephrine did not inhibit the expression of IGFBP1 in endometrial stromal cells after silencing alpha1b-adrenergic receptor, while significantly suppressed the induced decidualization with overexpression of alpha1b-adrenergic receptor. When alpha1b-adrenergic receptor was activated, endometrial p-PKC was significantly increased under post-treatment with norepinephrine in vivo and in vitro. In addition, norepinephrine treatment inhibited embryo and fetal development using a normal pregnancy model. Therefore, norepinephrine exposure inhibited endometrial decidualization through the activation of the PKC signaling pathway by upregulating alpha1b-adrenergic receptor. Our study could explain some female reproductive problems due to stress and provide some novel strategies for this disorder.
INTRODUCTION: Human dental pulp stem cells (hDPSCs) reside in specialized microenvironments in the dental pulp, termed "niches," which are composed of diverse cellular components including nerves. Sensory nerves can positively regulate the expansion and differentiation of pulp cells, while the biological effects of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) on hDPSCs remain elusive. This study is devoted to investigating the effects and underlying mechanisms of the SNS on the proliferation and migration of hDPSCs. METHODS: The distribution of sympathetic nerve fibers in human dental pulp was examined by immunofluorescence staining of tyrosine hydroxylase. The concentration of norepinephrine in healthy and carious human dental pulp tissues was detected using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. RNA-sequencing was applied to identify the dominant sympathetic neurotransmitter receptor in hDPSCs. Seahorse metabolic assay, adenosine triphosphate assay, lactate assay, and mitochondrial DNA copy number were performed to determine the level of glycometabolism. Transwell assay, wound healing assay, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine staining assay, cell cycle assay, and Cell Counting Kit-8 assay were conducted to analyze the migratory and proliferative capacities of hDPSCs. RESULTS: Sprouting of sympathetic nerve fibers and an increased concentration of norepinephrine were observed in inflammatory pulp tissues. Sympathetic nerve fibers were mainly distributed along blood vessels, and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1-positive hDPSCs resided in close proximity to neurovascular bundles. ADRA1B was identified as the major sympathetic neurotransmitter receptor expressed in hDPSCs, and its expression was enhanced in inflammatory pulp tissues. In addition, the SNS inhibited the proliferation and migration of hDPSCs through metabolic reprogramming via ADRA1B and its crosstalk with serine-threonine kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that the SNS can shift the metabolism of hDPSCs from oxidative phosphorylation to anaerobic glycolysis via ADRA1B and its crosstalk with serine-threonine kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways, thereby inhibiting the proliferative and migratory abilities of hDPSCs. This metabolic shift may facilitate the maintenance of the quiescent state of hDPSCs.
The alpha-1 adrenergic receptors (alpha(1)ARs) play important roles in normal physiology and in many disease states, and understanding their signaling pathways and regulatory mechanisms is thus of considerable relevance, in particular for identifying pharmacological targets for therapeutic modulation. The expression, function, localization, trafficking, and stability of these receptors are all subject to complex regulation by diverse molecular mechanisms. This article highlights recent studies from our laboratory and others focused on the localization and trafficking of the alpha-1B adrenergic receptor (alpha(1B)AR) subtype and on changes in its stability that are likely to be involved in regulating receptor expression. The role(s) of protein kinase C in alpha(1B)AR sequestration, endocytosis, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation are summarized, and evidence for alpha(1B)AR localization in caveolae/rafts is presented. Receptor structural domains involved in the multiple steps and mechanisms of agonist-induced desensitization are described. Finally, aspects of alpha(1B)AR structural stability that appear to control its drug-induced up- and down-regulation are discussed. Our understanding of regulation for the alpha(1B)AR subtype provides a model for studies of the differential regulation of the other alpha(1)AR subtypes and may lead to identification of new molecular targets for therapeutic intervention in a variety of disease states.
BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental disorders. Despite the extensive efforts of scientists, the etiology of ASD is far from completely elucidated. In an effort to enlighten the genetic architecture of ASDs, a meta-analysis of all available genetic association studies (GAS) was conducted. METHODS: We searched in the Human Genome Epidemiology Navigator (HuGE Navigator) and PubMed for available case-control GAS of ASDs. The threshold for meta-analysis was two studies per genetic variant. The association between genotype distribution and ASDs was examined using the generalized linear odds ratio (ORG). For variants with available allele frequencies, the examined model was the allele contrast. RESULTS: Overall, 57 candidate genes and 128 polymorphisms were investigated in 159 articles. In total 28 genetic polymorphisms have been shown to be associated with ASDs, that are harbored in 19 genes. Statistically significant results were revealed for the variants of the following genes adenosine deaminase (ADA), bone marrow stromal cell antigen-1 (CD157/BST1), Dopamine receptor D1 (DRD1), engrailed homolog 2 (EN2), met proto-oncogene (MET), methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), solute carrier family 6 member 4 (SLC6A4), Synaptosomal-associated protein, 25kDa (SNAP-25) and vitamin D receptor (VDR). In the allele contrast model of cases versus healthy controls, significant associations were observed for Adrenoceptor Alpha 1B (ADRA1B), acetyl serotonin O - methyltransferase (ASMT), complement component 4B (C4B), dopamine receptor D3 (DRD3), met proto-oncogene (MET), neuroligin 4, X-linked (NLGN4), neurexin 1 (NRXN1), oxytocin receptor (OXTR), Serine/Threonine-Protein Kinase PFTAIRE-1 (PFTK1), Reelin (RELN) and Ras-like without CAAX 2 (RIT2). CONCLUSION: These significant findings provide further evidence for genetic factors' implication in ASDs offering new perspectives in means of prevention and prognosis.
The network pharmacology under conditions is a recent development trend. We use network pharmacology methods to analyze the mechanism of crocetin (CRO) that regulates cardiovascular diseases. In this work, the spectral experimental data of CRO-Protein interaction is first time combined with constraint conditions to solve the problems of targeting redundancy and lack of verification. CRO targets and cardiovascular disease targets were obtained by the target database. The STRING platform was used for PPI analysis. The GO and KEGG pathways of the target were analyzed using the Metascape platform; The core functional targets of CRO were screened by molecular docking techniques and the spectra of CRO and human serum albumin (HSA). Under the collaborative constraint conditions, the core targets of CRO that regulate cardiovascular diseases are ADRA1A, ADRA1B, CHRM1, CHRM2, GABRA1, and PTGS2; This study incorporates spectroscopy and molecular docking as constraints into the network pharmacological analysis, which significantly improves the credibility of network pharmacological analysis compared with unconstrained conditions. This method provides theoretical references for the in-depth study of the mechanism between active substances and protein targets for other medicines in network pharmacology.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: Trace amines (TA) are small organic compounds that have neuromodulator activity due to their interaction with some neuron-related receptors, such as trace amine associated receptors (TAARs), alpha2-adrenergic receptor (alpha2-AR) and ss-adrenergic receptor (ss-AR). However, there is little information on whether TA and dopamine (DOP) can interact with other adrenergic receptors (ARs) such as the mammalian alpha1-AR and the bacterial counterpart QseC, which is involved in quorum sensing of some Gram-negative pathogens. The aim of this study was to investigate the interaction of TA and DOP with alpha1-AR and QseC. METHODS: We performed an in silico study using 3D structure from SWISS MODEL and analyzed the protein interaction via molecular docking using PyMol, PoseView and PyRX 8.0. For the in vitro study, we investigated the QseC kinase activity by measuring the remaining ATP in a reaction containing QseC-enriched membrane incubated together with purified QseB and EPI, TA, DOP, or PTL respectively. We also measured the intracellular Ca++ levels, which represents the alpha1-AR activation, in LNCAP (pancreatic cell line) cells treated with EPI, TA, DOP and PTL respectively using a fluorescence-based assay. The LNCAP cell proliferation was measured using an MTT-based assay. RESULTS: Our in silico analysis revealed that TAs and DOP have high binding affinity to the human alpha1-AR and the bacterial adrenergic receptor (QseC), comparable to epinephrine (EPI). Both are membrane-bound kinases. Experimental studies with pancreatic cell line (LNCAP) showed that the TAs and DOP act as alpha1-AR antagonist by counteracting the effect of EPI. In the presence of EPI, TA and DOP trigger an increase of the intracellular Ca++ levels in the LNCAP cells leading to an inhibition of cell proliferation. Although in silico data suggest an interaction of TA and DOP with QseC, they do not inhibit the kinase activity of QseC, a histidine kinase receptor involved in quorum sensing which is also sensitive to EPI. CONCLUSION: Our study showed that the TAs and DOP act as alpha1-AR antagonist but no effect was observed for QseC.
