Alpha-1D adrenergic receptor; This alpha-adrenergic receptor mediates its effect through the influx of extracellular calcium; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRA1D sub-subfamily.
The identification of key genes in transcriptomic data constitutes a huge challenge. Our review of microarray reports revealed 88 genes whose transcription is consistently regulated by glucocorticoids (GCs), such as cortisol, corticosterone and dexamethasone, in the brain. Replicable transcriptomic data were combined with biochemical and physiological data to create an integrated view of the effects induced by GCs. The most frequently reported genes were Errfi1 and Ddit4. Their up-regulation was associated with the altered transcription of genes regulating growth factor and mTORC1 signaling (Gab1, Tsc22d3, Dusp1, Ndrg2, Ppp5c and Sesn1) and progression of the cell cycle (Ccnd1, Cdkn1a and Cables1). The GC-induced reprogramming of cell function involves changes in the mRNA level of genes responsible for the regulation of transcription (Klf9, Bcl6, Klf15, Tle3, Cxxc5, Litaf, Tle4, Jun, Sox4, Sox2, Sox9, Irf1, Sall2, Nfkbia and Id1) and the selective degradation of mRNA (Tob2). Other genes are involved in the regulation of metabolism (Gpd1, Aldoc and Pdk4), actin cytoskeleton (Myh2, Nedd9, Mical2, Rhou, Arl4d, Osbpl3, Arhgef3, Sdc4, Rdx, Wipf3, Chst1 and Hepacam), autophagy (Eva1a and Plekhf1), vesicular transport (Rhob, Ehd3, Vps37b and Scamp2), gap junctions (Gjb6), immune response (Tiparp, Mertk, Lyve1 and Il6r), signaling mediated by thyroid hormones (Thra and Sult1a1), calcium (Calm2), adrenaline/noradrenaline (Adcy9 and Adra1d), neuropeptide Y (Npy1r) and histamine (Hdc). GCs also affected genes involved in the synthesis of polyamines (Azin1) and taurine (Cdo1). The actions of GCs are restrained by feedback mechanisms depending on the transcription of Sgk1, Fkbp5 and Nr3c1. A side effect induced by GCs is increased production of reactive oxygen species. Available data show that the brain's response to GCs is part of an emergency mode characterized by inactivation of non-core activities, restrained inflammation, restriction of investments (growth), improved efficiency of energy production and the removal of unnecessary or malfunctioning cellular components to conserve energy and maintain nutrient supply during the stress response.
The alpha1D-adrenergic receptor (ADRA1D) is a key regulator of cardiovascular, prostate, and central nervous system functions. This clinically relevant G protein-coupled receptor has proven difficult to study, as it must form an obligate modular homodimer containing the PDZ proteins scribble and syntrophin or become retained in the endoplasmic reticulum as non-functional protein. We previously determined that targeted removal of the N-terminal (NT) 79 amino acids facilitates ADRA1D plasma membrane expression and agonist-stimulated functional responses. However, whether such an event occurs in physiological contexts was unknown. Herein, we report the ADRA1D is subjected to innate NT processing in cultured human cells. SNAP near-infrared imaging and tandem-affinity purification revealed the ADRA1D is expressed as both full-length and NT truncated forms in multiple human cell lines. Serial truncation mapping identified the cleavage site as Leu(90)/Val(91) in the 95-amino acid ADRA1D NT domain, suggesting human cells express a Delta1-91 ADRA1D species. Tandem-affinity purification MS/MS and co-immunoprecipitation analysis indicate NT processing of ADRA1D is not required to form scribble-syntrophin macromolecular complexes. Yet, label-free dynamic mass redistribution signaling assays demonstrate that Delta1-91 ADRA1D agonist responses were greater than WT ADRA1D. Mutagenesis of the cleavage site nullified the processing event, resulting in ADRA1D agonist responses less than the WT receptor. Thus, we propose that processing of the ADRA1D NT domain is a physiological mechanism employed by cells to generate a functional ADRA1D isoform with optimal pharmacodynamic properties.
Cutaneous melanoma is a highly aggressive and malignant skin cancer, and its high recurrence rate and drug resistance increase the difficulty of treating advanced-stage patients. Studies have revealed that treatment via stimulation of alpha-1 adrenergic receptor (ADRA1) subtypes inhibits melanoma growth in mice. However, the associations between alpha-1D adrenergic receptor (ADRA1D) and cutaneous melanoma are poorly understood. Tissue specimens from 16 pairs of patients with a pigmented nevus and cutaneous melanoma were analyzed for ADRA1D expression using immunohistochemical staining. Western blotting and RT-qPCR were carried out in order to detect ADRA1D expression levels in melanoma cells and human epidermal melanocytes (HEMs), hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels in HUVECS. A375 cells were transfected with a lentivirus overexpressing ADRA1D. Wound-healing, Transwell, and cell proliferation assays were utilized to identify the ADRA1D effect on the migration, invasion, and proliferation of the two groups of A375 cells in vitro. In order to evaluate the function of ADRA1D in vivo, a melanoma xenograft model was developed in immunodeficient mice. ADRA1D was low expressed in cutaneous melanoma tissues. Overexpression of ADRA1D inhibited the tubulation and migration of HUVECs in vitro. Overexpression of ADRA1D significantly decreased the HIF-1alpha and VEGF expression. Overexpression of ADRA1D inhibited the invasion and proliferation of A375 melanoma cells in vitro and reduced its angiogenesis in vivo. ADRA1D inhibits cutaneous melanoma growth and angiogenesis. It attenuates melanoma cell proliferation and invasion. Meanwhile, its anti-angiogenic effect is achieved by negatively regulating the HIF-1alpha/VEGF axis in melanoma tissue, thereby attenuating the growth of cutaneous melanoma and reducing the potential of metastasis.
BACKGROUND: Vascular dementia (VaD) is a prevalent neurodegenerative disease characterized by cognitive impairment due to cerebrovascular factors, affecting a significant portion of the aging population and highlighting the critical need to understand specific targets and mechanisms for effective prevention and treatment strategies. We aimed to identify pathways and crucial genes involved in the progression of VaD through bioinformatics analysis and subsequently validate these findings. METHODS: We conducted differential expression analysis, Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA), Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis, and Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) analysis. We utilized pheochromocytoma 12 (PC12) cells to create an in vitro oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) model. We investigated the impact of overexpression and interference of adrenoceptor alpha 1D (ADRA1D) on OGD PC12 cells using TdT-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL), reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR), western blot (WB), and Fluo-3-pentaacetoxymethyl ester (Fluo-3 AM) analysis. RESULTS: We found 187 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the red module that were strongly associated with VaD and were primarily enriched in vasoconstriction, G protein-coupled amine receptor activity, and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway, and cell adhesion. Among these pathways, we identified ADRA1D as a gene shared by vasoconstriction, G protein-coupled amine receptor activity, and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. The TUNEL assay revealed a significant decrease in PC12 cell apoptosis with ADRA1D overexpression (p < 0.01) and a significant increase in apoptosis upon silencing ADRA1D (p < 0.01). RT-qPCR and WB analysis revealed elevated ADRA1D expression (p < 0.001) and decreased phospholipase C beta (PLCbeta) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) expression (p < 0.05) with ADRA1D overexpression. Moreover, the Fluo-3 AM assessment indicated significantly lower intracellular Ca2+ levels with ADRA1D overexpression (p < 0.001). Conversely, interference with ADRA1D yielded opposite results. CONCLUSION: Our study provides a new perspective on the pathogenic mechanisms of VaD and potential avenues for therapeutic intervention. The results highlight the role of ADRA1D in modulating cellular responses to OGD and VaD, suggesting its potential as a target for VaD treatment.
BACKGROUND: Dementia, mainly Alzheimer's disease (AD) and vascular dementia (VaD), remains a global health challenge. Previous studies have demonstrated the benefits of acupuncture therapy (AT) in improving dementia. Nevertheless, the therapeutic targets and integrated biological mechanisms involved remain ambiguous. OBJECTIVE: To identify therapeutic targets and biological mechanisms of AT in treating dementia by integrated analysis strategy. METHODS: By the identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of AD, VaD, and molecular targets of AT active components, the acupuncture therapeutic targets associated with the biological response to AD and VaD were extracted. Therapeutic targets-based functional enrichment analysis was conducted, and multiple networks were constructed. AT-therapeutic crucial targets were captured by weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA). The interactions between crucial targets with AT active components were verified by molecular docking. RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that 132 and 76 acupuncture therapeutic targets were associated with AD and VaD. AT-therapeutic crucial targets including 58 for AD and 24 for VaD were captured by WGCNA, with 11 in shared, including NMU, GRP, TAC1, ADRA1D, and SST. In addition, 35 and 14 signaling pathways were significantly enriched by functional enrichment analysis, with 6 mutual pathways including neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, GABAergic synapse, calcium signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway, chemokine signaling pathway, and inflammatory mediator regulation of TRP channels. CONCLUSION: The improvement of AD and VaD by AT was associated with modulation of synaptic function, immunity, inflammation, and apoptosis. Our study clarified the therapeutic targets of AT on dementia, providing valuable clues for complementing and combining pharmacotherapy.
Patulin (PAT) is a common mycotoxin contaminant of apple products linked to impaired metabolic and kidney function. Adenosine monophosphate activated protein kinase (AMPK), abundantly expressed in the kidney, intercedes metabolic changes and renal injury. The alpha-1-adrenergic receptors (alpha(1)-AR) facilitate Epinephrine (Epi)-mediated AMPK activation, linking metabolism and kidney function. Preliminary molecular docking experiments examined potential interactions and AMPK-gamma subunit 3 (PRKAG3). The effect of PAT exposure (0.2-2.5 microM; 24 h) on the AMPK pathway and alpha(1)-AR was then investigated in HEK293 human kidney cells. AMPK agonist Epi determined direct effects on the alpha(1)-AR, metformin was used as an activator for AMPK, while buthionine sulphoximine (BSO) and N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) assessed GSH inhibition and supplementation respectively. ADRA1A and ADRA1D expression was determined by qPCR. alpha(1)-AR, ERK1/2/MAPK and PI3K/Akt protein expression was assessed using western blotting. PAT (1 microM) decreased alpha(1)-AR protein and mRNA and altered downstream signalling. This was consistent in cells stimulated with Epi and metformin. BSO potentiated the observed effect on alpha(1)-AR while NAC ameliorated these effects. Molecular docking studies performed on Human ADRA1A and PRKAG3 indicated direct interactions with PAT. This study is the first to show PAT modulates the AMPK pathway and alpha(1)-AR, supporting a mechanism of kidney injury.
One of the sensitive markers for autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) clinical identification is thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies (TRAbs). To quickly distinguish TRAb with distinct antigenic epitopes, a straightforward and uncomplicated technique has not yet been created. The objective of this study is to search for molecular diagnostic targets for different types of AITD Graves' disease (GD), Graves' orbitopathy (GO), GD with third-degree goiter [GD(3)], hypothyroidism combined with positive TRAb [HT(TRAb+)] as molecular diagnostic targets. Following action on thyroid cells, differential genes (DEGs) generated by TRAb with distinct antigenic epitopes were detected and identified by RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), bioinformatics analysis, and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) in the serum of patients with AITD. Using the 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) assay, the effect of coculturing thyroid cells with different antigenic TRAb epitopes on the cells' capacity to proliferate was investigated. Bioinformatics analysis and RT-qPCR validation identified one GD key gene alpha 2-HS glycoprotein (AHSG), two GO key genes [adrenoceptor alpha 1D (ADRA1D) and H2B clustered histone 18 (H2BC18)], two GD(3) key genes [suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) and cytochrome b-245 beta (CYBB)], and one HT(TRAb+) key gene (MASP2). Correlation analysis and ROC curves showed that the abovementioned genes could be used as molecular diagnostic targets for different types of AITD. Finally, EdU results showed that TRAb inhibited thyroid cell proliferation in the HT(TRAb+) group compared with the normal control group, whereas the remaining three groups promoted thyroid cell proliferation, with a statistically significant difference (P < 0.05). We identified six key genes for different types of AITD, which have diagnostic value for different types of AITD. Meanwhile, we found that TRAbs with different antigenic epitopes in AITD have different biological functions.NEW & NOTEWORTHY We identified six molecular targets of different types of AITD [GD, GO, GD(3), and HT(TRAb+)], which have diagnostic value for different types of AITD. Meanwhile, we found that TRAb with different antigenic epitopes extracted from the sera of patients with AITD had different biological functions, which also provided a new idea for further research on the mechanism of action of TRAb with different antigenic epitopes in AITD.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is increasingly associated with nerve-driven processes and endogenous innate immune ligands such as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Interestingly, a connection between these entities has not been explored. Here, we report that noradrenaline (NA) derived from the lung's adrenergic nerve supply drives alpha-smooth muscle actin (alphaSMA)-expressing fibroblast accumulation via mechanisms involving alpha1 adrenoreceptors and mtDNA. Using the bleomycin model, we compared ablation of the lung's adrenergic nerve supply with surgical adrenal resection and found that NA derived from local but not adrenal sources contributes to experimentally induced lung fibrosis and the emergence of an alphaSMA+ve fibroblast population expressing adrenoreceptor alpha-1D (ADRA1D). Therapeutic delivery of the alpha1 adrenoreceptor antagonist terazosin reversed these changes and suppressed extracellular mtDNA accumulation. Cultured normal human lung fibroblasts displayed alpha1 adrenoreceptors and in response to costimulation with TGFbeta1 and NA adopted ACTA2 expression and extracellular mtDNA release. These findings were opposed by terazosin. Evaluation of a previously studied IPF cohort revealed that patients prescribed alpha1 adrenoreceptor antagonists for nonpulmonary indications demonstrated improved survival and reduced concentrations of plasma mtDNA. Our observations link nerve-derived NA, alpha1 adrenoreceptors, extracellular mtDNA, and lung fibrogenesis in mouse models, cultured cells, and humans with IPF. Further study of this neuroinnate connection may yield new avenues for investigation in the clinical and basic science realms.
BACKGROUND: Observational studies suggest that hypertension and epilepsy have a high co-occurrence, and antihypertensive medications may have impacts on the prevention and treatment of epilepsy. However, the directionality of causation between them is elusive. METHOD: By leveraging genome-wide association studies (GWAS) summary data of each trait, we firstly performed bidirectional univariate Mendelian randomization (UVMR) to assess the strength and direction of the associations between pairs of traits, then multivariate MR (MVMR) was conducted to adjust for potential confounders in causalities. Cochran's Q statistics, leave-one-out analysis, MR-Egger regression and MR-Pleiotropy Residual Sum and Outlier methods (MR-PRESSO) were employed to evaluate the robustness of the results. Drug target MR was proceeded to assess the association between five classes of first-line antihypertensive medications and epilepsy. Specifically, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) extracted from GWAS data on systolic blood pressure (SBP)/diastolic blood pressure (DBP), along with expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) were utilized as proxies for antihypertensive medications, respectively. RESULTS: Forward UVMR results provided evidence that genetically predicted blood pressure traits and hypertension have causal effects on epilepsy, while reverse UVMR indicated no causal impacts of epilepsy on blood pressure traits or hypertension. The sensitivity analysis results were robust. The causalities between DBP, hypertension and epilepsy remained remarkable after adjustment by MVMR. Inverse-variance-weighted MR (IVW-MR) yielded evidence of positive association only between Beta-Blockers target genes based on DBP GWAS screening and epilepsy. Summary-data-based MR (SMR) identified a positive correlation between Beta-Blockers target gene ADRA1D and epilepsy risk. CONCLUSIONS: Hypertension has a causal effect on epilepsy and managing DBP in patients with hypertension through Beta-Blockers may help prevent epilepsy.
INTRODUCTION: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a leading cause of dementia and is rapidly emerging as one of the costliest and most burdensome diseases. Neurotransmitter receptors play a vital role in many neuronal processes, primarily regulating signal inhibition within the brain to facilitate cell communication. OBJECTIVES: Our research aims to identify potential biomarkers associated with AD and how these biomarkers impact immune infiltration. METHODS: We extracted mRNA expression data from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and differential expression analysis were employed to identify hub genes as biomarkers in AD. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Gene Ontology (GO), and Gene Set Variation Analysis (GSVA) were used for functional enrichment. Furthermore, we examined 22 immune cell types infiltration using "CIBERSORT". RESULTS: In this study, we identified 70 neurotransmitter receptor genes showing differential expression in AD: 22 were up-regulated, and 48 were down-regulated. Functional analyses indicated these genes were involved in essential biochemical pathways, including G protein-coupled receptors, neurotransmitter receptor activity, and ion channel interactions. WGCNA generated three co-expression modules, with one demonstrating the strongest association with AD. Five key NRGs (HTR3C, HTR3E, ADRA2A, HTR3A, and ADRA1D) were identified using a combination of differential genes. These genes have better diagnostic value by ROC analysis. Immune infiltration analysis showed that these genes were closely associated with the levels of resting mast cells, activated natural killer (NK) cells, and plasma cells in AD compared to controls. CONCLUSION: Our study identified five NRGs (ADRA1D, ADRA2A, HTR3A, HTR3C, and HTR3E) with significant associations with AD. These findings may offer promising sights for further studies.
alpha(1)-Adrenoceptors seem to play key roles in cardiovascular, genitourinary, and central nervous system functions. This review will be focused on alpha(1D)-adrenoceptors. These receptors have intrinsic activity, and many of the more commonly used antagonists are in reality inverse agonists. alpha(1D)-Adrenoceptors are phosphorylated in the basal state, and the natural agonists, adrenaline and noradrenaline, increase their phosphorylation; similar effects are induced by direct activation of protein kinase C and through activation of nonadrenergic receptors. Interestingly, a large proportion of alpha(1D)-adrenoceptors are located in intracellular vesicles. Such intracellular location can be changed to surface expression through the use of inverse agonists and coexpression of alpha(1B)-adrenoceptors, which seem to act as pharmacological chaperons for proper plasma membrane insertion. The alpha(1D)-adrenoceptor amino terminus seems to contain a signal that keeps the receptor intracellularly, but interaction with other proteins may also contribute. The precise relationship between the intrinsic activity, phosphorylation, and intracellular location is currently unknown. alpha(1D)-Adrenoceptor activation induces contraction in a variety of vessels, and a role in the control of blood pressure has been suggested. Studies using young prehypertensive and adult spontaneously hypertensive rats as well as knockout mice suggest that vascular alpha(1D)-adrenoceptors are involved in the genesis/maintenance of hypertension.
We have developed a novel reporter assay that leverages SNAP-epitope tag/near-infrared (NIR) imaging technology to monitor G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) degradation in human cell lines. N-terminal SNAP-tagged GPCRs were subcloned and expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells and then subjected to 24 h of cycloheximide (CHX)-chase degradation assays to quantify receptor degradation half-lives (t(1/2)) using LICOR NIR imaging-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) analysis. Thus far, we have used this method to quantify t(1/2) for all nine adrenergic (ADRA1A, ADRA1B, ADRA1D, ADRA2A, ADRA2B, ADRA2C, ADRB1, ADRB2, ADRB3), five somatostatin (SSTR1, SSTR2, SSTR3, SSTR4, SSTR5), four chemokine (CXCR1, CXCR2, CXCR3, CXCR5), and three 5-HT2 (5HT2A, 5HT2B, 5HT2C) receptor subtypes. SNAP-GPCR-CHX degradation t(1/2) values ranged from 0.52 h (ADRA1D) to 5.5 h (SSTR3). On the contrary, both the SNAP-tag alone and SNAP-tagged and endogenous beta-actin were resistant to degradation with CHX treatment. Treatment with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib produced significant but variable increases in SNAP-GPCR protein expression levels, indicating that SNAP-GPCR degradation primarily occurs through the proteasome. Remarkably, endogenous beta2-adrenergic receptor/ADRB2 dynamic mass redistribution functional responses to norepinephrine were significantly decreased following CHX treatment, with a time course equivalent to that observed with the SNAP-ADRB2 degradation assay. We subsequently adapted this assay into a 96-well glass-bottom plate format to facilitate high-throughput GPCR degradation screening. t(1/2) values quantified for the alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor subtypes (ADRA1A, ADRA1B, ADR1D) using the 96-well-plate format correlated with t(1/2) values quantified using NIR-PAGE imaging analysis. In summary, this novel assay permits precise quantitative analysis of GPCR degradation in human cells and can be readily adapted to quantify degradation for any membrane protein of interest.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive tumor of the central nervous system (CNS). The standard of care improves the overall survival of patients only by a few months. Explorations of new therapeutic targets related to molecular properties of the tumor are under way. Even though neurotransmitters and their receptors normally function as mediators of interneuronal communication, growing data suggest that these molecules are also involved in modulating the development and growth of GBM by acting on neuronal and glioblastoma stem cells. In our previous DNA CpG methylation studies, gene ontology analyses revealed the involvement of the monoamine pathway in sequential GBM. In this follow-up study, we quantitated the expression levels of four selected catecholamine pathway markers (alpha 1D adrenergic receptor-ADRA1D; adrenergic beta receptor kinase 1 or G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2-ADRBK1/GRK2; dopamine receptor D2-DRD2; and synaptic vesicle monoamine transporter-SLC18A2) by immunohistochemistry, and compared the histological scores with the methylation levels within the promoters + genes of these markers in 21 pairs of sequential GBM and in controls. Subsequently, we also determined the promoter and gene methylation levels of the same markers in an independent database cohort of sequential GBM pairs. These analyses revealed partial inverse correlations between the catecholamine protein expression and promoter + gene methylation levels, when the tumor and control samples were compared. However, we found no differences in the promoter + gene methylation levels of these markers in either our own or in the database primary-recurrent GBM pairs, despite the higher protein expression of all markers in the primary samples. This observation suggests that regulation of catecholamine expression is only partially related to CpG methylation within the promoter + gene regions, and additional mechanisms may also influence the expression of these markers in progressive GBM. These analyses underscore the involvement of certain catecholamine pathway markers in GBM development and suggest that these molecules mediating or modulating tumor growth merit further exploration.
Smallpox is a deadly and debilitating disease that killed hundreds of millions of people in the past century alone. The use of Vaccinia virus-based smallpox vaccines led to the eradication of smallpox. These vaccines are remarkably effective, inducing the characteristic pustule or "take" at the vaccine site in >97 % of recipients, and inducing a wide spectrum of long-lasting humoral and cellular immune responses. The mechanisms behind inter-individual vaccine-response variability are likely to involve host genetic variation, but have not been fully characterized. We report here the first smallpox vaccine response genome-wide association study of over 1,000 recent recipients of Dryvax((R)). The data presented here focus on cellular immune responses as measured by both production of secreted IFNgamma and quantitation of IFNgamma secreting cells by ELISPOT assay. We identified multiple significant SNP associations in genes (RASA1, ADRA1D, TCF7L1, FAS) that are critical components of signaling pathways that directly control lymphocyte IFNgamma production or cytotoxic T cell function. Similarly, we found many associations with SNPs located in genes integral to nerve cell function; findings that, given the complex interplay between the nervous and immune systems, deserve closer examination in follow-up studies.
Both methylation and brain volume patterns hold important biological information for the development and prognosis of schizophrenia (SZ). A combined study to probe the association between them provides a new perspective to understanding SZ. Genomic methylation of peripheral blood and regional brain volumes derived from magnetic resonance imaging were analyzed using parallel independent component analyses in this study. Nine methylation components and five brain volumetric components were extracted for 94 SZ patients and 106 healthy controls. After controlling for age, sex, race, and substance use, a component comprised primarily of bilateral cerebellar volumes was significantly correlated to a methylation component from 14 CpG sites in 13 genes. Both patients and healthy controls demonstrated similar associations, but patients had significantly smaller cerebellar volumes and dysmethylation in the associated epigenetic component compared to controls. The 13 genes are enriched in cellular growth and proliferation with some genes involved in neuronal growth and cerebellum development (GATA4, ADRA1D, EPHA3, and KCNK10), and these genes are prominently associated with neurological and psychological disorders. Such findings suggest that the methylation pattern of the genes coding for cellular growth may influence the cerebellar development through regulating gene expression, and the alteration in the methylation of these genes in SZ patients may contribute to the cerebellar volume reduction observed in patients.
Lymphoma is one of the leading causes of cancer and cancer deaths and yet has not been amenable to population screening. The role of methylated DNA markers (MDMs) in the detection of lymphoma has not been extensively studied. We aimed to discover, validate, and test tissue-derived MDMs of lymphoma in archival plasma specimens. Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) was performed on a discovery set of frozen tissues. MDMs identified were converted to methylation-specific PCR assays and validated on independent formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. Target enrichment long-probe quantitative-amplified signal (TELQAS) assays were developed and assayed in plasma-extracted, bisulfite-converted DNA from independent treatment-naive lymphoma patients and healthy controls. Prediction of cancer status was modeled using random forest model with in silico cross-validation. After discovery and validation in tissue, 16 TELQAS assays (ZNF503, VWA5B1, HOXA9, GABRG3, ITGA5, MAX.chr17.7190, BNC1, CDK20, MAX.chr4.4069, TPBG, DNAH14, SYT6, CACNG8, FAM110B, ADRA1D, and NRN1) were selected for testing in plasma. These detected 78% (95% CI, 74%-82%) of lymphoma cases at 90% specificity. Excluding marginal zone and T-cell lymphomas, sensitivity increased to 84% (80%-88%). MDMs in plasma show promise to detect lymphoma and are candidates for inclusion in multi-cancer detection studies.
Currently utilized antidepressants have limited effectiveness and frequently incur undesired effects. Most antidepressants are thought to act via the inhibition of monoamine reuptake; however, direct binding to monoaminergic receptors has been proposed to contribute to both their clinical effectiveness and their side effects, or lack thereof. Among the target receptors of antidepressants, alpha1‑adrenergic receptors (ARs) have been implicated in depression etiology, antidepressant action, and side effects. However, differences in the direct effects of antidepressants on signaling from the three subtypes of alpha1-ARs, namely, alpha1A-, alpha1B- and alpha1D‑ARs, have been little explored. We utilized cell lines overexpressing alpha1A-, alpha1B- or alpha1D-ARs to investigate the effects of the antidepressants imipramine (IMI), desipramine (DMI), mianserin (MIA), reboxetine (REB), citalopram (CIT) and fluoxetine (FLU) on noradrenaline-induced second messenger generation by those receptors. We found similar orders of inhibition at alpha1A-AR (IMI < DMI < CIT < MIA < REB) and alpha1D‑AR (IMI = DMI < CIT < MIA), while the alpha1B-AR subtype was the least engaged subtype and was inhibited with low potency by three drugs (MIA < IMI = DMI). In contrast to their direct antagonistic effects, prolonged incubation with IMI and DMI increased the maximal response of the alpha1B-AR subtype, and the CIT of both the alpha1A- and the alpha1B-ARs. Our data demonstrate a complex, subtype-specific modulation of alpha1-ARs by antidepressants of different groups.
Background: The alpha(1) antagonist doxazosin reduces cocaine use in individuals with cocaine use disorder (CUD) through a functional polymorphism of the alpha(1) adrenoreceptor. The regulatory role of the alpha(1)adrenoreceptor subtype D (ADRA1D) gene polymorphism in CUD is uncharacterized.Objectives: To study how the genetic variant of ADRA1D gene (T1848A, rs2236554) may affect the treatment efficacy of doxazosin in reducing cocaine use.Methods: This 12-week pilot trial included 76 participants with CUD with ADRA1D (T1848A, rs2236554) AA (N = 40) or AT/TT genotype (N = 36). Participants were randomized to doxazosin (8 mg/day, N = 47) or placebo (N = 29), and followed with thrice weekly urine toxicology and once weekly cognitive behavioral psychotherapy.Results: The AA and the AT/TT groups had comparable baseline rates of cocaine positive urines at weeks 1-2 (~ 76%). In the placebo group, an increase of cocaine positive urines in the AT/TT group was found as compared to the AA group (24% vs. 9%). In the doxazosin group, a greater decrease in cocaine positive urines was found in the AT/TT group relative to the AA group. The difference between the doxazosin and placebo groups in cocaine negative urines became evident at weeks 5-6 and peaked at weeks 9-10 (~35% difference). The AT/TT group demonstrated a significant medication and time by medication effect (p < .001), whereas the AA group did not.Conclusion: The T-allele carriers showed a greater reduction of cocaine use after treatment with doxazosin in participants with the ADRA1D gene polymorphism (T1848A), suggesting that this SNP may serve as a pharmacogenetic marker in pharmacotherapy of CUD.
IGF-I positively impacts on muscle anabolism/regeneration. Using C2 skeletal myoblasts, we previously reported high dose TNF-alpha -induced (10 ng.ml(-1)) cell death is rescued by IGF-I. However, non-myotoxic low dose TNF-alpha (1.25 ng.ml(-1)) elicits a MAPK-mediated apoptotic response when co-incubated with IGF-I (1.5 ng.ml(-1)). Our aim was to investigate these conflicting roles of IGF-I in our model. Insulin array and qRT-PCR identified Adra1d as a potential regulatory gene that was up-regulated in survival and down-regulated under apoptotic conditions. TNF-alpha administration (1.25 or 10 ng.ml(-1)) induced significant decreases ( approximately 50% both incubations) in Adra1d expression relative to DM. IGF-I addition to high dose TNF-alpha (10 ng.ml(-1)) induced myoblast survival and matched a significant (P < 0.05) increase in Adra1d expression. By contrast, IGF-I addition to low dose TNF-alpha (1.25 ng.ml(-1)) induced elevated death resulting in a significant (P < 0.05) decline ( approximately 55%) in Adra1d expression. Pre-administration of PD98059 (20 uM), which rescues death induced by co-incubation of low dose TNF-alpha with IGF-I, Adra1d levels were again comparable to DM control. Since Adra1d was elevated following incubations that induced myoblast survival, we investigated effects of Adra1d siRNA gene silencing under these conditions. Adra1d knockdown resulted in significantly higher levels of cell death under all incubations suggesting Adra1d expression is essential for skeletal muscle cell survival.
Increasing evidence has demonstrated that microRNA (miR)‑133a‑3p is an important regulator of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In the present study, the diagnostic role of miR‑133a‑3p in HCC, and the potential functional pathways, were both explored based on publicly available data. Eligible microarray datasets were collected from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and ArrayExpress database. The data related to HCC and matched adjacent normal tissues were also downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Published studies reporting the association between miR‑133a‑3p expression and HCC were reviewed from multiple databases. By combining the data derived from three sources (GEO, TCGA and published studies), the authors analyzed the comprehensive relationship between miR‑133a‑3p expression and clinicopathological features of HCC. Eventually, putative targets of miR‑133a‑3p in HCC were selected for further bioinformatics prediction. A total of eight published microarray datasets were gathered, and the pooled results demonstrated that the expression of miR‑133a‑3p in the tumor group was lower than that in normal groups [standardized mean difference (SMD)=‑0.54; 95% confidence interval (CI), ‑0.74 to ‑0.35; P<0.001]. Consistently, the level of miR‑133a‑1 in HCC was reduced markedly compared to normal tissues (P<0.001) based on TCGA data, and the AUC value of low miR‑133a‑1 expression for HCC diagnosis was 0.670 (P<0.001). Furthermore, the combined SMD of all datasets (GEO, TCGA and literature) suggested that significant difference was observed between the HCC group and the normal control group, and lower miR‑133a‑3p expression in HCC group was noted (SMD=‑0.69; 95% CI, ‑1.10 to ‑0.29; P=0.001). In addition, the authors discovered five key genes of the calcium signaling pathway (NOS1, ADRA1A, ADRA1B, ADRA1D and TBXA2R) that may probably be targeted by miR‑133a‑3p in HCC. The study reveals that miR‑133a‑3p may function as a tumor suppressor in HCC. The prospective novel pathways and key genes of miR‑133a‑3p could offer potential biomarkers for HCC; however, the predictions require further confirmation.
