Alpha-2A adrenergic receptor; Alpha-2 adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine- induced inhibition of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins. The rank order of potency for agonists of this receptor is oxymetazoline > clonidine > epinephrine > norepinephrine > phenylephrine > dopamine > p-synephrine > p-tyramine > serotonin = p- octopamine. For antagonists, the rank order is yohimbine > phentolamine = mianserine > chlorpromazine = spiperone = prazosin > propanolol > alprenolol = pindolol.
BACKGROUND: Having a comprehensive map of the cellular anatomy of the normal human bladder is vital to understanding the cellular origins of benign bladder disease and bladder cancer. METHODS: We used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of 12,423 cells from healthy human bladder tissue samples taken from patients with bladder cancer and 12,884 cells from mouse bladders to classify bladder cell types and their underlying functions. RESULTS: We created a single-cell transcriptomic map of human and mouse bladders, including 16 clusters of human bladder cells and 15 clusters of mouse bladder cells. The homology and heterogeneity of human and mouse bladder cell types were compared and both conservative and heterogeneous aspects of human and mouse bladder evolution were identified. We also discovered two novel types of human bladder cells. One type is ADRA2A(+) and HRH2(+) interstitial cells which may be associated with nerve conduction and allergic reactions. The other type is TNNT1(+) epithelial cells that may be involved with bladder emptying. We verify these TNNT1(+) epithelial cells also occur in rat and mouse bladders. CONCLUSIONS: This transcriptomic map provides a resource for studying bladder cell types, specific cell markers, signaling receptors, and genes that will help us to learn more about the relationship between bladder cell types and diseases.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is characterized by dysbiosis of the gut microbiota and dysfunction of intestinal stem cells (ISCs). However, the direct interactions between IBD microbial factors and ISCs are undescribed. Here, we identify alpha(2A)-adrenergic receptor (ADRA2A) as a highly expressed GPCR in ISCs. Through PRESTO-Tango screening, we demonstrate that tyramine, primarily produced by Enterococcus via tyrosine decarboxylase (tyrDC), serves as a microbial ligand for ADRA2A. Using an engineered tyrDC-deficient Enterococcus faecalis strain and intestinal epithelial cell-specific Adra2a knockout mice, we show that Enterococcus-derived tyramine suppresses ISC proliferation, thereby impairing epithelial regeneration and exacerbating DSS-induced colitis through ADRA2A. Importantly, blocking the axis with an ADRA2A antagonist, yohimbine, disrupts tyramine-mediated suppression on ISCs and alleviates colitis. Our findings highlight a microbial ligand-GPCR pair in ISCs, revealing a causal link between microbial regulation of ISCs and colitis exacerbation and yielding a targeted therapeutic approach to restore ISC function in colitis.
Immunotherapy based on immunecheckpoint blockade (ICB) using antibodies induces rejection of tumours and brings clinical benefit in patients with various cancer types(1). However, tumours often resist immune rejection. Ongoing efforts trying to increase tumour response rates are based on combinations of ICB with compounds that aim to reduce immunosuppression in the tumour microenvironment but usually have little effect when used as monotherapies(2,3). Here we show that agonists of alpha2-adrenergic receptors (alpha2-AR) have very strong anti-tumour activity when used as monotherapies in multiple immunocompetent tumour models, including ICB-resistant models, but not in immunodeficient models. We also observed marked effects in human tumour xenografts implanted in mice reconstituted with human lymphocytes. The anti-tumour effects of alpha2-AR agonists were reverted by alpha2-AR antagonists, and were absent in Adra2a-knockout (encoding alpha2a-AR) mice, demonstrating on-target action exerted on host cells, not tumour cells. Tumours from treated mice contained increased infiltrating T lymphocytes and reduced myeloid suppressor cells, which were more apoptotic. Single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis revealed upregulation of innate and adaptive immune response pathways in macrophages and T cells. To exert their anti-tumour effects, alpha2-AR agonists required CD4(+) T lymphocytes, CD8(+) T lymphocytes and macrophages. Reconstitution studies in Adra2a-knockout mice indicated that the agonists acted directly on macrophages, increasing their ability to stimulate T lymphocytes. Our results indicate that alpha2-AR agonists, some of which are available clinically, could substantially improve the clinical efficacy of cancer immunotherapy.
Pharmacogenomic studies of antidepressant treatment-emergent suicidal events in depressed patients report associations with polymorphisms in genes involved in transcription (CREB1), neuroprotection (BDNF and NTRK2), glutamatergic and noradrenergic neurotransmission (GRIA3, GRIK2 and ADRA2A), the stress and inflammatory responses (FKBP5 and IL28RA), and the synthesis of glycoproteins (PAPLN). Nearly all of the reported events in these studies were modest one-time increases in suicidal ideation. In 3231 unique subjects across six studies, 424 (13.1%) patients showed increases in suicidal ideation, eight (0.25%) attempted suicide and four (0.12%) completed suicide. Systems related to most of these genes have also been implicated in studies of suicidal behavior irrespective of treatment. Future pharmacogenomic studies should target events that are clinically significant, related clinical phenotypes of response and medication side effects, and biological pathways that are involved in these outcomes in order to improve treatment approaches.
Levels of circulating glucose are tightly regulated. To identify new loci influencing glycemic traits, we performed meta-analyses of 21 genome-wide association studies informative for fasting glucose, fasting insulin and indices of beta-cell function (HOMA-B) and insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) in up to 46,186 nondiabetic participants. Follow-up of 25 loci in up to 76,558 additional subjects identified 16 loci associated with fasting glucose and HOMA-B and two loci associated with fasting insulin and HOMA-IR. These include nine loci newly associated with fasting glucose (in or near ADCY5, MADD, ADRA2A, CRY2, FADS1, GLIS3, SLC2A2, PROX1 and C2CD4B) and one influencing fasting insulin and HOMA-IR (near IGF1). We also demonstrated association of ADCY5, PROX1, GCK, GCKR and DGKB-TMEM195 with type 2 diabetes. Within these loci, likely biological candidate genes influence signal transduction, cell proliferation, development, glucose-sensing and circadian regulation. Our results demonstrate that genetic studies of glycemic traits can identify type 2 diabetes risk loci, as well as loci containing gene variants that are associated with a modest elevation in glucose levels but are not associated with overt diabetes.
Anxiety and depression coexist with cognitive impairment in Alzheimer's disease along with other concomitant disorders (>60%), which require multipurpose treatments. Polypharmaceutical regimens cause drug-drug interactions and adverse drug reactions, potentially avoidable in number and severity with the implementation of pharmacogenetic procedures. The accumulation of defective variants (>30 genes per patient in more than 50% of cases) in pharmagenes (pathogenic, mechanistic, metabolic, transporter, pleiotropic) influences the therapeutic response to antidementia, antidepressant and anxiolytic drugs in polyvalent regimens. APOE, CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP4F2, COMT, MAOB, CHAT, GSTP1, NAT2, SLC30A8, SLCO1B1, ADRA2A, ADRB2, BCHE, GABRA1, HMGCR, HTR2C, IFNL3, NBEA, UGT1A1, ABCB1, ABCC2, ABCG2, SLC6A2, SLC6A3, SLC6A4, MTHFR and OPRM1 variants affect anxiety and depression in Alzheimer's disease.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the contribution of germline genetics to regulating the briskness and diversity of T cell responses in CRC, we conducted a genome-wide association study to examine the associations between germline genetic variation and quantitative measures of T cell landscapes in 2,876 colorectal tumors from participants in the Molecular Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Study (MECC). METHODS: Germline DNA samples were genotyped and imputed using genome-wide arrays. Tumor DNA samples were extracted from paraffin blocks, and T cell receptor clonality and abundance were quantified by immunoSEQ (Adaptive Biotechnologies, Seattle, WA). Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes per high powered field (TILs/hpf) were scored by a gastrointestinal pathologist. Regression models were used to evaluate the associations between each variant and the three T-cell features, adjusting for sex, age, genotyping platform, and global ancestry. Three independent datasets were used for replication. RESULTS: We identified a SNP (rs4918567) near RBM20 associated with clonality at a genome-wide significant threshold of 5 x 10(- 8), with a consistent direction of association in both discovery and replication datasets. Expression quantitative trait (eQTL) analyses and in silico functional annotation for these loci provided insights into potential functional roles, including a statistically significant eQTL between the T allele at rs4918567 and higher expression of ADRA2A (P = 0.012) in healthy colon mucosa. CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that germline genetic variation is associated with the quantity and diversity of adaptive immune responses in CRC. Further studies are warranted to replicate these findings in additional samples and to investigate functional genomic mechanisms.
Raynaud's syndrome is a dysautonomia where exposure to cold causes vasoconstriction and hypoxia, particularly in the extremities. We performed meta-analysis in four cohorts and discovered eight loci (ADRA2A, IRX1, NOS3, ACVR2A, TMEM51, PCDH10-DT, HLA, and RAB6C) where ADRA2A, ACVR2A, NOS3, TMEM51, and IRX1 co-localized with expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), particularly in distal arteries. CRISPR gene editing further showed that ADRA2A and NOS3 loci modified gene expression and in situ RNAscope clarified the specificity of ADRA2A in small vessels and IRX1 around small capillaries in the skin. A functional contraction assay in the cold showed lower contraction in ADRA2A-deficient and higher contraction in ADRA2A-overexpressing smooth muscle cells. Overall, our study highlights the power of genome-wide association testing with functional follow-up as a method to understand complex diseases. The results indicate temperature-dependent adrenergic signaling through ADRA2A, effects at the microvasculature by IRX1, endothelial signaling by NOS3, and immune mechanisms by the HLA locus in Raynaud's syndrome.
Raynaud's phenomenon (RP) is a common vasospastic disorder that causes severe pain and ulcers, but despite its high reported heritability, no causal genes have been robustly identified. We conducted a genome-wide association study including 5,147 RP cases and 439,294 controls, based on diagnoses from electronic health records, and identified three unreported genomic regions associated with the risk of RP (p < 5 x 10(-8)). We prioritized ADRA2A (rs7090046, odds ratio (OR) per allele: 1.26; 95%-CI: 1.20-1.31; p < 9.6 x 10(-27)) and IRX1 (rs12653958, OR: 1.17; 95%-CI: 1.12-1.22, p < 4.8 x 10(-13)) as candidate causal genes through integration of gene expression in disease relevant tissues. We further identified a likely causal detrimental effect of low fasting glucose levels on RP risk (r(G) = -0.21; p-value = 2.3 x 10(-3)), and systematically highlighted drug repurposing opportunities, like the antidepressant mirtazapine. Our results provide the first robust evidence for a strong genetic contribution to RP and highlight a so far underrated role of alpha(2A)-adrenoreceptor signalling, encoded at ADRA2A, as a possible mechanism for hypersensitivity to catecholamine-induced vasospasms.
The neuro-immune regulation is associated with homeostasis of the intestine. Intestinal group 3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3s) are tissue-resident lymphocytes whose functions are affected by the intestine niche. However, how a gut neuronal signal coordinates the immune response of ILC3s is largely unknown. Here, we found that cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) signaling exacerbated the inflammatory response and attenuated the expression level of the transcription factor forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) in ILC3s. Deficiency of FOXO1 drove the hyperactivation of ILC3s and resulted in gut inflammation independently of T cells. Mechanistically, FOXO1 promoted the transcription of neuropeptide receptor VIPR2 and inhibited the transcription of adrenoceptor ADRA2A in ILC3s. FOXO1-related regulation of VIPR2 and ADRA2A signaling balanced the activation of ILC3s under steady condition or during colitis. Moreover, chronic stress elevated cAMP level and downregulated FOXO1 level, exacerbating intestinal inflammation. Our findings reveal that FOXO1 balances the activation of ILC3s via VIP and adrenergic signaling and regulates intestinal homeostasis.
INTRODUCTION: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a complex disease caused by an interaction between multiple genetic and environmental factors. T2D-associated loci identified by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) harbor the genes targeted by many clinically available drugs, supporting the idea that GWAS have the potential to discover novel genes for drug development. AREAS COVERED: This paper outlines, among the genes at those T2D-associated loci, the functional analysis of FTO, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, and MTNR1B, illustrating caveats we should be cautious about. This paper also reviews the current status of the compounds targeting the T2D-associated genes GCK, GKRP, ADIPOQ, and ADRA2A in clinical and preclinical phases. EXPERT OPINION: Functional analysis of those loci has fallen too far behind identification of T2D-associated loci. It is mandatory to define the true causal gene at the T2D-associated loci by using a variety of experimental techniques. The biggest challenge lies in the limited access to human tissues relevant to the pathogenesis of T2D. The ultimate goal of human genetic study is enabling personalized medicine based on the genetic information of individuals. More research will be needed to achieve this goal.
Topical alpha1- and alpha2-adrenoreceptor (ADRA1 and 2) agonists are effective in alleviating permanent vasodilation and facial erythema associated with rosacea by inducing skin vasoconstriction. Although beta-adrenoreceptor (ADRB) antagonists are used off-label for rosacea, pharmacological and pharmacodynamic data pertaining to these receptors in skin micro-vessels are lacking. Objectives: To analyse the expression of different adrenergic receptors and their contribution to vasoreactivity in skin micro-vessels. Small arteries (500-800 mum) and arterioles (<200 mum) were studied in human foreskin tissue. Specifically, ADR-A1, -A2, -B1 and -B2 expression was assayed by immunofluorescence, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and western blotting. Small skin artery reactivity was evaluated using ex vivo myography (500-800 mum) or a visible microscope perfusion system with precision-cut skin slices (<200 mum). ADRB2 was the most highly expressed receptor in small skin arteries and arterioles, followed by ADRA2. ADRA2 activation via brimonidine-induced vasoconstriction was greater in skin arterioles than in small skin arteries, and more potent than that with norepinephrine (NE). The use of prazosin (ADRA1 inhibitor) partially attenuated brimonidine-induced vasoconstriction, indicating some activation of ADRA1 by brimonidine, at least at 10-muM concentrations. Small skin arteries and arterioles, pre-treated with prazosin and stimulated with NE, exhibited ADRB2-mediated vasodilation, which was inhibited by the beta blockers, propranolol or timolol. This study shows that ADRB2 is predominantly expressed in small skin arteries and arterioles, and that ADRBs plays a functional role in vasodilation. The data presented here indicate that ADRBs can be a therapeutic target for the treatment of rosacea.
Cannabidiol (CBD) is a non-psychoactive phytocannabinoid known for its beneficial effects including antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Moreover, CBD is a compound with antidepressant, anxiolytic, anticonvulsant and antipsychotic effects. Thanks to all these properties, the interest of the scientific community for it has grown. Indeed, CBD is a great candidate for the management of neurological diseases. The purpose of our review is to summarize the in vitro and in vivo studies published in the last 15 years that describe the biochemical and molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of CBD and its therapeutic application in neurological diseases. CBD exerts its neuroprotective effects through three G protein coupled-receptors (adenosine receptor subtype 2A, serotonin receptor subtype 1A and G protein-coupled receptor 55), one ligand-gated ion channel (transient receptor potential vanilloid channel-1) and one nuclear factor (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma). Moreover, the therapeutical properties of CBD are also due to GABAergic modulation. In conclusion, CBD, through multi-target mechanisms, represents a valid therapeutic tool for the management of epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease.
Postsynaptic alpha(2A)-adrenoceptor density is enhanced in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) of antipsychotic-treated schizophrenia subjects. This alteration might be due to transcriptional activation, and could be regulated by epigenetic mechanisms such as histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs). The aim of this study was to evaluate ADRA2A and ADRA2C gene expression (codifying for alpha(2)-adrenoceptor subtypes), and permissive and repressive histone PTMs at gene promoter regions in the DLPFC of subjects with schizophrenia and matched controls (n = 24 pairs). We studied the effect of antipsychotic (AP) treatment in AP-free (n = 12) and AP-treated (n = 12) subgroups of schizophrenia subjects and in rats acutely and chronically treated with typical and atypical antipsychotics. ADRA2A mRNA expression was selectively upregulated in AP-treated schizophrenia subjects (+93%) whereas ADRA2C mRNA expression was upregulated in all schizophrenia subjects (+53%) regardless of antipsychotic treatment. Acute and chronic clozapine treatment in rats did not alter brain cortex Adra2a mRNA expression but increased Adra2c mRNA expression. Both ADRA2A and ADRA2C promoter regions showed epigenetic modification by histone methylation and acetylation in human DLPFC. The upregulation of ADRA2A expression in AP-treated schizophrenia subjects might be related to observed bivalent chromatin at ADRA2A promoter region in schizophrenia (depicted by increased permissive H3K4me3 and repressive H3K27me3) and could be triggered by the enhanced H4K16ac at ADRA2A promoter. In conclusion, epigenetic predisposition differentially modulated ADRA2A and ADRA2C mRNA expression in DLPFC of schizophrenia subjects.
As heritability is high in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), genetic factors must play a significant role in the development and course of this disorder. In recent years a large number of studies on different candidate genes for ADHD have been published, most have focused on genes involved in the dopaminergic neurotransmission system, such as DRD4, DRD5, DAT1/SLC6A3, DBH, DDC. Genes associated with the noradrenergic (such as NET1/SLC6A2, ADRA2A, ADRA2C) and serotonergic systems (such as 5-HTT/SLC6A4, HTR1B, HTR2A, TPH2) have also received considerable interest. Additional candidate genes related to neurotransmission and neuronal plasticity that have been studied less intensively include SNAP25, CHRNA4, NMDA, BDNF, NGF, NTF3, NTF4/5, GDNF. This review article provides an overview of these candidate gene studies, and summarizes findings from recently published genome-wide association studies (GWAS). GWAS is a relatively new tool that enables the identification of new ADHD genes in a hypothesis-free manner. Although these latter studies could be improved and need to be replicated they are starting to implicate processes like neuronal migration and cell adhesion and cell division as potentially important in the aetiology of ADHD and have suggested several new directions for future ADHD genetics studies.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) manifests diverse molecular subtypes, including the classical/progenitor and basal-like/squamous subtypes, with the latter known for its aggressiveness. We employed integrative transcriptome and metabolome analyses to identify potential genes contributing to the molecular subtype differentiation and its metabolic features. Our comprehensive analysis revealed that adrenoceptor alpha 2A (ADRA2A) was downregulated in the basal-like/squamous subtype, suggesting its potential role as a candidate suppressor of this subtype. Reduced ADRA2A expression was significantly associated with a high frequency of lymph node metastasis, higher pathological grade, advanced disease stage, and decreased survival among PDAC patients. In vitro experiments demonstrated that ADRA2A transgene expression and ADRA2A agonist inhibited PDAC cell invasion. Additionally, ADRA2A-high condition downregulated the basal-like/squamous gene expression signature, while upregulating the classical/progenitor gene expression signature in our PDAC patient cohort and PDAC cell lines. Metabolome analysis conducted on the PDAC cohort and cell lines revealed that elevated ADRA2A levels were associated with suppressed amino acid and carnitine/acylcarnitine metabolism, which are characteristic metabolic profiles of the classical/progenitor subtype. Collectively, our findings suggest that heightened ADRA2A expression induces transcriptome and metabolome characteristics indicative of classical/progenitor subtype with decreased disease aggressiveness in PDAC patients. These observations introduce ADRA2A as a candidate for diagnostic and therapeutic targeting in PDAC.
Cardiomyopathy is a common complication and significantly increases the risk of death in septic patients. Our previous study demonstrated that post-treatment with dexmedetomidine (DEX) aggravates septic cardiomyopathy. However, the mechanisms for the side effect of DEX post-treatment on septic cardiomyopathy are not well-defined. Here we employed a cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model and alpha(2A)-adrenoceptor deficient (Adra2a(-/-)) mice to observe the effects of DEX post-treatment on myocardial metabolic disturbances in sepsis. CLP mice displayed significant cardiac dysfunction, altered mitochondrial dynamics, reduced cardiac lipid and glucose uptake, impaired fatty acid and glucose oxidation, enhanced glycolysis and decreased ATP production in the myocardium, almost all of which were dramatically enhanced by DEX post-treatment in septic mice. In Adra2a(-/-) mice, DEX post-treatment did not affect cardiac dysfunction and metabolic disruptions in CLP-induced sepsis. Additionally, Adra2a(-/-) mice exhibited impaired cardiac function, damaged myocardial mitochondrial structures, and disturbed fatty acid metabolism and glucose oxidation. In sum, DEX post-treatment exacerbates metabolic disturbances in septic cardiomyopathy in a alpha(2A)-adrenoceptor dependent manner.
Monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs) make up a highly bioactive class of metabolites produced by a range of tropical and subtropical plants. The corynanthe-type MIAs are a stereochemically complex subclass with therapeutic potential against a large number of indications including cancer, psychotic disorders, and erectile dysfunction. Here, we report yeast-based cell factories capable of de novo production of corynanthe-type MIAs rauwolscine, yohimbine, tetrahydroalstonine, and corynanthine. From this, we demonstrate regioselective biosynthesis of 4 fluorinated derivatives of these compounds and de novo biosynthesis of 7-chlororauwolscine by coexpression of a halogenase with the biosynthetic pathway. Finally, we capitalize on the ability of these cell factories to produce derivatives of these bioactive scaffolds to establish a proof-of-principle drug discovery pipeline in which the corynanthe-type MIAs are screened for bioactivity on human drug targets, expressed in yeast. In doing so, we identify antagonistic and agonistic behavior against the human adrenergic G protein-coupled receptors ADRA2A and ADRA2B, and the serotonergic receptor 5HT4b, respectively. This study thus demonstrates a proto-drug discovery pipeline for bioactive plant-inspired small molecules based on one-pot biocatalysis of natural and new-to-nature corynanthe-type MIAs in yeast.
OBJECTIVE: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) are highly prevalent endocrine system diseases. However, studies on the molecular mechanisms of T2DM and PCOS at the transcriptomic level are still few. Thus, we aimed to reveal the potential common genetic and molecular pathways between T2DM and PCOS via bioinformatics analyses. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We downloaded the GSE10946 and GSE18732 datasets for T2DM and PCOS, respectively, from the National Center for Biotechnology Information's Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. These datasets were subjected to integrated differential and weighted gene co-expression network analyses (WGCNA) to screen common genes. Thereafter, functional enrichment and disease gene association analyses were performed, transcription factor (TF)-gene and TF-miRNA-gene regulatory networks were constructed, and finally, the relevant target drugs were identified. RESULTS: We identified common genes (BIRC3, DEPTOR, TNNL3, ADRA2A) in T2DM and PCOS. Pathway enrichment analysis depicted that the common genes were enriched in smooth muscle contraction, channel inhibitor activity, apoptosis, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling pathways. TFs such as SP7, KLF8, HCFC1, IRF1, and MLLT1 played key roles in TF regulatory networks. Orlistat was indicated to be an important gene-targeting drug. CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first study to explore four diagnostic biomarkers and gene regulatory networks for T2DM and PCOS. The findings of our study provide novel insights into the diagnosis and treatment of T2DM and PCOS.
INTRODUCTION: Dexmedetomidine (DEX) is primarily utilized for sedation in the context of general anesthesia or intensive care. However, the exact regulatory mechanism by which DEX affects cytokines remains unclear. This study aims to investigate the underlying mechanism by which DEX inhibits proinflammatory factors through activation of the beta2 adrenergic receptor (beta2 AR). METHODS: The inflammatory cell model of human mononuclear macrophage (THP-1) cells induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was established to study the effect of DEX on the expression of cell-related inflammatory factors. ADRA2A gene knockout THP-1 cells (THP-1(KO) ) were constructed by CRISPR technology, and the effect of DEX on the expression of inflammatory factors of THP-1(KO) cells was detected. The target sites of DEX on beta2 AR were screened by molecular docking. Reversion experiments were performed using ADRB2-siRNA. Western blot was used to detect the activation of beta2 AR/PKA/CREB pathway and NF-kappaB, and ELISA was used to detect the release level of inflammatory factors. RESULTS: The results demonstrated a significant reduction in the expression levels of MCP-1, interleukin-06, and IL-8 in both THP-1 and THP-1(KO) cells when induced by LPS following treatment with DEX. Additionally, DEX treatment led to an increase in IL-10 expression. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed an upregulation of beta2 AR expression after DEX treatment. Western blot results indicated that DEX notably enhanced the activation of the beta2 AR and PKA/CREB pathways, while concurrently suppressing the activation of NF-kappaB. Notably, the use of ADRB2 siRNA reversed the effects of DEX treatment and promoted the release of inflammatory cytokines. CONCLUSION: DEX initiates the activation of the PKA/CREB pathway through the activation of beta2 AR. Simultaneously, it exerts an inhibitory effect on the activation of NF-kappaB, consequently reducing the transcription of proinflammatory factors while increasing the transcription of anti-inflammatory factors.
