cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit alpha; Phosphorylates a large number of substrates in the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Regulates the abundance of compartmentalized pools of its regulatory subunits through phosphorylation of PJA2 which binds and ubiquitinates these subunits, leading to their subsequent proteolysis. Phosphorylates CDC25B, ABL1, NFKB1, CLDN3, PSMC5/RPT6, PJA2, RYR2, RORA and VASP. RORA is activated by phosphorylation. Required for glucose- mediated adipogenic differentiation increase and osteogenic differentiation inhibition from osteoblasts. Involved in the [...] 
CD8(+) T cells are essential components of the immune response against viral infections and tumours, and are capable of eliminating infected and cancerous cells. However, when the antigen cannot be cleared, T cells enter a state known as exhaustion(1). Although it is clear that chronic antigen contributes to CD8(+) T cell exhaustion, less is known about how stress responses in tissues regulate T cell function. Here we show a new link between the stress-associated catecholamines and the progression of T cell exhaustion through the beta(1)-adrenergic receptor ADRB1. We identify that exhausted CD8(+) T cells increase ADRB1 expression and that exposure of ADRB1(+) T cells to catecholamines suppresses their cytokine production and proliferation. Exhausted CD8(+) T cells cluster around sympathetic nerves in an ADRB1-dependent manner. Ablation of beta(1)-adrenergic signalling limits the progression of T cells towards the exhausted state in chronic infection and improves effector functions when combined with immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) in melanoma. In a pancreatic cancer model resistant to ICB, beta-blockers and ICB synergize to boost CD8(+) T cell responses and induce the development of tissue-resident memory-like T cells. Malignant disease is associated with increased catecholamine levels in patients(2,3), and our results establish a connection between the sympathetic stress response, tissue innervation and T cell exhaustion. Here, we uncover a new mechanism by which blocking beta-adrenergic signalling in CD8(+) T cells rejuvenates anti-tumour functions.
Upon viral infection, cytoplasmic pattern recognition receptors detect viral nucleic acids and activate the adaptor protein VISA/MAVS- or MITA/STING-mediated innate antiviral response. Whether and how the innate antiviral response is regulated by neuronal endocrine functions is unclear. Here, we show that viral infection reduced the serum levels of the beta-adrenergic hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine as well as the cellular levels of their receptors ADRB1 and ADRB2. We further show that an increase in epinephrine/norepinephrine level inhibited the innate antiviral response in an ADRB1-/2-dependent manner. Mechanistically, epinephrine/norepinephrine stimulation activated the downstream kinase PKA, which catalyzed the phosphorylation of MITA at S241, S243 and T263, inhibiting MITA activation and suppressing the innate immune response to DNA virus. In addition, phosphorylation of VISA at T54 by PKA antagonized the innate immune response to RNA virus. These findings reveal the regulatory mechanisms of innate antiviral responses by epinephrine/norepinephrine and provide a possible explanation for increased host susceptibility to viral infection in stressful and anxiety-promoting situations.
Stimulation of brown adipose tissue (BAT) thermogenesis in humans has emerged as an attractive target to improve metabolic health. Pharmacological stimulations targeting the beta(3)-adrenergic receptor (beta(3)-AR), the adrenergic receptor believed to mediate BAT thermogenesis, have historically performed poorly in human clinical trials. Here we report that, in contrast to rodents, human BAT thermogenesis is not mediated by the stimulation of beta(3)-AR. Oral administration of the beta(3)-AR agonist mirabegron only elicited increases in BAT thermogenesis when ingested at the maximal allowable dose. This led to off-target binding to beta(1)-AR and beta(2)-AR, thereby increasing cardiovascular responses and white adipose tissue lipolysis, respectively. ADRB2 was co-expressed with UCP1 in human brown adipocytes. Pharmacological stimulation and inhibition of the beta(2)-AR as well as knockdown of ADRB1, ADRB2, or ADRB3 in human brown adipocytes all confirmed that BAT lipolysis and thermogenesis occur through beta(2)-AR signaling in humans (ClinicalTrials.govNCT02811289).
Sleep is crucial for our survival, and many diseases are linked to long-term poor sleep quality. Before we can use sleep to enhance our health and performance and alleviate diseases associated with poor sleep, a greater understanding of sleep regulation is necessary. We have identified a mutation in the beta(1)-adrenergic receptor gene in humans who require fewer hours of sleep than most. In vitro, this mutation leads to decreased protein stability and dampened signaling in response to agonist treatment. In vivo, the mice carrying the same mutation demonstrated short sleep behavior. We found that this receptor is highly expressed in the dorsal pons and that these ADRB1(+) neurons are active during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and wakefulness. Activating these neurons can lead to wakefulness, and the activity of these neurons is affected by the mutation. These results highlight the important role of beta(1)-adrenergic receptors in sleep/wake regulation.
BACKGROUND: Epidemiological studies have reported conflicting findings on the potential adverse effects of long-term antihypertensive medication use on cancer risk. Naturally occurring variation in genes encoding antihypertensive drug targets can be used as proxies for these targets to examine the effect of their long-term therapeutic inhibition on disease outcomes. METHODS AND FINDINGS: We performed a mendelian randomization analysis to examine the association between genetically proxied inhibition of 3 antihypertensive drug targets and risk of 4 common cancers (breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate). Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ACE, ADRB1, and SLC12A3 associated (P < 5.0 x 10-8) with systolic blood pressure (SBP) in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) were used to proxy inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), beta-1 adrenergic receptor (ADRB1), and sodium-chloride symporter (NCC), respectively. Summary genetic association estimates for these SNPs were obtained from GWAS consortia for the following cancers: breast (122,977 cases, 105,974 controls), colorectal (58,221 cases, 67,694 controls), lung (29,266 cases, 56,450 controls), and prostate (79,148 cases, 61,106 controls). Replication analyses were performed in the FinnGen consortium (1,573 colorectal cancer cases, 120,006 controls). Cancer GWAS and FinnGen consortia data were restricted to individuals of European ancestry. Inverse-variance weighted random-effects models were used to examine associations between genetically proxied inhibition of these drug targets and risk of cancer. Multivariable mendelian randomization and colocalization analyses were employed to examine robustness of findings to violations of mendelian randomization assumptions. Genetically proxied ACE inhibition equivalent to a 1-mm Hg reduction in SBP was associated with increased odds of colorectal cancer (odds ratio (OR) 1.13, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.22; P = 3.6 x 10-4). This finding was replicated in the FinnGen consortium (OR 1.40, 95% CI 1.02 to 1.92; P = 0.035). There was little evidence of association of genetically proxied ACE inhibition with risk of breast cancer (OR 0.98, 95% CI 0.94 to 1.02, P = 0.35), lung cancer (OR 1.01, 95% CI 0.92 to 1.10; P = 0.93), or prostate cancer (OR 1.06, 95% CI 0.99 to 1.13; P = 0.08). Genetically proxied inhibition of ADRB1 and NCC were not associated with risk of these cancers. The primary limitations of this analysis include the modest statistical power for analyses of drug targets in relation to some less common histological subtypes of cancers examined and the restriction of the majority of analyses to participants of European ancestry. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we observed that genetically proxied long-term ACE inhibition was associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer, warranting comprehensive evaluation of the safety profiles of ACE inhibitors in clinical trials with adequate follow-up. There was little evidence to support associations across other drug target-cancer risk analyses, consistent with findings from short-term randomized controlled trials for these medications.
Beta-blockers are widely used medications for a variety of indications, including heart failure, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmias, and hypertension. Genetic variability in pharmacokinetic (e.g., CYP2D6) and pharmacodynamic (e.g., ADRB1, ADRB2, ADRA2C, GRK4, GRK5) genes have been studied in relation to beta-blocker exposure and response. We searched and summarized the strength of the evidence linking beta-blocker exposure and response with the six genes listed above. The level of evidence was high for associations between CYP2D6 genetic variation and both metoprolol exposure and heart rate response. Evidence indicates that CYP2D6 poor metabolizers experience clinically significant greater exposure and lower heart rate in response to metoprolol compared with those who are not poor metabolizers. Therefore, we provide therapeutic recommendations regarding genetically predicted CYP2D6 metabolizer status and metoprolol therapy. However, there was insufficient evidence to make therapeutic recommendations for CYP2D6 and other beta-blockers or for any beta-blocker and the other five genes evaluated (updates at www.cpicpgx.org).
An increasing number of studies indicate that adrenergic signalling plays a fundamental role in chronic stress-induced tumour progression and metastasis. However, its function in gastric cancer (GC) and its potential mechanisms remain unknown. The expression levels of beta-adrenergic receptor (ADRB) in GC cell lines were examined by using real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blotting. The effects of beta2 adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) activation and blockade were investigated in vitro in GC cells by using proliferation, migration, invasion, cell cycle and apoptosis assays. Chronic restraint stress (CRS) increased the plasma levels of catecholamines and cortisol and also induced progression and metastasis of GC in vivo. Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining and a TUNEL assay were employed to observe the regulation of cell viability in vivo. The expression levels of ADRB2 in 100 human GC samples were measured by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. The stress hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine significantly accelerated GC cell proliferation, invasion and viability in culture, as well as tumour growth in vivo. These effects were reversed by the ADRB antagonists propranolol and ICI118,551 (an ADRB2-specific antagonist). Moreover, the selective ADRB1 antagonist atenolol had almost no effect on tumour cell proliferation and invasion in vitro and in vivo. ADRB2 antagonists suppressed proliferation, invasion and metastasis by inhibiting the ERK1/2-JNK-MAPK pathway and transcription factors, such as NF-kappaB, AP-1, CREB and STAT3. Analysis of xenograft models using GC cells revealed that ADRB2 antagonists significantly inhibited tumour growth and metastasis, and chronic stress antagonized these inhibitory effects. In addition, chronic stress increased the expression of VEGF, MMP-2, MMP-7 and MMP-9 in transplanted tumour tissue, and catecholamine hormones enhanced the expression of metastasis-related proteins. The expression of ADRB2 was upregulated in tumour tissues and positively correlated with tumour size, histological grade, lymph node metastasis and clinical stage in human GC samples. Stress hormone-induced activation of the ADRB2 signalling pathway plays a crucial role in GC progression and metastasis. These findings indicate that ADRB2 signalling regulates GC progression and suggest beta2 blockade as a novel strategy to complement existing therapies for GC.
BACKGROUND: Cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD) is a group of neurological disorders that affect the small blood vessels within the brain, for which no effective treatments are currently available. We conducted a Mendelian randomization (MR) study to identify candidate therapeutic genes for CSVD. METHODS: We retrieved genome-wide association study data from 6 recently conducted, extensive investigations focusing on CSVD magnetic resonance imaging markers and performed a 2-sample MR analysis to assess the potential causal effects of gene expression and protein level within druggable genes on CSVD in blood and brain tissues. Colocalization analyses and repeat studies were undertaken to verify the relationship. Additionally, mediation analysis was conducted to explore the potential mechanisms involving druggable genes and known risk factors for CSVD. Finally, phenome-wide MR analyses were applied to evaluate the potential adverse effects related to the identified druggable genes for CSVD treatment. RESULTS: Overall, 5 druggable genes consistently showed associations with CSVD in MR analyses across both the discovery and validation cohorts. Notably, the ALDH2 and KLHL24 genes were identified as associated with CSVD in both blood and brain tissues, whereas the genes ADRB1, BTN3A2, and EFEMP1 were exclusively detected in brain tissue. Moreover, mediation analysis elucidated the proportion of the total effects mediated by CSVD risk factors through candidate druggable genes, which ranged from 5.5% to 18.5%, and offered potential explanations for the observed results. A comprehensive phenome-wide MR analysis further emphasized both the therapeutic benefits and potential side effects of targeting these candidate druggable genes. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides genetic evidence supporting the potential therapeutic benefits of targeting druggable genes for treating CSVD, which will be useful for prioritizing CSVD drug development.
IMPORTANCE: Limited information exists regarding the impact of pharmacotherapy in pregnancy due to ethical concerns of unintended fetal harm. Yet, maternal prescriptive drug use for chronic conditions such as hypertension is common. OBJECTIVE: To investigate potential causal relationships between perturbing maternal genetic variants influencing antihypertensive drug targets and perinatal outcomes among offspring using mendelian randomization (MR). DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This 2-sample MR study used individual-level single-nucleotide variation (SNV) outcome data from mother-father-offspring trios with complete genetic and phenotypic information from the Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study (MoBa) and summary-level SNV exposure data from UK Biobank participants sourced from the Integrative Epidemiology Unit OpenGWAS project. Pregnant individuals were recruited across Norway during their routine ultrasonography examination at 18 weeks' gestation between June 1999 and December 2008, and mothers, fathers, and offspring were followed up after birth. Novel genetic instruments for maternal antihypertensive drug targets that act via systolic blood pressure (SBP) were derived from individual-level data analyzed in January 2018. Two-sample multivariable MR analysis of these maternal drug targets and offspring outcomes were performed between January 2023 and April 2024. EXPOSURES: Maternal genetic variants associated with drug targets for treatments of hypertension, as specified in the National Health Service dictionary of medicines and devices. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Offspring outcomes were Apgar score at 1 minute and 5 minutes, offspring developmental score at 6 months, birth length, birth weight z score, gestational age, head circumference, and congenital malformation. Maternal hypertensive disorders of pregnancy were a positive control. RESULTS: The MoBa sample contained 29 849 family trios, with a mean (SD) maternal age of 30.2 (18.6) years and a mean (SD) paternal age of 32.8 (13.1) years; 51.1% of offspring were male. Seven independent SNVs were identified as influencing maternal SBP via the antihypertensive drug target instruments. For higher levels of maternal SBP acting through the CACNB2 calcium channel blocker target, the estimated change in gestational age was 3.99 days (95% CI, 0.02-7.96 days) per 10-mm Hg decrease in SBP. There was no evidence of differential risk for measured perinatal outcomes from maternal SBP acting through drug targets for multiple hypertensive subclasses, such as between the ADRB1 beta-adrenoceptor-blocking target and risk of congenital malformation (estimated odds ratio, 0.28 [95% CI, 0.02-4.71] per 10-mm Hg decrease in SBP). Maternal and paternal SBP acting through the EDNRA vasodilator antihypertensive target did not have a potential causal effect on birth weight z score, with respective beta estimates of 0.71 (95% CI, -0.09 to 1.51) and 0.72 (95% CI, -0.08 to 1.53) per 10-mm Hg decrease in SBP. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The findings provided little evidence to indicate that perturbation of maternal genetic variants for SBP that influence antihypertensive drug targets had potential causal relationships with measures of perinatal development and health within this study. These findings may be triangulated with existing literature to guide physicians and mothers in decisions about antihypertensive use during pregnancy.
Takotsubo syndrome (TTS) is an enigmatic disease with a multifactorial and still unresolved pathogenesis. A genetic predisposition has been suggested based on the few familial TTS cases. Conflicting results have been published regarding the role of functional polymorphisms in relevant candidate genes, such as alpha1-, beta1-, and beta2-adrenergic receptors; G protein-coupled receptor kinase 5; and estrogen receptors. Further research is required to help clarify the role of genetic susceptibility in TTS.
beta-blockers are commonly prescribed to treat multiple cardiovascular (CV) diseases, but, frequently, adverse drug reactions and intolerance limit their use in clinical practice. Interindividual variability in response to beta-blockers may be explained by genetic differences. In fact, pharmacogenetic interactions for some of these drugs have been widely studied, such as metoprolol. But studies that explore genetic variants affecting bisoprolol response are inconclusive, limited or confusing because of mixed results with other beta-Blockers, different genetic polymorphisms observed, endpoint studied etc. Because of this, we performed a systematic review in order to find relevant genetic variants affecting bisoprolol response. We have found genetic polymorphism in several genes, but most of the studies focused in ADRB variants. The ADRB1 Arg389Gly (rs1801253) was the most studied genetic polymorphism and it seems to influence the response to bisoprolol, although studies are inconclusive. Even, we performed a meta-analysis about its influence on systolic/diastolic blood pressure in patients treated with bisoprolol, but this did not show statistically significant results. In conclusion, many genetic polymorphisms have been assessed about their influence on patients  response to bisoprolol and the ADRB1 Arg389Gly (rs1801253) seems the most relevant genetic polymorphism in this regard but results have not been confirmed with a meta-analysis. Our results support the need of further studies about the impact of genetic variants on bisoprolol response, considering different genetic polymorphisms and conducting single and multiple SNPs analysis, including other clinical parameters related to bisoprolol response in a multivariate study.
OBJECTIVE: This study explored the potentially modifiable factors for depression and major depressive disorder (MDD) from the MR-Base database and further evaluated the associations between drug targets with MDD. METHODS: We analyzed two-sample of Mendelian randomization (2SMR) using genetic variant depression ( n = 113,154) and MDD ( n = 208,811) from Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS). Separate calculations were performed with modifiable risk factors from MR-Base for 1,001 genomes. The MR analysis was performed by screening drug targets with MDD in the DrugBank database to explore the therapeutic targets for MDD. Inverse variance weighted (IVW), fixed-effect inverse variance weighted (FE-IVW), MR-Egger, weighted median, and weighted mode were used for complementary calculation. RESULTS: The potential causal relationship between modifiable risk factors and depression contained 459 results for depression and 424 for MDD. Also, the associations between drug targets and MDD showed that SLC6A4, GRIN2A, GRIN2C, SCN10A, and IL1B expression are associated with an increased risk of depression. In contrast, ADRB1, CHRNA3, HTR3A, GSTP1, and GABRG2 genes are candidate protective factors against depression. CONCLUSION: This study identified the risk factors causally associated with depression and MDD, and estimated 10 drug targets with significant impact on MDD, providing essential information for formulating strategies to prevent and treat depression.
Recent reports indicate a potential oncogenic role of antihypertensive drugs in common cancers. However, it remains uncertain whether this phenomenon influences the risk of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). This study aimed to assess the potential causal effects of blood pressure (BP) and antihypertensive drugs on GBM. Genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary statistics for systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and GBM in Europeans were downloaded. To represent the effects of antihypertensive drugs, we utilized single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with SBP/DBP adjacent to the coding regions of different antihypertensive drugs as instrumental variables to model five antihypertensive drugs, including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, calcium channel blockers, beta-receptor blockers (BBs), and thiazide diuretics. Positive control studies were performed using GWAS data in chronic heart failure. The primary method for causality estimation was the inverse-variance-weighted method. Mendelian randomization analysis showed that BBs with the beta1-adrenergic receptor (ADRB1) as a therapeutic target could significantly reduce the risk of GBM by mediating DBP (OR = 0.431, 95% CI: 0.267-0.697, p < .001) and that they could also significantly reduce the risk of GBM by mediating SBP (OR = 0.595, 95% CI: 0.422-0.837, p = .003). Sensitivity analysis and colocalization analysis reinforced the robustness of these findings. Finally, the low expression of the ADRB1 gene in malignant gliomas was found by GBM data from TCGA and single-cell RNA sequencing, which most likely contributed to the poor prognosis of GBM patients. In summary, our study provides preliminary evidence of some causal relationship between ADRB1-targeted BBs and glioblastoma development. However, more studies are needed to validate these findings and further reveal the complex relationship between BP and GBM.
Betablockers (BBs) are prescribed for ischaemia in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS). In Spain, bisoprolol and carvedilol are the most prescribed BBs, but patients often had to discontinue them due to adverse effects. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ADRB1, ADRB2 and CYP2D6 genes have strong evidence of pharmacogenetic association with BBs in heart failure or hypertension, but the evidence in ACS is limited. Therefore, our study focuses on investigating how these genes influence the response to BBs in ACS patients. We analysed the association between SNPs in ADRB1 Gly389Arg (rs1801253) and Ser49Gly (rs1801252), ADRB2 Gly16Arg (rs1042713) and Glu27Gln (rs1042714), and CYP2D* 6 (*2- rs1080985, *4- rs3892097, *10 - rs1065852) and the occurrence of bradycardia/hypotension events during one year of follow-up. We performed an observational study and included 285 ACS-PCI-stent patients. A first analysis including patients treated with bisoprolol and a second analysis including patients treated with other BBs were performed. We found that the presence of the G allele (Glu) of the ADRB2 gene (rs1042714; Glu27Gln) conferred a protective effect against hypotension-induced by BBs; OR (CI 95%) = 0,14 (0,03-0,60), p < 0.01. The ADRB2 (rs1042713; Gly16Arg) GG genotype could also prevent hypotensive events; OR (CI 95%) = 0.49 (0.28-0.88), p = 0015. SNPs in ADRB1 and CYP2D6 * 2, CYP2D6 * 4 weren t associated with primary events. The effect of CYP2D6 * 10 does not seem to be relevant for the response to BBs. According to our findings, SNPs in ADRB2 (rs1042713, rs1042714) could potentially affect the response and tolerance to BBs in ACS-patients. Further studies are necessary to clarify the impact of ADRB2 polymorphisms.
While brown adipose tissue (BAT) is activated by the beta-3-adrenergic receptor (ADRB3) in rodents, in human brown adipocytes, the ADRB2 is dominantly present and responsible for noradrenergic activation. Therefore, we performed a randomized double-blinded crossover trial in young lean men to compare the effects of single intravenous bolus of the ADRB2 agonist salbutamol without and with the ADRB1/2 antagonist propranolol on glucose uptake by BAT, assessed by dynamic 2-[(18)F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan (i.e., primary outcome). Salbutamol, compared with salbutamol with propranolol, increases glucose uptake by BAT, without affecting the glucose uptake by skeletal muscle and white adipose tissue. The salbutamol-induced glucose uptake by BAT positively associates with the increase in energy expenditure. Notably, participants with high salbutamol-induced glucose uptake by BAT have lower body fat mass, waist-hip ratio, and serum LDL-cholesterol concentration. In conclusion, specific ADRB2 agonism activates human BAT, which warrants investigation of ADRB2 activation in long-term studies (EudraCT: 2020-004059-34).
BACKGROUND: G-protein receptor kinase 5 (GRK5) Gln41 > Leu and beta1-adrenergic receptor (ADRB1) Arg389 > Gly polymorphisms presented the different distribution of genotype frequencies between Caucasian American and African American, and produced the difference in beta-blocker treatment effect among them with systolic heart failure (SHF). OBJECTIVE: This study sought to identify the distributed characteristics of these variant genotypes in Chinese population, and influence of GRK5 and ADRB1 polymorphisms on SHF morbidity and beta-blocker treatment effect in patients with SHF. METHODS: This study was based on cross-sectional survey data. 1794 and 1718 subjects' ADRB1 and GRK5 gene sequencing (sanger method) data were achieved respectively. Blood samples collection, clinical laboratory detection, electrocardiogram and echocardiography examinations were performed. Medication usage was confirmed at in-hospital visits or the questionnaire by personal interview. RESULTS: GRK5 Leu41Leu genotype was not found in our Chinese population. In non-SHF population, allele frequencies of GRK5 Gln41 and Leu41 were 2782 (0.992) and 22 (0.008) (Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium test chi(2) = 0.088, P = 0.767), and allele frequencies of ADRB1 Arg389 and Gly389 were 2127 (0.715) and 849 (0.285) (chi(2) = 0.272, P = 0.602). In SHF patients, allele frequencies of Gln41 and Leu41 were 446 (0.991) and 4 (0.009) (chi(2) = 0.018, P = 0.893), and allele frequencies of Arg389 and Gly389 were 331 (0.726) and 125 (0.274) (chi(2) = 1.892, P = 0.169). Further in logistic regression model, these ADRB1 and GRK5 variants were not significantly independently associated with the risk of SHF morbidity. Those carrying genotype ADRB1 Gly389Gly did not reduce significantly the risk of SHF morbidity after beta-blocker therapy. CONCLUSIONS: GRK5 Leu41Leu genotype was not found in our Chinese population, neither ADRB1 nor GRK5 variants presented independently associated with the risk of SHF morbidity, most ADRB1 and GRK5 polymorphisms did decrease significantly the risk of SHF morbidity after beta-blocker therapy except for those carrying genotype ADRB1 Gly389Gly.
INTRODUCTION: beta-blockers are among the most widely prescribed of all drugs, used for treatment of a large number of cardiovascular diseases. Herein we evaluate literature pertaining to pharmacogenetics of beta-blocker therapy, provide insight into the robustness of the genetic associations, and determine the appropriateness for translating these genetic associations into clinical practice. AREAS COVERED: A literature search was conducted using PubMed to collate evidence on associations between CYP2D6, ADRB1, ADRB2, and GRK5 genetic variation and drug-response outcomes in the presence of beta-blocker exposure. Pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and clinical outcomes studies were included if genotype data and beta-blocker exposure were documented. EXPERT OPINION: Substantial data suggest that specific ADRB1 and GRK5 genotypes are associated with improved beta-blocker efficacy and have potential for use to guide therapy decisions in the clinical setting. While the data do not justify ordering a CYP2D6 pharmacogenetic test, if CYP2D6 genotype is available in the electronic health record, there may be clinical utility for understanding dosing of beta-blockers.
BACKGROUND: Antihypertensive drugs are known to lower cardiovascular mortality, but the role of different types of antihypertensive drugs in lifespan has not been clarified. Moreover, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. METHODS AND RESULTS: To minimize confounding, we used Mendelian randomization to assess the role of different antihypertensive drug classes in longevity and examined the pathways via proteins. Genetic variants associated with systolic blood pressure (SBP) corresponding to drug-target genes were used as genetic instruments. The genetic associations with lifespan were obtained from a large genome-wide association study including 1 million European participants from UK Biobank and LifeGen. For significant antihypertensive drug classes, we performed sex-specific analysis, drug-target analysis, and colocalization. To examine the mediation pathways, we assessed the associations of 2291 plasma proteins with lifespan, and examined the associations of drug classes with the proteins affecting lifespan. After correcting for multiple testing, genetically proxied beta-blockers (BBs), calcium channel blockers (CCBs), and vasodilators were related to longer life years (BBs: 2.03, 95% CI 0.78-3.28 per 5 mmHg reduction in SBP, CCBs: 3.40, 95% CI 1.47-5.33, and vasodilators: 2.92, 95% CI 1.08-4.77). The beneficial effects of BBs and CCBs were more obvious in men. ADRB1, CACNA2D2, CACNB3, CPT1A, CPT2, and EDNRA genes were related to extended lifespan, with CPT2 further supported by colocalization evidence. Eighty-six proteins were related to lifespan, of which four proteins were affected by CCBs. CDH1 may mediate the association between CCBs and lifespan. CONCLUSIONS: Beta-blockers, CCBs, and vasodilators may prolong lifespan, with potential sex differences for BBs and CCBs. The role of CCBs in lifespan is partly mediated by CDH1. Prioritizing the potential protein targets can provide new insights into healthy aging.
Background and Objectives: Tachycardia is a common cardiovascular disease. Drugs blocking beta1-adrenergic receptors (ADRB1) are used in the therapy of arrhythmogenic heart diseases. Disease-related polymorphisms can be observed within the ADRB1 gene. The two most important are Ser49Gly and Arg389Gly, and they influence the treatment efficacy. The family of the cytochrome P450 system consists of the isoenzyme CYP2D6 (Debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase), which is involved in phase I metabolism of almost 25% of clinically important drugs, including antiarrhythmic drugs. A study was conducted to detect the ADRB1 and CYP2D6 gene polymorphisms. Materials and Methods: The material for the test was whole blood from 30 patients with ventricular and supraventricular tachycardia and 20 controls. The samples were obtained from the Department of Pediatric Cardiology. The first to be made was the extraction of DNA using a GeneMATRIX Quick Blood DNA Purification Kit from EURx. The selected ADRB1 and CYP2D6 gene polymorphisms were detected by high-resolution melting polymerase chain reaction (HRM-PCR) analysis. Results: Based on the analysis of melt profile data for each PCR product, the identification of polymorphisms was carried out. Heterozygotes and homozygotes were found in the examined alleles. Conclusions: The frequency of the Arg389Gly polymorphism differs statistically significantly between the control group and patients with supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias, as well as between these two groups of patients. Moreover, the Arg389Gly polymorphism was statistically more prevalent in the group of girls with SVT arrhythmia compared to girls with VT. A few carriers of homozygous and heterozygous systems of the S49G polymorphism were detected among patients with arrhythmias, as well as control group. The percentage of individuals carrying the CYP2D6 4 allele as either homozygous or heterozygous was observed in the study and control groups. The high prevalence of the CYP2D6*4 allele carriers in both groups prompts the optimization of beta-1 blocker therapy.
Hypertension is the most common, chronic disease in the world, and there are many effective pharmacological agents available for its treatment. Despite the plethora of treatment options, data across the globe suggest that blood pressure control rates are < 50%, a fact likely influenced in part by the inability to predict the antihypertensive drug likely to be most effective for an individual patient. Pharmacogenomics in hypertension holds the promise of identifying genetic biomarkers for antihypertensive drug response, which might be used in the future in treatment selection. Research in the field is also likely to enhance our understanding of hypertension and the mechanisms by which the various drugs produce efficacy. There are several examples in the literature of genes with relatively strong data on associations of genetic polymorphisms with antihypertensive response; the data on ADRB1, CACNB2, and NEDD4L are detailed as examples. Substantial additional data in hypertension pharmacogenomics are expected to be forthcoming from recently completed genome-wide association studies. Increased collaboration among research groups will help insure successful discoveries from these large-scale studies. The next decade should clearly define the potential clinical implications of the research in hypertension pharmacogenomics that is currently in progress.
