Beta-3 adrenergic receptor; Beta-adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine-induced activation of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins. Beta- 3 is involved in the regulation of lipolysis and thermogenesis.
The dysregulation of energy homeostasis in obesity involves multihormone resistance. Although leptin and insulin resistance have been well characterized, catecholamine resistance remains largely unexplored. Murine beta3-adrenergic receptor expression in adipocytes is orders of magnitude higher compared with that of other isoforms. While resistant to classical desensitization pathways, its mRNA (Adrb3) and protein expression are dramatically downregulated after ligand exposure (homologous desensitization). beta3-Adrenergic receptor downregulation also occurs after high-fat diet feeding, concurrent with catecholamine resistance and elevated inflammation. This downregulation is recapitulated in vitro by TNF-alpha treatment (heterologous desensitization). Both homologous and heterologous desensitization of Adrb3 were triggered by induction of the pseudokinase TRIB1 downstream of the EPAC/RAP2A/PI-PLC pathway. TRIB1 in turn degraded the primary transcriptional activator of Adrb3, CEBPalpha. EPAC/RAP inhibition enhanced catecholamine-stimulated lipolysis and energy expenditure in obese mice. Moreover, adipose tissue expression of genes in this pathway correlated with body weight extremes in a cohort of genetically diverse mice and with BMI in 2 independent cohorts of humans. These data implicate a signaling axis that may explain reduced hormone-stimulated lipolysis in obesity and resistance to therapeutic interventions with beta3-adrenergic receptor agonists.
Stimulation of brown adipose tissue (BAT) thermogenesis in humans has emerged as an attractive target to improve metabolic health. Pharmacological stimulations targeting the beta(3)-adrenergic receptor (beta(3)-AR), the adrenergic receptor believed to mediate BAT thermogenesis, have historically performed poorly in human clinical trials. Here we report that, in contrast to rodents, human BAT thermogenesis is not mediated by the stimulation of beta(3)-AR. Oral administration of the beta(3)-AR agonist mirabegron only elicited increases in BAT thermogenesis when ingested at the maximal allowable dose. This led to off-target binding to beta(1)-AR and beta(2)-AR, thereby increasing cardiovascular responses and white adipose tissue lipolysis, respectively. ADRB2 was co-expressed with UCP1 in human brown adipocytes. Pharmacological stimulation and inhibition of the beta(2)-AR as well as knockdown of ADRB1, ADRB2, or ADRB3 in human brown adipocytes all confirmed that BAT lipolysis and thermogenesis occur through beta(2)-AR signaling in humans (ClinicalTrials.govNCT02811289).
BACKGROUND: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) has become a standard treatment strategy for breast cancer (BC). However, owing to the high heterogeneity of these tumors, it is unclear which patient population most likely benefit from NAC. Multi-omics offer an improved approach to uncovering genomic and transcriptomic changes before and after NAC in BC and to identifying molecular features associated with NAC sensitivity. METHODS: We performed whole-exome and RNA sequencing on 233 samples (including matched pre- and post-treatment tumors) from 50 BC patients with rigorously defined responses to NAC and analyzed changes in the multi-omics landscape. Molecular features associated with NAC response were identified and validated in a larger internal, and two external validation cohorts, as well as in vitro experiments. RESULTS: The most frequently altered genes were TP53, TTN, and MUC16 in both pre- and post-treatment tumors. In comparison with pre-treatment tumors, there was a significant decrease in C > A transversion mutations in post-treatment tumors (P = 0.020). NAC significantly decreased the mutation rate (P = 0.006) of the DNA repair pathway and gene expression levels (FDR = 0.007) in this pathway. NAC also significantly changed the expression level of immune checkpoint genes and the abundance of tumor-infiltrating immune and stroma cells, including B cells, activated dendritic cells, gammadeltaT cells, M2 macrophages and endothelial cells. Furthermore, there was a higher rate of C > T substitutions in NAC nonresponsive tumors than responsive ones, especially when the substitution site was flanked by C and G. Importantly, there was a unique amplified region at 8p11.23 (containing ADGRA2 and ADRB3) and a deleted region at 3p13 (harboring FOXP1) in NAC nonresponsive and responsive tumors, respectively. Particularly, the CDKAL1 missense variant P409L (p.Pro409Leu, c.1226C > T) decreased BC cell sensitivity to docetaxel, and ADGRA2 or ADRB3 gene amplifications were associated with worse NAC response and poor prognosis in BC patients. CONCLUSIONS: Our study has revealed genomic and transcriptomic landscape changes following NAC in BC, and identified novel biomarkers (CDKAL1(P409L), ADGRA2 and ADRB3) underlying chemotherapy resistance and poor prognosis, which could guide the development of personalized treatments for BC.
Whether the Adrenoceptor Beta 3 (ADRB3) gene rs4994 polymorphism could affect the individual risk of childhood and adolescent overweight/obesity remains controversial. This meta-analysis was performed to estimate the prevalence of this polymorphism in overweight/obesity, and test the potential association by summarizing existing evidence. Comprehensive literature search in PubMed, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, Wanfang, and CNKI databases was performed to identify eligible data sets. Finally, 16 studies involving 5,147 overweight/obese cases and 7,350 non-obese controls were included for further synthetic analyses. Odds ratio (OR) and its corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were statistically calculated. Totally, 69.9% of the included subjects came from East Asia. In the meta-analysis for overall population, statistically significant associations with increased risk of childhood and adolescent overweight/obesity were identified in allele model (OR 1.23, 95% CI 1.10-1.38), heterozygote model (OR 1.39, 95% CI 1.16-1.68), and dominant model (OR 1.31, 95% CI 1.12-1.54). Further stratified analysis according to geographical regions revealed that the statistical significance could only be detected in the East Asia subgroup in allele model, homozygote model, heterozygote model, and dominant model. In summary, our meta-analysis indicated that the ADRB3 rs4994 polymorphism could significantly increase the risk of childhood and adolescent overweight/obesity, especially for the East Asia's population.
AIMS: beta3-Adrenergic receptor (beta3-AR) is essential for cardiovascular homoeostasis through regulating adipose tissue function. Perivascular adipose tissue (PVAT) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of aortic dissection and aneurysm (AD/AA). Here, we aim to investigate beta3-AR activation-mediated PVAT function in AD/AA. METHODS AND RESULTS: Aortas from patients with thoracic aortic dissection (TAD) were collected to detect beta3-AR expression in PVAT. ApoE-/- and beta-aminopropionitrile monofumarate (BAPN)-treated C57BL/6 mice were induced with Angiotensin II (AngII) to simulate AD/AA and subsequently received either placebo or mirabegron, a beta3-AR agonist. The results demonstrated an up-regulation of beta3-AR in PVAT of TAD patients and AD/AA mice. Moreover, activation of beta3-AR by mirabegron significantly prevented AngII-induced AD/AA formation in mice. RNA-sequencing analysis of adipocytes from PVAT revealed a notable increase of the lymphangiogenic factor, vascular endothelial growth factor C (VEGF-C), in mirabegron-treated mice. Consistently, enhanced lymphangiogenesis was found in PVAT with mirabegron treatment. Mechanistically, the number of CD4+/CD8+ T cells and CD11c+ cells was reduced in PVAT but increased in adjacent draining lymph nodes of mirabegron-treated mice, indicating the improved draining and clearance of inflammatory cells in PVAT by lymphangiogenesis. Importantly, adipocyte-specific VEGF-C knockdown by the adeno-associated virus system restrained lymphangiogenesis and exacerbated inflammatory cell infiltration in PVAT, which ultimately abolished the protection of mirabegron on AD/AA. In addition, the conditional medium derived from mirabegron-treated adipocytes activated the proliferation and tube formation of LECs, which was abrogated by the silencing of VEGF-C in adipocytes. CONCLUSION: Our findings illustrated the therapeutic potential of beta3-AR activation by mirabegron on AD/AA, which promoted lymphangiogenesis by increasing adipocyte-derived VEGF-C and, therefore, ameliorated PVAT inflammation.
Nitric oxide (NO) signalling has pleiotropic roles in biology and a crucial function in cardiovascular homeostasis. Tremendous knowledge has been accumulated on the mechanisms of the nitric oxide synthase (NOS)-NO pathway, but how this highly reactive, free radical gas signals to specific targets for precise regulation of cardiovascular function remains the focus of much intense research. In this Review, we summarize the updated paradigms on NOS regulation, NO interaction with reactive oxidant species in specific subcellular compartments, and downstream effects of NO in target cardiovascular tissues, while emphasizing the latest developments of molecular tools and biomarkers to modulate and monitor NO production and bioavailability.
OBJECTIVES: Activation of beta3-adrenoceptor (ADRB3) is essential in the process of human adipose tissue browning, but obese subjects suffered from reduced ability of brown adipose tissue activation. The present study aims to detect the adipocyte ADRB3 expression in overweight individuals and the relationship between adipocyte ADRB3 expression and adiposity in adults. METHODS: Visceral adipose tissue samples were obtained from 85 subjects who underwent abdominal surgery. ADRB3 mRNA and protein expression levels in mature adipocytes and adipose tissue stromal vascular cells were examined by quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot assay, respectively. UCP-1mRNA expression levels in mature adipocytes were examined by quantitative real-time PCR. RESULTS: The data revealed that ADRB3 mRNA (p = 0.021) and protein (p = 0.025) expression levels in mature adipocytes were significantly higher in the normal-weight than in the overweight group. Similar results were also found for ADRB3 mRNA (p = 0.041) and protein (p = 0.025) expressions of stromal vascular cells. An inverse correlation was verified between mature adipocyte ADRB3 mRNA expression and BMI (r = -0.362, p = 0.012). UCP-1 mRNA expression levels in mature adipocytes were higher in the normal-weight group compared with the overweight group (p = 0.045). CONCLUSION: Adipocyte ADRB3 expression levels were down-regulated before the onset of obesity, which indicated that the reduction of ADRB3 expression might be the cause of compromised adipose tissue browning and obesity rather than the result. Thus, the interference of the ADRB3 pathway in adipocytes may provide a potential treatment target for obesity.
Thermogenic brown adipose tissue (BAT) has emerged as an attractive target for combating obesity. However, pharmacological activation of energy expenditure by BAT and/or induction of browning of white adipose tissue (WAT) has been hampered by cardiovascular side effects. To address these concerns, we developed polylactide-co-glycolide acid (PLGA) microspheres loaded with mirabegron (MIR), a selective beta-3 adrenergic receptor (ADRB3) agonist, to achieve sustained local induction and activation of thermogenic adipocytes. MIR-loaded PLGA microspheres (MIR-MS) effectively activated brown adipocytes and enhanced the thermogenic program in white adipocytes. Moreover, treating isolated inguinal WAT (iWAT) with MIR-MS resulted in increased expression of browning markers and elevated lipolysis mainly via ADRB3. In mice, injection of MIR-MS over four weeks induced browning of iWAT at the injection site. Importantly, local MIR-MS injection successfully mitigated unwanted cardiovascular risks, including high systolic blood pressure (SBP) and heart rate, as compared to MIR-treated mice. Finally, injecting MIR-MS into human subcutaneous WAT led to a significant induction of lipolysis and an increase in the expression of thermogenic marker uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1). Taken together, our findings indicate that MIR-MS function as a local drug release system that induces browning of human and murine subcutaneous WAT while mitigating undesirable cardiovascular effects.
The management of premature birth still remains unsatisfactory. Since the relative lack of efficiency and/or safety of current tocolytic agents have been highlighted, it is necessary to develop new uterorelaxant drugs deprived of important maternal and foetal side effects. Our work reported in this review focuses on a potential new target for tocolytic drugs, the beta3-adrenoceptor (ADRB3). This third type of ADRB is shown to be present and functional in human myometrium. We demonstrated that ADRB3 agonists are able to inhibit in-vitro spontaneous contractions of myometrial strips, via a cyclic AMP-mediated pathway. Furthermore, we established that ADRB3 is the predominant subtype over the ADRB2 in human myometrium and that its expression is increased in near-term myometrium, compared to non-pregnant myometrium. Finally, we reported that contrary to ADRB2, the human myometrial ADRB3 is resistant to long-term agonist-induced desensitisation. These compelling data confirm the clinical potential interest of ADRB3 agonists in the pharmacological management of preterm labour.
Obesity is a chronic metabolic disease, affecting individuals throughout the world. Bariatric surgery such as vertical sleeve gastrectomy (VSG) provides sustained weight loss and improves glucose homeostasis in obese mice and humans. However, the precise underlying mechanisms remain elusive. In this study, we investigated the potential roles and the mechanisms of action of gut metabolites in VSG-induced anti-obesity effect and metabolic improvement. Methods: High-fat diet (HFD)-fed C57BL/6J mice were subjected to VSG. Energy dissipation in mice was monitored using metabolic cage experiments. The effects of VSG on gut microbiota and metabolites were determined by 16S rRNA sequencing and metabolomics, respectively. The metabolic beneficial effects of the identified gut metabolites were examined in mice by both oral administration and fat pad injection of the metabolites. Results: VSG in mice greatly increased thermogenic gene expression in beige fat, which was correlated with increased energy expenditure. VSG reshaped gut microbiota composition, resulting in elevated levels of gut metabolites including licoricidin. Licoricidin treatment promoted thermogenic gene expression in beige fat by activating the Adrb3-cAMP-PKA signaling pathway, leading to reduced body weight gain in HFD-fed mice. Conclusions: We identify licoricidin, which mediates the crosstalk between gut and adipose tissue in mice, as a VSG-provoked anti-obesity metabolite. Identification of anti-obesity small molecules should provide new insights into treatment options for obesity and its associated metabolic diseases.
Metastatic tumors are mainly composed of neoplastic cells escaping from the primary tumor and inflammatory cells egressing from bone marrow. Cancer cell and inflammatory cell are remained in the state of immaturity during migration to distant organs. Here, we show that ADRB3 is crucial in cell mobilization and differentiation. Immunohistochemistry revealed ADRB3 expression is significantly more frequent in breast cancer tissues than in adjacent noncancerous tissues (92.1% vs. 31.5%). Expression of ADRB3 correlated with malignant degree, TNM stage and poor prognosis. Moreover, ADRB3 expression was markedly high in activated disseminated tumor cells, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), lymphocytes and neutrophil extracellular traps of patients. Importantly, ADRB3 promoted the expansion of MDSC through stimulation of bone marrow mobilization and inhibiting of the differentiation of immature myeloid cells. Furthermore, ADRB3 promoted MCF-7 cells proliferation and inhibited transdifferentiation into adipocyte-like cell by activating mTOR pathway. Ultimately, the MDSC-deficient phenotype of ADRB3 (-/-) PyMT mice was associated with impairment of mammary tumorigenesis and reduction in pulmonary metastasis. Collectively, ADRB3 promotes metastasis by inducing mobilization and inhibiting differentiation of both breast cancer cells and MDSCs.
BACKGROUND: The beta(3) -adrenergic receptor (ADRB3) is very important in the regulation of the human detrusor muscle function. The well-known tryptophan64arginine polymorphism of the ADRB3 gene alters the response of the receptor to various stimuli, including adrenalin and noradrenalin, and may increase the susceptibility to develop overactive bladder (OAB). Therefore, this study was performed to determine whether ADRB3 Trp64Arg polymorphism is associated with the pathophysiology of OAB syndrome. METHODS: The study group (n = 150) consists of 72 patients with OAB and 78 controls without OAB. Venous blood samples were taken from all participants to analyze the ADRB3 gene Trp64Arg polymorphism using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) assay. We compared the distribution of Trp64Arg polymorphism and symptom severity in both OAB and non-OAB subjects using chi(2) test and Mann-Whitney's U test, respectively. RESULTS: The frequency of the 64Arg variant (heterozygous plus homozygous) in OAB and non-OAB subjects was 15.3% and 14.1%, respectively. There was no statistically significant difference between the OAB and non-OAB groups in regard to the distribution frequency of ADRB3 Trp64Arg polymorphism. The total frequency (OAB + non-OAB, 76 women and 74 men) of the Arg64 variant allele was 5.9% and 10.8% in women and in men, respectively. Although the frequency of the Arg64 variant was nearly twofold higher in men compared to women, the difference was not statistically significant. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrated that the ADRB3 Trp64Arg polymorphism is not significantly associated with OAB syndrome in a sample of Turkish OAB patients.
The beta-3 adrenergic receptor (beta(3)-AR) is by far the least studied isotype of the beta-adrenergic sub-family. Despite its study being long hampered by the lack of suitable animal and cellular models and inter-species differences, a substantial body of literature on the subject has built up in the last three decades and the physiology of beta(3)-AR is unraveling quickly. As will become evident in this work, beta(3)-AR is emerging as an appealing target for novel pharmacological approaches in several clinical areas involving metabolic, cardiovascular, urinary, and ocular disease. In this review, we will discuss the most recent advances regarding beta(3)-AR signaling and function and summarize how these findings translate, or may do so, into current clinical practice highlighting beta(3)-AR's great potential as a novel therapeutic target in a wide range of human conditions.
BACKGROUND: Recently, some studies claim that adipokines may modulate plasma lipids. More interestingly, the ADRB3 Trp64Arg polymorphism may regulate adipokines and play an essential role in lipids metabolism. This study aims to clarify the associations of ADRB3 Trp64Arg polymorphism with plasma adipokines and lipid levels. METHODS: Twenty-two studies (5527 subjects) and 121 studies (54,059 subjects) were respectively identified for the association analyses of adipokines and lipids. Standardized mean difference (SMD) and 95% confidence interval (CI) were used to estimate the strength of the Trp64Arg variant in adipokines and plasma lipids. All results were recalculated after eliminating the studies with heterogeneity. RESULTS: The carriers of the C allele (Arg at 64th position was encoded by the C allele) had higher levels of leptin and lower levels of adiponectin than the non-carriers. The carriers of the C allele had higher levels of triglycerides (TG), total cholesterol (TC), and lower levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) than the non-carriers. Subgroup analysis certified an ethnicity (Asians), disease status (obesity), and gender (females) specific association. Sensitivity analysis indicated that the analysis results were robust and stable. Meta-regression indicated that obesity was related to adiponectin. CONCLUSIONS: The C allele carriers of Trp64Arg polymorphism had a slight but significant influence on lipid levels, and the remarkable effects specific existed in obese Asian women. The associations of Trp64Arg polymorphism with dyslipidemia may partly be mediated by the effect of this polymorphism on adipokines. The association of Trp64Arg polymorphism with obesity may partly be mediated by the effect of this polymorphism on adipokines. The C allele carriers had abnormal levels of adipokines and lipids, and it indicated that the Trp64Arg polymorphism might represent a genetic risk factor for coronary artery disease (CAD).
Infantile hemangiomas (IH) are frequent (4-5% of the childhood population) benign vascular tumors that involve accumulation, proliferation, and differentiation of aberrant vascular cells. Typically, IH are innocuous and spontaneously disappear, but they represent a potential risk for harmful effects in the body (e.g., permanent disfigurement) and health (e.g., ulcerations) in some patients. From a serendipitous discovery, the nonselective beta-adrenoceptor blocker propranolol (which blocks beta1-adrenoceptors, beta2-adrenoceptors, and beta3-adrenoceptors) emerged as an alternative therapy to treat this pathology and it quickly became a first-line treatment for IH. Nevertheless, its specific mechanisms of action remain thus far unknown. In this respect, several studies have suggested that beta1-adrenoceptors and beta2-adrenoceptors play a role in proliferative and angiogenic mechanisms. However, current basic research studies suggest that beta3-adrenoceptors could be also involved. Notably, beta3-adrenoceptors stimulate multiple intracellular pathways related to vascular function (e.g., blood flow, angiogenesis, etc.). This review compiles some lines of evidence suggesting that beta3-adrenoceptors may: (1) play a role in the pathophysiology of IH and (2) represent a potential therapeutic target for IH treatment. Hence, clinical evidence is mandatory to decide whether incorporation of beta3-adrenoceptor blockers into the therapeutic armamentarium may increase effectiveness in the treatment of IH and other vascular anomalies.
BACKGROUND: The beta-3 adrenergic receptor gene (ADRB3) is part of the adrenergic system, which is known to play a key role in energy metabolism. The association between the Trp64Arg variant in the ADRB3 and body mass index (BMI) has been widely examined, but previous studies have been small and results have been inconsistent. METHODS: We assessed the association between the ADRB3 Trp64Arg variant and BMI in a large UK population-based cohort of 4854 middle-aged men and women. We also performed a meta-analysis of 97 studies, involving 44 833 individuals, to place our findings in context. RESULTS: Although we found no significant difference in BMI (0.20 kg/m(2), P=0.40) between the Trp64Trp homozygotes and Arg64 allele carriers in our UK population-based cohort, the meta-analysis showed significant association between the Arg64Trp variant and BMI, with Arg64-allele carriers having a 0.24 kg/m(2) (P=0.0002) higher BMI compared with noncarriers. However, we also found substantial heterogeneity among the studies (P=2.2 x 10(-14)). The difference in East Asians (0.31 kg/m(2), P=0.001) was 3.9 times larger than that in Europeans in whom no significant association was observed (0.08 kg/m(2), P=0.36). This was consistent with the chronological cumulative decrease in the effect size, which decreased steadily in Europeans and reached nonsignificance after 11 studies in 1996. In East Asians, the cumulative effect size decreased after the first reports, but reached a steady state at a significant effect size of 0.24 kg/m(2) in 2000. Although the funnel plot indicated no apparent publication bias, smaller studies tended to report greater differences in BMI, compared with larger studies. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data suggest that the Trp64Arg ADRB3 genetic variant might be associated with BMI in East Asians, but not Europeans. More generally, our study shows the importance of meta-analyses in the field of genetic association studies for common traits. Each genetic variant makes only a small contribution to variation in BMI, and large sample sizes are needed to reliably assess and interpret gene-phenotype associations.
Fibromyalgia (FM) is a chronic pain syndrome that affects the central nervous system and generates disability, which is characterized by generalized pain, fatigue, and functional decline. In this review, we aimed to identify the polymorphisms related to the pathophysiology of FM and the clinical characteristics generated by genetic influence. Only original studies with genes related to FM were considered, totaling 27 articles. The genes found were: MTHFR, RGS4, MYT1L, TACR1, SCN9A, DRD3, ADRB2, IL-4, HLA-DRB1, EDN1, CNR1, TAAR1, OPRM1, ADRA1A, ADRB3, BDNF, GRIA4, HTR3A, HTR3B, HTR2A, SERPINA 1 or A1AT, NRXN3, GCH1, MEFV, TRPV3, SLC6A4, ACE I/D, TSPO, COMT, and MAOA. Several genes related to different pain syndromes and altered pain thresholds have been identified and some polymorphisms were related to susceptibility to FM. It was observed that 73.33% of the genes related to FM were also associated with some psychological disorders, such as anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, and obsessive and compulsive disorder, and 40.00% with pain sensitivity and/or migraine, besides other disorders associated (drug addiction, autoimmune disorders, circulatory problems, and metabolic alterations). This review demonstrated an association of FM and genetic polymorphisms that can expand our knowledge about the pathophysiology of this disease.
BACKGROUND: Defects in DNA methylation have been shown to be associated with metabolic diseases such as obesity, dyslipidemia, and hypercholesterolemia. To analyze the methylation profile of the ADRB3 gene and correlate it with lipid profile, lipid intake, and oxidative stress based on malondialdehyde (MDA) and total antioxidant capacity (TAC), homocysteine and folic acid levels, nutritional status, lifestyle, and socioeconomic variables in an adult population. A cross-sectional epidemiological study representative of the East and West regions of the municipality of Joao Pessoa, Paraiba state, Brazil, enrolled 265 adults of both genders. Demographic, lifestyle, and socioeconomic questionnaires and a 24-h recall questionnaire were applied by trained interviewers' home. Nutritional and biochemical evaluation (DNA methylation, lipid profile, MDA, TAC, homocysteine and folic acid levels) was performed. RESULTS: DNA hypermethylation of the ADRB3 gene, analyzed in leukocytes, was present in 50% of subjects and was associated with a higher risk of being overweight (OR 3.28; p = 0.008) or obese (OR 3.06; p = 0.017), a higher waist-hip ratio in males (OR 1.17; p = 0.000), greater intake of trans fats (OR 1.94; p = 0.032), higher LDL (OR 2.64; p = 0.003) and triglycerides (OR 1.81; p = 0.031), and higher folic acid levels (OR 1.85; p = 0.022). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that epigenetic changes in the ADRB3 gene locus may explain the development of obesity and non-communicable diseases associated with trans-fat intake, altered lipid profile, and elevated folic acid. Because of its persistence, DNA methylation may have an impact in adults, in association with the development of non-communicable diseases. This study is the first population-based study of the ADRB3 gene, and the data further support evaluation of ADRB3 DNA methylation as an effective biomarker.
The sympathetic nervous system has been evolutionary selected to respond to stress and activates haematopoietic stem cells via noradrenergic signals. However, the pathways preserving haematopoietic stem cell quiescence and maintenance under proliferative stress remain largely unknown. Here we found that cholinergic signals preserve haematopoietic stem cell quiescence in bone-associated (endosteal) bone marrow niches. Bone marrow cholinergic neural signals increase during stress haematopoiesis and are amplified through cholinergic osteoprogenitors. Lack of cholinergic innervation impairs balanced responses to chemotherapy or irradiation and reduces haematopoietic stem cell quiescence and self-renewal. Cholinergic signals activate alpha7 nicotinic receptor in bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells leading to increased CXCL12 expression and haematopoietic stem cell quiescence. Consequently, nicotine exposure increases endosteal haematopoietic stem cell quiescence in vivo and impairs hematopoietic regeneration after haematopoietic stem cell transplantation in mice. In humans, smoking history is associated with delayed normalisation of platelet counts after allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. These results suggest that cholinergic signals preserve stem cell quiescence under proliferative stress.
While brown adipose tissue (BAT) is activated by the beta-3-adrenergic receptor (ADRB3) in rodents, in human brown adipocytes, the ADRB2 is dominantly present and responsible for noradrenergic activation. Therefore, we performed a randomized double-blinded crossover trial in young lean men to compare the effects of single intravenous bolus of the ADRB2 agonist salbutamol without and with the ADRB1/2 antagonist propranolol on glucose uptake by BAT, assessed by dynamic 2-[(18)F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan (i.e., primary outcome). Salbutamol, compared with salbutamol with propranolol, increases glucose uptake by BAT, without affecting the glucose uptake by skeletal muscle and white adipose tissue. The salbutamol-induced glucose uptake by BAT positively associates with the increase in energy expenditure. Notably, participants with high salbutamol-induced glucose uptake by BAT have lower body fat mass, waist-hip ratio, and serum LDL-cholesterol concentration. In conclusion, specific ADRB2 agonism activates human BAT, which warrants investigation of ADRB2 activation in long-term studies (EudraCT: 2020-004059-34).
