Type-1 angiotensin II receptor; Receptor for angiotensin II. Mediates its action by association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol- calcium second messenger system.
The loss of dopamine (DA) neurons within the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) is a defining pathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease (PD). Nevertheless, the molecular features associated with DA neuron vulnerability have not yet been fully identified. Here, we developed a protocol to enrich and transcriptionally profile DA neurons from patients with PD and matched controls, sampling a total of 387,483 nuclei, including 22,048 DA neuron profiles. We identified ten populations and spatially localized each within the SNpc using Slide-seq. A single subtype, marked by the expression of the gene AGTR1 and spatially confined to the ventral tier of SNpc, was highly susceptible to loss in PD and showed the strongest upregulation of targets of TP53 and NR2F2, nominating molecular processes associated with degeneration. This same vulnerable population was specifically enriched for the heritable risk associated with PD, highlighting the importance of cell-intrinsic processes in determining the differential vulnerability of DA neurons to PD-associated degeneration.
BACKGROUND: Endometriosis (EM) is a common gynecological disorder that often leads to irregular menstruation and infertility. The pathogenesis of EM remains unclear and delays in diagnosis are common. Thus, it is urgent to explore potential biomarkers and underlying molecular mechanisms for EM diagnosis and therapies. METHODS: Three EM-related datasets (GSE11691, GSE25628, and GSE86534) were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) which were integrated into a combined dataset after removing batch effect. Differentially expressed immune cell-related genes were obtained by CIBERSORT, WGCNA, and the identification of differentially expressed genes. Random forest model (RF), support vector machine model (SVM), and generalized linear model (GLM) were then constructed and the biomarkers for EM were determined. A nomogram evaluating the risk of disease was constructed and the validity was assessed by the calibration curve, DCA curve, and clinical impact curve. Single-gene Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)was performed to explore the molecular mechanisms of biomarkers. The ceRNA regulatory network of biomarkers was created by Cytoscape and potential target drugs were obtained in the DGIdb database (Drug-Gene Interaction database).The expression levels of biomarkers from clinical samples was quantified by RT-qPCR. RESULTS: The ratio of eight immune cells was significantly different between the eutopic and ectopic endometrium samples. A total of eight differentially expressed immune cell-related genes were investigated. The SVM model was a relatively suitable model for the prediction of EM and five genes (CXCL12, PDGFRL, AGTR1, PTGER3, and S1PR1) were selected from the model as biomarkers. The calibration curve, DCA curve, and clinical impact curve indicated that the nomogram based on the five biomarkers had a robust ability to predict disease. Single gene GSEA result suggested that all five biomarkers were involved in labyrinthine layer morphogenesis and transmembrane transport-related biological processes in EM. A ceRNA regulatory network containing 184 nodes and 251 edges was constructed. Seven drugs targeting CXCL12, 49 drugs targeting AGTR1, 16 drugs targeting PTGER3, and 21 drugs targeting S1PR1 were extracted as potential drugs for EM therapy. Finally, the expression of PDGFRL and S1PR1 in clinical samples was validated by RT-qPCR, which was consistent with the result of public database. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we identified five biomarkers (CXCL12, PDGFRL, AGTR1, PTGER3, and S1PR1) and constructed diagnostic model, furthermore predicted the potential therapeutic drugs for EM. Collectively, these findings provide new insights into EM diagnosis and treatment.
The study presents a transcriptomics-based liquid biopsy approach for early recurrence detection in locally advanced gastric cancer (LAGC). Four mRNA biomarkers (AGTR1, DNER, EPHA7, and SUSD5) linked to recurrence are identified through transcriptomic data analysis. A Risk Stratification Assessment (RSA) model combining these biomarkers with clinical features showed superior predictive accuracy for postoperative recurrence, with AUCs of 0.919 and 0.935 in surgical and liquid biopsy validation cohorts, respectively. Functional studies using human gastric cancer cell lines AGS and HGC-27 demonstrated that silencing the identified mRNA panel genes impaired cell migration, invasion, and proliferation. In vivo experiments further showed reduced tumor growth, metastasis, and lymphangiogenesis in mice, possibly mediated by the cAMP signaling pathway. This non-invasive approach offers significant potential for enhancing recurrence detection and enabling personalized treatment strategies, thereby improving patient outcomes in the management of LAGC.
Preeclampsia is one of the most frequent and severe complications of pregnancy. Symptoms of preeclampsia usually occur after 20 weeks of pregnancy and include hypertension and kidney dysfunction with proteinuria. Up to now, delivery of the infant has been the most effective and life-saving treatment to alleviate symptoms of preeclampsia because a causative treatment does not exist, which could prolong a pregnancy complicated with preeclampsia. Preeclampsia is a complex medical condition, which is attributed to a variety of different risk factors and causes. Risk factors account for insufficient placentation and impaired vasculogenesis and finally culminate in this life-threatening condition of pregnancy. Despite progress, many pathomechanisms and causes of preeclampsia are still incompletely understood. In recent years, it was found that excessive protein complex formation between G-protein-coupled receptors is a common sign of preeclampsia. Specifically, the aberrant heteromerization of two vasoactive G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), the angiotensin II AT1 receptor and the bradykinin B2 receptor, is a causative factor of preeclampsia symptoms. Based on this knowledge, inhibition of abnormal GPCR protein complex formation is an experimental treatment approach of preeclampsia. This review summarizes the impact of pathological GPCR protein aggregation on symptoms of preeclampsia and delineates potential new therapeutic targets.
Autosomal Recessive Renal Tubular Dysgenesis (AR-RTD) is a fatal genetic disorder characterized by complete absence or severe depletion of proximal tubules (PT) in patients harboring pathogenic variants in genes involved in the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System. To uncover the pathomechanism of AR-RTD, differentiation of ACE-/- and AGTR1-/- induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and AR-RTD patient-derived iPSCs into kidney organoids is leveraged. Comprehensive marker analyses show that both mutant and control organoids generate indistinguishable PT in vitro under normoxic (21% O2) or hypoxic (2% O2) conditions. Fully differentiated (d24) AGTR1-/- and control organoids transplanted under the kidney capsule of immunodeficient mice engraft and mature well, as do renal vesicle stage (d14) control organoids. By contrast, d14 AGTR1-/- organoids fail to engraft due to insufficient pro-angiogenic VEGF-A expression. Notably, growth under hypoxic conditions induces VEGF-A expression and rescues engraftment of AGTR1-/- organoids at d14, as does ectopic expression of VEGF-A. We propose that PT dysgenesis in AR-RTD is primarily a non-autonomous consequence of delayed angiogenesis, starving PT at a critical time in their development.
OBJECTIVE: Systematic review and meta-analysis to investigate the association between maternal AGTR1 gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and preeclampsia (PE). METHODS: A systematic literature search was performed using PubMed, EMBASE, Scopus, and HuGE Literature Finder databases. The review was conducted according to PRISMA guidelines. Summary odds ratios (ORs) for the allelic and genotypic contrasts were calculated and compared to indicate the most appropriate genetic model for the polymorphism of interest. Among-study heterogeneity was assessed using the I(2) statistic and publication bias was evaluated visually using funnel plots. RESULTS: Seven maternal SNPs investigated with PE were found, but only AGTR1 +1166A>C accumulated sufficient evidence for meta-analysis. Summary ORs calculated from eight studies (10 populations involving 845 PE cases and 1150 controls) did not reveal an association between the +1166A>C polymorphism and PE (allelic OR = 1.19, 95% CI: 0.96-1.47). No evidence of publication bias and among-study heterogeneity was detected. CONCLUSIONS: meta-analysis findings did not support AGTR1 +1166A>C as a susceptibility locus for PE. Other AGTR1 SNPs require more study.
Clinical treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) largely relies on intensive chemotherapy. However, the application of chemotherapy is often hindered by cardiotoxicity. Patient sequence data revealed that angiotensin II receptor type 1 (AGTR1) is a shared target between AML and cardiovascular disease (CVD). We found that inhibiting AGTR1 sensitized AML to chemotherapy and protected the heart against chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity in a human AML cell-transplanted mouse model. These effects were regulated by the AGTR1-Notch1 axis in AML cells and cardiomyocytes from mice. In mouse cardiomyocytes, AGTR1 was hyperactivated by AML and chemotherapy. AML leukemogenesis increased the expression of the angiotensin-converting enzyme and led to increased production of angiotensin II, the ligand of AGTR1, in an MLL-AF9-driven AML mouse model. In this model, the AGTR1-Notch1 axis regulated a variety of genes involved with cell stemness and chemotherapy resistance. AML cell stemness was reduced after Agtr1a deletion in the mouse AML cell transplant model. Mechanistically, Agtr1a deletion decreased gamma-secretase formation, which is required for transmembrane Notch1 cleavage and release of the Notch1 intracellular domain into the nucleus. Using multiomics, we identified AGTR1-Notch1 signaling downstream genes and found decreased binding between these gene sequences with Notch1 and chromatin enhancers, as well as increased binding with silencers. These findings describe an AML/CVD association that may be used to improve AML treatment.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to identify key genes related to copper metabolism in Parkinson's disease (PD), providing insight into their roles in disease progression. METHODS: Using bioinformatic analyses, the study identified hub genes related to copper metabolism in PD patients. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using the limma package, and copper-metabolism-related genes (CMRGs) were sourced from the Genecard database. Immune cell-related genes were derived through immune infiltration and Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA). Hub genes were pinpointed by integrating DEGs, CMRGs, and immune cell-related genes. Functional analyses included Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), and networks for miRNA-mRNA-transcription factor (TF), Competitive Endogenous RNA (ceRNA), and hub gene-drug interactions. Validation was performed in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from PD patients, while in vitro experiments utilized GBE1- overexpressing SH-SY5Y cells to examine cell proliferation, migration, and viability. RESULTS: Nine hub genes (HPRT1, GLS, SNCA, MDH1, GBE1, DDC, STXBP1, ACHE, and AGTR1) were identified from 753 CMRGs, 416 DEGs, and 951 immune cell-related genes. ROC analysis showed high predictive accuracy for PD, and principal component analysis (PCA) effectively distinguished PD patients from controls. IPA identified 20 significant pathways, and various networks highlighted miRNA, TF, and drug interactions with the hub genes. Hub gene expression was validated in PD CSF samples. GBE1-overexpressing cells displayed enhanced proliferation, migration, and viability. CONCLUSIONS: The study identified nine copper metabolism-related genes as potential therapeutic targets in PD, highlighting their relevance in PD pathology and possible treatment pathways.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) belongs to the ErbB-family of receptor tyrosine kinases that are of importance in oncology. During the last years, substantial evidence accumulated for a crucial role of EGFR concerning the action of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) in blood vessels, resulting form AT1R-induced EGFR transactivation. This transactivation occurs through the release of membrane-anchored EGFR-ligands, cytosolic tyrosine kinases, heterocomplex formation or enhanced ligand expression. AT1R-EGFR crosstalk amplifies the signaling response and enhances the biological effects of angiotensin II. Downstream signaling cascades include ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK, PLCgamma and STAT. AT1R-induced EGFR activation contributes to vascular remodeling and hypertrophy via e.g. smooth muscle cell proliferation, migration and extracellular matrix production. EGFR transactivation results in increased vessel wall thickness and reduced vascular compliance. AT1R and EGFR signaling pathways are also implicated the induction of vascular inflammation. Again, EGFR transactivation exacerbates the effects, leading to endothelial dysfunction that contributes to vascular inflammation, dysfunction and remodeling. Dysregulation of the AT1R-EGFR axis has been implicated in the pathogenesis of various cardiovascular diseases and inhibition or prevention of EGFR signaling can attenuate part of the detrimental impact of enhanced renin-angiotensin-system (RAAS) activity, highlighting the importance of EGFR for the adverse consequences of AT1R activation. In summary, EGFR plays a critical role in vascular AT1R action, enhancing signaling, promoting remodeling, contributing to inflammation, and participating in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. Understanding the interplay between AT1R and EGFR will foster the development of effective therapeutic strategies of RAAS-induced disorders.
The AT(1) receptor, a major effector of the renin-angiotensin system, has been extensively studied in the context of cardiovascular and renal disease. Moreover, angiotensin receptor blockers, sartans, are among the most frequently prescribed drugs for the treatment of hypertension, chronic heart failure and chronic kidney disease. However, precise molecular insights into the structure of this important drug target have not been available until recently. In this context, seminal studies have now revealed exciting new insights into the structure and biased signaling of the receptor and may thus foster the development of novel therapeutic approaches to enhance the efficacy of pharmacological angiotensin receptor antagonism or to enable therapeutic induction of biased receptor activity. In this review, we will therefore highlight these and other seminal publications to summarize the current understanding of the tertiary structure, ligand binding properties and downstream signal transduction of the AT(1) receptor.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding single-stranded RNAs, which play significant roles in the regulation of a myriad of biological processes. Overwhelmingly increasing high-impact research has also deepened our understanding about the central role of miRNAs in cancer development, metastatic spread, and development of resistance against various drugs. Recent studies have identified miRNAs that regulate RNA expression/processing and posttranscriptional expression of important oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Rapidly emerging experimentally verified data have started to shed light on the significance of miRNAs as biomarkers for diagnostic, prognostic, and monitoring purposes. Next-generation sequencing and DNA microarray technologies have helped us tremendously in the identification of miRNA and mRNA signatures in different cancers and their subtypes on a genome-wide scale. It is being increasing realized that miRNAs have diametrically opposite roles in different cancers. miR-410 is context-dependently involved in positive and negative regulation of cancers. miR-410 negatively regulates BAK1, CETN3, and BRD7 to promote cancer. However, miR-410 effectively targetes c-MET, AGTR1, and SNAIL to suppress cancer. In this review, we will comprehensively summarize most recent evidence available related to the "split personality" of miR-410 in different cancers.
Brown adipocytes are potential therapeutic targets for the prevention of obesity-associated metabolic diseases because they consume circulating glucose and fatty acids for heat production. Angiotensin II (Ang II) peptide is involved in the pathogenesis of obesity- and cold-induced hypertension; however, the mechanism underlying the direct effects of Ang II on human brown adipocytes remains unclear. Our transcriptome analysis of chemical compound-induced brown adipocytes (ciBAs) showed that the Ang II type 1 receptor (AGTR1), but not AGTR2 and MAS1 receptors, was expressed. The Ang II/AGTR1 axis downregulated the expression of mitochondrial uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1). The simultaneous treatment with beta-adrenergic receptor agonists and Ang II attenuated UCP1 expression, triglyceride lipolysis, and cAMP levels, although cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation was enhanced by Ang II mainly through the protein kinase C pathway. Despite reduced lipolysis, both coupled and uncoupled mitochondrial respiration was enhanced in Ang II-treated ciBAs. Instead, glycolysis and glucose uptake were robustly activated upon treatment with Ang II without a comprehensive transcriptional change in glucose metabolic genes. Elevated mitochondrial energy status induced by Ang II was likely associated with UCP1 repression. Our findings suggest that the Ang II/AGTR1 axis participates in mitochondrial thermogenic functions via glycolysis.
The renin angiotensin system (RAS) is a major regulator of blood pressure, fluid, and electrolyte homeostasis. RAS precursor angiotensinogen (Agt) is cleaved into angiotensin I (Ang I) and II (Ang II) by renin and angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), respectively. Major effects of Ang II, the main bioactive peptide of this system, is mediated by G protein coupled receptors, Angiotensin Type 1 (AGTR1, AT1R) and Type 2 (AGTR2, AT2R) receptors. Further, the discovery of additional RAS peptides such as Ang 1-7 generated by the action of another enzyme ACE2 identified novel functions of this complex system. In addition to the systemic RAS, several local RAS exist in organs such as the brain, kidney, pancreas, and adipose tissue. The expression and regulation of various components of RAS in adipose tissue prompted extensive research into the role of adipose RAS in metabolic diseases. Indeed, animal studies have shown that adipose-derived Agt contributes to circulating RAS, kidney, and blood pressure regulation. Further, mice overexpressing Agt have high blood pressure and increased adiposity characterized by inflammation, adipocyte hypertrophy, and insulin resistance, which can be reversed at least in part by RAS inhibition. These findings highlight the importance of this system in energy homeostasis, especially in the context of obesity. This overview article discusses the depot-specific functions of adipose RAS, genetic and pharmacological manipulations of RAS, and its applications to adipogenesis, thermogenesis, and overall energy homeostasis. (c) 2017 American Physiological Society. Compr Physiol 7:1137-1150, 2017.
BACKGROUND: Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a common complication in patients with diabetic mellitus (DM). Growing evidences have demonstrated that the polymorphisms of angiotensin II receptor type 1 (AGTR1) showed significant association with DN onset, but no consensus has been achieved yet. Therefore, we performed this meta-analysis to combine the findings of previous researches for a more comprehensive conclusion. METHODS: Eligible publications were identified through electronic databases. The intensity of the correlation between AGTR1 A1166C polymorphism and DN susceptibility was evaluated through calculating pooled odds ratios (ORs) with their 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs). Heterogeneity among included studies was examined with Q test. When P-value less than .05, significant heterogeneity presented, random-effects model was used to calculate the pooled ORs, otherwise, the fixed-effects model was used. Stratification analyses were also performed based on ethnicity and the type of DM. RESULTS: Seventeen eligible articles were finally included in the present meta-analysis. The analysis results showed that AGTR1 A1166C polymorphism was significantly related to increased risk of DN under CC versus AA (OR = 1.723, 95% CI = 1.123-2.644), CC + AC versus AA (OR = 1.179, 95% CI = 1.004-1.383), CC versus AA + AC (OR = 1.662, 95% CI = 1.112-2.486), and C versus A (OR = 1.208, 95% CI = 1.044-1.397) genetic models. Additionally, a similar result was also found in Asian and T2DM (type 2 diabetic mellitus) groups after subgroup analyses of ethnicity and DM type. CONCLUSION: AGTR1 A1166C polymorphism may increase the susceptibility to DN, especially in Asians and T2DM population.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Obesity represents the primary challenge to improving cardiovascular health, and suppression of resting metabolic rate (RMR) is implicated in the maintenance of obesity. Increasing evidence supports a major role for the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) within the brain in the control of RMR. RECENT FINDINGS: The angiotensin II (ANG) Agtr1a receptor colocalizes with the leptin receptor (Lepr) primarily within cells of the arcuate nucleus (ARC) of the hypothalamus that also express Agouti-related peptide (Agrp). This sub-population of Agtr1a receptors is required for stimulation of thermogenic sympathetic nervous activity and RMR, but not the suppression of food intake or increasing blood pressure, in response to various stimuli including high-fat diet, deoxycorticosterone acetate and salt, and leptin. Agtr1a is localized to a specific subset (SST3) of Agrp neurons within the ARC. SUMMARY: The RAS within the ARC is implicated specifically in RMR control, primarily through Agtr1a localized to the SST3 subset of Agrp neurons. Ongoing research is focused on understanding the unique anatomical projections, neurotransmitter utilization, and signal transduction pathways of Agtr1a within this subset of neurons. Understanding these projections and molecular mechanisms may identify therapeutic targets for RMR and thus obesity, independent of blood pressure and appetite.
BACKGROUND: Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) has made remarkable achievements, but newly identified armored and cold tumors cannot respond to ICB therapy. The high prevalence of concomitant medications has huge impact on immunotherapeutic responses, but the clinical effects on the therapeutic outcome of armored and cold tumors are still unclear. METHODS: In this research, using large-scale transcriptomics datasets, the expression and potential biological functions of angiotensin II receptor 1 (AGTR1), the target of angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB), were investigated. Next, the roles of ARB in tumor cells and tumor microenvironment cells were defined by a series of in vitro and in vivo assays. In addition, the clinical impacts of ARB on ICB therapy were assessed by multicenter cohorts and meta-analysis. RESULTS: AGTR1 was overexpressed in armored and cold tumors and associated with poor response to ICB therapy. ARB, the inhibitor for AGTR1, only suppressed the aggressiveness of tumor cells with high AGTR1 expression, which accounted for a very small proportion. Further analysis revealed that AGTR1 was always highly expressed in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and ARB inhibited type I collagen expression in CAFs by suppressing the RhoA-YAP axis. Moreover, ARB could also drastically reverse the phenotype of armored and cold to soft and hot in vivo, leading to a higher response to ICB therapy. In addition, both our in-house cohorts and meta-analysis further supported the idea that ARB can significantly enhance ICB efficacy. CONCLUSION: Overall, we identify AGTR1 as a novel target in armored and cold tumors and demonstrate the improved therapeutic efficacy of ICB in combination with ARB. These findings could provide novel clinical insight into how to treat patients with refractory armored and cold tumors.
BACKGROUND: Somatic gene mutations that facilitate inappropriate intracellular calcium entrance have been identified in most aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs). Studies suggest that angiotensin II and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) augment aldosterone production from APAs. Little is known, however, regarding possible variations in response to hormonal stimuli between APAs with different aldosterone-driver mutations. OBJECTIVE: To analyze the transcript expression of type 1 angiotensin II receptors (AGTR1), ACTH receptors (MC2R), and melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein (MRAP) in APAs with known aldosterone-driver somatic mutations. METHODS: RNA was isolated from APAs with mutations in: KCNJ5 (n = 14), ATP1A1 (n = 14), CACNA1D (n = 14), and ATP2B3 (n = 5), and from normal adjacent adrenal tissue (n = 45). Transcript expression of MC2R, MRAP, AGTR1, aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2), 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1), and 11beta-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) were quantified using quantitative RT-PCR and normalized to beta-actin. RESULTS: Compared to adjacent normal adrenal tissue, APAs had higher transcript levels of CYP11B2 (2,216.4 [1,112.0, 2,813.5]-fold, p < 0.001), MC2R (2.88 [2.00, 4.52]-fold, p < 0.001), and AGTR1 (1.80 [1.02, 2.80]-fold, p < 0.001]), and lower transcript levels of MRAP, CYP17A1, and CYP11B1 (0.28-0.36, p < 0.001 for all). MC2R and CYP11B2 transcripts were lower in APAs with KCNJ5 vs. other mutations (p < 0.01 for both). MC2R expression correlated positively with that of AGTR1 in APAs harboring KCNJ5 and CACNA1D mutations, and with MRAP expression in APAs harboring ATPase mutations. CONCLUSIONS: While MC2R and AGTR1 are expressed in all APAs, differences were observed based on the underlying aldosterone-driver somatic mutations. In tandem, our findings suggest that APAs with ATPase-mutations are more responsive to ACTH than KCNJ5-mutated APAs.
AIM: The aim of this study is to discuss the reliable scientific evidence of an interactive link between hypertension and hypercholesterolemia considering the metabolic pathways and the pathogenetic mechanisms connecting the two risk factors. DATA SYNTHESIS: Hypertension and hypercholesterolemia are highly prevalent in the general population and their coexistence in the same subjects additively increases the risk of cardiovascular disease. Probably, hypercholesterolemia is also a risk factor for the development of hypertension. On the other side, it is also possible that lipid-lowering treatment could improve blood pressure control. Although the mechanisms of interaction between these two risk factors have not been completely elucidated thus far, there is rapidly growing evidence that the involvement of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) can be considered as the common link between hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. In particular, hypercholesterolemia seems to promote the upregulation of type 1 angiotensin II (AT1) receptor genes because of an increase in the stability of mRNA followed by structural overexpression of vascular AT1 receptors for angiotensin II. The treatment of both risk factors greatly improves individual risk profile, especially when statins and RAS blockers are used together. CONCLUSIONS: Hypertension and hypercholesterolemia are highly coprevalent and strongly related from a pathophysiological point of view. The RAS could be the main mediator of this link.
[Figure: see text].
Evidence has arisen in recent years suggesting that a tissue renin-angiotensin system (tRAS) is involved in the progression of various human diseases. This system contains two regulatory pathways: a pathological pro-inflammatory pathway containing the Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE)/Angiotensin II (AngII)/Angiotensin II receptor type 1 (AGTR1) axis and a protective anti-inflammatory pathway involving the Angiotensin II receptor type 2 (AGTR2)/ACE2/Ang1-7/MasReceptor axis. Numerous studies reported the positive effects of pathologic tRAS pathway inhibition and protective tRAS pathway stimulation on the treatment of cardiovascular, inflammatory, and autoimmune disease and the progression of neuropathic pain. Cell senescence and aging are known to be related to RAS pathways. Further, this system directly interacts with SARS-CoV 2 and seems to be an important target of interest in the COVID-19 pandemic. This review focuses on the involvement of tRAS in the progression of the mentioned diseases from an interdisciplinary clinical perspective and highlights therapeutic strategies that might be of major clinical importance in the future.
