Alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein chain A; Promotes endocytosis, possesses opsonic properties and influences the mineral phase of bone. Shows affinity for calcium and barium ions; Belongs to the fetuin family.
Multiple sclerosis is a complex autoimmune disease, and several therapies for multiple sclerosis have been developed and widely used. However, existing medications for multiple sclerosis were far from satisfactory due to their failure to suppress relapses and alleviate disease progression. Novel drug targets for multiple sclerosis prevention are still needed. We performed Mendelian randomization to explore potential drug targets for multiple sclerosis using summary statistics from the International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium (nCase = 47 429, nControl = 68 374) and further replicated in UK Biobank (nCase = 1356, nControl = 395 209) and FinnGen cohorts (nCase = 1326, nControl = 359 815). Genetic instruments for 734 plasma and 154 CSF proteins were obtained from recently published genome-wide association studies. The reverse causality detection using bidirectional Mendelian randomization analysis and Steiger filtering, Bayesian co-localization, and phenotype scanning that searched previously reported genetic variant-trait associations were implemented to consolidate the Mendelian randomization findings further. In addition, the protein-protein interaction network was performed to reveal potential associations among proteins and/or present multiple sclerosis medications. At Bonferroni significance (P < 5.63 x 10-5), Mendelian randomization analysis revealed six protein-multiple sclerosis pairs. In plasma, per standard deviation increase in FCRL3, TYMP and AHSG had a protective effect. Odds ratios for the proteins above were 0.83 (95% CI, 0.79-0.89), 0.59 (95% CI, 0.48-0.71) and 0.88 (95% CI, 0.83-0.94), respectively. In CSF, per 10-fold increase in MMEL1 (OR, 5.03; 95% CI, 3.42-7.41) increased the risk of multiple sclerosis, while SLAMF7 (OR, 0.42; 95% CI, 0.29-0.60) and CD5L (OR, 0.30; 95%CI, 0.18-0.52) decreased the risk. None of the six proteins had reverse causality. Bayesian co-localization suggested that FCRL3 [coloc.abf-posterior probability of hypothesis 4 (PPH4) = 0.889], TYMP (coloc.susie-PPH4 = 0.896), AHSG (coloc.abf-PPH4 = 0.957, coloc.susie-PPH4 = 0.973), MMEL1 (coloc.abf-PPH4 = 0.930) and SLAMF7 (coloc.abf-PPH4 = 0.947) shared the same variant with multiple sclerosis. FCRL3, TYMP and SLAMF7 interacted with target proteins of current multiple sclerosis medications. MMEL1 was replicated in both UK Biobank and FinnGen cohorts. Our integrative analysis suggested that genetically determined levels of circulating FCRL3, TYMP, AHSG, CSF MMEL1 and SLAMF7 had causal effects on multiple sclerosis risk. These findings suggested those five proteins might be promising drug targets for multiple sclerosis and warrant further clinical investigation, especially FCRL3 and SLAMF7.
BACKGROUND: Fetuin-A, also called Alpha 2-Heremans Schmid Glycoprotein, is a multifunctional plasma agent what has been proven in animal and human studies. It plays a role as a physiological inhibitor of insulin receptor tyrosine kinase associated with insulin resistance and a negative acute phase reactant. It also regulates bone remodeling and calcium metabolism being an important inhibitor of calcium salt precipitation and vascular calcifications. METHODS: PubMed database was searched for articles from 2002 up to December 2014 to identify the role of fetuin-A in the pathogenesis of selected internal diseases. RESULTS: Due to secretion of fetuin-A mainly by the liver, it may be a marker of liver function and predictor of mortality in patients with cirrhosis and hepatocellular cancer. The associations between high fetuin-A and metabolic syndrome as well as its hepatic manifestation- nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and atherogenic lipid profile have been well proven. However, fetuin-A relation with BMI is not so clear. Contrary to few reports, many authors suggest that fetuin-A may be an independent risk factor for type 2 diabetes and marker of diabetic complications. Close associations of high and low fetuin-A concentrations with cardiovascular diseases and mortality risk have been reported which is explained by differences in analyzed populations, stages of atherosclerosis and calcifications, coexistence of type 2 diabetes or kidney dysfunction and different main pathways of fetuin-A actions in various diseases. CONCLUSIONS: Fetuin-A has a diagnostic potential as a biomarker for liver dysfunction, cardiovascular diseases and disorders associated with metabolic syndrome.
Fetuin-A is the protein product of the AHSG gene in humans. It is mainly synthesized by the liver in adult humans and is secreted into the blood where its concentration can vary from a low of ~0.2 mg/mL to a high of ~0.8 mg/mL. Presently, it is considered to be a multifunctional protein that plays important roles in diabetes, kidney disease, and cancer, as well as in inhibition of ectopic calcification. In this review we have focused on work that has been done regarding its potential role(s) in tumor progression and sequelae of diabetes. Recently a number of laboratories have demonstrated that a subset of tumor cells such as pancreatic, prostate and glioblastoma multiform synthesize ectopic fetuin-A, which drives their progression. Fetuin-A that is synthesized, modified, and secreted by tumor cells may be more relevant in understanding the pathophysiological role of this enigmatic protein in tumors, as opposed to the relatively high serum concentrations of the liver derived protein. Lastly, auto-antibodies to fetuin-A frequently appear in the sera of tumor patients that could be useful as biomarkers for early diagnosis. In diabetes, solid experimental evidence shows that fetuin-A binds the beta-subunit of the insulin receptor to attenuate insulin signaling, thereby contributing to insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Fetuin-A also may, together with free fatty acids, induce apoptotic signals in the beta islets cells of the pancreas, reducing the secretion of insulin and further exacerbating T2DM.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Calciprotein particles (CPP) are formed in supersaturated solutions of calcium, phosphate and the mineral-binding protein fetuin-A. CPP have garnered considerable interest as potential mediators of mineral stress, but little consideration has been given to their origin, clearance and role in metabolism. RECENT FINDINGS: CPP are made whilst buffering the mineral absorbed from the intestine after a meal or during remodelling of bone matrix. The postprandial rise in circulating CPP rise may be sensed by osteoblasts/osteocytes in bone, stimulating the secretion of the master phosphatonin fibroblast growth factor 23. Amorphous calcium phosphate-containing CPP are rapidly cleared by endothelial cells in the liver whereas crystalline apatite-containing CPP are filtered by phagocytic cells of the reticuloendothelial system. Impaired excretory function in kidney disease may lead to accumulation of CPP and its precursors with possible pathological sequalae. Inability to stabilize CPP in fetuin-A-deficiency states can result in intraluminal precipitation and inflammatory cascades if other mineralisation regulatory networks are compromised. SUMMARY: CPP allow efficient transport and clearance of bulk calcium phosphate as colloids without risk of precipitation. As circulating factors, CPP may couple dietary mineral exposure with endocrine control of mineral metabolism in bone, signalling the need to dispose of excess phosphate from the body.
Fetuin was first isolated from bovine serum in 1944. It is now most commonly known as either fetuin-A or alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein (AHSG), the protein product of Ahsg gene. A prominent feature of this protein is the functional diversity exerted in human physiology and pathophysiology. Fetuin-A plays a role in bone metabolism, metabolic disorders such as insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus (DM), and central nervous system (CNS) disorders such as ischemic stroke (IS) and neurodegenerative diseases. In addition, emerging evidence suggests involvement of fetuin-A in the cardiovascular system. However, there are many discordant findings on the associations between fetuin-A and vascular diseases. In other words, it is unknown whether fetuin-A is an exacerbating or a protective factor in the cardiovascular system. One reason for the seemingly inconsistent behavior is the dual functionality of fetuin-A in vascular diseases where it can act as an atherogenic factor or as a vascular calcification inhibitor. In addition, the existence of confounding factors such as DM and renal dysfunction can veil the primary association between fetuin-A and clinical parameters. Considering these issues, we discuss the role of fetuin-A for atherosclerosis and vascular calcification in this review.
Ahsg (fetuin-A) is a 55-59kDa phosphorylated glycoprotein synthesized in the adult predominantly by hepatocytes, from which it enters the circulation. When dysregulated, this glycoprotein operates to influence the clinical sequelae of insulin resistance-type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The pathological sequelae likely arise from two separable molecular "faces" of Ahsg-one acting at the level of the insulin receptor and a second face influencing ectopic biomineralization in the intima. A detailed understanding of these two functional faces of Ahsg is not yet clear for lack of structural studies. Ahsg has a physiological role in the biomineralization of bone, which when dysregulated can lead to ectopic calcification of soft tissues in the vasculature. Ahsg has a second physiological function in regulating how insulin signals through its receptor, a transmembrane tyrosine kinase. Dysregulation of this "face" of Ahsg results in morbid sequelae such as impaired glucose disposal and fatty liver. Ahsg binds to tandem fibronectin type 3 (Fn3) domains present in the 194 amino acid residue extracellular portion of the beta-subunit of the insulin receptor, distant from the high-affinity pocket formed by two complementing alpha-subunits where insulin binds. Only two proteins are known to bind directly to the insulin receptor ectodomain - insulin and Ahsg - the former turns on the receptor's intrinsic tyrosine kinase (TK) activity, and the latter shuts it down. Recent X-ray crystallographic studies of the ectodomain of the insulin receptor now sharpen our understanding of the receptor's extracellular alpha-subunit and linked beta-subunit. Ahsg genotype and its circulating level have been correlated with body morphometrics (obese versus lean and visceral adiposity) in epidemiological studies enrolling thousands of patients. Epidemiological studies from the clinic reveal high levels of circulating Ahsg in insulin resistance and diabetes. This review endeavors to explain how one protein can mediate diverse pathologies, but specifically addresses its metabolic "face" blunting insulin receptor activity, an action leading to insulin resistance.
BACKGROUND: Aortic valve stenosis (AVS) is a multifactorial-progressive pathological process. In the past decades, many studies have focus their attention on circulating biomarkers able to identify AVS and/or to predict its progression. One of the many biomarkers studied is the fetuin A. The aim of the present meta-analysis was to evaluate the correlation between fetuin A levels and end-stage AVS. METHODS AND RESULTS: A systematic search was performed in three electronic databases (PubMed, Web of Science and Scopus), looking for studies that compared control subjects with AVS patients and that have measured fetuin A circulating levels in both groups. The main outcome was to evaluate the difference in circulating fetuin A concentration in the two groups. Seven studies, enrolling 2283 AVS patients and 1549 controls, were included. Differences between control subjects and AVS patients were expressed as standardized mean difference (SMD) with pertinent 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) and standard deviation (SD), analysing the data using a random effect model. We found significantly lower circulating levels of fetuin A in AVS patients compared to healthy subjects (SMD: -0.96mug/mL, 95% CI: -1.62, -0.30; p=0.004). In addition, meta-regression analyses showed that several cardiovascular risk factors were significantly associated with circulating levels of fetuin A between patients affected by AVS and healthy controls. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our meta-analysis shows that AVS patients have significant lower circulating levels of fetuin A compared to control subjects. However, dedicated studies with large and matched cohorts are needed to validate these findings, evaluating if there is a real link or just a mere association.
Fetuin-A is a multifunctional protein which inhibits ectopic calcification and insulin receptor phosphorylation. It may also promote insulin resistance by activation of toll-like receptor 4 pro-inflammatory cascade. Increased levels of Fetuin-A have been associated with obesity and related comorbidities such as type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease, therefore, it has been suggested as a potential therapeutic target for intervention. However, in addition to its role in disease pathophysiology, Fetuin-A is also important for growth and development. Thus, before evaluating Fetuin-A as a biomarker or pharmacological target, an understanding of Fetuin-A variability throughout the life cycle is essential. This manuscript reviews the current body of knowledge surrounding Fetuin-A throughout the life cycle and discuss challenges to studying Fetuin-A.
Fetuin-A acts as both an inhibitor of calcification and insulin signaling. Previous studies reported conflicting results on the association between fetuin-A and cardiometabolic diseases. We aim to provide further insights into the association between genetically predicted levels of fetuin-A and cardiometabolic diseases using a Mendelian randomization strategy. Genetic variants associated with fetuin-A and their effect sizes were obtained from previous genetic studies. A series of two-sample Mendelian randomization analyses in 412,444 unrelated individuals from the UK Biobank did not show evidence for an association of genetically predicted fetuin-A with any stroke, ischemic stroke, or myocardial infarction. We do find that increased levels of genetically predicted fetuin-A are associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes (OR = 1.21, 95%CI 1.13-1.30, P =  < 0.01). Furthermore, genetically predicted fetuin-A increases the risk of coronary artery disease in individuals with type 2 diabetes, but we did not find evidence for an association between genetically predicted fetuin-A and coronary artery disease in those without type 2 diabetes (P for interaction = 0.03). One SD increase in genetically predicted fetuin-A decreases risk of myocardial infarction in women, but we do not find evidence for an association between genetically predicted fetuin-A and myocardial infarction in men (P for interaction =  < 0.01). Genetically predicted fetuin-A is associated with type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, type 2 diabetes status modifies the association of genetically predicted fetuin-A with coronary artery disease, indicating that fetuin-A increases risk in individuals with type 2 diabetes. Finally, higher genetically predicted fetuin-A reduces the risk of myocardial infarction in women, but we do not find evidence for an association between genetically predicted fetuin-A and myocardial infarction in men.
A comprehensive analysis of site-specific protein O-glycosylation is hindered by the absence of a consensus O-glycosylation motif, the diversity of O-glycan structures, and the lack of a universal enzyme that cleaves attached O-glycans. Here, we report the development of a robust O-glycoproteomic workflow for analyzing complex biological samples by combining four different strategies: removal of N-glycans, complementary digestion using O-glycoprotease (IMPa) with/without another protease, glycopeptide enrichment, and mass spectrometry with fragmentation of glycopeptides using stepped collision energy. Using this workflow, we cataloged 474 O-glycopeptides on 189 O-glycosites derived from 79 O-glycoproteins from human plasma. These data revealed O-glycosylation of several abundant proteins that have not been previously reported. Because many of the proteins that contained unannotated O-glycosylation sites have been extensively studied, we wished to confirm glycosylation at these sites in a targeted fashion. Thus, we analyzed selected purified proteins (kininogen-1, fetuin-A, fibrinogen, apolipoprotein E, and plasminogen) in independent experiments and validated the previously unknown O-glycosites.
Endothelial dysfunction induced by oxidative stress is an early predictor of atherosclerosis, which can cause various cardiovascular diseases. The glycocalyx layer on the endothelial cell surface acts as a barrier to maintain endothelial biological function, and it can be impaired by oxidative stress. However, the mechanism of glycocalyx damage during the development of atherosclerosis remains largely unclear. Herein, we established a novel strategy to address these issues from the glycomic perspective that has long been neglected. Using countercharged fluorescence protein staining and quantitative mass spectrometry, we found that heparan sulfate, a major component of the glycocalyx, was structurally altered by oxidative stress. Comparative proteomics and protein microarray analysis revealed several new heparan sulfate-binding proteins, among which alpha-2-Heremans-Schmid glycoprotein (AHSG) was identified as a critical protein. The molecular mechanism of AHSG with heparin was characterized through several methods. A heparan analog could relieve atherosclerosis by protecting heparan sulfate from degradation during oxidative stress and by reducing the accumulation of AHSG at lesion sites. In the present study, the molecular mechanism of anti-atherosclerotic effect of heparin through interaction with AHSG was revealed. These findings provide new insights into understanding of glycocalyx damage in atherosclerosis and lead to the development of corresponding therapeutics.
Purpose: Retroperitoneal liposarcoma (RLPS) is a rare malignancy without effective treatment. Since current treatment for unresectable RLPS is unsatisfactory, immunotherapy and targeted therapy are urgently needed. Siglec-15 is a transmembrane protein highly homologous to PD-L1 and is involved in tumor immune escape. The biological function of Siglec-15 in RLPS, its prognostic relevance and its relationship with PD-L1 need to be further clarified. In this study, we aimed to explore the biological function of Siglec-15 in sarcomas through bioinformatics analysis, and we also evaluated Siglec-15 and PD-L1 expression in RLPS samples. The relationship between the expression of Siglec-15 and PD-L1 and their clinicopathological relevance and prognostic value were also investigated in clinical RLPS patients. Methods: The RNA sequencing data of 259 sarcoma cases and 48 RLPS cases from TCGA were used to analyze the Siglec-15 expression and the differentially expressed genes (DEG) related with Siglec-15 expression. In addition, DEGs were subsequently analyzed through the gene ontology (GO)/ Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. Tumor specimens were obtained from 91 RLPS patients of our sarcoma center, and Siglec-15 and PD-L1 expression were evaluated using immunohistochemistry. The correlation between the expression level of these two markers as well as their correlation with clinicopathological factors and prognosis of RLPS patients was also assessed. Results: GEPIA analysis showed that the high expression of Siglec-15 was associated with poor sarcoma OS (P=0.034). A total of 682 differential genes were identified between the high and low expression groups of Siglec-15 in RLPS. Enrichment analysis of the KEGG pathway showed that Siglec-15 was related to the Hippo signaling pathway and the neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. GO annotation analysis showed that the expression of Siglec-15 may thus be able to affect serine hydrolase activity, alongside signal receptor activator activity. The top 5 genes with the largest number of connection points are APOA1, F2, AHSG, AMBP, SERPINC1. In subsequent studies, we used 91 liposarcoma samples from our center for verification. Siglec-15 was expressed in 84.6% of RLPS cases, whereas PD-L1 was expressed in 17.6% of RLPS cases. A negative correlation was observed between Siglec-15 and PD-L1 expression (P=0.020). In this group of RLPS patients, high Siglec-15 expression was correlated with poorer disease-free survival (DFS) (P=0.021), and it was an independent predictor of DFS (hazard ratio: 2.298; 95% confidence interval: 1.154-4.576; P=0.018). However, we did not find a correlation between PD-L1 expression and overall survival or DFS in RLPS patients. Conclusion: The DEG and signaling pathways identified in the study could provide a preliminary understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms of Siglec-15 in the development and progression of RLPS. High expression of Siglec-15 was a negative independent predictive factor for DFS of RLPS. The negative relationship between Siglec-15 and PD-L1 expression suggested that the Siglec-15 pathway might be an important supplement to PD-L1 treatment.
Recent evidence suggests that uremic vascular calcification is an active, cell-mediated process resembling osteogenesis in bone rather than passive precipitation. We identified increased expression of bone-associated proteins (osteopontin, bone sialoprotein, alkaline phosphatase, type I collagen) and the bone-specific transcription factor core-binding factor alpha(1) (Cbfalpha(1)) in histologic sections of inferior epigastric arteries obtained from patients with stage V chronic kidney disease or calcific uremic arteriolopathy. In in vitro experiments, the addition of uremic serum to cultured vascular smooth muscle cells up-regulated osteopontin and Cbfalpha(1) expression and accelerated mineralization. This implies that the uremic mileau may lead to dedifferentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells, with subsequent mineralization. However, a lack of inhibitors of calcification may also be important. Dialysis patients with low levels of serum fetuin A, a circulating inhibitor of mineralization, have increased coronary artery calcification, and fetuin A can inhibit mineralization of vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro. Further understanding of the pathophysiology of uremic vascular calcification is needed to design effective therapeutic strategies to intervene with this devastating condition in patients with stage V chronic kidney disease.
OBJECTIVE: Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) was a serious autoimmune inflammatory condition affecting the central nervous system. Currently, there was a lack of diagnostic biomarkers for AQP4-IgG-negative NMO patients. METHODS: A comparative proteomic analysis was conducted on the CSF of 10 patients with NMO and 10 patients with non-inflammatory neurological disorders (NND) using tandem mass tagging technology. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were analyzed using bioinformatic methods. The candidate proteins were then validated through ELISAs in a subsequent cohort of 160 samples, consisting of paired CSF and plasma samples from 50 NMO patients, CSF samples from 30 NND patients, and plasma samples from 30 healthy individuals. RESULTS: We identified 389 proteins via proteomics, screening 79 DEPs. NCAM1, SST and AHSG were selected as candidate molecules for further validation. Compared to NND patients, there were decreased levels of AHSG in CSF and increased levels of NCAM1 and SST in NMO patients. The ELISA results revealed significantly higher levels of AHSG, SST and NCAM1 in the CSF of the NMO group compared to the NND group. Similarly, the serum levels of these three proteins were also higher in the NMO group compared to the healthy control group. It was found that serum NCAM1 levels significantly decreased in patients with non-relapsed NMO compared to patients with relapsed NMO and CSF NCAM1 level increased in patients with bilateral NMO compared to patients with unilateral NMO. Furthermore, CSF SST levels increased in AQP4 antibody-positive NMO patients compared to AQP4 antibody-negative patients. INTERPRETATION: CSF NCAM1, serum NCAM1 and serum SST may serve as potential biomarkers for NMO patients and aid in the diagnosis of AQP4 antibody-negative NMO patients.
BACKGROUND: Immune system dysfunction and blood-brain barrier (BBB) impairment are implicated in multiple sclerosis (MS) risk and severity. However, the causal relationships and potential therapeutic targets remain unclear. METHODS: Leveraging the MRC IEU OpenGWAS data infrastructure, we extracted 1254 peripheral immune systems and 792 BBB biomarkers as genetic instruments for exposure. MS risk data from the International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium (IMSGC) (47,429 MS cases, 68,374 controls) served as one outcome, replicated in FinnGen (1048 cases, 217,141 controls) and the UK Biobank (1679 cases, 461,254 controls). Genetic associations with MS severity derived from IMSGC and MultipleMS Consortium GWAS data (12,584 cases). Two-sample, bidirectional, and protein drug-target MR analyses were conducted, along with interaction analysis of identified proteins and druggability assessment. RESULTS: Causal relationships between 45 immunological markers, 15 BBB markers, and MS risk were strongly supported. In peripheral immunity, the causal associations with MS are predominantly concentrated in CD4+ T cells and CD8+ T cells. Notably, anti-Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen (EBNA) IgG levels exhibited the most significant causal effect on MS risk (OR = 225.62, P = 5.63E-208), replicated in the MS severity (OR = 1.11, P = 0.04). Weak causal evidence was found between 62 immunological markers, 35 BBB markers, and MS severity. Reverse MR analysis suggested potential causal effects of MS risk on 8 markers. Drug-targeted MR analysis indicated potential therapeutic benefits in reducing MS risk for CD40 (OR = 0.71, P = 7.24E-13, PPH4 = 97.6 %), AHSG (OR = 0.88, P = 2.91E-05, PPH4 = 94.4 %), and FCRL3 (Sun BB et al.: OR = 0.83, P = 8.93E-09, PPH4 = 94.2 %, Suhre K et al.: OR = 0.88, P = 5.20E-08, PPH4 = 99.2 %). CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence supporting the causal effects of immune system and BBB dysfunction on MS risk and severity. It emphasizes the significant role of anti-EBNA IgG levels, CD4+ T cells, and CD8+ T cells in MS, and delineates the potential therapeutic benefits of targeting three proteins associated with MS risk: CD40, AHSG, and FCRL3.
Fetuin-A (Alfa 2-Heremans-Schmid) is a glycoprotein that is mainly synthesized by hepatocytes and then released into the bloodstream. While fetuin-A, a multifunctional protein, has inhibitory effects on health in the processes of calcification, mineralization, coronary artery calcification (CAC), and kidney stone formation by various mechanisms, it has such stimulatory effects as obesity, diabetes, and tumor progression processes. Fetuin-A produces these effects on the organism mainly by playing a role in the secretion levels of some inflammatory cytokines and exosomes, preventing unwanted calcification, inhibiting the autophosphorylation of tyrosine kinase, suppressing the release of adiponectin and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma), activating the toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4), triggering the phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3) kinase/Akt signaling pathway and cell proliferation, and mimicking the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) receptor. In the present review, fetuin-A was examined in a wide perspective from the structure and release of fetuin-A to its effects on health.
Mineralization in higher vertebrates is restricted to bones and teeth. Pathological calcification is mostly known in vasculature but can basically affect all soft tissues. Simply put, tissue mineralization occurs through the interplay of three key determinants: extracellular matrix suitable for mineralization, extracellular levels of inorganic phosphate and calcium, and the levels of mineralization inhibitors that may be expressed systemically or locally. In this article we describe the role of a prototypic systemic inhibitor protein of mineralization, the hepatic plasma protein alpha2-Heremans-Schmid glycoprotein/fetuin-A. Fetuin-A mediates the formation of stable colloidal mineral-protein complexes called calciprotein particles (CPPs). Thus, fetuin-A is important in the stabilization and clearance of amorphous mineral precursor phases. Efficient clearance of CPPs and, thus, of excess mineral from circulation prevents local buildup of mineral and calcification of soft tissue. Besides calcium phosphate binding, fetuin-A also acts as a carrier for lipids, which may influence calcification, inflammation, and apoptosis. Fetuin-A-deficient (Ahsg(-/-)) mice show impaired growth of their long bones and premature growth plate closure. We posit that the absence of fetuin-A in the growth plate causes simultaneous lack of calcification inhibition and excess lipid hormone signaling, leading to premature growth plate mineralization and shortened long bones. This suggests that fetuin-A regulates endochondral ossification through mineralization inhibition and lipid (hormone) binding.
The liver acts as a manufacturing unit for the production of fetuin-A, which is essential for various physiological characteristics. Scientific research has shown that a moderate upward push in fetuin-A serum levels is associated with a confirmed non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) diagnosis. Fetuin-A modulation is associated with a number of pathophysiological variables that cause liver problems, including insulin receptor signaling deficiencies, adipocyte dysfunction, hepatic inflammation, fibrosis, triacylglycerol production, macrophage invasion, and TLR4 activation. The focus of the present review is on the various molecular pathways, and genetic relevance of mRNA expression of fetuin-A which is correlated with progression of NAFLD. The other major area of exploration in the present review is based on the new targets for the modulation of fetuin-A, like calorie restriction and novel pharmacological agents, such as rosuvastatin, metformin, and pioglitazone which are successfully implicated in the management of various liver-related complications.
Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) on dialysis have 2- to 5-fold more coronary artery calcification than age-matched individuals with angiographically proven coronary artery disease. In addition to increased traditional risk factors, CKD patients also have a number of nontraditional cardiovascular risk factors that may play a prominent role in the pathogenesis of arterial calcification, including duration of dialysis and disorders of mineral metabolism. In histological specimens from the inferior epigastric artery of dialysis patients, we have found expression of the osteoblast differentiation factor core binding factor alpha-1 (Cbfa1) and several bone-associated proteins (osteopontin, bone sialoprotein, alkaline phosphatase, type I collagen) in both the intima and medial layers when calcification was present. In cultured vascular smooth muscle cells, the addition of pooled serum from dialysis patients (versus normal healthy controls) accelerated mineralization and increased expression of Cbfa1, osteopontin, and alkaline phosphatase to a similar magnitude as does beta-glycerophosphate alone. However, a lack of inhibitors of calcification may also be important. Dialysis patients with low levels of serum fetuin-A, a circulating inhibitor of mineralization, have increased coronary artery calcification and fetuin-A can inhibit mineralization of vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro. These data support that elevated levels of phosphorus and/or other potential uremic toxins may play an important role by transforming vascular smooth muscle cells into osteoblast-like cells, which can produce a matrix of bone collagen and noncollagenous proteins. This nidus can then mineralize if the balance of pro-mineralizing factors outweighs inhibitory factors.
Fetuin-A, also known as alpha-2-Heremans-Schmid-glycoprotein (Ahsg), is a multifunctional molecule with diverse roles in biological processes such as mineralization, tumor growth, and inflammation. This review explores the involvement of Ahsg in various cancers, including liver, breast, prostate, colorectal, brain, osteosarcoma, and lung cancers. In many cancer types, Ahsg promotes tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis through various mechanisms, including cellular adhesion, spreading, chemotaxis, and modulation of cell-growth signaling pathways. Additionally, Ahsg has been implicated in the regulation of inflammatory cytokine production, making it a potential marker of inflammation in cancer. The complex interplay between Ahsg and cancer progression highlights its potential as a diagnostic biomarker and therapeutic target in various cancers. However, further research is needed to fully elucidate the mechanisms of action of Ahsg in cancer and to explore its clinical implications in cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment.
