Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma; Nuclear receptor that binds peroxisome proliferators such as hypolipidemic drugs and fatty acids. Once activated by a ligand, the nuclear receptor binds to DNA specific PPAR response elements (PPRE) and modulates the transcription of its target genes, such as acyl-CoA oxidase. It therefore controls the peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway of fatty acids. Key regulator of adipocyte differentiation and glucose homeostasis. ARF6 acts as a key regulator of the tissue-specific adipocyte P2 (aP2) enhancer. Acts as a critical regulator of gut ho [...] 
Due to the rise in temperature and sea level caused by climate change, the detection rate of aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) in food crops has increased dramatically, and the frequency and severity of aflatoxicosis in humans and animals are also increasing. AFB1 has strong hepatotoxicity, causing severe liver damage and even cancer. However, the mechanism of AFB1 hepatotoxicity remains unclear. By integrating network toxicology, molecular docking and in vivo experiments, this research was designed to explore the potential hepatotoxicity mechanisms of AFB1. Thirty-three intersection targets for AFB1-induced liver damage were identified using online databases. PI3K/AKT1, MAPK, FOXO1 signaling pathways, and apoptosis were significantly enriched. In addition, the proteins of ALB, AKT1, PIK3CG, MAPK8, HSP90AA1, PPARA, MAPK1, EGFR, FOXO1, and IGF1 exhibited good affinity with AFB1. In vivo experiments, significant pathological changes occurred in the liver of mice. AFB1 induction increased the expression levels of EGFR, ERK, and FOXO1, and decreased the expression levsls of PI3K and AKT1. Moreover, AFB1 treatment caused an increase in Caspase3 expression, and a decrease in Bcl2/Bax ratio. By combining network toxicology with in vivo experiments, this study confirms for the first time that AFB1 promotes the FOXO1 signaling pathway by inactivating PI3K/AKT1 and activating EGFR/ERK signaling pathways, hence aggravating hepatocyte apoptosis. This research provides new strategies for studying the toxicity of environmental pollutants and new possible targets for the development of hepatoprotective drugs.
The phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway regulates cell survival and is over-activated in most human cancers, including ovarian cancer. Following growth factor stimulation, AKT1 is activated by phosphorylation at T308 and S473. Disruption of the AKT1 signaling pathway is sufficient to inhibit the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells. In metastatic disease, adherent EOC cells transition to a dormant spheroid state, characterized previously by low S473 phosphorylation in AKT1. We confirmed this finding and observed that T308 phosphorylation was yet further reduced in EOC spheroids and that the transition from adherent to spheroid growth is accompanied by significantly increased levels of let-7 miRNAs. We then used mechanistic studies to investigate the impact of let-7 miRNAs on AKT1 phosphorylation status and activity in cells. In growth factor-stimulated HEK 293T cells supplemented with let-7a, we found increased phosphorylation of AKT1 at T308, decreased phosphorylation at S473, and enhanced downstream AKT1 substrate GSK-3beta phosphorylation. Let-7b and let-7g also deregulated AKT signaling by rendering AKT1 insensitive to growth factor simulation. We uncovered let-7a-dependent deregulation of PI3K pathway components, including PI3KC2A, PDK1, and RICTOR, that govern AKT1 phosphorylation and activity. Together, our data show a new role for miRNAs in regulating AKT signaling.
The pleckstrin homology [PH] domain is a structural fold found in more than 250 proteins making it the 11th most common domain in the human proteome. 25% of family members have more than one PH domain and some PH domains are split by one, or several other, protein domains although still folding to give functioning PH domains. We review mechanisms of PH domain activity, the role PH domain mutation plays in human disease including cancer, hyperproliferation, neurodegeneration, inflammation, and infection, and discuss pharmacotherapeutic approaches to regulate PH domain activity for the treatment of human disease. Almost half PH domain family members bind phosphatidylinositols [PIs] that attach the host protein to cell membranes where they interact with other membrane proteins to give signaling complexes or cytoskeleton scaffold platforms. A PH domain in its native state may fold over other protein domains thereby preventing substrate access to a catalytic site or binding with other proteins. The resulting autoinhibition can be released by PI binding to the PH domain, or by protein phosphorylation thus providing fine tuning of the cellular control of PH domain protein activity. For many years the PH domain was thought to be undruggable until high-resolution structures of human PH domains allowed structure-based design of novel inhibitors that selectively bind the PH domain. Allosteric inhibitors of the Akt1 PH domain have already been tested in cancer patients and for proteus syndrome, with several other PH domain inhibitors in preclinical development for treatment of other human diseases.
Prostate is a zinc rich organ and the physiological function of the abundant zinc ions is relatively less understood. AKT kinase is a pivotal regulator downstream of cytokines, growth factors and other extracellular stimuli, and the attachment of its PH domain to PtdIns-3,4,5-P3 (PIP3) and the subsequent phosphorylation of its kinase domain by PDPK1 are considered important for its activation. Herein, we report a regulatory mechanism of AKT kinase by zinc ions. Mechanistically, zinc ions directly bind to AKT and facilitate AKT activation through disrupting the interaction between PH and kinase domains within AKT molecule. Consistently, AKT1-H89A/E91A mutant (zinc-binding-deficient) fails to respond to zinc ions and exhibits strong interaction between PH and kinase domains, and it is less oncogenic in orthotopic xenograft model of prostate cancer. On the other hand, the AKT1-W80L mutant with minimum intra-molecular interaction between PH and kinase domains shows strong tumor promoting capacity although it could not be further stimulated by zinc ions. Overall, this study reveals a distinctive regulatory mechanism of AKT activation and implies a tumor promoting role of the zinc ions in prostate cancer.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an extremely aggressive tumor associated with a poor prognosis that impacts the central nervous system. Increasing evidence suggests an inherent association between glucose metabolism dysregulation and the aggression of GBM. Polo-like kinase 4 (PLK4), a highly conserved serine/threonine protein kinase, was found to relate to glioma progression and unfavorable prognosis. As revealed by the integration of proteomics and phosphoproteomics, PLK4 was found to be involved in governing metabolic processes and the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. For the first time, this study supports evidence demonstrating that PLK4 activated PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling through direct binding to AKT1 and subsequent phosphorylating AKT1 at S124, T308, and S473 to promote tumorigenesis and glucose metabolism in glioma. In addition, PLK4-mediated phosphorylation of AKT1 S124 significantly augmented the phosphorylation of AKT1 S473. Therefore, PLK4 exerted an influence on glucose metabolism by stimulating PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling. Additionally, the expression of PLK4 protein exhibited a positive correlation with AKT1 phosphorylation in glioma patient tissues. These findings highlight the pivotal role of PLK4-mediated phosphorylation of AKT1 in glioma tumorigenesis and dysregulation of glucose metabolism.
Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disorder induced by the infiltration of autoreactive immune cells into the central nervous system. Akt/PKB signaling pathway is crucially involved in T cell development and survival. We aimed to determine whether Akt1 expression levels of regulatory T (Treg) cells are altered in MS and are associated with disease activity. Relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RR-MS, n = 17) patients and healthy individuals (n = 20) were enrolled. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated and anti-CD3, -CD4, -CD8, -CD25, -CD127 monoclonal antibodies were used to identify the T cell subsets. After stimulation with phorbol myristate acetate/ionomycin, the Akt1 and phosphorylated-Akt1 (p-Akt1) levels of T cell subsets were detected with intracellular staining using flow cytometry. Total Akt1 and p-Akt1 expression levels were found to be suppressed in CD4(+ )T cell and Treg populations of RR-MS patients. Progression indices were positively correlated with Akt1 expression levels of Tregs indicating that the Akt pathway might partake in the progression of multiple sclerosis. Flow cytometry may effectively be used for the evaluation of the Akt pathway activity. Our findings suggest that the magnitude of suppression of the Akt pathway might serve as a biomarker for the prognosis of multiple sclerosis.
AKT is involved in a number of key cellular processes including cell proliferation, apoptosis and metabolism. Hyperactivation of AKT is associated with many pathological conditions, particularly cancers. Emerging evidence indicates that arginine methylation is involved in modulating AKT signaling pathway. However, whether and how arginine methylation directly regulates AKT kinase activity remain unknown. Here we report that protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5), but not other PRMTs, promotes AKT activation by catalyzing symmetric dimethylation of AKT1 at arginine 391 (R391). Mechanistically, AKT1-R391 methylation cooperates with phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5 trisphosphate (PIP3) to relieve the pleckstrin homology (PH)-in conformation, leading to AKT1 membrane translocation and subsequent activation by phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) and the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2). As a result, deficiency in AKT1-R391 methylation significantly suppresses AKT1 kinase activity and tumorigenesis. Lastly, we show that PRMT5 inhibitor synergizes with AKT inhibitor or chemotherapeutic drugs to enhance cell death. Altogether, our study suggests that R391 methylation is an important step for AKT activation and its oncogenic function.
Serine threonine kinase AKT has a central role in the cell, controlling survival, proliferation, metabolism and angiogenesis. Deregulation of its activity underlies a wide range of pathological situations, including cancer. Here we show that AKT is post-translationally modified by the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) protein. Interestingly, neither SUMO conjugation nor activation of SUMOylated AKT is regulated by the classical AKT targeting to the cell membrane or by the phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. We demonstrate that SUMO induces the activation of AKT, whereas, conversely, down-modulation of the SUMO machinery diminishes AKT activation and cell proliferation. Furthermore, an AKT SUMOylation mutant shows reduced activation, and decreased anti-apoptotic and pro-tumoral activities in comparison with the wild-type protein. These results identify SUMO as a novel key regulator of AKT phosphorylation and activity.
Despite the immense importance of enzyme-substrate reactions, there is a lack of general and unbiased tools for identifying and prioritizing substrate proteins that are modified by the enzyme on the structural level. Here we describe a high-throughput unbiased proteomics method called System-wide Identification and prioritization of Enzyme Substrates by Thermal Analysis (SIESTA). The approach assumes that the enzymatic post-translational modification of substrate proteins is likely to change their thermal stability. In our proof-of-concept studies, SIESTA successfully identifies several known and novel substrate candidates for selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1, protein kinase B (AKT1) and poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-10 systems. Wider application of SIESTA can enhance our understanding of the role of enzymes in homeostasis and disease, opening opportunities to investigate the effect of post-translational modifications on signal transduction and facilitate drug discovery.
BACKGROUND: Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) is a progressive and difficult-to-heal lung disease that poses a significant threat to human life and health. This study aimed to investigate the potential pathological mechanisms of PF and to identify new avenues for the treatment of PF. METHODS: Clinical samples were collected to assess the effect of disulfide-bond A oxidoreductase-like protein (DsbA-L) on PF. TGF-beta1-induced MLE-12 cell model and bleomycin (BLM)-induced mice model were established. Changes in physiological morphology and fibrosis were observed in the lung tissues. The degree of apoptosis and the mitochondrial function was analyzed. The expression of relative cytokines was examined. The CD68(+)/CD206(+) ratio was determined to indicate M2 macrophage polarization. RESULTS: The expression of DsbA-L was upregulated in patients with PF and PF-like models. In vitro, DsbA-L overexpression exacerbated TGF-beta1-induced the deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM), apoptosis, inflammation, and mitochondrial damage, whereas DsbA-L silencing exerted the opposite effects. DsbA-L silencing inhibited the activation of AKT1, NLRP3, and SMAD3 by TGF-beta1. MLE-12 cells silencing DsbA-L limited the polarization of RAW264.7 cells towards the M2 phenotype. AKT1 agonist or NLRP3 agonist reversed the role of DsbA-L silencing in inhibiting the TGF-beta1/SMAD3 pathway and M2 macrophage polarization. In vivo, DsbA-L knockout protected mice from PF-like pathological damage caused by BLM. CONCLUSION: DsbA-L exhibited a significant profibrotic effect in lung epithelial cells and mice, which increased the levels of AKT1 and NLRP3 to activate the TGF-beta1/SMAD3 pathway and M2 macrophage polarization. These findings could shed light on new clues for comprehension and treatment of PF.
Bax-dependent mitochondrial permeabilization during apoptosis is controlled by multiple factors, including the phosphorylation by the protein kinase AKT. We used the heterologous co-expression of human Bax and AKT1 in yeast to investigate how the kinase modulates the different steps underlying Bax activation. We found that AKT activated Bax and increased its cellular content. Both effects were dependent on Ser184, but a phosphorylation of this residue did not fully explain the effects of AKT. Additional experiments with mutants substituted on Ser184 suggested that the regulation of Bax dynamic equilibrium between the cytosol and mitochondria might be more tightly regulated by Bcl-xL when Bax is phosphorylated.
Numerous studies have shown that Akt isoforms promote tumorigenesis by enhancing cancer cell survival and growth, and it is well established that signaling through the Akt upstream regulator PI 3-K enhances cancer cell migration. Therefore, it is conventionally accepted that PI 3-K/Akt pathway promotes tumor formation and metastasis. A few years ago, studies from several laboratories added a new layer to the pleiotropic effects of Akt function by showing that the Akt1 isoform inhibits breast cancer cell migration and invasion, whereas Akt2 promotes these phenotypes. These studies challenged the dogma and identified non-redundant functions of Akt isoforms in cancer progression. The identification of palladin as an Akt1-specific substrate in our recently published work has exemplified distinct Akt isoform-specific signaling in breast cancer. Here, we review these findings and discuss the implications for the understanding of the mechanistic basis for designing more effective anti-cancer therapeutics targeting the Akt pathway.
The genetic manipulation of mice has become an essential and elegant method for studying the function of proteins in physiology, and for testing the veracity of information obtained from cell culture experiments. During the past few years, a variety of transgenic and knockout mouse models of PKB (protein kinase B)/Akt have been generated and investigated. In this paper, we focus on the phenotypes of these PKB/Akt overexpression and mutant mice that may help to elucidate the functions exerted by PKB/Akt in mammals.
The protein kinase B (PKB) family encompasses three isoforms; PKBalpha (AKT1), PKBbeta (AKT2) and PKBgamma (AKT3). PKBalpha and PKBbeta but not PKBgamma, are prominently expressed in classical insulin-sensitive tissues like liver, muscle and fat. Transgenic mice deficient for PKBalpha, PKBbeta or PKBgamma have been analysed to study the roles of PKB isoforms in metabolic regulation. Until recently, only loss of PKBbeta was reported to result in metabolic disorders, especially insulin resistance, in humans and mice. However, a new study has shown that PKBalpha-deficient mice can show enhanced glucose tolerance accompanied by improved beta-cell function and higher insulin sensitivity in adipocytes. These findings prompted us to review the relevant literature on the regulation of glucose metabolism by PKB isoforms in liver, skeletal muscle, adipocytes and pancreas.
In 1997, the PTEN gene (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10) was identified as a tumor suppressor gene on the long arm of chromosome 10. Since then, important progress has been made with respect to the understanding of the role of the Pten protein in the normal development of the brain as well as in the molecular pathogenesis of human gliomas. This review summarizes the current state of the art concerning the involvement of aberrant Pten function in the development of different biologic features of malignant gliomas, such as loss of cell-cycle control and uncontrolled cell proliferation, escape from apoptosis, brain invasion, and aberrant neoangiogenesis. Most of the tumor-suppressive properties of Pten are dependent on its lipid phosphatase activity, which inhibits the phosphatidylinositol-3'-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway through dephosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol-(3,4,5)-triphosphate. The additional function of Pten as a dual-specificity protein phosphatase may also play a role in glioma pathogenesis. Besides the wealth of data elucidating the functional roles of Pten, recent studies suggest a diagnostic significance of PTEN gene alterations as a molecular marker for poor prognosis in anaplastic astrocytomas and anaplastic oligodendrogliomas. Furthermore, the possibility of selective targeting of PTEN mutant tumor cells by specific pharmacologic inhibitors of members of the Pten/PI3K/Akt pathway opens up new perspectives for a targeted molecular therapy of malignant gliomas.
The AKT1, AKT2, and AKT3 kinases have emerged as critical mediators of signal transduction pathways downstream of activated tyrosine kinases and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. An ever-increasing list of AKT substrates has precisely defined the multiple functions of this kinase family in normal physiology and disease states. Cellular processes regulated by AKT include cell proliferation and survival, cell size and response to nutrient availability, intermediary metabolism, angiogenesis, and tissue invasion. All these processes represent hallmarks of cancer, and a burgeoning literature has defined the importance of AKT alterations in human cancer and experimental models of tumorigenesis, continuing the legacy represented by the original identification of v-Akt as the transforming oncogene of a murine retrovirus. Many oncoproteins and tumor suppressors intersect in the AKT pathway, finely regulating cellular functions at the interface of signal transduction and classical metabolic regulation. This careful balance is altered in human cancer by a variety of activating and inactivating mechanisms that target both AKT and interrelated proteins. Reprogramming of this altered circuitry by pharmacologic modulation of the AKT pathway represents a powerful strategy for rational cancer therapy. In this review, we summarize a large body of data, from many types of cancer, indicating that AKT activation is one of the most common molecular alterations in human malignancy. We also review mechanisms of activation of AKT kinases, examples of therapeutic modulation of the AKT pathway in animal models, and the current status of efforts to target molecular components of the AKT pathway for cancer therapy and, possibly, cancer prevention.
DPP8 and DPP9 are recently identified members of the dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPPIV) enzyme family, which is characterized by the rare ability to cleave a post-proline bond two residues from the N-terminus of a substrate. DPP8 and DPP9 have unique cellular localization patterns, are ubiquitously expressed in tissues and cell lines, and evidence suggests important contributions to various biological processes including: cell behavior, cancer biology, disease pathogenesis, and immune responses. Importantly, functional differences between these two proteins have emerged, such as DPP8 may be more associated with gut inflammation whereas DPP9 is involved in antigen presentation and intracellular signaling. Similarly, the DPP9 connections with H-Ras and SUMO1, and its role in AKT1 pathway downregulation provide essential insights into the molecular mechanisms of DPP9 action. The recent discovery of novel natural substrates of DPP8 and DPP9 highlights the potential role of these proteases in energy metabolism and homeostasis. This review focuses on the recent progress made with these post-proline dipeptidyl peptidases and underscores their emerging importance.
BACKGROUND: Recently, increasing evidence has indicated that elevation of Hexokinase 2 (HK2) plays an important role in several cancers on regulating cell motility and growth. However, its role on regulating cell EMT in human ovarian cancer still less to known. METHODS: The transwell and wound-healing assay were used to detect the effective of HK2 on regulating motility of ovarian cancer cells. Real Time PCR and Western Blotting were used to explore the changing of EMT-related proteins in HK2-modified cells. The clonogenic formation, cell growth curves and MTT assays were used to evaluate the effective of HK2 on regulating cell proliferation in HK2-modified cells. The flow cytometry was used to detect the differences in the distribution of cells in the cell cycle between the HK2-modified cells and their control cells. The correlation of HK2 and Akt1/p-Akt1 was explored by using Western Blotting, Akt1 inhibitor (MK2206) and transient transfection of an Akt1 recombinant plasmid. The potential correlation between HK2 and EMT-related proteins in human ovarian cancer tissues and OV (ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma) was confirmed by using Pearson correlation analysis and TIMER 2.0. RESULTS: In ovarian cancer cells, overexpressing of HK2 enhanced cell motility by inducing of EMT-related proteins, such as CDH2, fibronectin, MMP9, ZEB1, ZEB2 and vimentin. Moreover, overexpressing of HK2 promoted cell growth by reducing p21 and p27 expression in ovarian cancer cells. Further studies demonstrated that this promotion of cell motility and growth by HK2 was probably a result of it activating of Akt1 (p-Akt1) in ovarian cancer cells. Additionally, the positive correlation between HK2 and p-Akt1, fibronectin, MMP9 expression in human ovarian cancer samples was verified by using Pearson correlation analysis. The positive correlation between HK2 and CDH2, fibronectin, MMP9, ZEB1, ZEB2 and vimentin in OV (ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma) was confirmed by using TIMER 2.0. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated that HK2 could induce EMT-related proteins and reduce cell cycle inhibitor by activating Akt1 in human ovarian cancer cells, subsequently enhancing cell motility and growth, suggesting that HK2 participate in the malignant process of ovarian cancer by interacting with Akt1.
Protein kinase B or Akt (PKB/Akt) is a serine/threonine kinase, which in mammals comprises three highly homologous members known as PKBalpha (Akt1), PKBbeta (Akt2), and PKBgamma (Akt3). PKB/Akt is activated in cells exposed to diverse stimuli such as hormones, growth factors, and extracellular matrix components. The activation mechanism remains to be fully characterised but occurs downstream of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI-3K). PI-3K generates phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP(3)), a lipid second messenger essential for the translocation of PKB/Akt to the plasma membrane where it is phosphorylated and activated by phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK-1) and possibly other kinases. PKB/Akt phosphorylates and regulates the function of many cellular proteins involved in processes that include metabolism, apoptosis, and proliferation. Recent evidence indicates that PKB/Akt is frequently constitutively active in many types of human cancer. Constitutive PKB/Akt activation can occur due to amplification of PKB/Akt genes or as a result of mutations in components of the signalling pathway that activates PKB/Akt. Although the mechanisms have not yet been fully characterised, constitutive PKB/Akt signalling is believed to promote proliferation and increased cell survival and thereby contributing to cancer progression. This review surveys recent developments in understanding the mechanisms and consequences of PKB/Akt activation in human malignancy.
Antascomicin B is a natural product that similarly to the macrolides FK506 and Rapamycin binds to the FK506-binding protein 12 (FKBP12). FK506 and Rapamycin act as molecular glues by inducing ternary complexes between FKBPs and additional target proteins. Whether Antascomicin B can induce ternary complexes is unknown. Here we show that Antascomicin B binds tightly to larger human FKBP homologs. The cocrystal structure of FKBP51 in complex with Antascomicin B revealed that large parts of Antascomicin B are solvent-exposed and available to engage additional proteins. Cellular studies demonstrated that Antascomicin B enhances the interaction between human FKBP51 and human Akt. Our studies show that molecules with molecular glue-like properties are more prominent in nature than previously thought. We predict the existence of additional 'orphan' molecular glues that evolved to induce ternary protein complexes but where the relevant ternary complex partners are unknown.
