Membrane primary amine oxidase; Cell adhesion protein that participates in lymphocyte extravasation and recirculation by mediating the binding of lymphocytes to peripheral lymph node vascular endothelial cells in an L-selectin- independent fashion. Has semicarbazide-sensitive (SSAO) monoamine oxidase activity. May play a role in adipogenesis.
Aldehyde dehydrogenases superfamily (ALDHs), which are ubiquitously present in various organisms with diverse subcellular localizations, play a crucial role in regulating malignant tumor progression; Nevertheless, their involvement in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) has not been elucidated. In this study, we performed comprehensive bioinformatics analyses on the 19 ALDHs genes, and identified ALDH9A1 as a key contributor in ccRCC. Expression patterns and clinical relevance of ALDH9A1 were determined using bioinformatics analyses, real-time PCR, western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. To explore the underlying mechanism behind the tumor suppressor role of ALDH9A1, RNA sequencing, methylated RNA immunoprecipitation, luciferase reporter assay, mass spectroscopy, immunoprecipitation, mutational studies and immunofluorescence were employed. The impact of ALDH9A1 in ccRCC progression and metabolic programming was assessed through both in vitro and in vivo. Here, this study revealed ALDH9A1 as a tumor suppressor gene in ccRCC. The fat mass and obesity associated protein (FTO) was identified as a demethylase for ALDH9A1 mRNA, resulting in its reduced stability and expression levels in ccRCC. Functional experiments demonstrated that the deficiency of ALDH9A1 in ccRCC promoted tumor proliferation, invasion, migration and lipid accumulation. Mechanistic insights illustrated that the diminished levels of ALDH9A1 resulted in the failure to sequester nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1) within cytoplasm, thereby suppressing the transcription of IQ motif containing the GTPase-activating protein 2 (IQGAP2), subsequently activating the AKT-mTOR signaling, ultimately fostering tumor progression and lipid accumulation. In conclusion, the present study highlights the robust prognostic significance of ALDH9A1 and delivers a comprehensive understanding of ALDH9A1-NPM1-IQGAP2-AKT axis in ccRCC. These findings established a solid research foundation for novel therapeutic strategies for ccRCC patients.
Mitochondrial dysfunction and immune cell infiltration play crucial yet incompletely understood roles in the pathogenesis of calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD). This study aimed to identify immune-related mitochondrial genes critical to the pathological process of CAVD using multiomics approaches. The CIBERSORT algorithm was employed to evaluate immune cell infiltration characteristics in CAVD patients. An integrative analysis combining weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA), machine learning, and summary data-based Mendelian randomization (SMR) was performed to identify key mitochondrial genes implicated in CAVD. Spearman's rank correlation analysis was also performed to assess the relationships between key mitochondrial genes and infiltrating immune cells. Compared with those in normal aortic valve tissue, an increased proportion of M0 macrophages and resting memory CD4 T cells, along with a decreased proportion of plasma cells and activated dendritic cells, were observed in CAVD patients. Additionally, eight key mitochondrial genes associated with CAVD, including PDK4, LDHB, SLC25A36, ALDH9A1, ECHDC2, AUH, ALDH2, and BNIP3, were identified through the integration of WGCNA and machine learning methods. Subsequent SMR analysis, incorporating multiomics data, such as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) and methylation quantitative trait loci (mQTLs), revealed a significant causal relationship between ALDH9A1 expression and a reduced risk of CAVD. Moreover, ALDH9A1 expression was inversely correlated with M0 macrophages and positively correlated with M2 macrophages. These findings suggest that increased ALDH9A1 expression is significantly associated with a reduced risk of CAVD and that it may exert its protective effects by modulating mitochondrial function and immune cell infiltration. Specifically, ALDH9A1 may contribute to the shift from M0 macrophages to anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages, potentially mitigating the pathological progression of CAVD. In conclusion, ALDH9A1 represents a promising molecular target for the diagnosis and treatment of CAVD. However, further validation through in vivo and n vitro studies is necessary to confirm its role in CAVD pathogenesis and therapeutic potential.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase 9A1 (ALDH9A1) is a human enzyme that catalyzes the NAD(+)-dependent oxidation of the carnitine precursor 4-trimethylaminobutyraldehyde to 4-N-trimethylaminobutyrate. Here we show that the broad-spectrum ALDH inhibitor diethylaminobenzaldehyde (DEAB) reversibly inhibits ALDH9A1 in a time-dependent manner. Possible mechanisms of inhibition include covalent reversible inactivation involving the thiohemiacetal intermediate and slow, tight-binding inhibition. Two crystal structures of ALDH9A1 are reported, including the first of the enzyme complexed with NAD(+). One of the structures reveals the active conformation of the enzyme, in which the Rossmann dinucleotide-binding domain is fully ordered and the inter-domain linker adopts the canonical beta-hairpin observed in other ALDH structures. The oligomeric structure of ALDH9A1 was investigated using analytical ultracentrifugation, small-angle X-ray scattering, and negative stain electron microscopy. These data show that ALDH9A1 forms the classic ALDH superfamily dimer-of-dimers tetramer in solution. Our results suggest that the presence of an aldehyde substrate and NAD(+) promotes isomerization of the enzyme into the active conformation.
Testosterone exhibits high variability in pharmacokinetics and glucuronidation after oral administration. Although testosterone metabolism has been studied for decades, the impact of UGT2B17 gene deletion and the role of gut bacterial beta-glucuronidases on its disposition are not well characterized. We first performed an exploratory study to investigate the effect of UGT2B17 gene deletion on the global liver proteome, which revealed significant increases in proteins from multiple biological pathways. The most upregulated liver proteins were aldoketoreductases [AKR1D1, AKR1C4, AKR7A3, AKR1A1, and 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7)] and alcohol or aldehyde dehydrogenases (ADH6, ADH1C, ALDH1A1, ALDH9A1, and ALDH5A). In vitro assays revealed that AKR1D1 and AKR1C4 inactivate testosterone to 5beta-dihydrotestosterone (5beta-DHT) and 3alpha,5beta-tetrahydrotestosterone (3alpha,5beta-THT), respectively. These metabolites also appeared in human hepatocytes treated with testosterone and in human serum collected after oral testosterone dosing in men. Our data also suggest that 5beta-DHT and 3alpha, 5beta-THT are then eliminated through glucuronidation by UGT2B7 in UGT2B17 deletion individuals. Second, we evaluated the potential reactivation of testosterone glucuronide (TG) after its secretion into the intestinal lumen. Incubation of TG with purified gut microbial beta-glucuronidase enzymes and with human fecal extracts confirmed testosterone reactivation into testosterone by gut bacterial enzymes. Both testosterone metabolic switching and variable testosterone activation by gut microbial enzymes are important mechanisms for explaining the disposition of orally administered testosterone and appear essential to unraveling the molecular mechanisms underlying UGT2B17-associated pathophysiological conditions. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This study investigated the association of UGT2B17 gene deletion and gut bacterial beta-glucuronidases with testosterone disposition in vitro. The experiments revealed upregulation of AKR1D1 and AKR1C4 in UGT2B17 deletion individuals, and the role of these enzymes to inactivate testosterone to 5beta-dihydrotestosterone and 3alpha, 5beta-tetrahydrotestosterone, respectively. Key gut bacterial species responsible for testosterone glucuronide activation were identified. These data are important for explaining the disposition of exogenously administered testosterone and appear essential to unraveling the molecular mechanisms underlying UGT2B17-associated pathophysiological conditions.
Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs) constitute a superfamily of NAD(P)(+)-dependent enzymes, which detoxify aldehydes produced in various metabolic pathways to the corresponding carboxylic acids. Among the 19 human ALDHs, the cytosolic ALDH9A1 has so far never been fully enzymatically characterized and its structure is still unknown. Here, we report complete molecular and kinetic properties of human ALDH9A1 as well as three crystal forms at 2.3, 2.9, and 2.5 A resolution. We show that ALDH9A1 exhibits wide substrate specificity to aminoaldehydes, aliphatic and aromatic aldehydes with a clear preference for gamma-trimethylaminobutyraldehyde (TMABAL). The structure of ALDH9A1 reveals that the enzyme assembles as a tetramer. Each ALDH monomer displays a typical ALDHs fold composed of an oligomerization domain, a coenzyme domain, a catalytic domain, and an inter-domain linker highly conserved in amino-acid sequence and folding. Nonetheless, structural comparison reveals a position and a fold of the inter-domain linker of ALDH9A1 never observed in any other ALDH so far. This unique difference is not compatible with the presence of a bound substrate and a large conformational rearrangement of the linker up to 30 A has to occur to allow the access of the substrate channel. Moreover, the alphabetaE region consisting of an alpha-helix and a beta-strand of the coenzyme domain at the dimer interface are disordered, likely due to the loss of interactions with the inter-domain linker, which leads to incomplete beta-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) binding pocket.
Butyrylcholinesterase may have a role in a number of metabolic functions and could affect the expression of insulin resistance syndrome. We present our integrated work using clinical, biochemical and bioinformatic approaches to delineate the possible function of this enzyme. Initially, we constructed a phylogenic tree with nucleotides and amino acid sequences and showed the existence of similar sequences in bacteria, plants and in other animals. We also demonstrated a possible pathogenic role for BChE in the common existence of insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer's disease by in silico method and followed it up with a diabetic mouse study where cognition was slowed along with changes in BChE levels. In the next group of in silico studies, we employed THEMATICS method to identify the amino acids at the active site and later performed docking studies with drugs. THEMATICS predicted two clusters of ionisable amino acid residues that are in proximity: one with two residues and another with 11 showed perturbation in the THEMATICS curves. Using ISIS/Draw 2.5SP4, ARGUSLAB 4.0.1 and HEX 5.1. software. 3-D ligands were docked with BChE motif (from PDB). We did not find any of the ligands studied with significant docking distance, indicating they did not have direct interaction with the active site. Subsequently we performed in silico studies to compare the secondary structure and domain of BChE. Protein-protein interaction showed the following intersections with BChE UBE21, CHAT, APOE, AATF, DF ALDH9A1, PDHX, PONI PSME3 and ATP6VOA2. The integrative physiological roles of proteins with poorly known functions can be approached by generating leads in silico, which can be studied in vivo, setting into movement an iterative process.
Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs) oxidize aldehydes to the corresponding carboxylic acids using either NAD or NADP as a coenzyme. Aldehydes are highly reactive aliphatic or aromatic molecules that play an important role in numerous physiological, pathological, and pharmacological processes. ALDHs have been discovered in practically all organisms and there are multiple isoforms, with multiple subcellular localizations. More than 160 ALDH cDNAs or genes have been isolated and sequenced to date from various sources, including bacteria, yeast, fungi, plants, and animals. The eukaryote ALDH genes can be subdivided into several families; the human genome contains 19 known ALDH genes, as well as many pseudogenes. Noteworthy is the fact that elevated activity of various ALDHs, namely ALDH1A2, ALDH1A3, ALDH1A7, ALDH2*2, ALDH3A1, ALDH4A1, ALDH5A1, ALDH6, and ALDH9A1, has been observed in normal and cancer stem cells. Consequently, ALDHs not only may be considered markers of these cells, but also may well play a functional role in terms of self-protection, differentiation, and/or expansion of stem cell populations. The ALDH3 family includes enzymes able to oxidize medium-chain aliphatic and aromatic aldehydes, such as peroxidic and fatty aldehydes. Moreover, these enzymes also have noncatalytic functions, including antioxidant functions and some structural roles. The gene of the cytosolic form, ALDH3A1, is localized on chromosome 17 in human beings and on the 11th and 10th chromosome in the mouse and rat, respectively. ALDH3A1 belongs to the phase II group of drug-metabolizing enzymes and is highly expressed in the stomach, lung, keratinocytes, and cornea, but poorly, if at all, in normal liver. Cytosolic ALDH3 is induced by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons or chlorinated compounds, such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, in rat liver cells and increases during carcinogenesis. It has been observed that this increased activity is directly correlated with the degree of deviation in hepatoma and lung cancer cell lines, as is the case in chemically induced hepatoma in rats. High ALDH3A1 expression and activity have been correlated with cell proliferation, resistance against aldehydes derived from lipid peroxidation, and resistance against drug toxicity, such as oxazaphosphorines. Indeed, cells with a high ALDH3A1 content are more resistant to the cytostatic and cytotoxic effects of lipidic aldehydes than are those with a low content. A reduction in cell proliferation can be observed when the enzyme is directly inhibited by the administration of synthetic specific inhibitors, antisense oligonucleotides, or siRNA or indirectly inhibited by the induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) with polyunsaturated fatty acids or PPARgamma transfection. Conversely, cell proliferation is stimulated by the activation of ALDH3A1, whether by inhibiting PPARgamma with a specific antagonist, antisense oligonucleotides, siRNA, or a medical device (i.e., composite polypropylene prosthesis for hernia repair) used to induce cell proliferation. To date, the mechanisms underlying the effects of ALDHs on cell proliferation are not yet fully clear. A likely hypothesis is that the regulatory effect is mediated by the catabolism of some endogenous substrates deriving from normal cell metabolism, such as 4-hydroxynonenal, which have the capacity to either stimulate or inhibit the expression of genes involved in regulating proliferation.
Recently published articles have reported the controversial data regarding expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase isozyme 1A1 (ALDH1A1), a potential candidate marker for normal and cancer stem cells (CSCs), in thyroid tissues. These data prompted us to re-evaluate expression of ALDH1A1 in normal and cancerous thyroid tissues by 2 different means. The first method was immunohistochemistry with 2 different anti-ALDH1A1 antibodies from distinct companies. Following validating the integrity of these 2 antibodies by Western blotting with ALDH-expressing and nonexpressing cancer cell lines and immunohistochemistry with breast and colon tissues, we report here significant and comparable expression of ALDH1A1 in both normal and cancerous thyroid tissues with both antibodies. Next, relative expression levels of ALDH isozymes were evaluated by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), revealing that ALDH1A1 was the most highly expressed isozyme followed by ALDH9A1 and relative expression patterns of isozymes were very similar in normal and cancerous tissues. All these data demonstrate that thyroid cells of normal and cancer origins do express ALDH1A1 and to a lesser extent 9A1. Further study will be necessary to study functional significance of ALDH1A1 in the function and behaviors of thyroid normal and cancer stem cells.
Sepsis, characterized as a systemic inflammatory response triggered by the invasion of pathogens, represents a continuum that may escalate from mild systemic infection to severe sepsis, potentially resulting in septic shock and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Advancements in lipidomics and metabolomics have unveiled the complex role of fatty acid metabolism (FAM) in both healthy and pathological states. Leveraging bioinformatics, this investigation aimed to identify and substantiate potential FAM-related genes (FAMGs) implicated in sepsis. The approach encompassed a differential expression analysis across a pool of 36 candidate FAMGs. GSEA and GSVA were employed to assess the biological significance and pathways associated with these genes. Furthermore, Lasso regression and SVM-RFE methodologies were implemented to determine key hub genes and assess the diagnostic prowess of nine selected FAMGs in sepsis identification. The study also investigated the correlation between these hub FAMGs. Validation was conducted through expression-level analysis using the GSE13904 and GSE65682 datasets. The study identified 13 sepsis-associated FAMGs, including ABCD2, ACSL3, ACSM1, ACSS1, ACSS2, ACOX1, ALDH9A1, ACACA, ACACB, FASN, OLAH, PPT1, and ELOVL4. As demonstrated by functional enrichment analysis results, these genes played key roles in several critical biological pathways, such as the Peroxisome, PPAR signaling pathway, and Insulin signaling pathway, all of which are intricately linked to metabolic regulation and inflammatory responses. The diagnostic potential of these FAMGs was further highlighted. In short, the expression patterns of these FAMGs c effectively distinguished sepsis cases from non-septic controls, which suggested that they may be promising biomarkers for early sepsis detection. This discovery not only enhanced our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underpinning sepsis but also paved the way for developing novel diagnostic tools and therapeutic strategies targeting metabolic dysregulation in septic patients. This research sheds light on 13 FAMGs associated with sepsis, providing valuable insights into novel biomarkers for this condition and facilitating the monitoring of its progression. These findings underscore the significance of purine metabolism in sepsis pathogenesis and open avenues for further investigation into therapeutic targets.
So far six susceptibility loci for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) have been discovered by genome-wide association studies (GWAS). To identify additional RCC common risk loci, we performed a meta-analysis of published GWAS (totalling 2,215 cases and 8,566 controls of Western-European background) with imputation using 1000 Genomes Project and UK10K Project data as reference panels and followed up the most significant association signals [22 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 3 indels in eight genomic regions] in 383 cases and 2,189 controls from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). A combined analysis identified a promising susceptibility locus mapping to 1q24.1 marked by the imputed SNP rs3845536 (Pcombined =2.30x10-8). Specifically, the signal maps to intron 4 of the ALDH9A1 gene (aldehyde dehydrogenase 9 family, member A1). We further evaluated this potential signal in 2,461 cases and 5,081 controls from the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) GWAS of RCC cases and controls from multiple European regions. In contrast to earlier findings no association was shown in the IARC series (P=0.94; Pcombined =2.73x10-5). While variation at 1q24.1 represents a potential risk locus for RCC, future replication analyses are required to substantiate our observation.
Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs) constitute a group of enzymes that catalyze the oxidation of aldehydes to carboxylic acids. The human ALDH superfamily, including 19 different isoenzymes (ALDH1A1, ALDH1A2, ALDH1A3, AHDH1B1, ALDH1L1, ALDH1L2, ALDH2, ALDH3A1, ALDH3A2, ALDH3B1, ALDH3B2, ALDH4A1, ALDH5A1, ALDH6A1, ALDH7A1, ALDH8A1, ALDH9A1, ALDHA16A1, ALDH18A1), displays different key physiological and toxicological functions, with specific tissue expression and substrate specificity. Several studies have established that ALDH are interesting markers for the identification and quantification of human hematopoietic stem cells and cancer stem cells, notably leukemic stem cells. ALDH2 is the best-documented enzyme, in this family, as having an impact on hematology, particularly myeloid malignancies. ALDH2 mainly catalyzes the detoxification of toxic aldehydes (acetaldehyde, formaldehyde). For example, ALDH2 detoxifies formaldehyde, which is produced during the differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors. The trigger of alcohol dehydrogenase 5 (also known as formaldehyde dehydrogenase or S-nitrosoglutathione reductase, ADH5/FDH/GSNOR)/ALDH2 allows to eliminate formaldehyde and ensures normal hematopoiesis. Moreover, the ALDH2*2 variant allele is the most frequent ALDH2 variant, found in 35-45% of individuals of East Asian origin. It is associated with altered acetaldehyde metabolism and is involved in several hematological diseases (aplastic anemia, bone marrow failure, myelodysplastic syndrome). This review presents current knowledge of different members of the ALDH family and their involvement in normal and malignant hematopoiesis. Focus was brought to the ALDH2 isoenzyme in congenital (Fanconi anemia, Aplastic anemia, mental retardation, and dwarfism (AMeD) syndrome, and idiopathic aplastic anemia) and acquired (acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome) hematological diseases. It also describes the possibilities of using ALDH as both a biomarker and therapeutic target, to identify and eradicate leukemic stem cells in malignant diseases.
Alterations in brain metabolism are closely associated with the molecular hallmarks of Parkinson's disease (PD). A clear understanding of the main metabolic perturbations in PD is therefore important. Here, we retrospectively analysed the expression of metabolic genes from 34 PD-control post-mortem human brain transcriptome data comparisons from literature, spanning multiple brain regions. We found high metabolic correlations between the Substantia nigra (SN)- and cerebral cortex-derived tissues. Moreover, three clusters of PD patient cohorts were identified based on perturbed metabolic processes in the SN - each characterised by perturbations in (a) bile acid metabolism (b) omega-3 fatty acid metabolism, and (c) lipoic acid and androgen metabolism - metabolic themes not comprehensively addressed in PD. These perturbations were supported by concurrence between transcriptome and proteome changes in the expression patterns for CBR1, ECI2, BDH2, CYP27A1, ALDH1B1, ALDH9A1, ADH5, ALDH7A1, L1CAM, and PLXNB3 genes, providing a valuable resource for drug targeting and diagnosis. Also, we analysed 58 PD-control transcriptome data comparisons from in vivo/in vitro disease models and identified experimental PD models with significant correlations to matched human brain regions. Collectively, our findings suggest metabolic alterations in several brain regions, heterogeneity in metabolic alterations between study cohorts for the SN tissues and the need to optimize current experimental models to advance research on metabolic aspects of PD.
Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs), a superfamily of NAD(P)(+)-dependent enzymes with similar primary structures, catalyze the oxidation of a wide spectrum of endogenous and exogenous aliphatic and aromatic aldehydes. Thus far, 16 ALDH genes with distinct chromosomal locations have been identified in the human genome. Polymorphism in ALDH2 is associated with altered acetaldehyde metabolism, decreased risk of alcoholism and increased risk of ethanol-induced cancers. Polymorphisms in ALDH3A2, ALDH4A1, ALDH5A1 and ALDH6A1 are associated with metabolic diseases generally characterized by neurologic complications. Mutations in ALDH3A2 cause loss of enzymatic activity and are the molecular basis of Sjogren-Larsson syndrome. Mutations in ALDH4A1 are associated with type II hyperprolinemia. Deficiency in ALDH5A1 causes 4-hydroxybutyric aciduria. Lack of ALDH6A1 appears to be associated with developmental delay. Allelic variants of the ALDH1A1, ALDH1B1, ALDH3A1 and ALDH9A1 genes have also been observed but not yet characterized. This review describes consequences of ALDH polymorphisms with respect to drug metabolism and disease.
Human exposure to abacavir, a primary alcohol antiretroviral, is associated with the development of immunological drug reactions in individuals carrying the HLA risk allele B*57:01. Interaction of abacavir with antigen presenting cells results in cell activation through an Hsp70-mediated Toll-like receptor pathway and the provision of T-cell antigenic determinants. Abacavir's electrophilic aldehyde metabolites are potential precursors of neoantigens. Herein, we have used mass spectrometry to study the oxidative metabolism of abacavir in EBV-transformed human B-cells. RNA and protein were isolated from the cells and subjected to transcriptomic and mass spectrometric analyses to identify the redox enzymes expressed. Low levels of isomeric abacavir carboxylic acids were detected in subcellular fractions of EBV-transformed human B-cells incubated with abacavir. Metabolite formation was time-dependent but was not reduced by an inhibitor of Class I alcohol dehydrogenases. Relatively high levels of mRNA were detected for several redox enzymes, including alcohol dehydrogenase 5 (Class III), aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDH3A2, ALDH6A1, and ALDH9A1), CYP1B1, CYP2R1, CYP7B1, and hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 10. Over 2600 proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. More than 1000 of these proteins exhibited catalytic activity, and 80 were oxido-reductases. This is the first proteomic inventory of enzymes in antigen presenting cells. However, neither of the hepatic alcohol dehydrogenases of Class I which metabolize abacavir in vitro was expressed at the protein level. Nevertheless the metabolic production of abacavir carboxylic acids by B-cell fractions implies abacavir-treated immune cells might be exposed to the drug's protein-reactive aldehyde metabolites in vivo.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the impact of maternal aging on the molecular signature of cumulus cells. DESIGN: Experimental study. SETTING: Research laboratory. PATIENT(S): Patients, young fertile oocyte donors (n = 40) and infertile women of advanced maternal age (40-45 years; n = 48), donated, with Institutional Review Board consent, cumulus cells during routine infertility treatment. INTERVENTION(S): None. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Proteomic and gene expression profiles of cumulus cells. RESULT(S): Proteomic analysis identified a total of 1,423 cumulus cell proteins. Statistical analysis revealed 110 (7.7%) proteins to be differentially expressed in relation to female aging (>1.5-fold change). Pathway annotation revealed significant involvement in metabolism (ACAT2, HSD17B4, ALDH9A1, MVK, CYP11A1, and FDFT1), oxidative phosphorylation (OP; NDUFA1, UQCRC1, MT-ATP6, ATP5I, and MT-ATP8), and post-transcriptional mechanisms (KHSRP, SFPQ, DDX46, SNRPF, ADAR, NHPL1, and U2AF2) relative to advanced maternal age. Gene expression analysis also revealed altered profiles in cumulus cells from women in their early to mid-40s. CONCLUSION(S): This novel study reveals that the cumulus cell molecular signature, at both the gene and protein level, is impacted by advanced maternal aging. A compromised follicular environment is evident with altered energy metabolism and post-transcriptional processes.
Tibeto-Burman (TB) people have endeavored to adapt to the hypoxic, cold, and high-UV high-altitude environments in the Tibetan Plateau and complex disease exposures in lowland rainforests since the late Paleolithic period. However, the full landscape of genetic history and biological adaptation of geographically diverse TB-speaking people, as well as their interaction mechanism, remain unknown. Here, we generate a whole-genome meta-database of 500 individuals from 39 TB-speaking populations and present a comprehensive landscape of genetic diversity, admixture history, and differentiated adaptative features of geographically different TB-speaking people. We identify genetic differentiation related to geography and language among TB-speaking people, consistent with their differentiated admixture process with incoming or indigenous ancestral source populations. A robust genetic connection between the Tibetan-Yi corridor and the ancient Yellow River people supports their Northern China origin hypothesis. We finally report substructure-related differentiated biological adaptative signatures between highland Tibetans and Loloish speakers. Adaptative signatures associated with the physical pigmentation (EDAR and SLC24A5) and metabolism (ALDH9A1) are identified in Loloish people, which differed from the high-altitude adaptative genetic architecture in Tibetan. TB-related genomic resources provide new insights into the genetic basis of biological adaptation and better reference for the anthropologically informed sampling design in biomedical and genomic cohort research.
Epidemiological and fetal programming studies point to the role of fetal growth in adult adipose tissue (AT) mass in large mammals. Despite the incidence of fetal AT growth for human health and animal production outcomes, there is still a lack of relevant studies. We determined the cellular and large-scale-molecular features of bovine fetal perirenal AT sampled at 110, 180, 210, and 260 days post-conception (dpc) with the aim of identifying key cellular and molecular events in AT growth. The increase in AT weight from 110 to 260 dpc resulted from an increase in adipocyte volume and particularly adipocyte number that were concomitant with temporal changes in the abundance of 142 proteins revealed by proteomics. At 110 and 180 dpc, we identified proteins such as TCP1, FKBP4, or HSPD1 that may regulate adipocyte precursor proliferation by controlling cell-cycle progression and/or apoptosis or delaying PPARgamma-induced differentiation. From 180 dpc, the up-regulation of PPARgamma-induced proteins, lipogenic and lipolytic enzymes, and adipokine expression may underpin the differentiation and increase in adipocyte volume. Also from 180 dpc, we unexpectedly observed up-regulations in the beta-subunit of ATP synthase, which is normally bypassed in brown AT, as well as in aldehyde dehydrogenases ALDH2 and ALDH9A1, which were predominantly expressed in mouse white AT. These results, together with the observed abundant unilocular adipocytes at 180 and 260 dpc, strongly suggest that fetal bovine perirenal AT has much more in common with white than with brown AT.
Chronic alcohol consumption may induce gene expression alterations in brain reward regions such as the prefrontal cortex (PFC), modulating the risk of alcohol use disorders (AUDs). Transcriptome profiles of 23 AUD cases and 23 matched controls (16 pairs of males and 7 pairs of females) in postmortem PFC were generated using Illumina's HumanHT-12 v4 Expression BeadChip. Probe-level differentially expressed genes and gene modules in AUD subjects were identified using multiple linear regression and weighted gene co-expression network analyses. The enrichment of differentially co-expressed genes in alcohol dependence-associated genes identified by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) was examined using gene set enrichment analysis. Biological pathways overrepresented by differentially co-expressed genes were uncovered using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Three AUD-associated gene modules in males [Module 1 (561 probes mapping to 505 genes): r = 0.42, P(correlation) = 0.020; Module 2 (815 probes mapping to 713 genes): r = 0.41, P(correlation) = 0.020; Module 3 (1,446 probes mapping to 1,305 genes): r = -0.38, P(correlation) = 0.030] and one AUD-associated gene module in females [Module 4 (683 probes mapping to 652 genes): r = 0.64, P(correlation) = 0.010] were identified. Differentially expressed genes mapped by significant expression probes (P(nominal) </= 0.05) clustered in Modules 1 and 2 were enriched in GWAS-identified alcohol dependence-associated genes [Module 1 (134 genes): P = 0.028; Module 2 (243 genes): P = 0.004]. These differentially expressed genes, including ALDH2, ALDH7A1, and ALDH9A1, are involved in cellular functions such as aldehyde detoxification, mitochondrial function, and fatty acid metabolism. Our study revealed differentially co-expressed genes in postmortem PFC of AUD subjects and demonstrated that some of these differentially co-expressed genes participate in alcohol metabolism.
OBJECTIVE: Neuroleptic-induced tardive dyskinesia (TD) is an involuntary movement disorder that develops in patients who have undergone long-term treatment with antipsychotic medications, and its etiology is unclear. In this study, a genome-wide association screening was done to identify the pathway(s) in which genetic variations influence susceptibility to neuroleptic-induced TD. METHODS: Screening with Sentrix Human-1 Genotyping BeadChip (Illumina, San Diego, California, USA) was done for 50 Japanese schizophrenia patients with treatment-resistant TD and 50 Japanese schizophrenia patients without TD. A total of 40 573 single nucleotide polymorphisms that were not in linkage disequilibrium with each other and were located in the exonic and intronic regions of 13 307 genes were analyzed. After gene-based corrections, P values for allelic associations were subjected to canonical pathway-based analyses with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (Ingenuity Systems, Inc., Redwood City, California, USA). RESULTS: Eight genes (ABAT, ALDH9A1, GABRA3, GABRA4, GABRB2, GABRAG3, GPHN, and SLC6A11) contained polymorphisms with gene-based corrected allelic P values of less than 0.05. They were aggregated significantly in 33 genes belonging to the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor signaling pathway (P=0.00007, corrected P=0.01). Associations were replicated in an independent sample of 36 patients with TD and 136 patients without TD for polymorphisms in SLC6A11 (GABA transporter 3) (P=0.0004 in the total sample), GABRB2 (beta-2 subunit of GABA-A receptor) (P=0.00007 in the total sample), and GABRG3 (gamma-3 subunit of GABA-A receptor) (P=0.0006 in the total sample). CONCLUSION: The results suggest that the GABA receptor signaling pathway may be involved in genetic susceptibility to treatment-resistant TD, at least in a subgroup of Japanese patients with schizophrenia. The present results suggest that benzodiazepines may be considered as possible treatment option for TD.
Genetic impairment of the genes coding for three mammalian trefoil peptides resulted in severe gastrointestinal malfunctions. The trefoil peptides also appear involved in caloric metabolism. Monitoring global miRNA expression of Tff3 deficient mice points to an interplay of Tff3 with a miRNA regulatory network. We identified 21 miRNAs that were deregulated when compared to the wild type strain. In silico evaluation indicated that the majority of the 21 miRNA were connected with the metabolic pathway "glycolysis/gluconeogenesis'' (p=0.032), a signaling pathway including nine target genes Aldh9a1, Aldh2, Pck1, Aldoc, Pgam2, Pck2, Adh4, Adh5, and Fbp1. Association of Tff3 with this metabolic pathway is further supported by the observation that the body mass of adult Tff3 KO mice (five months) showed a clearly reduced weight. Furthermore, the majority of the identified 21 miRNA genes are localized on murine chromosomes 2 and 5 in three clusters (2A1, 2B, 5B3) suggesting a coordinated expression control and function.
