Aldehyde dehydrogenase, mitochondrial; Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 family member; Belongs to the aldehyde dehydrogenase family.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The Glu504Lys polymorphism in the aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) gene is closely associated with myocardial ischaemia/reperfusion injury (I/RI). The effects of ALDH2 on neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation (i.e. NETosis) during I/RI remain unknown. This study aimed to investigate the role of ALDH2 in NETosis in the pathogenesis of myocardial I/RI. METHODS: The mouse model of myocardial I/RI was constructed on wild-type, ALDH2 knockout, peptidylarginine deiminase 4 (Pad4) knockout, and ALDH2/PAD4 double knockout mice. Overall, 308 ST-elevation myocardial infarction patients after primary percutaneous coronary intervention were enrolled in the study. RESULTS: Enhanced NETosis was observed in human neutrophils carrying the ALDH2 genetic mutation and ischaemic myocardium of ALDH2 knockout mice compared with controls. PAD4 knockout or treatment with NETosis-targeting drugs (GSK484, DNase1) substantially attenuated the extent of myocardial damage, particularly in ALDH2 knockout. Mechanistically, ALDH2 deficiency increased damage-associated molecular pattern release and susceptibility to NET-induced damage during myocardial I/RI. ALDH2 deficiency induced NOX2-dependent NETosis via upregulating the endoplasmic reticulum stress/microsomal glutathione S-transferase 2/leukotriene C4 (LTC4) pathway. The Food and Drug Administration-approved LTC4 receptor antagonist pranlukast ameliorated I/RI by inhibiting NETosis in both wild-type and ALDH2 knockout mice. Serum myeloperoxidase-DNA complex and LTC4 levels exhibited the predictive effect on adverse left ventricular remodelling at 6 months after primary percutaneous coronary intervention in ST-elevation myocardial infarction patients. CONCLUSIONS: ALDH2 deficiency exacerbates myocardial I/RI by promoting NETosis via the endoplasmic reticulum stress/microsomal glutathione S-transferase 2/LTC4/NOX2 pathway. This study hints at the role of NETosis in the pathogenesis of myocardial I/RI, and pranlukast might be a potential therapeutic option for attenuating I/RI, particularly in individuals with the ALDH2 mutation.
A family of detoxifying enzymes called aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs) has been a subject of recent interest, as its role in detoxifying aldehydes that accumulate through metabolism and to which we are exposed from the environment has been elucidated. Although the human genome has 19 ALDH genes, one ALDH emerges as a particularly important enzyme in a variety of human pathologies. This ALDH, ALDH2, is located in the mitochondrial matrix with much known about its role in ethanol metabolism. Less known is a new body of research to be discussed in this review, suggesting that ALDH2 dysfunction may contribute to a variety of human diseases including cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, neurodegenerative diseases, stroke, and cancer. Recent studies suggest that ALDH2 dysfunction is also associated with Fanconi anemia, pain, osteoporosis, and the process of aging. Furthermore, an ALDH2 inactivating mutation (termed ALDH2*2) is the most common single point mutation in humans, and epidemiological studies suggest a correlation between this inactivating mutation and increased propensity for common human pathologies. These data together with studies in animal models and the use of new pharmacological tools that activate ALDH2 depict a new picture related to ALDH2 as a critical health-promoting enzyme.
BACKGROUND: Human cardiac long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) profiles in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) were previously analyzed, and the long noncoding RNA CHKB (choline kinase beta) divergent transcript (CHKB-DT) levels were found to be mostly downregulated in the heart. In this study, the function of CHKB-DT in DCM was determined. METHODS: Long noncoding RNA expression levels in the human heart tissues were measured via quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and in situ hybridization assays. A CHKB-DT heterozygous or homozygous knockout mouse model was generated using the clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 system, and the adeno-associated virus with a cardiac-specific promoter was used to deliver the RNA in vivo. Sarcomere shortening was performed to assess the primary cardiomyocyte contractility. The Seahorse XF cell mitochondrial stress test was performed to determine the energy metabolism and ATP production. Furthermore, the underlying mechanisms were explored using quantitative proteomics, ribosome profiling, RNA antisense purification assays, mass spectrometry, RNA pull-down, luciferase assay, RNA-fluorescence in situ hybridization, and Western blotting. RESULTS: CHKB-DT levels were remarkably decreased in patients with DCM and mice with transverse aortic constriction-induced heart failure. Heterozygous knockout of CHKB-DT in cardiomyocytes caused cardiac dilation and dysfunction and reduced the contractility of primary cardiomyocytes. Moreover, CHKB-DT heterozygous knockout impaired mitochondrial function and decreased ATP production as well as cardiac energy metabolism. Mechanistically, ALDH2 (aldehyde dehydrogenase 2) was a direct target of CHKB-DT. CHKB-DT physically interacted with the mRNA of ALDH2 and fused in sarcoma (FUS) through the GGUG motif. CHKB-DT knockdown aggravated ALDH2 mRNA degradation and 4-HNE (4-hydroxy-2-nonenal) production, whereas overexpression of CHKB-DT reversed these molecular changes. Furthermore, restoring ALDH2 expression in CHKB-DT(+/)(-) mice alleviated cardiac dilation and dysfunction. CONCLUSIONS: CHKB-DT is significantly downregulated in DCM. CHKB-DT acts as an energy metabolism-associated long noncoding RNA and represents a promising therapeutic target against DCM.
The primary enzymes involved in alcohol metabolism are alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). Both enzymes occur in several forms that are encoded by different genes; moreover, there are variants (i.e., alleles) of some of these genes that encode enzymes with different characteristics and which have different ethnic distributions. Which ADH or ALDH alleles a person carries influence his or her level of alcohol consumption and risk of alcoholism. Researchers to date primarily have studied coding variants in the ADH1 B, ADH1C, and ALDH2 genes that are associated with altered kinetic properties of the resulting enzymes. For example, certain ADH1B and ADH1C alleles encode particularly active ADH enzymes, resulting in more rapid conversion of alcohol (i.e., ethanol) to acetaldehyde; these alleles have a protective effect on the risk of alcoholism. A variant of the ALDH2 gene encodes an essentially inactive ALDH enzyme, resulting in acetaldehyde accumulation and a protective effect. It is becoming clear that noncoding variants in both ADH and ALDH genes also may influence alcohol metabolism and, consequently, alcoholism risk; the specific nature and effects of these variants still need further study.
The mitochondrial enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) catalyzes the detoxification of acetaldehyde and endogenous lipid aldehydes. Approximately 40% of East Asians, accounting for 8% of the human population, carry the E504K mutation in ALDH2 that leads to accumulation of toxic reactive aldehydes and increases the risk for cardiovascular disease, cancer, and Alzheimer disease, among others. However, the role of ALDH2 in acute kidney injury (AKI) remains poorly defined and is therefore the subject of the present study using various cellular and organismal sources. In murine models, in which AKI was induced by either the contrast agent iohexol or renal ischemia/reperfusion, KO, activation/overexpression of ALDH2 were associated with increased and decreased renal injury, respectively. In murine renal tubular epithelial cells (RTECs), ALDH2 upregulated Beclin-1 expression, promoted autophagy activation, and eliminated ROS. In vivo and in vitro, both 3-MA and Beclin-1 siRNAs inhibited autophagy and abolished ALDH2-mediated renoprotection. In mice with iohexol-induced AKI, ALDH2 knockdown in RTECs using AAV-shRNA impaired autophagy activation and aggravated renal injury. In human renal proximal tubular epithelial HK-2 cells exposed to iohexol, ALDH2 activation potentiated autophagy and attenuated apoptosis. In mice with AKI induced by renal ischemia/reperfusion, ALDH2 overexpression or pretreatment regulated autophagy mitigating apoptosis of RTECs and renal injury. In summary, our data collectively substantiate a critical role of ALDH2 in AKI via autophagy activation involving the Beclin-1 pathway.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: We review the search for genetic variants that affect the risk for alcohol dependence and alcohol consumption. RECENT FINDINGS: Variations in genes affecting alcohol metabolism (ADH1B, ALDH2) are protective against both alcohol dependence and excessive consumption, but different variants are found in different populations. There are different patterns of risk variants for alcohol dependence vs. consumption. Variants for alcohol dependence, but not consumption, are associated with risk for other psychiatric illnesses. ADH1B and ALDH2 strongly affect both consumption and dependence. Variations in many other genes affect both consumption and dependence-or one or the other of these traits-but individual effect sizes are small. Evidence for other specific genes that affect dependence is not yet strong. Most current knowledge derives from studies of European-ancestry populations, and large studies of carefully phenotyped subjects from different populations are needed to understand the genetic contributions to alcohol consumption and alcohol use disorders.
Obesity and type 2 diabetes have reached pandemic proportion. ALDH2 (acetaldehyde dehydrogenase 2, mitochondrial) is the key metabolizing enzyme of acetaldehyde and other toxic aldehydes, such as 4-hydroxynonenal. A missense Glu504Lys mutation of the ALDH2 gene is prevalent in 560 million East Asians, resulting in reduced ALDH2 enzymatic activity. We find that male Aldh2 knock-in mice mimicking human Glu504Lys mutation were prone to develop diet-induced obesity, glucose intolerance, insulin resistance, and fatty liver due to reduced adaptive thermogenesis and energy expenditure. We find reduced activity of ALDH2 of the brown adipose tissue from the male Aldh2 homozygous knock-in mice. Proteomic analyses of the brown adipose tissue from the male Aldh2 knock-in mice identifies increased 4-hydroxynonenal-adducted proteins involved in mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation and electron transport chain, leading to markedly decreased fatty acid oxidation rate and mitochondrial respiration of brown adipose tissue, which is essential for adaptive thermogenesis and energy expenditure. AD-9308 is a water-soluble, potent, and highly selective ALDH2 activator. AD-9308 treatment ameliorates diet-induced obesity and fatty liver, and improves glucose homeostasis in both male Aldh2 wild-type and knock-in mice. Our data highlight the therapeutic potential of reducing toxic aldehyde levels by activating ALDH2 for metabolic diseases.
Renal tubular epithelial cells are one of the high energy-consuming cell types, which mainly depend on mitochondrial energy supply. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) is a key enzyme that is involved in alcohol metabolism and mitochondrial oxidative ATP production; however, its function in mitochondrial homoeostasis in acute kidney injury (AKI) is unclear. Here, we found that ALDH2 expression was predominantly decreased in cisplatin or maleic acid (MA) models both in vivo and in vitro. ALDH2 knockout (KO) mice exhibited exacerbated kidney impairment and apoptosis of tubular epithelial cells after cisplatin injection. In contrast, ALDH2 activation alleviated AKI and tubular cell apoptosis in both cisplatin- and MA-induced models. RNA sequencing revealed that the oxidative phosphorylation pathway was positively enriched in the renal tissues after Alda-1 pre-treatment in MA-induced mice. ALDH2 activation restored mitochondrial structure, mitochondrial membrane potential, and respiration rate, but downregulated glycolysis in MA-induced mice and human renal proximal tubular epithelial (HK-2) cells. Mechanistically, co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that ALDH2 interacts with peroxisomal proliferator-gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha), a master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, and advanced its nuclear translocation. Subsequently, PGC-1alpha knockdown almost abolished the improvement of ALDH2 activation on MA-induced tubular epithelial cells damage. Thus, our study revealed that ALDH2 activation alleviated mitochondrial dysfunction in AKI by enhancing PGC-1alpha-mediated mitochondrial biogenesis. Hence, ALDH2 may act as a potential therapeutic target to prevent AKI progression.
BACKGROUND: Clinical studies show that the most common single-point mutation in humans, ALDH2 (aldehyde dehydrogenase 2) rs671 mutation, is a risk factor for the development and poor prognosis of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases, but the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Apoptotic cells are phagocytosed and eliminated by macrophage efferocytosis during atherosclerosis, and enhancement of arterial macrophage efferocytosis reduces atherosclerosis development. METHODS: Plaque areas, necrotic core size, apoptosis, and efferocytosis in aortic lesions were investigated in APOE(-/-) mice with bone marrow transplanted from APOE(-)(/-)ALDH2(-)(/-) and APOE(-)(/-) mice. RNA-seq, proteomics, and immunoprecipitation experiments were used to screen and validate signaling pathways affected by ALDH2. Efferocytosis and protein levels were verified in human macrophages from wild-type and rs671 mutation populations. RESULTS: We found that transplanting bone marrow from APOE(-)(/-)ALDH2(-)(/-) to APOE(-)(/-) mice significantly increased atherosclerosis plaques compared with transplanting bone marrow from APOE(-)(/-) to APOE(-)(/-) mice. In addition to defective efferocytosis in plaques of APOE(-)(/-) mice bone marrow transplanted from APOE(-)(/-)ALDH2(-)(/-) mice in vivo, macrophages from ALDH2(-)(/-) mice also showed significantly impaired efferocytotic activity in vitro. Subsequent RNA-seq, proteomics, and immunoprecipitation experiments showed that wild-type ALDH2 directly interacted with Rac2 and attenuated its degradation due to decreasing the K48-linked polyubiquitination of lysine 123 in Rac2, whereas the rs671 mutant markedly destabilized Rac2. Furthermore, Rac2 played a more crucial role than other Rho GTPases in the internalization process in which Rac2 was up-regulated, activated, and clustered into dots. Overexpression of wild-type ALDH2 in ALDH2(-)(/-) macrophages, rather than the rs671 mutant, rescued Rac2 degradation and defective efferocytosis. More importantly, ALDH2 rs671 in human macrophages dampened the apoptotic cells induced upregulation of Rac2 and subsequent efferocytosis. CONCLUSIONS: Our study has uncovered a pivotal role of the ALDH2-Rac2 axis in mediating efferocytosis during atherosclerosis, highlighting a potential therapeutic strategy in cardiovascular diseases, especially for ALDH2 rs671 mutation carriers.
The involvement of endothelial barrier function in abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and its upstream regulators remains unknown. Single-cell RNA sequencing shows that disrupted endothelial focal junction is an early (3 days) and persistent (28 days) event during Angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced AAA progression. Consistently, mRNA sequencing on human aortic dissection tissues confirmed downregulated expression of endothelial barrier-related genes. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2), a negative regulator of AAA, is found to be upregulated in the intimal media of AAA samples, leading to testing its role in early-stage AAA. ALDH2 knockdown/knockout specifically in endothelial cells (ECs) significantly increases expression of EC barrier markers related to focal adhesion and tight junction, restores endothelial barrier integrity, and suppresses early aortic dilation of AAA (7 and 14 days post-Ang II). Mechanically, ELK3 acts as an ALDH2 downstream regulator for endothelial barrier function preservation. At the molecular level, ALDH2 directly binds to LIN28B, a regulator of ELK3 mRNA stability, hindering LIN28B binding to ELK3 mRNA, thereby depressing ELK3 expression and impairing endothelial barrier function. Therefore, preserving vascular endothelial barrier integrity via ALDH2-specific knockdown in ECs holds therapeutic potential in the early management of AAAs.
The common aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) alcohol flushing variant known as ALDH2*2 affects  approximately 8% of the world's population. Even in heterozygous carriers, this missense variant leads to a severe loss of ALDH2 enzymatic activity and has been linked to an increased risk of coronary artery disease (CAD). Endothelial cell (EC) dysfunction plays a determining role in all stages of CAD pathogenesis, including early-onset CAD. However, the contribution of ALDH2*2 to EC dysfunction and its relation to CAD are not fully understood. In a large genome-wide association study (GWAS) from Biobank Japan, ALDH2*2 was found to be one of the strongest single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with CAD. Clinical assessment of endothelial function showed that human participants carrying ALDH2*2 exhibited impaired vasodilation after light alcohol drinking. Using human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived ECs (iPSC-ECs) and CRISPR-Cas9-corrected ALDH2*2 iPSC-ECs, we modeled ALDH2*2-induced EC dysfunction in vitro, demonstrating an increase in oxidative stress and inflammatory markers and a decrease in nitric oxide (NO) production and tube formation capacity, which was further exacerbated by ethanol exposure. We subsequently found that sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) such as empagliflozin mitigated ALDH2*2-associated EC dysfunction. Studies in ALDH2*2 knock-in mice further demonstrated that empagliflozin attenuated ALDH2*2-mediated vascular dysfunction in vivo. Mechanistically, empagliflozin inhibited Na(+)/H(+)-exchanger 1 (NHE-1) and activated AKT kinase and endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) pathways to ameliorate ALDH2*2-induced EC dysfunction. Together, our results suggest that ALDH2*2 induces EC dysfunction and that SGLT2i may potentially be used as a preventative measure against CAD for ALDH2*2 carriers.
Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) are responsible for metabolizing the bulk of ethanol consumed as part of the diet and their activities contribute to the rate of ethanol elimination from the blood. They are expressed at highest levels in liver, but at lower levels in many tissues. This pathway probably evolved as a detoxification mechanism for environmental alcohols. However, with the consumption of large amounts of ethanol, the oxidation of ethanol can become a major energy source and, particularly in the liver, interferes with the metabolism of other nutrients. Polymorphic variants of the genes for these enzymes encode enzymes with altered kinetic properties. The pathophysiological effects of these variants may be mediated by accumulation of acetaldehyde; high-activity ADH variants are predicted to increase the rate of acetaldehyde generation, while the low-activity ALDH2 variant is associated with an inability to metabolize this compound. The effects of acetaldehyde may be expressed either in the cells generating it, or by delivery of acetaldehyde to various tissues by the bloodstream or even saliva. Inheritance of the high-activity ADH beta2, encoded by the ADH2*2 gene, and the inactive ALDH2*2 gene product have been conclusively associated with reduced risk of alcoholism. This association is influenced by gene-environment interactions, such as religion and national origin. The variants have also been studied for association with alcoholic liver disease, cancer, fetal alcohol syndrome, CVD, gout, asthma and clearance of xenobiotics. The strongest correlations found to date have been those between the ALDH2*2 allele and cancers of the oro-pharynx and oesophagus. It will be important to replicate other interesting associations between these variants and other cancers and heart disease, and to determine the biochemical mechanisms underlying the associations.
Mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) is the major enzyme responsible for metabolizing toxic acetaldehyde to acetate and acts as a protective or defensive protein against various disease states associated with alcohol use disorder (AUD), including alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD). We hypothesized that Aldh2-knockout (KO) mice are more susceptible to binge alcohol-mediated liver injury than wild-type (WT) mice through increased oxidative stress, gut leakiness and endotoxemia. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the protective role of ALDH2 in binge alcohol-induced gut permeability, endotoxemia, and acute inflammatory liver injury by exposing Aldh2-KO or WT mice to a single oral dose of binge alcohol 3.5, 4.0, or 5.0 g/kg. Our findings showed for the first time that ALDH2 deficiency in Aldh2-KO mice increases their sensitivity to binge alcohol-induced oxidative and nitrative stress, enterocyte apoptosis, and nitration of gut tight junction (TJ) and adherent junction (AJ) proteins, leading to their degradation. These resulted in gut leakiness and endotoxemia in Aldh2-KO mice after exposure to a single dose of ethanol even at 3.5 g/kg, while no changes were observed in the corresponding WT mice. The elevated serum endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS) and bacterial translocation contributed to systemic inflammation, hepatocyte apoptosis, and subsequently acute liver injury through the gut-liver axis. Treatment with Daidzin, an ALDH2 inhibitor, exacerbated ethanol-induced cell permeability and reduced TJ/AJ proteins in T84 human colon cells. These changes were reversed by Alda-1, an ALDH2 activator. Furthermore, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of ALDH2 in T84 cells increased alcohol-mediated cell damage and paracellular permeability. All these findings demonstrate the critical role of ALDH2 in alcohol-induced epithelial barrier dysfunction and suggest that ALDH2 deficiency or gene mutation in humans is a risk factor for alcohol-mediated gut and liver injury, and that ALDH2 could be an important therapeutic target against alcohol-associated tissue or organ damage.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) is a member of ALDH family. ALDH1 has been widely recognized for its roles in carcinogenesis and cancer therapy; however, investigation for ALDH2 in cancer is seldom mentioned. The ALDH2 point mutation ALDH2*2 is the most frequent human gene variant, and it is present in approximately 560 million East Asians. ALDH2*2 demonstrates its effect on alcohol consumption limiting and alcoholism developing protection, and this variant is recently found to have an important impact on human health. This chapter focuses on its potential effect on cancer therapy, especially for chemotherapeutics with anthracyclines.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) is a non-cytochrome P450 mitochondrial aldehyde oxidizing enzyme. It is best known for its role in the metabolism of acetaldehyde, a common metabolite from alcohol drinking. More evidences have been accumulated in recent years to indicate a greater role of ALDH2 in the metabolism of other endogenous and exogenous aldehydes, especially lipid peroxidation-derived reactive aldehyde under oxidative stress. Many cardiovascular diseases are associated with oxidative stress and mitochondria dysfunction. Considering that an estimated 560 million East Asians carry a common ALDH2 deficient variant which causes the well-known alcohol flushing syndrome due to acetaldehyde accumulation, the importance of understanding the role of ALDH2 in these diseases should be highlighted. There are several unfavorable cardiovascular conditions that are associated with ALDH2 deficiency. This chapter reviews the function of ALDH2 in various pathological conditions of the heart in relation to aldehyde toxicity. It also highlights the importance and clinical implications of interaction between ALDH2 deficiency and alcohol drinking on cardiovascular disease among the East Asians.
Alcohol is widely consumed; however, excessive use creates serious physical, psychological and social problems and contributes to the pathogenesis of many diseases. Alcohol use disorders (that is, alcohol dependence and alcohol abuse) are maladaptive patterns of excessive drinking that lead to serious problems. Abundant evidence indicates that alcohol dependence (alcoholism) is a complex genetic disease, with variations in a large number of genes affecting a person's risk of alcoholism. Some of these genes have been identified, including two genes involved in the metabolism of alcohol (ADH1B and ALDH2) that have the strongest known affects on the risk of alcoholism. Studies continue to reveal other genes in which variants affect the risk of alcoholism or related traits, including GABRA2, CHRM2, KCNJ6 and AUTS2. As more variants are analysed and studies are combined for meta-analysis to achieve increased sample sizes, an improved picture of the many genes and pathways that affect the risk of alcoholism will be possible.
Cardiac arrhythmia is a common cardiovascular disease that leads to considerable economic burdens and significant global public health challenges. Despite the remarkable progress made in recent decades, antiarrhythmic therapy remains suboptimal. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2), a critical detoxifying enzyme, catalyzes toxic aldehydes and protects individuals from damage caused by oxidative stress. Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that ALDH2 activation has potential antiarrhythmic benefits. The correlation between ALDH2 deficiency and arrhythmogenesis has been widely recognized. In this review, we summarize recent research on the potential role of ALDH2 activation and antiarrhythmic protection, as well as the role played by the ALDH2 *2 polymorphism (rs671) in promoting arrhythmic risk. Additionally, we discuss important new findings illustrating the use of ALDH2 activators, which may prove to be promising antiarrhythmic therapy agents.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase-1a1 (ALDH1a1), the enzyme responsible for the oxidation of retinal into retinoic acid, represents a key therapeutic target for the treatment of debilitating disorders such as cancer, obesity, and inflammation. Drugs that can inhibit ALDH1a1 include disulfiram, an FDA-approved drug to treat chronic alcoholism. Disulfiram, by carbamylation of the catalytic cysteines, irreversibly inhibits ALDH1a1 and ALDH2. The latter is the isozyme responsible for important physiological processes such as the second stage of alcohol metabolism. Given the fact that ALDH1a1 has a larger substrate tunnel than that in ALDH2, replacing disulfiram ethyl groups with larger motifs will yield selective ALDH1a1 inhibitors. We report herein the synthesis of new inhibitors of ALDH1a1 where (hetero)aromatic rings were introduced into the structure of disulfiram. Most of the developed compounds retained the anti-ALDH1a1 activity of disulfiram; however, they were completely devoid of inhibitory activity against ALDH2.
Obesity and fatty liver diseases-metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH)-affect over one-third of the global population and are exacerbated in individuals with reduced functional aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2), observed in approximately 560 million people. Current treatment to prevent disease progression to cancer remains inadequate, requiring innovative approaches. We observe that Aldh2(-/-) and Aldh2(-/-)Sptbn1(+/-) mice develop phenotypes of human metabolic syndrome (MetS) and MASH with accumulation of endogenous aldehydes such as 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE). Mechanistic studies demonstrate aberrant transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling through 4-HNE modification of the SMAD3 adaptor SPTBN1 (beta2-spectrin) to pro-fibrotic and pro-oncogenic phenotypes, which is restored to normal SMAD3 signaling by targeting SPTBN1 with small interfering RNA (siRNA). Significantly, therapeutic inhibition of SPTBN1 blocks MASH and fibrosis in a human model and, additionally, improves glucose handling in Aldh2(-/-) and Aldh2(-/-)Sptbn1(+/-) mice. This study identifies SPTBN1 as a critical regulator of the functional phenotype of toxic aldehyde-induced MASH and a potential therapeutic target.
The ALDH2*2 missense variant that commonly causes alcohol flushing reactions is the single genetic polymorphism associated with the largest number of traits in humans. The dysfunctional ALDH2 variant affects nearly 8% of the world population and is highly concentrated among East Asians. Carriers of the ALDH2*2 variant commonly present alterations in a number of blood biomarkers, clinical measurements, biometrics, drug prescriptions, dietary habits and lifestyle behaviors, and they are also more susceptible to aldehyde-associated diseases, such as cancer and cardiovascular disease. However, the interaction between alcohol and ALDH2-related pathology is not clearly delineated. Furthermore, genetic evidence indicates that the ALDH2*2 variant has been favorably selected for in the past 2000-3000 years. It is therefore necessary to consider the disease risk and mechanism associated with ALDH2 deficiency, and to understand the possible beneficial or protective effect conferred by ALDH2 deficiency and whether the pleiotropic effects of ALDH2 variance are all mediated by alcohol use.
