Cytochrome P450 2C9; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of various endogenous substrates, including fatty acids and steroids. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Metabolizes cholesterol toward 25-hydroxycholesterol, a physiological regulato [...] 
Inflammation can be either beneficial or detrimental to the liver, depending on multiple factors. Mild (i.e., limited in intensity and destined to resolve) inflammatory responses have indeed been shown to exert consistent hepatoprotective effects, contributing to tissue repair and promoting the re-establishment of homeostasis. Conversely, excessive (i.e., disproportionate in intensity and permanent) inflammation may induce a massive loss of hepatocytes and hence exacerbate the severity of various hepatic conditions, including ischemia-reperfusion injury, systemic metabolic alterations (e.g., obesity, diabetes, non-alcoholic fatty liver disorders), alcoholic hepatitis, intoxication by xenobiotics and infection, de facto being associated with irreversible liver damage, fibrosis, and carcinogenesis. Both liver-resident cells (e.g., Kupffer cells, hepatic stellate cells, sinusoidal endothelial cells) and cells that are recruited in response to injury (e.g., monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, natural killer cells) emit pro-inflammatory signals including - but not limited to - cytokines, chemokines, lipid messengers, and reactive oxygen species that contribute to the apoptotic or necrotic demise of hepatocytes. In turn, dying hepatocytes release damage-associated molecular patterns that-upon binding to evolutionary conserved pattern recognition receptors-activate cells of the innate immune system to further stimulate inflammatory responses, hence establishing a highly hepatotoxic feedforward cycle of inflammation and cell death. In this review, we discuss the cellular and molecular mechanisms that account for the most deleterious effect of hepatic inflammation at the cellular level, that is, the initiation of a massive cell death response among hepatocytes.
Atherosclerosis (AS) is a chronic inflammatory disease, which has a complex interplay between altered immune metabolism and oxidative stress. Therefore, we aimed to determine the oxidative stress and immune-related biomarkers in AS. Differential gene expression analyses are based on the GSE100927 dataset in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), and 389 oxidative stress (OS) genes are identified based on gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). We identified 74 differentially expressed genes related to oxidative stress (DEOSGs). "CIBERSORT" and "WGCNA" R Packages were used to compare the differences in immune infiltration levels between AS and control samples. The DEOSGs (N = 74) were intersected with the key module's genes of WGCNA (N = 972), and 27 differentially expressed immune-related oxidative stress genes (DEIOSGs) were obtained. To identify the pivotal genes, a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using the STRING database and the Cytoscape software. MMP9, ALOX5, NCF2, NCF, and NCF4 were identified as diagnostic markers of AS, and we validated them in the GSE57691 dataset. The expression levels of the five diagnostic genes were significantly highly expressed in the AS group. Correlation analysis and single-cell analysis revealed that five diagnostic genes were mainly correlated with macrophages M1. We, respectively, intersected differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with ferroptosis gene set, necroptosis gene set, and pyroptosis gene set. The findings suggested that ALOX5 and NCF2 were differentially expressed genes of ferroptosis. High expression of five hub genes in RAW264.7 macrophages were confirmed by PCR. High ALOX5 and NCF2 expression levels in plaque tissues were confirmed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and western blotting. Our study identified that MMP9, ALOX5, NCF2, NCF1, and NCF4 were diagnostic genes of AS and associated with oxidative stress. ALOX5 and NCF2 may be involved in the formation of the necrotic core in AS by regulating macrophage ferroptosis.
BACKGROUND: Melanoma has become more common, and its therapeutic management has remained challenging in recent decades. The purpose of our study is to explore new prognostic therapeutic markers of melanoma and to find new therapeutic methods and therapeutic targets of novel drugs, which have great significance. METHOD: First, the arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5) gene associated with both autophagy and ferroptosis was identified by R version 4.2.0. We used human melanoma and para-cancer tissues, human melanoma cell lines, and melanoma-bearing mouse tissues. We used qRT-PCR, Western blotting, immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence staining, CCK-8, iron ion assay, GSH assay, and MDA assay. In vivo, the ferroptosis activation and antitumor effects of recombinant human ALOX5 protein were evaluated using a xenograft model. RESULT: We report that the downregulation of ALOX5 in melanoma is positively correlated with the prognosis of patients and is an independent prognostic factor. Elevated ALOX5 contributes to autophagy and ferroptosis in vitro and in vivo. At the same time, inhibition of autophagy can reduce ferroptosis enhanced by ALOX5, and autophagy and ALOX5 have a synergistic effect. The results of the mechanistic study showed that the increase in ALOX5 could activate the AMPK/mTOR pathway and inhibit GPX4 expression, promoting the occurrence of autophagy-dependent ferroptosis, while the decrease in p-AMPK/AMPK inhibited the occurrence of ferroptosis. CONCLUSION: ALOX5 deficiency was resistant to autophagy and ferroptosis by inhibiting the AMPK/mTOR pathway. Therefore, it can provide new targets and methods for melanoma drug development.
Pancreatic cancer tends to be highly resistant to current therapy and remains one of the great challenges in biomedicine with very low 5-year survival rates. Here, we report that zalcitabine, an antiviral drug for human immunodeficiency virus infection, can suppress the growth of primary and immortalized human pancreatic cancer cells through the induction of ferroptosis, an iron-dependent form of regulated cell death. Mechanically, this effect relies on zalcitabine-induced mitochondrial DNA stress, which activates the STING1/TMEM173-mediated DNA sensing pathway, leading to macroautophagy/autophagy-dependent ferroptotic cell death via lipid peroxidation, but not a type I interferon response. Consequently, the genetic and pharmacological inactivation of the autophagy-dependent ferroptosis pathway diminishes the anticancer effects of zalcitabine in cell culture and animal models. Together, these findings not only provide a new approach for pancreatic cancer therapy but also increase our understanding of the interplay between autophagy and DNA damage response in shaping cell death.Abbreviations: ALOX: arachidonate lipoxygenase; ARNTL/BMAL1: aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like; ATM: ATM serine/threonine kinase; ATG: autophagy-related; cGAMP: cyclic GMP-AMP; CGAS: cyclic GMP-AMP synthase; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; FANCD2: FA complementation group D2; GPX4: glutathione peroxidase 4; IFNA1/IFNalpha: interferon alpha 1; IFNB1/IFNbeta: interferon beta 1; MAP1LC3B/LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MDA: malondialdehyde; mtDNA: mitochondrial DNA; NCOA4: nuclear receptor coactivator 4; PDAC: pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; POLG: DNA polymerase gamma, catalytic subunit; qRT-PCR: quantitative polymerase chain reaction; RCD: regulated cell death; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SLC7A11: solute carrier family 7 member 11; STING1/TMEM173: stimulator of interferon response cGAMP interactor 1; TFAM: transcription factor A, mitochondrial.
Ferroptosis is an iron-dependent form of regulated cell death driven by the lethal lipid peroxides. Previous studies have demonstrated that inducing ferroptosis holds great potential in cancer therapy, especially for patients with traditional therapy failure. However, cancer cells can acquire ferroptosis evasion during progression. To date, the therapeutic potential of inducing ferroptosis in bladder cancer (BCa) remains unclear, and whether a ferroptosis escape mechanism exists in BCa needs further investigation. This study verified that low pathological stage BCa cells were highly sensitive to RSL3-induced ferroptosis, whereas high pathological stage BCa cells exhibited obviously ferroptosis resistance. RNA-seq, RNAi-mediated loss-of-function, and CRISPR/Cas9 experiments demonstrated that ALOX5 deficiency was the crucial factor of BCa resistance to ferroptosis in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, we found that ALOX5 deficiency was regulated by EGR1 at the transcriptional level. Clinically, ALOX5 expression was decreased in BCa tissues, and its low expression was associated with poor survival. Collectively, this study uncovers a novel mechanism for BCa ferroptosis escape and proposes that ALOX5 may be a valuable therapeutic target and prognostic biomarker in BCa treatment.
5-lipoxygenase (encoded by ALOX5) plays an important role in immune regulation. Zileuton is currently the only approved ALOX5 inhibitor. However, the mechanisms of ALOX5 and Zileuton in progression of pancreatic cancer remain unclear. Therefore, we investigated the effects of Zileuton on tumor-associated macrophage M2 polarization and pancreatic cancer invasion and metastasis, both in vivo and in vitro. In bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analyses, we found a significant association between elevated levels of ALOX5 and poor survival, adverse stages, M2 macrophage infiltration, and the activation of JAK/STAT pathways in macrophages. In clinical samples, immunofluorescence, quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemical results verified the high expression of ALOX5 in pancreatic cancer, primarily in macrophages. We constructed PANC-1 human pancreatic cancer cells and macrophages overexpressing ALOX5 using lentivirus. In PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells, low-dose Zileuton inhibited PANC-1 cell invasion and migration by blocking ALOX5. In macrophages, ALOX5 induced the M2-like phenotype through the JAK/STAT pathway and promoted the chemotaxis of macrophages towards PANC-1 cells, while Zileuton can inhibit these effects. We constructed the nude mouse model of in situ transplantation tumor of pancreatic cancer. After treatment with Zileuton, the mice showed increased survival rates and reduced liver metastasis. These findings indicate that ALOX5 regulates tumor-associated macrophage M2 polarization via the JAK/STAT pathway and promotes invasion and metastasis in pancreatic cancer. Zileuton can inhibit these effects by inhibiting ALOX5. These results provide a theoretical basis for the potential use of Zileuton in the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
BACKGROUND: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is poorly treated due to the presence of an inhibitory immune microenvironment. Tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) are an important component of TME. ALOX5 is an important lipid metabolism enzyme in cancer progression, but the mechanism by which it regulates TAM to promote ICC progression is unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the potential mechanism of TAM regulation by ALOX5 and the translational effect of targeting ALOX5. METHODS: In this study, we investigated the association between the spatial localization of epithelial cells and TAMs by combining scRNA-seq analysis with multiplex immunofluorescence analysis. Through bulk sequencing analysis and spatial analysis, lipid metabolism genes closely related to TAM infiltration were screened. In vitro co-culture model was constructed to verify that ALOX5 and its downstream metabolite LTB4 promote M2 macrophage migration. Bulk sequencing after co-culture combined with single-cell analysis was performed to identify key pathways for up-regulation of M2 macrophage migration. Finally, the effect of CSF1R inhibitor (PLX3397) combined with ALOX5 inhibitor (Zileuton) in vivo was investigated by by xenograft tumor formation experiment in nude mice. RESULTS: ALOX5 in ICC cells was a key lipid metabolism gene affecting the infiltration of M2 macrophages in TME. Mechanically, LTB4, a metabolite downstream of ALOX5, recruited M2 macrophages to migrate around tumor cells by binding to BLT1/BLT2 and activating the PI3K pathway, which ultimately lead to the promotion of ICC progression. Targeting CSF1R in combination with ALOX5 inhibitor effectively reduced tumor volume and M2 macrophage infiltration abundance. CONCLUSION: In ICC, LTB4, a metabolite secreted by ALOX5 of epithelial cells, binded to BLT1/BLT2 on TAM surface to activate PI3K pathway and promote TAM migration, thus promoting ICC progression. Targeting CSF1R in combination with ALOX5 inhibitor for ICC is a promising combination therapy modality.
Pyroptosis, an inflammatory form of programmed cell death, is linked to the pathology of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Here, we investigated the molecular mechanism underlying pyroptosis in T cells isolated from patients with RA. Compared with healthy individuals, patients with RA had more pyroptotic CD4(+) T cells in blood and synovia, which correlated with clinical measures of disease activity. Moreover, the mRNA expression and protein abundance of arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5), which converts arachidonic acid to leukotriene A(4) (LTA(4)), were increased in CD4(+) T cells from patients with RA and, among patients with RA, were lowest in those in clinical remission. Knockdown or pharmacological inhibition of ALOX5 suppressed CD4(+) T cell pyroptosis and improved symptoms in two rodent models of RA. Mechanistically, the increase in ALOX5 activity in RA CD4(+) T cells enhanced the production of the LTA(4) derivative LTB(4), which stimulated Ca(2+) influx through ORAI3 channels, leading to the activation of NLRP3 inflammasomes and pyroptosis. Our findings reveal a role for ALOX5 in RA and provide a molecular basis for further exploring the clinical utility of ALOX5 inhibition in RA and for using ALOX5 as a biomarker to distinguish active disease and remission in RA.
Extravasation of monocytes into tissue and to the site of injury is a fundamental immunological process, which requires rapid responses via post translational modifications (PTM) of proteins. Protein arginine methyltransferase 7 (PRMT7) is an epigenetic factor that has the capacity to mono-methylate histones on arginine residues. Here we show that in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients, PRMT7 expression is elevated in the lung tissue and localized to the macrophages. In mouse models of COPD, lung fibrosis and skin injury, reduced expression of PRMT7 associates with decreased recruitment of monocytes to the site of injury and hence less severe symptoms. Mechanistically, activation of NF-kappaB/RelA in monocytes induces PRMT7 transcription and consequential mono-methylation of histones at the regulatory elements of RAP1A, which leads to increased transcription of this gene that is responsible for adhesion and migration of monocytes. Persistent monocyte-derived macrophage accumulation leads to ALOX5 over-expression and accumulation of its metabolite LTB4, which triggers expression of ACSL4 a ferroptosis promoting gene in lung epithelial cells. Conclusively, inhibition of arginine mono-methylation might offer targeted intervention in monocyte-driven inflammatory conditions that lead to extensive tissue damage if left untreated.
SBFI26, an inhibitor of FABP5, has been shown to suppress the proliferation and metastasis of tumour cells. However, the underlying mechanism by which SBFI26 induces ferroptosis in breast cancer cells remains largely unknown. Three breast cancer cell lines were treated with SBFI26 and CCK-8 assessed cytotoxicity. Transcriptome was performed on the Illumina platform and verified by qPCR. Western blot evaluated protein levels. Malondialdehyde (MDA), total superoxide dismutase (T-SOD), Fe, glutathione (GSH) and oxidized glutathione (GSSG) were measured. SBFI26 induced cell death time- and dose-dependent, with a more significant inhibitory effect on MDA-MB-231 cells. Fer-1, GSH and Vitamin C attenuated the effects but not erastin. RNA-Seq analysis revealed that SBFI26 treatment significantly enriched differentially expressed genes related to ferroptosis. Furthermore, SBFI26 increased intracellular MDA, iron ion, and GSSG levels while decreasing T-SOD, total glutathione (T-GSH), and GSH levels.SBFI26 dose-dependently up-regulates the expression of HMOX1 and ALOX12 at both gene and protein levels, promoting ferroptosis. Similarly, it significantly increases the expression of SAT1, ALOX5, ALOX15, ALOXE3 and CHAC1 that, promoting ferroptosis while downregulating the NFE2L2 gene and protein that inhibit ferroptosis. SBFI26 leads to cellular accumulation of fatty acids, which triggers excess ferrous ions and subsequent lipid peroxidation for inducing ferroptosis.
BACKGROUND: Arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (Alox5) belongs to a class of nonheme iron-containing dioxygenases involved in the catalysis of leukotriene biosynthesis. However, the effects of Alox5 itself on pathological cardiac remodeling and heart failure remain elusive. METHODS: The role of Alox5 in pathological cardiac remodeling was investigated by Alox5 genetic depletion, AAV9-mediated overexpression in cardiomyocytes, and a bone marrow (BM) transplantation approach. Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were used to explore the effects of Alox5 in vitro. Molecular and signaling pathways were revealed by CUT &Tag, IP-MS, RNA sequencing and bioinformatic analyses. FINDINGS: Untargeted metabolomics showed that serum 5-HETE (a primary product of Alox5) levels were little changed in patients with cardiac hypertrophy, while Alox5 expression was significantly upregulated in murine hypertensive cardiac samples and human cardiac samples of hypertrophy, which prompted us to test whether high Alox5 levels under hypertensive stimuli were directly associated with pathologic myocardium in an enzymatic activity-independent manner. Herein, we revealed that Alox5 deficiency significantly ameliorated transverse aortic constriction (TAC)-induced hypertrophy. Cardiomyocyte-specific Alox5 depletion attenuated hypertensive ventricular remodeling. Conversely, cardiac-specifical Alox5 overexpression showed a pro-hypertrophic cardiac phenotype. Ablation of Alox5 in bone marrow-derived cells did not affect pathological cardiac remodeling and heart failure. Mechanically, Runx2 was identified as a target of Alox5. In this regard, Alox5 PEST domain could directly bind to Runx2 PTS domain, promoting nuclear localization of Runx2 in an enzymatic activity-independent manner, simultaneously contributed to liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of Runx2 at specific domain in the nucleus and increased transcription of EGFR in cardiomyocytes. Runx2 depletion alleviated hypertrophy in Ang II-pretreated Alox5-overexpressing cardiomyocytes. INTERPRETATION: Overall, our study demonstrated that targeting Alox5 exerted a protective effect against cardiac remodeling and heart failure under hypertensive stimuli by disturbing LLPS of Runx2 and substantial reduction of EGFR transcription activation in cardiomyocytes. Our findings suggest that negative modulation of Alox5-Runx2 may provide a therapeutic approach against pathological cardiac remodeling and heart failure. FUNDING: National Natural Science Foundation of China.
PURPOSE: There is a bidirectional relationship between periodontitis and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The aim of this study was to further explore the pathogenesis of this comorbidity, screen out ferroptosis-related genes involved in the pathological process, and predict potential drug targets to develop new therapeutic strategies. METHODS: Common cross-talk genes were identified from periodontitis datasets (GSE16134, GSE10334 and GSE106090) and T2DM databases (DisGeNET and GeneCard). Then, GO and KEGG enrichment analyses, PPI network analysis and hub gene identification were performed. The association between ferroptosis and periodontitis with T2DM was investigated by Pearson correlation analysis. Core ferroptosis-related cross-talk genes were identified and verified by qRT-PCR. Potential drugs targeting these core genes were predicted via DGIDB. RESULTS: In total, 67 cross-talk genes and two main signalling pathways (immuno-inflammatory pathway and AGE-RAGE signalling pathway) were identified. Pearson correlation analysis indicated that ferroptosis served as a crucial target in the pathological mechanism and treatment of periodontitis with T2DM. IL-1beta, IL-6, NFE2L2 and ALOX5 were identified as core ferroptosis-related genes and the qRT-PCR detection results were statistically different. In total, 13 potential drugs were screened out, among which, Echinacea and Ibudilast should be developed first. CONCLUSIONS: This study contributes to a deeper understanding of the common pathogenesis of periodontitis and T2DM and provides new insights into the role of ferroptosis in this comorbidity. In addition, two drugs with potential clinical application value were identified. The potential utility of these drugs requires further experimental investigation.
Pediatric sepsis is a great threat to death worldwide. However, the pathogenesis has not been clearly understood until now in sepsis. This study identified differentially expressed mRNAs and lncRNAs based on Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. And the weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was performed to explore co-expression modules associated with pediatric sepsis. Then, Gene Ontology (GO), KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway, mRNA‑lncRNA and mRNA‑lncRNA-pathway co-expression network analysis was conducted in selected significant module. A total of 1941 mRNAs and 225 lncRNAs were used to conduct WGCNA. And turquoise module was selected as a significant module that was associated with particular traits. The mRNAs functions associated with many vital processes were also shown by GO and KEGG pathway analysis in the turquoise module. Finally, 15 mRNAs (MAPK14, ITGAM, HK3, ALOX5, CR1, HCK, NCF4, PYGL, FLOT1, CARD6, NLRC4, SH3GLB1, PGS1, RAB31, LTB4R) and 4 lncRNAs (GSEC, NONHSAT160878.1, XR_926068.1 and RARA-AS1) were selected as hub genes in mRNA‑lncRNA-Pathway co-expression network. We identified 15 mRNAs and 4 lncRNAs as diagnostic markers, which have potential functions in pediatric sepsis. Our study provides more directions to study the molecular mechanism of pediatric sepsis.Abbreviations: mRNA: messenger RNA; lncRNA: long noncoding RNAs; GEO: Gene Expression Omnibus; WGCNA: weighted gene co-expression network analysis; GO: Gene Ontology; KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; SIRS: systemic inflammatory response syndrome; TOM: topological overlap measure; BP: biological process; MF: molecular function; CC: cellular component; ROC: receiver operating characteristic curve; AUC: area under curve; MAPK14: Mitogen-activated protein kinase 14; ALI: acute lung injury; ITGAM: Integrin subunit alpha M; HK3: Hexokinase 3; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; 5-LO: 5-lipoxygenase; LTs: leukotrienes; LTB4R: leukotriene B4 receptor.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: We previously demonstrated that cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) promote tumor growth through recruitment of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) is highly expressed in myeloid cells and is critical for synthesizing leukotriene B4 (LTB4), which is involved in tumor progression by activating its receptor leukotriene B4 receptor type 2 (BLT2). In this study, we investigated whether and how CAFs regulate MDSC function to enhance cancer stemness, the driving force of the cancer aggressiveness and chemotherapy refractoriness, in highly desmoplastic intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC). APPROACH AND RESULTS: RNA-sequencing analysis revealed enriched metabolic pathways but decreased inflammatory pathways in cancer MDSCs compared with blood MDSCs from patients with ICC. Co-injection of ICC patient-derived CAFs promoted cancer stemness in an orthotopic ICC model, which was blunted by MDSC depletion. Conditioned media (CM) from CAF-educated MDSCs drastically promoted tumorsphere formation efficiency and stemness marker gene expression in ICC cells. CAF-CM stimulation increased expression and activity of 5-LO in MDSCs, while 5-LO inhibitor impaired the stemness-enhancing capacity of MDSCs in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, IL-6 and IL-33 primarily expressed by CAFs mediated hyperactivated 5-LO metabolism in MDSCs. We identified the LTB4-BLT2 axis as the critical downstream metabolite signaling of 5-LO in promoting cancer stemness, as treatment with LTB4 was elevated in CAF-educated MDSCs, or blockade of BLT2 (which was preferentially expressed in stem-like ICC cells) significantly reduced stemness-enhancing effects of CAF-educated MDSCs. Finally, BLT2 blockade augmented chemotherapeutic efficacy in ICC patient-derived xenograft models. CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals a role for CAFs in orchestrating the optimal cancer stemness-enhancing microenvironment by educating MDSCs, and suggests the 5-LO/LTB4-BLT2 axis as promising therapeutic targets for ICC chemoresistance by targeting cancer stemness.
The tumor immune landscape gained considerable interest based on the knowledge that genetic aberrations in cancer cells alone are insufficient for tumor development. Macrophages are basically supporting all hallmarks of cancer and owing to their tremendous plasticity they may exert a whole spectrum of anti-tumor and pro-tumor activities. As part of the innate immune response, macrophages are armed to attack tumor cells, alone or in concert with distinct T cell subsets. However, in the tumor microenvironment, they sense nutrient and oxygen gradients, receive multiple signals, and respond to this incoming information with a phenotype shift. Often, their functional output repertoire is shifted to become tumor-supportive. Incoming and outgoing signals are chemically heterogeneous but also comprise lipid mediators. Here, we review the current understanding whereby arachidonate metabolites derived from the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways shape the macrophage phenotype in a tumor setting. We discuss these findings in the context of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 (mPGES-1) expression and concomitant prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) formation. We elaborate the multiple actions of this lipid in affecting macrophage biology, which are sensors for and generators of this lipid. Moreover, we summarize properties of 5-lipoxygenases (ALOX5) and 15-lipoxygenases (ALOX15, ALOX15B) in macrophages and clarify how these enzymes add to the role of macrophages in a dynamically changing tumor environment. This review will illustrate the potential routes how COX-2/mPGES-1 and ALOX5/-15 in macrophages contribute to the development and progression of a tumor.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Patient response to the asthma drug classes, bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids and leukotriene modifiers, are characterized by a large degree of heterogeneity, which is attributable in part to genetic variation. Herein, we review and update the pharmacogenetics and pharmaogenomics of common asthma drugs. RECENT FINDINGS: Early studies suggest that bronchodilator reversibility and asthma worsening in patients on continuous short-acting and long-acting beta-agonists are related to the Gly16Arg genotype for the ADRB2. More recent studies including genome-wide association studies implicate variants in other genes contribute to bronchodilator response heterogeneity and fail to replicate asthma worsening associated with continuous beta-agonist use. Genetic determinants of the safety of long-acting beta-agonist require further study. Variants in CRHR1, TBX21, and FCER2 contribute to variability in response for lung function, airways responsiveness, and exacerbations in patients taking inhaled corticosteroids. Variants in ALOX5, LTA4H, LTC4S, ABCC1, CYSLTR2, and SLCO2B1 contribute to variability in response to leukotriene modifiers. SUMMARY: Identification of novel variants that contribute to response heterogeneity supports future studies of single nucleotide polymorphism discovery and include gene expression and genome-wide association studies. Statistical models that predict the genomics of response to asthma drugs will complement single nucleotide polymorphism discovery in moving toward personalized medicine.
BACKGROUND: The liver is anatomically divided into eight segments based on the distribution of Glisson's triad. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying each segment and its association with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) heterogeneity are not well understood. In this study, our objective is to conduct a comprehensive multiomics profiling of the segmentation atlas in order to investigate potential subtypes and therapeutic approaches for HCC. METHODS: A high throughput liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometer strategy was employed to comprehensively analyse proteome, lipidome and metabolome data, with a focus on segment-resolved multiomics profiling. To classify HCC subtypes, the obtained data with normal reference profiling were integrated. Additionally, potential therapeutic targets for HCC were identified using immunohistochemistry assays. The effectiveness of these targets were further validated through patient-derived organoid (PDO) assays. RESULTS: A multiomics profiling of 8536 high-confidence proteins, 1029 polar metabolites and 3381 nonredundant lipids was performed to analyse the segmentation atlas of HCC. The analysis of the data revealed that in normal adjacent tissues, the left lobe was primarily involved in energy metabolism, while the right lobe was associated with small molecule metabolism. Based on the normal reference atlas, HCC patients with segment-resolved classification were divided into three subtypes. The C1 subtype showed enrichment in ribosome biogenesis, the C2 subtype exhibited an intermediate phenotype, while the C3 subtype was closely associated with neutrophil degranulation. Furthermore, using the PDO assay, exportin 1 (XPO1) and 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5) were identified as potential targets for the C1 and C3 subtypes, respectively. CONCLUSION: Our extensive analysis of the segmentation atlas in multiomics profiling defines molecular subtypes of HCC and uncovers potential therapeutic strategies that have the potential to enhance the prognosis of HCC.
Specialized pro-resolving lipid mediators (SPMs) such as lipoxins or resolvins are formed by the consecutive action of 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO, ALOX5) and different types of arachidonic acid 12- or 15-lipoxygenases using arachidonic acid, eicosapentaenoic acid or docosahexaenoic acid as substrate. Lipoxins are trihydroxylated oxylipins which are formed from arachidonic and eicosapentaenoic acid. The latter can also be converted to di- and trihydroxylated resolvins of the E series, whereas docosahexaenoic acid is the substrate for the formation of di- and trihydroxylated resolvins of the D series. Here, we summarize the formation of lipoxins and resolvins in leukocytes. From the data published so far, it becomes evident that FLAP is required for the biosynthesis of most of the lipoxins and resolvins. Even in the presence of FLAP, formation of the trihydroxylated SPMs (lipoxins, RvD1-RvD4, RvE1) in leukocytes is very low or undetectable which is obviously due to the extremely low epoxide formation by 5-LO from oxylipins such as 15-H(p)ETE, 18-H(p)EPE or 17-H(p)DHA. As a result, only the dihydroxylated oxylipins (5 S,15S-diHETE, 5 S,15S-diHEPE) and resolvins (RvD5, RvE2, RvE4) can be consistently detected using leukocytes as SPM source. However, the reported levels of these dihydroxylated lipid mediators are still much lower than those of the typical pro-inflammatory mediators including the monohydroxylated fatty acid derivatives (e.g. 5-HETE), leukotrienes or cyclooxygenase-derived prostaglandins. Since 5-LO expression is mainly restricted to leukocytes these cells are considered as the main source of SPMs. The low formation of trihydroxylated SPMs in leukocytes, the fact that they are hardly detected in biological samples as well as the lack of functional signaling by their receptors make it highly questionable that trihydroxylated SPMs play a role as endogenous mediators in the resolution of inflammation.
Leukemia stem cells (LSCs) are a subpopulation cells at the apex of hierarchies in leukemia cells and responsible for disease continuous propagation. In this article, we discuss some cellular and molecular components, which are critical for LSC survival. These components include intrinsic signaling pathways and extrinsic microenvironments. The intrinsic signaling pathways to be discussed include Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, Hox genes, Hh pathway, Alox5, and some miRNAs, which have been shown to play important roles in regulating LSC survival and proliferation. The extrinsic components to be discussed include selectins, CXCL12/CXCR4, and CD44, which involve in LSC homing, survival, and proliferation by affecting bone marrow microenvironment. Potential strategies for eradicating LSCs will also discuss.
Leukotrienes are powerful immune-regulating lipid mediators with established pathogenic roles in inflammatory allergic diseases of the respiratory tract - in particular, asthma and hay fever. More recent work indicates that these lipids also contribute to low-grade inflammation, a hallmark of cardiovascular, neurodegenerative, and metabolic diseases as well as cancer. Biosynthesis of leukotrienes involves oxidative metabolism of arachidonic acid and proceeds via a set of soluble and membrane enzymes that are primarily expressed by cells of myeloid origin. In activated immune cells, these enzymes assemble at the endoplasmic and perinuclear membrane, constituting a biosynthetic complex. This Review describes recent advances in our understanding of the components of the leukotriene-synthesizing enzyme machinery, emerging opportunities for pharmacological intervention, and the development of new medicines exploiting both antiinflammatory and pro-resolving mechanisms.
