Mu-type opioid receptor; Receptor for endogenous opioids such as beta-endorphin and endomorphin. Receptor for natural and synthetic opioids including morphine, heroin, DAMGO, fentanyl, etorphine, buprenorphin and methadone. Agonist binding to the receptor induces coupling to an inactive GDP-bound heterotrimeric G-protein complex and subsequent exchange of GDP for GTP in the G-protein alpha subunit leading to dissociation of the G-protein complex with the free GTP-bound G-protein alpha and the G-protein beta-gamma dimer activating downstream cellular effectors. The agonist- and cell typ [...] 
Esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma (ESCC) develops through multistage epithelial cancer formation, i.e., from normal epithelium, low- and high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia to invasive carcinoma. However, how the precancerous lesions progress to carcinoma remains elusive. Here, we report a comprehensive single-cell RNA sequencing and spatial transcriptomic study of 79 multistage esophageal lesions from 29 patients with ESCC. We reveal a gradual and significant loss of ANXA1 expression in epithelial cells due to its transcription factor KLF4 suppression along the lesion progression. We demonstrate that ANXA1 is a ligand to formyl peptide receptor type 2 (FPR2) on fibroblasts that maintain fibroblast homeostasis. Loss of ANXA1 leads to uncontrolled transformation of normal fibroblasts into cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which can be enhanced by secreted TGF-beta from malignant epithelial cells. Given the role of CAFs in cancer, our study underscores ANXA1/FPR2 signaling as an important crosstalk mechanism between epithelial cells and fibroblasts in promoting ESCC.
Since failed resolution of inflammation is a major contributor to the progression of diabetic nephropathy, identifying endogenously generated molecules that promote the physiological resolution of inflammation may be a promising therapeutic approach for this disease. Annexin A1 (ANXA1), as an endogenous mediator, plays an important role in resolving inflammation. Whether ANXA1 could affect established diabetic nephropathy through modulating inflammatory states remains largely unknown. In the current study, we found that in patients with diabetic nephropathy, the levels of ANXA1 were upregulated in kidneys, and correlated with kidney function as well as kidney outcomes. Therefore, the role of endogenous ANXA1 in mouse models of diabetic nephropathy was further evaluated. ANXA1 deficiency exacerbated kidney injuries, exhibiting more severe albuminuria, mesangial matrix expansion, tubulointerstitial lesions, kidney inflammation and fibrosis in high fat diet/streptozotocin-induced-diabetic mice. Consistently, ANXA1 overexpression ameliorated kidney injuries in mice with diabetic nephropathy. Additionally, we found Ac2-26 (an ANXA1 mimetic peptide) had therapeutic potential for alleviating kidney injuries in db/db mice and diabetic Anxa1 knockout mice. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that intracellular ANXA1 bound to the transcription factor NF-kappaB p65 subunit, inhibiting its activation thereby modulating the inflammatory state. Thus, our data indicate that ANXA1 may be a promising therapeutic approach to treating and reversing diabetic nephropathy.
Chronic inflammation is increasingly considered as the most important component of vascular aging, contributing to the progression of age-related cardiovascular diseases. To delay the process of vascular aging, anti-inflammation may be an effective measure. The anti-inflammatory factor annexin A1 (ANXA1) is shown to participate in several age-related diseases; however, its function during vascular aging remains unclear. Here, an ANXA1 knockout (ANXA1(-/-)) and an endothelial cell-specific ANXA1 deletion mouse (ANXA1( big up tri, openEC)) model are used to investigate the role of ANXA1 in vascular aging. ANXA1 depletion exacerbates vascular remodeling and dysfunction while upregulates age- and inflammation-related protein expression. Conversely, Ac2-26 (a mimetic peptide of ANXA1) supplementation reverses this phenomenon. Furthermore, long-term tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) induction of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) increases cell senescence. Finally, the senescence-associated secretory phenotype and senescence-related protein expression, rates of senescence-beta-galactosidase positivity, cell cycle arrest, cell migration, and tube formation ability are observed in both ANXA1-knockdown HUVECs and overexpressed ANXA1-TNF-alpha induced senescent HUVECs. They also explore the impact of formyl peptide receptor 2 (a receptor of ANXA1) in an ANXA1 overexpression inflammatory model. These data provide compelling evidence that age-related inflammation in arteries contributes to senescent endothelial cells that promote vascular aging.
AIMS: Acute aortic dissection (AAD) is a life-threatening disease with high morbidity and mortality. Previous studies have showed that vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) phenotype switching modulates vascular function and AAD progression. However, whether an endogenous signalling system that protects AAD progression exists remains unknown. Our aim is to investigate the role of Anxa1 in VSMC phenotype switching and the pathogenesis of AAD. METHODS AND RESULTS: We first assessed Anxa1 expression levels by immunohistochemical staining in control aorta and AAD tissue from mice. A strong increase of Anxa1 expression was seen in the mouse AAD tissues. In line with these findings, micro-CT scan results indicated that Anxa1 plays a role in the development of AAD in our murine model, with systemic deficiency of Anxa1 markedly progressing AAD. Conversely, administration of Anxa1 mimetic peptide, Ac2-26, rescued the AAD phenotype in Anxa1-/- mice. Transcriptomic studies revealed a novel role for Anxa1 in VSMC phenotype switching, with Anxa1 deficiency triggering the synthetic phenotype of VSMCs via down-regulation of the JunB/MYL9 pathway. The resultant VSMC synthetic phenotype rendered elevated inflammation and enhanced matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) production, leading to augmented elastin degradation. VSMC-restricted deficiency of Anxa1 in mice phenocopied VSMC phenotype switching and the consequent exacerbation of AAD. Finally, our studies in human AAD aortic specimens recapitulated key findings in murine AAD, specifically that the decrease of Anxa1 is associated with VSMC phenotype switch, heightened inflammation, and enhanced MMP production in human aortas. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrated that Anxa1 is a novel endogenous defender that prevents AAD by inhibiting VSMC phenotype switching, suggesting that Anxa1 signalling may be a potential target for AAD pharmacological therapy.
The deregulation of Annexin A1 (ANXA1), a regulator of inflammation and immunity, leads to cancer growth and metastasis. However, whether ANXA1 is involved in cancer immunosuppression is still unclear. Here, we report that ANXA1 knockdown (i) dramatically downregulates programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression in breast cancer, lung cancer, and melanoma cells; (ii) promotes T cell-mediated killing of cancer cells in vitro; and (iii) inhibits cancer immune escape in immune-competent mice via downregulating PD-L1 expression and increasing the number and killing activity of CD8+ T cells. Mechanistically, ANXA1 functioned as a sponge molecule for interaction of PARP1 and Stat3. Specifically, binding of ANXA1 to PARP1 decreased PARP1's binding to Stat3, which reduced poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and dephosphorylation of Stat3 and thus, increased Stat3's transcriptional activity, leading to transcriptionally upregulated expression of PD-L1 in multiple cancer cells. In clinical samples, expression of ANXA1 and PD-L1 was significantly higher in breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and skin cutaneous melanoma compared with corresponding normal tissues and positively correlated in cancer tissues. Moreover, using both ANXA1 and PD-L1 proteins for predicting efficacy of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy and patient prognosis was superior to using individual proteins. Our data suggest that ANXA1 promotes cancer immune escape via binding PARP1 and upregulating Stat3-induced expression of PD-L1, that ANXA1 is a potential new target for cancer immunotherapy, and combination of ANXA1 and PD-L1 expression is a potential marker for predicting efficacy of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in multiple cancers.
Inflammation and abnormal metabolism play important roles in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy (DN). Annexin A1 (ANXA1) contributes to inflammation resolution and improves metabolism. In this study, we assess the effects of ANXA1 in diabetic mice and proximal tubular epithelial cells (PTECs) treated with high glucose plus palmitate acid (HGPA) and explore the association of ANXA1 with lipid accumulation in patients with DN. It is found that ANXA1 deletion aggravates renal injuries, including albuminuria, mesangial matrix expansion, and tubulointerstitial lesions in high-fat diet/streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. ANXA1 deficiency promotes intrarenal lipid accumulation and drives mitochondrial alterations in kidneys. In addition, Ac2-26, an ANXA1 mimetic peptide, has a therapeutic effect against lipid toxicity in diabetic mice. In HGPA-treated human PTECs, ANXA1 silencing causes FPR2/ALX-driven deleterious effects, which suppress phosphorylated Thr(172) AMPK, resulting in decreased peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha and carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1b expression and increased HGPA-induced lipid accumulation, apoptosis, and elevated expression of proinflammatory and profibrotic genes. Last but not least, the extent of lipid accumulation correlates with renal function, and the level of tubulointerstitial ANXA1 expression correlates with ectopic lipid deposition in kidneys of patients with DN. These data demonstrate that ANXA1 regulates lipid metabolism of PTECs to ameliorate disease progression; hence, it holds great potential as a therapeutic target for DN.
BACKGROUND: Ischemia reperfusion injury (I/RI) is a common complication of cardiovascular diseases. Resolution of detrimental I/RI-generated prothrombotic and proinflammatory responses is essential to restore homeostasis. Platelets play a crucial part in the integration of thrombosis and inflammation. Their role as participants in the resolution of thromboinflammation is underappreciated; therefore we used pharmacological and genetic approaches, coupled with murine and clinical samples, to uncover key concepts underlying this role. METHODS: Middle cerebral artery occlusion with reperfusion was performed in wild-type or annexin A1 (AnxA1) knockout (AnxA1(-/-)) mice. Fluorescence intravital microscopy was used to visualize cellular trafficking and to monitor light/dye-induced thrombosis. The mice were treated with vehicle, AnxA1 (3.3 mg/kg), WRW4 (1.8 mg/kg), or all 3, and the effect of AnxA1 was determined in vivo and in vitro. RESULTS: Intravital microscopy revealed heightened platelet adherence and aggregate formation post I/RI, which were further exacerbated in AnxA1(-/-) mice. AnxA1 administration regulated platelet function directly (eg, via reducing thromboxane B(2) and modulating phosphatidylserine expression) to promote cerebral protection post-I/RI and act as an effective preventative strategy for stroke by reducing platelet activation, aggregate formation, and cerebral thrombosis, a prerequisite for ischemic stroke. To translate these findings into a clinical setting, we show that AnxA1 plasma levels are reduced in human and murine stroke and that AnxA1 is able to act on human platelets, suppressing classic thrombin-induced inside-out signaling events (eg, Akt activation, intracellular calcium release, and Ras-associated protein 1 [Rap1] expression) to decrease alpha(IIb)beta(3) activation without altering its surface expression. AnxA1 also selectively modifies cell surface determinants (eg, phosphatidylserine) to promote platelet phagocytosis by neutrophils, thereby driving active resolution. (n=5-13 mice/group or 7-10 humans/group.) Conclusions: AnxA1 affords protection by altering the platelet phenotype in cerebral I/RI from propathogenic to regulatory and reducing the propensity for platelets to aggregate and cause thrombosis by affecting integrin (alpha(IIb)beta(3)) activation, a previously unknown phenomenon. Thus, our data reveal a novel multifaceted role for AnxA1 to act both as a therapeutic and a prophylactic drug via its ability to promote endogenous proresolving, antithromboinflammatory circuits in cerebral I/RI. Collectively, these results further advance our knowledge and understanding in the field of platelet and resolution biology.
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a malignant tumor of the kidneys. Approximately 70% of RCC cases are clear cell renal cell carcinoma with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene mutation and activation of the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) targeting VEGF have emerged as promising agents for RCC treatment. Apart from primary resistance, acquired resistance to TKIs after initial tumor regression is common in RCC. Recently, immune checkpoint inhibition, including PD-1/PD-L1 blockade, alone or in combination with TKIs has improved the overall survival of patients with RCC. Ribonucleotide reductase subunit M2 (RRM2) has been reported in many types of cancer and has been implicated in tumor progression. However, the role of RRM2 in TKIs resistance in RCC remains unclear. In this study, the authors have demonstrated that RRM2 is upregulated in sunitinib-resistant RCC cells and patient tissues. They also find that RRM2 stabilizes ANXA1 and activates the AKT pathway independent of its ribonucleotide reductase activity, promoting sunitinib resistance in RCC. Moreover, RRM2 regulated antitumor immune responses, and knockdown of RRM2 enhance the anti-tumor efficiency of PD-1 blockade in renal cancer. Collectively, these results suggest that aberrantly expressed RRM2 may be a promising therapeutic target for RCC.
OBJECTIVE: Pancreatic cancer is an incurable malignant disease with extremely poor prognosis and a complex tumor microenvironment. We sought to characterize the role of Annexin A1 (ANXA1) in pancreatic cancer, including its ability to promote efferocytosis and antitumor immune responses. METHODS: The tumor expression of ANXA1 and cleaved Caspase-3 (c-Casp3) and numbers of tumor-infiltrating CD68(+) macrophages in 151 cases of pancreatic cancer were examined by immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. The role of ANXA1 in pancreatic cancer was investigated using myeloid-specific ANXA1-knockout mice. The changes in tumor-infiltrating immune cell populations induced by ANXA1 deficiency in macrophages were assessed by single-cell RNA sequencing and flow cytometry. RESULTS: ANXA1 expression in pancreatic cancer patient samples correlated with the number of CD68(+) macrophages. The percentage of ANXA1(+) tumor-infiltrating macrophages negatively correlated with c-Casp3 expression and was significantly associated with worse survival. In mice, myeloid-specific ANXA1 deficiency inhibited tumor growth and was accompanied by the accumulation of apoptotic cells in pancreatic tumor tissue caused by inhibition of macrophage efferocytosis, which was dependent on cGAS-STING pathway-induced type I interferon signaling. ANXA1 deficiency significantly remodeled the intratumoral lymphocyte and macrophage compartments in tumor-bearing mice by increasing the number of effector T cells and pro-inflammatory macrophages. Furthermore, combination therapy of ANXA1 knockdown with gemcitabine and anti-programmed cell death protein-1 antibody resulted in synergistic inhibition of pancreatic tumor growth. CONCLUSION: This research uncovers a novel role of macrophage ANXA1 in pancreatic cancer. ANXA1-mediated regulation of efferocytosis by tumor-associated macrophages promotes antitumor immune response via STING signaling, suggesting potential treatment strategies for pancreatic cancer.
Atherosclerosis, characterized by the formation of fat-laden plaques, is a chronic inflammatory disease. ABCA1 promotes cholesterol efflux, reduces cellular cholesterol accumulation, and regulates anti-inflammatory activities in an apoA-I- or ANXA1-dependent manner. The latter activity occurs by mediating the efflux of ANXA1, which plays a critical role in anti-inflammatory effects, cholesterol transport, exosome and microparticle secretion, and apoptotic cell clearance. ApoA-I increases ANXA1 expression via the ERK, p38MAPK, AKT, and PKC pathways. ApoA-I regulates the signaling pathways by binding to ABCA1, suggesting that apoA-I increases ANXA1 expression by binding to ABCA1. Furthermore, ANXA1 may increase ABCA1 expression. ANXA1 increases PPARgamma expression by modulating STAT6 phosphorylation. PPARgamma also increases ANXA1 expression by binding to the promoter of ANXA1. Therefore, ABCA1, PPARgamma, and ANXA1 may form a feedback loop and regulate each other. Interestingly, the ANXA1 needs to be externalized to the cell membrane or secreted into the extracellular fluids to exert its anti-inflammatory properties. ABCA1 transports ANXA1 from the cytoplasm to the cell membrane by regulating lipidization and serine phosphorylation, thereby mediating ANXA1 efflux, likely by promoting microparticle and exosome release. The direct role of ABCA1 expression and ANXA1 release in atherosclerosis has been unclear. In this review, we focus on the role of ANXA1 in atheroprogression and its novel interaction with ABCA1, which may be useful for providing basic knowledge for the development of novel therapeutic targets for atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease.
Obesity is a global issue that warrants the identification of more effective therapeutic targets and a better understanding of the pivotal molecular pathogenesis. Annexin A1 (ANXA1) is known to inhibit phospholipase A2, exhibiting anti-inflammatory activity. However, the specific effects of ANXA1 in obesity and the underlying mechanisms of action remain unclear. Our study reveals that ANXA1 levels are elevated in the adipose tissue of individuals with obesity. Whole-body or adipocyte-specific ANXA1 deletion aggravates obesity and metabolic disorders. ANXA1 levels are higher in stromal vascular fractions (SVFs) than in mature adipocytes. Further investigation into the role of ANXA1 in SVFs reveals that ANXA1 overexpression induces lower numbers of mature adipocytes, while ANXA1-knockout SVFs exhibit the opposite effect. This suggests that ANXA1 plays an important role in adipogenesis. Mechanistically, ANXA1 competes with MYC binding protein 2 (MYCBP2) for interaction with PDZ and LIM domain 7 (PDLIM7). This exposes the MYCBP2-binding site, allowing it to bind more readily to the SMAD family member 4 (SMAD4) and promoting its ubiquitination and degradation. SMAD4 degradation downregulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) transcription and reduces adipogenesis. Treatment with Ac2-26, an active peptide derived from ANXA1, inhibits both adipogenesis and obesity through the mechanism. In conclusion, the molecular mechanism of ANXA1 inhibiting adipogenesis was first uncovered in our study, which is a potential target for obesity prevention and treatment.
BACKGROUND: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as sunitinib are multitarget antiangiogenic agents in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). They are widely used in the treatment of advanced/metastatic renal cancer. However, resistance to TKIs is common in the clinic, particularly after long-term treatment. YTHDC1 is the main nuclear reader protein that binds with m(6)A to regulate the splicing, export and stability of mRNA. However, the specific role and corresponding mechanism of YTHDC1 in renal cancer cells are still unclear. METHODS: The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset was used to study the expression of YTHDC1 in ccRCC. Cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8), wound healing, Transwell and xenograft assays were applied to explore the biological function of YTHDC1 in ccRCC. Western blot, quantitative real time PCR (RT‒qPCR), RNA immunoprecipitation PCR (RIP-qPCR), methylated RIP-qPCR (MeRIP-qPCR) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analyses were applied to study the YY1/HDAC2/YTHDC1/ANXA1 axis in renal cancer cells. The CCK-8 assay and xenograft assay were used to study the role of YTHDC1 in determining the sensitivity of ccRCC to sunitinib. RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that YTHDC1 is downregulated in ccRCC tissues compared with normal tissues. Low expression of YTHDC1 is associated with a poor prognosis in patients with ccRCC. Subsequently, we showed that YTHDC1 inhibits the progression of renal cancer cells via downregulation of the ANXA1/MAPK pathways. Moreover, we also showed that the YTHDC1/ANXA1 axis modulates the sensitivity of tyrosine kinase inhibitors. We then revealed that HDAC2 inhibitors resensitize ccRCC to tyrosine kinase inhibitors through the YY1/HDAC2 complex. We have identified a novel YY1/HDAC2/YTHDC1/ANXA1 axis modulating the progression and chemosensitivity of ccRCC. CONCLUSION: We identified a novel YY1/HDAC2/YTHDC1/ANXA1 axis modulating the progression and chemosensitivity of ccRCC.
A highly immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME) and the presence of the blood‒brain barrier are the two major obstacles to eliciting an effective immune response in patients with high-grade glioma (HGG). Here, we tried to enhance the local innate immune response in relapsed HGG by intracranially injecting poly(I:C) to establish a robust antitumor immune response in this registered clinical trial (NCT03392545). During the follow-up, 12/27 (44.4%) patients who achieved tumor control concomitant with survival benefit were regarded as responders in our study. We found that the T-cell receptor (TCR) repertoire in the TME was reshaped after poly(I:C) treatment. Based on the RNA-seq analysis of tumor samples, the expression of annexin A1 (ANXA1) was significantly upregulated in the tumor cells of nonresponders, which was further validated at the protein level. In vitro and in vivo experiments showed that ANXA1 could induce the production of M2-like macrophages and microglia via its surface receptor formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1) to establish a Treg cell-driven immunosuppressive TME and suppress the antitumor immune response facilitated by poly(I:C). The ANXA1/FPR1 signaling axis can inhibit the innate immune response of glioma patients by promoting an anti-inflammatory and Treg-driven TME. Moreover, ANXA1 could serve as a reliable predictor of response to poly(I:C), with a notable predictive accuracy rate of 92.3%. In light of these notable findings, this study unveils a new perspective of immunotherapy for gliomas.
In squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), macrophages responding to interleukin (IL)-33 create a TGF-beta-rich stromal niche that maintains cancer stem cells (CSCs), which evade chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in part via activation of the NRF2 antioxidant program. Here, we examined how IL-33 derived from CSCs facilitates the development of an immunosuppressive microenvironment. CSCs with high NRF2 activity redistributed nuclear IL-33 to the cytoplasm and released IL-33 as cargo of large oncosomes (LOs). Mechanistically, NRF2 increased the expression of the lipid scramblase ATG9B, which exposed an "eat me" signal on the LO surface, leading to annexin A1 (ANXA1) loading. These LOs promoted the differentiation of AXNA1 receptor(+) myeloid precursors into immunosuppressive macrophages. Blocking ATG9B's scramblase activity or depleting ANXA1 decreased niche macrophages and hindered tumor progression. Thus, IL-33 is released from live CSCs via LOs to promote the differentiation of alternatively activated macrophage, with potential relevance to other settings of inflammation and tissue repair.
BACKGROUND: Loss of AZGP1 expression is a biomarker associated with progression to castration resistance, development of metastasis, and poor disease-specific survival in prostate cancer. However, high expression of AZGP1 cells in prostate cancer has been reported to increase proliferation and invasion. The exact role of AZGP1 in prostate cancer progression remains elusive. METHOD: AZGP1 knockout and overexpressing prostate cancer cells were generated using a lentiviral system. The effects of AZGP1 under- or over-expression in prostate cancer cells were evaluated by in vitro cell proliferation, migration, and invasion assays. Heterozygous AZGP1(+/-) mice were obtained from European Mouse Mutant Archive (EMMA), and prostate tissues from homozygous knockout male mice were collected at 2, 6 and 10 months for histological analysis. In vivo xenografts generated from AZGP1 under- or over-expressing prostate cancer cells were used to determine the role of AZGP1 in prostate cancer tumor growth, and subsequent proteomics analysis was conducted to elucidate the mechanisms of AZGP1 action in prostate cancer progression. AZGP1 expression and microvessel density were measured in human prostate cancer samples on a tissue microarray of 215 independent patient samples. RESULT: Neither the knockout nor overexpression of AZGP1 exhibited significant effects on prostate cancer cell proliferation, clonal growth, migration, or invasion in vitro. The prostates of AZGP1(-/-) mice initially appeared to have grossly normal morphology; however, we observed fibrosis in the periglandular stroma and higher blood vessel density in the mouse prostate by 6 months. In PC3 and DU145 mouse xenografts, over-expression of AZGP1 did not affect tumor growth. Instead, these tumors displayed decreased microvessel density compared to xenografts derived from PC3 and DU145 control cells, suggesting that AZGP1 functions to inhibit angiogenesis in prostate cancer. Proteomics profiling further indicated that, compared to control xenografts, AZGP1 overexpressing PC3 xenografts are enriched with angiogenesis pathway proteins, including YWHAZ, EPHA2, SERPINE1, and PDCD6, MMP9, GPX1, HSPB1, COL18A1, RNH1, and ANXA1. In vitro functional studies show that AZGP1 inhibits human umbilical vein endothelial cell proliferation, migration, tubular formation and branching. Additionally, tumor microarray analysis shows that AZGP1 expression is negatively correlated with blood vessel density in human prostate cancer tissues. CONCLUSION: AZGP1 is a negative regulator of angiogenesis, such that loss of AZGP1 promotes angiogenesis in prostate cancer. AZGP1 likely exerts heterotypical effects on cells in the tumor microenvironment, such as stromal and endothelial cells. This study sheds light on the anti-angiogenic characteristics of AZGP1 in the prostate and provides a rationale to target AZGP1 to inhibit prostate cancer progression.
Annexin A1 (ANXA1) is widely expressed in a variety of body tissues and cells and is also involved in tumor development through multiple pathways. The invasion, metastasis, and immune escape of tumor cells depend on the interaction between tumor cells and their surrounding environment. Research shows that ANXA1 can act on a variety of cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME), and subsequently affect the proliferation, invasion and metastasis of tumors. This article describes the role of ANXA1 in the various components of the tumor microenvironment and its mechanism of action, as well as the existing clinical treatment measures related to ANXA1. These findings provide insight for the further design of strategies targeting ANXA1 for the diagnosis and treatment of malignant tumors.
Wheezing is a common and heterogeneous condition in preschool children. In some countries, the prevalence can be as high as 30% and up to 50% of all children experience wheezing before the age of 6. Asthma often starts with preschool wheeze, but not all wheezing children will develop asthma at school age. At this moment, it is not possible to accurately predict which wheezing children will develop asthma. Recently, studying the genetics of wheeze and the childhood-onset of asthma have grown in interest. Childhood-onset asthma has a stronger heritability in comparison with adult-onset asthma. In early childhood asthma exacerbations, CDHR3, which encodes the receptor for Rhinovirus C, was identified, as well as IL33, and the 17q locus that includes GSDMB and ORMDL3 genes. The 17q locus is the strongest wheeze and childhood-onset asthma locus, and was shown to interact with many environmental factors, including smoking and infections. Finally, ANXA1 was recently associated with early-onset, persistent wheeze. ANXA1 may help resolve eosinophilic inflammation. Overall, despite its complexities, genetic approaches to unravel the early-onset of wheeze and asthma are promising, since these shed more light on mechanisms of childhood asthma-onset. Implicated genes point toward airway epithelium and its response to external factors, such as viral infections. However, the heterogeneity of wheeze phenotypes complicates genetic studies. It is therefore important to define accurate wheezing phenotypes and forge larger international collaborations to gain a better understanding of the pathways underlying early-onset asthma.
Overexpression of ANXA1 and EphA2 has been linked to various cancers and both proteins have attracted considerable attention for the development of new anticancer drugs. Here we report that ANXA1 competes with Cbl for binding EphA2 and increases its stability by inhibiting Cbl-mediated EphA2 ubiquitination and degradation in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Binding of ANXA1 to EphA2 promoted NPC cell growth and metastasis in vitro and in vivo by elevating EphA2 levels and increasing activity of EphA2 oncogenic signaling (pS897-EphA2). Expression of ANXA1 and EphA2 was positively correlated and both were significantly higher in NPC tissues than in the normal nasopharyngeal epithelial tissues. Patients with high expression of both proteins presented poorer disease-free survival and overall survival relative to patients with high expression of one protein alone. Furthermore, amino acid residues 20-30aa and 28-30aa of the ANXA1 N-terminus bound EphA2. An 11 amino acid-long ANXA1-derived peptide (EYVQTVKSSKG) was developed on the basis of this N-terminal region, which disrupted the connection of ANXA1 with EphA2, successfully downregulating EphA2 expression and dramatically suppressing NPC cell oncogenicity in vitro and in mice. These findings suggest that ANXA1 promotes NPC growth and metastasis via binding and stabilization of EphA2 and present a strategy for targeting EphA2 degradation and treating NPC with a peptide. This therapeutic strategy may also be extended to other cancers with high expression of both proteins. SIGNIFICANCE: These findings show that EphA2 is a potential target for NPC therapeutics and an ANXA1-derived peptide suppresses NPC growth and metastasis. GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT: http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/canres/80/20/4386/F1.large.jpg.
Annexin-A1 (ANXA1) was first discovered in the early 1980's as a protein, which mediates (some of the) anti-inflammatory effects of glucocorticoids. Subsequently, the role of ANXA1 in inflammation has been extensively studied. The biology of ANXA1 is complex and it has many different roles in both health and disease. Its effects as a potent endogenous anti-inflammatory mediator are well-described in both acute and chronic inflammation and its role in activating the pro-resolution phase receptor, FPR2, has been described and is now being exploited for therapeutic benefit. In the present mini review, we will endeavor to give an overview of ANXA1 biology in relation to inflammation and functions that mediate pro-resolution that are independent of glucocorticoid induction. We will focus on the role of ANXA1 in diseases with a large inflammatory component focusing on diabetes and microvascular disease. Finally, we will explore the possibility of exploiting ANXA1 as a novel therapeutic target in diabetes and the treatment of microvascular disease.
The annexins are a well-known, closely related, multigene superfamily of Ca(2+)-regulated, phospholipid-dependent, membrane-binding proteins. As a member of the annexins, Anxa1 participates in a variety of important biological processes, such as cellular transduction, membrane aggregation, inflammation, phagocytosis, proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Accumulated evidence has indicated that Anxa1 deregulations are associated with the development, invasion, metastasis, occurrence and drug resistance of cancers. The research evidence in recent years indicates that Anxa1 might specifically function either as a tumor suppressor or a tumor promoter candidate for certain cancers depending on the particular type of tumor cells/tissues. This article summarizes the associations between Anxa1 and malignant tumors, as well as potential action mechanisms. Anxa1 has the potential to be used in the future as a biomarker for the diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of certain tumors.
