Annexin A5; This protein is an anticoagulant protein that acts as an indirect inhibitor of the thromboplastin-specific complex, which is involved in the blood coagulation cascade.
Sorafenib is the most widely used first-line drug for the treatment of the advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Unfortunately, sorafenib resistance often limits its therapeutic efficacy. To evaluate the efficacy of artesunate against sorafenib-resistant HCC and to investigate its underlying pharmacological mechanisms, a "sorafenib resistance related gene-ART candidate target" interaction network was constructed, and a signaling axis consisting with artesunate candidate target AFAP1L2 and sorafenib target SRC, and the downstream FUNDC1-dependent mitophagy was identified as a major contributor to the sorafenib resistance and a potential way of artesunate to mitigate resistance. Notably, our clinical data demonstrated that AFAP1L2 expression in HCC tissues was markedly higher than that in adjacent non-cancerous liver tissues (P < 0.05), and high AFAP1L2 expression was also significantly associated with an unfavorable overall survival of HCC patients (P < 0.05). Experimentally, AFAP1L2 was overexpressed in sorafenib resistant cells, leading to the activation of downstream SRC-FUNDC1 signaling axis, further blocking the FUNDC1 recruitment of LC3B to mitochondria and inhibiting the activation of mitophagy, based on both in vitro and in vivo systems. Moreover, artesunate significantly enhanced the inhibitory effects of sorafenib on resistant cells and tumors by inducing excessive mitophagy. Mechanically, artesunate reduced the expression of AFAP1L2 protein, suppressed the phosphorylation levels of SRC and FUNDC1 proteins, promoted the FUNDC1 recruitment of massive LC3B to mitochondria, and further overactivated the mitophagy and subsequent cell apoptosis of sorafenib resistant cells. In conclusion, artesunate may be a promising strategy to mitigate sorafenib resistance in HCC via exacerbating AFAP1L2-SRC-FUNDC1 axis-dependent mitophagy.Abbreviations: AFAP1L2, actin filament associated protein 1 like 2; ANOVA, analysis of variance; ANXA5, annexin V; ART: artesunate; CETSA, cellular thermal shift assay; CI: combination index; CO-IP: co-immunoprecipitation; CQ: chloroquine; CT, computed tomography; [(18)F]-FDG, fluoro-2-D-deoxyglucose F18; FUNDC1: FUN14 domain containing 1; GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; H&E Staining: hematoxylin - eosin staining; HepG2(R), sorafenib resistant HepG2; IF, immunofluorescence; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; miR, microRNA; mRNA: messenger RNA; OE, overexpression; OS, overall survival; PET, positron emission tomography; qRT-PCR: quantitative real-time PCR; sh, short hairpin; shNC: negative control shRNA; shAFAP1L2: short hairpin AFAP1L2; SORA, sorafenib; SPR, surface plasmon resonance; SRC, SRC proto-oncogene, non-receptor tyrosine kinase; SUV, standardized uptake value; TEM, transmission electron microscopy; TOMM20: translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 20.
INTRODUCTION: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) from human Alzheimer's disease (AD) biospecimens contain amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide and tau. While AD EVs are known to affect brain disease pathobiology, their biochemical and molecular characterizations remain ill defined. METHODS: EVs were isolated from the cortical gray matter of 20 AD and 18 control brains. Tau and Abeta levels were measured by immunoassay. Differentially expressed EV proteins were assessed by quantitative proteomics and machine learning. RESULTS: Levels of pS396 tau and Abeta1-42 were significantly elevated in AD EVs. High levels of neuron- and glia-specific factors are detected in control and AD EVs, respectively. Machine learning identified ANXA5, VGF, GPM6A, and ACTZ in AD EV compared to controls. They distinguished AD EVs from controls in the test sets with 88% accuracy. DISCUSSION: In addition to Abeta and tau, ANXA5, VGF, GPM6A, and ACTZ are new signature proteins in AD EVs.
Mitochondrial quality control, which is crucial for maintaining cellular homeostasis, has been considered to be achieved exclusively through mitophagy. Here we report an alternative mitochondrial quality control pathway mediated by extracellular mitochondria release. By performing time-lapse confocal imaging on a stable cell line with fluorescent-labeled mitochondria, we observed release of mitochondria from cells into the extracellular space. Correlative light-electron microscopy revealed that majority of the extracellular mitochondria are in free form and, on rare occasions, some are enclosed in membrane-surrounded vesicles. Rotenone- and carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone-induced mitochondrial quality impairment promotes the extracellular release of depolarized mitochondria. Overexpression of PRKN (parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase), which has a pivotal role in mitophagy regulation, suppresses the extracellular mitochondria release under basal and stress condition, whereas its knockdown exacerbates it. Correspondingly, overexpression of PRKN-independent mitophagy regulators, BNIP3 (BCL2 interacting protein 3) and BNIP3L/NIX (BCL2 interacting protein 3 like), suppress extracellular mitochondria release. Autophagy-deficient cell lines show elevated extracellular mitochondria release. These results imply that perturbation of mitophagy pathway prompts mitochondria expulsion. Presence of mitochondrial protein can also be detected in mouse sera. Sera of PRKN-deficient mice contain higher level of mitochondrial protein compared to that of wild-type mice. More importantly, fibroblasts and cerebrospinal fluid samples from Parkinson disease patients carrying loss-of-function PRKN mutations show increased extracellular mitochondria compared to control subjects, providing evidence in a clinical context. Taken together, our findings suggest that extracellular mitochondria release is a comparable yet distinct quality control pathway from conventional mitophagy.Abbreviations: ACTB: actin beta; ANXA5: annexin A5; ATP5F1A/ATP5A: ATP synthase F1 subunit alpha; ATG: autophagy related; BNIP3: BCL2 interacting protein 3; BNIP3L/NIX: BCL2 interacting protein 3 like; CCCP: carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone; CM: conditioned media; CSF: cerebrospinal fluid; DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide; EM: electron microscopy; HSPD1/Hsp60: heat shock protein family D (Hsp60) member 1; KD: knockdown; KO: knockout; MAP1LC3A/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha; MT-CO1: mitochondrially encoded cytochrome c oxidase I; NDUFB8: NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit B8; OE: overexpression; OPA1: OPA1 mitochondrial dynamin like GTPase; OXPHOS: oxidative phosphorylation; PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PB: phosphate buffer; PD: Parkinson disease; PINK1: PTEN induced kinase 1; PRKN: parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase; RB1CC1/FIP200: RB1 inducible coiled-coil 1; SDHB: succinate dehydrogenase complex iron sulfur subunit B; TOMM20: translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 20; TOMM40: translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 40; UQCRC2: ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase core protein 2; WT: wild-type.
N(6)-methyladenosine (m(6)A) mRNA modifications play critical roles in various biological processes. However, no study addresses the role of m(6)A in macroautophagy/autophagy. Here, we show that m(6)A modifications are increased in H/R-treated cardiomyocytes and ischemia/reperfusion (I/R)-treated mice heart. We found that METTL3 (methyltransferase like 3) is the primary factor involved in aberrant m(6)A modification. Silencing METTL3 enhances autophagic flux and inhibits apoptosis in H/R-treated cardiomyocytes. However, overexpression of METTL3 or inhibition of the RNA demethylase ALKBH5 has an opposite effect, suggesting that METTL3 is a negative regulator of autophagy. Mechanistically, METTL3 methylates TFEB, a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy genes, at two m(6)A residues in the 3'-UTR, which promotes the association of the RNA-binding protein HNRNPD with TFEB pre-mRNA and subsequently decreases the expression levels of TFEB. Further experiments show that autophagic flux enhanced by METTL3 deficiency is TFEB dependent. In turn, TFEB regulates the expression levels of METTL3 and ALKBH5 in opposite directions: it induces ALKBH5 and inhibits METTL3. TFEB binds to the ALKBH5 promoter and activates its transcription. In contrast, inhibition of METTL3 by TFEB does not involve transcriptional repression but rather downregulation of mRNA stability, thereby establishing a negative feedback loop. Together, our work uncovers a critical link between METTL3-ALKBH5 and autophagy, providing insight into the functional importance of the reversible mRNA m(6)A methylation and its modulators in ischemic heart disease. Abbreviations: ACTB, actin beta; ALKBH5, alkB homolog 5, RNA demethylase; ANXA5, annexin A5; ATG, autophagy-related; BafA, bafilomycin A(1); CASP3, caspase 3; ELAVL1, ELAV like RNA binding protein 1; FTO, FTO, alpha-ketoglutarate dependent dioxygenase; GFP, green fluorescent protein; GST, glutathione S-transferase; HNRNPD, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein D; H/R, hypoxia/reoxygenation; I/R, ischemia/reperfusion; LAD, left anterior descending; m(6)A, N(6)-methyladenosine; MEFs, mouse embryo fibroblasts; Mer, mutated estrogen receptor domains; METTL3, methyltransferase like 3; METTL14, methyltransferase like 14; mRFP, monomeric red fluorescent protein; MTORC1, mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase complex 1; NMVCs, neonatal mouse ventricular cardiomyocytes; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; PI, propidium iodide; PTMs, post-translational modifications; PVDF, polyvinylidenedifluoride; RIP, RNA-immunoprecipitation; siRNA, small interfering RNA; SQSTM1, sequestosome 1; TFEB, transcription factor EB; TUBA: tublin alpha; WTAP, WT1 associated protein; YTHDF, YTH N6-methyladenosine RNA binding protein.
Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell malignancy with poor survival. Autophagy, a stress-responsive catabolic process mediated by lysosomal activity, plays a crucial role in the pathophysiology of MM. Growing evidence has indicated that dysregulated microRNAs (miRNAs) are associated with the aberrant autophagy in various human cancers. However, to date, few miRNAs have been reported to directly modulate autophagy in the pathobiology of MM. In this study, we investigated the role of MIR145-3p (microRNA 145-3p) in MM, with focus on cellular processes autophagy and cell death. Our results provided evidence that downregulation of MIR145-3p expression was associated with disease progression in human MM. MIR145-3p triggered autophagic flux through direct targeting of HDAC4 (histone deacetylase 4) in MM cells, leading to enhanced apoptosis. Silencing HDAC4 recapitulated the effects of MIR145-3p, whereas enforced expression of HDAC4 abrogated the effects of MIR145-3p. Furthermore, we showed that suppression of HDAC4 by MIR145-3p resulted in upregulation of the pro-apoptotic protein BCL2L11 and caused MTORC1 inactivation, which in turn led to enhanced autophagy and cell death. Importantly, we demonstrated that MIR145-3p mimic could potentiate the anti-MM activity of bortezomib in both in vitro and in vivo experiments. Overall, our findings indicate that MIR145-3p exerted a tumor suppression function in MM by inducing autophagic cell death and suggest that MIR145-3p-based targeted therapy would represent a novel strategy for MM treatment.Abbreviations: 3-MA: 3-methyladenine; 3'-UTR: 3'-untranslated region; 7-AAD: 7-aminoactinomycin D; ACTB: actin beta; ANXA5: annexin A5; ATG5: autophagy related 5; ATG7: autophagy related 7; B2M: beta-2-microglobulin; BAF: bafilomycin A(1); BCL2L11: BCL2 like 11; Bort: bortezomib; CASP3: caspase 3; CCK-8: Cell Counting Kit-8; CQ: chloroquine; Ct: threshold cycle; ctrl: control; DAPI: 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GFP: green fluorescent protein; HDAC4: histone deacetylase 4; ISS: International Staging System; MAP1LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; miRNAs: microRNAs; MIR145-3p: microRNA 145-3p; MM: multiple myeloma; mRNA: messenger RNA; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MTORC1: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase complex 1; PCs: plasma cells; PFS: progression-free survival; qRT-PCR: quantitative reverse transcription PCR; RPS6KB1: ribosomal protein S6 kinase B1; SD: standard deviation; siRNA: small interfering RNA; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; STV: starvation; TUBB: tubulin beta class I.
Microglia are specialized macrophages responsible for the clearance of dead neurons and pathogens by phagocytosis and degradation. The degradation requires phagosome maturation and acidification provided by the vesicular- or vacuolar-type H(+)-translocating adenosine triphosphatase (V-ATPase), which is composed of the cytoplasmic V(1) domain and the membrane-embedded V(o) domain. The V-ATPase a subunit, an integral part of the V(o) domain, has four isoforms in mammals. The functions of different isoforms on phagosome maturation in different cells/species remain controversial. Here we show that mutations of both the V-ATPase Atp6v0a1 and Tcirg1b/Atp6v0a3 subunits lead to the accumulation of phagosomes in zebrafish microglia. However, their mechanisms are different. The V-ATPase Atp6v0a1 subunit is mainly distributed in early and late phagosomes. Defects of this subunit lead to a defective transition from early phagosomes to late phagosomes. In contrast, The V-ATPase Tcirg1b/Atp6v0a3 subunit is primarily located on lysosomes and regulates late phagosome-lysosomal fusion. Defective Tcirg1b/Atp6v0a3, but not Atp6v0a1 subunit leads to reduced acidification and impaired macroautophagy/autophagy in microglia. We further showed that ATP6V0A1/a1 and TCIRG1/a3 subunits in mouse macrophages preferentially located in endosomes and lysosomes, respectively. Blocking these subunits disrupted early-to-late endosome transition and endosome-to-lysosome fusion, respectively. Taken together, our results highlight the essential and conserved roles played by different V-ATPase subunits in multiple steps of phagocytosis and endocytosis across various species.Abbrevations: Apoe: apolipoprotein E; ANXA5/annexin V: annexin A5; ATP6V0A1/a1: ATPase H+-transporting V0 subunit a1; ATP6V0A2/a2: ATPase H+-transporting V0 subunit a2; ATP6V0A4/a4: ATPase H+-transporting V0 subunit a4; dpf: days post-fertilization; EEA1: early endosome antigen 1; HOPS: homotypic fusion and protein sorting; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; Lcp1: lymphocyte cytosolic protein 1 (L-plastin); Map1lc3/Lc3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; NR: neutral red; PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PtdIns: phosphatidylinositol; PtdIns3P: phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate; PtdIns(3,5)P2: phosphatidylinositol (3,5)-bisphosphate; RAB4: RAB4, member RAS oncogene family; RAB5: RAB5, member RAS oncogene family; RAB7: RAB7, member RAS oncogene family; TCIRG1/Atp6v0a3/a3: T cell immune regulator 1, ATPase H+-transporting V0 subunit a3; V-ATPase: vacuolar-type H+-translocating adenosine triphosphatase; Xla.Tubb2b/NBT: tubulin beta 2B class IIb.
Annexins are soluble proteins that bind to biological membranes containing negatively charged phospholipids, principally phosphatidylserine, in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner. Annexin-A5 (AnxA5), the smallest member of the annexin family, presents unique properties of membrane binding and self-assembly into ordered two-dimensional (2D) arrays on membrane surfaces. We have previously reported that AnxA5 plays a central role in the machinery of membrane repair by enabling rapid resealing of plasma membrane disruption in murine perivascular cells. AnxA5 promotes membrane repair via the formation of a protective 2D bandage at membrane damaged site. Here, we review current knowledge on cell membrane repair and present recent findings on the role of AnxA5 in membrane resealing of human trophoblasts.
The incidence of recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) in fertile women ranges from 1% to 5%, of which about 50% of them are due to unknown causes. The possible pathogenesis of RPL is an urgent problem to be solved in the clinical. Mutations or polymorphisms of certain genes in the coagulation mechanism are associated with susceptibility to thrombotic diseases and are one of the main reasons for the occurrence of RPL. Among them, the ANXA5 gene was newly studied and some single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the promoter region of ANXA5 have been reported to be associated with RPL in multiple races. In this review, we summarized the research progress on the correlation between the SNPs in ANXA5 and RPL, hoping to provide some valuable guidance for the future studies.
Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most frequent primary liver cancer. Macroautophagy/autophagy inhibitors have been extensively studied in cancer but, to date, none has reached efficacy in clinical trials. In this study, we demonstrated that GNS561, a new autophagy inhibitor, whose anticancer activity was previously linked to lysosomal cell death, displayed high liver tropism and potent antitumor activity against a panel of human cancer cell lines and in two hepatocellular carcinoma in vivo models. We showed that due to its lysosomotropic properties, GNS561 could reach and specifically inhibited its enzyme target, PPT1 (palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1), resulting in lysosomal unbound Zn(2+) accumulation, impairment of cathepsin activity, blockage of autophagic flux, altered location of MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase), lysosomal membrane permeabilization, caspase activation and cell death. Accordingly, GNS561, for which a global phase 1b clinical trial in liver cancers was just successfully achieved, represents a promising new drug candidate and a hopeful therapeutic strategy in cancer treatment.Abbreviations: ANXA5:annexin A5; ATCC: American type culture collection; BafA1: bafilomycin A(1); BSA: bovine serum albumin; CASP3: caspase 3; CASP7: caspase 7; CASP8: caspase 8; CCND1: cyclin D1; CTSB: cathepsin B; CTSD: cathepsin D; CTSL: cathepsin L; CQ: chloroquine; iCCA: intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma; DEN: diethylnitrosamine; DMEM: Dulbelcco's modified Eagle medium; FBS: fetal bovine serum; FITC: fluorescein isothiocyanate; GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; HCC: hepatocellular carcinoma; HCQ: hydroxychloroquine; HDSF: hexadecylsulfonylfluoride; IC(50): mean half-maximal inhibitory concentration; LAMP: lysosomal associated membrane protein; LC3-II: phosphatidylethanolamine-conjugated form of MAP1LC3; LMP: lysosomal membrane permeabilization; MALDI: matrix assisted laser desorption ionization; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MKI67: marker of proliferation Ki-67; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging; NH(4)Cl: ammonium chloride; NtBuHA: N-tert-butylhydroxylamine; PARP: poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase; PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PPT1: palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1; SD: standard deviation; SEM: standard error mean; vs, versus; Zn(2+): zinc ion; Z-Phe: Z-Phe-Tyt(tBu)-diazomethylketone; Z-VAD-FMK: carbobenzoxy-valyl-alanyl-aspartyl-[O-methyl]- fluoromethylketone.
Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is often associated with dysregulated Annexin A5 (ANXA5) expression. Moreover, the variants of Anxa5, a protein that is enriched in the placenta to prevent coagulation, have been reported to affect RPL risks. The haplotypes M1 [including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 1A/C and 27T/C] and M2 (including SNPs 19G/A, 1A/C, 27T/C and 76G/A) of ANXA5 were also reported to affect RPL risks. The present study aimed to investigate the association between the haplotype located in the promoter region of ANXA5 and the risk of RPL. Patients with RPL (n=235) or intrauterine fetus death (IUFD; n=154), as well as healthy control subjects (n=375) were enrolled in the current research. Their haplotypes of ANXA5 were determined using genotyping, and the association between ANXA5 haplotypes and the risk of RPL was accordingly analyzed. A luciferase assay was conducted to investigate the haplotype responsible for ANXA5 activity. Reverse transcription‑quantitative PCR, western blot analysis, immunohistochemistry and ELISA were performed to assess the expression level and activity of ANXA5 in patients with RPL. Consequently, the majority (n=214) of patients with RPL had a history of early RPL, whereas 31 patients with RPL had a history of both early and late RPL episodes. A significant difference was found between cases and controls in terms of gravidity and parity, whereas no significant differences were found in terms of age. The percentage of patients with RPL carrying the M2 haplotype of ANXA5 was significantly higher compared with that in control subjects, indicating that the M2 haplotype of ANXA5 was an independent risk of RPL as it influenced the transcription efficiency of ANXA5 promoter. In patients with RPL, ANXA5 activity was suppressed and the mRNA and protein expression levels of Anxa5 were decreased. Thus, the ANXA5 M2 haplotype may be an independent risk factor of RPL by affecting Anxa5 activity.
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a prevalent malignancy with a pressing need for improved therapeutic response and prognosis prediction. This study delves into a novel predictive model related to ferroptosis, a regulated cell death mechanism disrupting metabolic processes. RESULTS: Single-cell sequencing data analysis identified subpopulations of HCC cells exhibiting activated ferroptosis and distinct gene expression patterns compared to normal tissues. Utilizing the LASSO-Cox algorithm, we constructed a model with 10 single-cell biomarkers associated with ferroptosis, namely STMN1, S100A10, FABP5, CAPG, RGCC, ENO1, ANXA5, UTRN, CXCR3, and ITM2A. Comprehensive analyses using these biomarkers revealed variations in immune infiltration, tumor mutation burden, drug sensitivity, and biological functional profiles between risk groups. Specific associations were established between particular immune cell subtypes and certain gene expression patterns. Treatment response analyses indicated potential benefits from anti-tumor immune therapy for the low-risk group and chemotherapy advantages for the high-risk group. CONCLUSIONS: The integration of this single-cell level model with clinicopathological features enabled accurate overall survival prediction and effective risk stratification in HCC patients. Our findings illuminate the potential of ferroptosis-related genes in tailoring therapy and prognosis prediction for HCC, offering novel insights into the intricate interplay among ferroptosis, immune response, and HCC progression.
Inflammation promotes solid tumor progression, but how regulatory mechanisms of inflammation may affect leukemia is less well studied. Using annexin A5 (ANXA5), a calcium-binding protein known for apoptosis, which we discovered to be differentially expressed in the bone marrow microenvironment (BMM) of mice with acute myeloid (AML) vs chronic myeloid leukemia, as a model system, we unravel here a circuit in which AML-derived tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) dose-dependently reduces ANXA5 in the BMM. This creates an inflammatory BMM via elevated levels of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Via binding to its EP4 receptor, PGE2 increases beta-catenin and hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha signaling in AML cells, thereby accelerating PGE2-sensitive AML. Human trephine biopsies may show lower ANXA5 expression and higher PGE2 expression in AML than other hematologic malignancies. Furthermore, syngeneic and xenogeneic transplantation models suggest a survival benefit after treatment with the inhibitor of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (cyclooxygenase 2 [COX2]), celecoxib, plus cytarabine in those AML types highly sensitive to PGE2 compared with cytarabine alone. Taken together, TNF-alpha/ANXA5/NF-kappaB/COX2/PGE2-mediated inflammation influences AML course in a highly differential and circular manner, and patients with AML with "inflammatory AML" may benefit from antiphlogistic agents as adjunct therapy.
BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a common malignancy that often develops unnoticed. Typically, these tumors are identified at advanced stages, resulting in a relatively low chance of successful treatment. Anoikis serves as a natural defense against the spread of tumor cells, meaning circumventing anoikis can effectively inhibit tumor metastasis. Nonetheless, studies focusing on anoikis in the context of HNSCC remain scarce. METHODS: Anoikis-related genes (ARGs) were identified by using the GeneCards and Harmonizome databases. Expression data of these genes and relevant clinical features were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases. A LASSO regression and a prognostic risk score model were developed to determine their prognostic significance. The analysis included the use of the CIBERSORT algorithm to quantify immune and stromal cell presence. Furthermore, in vitro and in vivo, we confirmed the expression and functional roles of proteins and mRNA of genes independently predictive of prognosis. RESULTS: The study identified eight genes linked to prognosis (ANXA5, BAK1, CDKN2A, PPARG, CCR7, MAPK11, CRYAB, CRYBA1) and developed a prognostic model that effectively forecasts the survival outcomes for patients with HNSCC. A higher survival likelihood is associated with lower risk scores. In addition, a significant relationship was found between immune and risk score, and ANXA5 deletion promoted the killing of HNSCC cells by activated CD8(+) T cells. During the screening process, 65 different chemotherapeutic drugs were found to have significant differences in IC50 values when comparing high- and low-risk categories. ANXA5 emerged as a gene with independent prognostic significance, exhibiting notably elevated protein and mRNA levels in HNSCC tissue compared to non-tumorous tissue. The suppression of ANXA5 gene activity resulted in a substantial decrease in both the growth and mobility of HNSCC cells. Animal model experiments demonstrated that inhibiting ANXA5 suppressed HNSCC growth and migration in vivo. CONCLUSION: Through bioinformatics, a prognostic risk model of high precision was developed, offering valuable insights into the survival rates and immune responses in patients with HNSCC. ANXA5 is highlighted as a significant prognostic factor among the identified genes, indicating its promise as a potential therapeutic target for those with HNSCC.
BACKGROUND: Annexin A5 (ANXA5) haplotypes can increase the risk of recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL). This study aimed to investigate the effect of ANXA5 haplotypes on ANXA5 expression in patients with RPL. METHODS: Female subjects with RPL, parous controls (those who intentionally aborted without medical conditions or complications), and population controls (normal delivery) were studied. Real-time polymerase chain reaction was carried out to evaluate ANXA5 expression in the placenta and peripheral blood. Western blotting and immunohistochemistry were used to assess ANXA5 protein expression. The luciferase assay was performed to detect the effect of M1 and M2 haplotypes on transcription efficiency of the ANXA5 promoter. RESULTS: We found that the percentage of the M2 carrier was highest in the RPL group. ANXA5 expression in the placenta and peripheral blood in subjects with RPL was significantly inhibited. Furthermore, ANXA5 expression in subjects carrying the M2 haplotype was remarkably suppressed compared with that in carriers of other haplotypes. Finally, the M2 haplotype decreased the transcription efficiency of the ANXA5 promoter. CONCLUSION: Our findings show that ANXA5 expression is decreased in carriers of the M2 haplotype and that M1/M2 haplotypes in the ANXA5 gene are associated with an increased risk of RPL.
Gastric cancer (GC) remains a predominant form of malignant tumor globally, necessitating innovative non-surgical therapeutic approaches. This investigation aimed to delineate the expression landscape of macrophage-associated genes in GC and to evaluate their prognostic significance and influence on immunotherapeutic responsiveness. Utilizing the CellMarker2.0 database, we identified 69 immune cell markers with prognostic relevance in GC, including 12 macrophage-specific genes. A Weighted Gene Co-Expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) isolated 3,181 genes correlated with these macrophage markers. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA-STAD) dataset was employed as the training set, while data from the GSE62254 served as the validation cohort. 13 genes were shortlisted through LASSO-Cox regression to formulate a prognostic model. Multivariable Cox regression substantiated that the calculated risk score serves as an imperative independent predictor of overall survival (OS). Distinct macrophage infiltration profiles, pathway associations, treatment susceptibilities, and drug sensitivities were observed between high- and low-risk groups. The preliminary validation of ANXA5 in predicting the survival rates of GC patients at 1 year, 3 years, and 5 years, as well as its expression levels were higher and role in promoting tumor angiogenesis in GC through immunohistochemistry and angiogenesis experiments. In summary, macrophage-related genes were potentially a novel crosstalk mechanism between macrophages and endothelial cells in the tumor microenvironment, and the interplay between inflammation and angiogenesis might have also offered new therapeutic targets, providing a new avenue for personalized treatment interventions.
Identifying a universal biomarker for cancer treatment remains a major challenge in cancer therapy. Extracellular exposure of phosphatidylserine (PS) is tightly regulated and is an "eat me" signal for phagocytosis in healthy cells. Although cancer cells and vasculature express high levels of externalized PS, they do not undergo apoptosis, making them a promising biomarker for cancer treatment. Annexin A5 (ANXA5) is the native binding partner of PS and can actively target and deliver chemotherapies to the tumor microenvironment (TME) via PS expression. ANXA5 acts as a bridge between the innate and adaptive immune systems and contributes to an immunostimulatory profile in the TME. ANXA5-enzyme prodrug therapies allow for systemic delivery of prodrugs and targeted killing at the tumor site. ANXA5-carbon nanotube conjugates have been used to physically ablate tumors via photothermal therapy. This review aims to explore the expression of PS in cancer cells and how ANXA5 has been used as a chemotherapeutic and targeting agent for cancer.
There is biological plausibility that coagulation activation underlies a proportion of in vitro fertilisation IVF failures and recurrent early clinical pregnancy loss (RPL). However, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) use, based upon previous clinical outcome alone, is not effective in preventing RPL. RPL is heterogeneous in mechanism. Identifying those with an underlying thrombotic mechanism would allow stratification for LMWH treatment. Annexin A5 is an anticoagulant protein expressed on the trophoblast surface. The annexin A5 M2 haplotype (ANXA5 M2) is associated with several placenta mediated pregnancy complications (PMPC) and poor IVF outcome. It is transmitted equally by males and females. A pragmatic observational study of IVF couples screened for M2 carriage and treated with LMWH achieved a 37.9% live birth rate, similar to an unscreened and untreated group with fewer adverse risk factors for conception and a better prognosis from assisted conception. This suggests that LMWH may counteract the adverse effects of M2 carriage. Using this biomarker to stratify IVF and PMPC patients for LMWH treatment merits further evaluation.
Annexin-A5 (AnxA5) is the smallest member of the annexins, a group of soluble proteins that bind to membranes containing negatively-charged phospholipids, principally phosphatidylserine, in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner. AnxA5 presents unique properties of binding and self-assembling on membrane surfaces, forming highly ordered two-dimensional (2D) arrays. We showed previously that AnxA5 plays a central role in the machinery of cell membrane repair of murine perivascular cells, promoting the resealing of membrane damages via the formation of 2D protein arrays at membrane disrupted sites and preventing the extension of membrane ruptures. As the placenta is one of the richest source of AnxA5 in humans, we investigated whether AnxA5 was involved in membrane repair in this organ. We addressed this question at the level of human trophoblasts, either mononucleated cytotrophoblasts or multinucleated syncytiotrophoblasts, in choriocarcinoma cells and primary trophoblasts. Using established procedure of laser irradiation and fluorescence microscopy, we observed that both human cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts repair efficiently a mum(2)-size disruption. Compared to wild-type cells, AnxA5-deficient trophoblasts exhibit severe defect of membrane repair. Through specifically binding to the disrupted site as early as a few seconds after membrane wounding, AnxA5 promotes membrane resealing of injured human trophoblasts. In addition, we observed that a large membrane area containing the disrupted site was released in the extracellular milieu. We propose mechanisms ensuring membrane resealing and subsequent lesion removal in human trophoblasts. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: 13th European Symposium on Calcium.
Atherosclerosis, a disease process characterized by lipid accumulation and inflammation, is the main cause of coronary heart disease (CHD) and myocardial infarction (MI). Efferocytosis involves the clearance of apoptotic cells by phagocytes. Successful engulfment triggers the release of anti-inflammatory cytokines to suppress atherosclerosis. ABCA1 is a key mediator of cholesterol efflux to apoA-I for the generation of HDL-C in reverse cholesterol transport (RCT). Intriguingly, ABCA1 promotes not only cholesterol efflux but also efferocytosis. ABCA1 promotes efferocytosis by regulating the release of "find-me" ligands, including LPC, and the exposure, release, and expression of "eat-me" ligands, including PtdSer, ANXA1, ANXA5, MEGF10, and GULP1. ABCA1 has a pathway similar to TG2, which is an "eat-me" ligand. ABCA1 has the highest known homology to ABCA7, which controls efferocytosis as the engulfment and processing ligand. In addition, ABCA1 can form several regulatory feedback axes with ANXA1, MEGF10, GULP1, TNFalpha, and IL-6. Therefore, ABCA1 is the central factor that links cholesterol efflux and apoptotic cell clearance. Several drugs have been studied or approved for apoptotic cell clearance, such as CD47 antibody and PD1-/PD-L1 antibody. In this article, we review the role and mechanism of action of ABCA1 in efferocytosis and focus on new insights into the ABCA1-efferocytosis axis and its potential as a novel therapeutic target in atherosclerosis.
Routine manipulation of the mouse genome has become a landmark in biomedical research. Traits that are only associated with advanced developmental stages can now be investigated within a living organism, and the in vivo analysis of corresponding phenotypes and functions advances the translation into the clinical setting. The annexins, a family of closely related calcium (Ca(2+))- and lipid-binding proteins, are found at various intra- and extracellular locations, and interact with a broad range of membrane lipids and proteins. Their impacts on cellular functions has been extensively assessed in vitro, yet annexin-deficient mouse models generally develop normally and do not display obvious phenotypes. Only in recent years, studies examining genetically modified annexin mouse models which were exposed to stress conditions mimicking human disease often revealed striking phenotypes. This review is the first comprehensive overview of annexin-related research using animal models and their exciting future use for relevant issues in biology and experimental medicine.
