4-trimethylaminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase, N-terminally processed; Converts gamma-trimethylaminobutyraldehyde into gamma- butyrobetaine with high efficiency (in vitro). Can catalyze the irreversible oxidation of a broad range of aldehydes to the corresponding acids in an NAD-dependent reaction, but with low efficiency.
BACKGROUND: Accumulation of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in the tumor stroma is linked to poor prognosis in colorectal cancer (CRC). CAF-cancer cell interplay, facilitated by secretomes including transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta1), supports fibroblast activation, drives colorectal carcinogenesis, and contributes to CRC aggressive phenotypes. Although widely used, traditional CAF biomarkers are found to have heterogeneous and non-specific expression. Amine oxidase copper containing 3 (AOC3) and leucine-rich repeat-containing 17 (LRRC17) have been reported to be emerging markers of myofibroblasts. AIM: Our objective was to investigate the potential of AOC3 and LRRC17 as biomarkers for fibroblast activation thus predicting their roles in CRC progression. METHODS: Immunofluorescence (IF) staining of AOC3 and LRRC17 was performed on myofibroblast line (CCD-112CoN), primary fibroblasts from colorectal tumor (CAFs), and adjacent normal tissue (normal fibroblasts-NFs). SW620 (epithelial CRC cell line) was used as a control.  Conventional CAF biomarker (alpha-smooth muscle actin - alpha-SMA) was included in the IF analysis. Fluorescence intensity was compared between groups using ImageJ software. Proliferation and contractility of treated cells were assessed using 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) and collagen gel contraction assays, respectively. Fibroblast contraction under TGF-beta1 treatment was compared to those treated with complete medium (addition of 10% serum) and serum free (SF) medium. RESULTS: Positive AOC3, LRRC17, and alpha-SMA expression were observed in colonic fibroblasts, more prominent in CAFs, whereas negative staining was found in SW620. Significant downregulation of AOC3, and upregulations in LRRC17 and alpha-SMA expression was found in TGF-beta1-treated fibroblasts compared to SF medium treatment (p-value<0.05). All fibroblasts exhibited higher proliferation in complete medium and under treatment with conditioned medium from SW620 than SF medium. Significant contraction of NFs was recorded in complete medium and TGF-beta1 (p-value<0.01). CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate AOC3 and LRRC17 as the potential markers of CAF activation which promote CRC progression.
The present work addressed the hypothesis that NG2/CSPG4, CD146/MCAM, and VAP1/AOC3 are target genes of myocardin-related transcription factors (MRTFs: myocardin/MYOCD, MRTF-A/MKL1, MRTF-B/MKL2) and serum response factor (SRF). Using a bioinformatics approach, we found that CSPG4, MCAM, and AOC3 correlate with MYOCD, MRTF-A/MKL1, and SRF across human tissues. No other transcription factor correlated as strongly with these transcripts as SRF. Overexpression of MRTFs increased both mRNA and protein levels of CSPG4, MCAM, and AOC3 in cultured human smooth muscle cells (SMCs). Imaging confirmed increased staining for CSPG4, MCAM, and AOC3 in MRTF-A/MKL1-transduced cells. MRTFs exert their effects through SRF, and the MCAM and AOC3 gene loci contained binding sites for SRF. SRF silencing reduced the transcript levels of these genes, and time-courses of induction paralleled the direct target ACTA2. MRTF-A/MKL1 increased the activity of promoter reporters for MCAM and AOC3, and transcriptional activation further depended on the chromatin remodeling enzyme KDM3A. CSPG4, MCAM, and AOC3 responded to the MRTF-SRF inhibitor CCG-1423, to actin dynamics, and to ternary complex factors. Coincidental detection of these proteins should reflect MRTF-SRF activity, and beyond SMCs, we observed co-expression of CD146/MCAM, NG2/CSPG4, and VAP1/AOC3 in pericytes and endothelial cells in the human brain. This work identifies highly responsive vascular target genes of MRTF-SRF signaling that are regulated via a mechanism involving KDM3A.
Vascular adhesion protein-1 (VAP-1) is a bifunctional protein that has the ability to catalyze the deamination of primary amines and is involved in the production of hydrogen peroxide, aldehydes, and advanced glycation end products (AGEs). VAP-1 is usually stored in intracellular vesicles of endothelial cells, smooth muscles, and adipocytes. It is responsible for leukocyte transmigration and adhesion. Overexpression of VAP-1 exacerbates oxidative stress and modulates a variety of inflammatory mediators linked with diabetic complications. Numerous studies have suggested the association of increased insulin levels with serum VAP-1 (sVAP-1). Preclinical research evidence suggests the increased activity of sVAP-1 in type 1 and 2 diabetes. Scientific reports on VAP-1 inhibitors have shown a reduction in severity in diabetic animal models. VAP-1 is a potential target of a therapeutically effective line of treatment for diabetes and diabetic complications such as nephropathy and retinopathy. The primary focus of this review is the role of VAP-1 in diabetes and its associated microvascular complications.
The intricate crosstalk of various cell death forms was recently implicated in cancers, laying a foundation for exploring the association between cell death and cancers. Recent evidence has demonstrated that biological networks outperform snapshot gene expression profiles at discovering promising biomarkers or heterogenous molecular subtypes across different cancer types. In order to investigate the behavioral patterns of cell death-related interaction perturbation in colorectal cancer (CRC), this study constructed the interaction-perturbation network with 11 cell death pathways and delineated four cell death network (CDN) derived heterogeneous subtypes (CDN1-4) with distinct molecular characteristics and clinical outcomes. Specifically, we identified a subtype (CDN4) endowed with high autophagy activity and the worst prognosis. Furthermore, AOC3 was identified as a potential autophagy-related biomarker, which demonstrated exceptional predictive performance for CDN4 and significant prognostic value. Overall, this study sheds light on the complex interplay of various cell death forms and reveals an autophagy-related gene AOC3 as a critical prognostic marker in CRC.
BACKGROUND: Recently, there has been a great deal interest in cuproptosis, a form of programmed cell death that is mediated by copper. The specific mechanism through which cuproptosis-related genes impact the development of colorectal cancer (CRC) remains unknown. METHODS: Here, we combined bulk RNA-seq with scRNA-seq to investigate the CRGs functions within CRC. A number of 61 cuproptosis-related genes were chosen for further investigation. Nine prognostic CRGs were identified by Lasso-Cox. The RiskScore was created and the patients have been separated into two different groups, low- and high-RiskScore group. The CIBERSORT, ESTIMATE, MCP-counter, TIDE, and IPS have been employed to score the TME, and GSVA and GSEA were utilized to evaluate the pathway within the both groups. Further, we used cell communication analysis to explore the tumor microenvironment remodeling mechanisms of the COX17 and DLAT based on scRNA-seq. Finally, we used IHC and qPCR to validate the expression of COX17 and DLAT. RESULTS: AOC3, CCS, CDKN2A, COX11, COX17, COX19, DLD, DLAT, and PDHB have been recognized as prognostic CRGs in CRC. The high-risk group exhibited the worst prognosis, an immune-deficient phenotype, and were more resistant to ICB treatment. Further, scRNA-seq analysis revealed that elevated expression of COX17 in CD4-CXCL13Tfh could contribute to the immune evasion while DLAT had the opposite effect, reversing T cell exhaustion and inducing pyroptosis to boost CD8-GZMKT infiltration. CONCLUSIONS: The current investigation has developed a prognostic framework utilizing cuproptosis-related genes that is highly effective in predicting prognosis, TME type, and response to immunotherapy in CRC patients. Furthermore, our study reveals a novel finding that elevated levels of COX17 expression within CD4-CXCL13 T cells in CRC mediates T cell exhaustion and Treg infiltration, while DLAT has been found to facilitate the anti-tumor immunity activation through the T cell exhaustion reversal and the induction of pyroptosis.
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is a progressive, inflammatory liver disease with no approved pharmacological treatment. This Phase IIa, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03166735) investigated pharmacodynamics and safety of BI 1467335, an amine oxidase copper-containing 3 (AOC3) inhibitor, in adults with NASH from Europe and North America. Participants from 44 centres across the US, Germany, Spain, Belgium, the UK, Netherlands, Canada, France and Ireland were randomised (2:1:1:1:2; 27 July 2017 to 14 June 2019) to daily oral BI 1467335 1 mg (n = 16), 3 mg (n = 16), 6 mg (n = 17), 10 mg (n = 32) or placebo (n = 32) for 12 weeks, with follow-up to Week 16. Primary endpoint was AOC3 activity relative to baseline (%), 24 hours post-dose after 12 weeks' treatment. Secondary biomarker endpoints included changes from baseline at Week 12 in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and caspase-cleaved cytokeratin 18 (CK-18 caspase). Mean AOC3 activities relative to baseline at Week 12: 90.4% (placebo; n = 32), 26.5% (1 mg; n = 16), 10.4% (3 mg; n = 16), 5.0% (6 mg; n = 16), 3.3% (10 mg; n = 32). These changes indicated that BI 1467335 dose-dependently inhibited AOC3 activity; >/=3 mg doses achieved >80% inhibition ( < 20% activity) at Week 4. At Week 12 following doses of BI 1467335 >/= 3 mg, ALT and CK-18 caspase decreased dose-dependently. All tested BI 1467335 doses were well tolerated, with no clinically relevant treatment-emergent safety signals. BI 1467335 strongly inhibited AOC3 in participants with NASH, with doses >/=3 mg dose-dependently reducing the levels of liver injury biomarkers, ALT and CK-18. This trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03166735) and the European Union Drug Regulating Authorities Clinical Trials Database (EudraCT 2016-000499-83).
BACKGROUND: Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a progressive inflammatory liver disease characterized by biliary and liver fibrosis. Vascular adhesion protein-1 (VAP-1) is important in the inflammatory process driving liver fibrosis. We evaluated the safety and efficacy of VAP-1 blockade with a monoclonal antibody (timolumab, BTT1023) in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. METHODS: BUTEO was a prospective, single-arm, open-label, multicenter, phase II trial, conducted in 6 centers in the United Kingdom. Patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis aged 18-75 years had an alkaline phosphatase value of >1.5 times the upper limit of normal. The dose-confirmatory stage aimed to confirm the safety of timolumab through the incidence of dose-limiting toxicity and sufficient trough levels of circulating antibody to block VAP-1 function. The primary outcome of the dose-expansion portion of the trial was patient's response to timolumab at day 99, as measured by a reduction in serum alkaline phosphatase by 25% or more from baseline to day 99. RESULTS: Twenty-three patients were recruited: 7 into the initial dose-confirmatory stage and a further 16 into an expansion stage. Timolumab (8 mg/kg) was confirmed to be safe for the duration of administration with sufficient circulating levels. Only 2 of the 18 evaluable patients (11.1%) achieved a reduction in alkaline phosphatase levels of 25% or more, and both the proportion of circulating inflammatory cell populations and biomarkers of fibrosis remained unchanged from baseline. CONCLUSIONS: The BUTEO trial confirmed 8 mg/kg timolumab had no short-term safety signals and resulted in sufficient circulating levels of VAP-1 blocking timolumab. However, the trial was stopped after an interim assessment due to a lack of efficacy as determined by no significant change in serum liver tests.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent and poorly responsive cancers worldwide. Bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) inhibitors, such as JQ1 and OTX-015, inhibit BET protein binding to acetylated residues in histones. However, the physiological mechanisms and regulatory processes of BET inhibition in HCC remain unclear. To explore BET inhibitors' potential role in the molecular mechanisms underlying their anticancer effects in HCC, we analyzed BET inhibitor-treated HCC cells' gene expression profiles with RNA-seq and bioinformatics analysis. BET inhibitor treatment significantly downregulated genes related to bromodomain-containing proteins 4 (BRD4), such as ACSL5, SLC38A5, and ICAM2. Importantly, some cell migration-related genes, including AOC3, CCR6, SSTR5, and SCL7A11, were significantly downregulated. Additionally, bioinformatics analysis using Ingenuity Knowledge Base Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) revealed that SMARCA4 regulated migration response molecules. Furthermore, knockdown of SMARCA4 gene expression by siRNA treatment significantly reduced cell migration and the expression of migration-related genes. In summary, our results indicated that BET inhibitor treatment in HCC cell lines reduces cell migration through the downregulation of SMARCA4.
Stroke is a brain disease that occurs when blood flow stops, resulting in reduced oxygen supply to neurons. Stroke occurs at any time and at any age, but increases after the age of 55. It is the second leading cause of death and the third leading cause of disability-adjusted, life-years. The pathophysiology of ischemic stroke is complex and recent molecular, cellular, and animal models and postmortem brain studies have revealed that multiple cellular changes have been implicated, including oxidative stress/mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammatory responses, micro RNA alterations, and marked changes in brain proteins. These cellular changes provide new information for developing therapeutic strategies for ischemic stroke treatment. Research also revealed that stroke increases with a number of modifiable factors and most strokes can be prevented and/or controlled through pharmacological or surgical interventions and lifestyle changes. Ischemic stroke is the major risk factor for vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease. This review summarizes the latest research findings on stroke, including causal factors and molecular links between stroke and vascular disease/Alzheimer's disease.
Leukocyte extravasation from the blood into tissues is of paramount importance for normal immunosurveillance and in mounting adequate inflammatory responses. Multiple traditional adhesion molecules and chemoattractants on leukocytes and endothelial cells are involved in the emigration process. Vascular adhesion protein 1 (VAP-1) is a nonclassical inflammation-inducible endothelial molecule involved in leukocyte-subtype-specific rolling under physiological shear. Molecularly, VAP-1 belongs to a special class of cell surface amino oxidases. The enzymatic reaction itself and the biologically active end products can potentially regulate the adhesive status of the vessel wall. Thus, VAP-1 is an ectoenzyme that has inter-related adhesive and enzymatic functions in regulating physiological trafficking and inflammation.
Two members of the copper-containing amine oxidase family are physiologically important proteins: (1) Diamine oxidase (hDAO; AOC1) with a preference for diamines is involved in degradation of histamine and (2) Vascular adhesion protein-1 (hVAP-1; AOC3) with a preference for monoamines is a multifunctional cell-surface receptor and an enzyme. hVAP-1-targeted inhibitors are designed to treat inflammatory diseases and cancer, whereas the off-target binding of the designed inhibitors to hDAO might result in adverse drug reactions. The X-ray structures for both human enzymes are solved and provide the basis for computer-aided inhibitor design, which has been reported by several research groups. Although the putative off-target effect of hDAO is less studied, computational methods could be easily utilized to avoid the binding of VAP-1-targeted inhibitors to hDAO. The choice of the model organism for preclinical testing of hVAP-1 inhibitors is not either trivial due to species-specific binding properties of designed inhibitors and different repertoire of copper-containing amine oxidase family members in mammalian species. Thus, the facts that should be considered in hVAP-1-targeted inhibitor design are discussed in light of the applied structural bioinformatics and structural biology approaches.
Zinc-alpha2-glycoprotein (ZAG) is a major plasma protein whose levels increase in chronic energy-demanding diseases and thus serves as an important clinical biomarker in the diagnosis and prognosis of the development of cachexia. Current knowledge suggests that ZAG mediates progressive weight loss through beta-adrenergic signalling in adipocytes, resulting in the activation of lipolysis and fat mobilization. Here, through cross-linking experiments, amine oxidase copper-containing 3 (AOC3) is identified as a novel ZAG binding partner. AOC3-also known as vascular adhesion protein 1 (VAP-1) and semicarbazide sensitive amine oxidase (SSAO)-deaminates primary amines, thereby generating the corresponding aldehyde, H(2)O(2) and NH(3). It is an ectoenzyme largely expressed by adipocytes and induced in endothelial cells during inflammation. Extravasation of immune cells depends on amine oxidase activity and AOC3-derived H(2)O(2) has an insulinogenic effect. The observations described here suggest that ZAG acts as an allosteric inhibitor of AOC3 and interferes with the associated pro-inflammatory and anti-lipolytic functions. Thus, inhibition of the deamination of lipolytic hormone octopamine by AOC3 represents a novel mechanism by which ZAG might stimulate lipolysis. Furthermore, experiments involving overexpression of recombinant ZAG reveal that its glycosylation is co-regulated by oxygen availability and that the pattern of glycosylation affects its inhibitory potential. The newly identified protein interaction between AOC3 and ZAG highlights a previously unknown functional relationship, which may be relevant to inflammation, energy metabolism and the development of cachexia.
Pericryptal myofibroblasts in the colon and rectum play an important role in regulating the normal colorectal stem cell niche and facilitating tumor progression. Myofibroblasts previously have been distinguished from normal fibroblasts mostly by the expression of alpha smooth muscle actin (alphaSMA). We now have identified AOC3 (amine oxidase, copper containing 3), a surface monoamine oxidase, as a new marker of myofibroblasts by showing that it is the target protein of the myofibroblast-reacting mAb PR2D3. The normal and tumor tissue distribution and the cell line reactivity of AOC3 match that expected for myofibroblasts. We have shown that the surface expression of AOC3 is sensitive to digestion by trypsin and collagenase and that anti-AOC3 antibodies can be used for FACS sorting of myofibroblasts obtained by nonenzymatic procedures. Whole-genome microarray mRNA-expression profiles of myofibroblasts and skin fibroblasts revealed four additional genes that are significantly differentially expressed in these two cell types: NKX2-3 and LRRC17 in myofibroblasts and SHOX2 and TBX5 in skin fibroblasts. TGFbeta substantially down-regulated AOC3 expression in myofibroblasts but in skin fibroblasts it dramatically increased the expression of alphaSMA. A knockdown of NKX2-3 in myofibroblasts caused a decrease of myofibroblast-related gene expression and increased expression of the fibroblast-associated gene SHOX2, suggesting that NKX2-3 is a key mediator for maintaining myofibroblast characteristics. Our results show that colorectal myofibroblasts, as defined by the expression of AOC3, NKX2-3, and other markers, are a distinctly different cell type from TGFbeta-activated fibroblasts.
Significance: Vascular adhesion protein-1 (VAP-1) is an ectoenzyme that oxidates primary amines in a reaction producing also hydrogen peroxide. VAP-1 on the blood vessel endothelium regulates leukocyte extravasation from the blood into tissues under physiological and pathological conditions. Recent Advances: Inhibition of VAP-1 by neutralizing antibodies and by several novel small-molecule enzyme inhibitors interferes with leukocyte trafficking and alleviates inflammation in many experimental models. Targeting of VAP-1 also shows beneficial effects in several other diseases, such as ischemia/reperfusion, fibrosis, and cancer. Moreover, soluble VAP-1 levels may serve as a new prognostic biomarker in selected diseases. Critical Issues: Understanding the contribution of the enzyme activity-independent and enzyme activity-dependent functions, which often appear to be mediated by the hydrogen peroxide production, in the VAP-1 biology will be crucial. Similarly, there is a pressing need to understand which of the VAP-1 functions are regulated through the modulation of leukocyte trafficking, and what is the role of VAP-1 synthesized in adipose and smooth muscle cells. Future Directions: The specificity and selectivity of new VAP-1 inhibitors, and their value in animal models under therapeutic settings need to be addressed. Results from several programs studying the therapeutic potential of VAP-1 inhibition, which now are in clinical trials, will reveal the relevance of this amine oxidase in humans.
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is known for its aggressive nature, lack of effective diagnostic tools and treatments, and generally poor prognosis. The objective of this study was to investigate metabolic changes in TNBC using metabolomics approaches and explore the underlying mechanisms through integrated analysis with transcriptomics. In this study, serum untargeted metabolic profiles were first examined between 18 TNBC patients and 21 healthy control (HC) subjects using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), identifying a total of 22 significantly differential metabolites (DMs). Subsequently, receiver operating characteristic analysis revealed that 7-methylguanine could serve as a potential biomarker for TNBC in both the discovery and validation sets. Additionally, transcriptomic datasets were retrieved from the GEO database to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between TNBC and normal tissues. An integrative analysis of the DMs and DEGs was conducted, uncovering potential molecular mechanisms underlying TNBC. Notably, three pathways-tyrosine metabolism, phenylalanine metabolism, and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis-were enriched, providing insight into the energy metabolism disorders in TNBC. Within these pathways, two DMs (4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde and oxaloacetic acid) and six DEGs (MAOA, ADH1B, ADH1C, AOC3, TAT, and PCK1) were identified as key components. In summary, this study highlights metabolic biomarkers that could potentially be used for the diagnosis and screening of TNBC. The comprehensive analysis of metabolomics and transcriptomics data offers a validated and in-depth understanding of TNBC metabolism.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of BI 1467335 in patients with non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR). METHODS: ROBIN is a Phase IIa, double-masked, randomised, placebo-controlled study (NCT03238963). Patients with NPDR and without centre-involved diabetic macular oedema were included; all had a best corrected visual acuity letter score of >/=70 Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study letters in the study eye at screening. Patients received oral BI 1467335 10 mg or placebo once daily for 12 weeks. Post-treatment follow-up was 12 weeks. The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients over the 24 weeks with ocular adverse events (AEs). Secondary endpoints were the proportion of patients with >/=2-step improvement from baseline in DRSS severity level at Week 12 and the proportion of patients with non-ocular AEs at 24 weeks. RESULTS: Seventy-nine patients entered the study (BI 1467335, n = 40; placebo, n = 39). The proportion of patients with ocular AEs over 24 weeks was greater in the BI 1467335 versus the placebo group (35.0% vs 23.1%, respectively). Treatment-related AEs were reported for similar numbers of patients in the placebo and BI 1467335 group (7.7% vs 7.5%, respectively). At Week 12, 5.7% (n = 2) of patients in the BI 1467335 group had a 2-step improvement in DRSS severity level from baseline, compared with 0% in the placebo group. CONCLUSIONS: BI 1467335 was well tolerated by patients with NPDR. There was a high variability in DRSS levels for individual patients over time, with no clear efficacy signal.
In pulmonary fibrosis, an inflammatory reaction and differentiation of myofibroblasts culminate in pathologic deposition of collagen. Amine oxidase copper containing-3 (AOC3) is a cell-surface-expressed oxidase that regulates leukocyte extravasation. Here we analyzed the potential role of AOC3 using gene-modified and inhibitor-treated mice in a bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis model. Inflammation and fibrosis of lungs were assessed by histologic, flow cytometric, and quantitative PCR analysis. AOC3-deficient mice showed a 30-50% reduction in fibrosis, collagen synthesis, numbers of myofibroblasts, and accumulation of CD4(+) lymphocytes, NK T cells, macrophages, and type 2 innate lymphoid cells compared with wild-type control mice. AOC3-knock-in mice, which express a catalytically inactive form of AOC3, were also protected from lung fibrosis. In wild-type mice, a small-molecule AOC3 inhibitor treatment reduced leukocyte infiltration, myofibroblast differentiation, and fibrotic injury both in prophylactic and early therapeutic settings by about 50% but was unable to reverse the established fibrosis. AOC3 was also induced in myofibroblasts in human idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Thus, the oxidase activity of AOC3 contributes to the development of lung fibrosis mainly by regulating the accumulation of pathogenic leukocyte subtypes, which drive the fibrotic response.-Marttila-Ichihara, F., Elima, K., Auvinen, K., Veres, T. Z., Rantakari, P., Weston, C., Miyasaka, M., Adams, D., Jalkanen, S., Salmi, M. Amine oxidase activity regulates the development of pulmonary fibrosis.
We aimed to evaluate the expression of amine oxidase proteins in breast cancer and their clinical implications. We performed immunohistochemical staining of amine oxidase proteins (LOX, lysyl oxidase, AOC3, amine oxidase, MAOA, monoamine oxidase A, MAOB, monoamine oxidase B). Based on their hormone receptors, such as estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2), and Ki-67 immunohistochemical staining, breast cancer was divided into four molecular subtypes: luminal A, luminal B, HER-2 type, and triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Luminal A was observed in 380 cases (49.4%), luminal B in 224 (29.1%), HER-2 type in 68 (8.8%), and TNBC in 98 (12.7%). Stromal AOC3, MAO-A, and MAO-B expression varied according to molecular subtypes. Stromal AOC3 expression was high in luminal B and HER-2 type and MAO-A expression was high in luminal A and luminal B (p < 0.001). MAO-B expression was higher in TNBC than in other subtypes (p = 0.020). LOX positivity was associated with high histological grade (p < 0.001) and high Ki-67 labeling index (LI) (p = 0.009), and stromal AOC3 positivity was associated with high histological grade (p = 0.001), high Ki-67 LI (p < 0.001), and HER-2 positivity (p = 0.002). MAO-A positivity was related to low histological grade (p < 0.001), ER positivity, PR positivity (p < 0.001), and low Ki-67 LI (p < 0.001). In univariate analysis, MAO-A positivity was related to short disease-free survival in HER-2 type (p = 0.013), AOC3 negativity was related to short disease-free survival and overall survival in ER-positive breast cancer, PR-positive breast cancer, HER-2-negative breast cancer, and lymph node metastasis. In conclusion, the expression of amine oxidase proteins varies depending on the molecular subtype of breast cancer. Stromal AOC3 expression was high in luminal B and HER-2 type, and MAO-A expression was high in luminal A and luminal B.
The liver is constantly exposed to antigens present in the blood and to particulate antigens delivered from the gut. To maintain effective levels of immune surveillance and yet tolerate food antigens, the hepatic environment has become highly specialised. A low flow environment exists within the hepatic sinusoids that not only facilitates the exchange of toxins and nutrients within the liver parenchyma, but also provides an ideal niche for the recruitment of leukocytes. One such adhesion molecule involved in this process, the vascular adhesion protein-1 (VAP-1), is unusual in the context of the leukocyte adhesion cascade in that it is both an adhesion molecule and a primary amine oxidase. In this review, we examine the biological functions of VAP-1 and examine what role this molecule might play in the establishment and progression of chronic liver disease.
Mounting evidence has been provided regarding the crucial role of leukocyte extravasation and subsequent inflammatory response in several central nervous system (CNS) disorders. The infiltrated leukocytes release proinflammatory mediators and activate resident cells, leading to tissue injury. Leukocyte-endothelia interaction is critical for leukocyte extravasation and migration from the intravascular space into the tissue during inflammation. The basic physiology of leukocyte-endothelia interaction has been investigated extensively. Traditionally, three kinds of adhesion molecules, selectin, integrin, and immunoglobulin families, are responsible for this multiple-step interaction. Furthermore, blocking adhesion molecule function by genetic knockout, antagonizing antibodies, or inhibitory pharmacological drugs provides neuroprotection, which is associated with a reduction in leukocyte accumulation within the tissue. Detection of the soluble form of adhesion molecules has also been proven to predict outcomes in CNS disorders. Lately, vascular adhesion protein-1, a novel adhesion molecule and endothelial cell surface enzyme, has been implicated as a brake in the rolling step of the adhesion cascade, and also a regulator of leukocyte transmigration step. In this review, we summarize the functions of traditional adhesion molecules as well as vascular adhesion protein-1in the leukocyte adhesion cascade. We also discuss the diagnostic and therapeutic potential of adhesion molecules in CNS disorders.
