Cholinesterase; Esterase with broad substrate specificity. Contributes to the inactivation of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Can degrade neurotoxic organophosphate esters; Belongs to the type-B carboxylesterase/lipase family.
The APOE epsilon4 allele remains the strongest genetic risk factor for sporadic Alzheimer's disease and the APOE epsilon2 allele the strongest genetic protective factor after multiple large scale genome-wide association studies and genome-wide association meta-analyses. However, no therapies directed at APOE are currently available. Although initial studies causally linked APOE with amyloid-beta peptide aggregation and clearance, over the past 5 years our understanding of APOE pathogenesis has expanded beyond amyloid-beta peptide-centric mechanisms to tau neurofibrillary degeneration, microglia and astrocyte responses, and blood-brain barrier disruption. Because all these pathological processes can potentially contribute to cognitive impairment, it is important to use this new knowledge to develop therapies directed at APOE. Several therapeutic approaches have been successful in mouse models expressing human APOE alleles, including increasing or reducing APOE levels, enhancing its lipidation, blocking the interactions between APOE and amyloid-beta peptide, and genetically switching APOE4 to APOE3 or APOE2 isoforms, but translation to human clinical trials has proven challenging.
Apolipoprotein E (apoE) is a lipid carrier in both the peripheral and the central nervous systems. Lipid-loaded apoE lipoprotein particles bind to several cell surface receptors to support membrane homeostasis and injury repair in the brain. Considering prevalence and relative risk magnitude, the epsilon4 allele of the APOE gene is the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). ApoE4 contributes to AD pathogenesis by modulating multiple pathways, including but not limited to the metabolism, aggregation, and toxicity of amyloid-beta peptide, tauopathy, synaptic plasticity, lipid transport, glucose metabolism, mitochondrial function, vascular integrity, and neuroinflammation. Emerging knowledge on apoE-related pathways in the pathophysiology of AD presents new opportunities for AD therapy. We describe the biochemical and biological features of apoE and apoE receptors in the central nervous system. We also discuss the evidence and mechanisms addressing differential effects of apoE isoforms and the role of apoE receptors in AD pathogenesis, with a particular emphasis on the clinical and preclinical studies related to amyloid-beta pathology. Finally, we summarize the current strategies of AD therapy targeting apoE, and postulate that effective strategies require an apoE isoform-specific approach.
Apolipoprotein E (APOE) traffics lipids in the central nervous system. The E4 variant of APOE is a major genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and a multitude of other neurodegenerative diseases, yet the molecular mechanisms by which APOE4 drives disease are still unclear. A growing collection of studies in iPSC models, knock-in mice, and human postmortem brain tissue have demonstrated that APOE4 expression in astrocytes and microglia is associated with the accumulation of cytoplasmic lipid droplets, defects in endolysosomal trafficking, impaired mitochondrial metabolism, upregulation of innate immune pathways, and a transition into a reactive state. In this review, we collate these developments and suggest testable mechanistic hypotheses that could explain common APOE4 phenotypes.
Apolipoprotein (apo) E is a multifunctional protein with central roles in lipid metabolism, neurobiology, and neurodegenerative diseases. It has three major isoforms (apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4) with different effects on lipid and neuronal homeostasis. A major function of apoE is to mediate the binding of lipoproteins or lipid complexes in the plasma or interstitial fluids to specific cell-surface receptors. These receptors internalize apoE-containing lipoprotein particles; thus, apoE participates in the distribution/redistribution of lipids among various tissues and cells of the body. In addition, intracellular apoE may modulate various cellular processes physiologically or pathophysiologically, including cytoskeletal assembly and stability, mitochondrial integrity and function, and dendritic morphology and function. Elucidation of the functional domains within this protein and of the three-dimensional structure of the major isoforms of apoE has contributed significantly to our understanding of its physiological and pathophysiological roles at a molecular level. It is likely that apoE, with its multiple cellular origins and multiple structural and biophysical properties, is involved widely in processes of lipid metabolism and neurobiology, possibly encompassing a variety of disorders of neuronal repair, remodeling, and degeneration by interacting with different factors through various pathways.
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) is of great interest due to its role as a cholesterol/lipid transporter in the central nervous system (CNS) and as the most influential genetic risk factor for Alzheimer disease (AD). Work over the last four decades has given us important insights into the structure of ApoE and how this might impact the neuropathology and pathogenesis of AD. In this review, we highlight the history and progress in the structural and molecular understanding of ApoE and discuss how these studies on ApoE have illuminated the physiology of ApoE, receptor binding, and interaction with amyloid-beta (Abeta). We also identify future areas of study needed to advance our understanding of how ApoE influences neurodegeneration.
The E4 allele of Apolipoprotein E (APOE) is associated with both metabolic dysfunction and a heightened pro-inflammatory response: two findings that may be intrinsically linked through the concept of immunometabolism. Here, we combined bulk, single-cell, and spatial transcriptomics with cell-specific and spatially resolved metabolic analyses in mice expressing human APOE to systematically address the role of APOE across age, neuroinflammation, and AD pathology. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) highlighted immunometabolic changes across the APOE4 glial transcriptome, specifically in subsets of metabolically distinct microglia enriched in the E4 brain during aging or following an inflammatory challenge. E4 microglia display increased Hif1alpha expression and a disrupted tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and are inherently pro-glycolytic, while spatial transcriptomics and mass spectrometry imaging highlight an E4-specific response to amyloid that is characterized by widespread alterations in lipid metabolism. Taken together, our findings emphasize a central role for APOE in regulating microglial immunometabolism and provide valuable, interactive resources for discovery and validation research.
Human apolipoprotein E has three isoforms: APOE2, APOE3 and APOE4. APOE4 is a major genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease and is associated with Down's syndrome dementia and poor neurological outcome after traumatic brain injury and haemorrhage. Neurovascular dysfunction is present in normal APOE4 carriers and individuals with APOE4-associated disorders. In mice, lack of Apoe leads to blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown, whereas APOE4 increases BBB susceptibility to injury. How APOE genotype affects brain microcirculation remains elusive. Using different APOE transgenic mice, including mice with ablation and/or inhibition of cyclophilin A (CypA), here we show that expression of APOE4 and lack of murine Apoe, but not APOE2 and APOE3, leads to BBB breakdown by activating a proinflammatory CypA-nuclear factor-kappaB-matrix-metalloproteinase-9 pathway in pericytes. This, in turn, leads to neuronal uptake of multiple blood-derived neurotoxic proteins, and microvascular and cerebral blood flow reductions. We show that the vascular defects in Apoe-deficient and APOE4-expressing mice precede neuronal dysfunction and can initiate neurodegenerative changes. Astrocyte-secreted APOE3, but not APOE4, suppressed the CypA-nuclear factor-kappaB-matrix-metalloproteinase-9 pathway in pericytes through a lipoprotein receptor. Our data suggest that CypA is a key target for treating APOE4-mediated neurovascular injury and the resulting neuronal dysfunction and degeneration.
BACKGROUND: The apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is the strongest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD); however, how it modulates brain homeostasis is not clear. The apoE protein is a major lipid carrier in the brain transporting lipids such as cholesterol among different brain cell types. METHODS: We generated three-dimensional (3-D) cerebral organoids from human parental iPSC lines and its isogenic APOE-deficient (APOE(-/-)) iPSC line. To elucidate the cell-type-specific effects of APOE deficiency in the cerebral organoids, we performed scRNA-seq in the parental and APOE(-/-) cerebral organoids at Day 90. RESULTS: We show that APOE deficiency in human iPSC-derived cerebral organoids impacts brain lipid homeostasis by modulating multiple cellular and molecular pathways. Molecular profiling through single-cell RNA sequencing revealed that APOE deficiency leads to changes in cellular composition of isogenic cerebral organoids likely by modulating the eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (EIF2) signaling pathway as these events were alleviated by the treatment of an integrated stress response inhibitor (ISRIB). APOE deletion also leads to activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway with concomitant decrease of secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1) expression in glia cells. Importantly, the critical role of apoE in cell-type-specific lipid homeostasis was observed upon APOE deletion in cerebral organoids with a specific upregulation of cholesterol biosynthesis in excitatory neurons and excessive lipid accumulation in astrocytes. Relevant to human AD, APOE4 cerebral organoids show altered neurogenesis and cholesterol metabolism compared to those with APOE3. CONCLUSIONS: Our work demonstrates critical roles of apoE in brain homeostasis and offers critical insights into the APOE4-related pathogenic mechanisms.
The E4 variant of APOE strongly predisposes individuals to late-onset Alzheimer's disease. We demonstrate that in response to lipogenesis, apolipoprotein E (APOE) in astrocytes can avoid translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen and traffic to lipid droplets (LDs) via membrane bridges at ER-LD contacts. APOE knockdown promotes fewer, larger LDs after a fatty acid pulse, which contain more unsaturated triglyceride after fatty acid pulse-chase. This LD size phenotype was rescued by chimeric APOE that targets only LDs. Like APOE depletion, APOE4-expressing astrocytes form a small number of large LDs enriched in unsaturated triglyceride. Additionally, the LDs in APOE4 cells exhibit impaired turnover and increased sensitivity to lipid peroxidation. Our data indicate that APOE plays a previously unrecognized role as an LD surface protein that regulates LD size and composition. APOE4 causes aberrant LD composition and morphology. Our study contributes to accumulating evidence that APOE4 astrocytes with large, unsaturated LDs are sensitized to lipid peroxidation, which could contribute to Alzheimer's disease risk.
Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) have proven to be highly efficient carriers of short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) to hepatocytes in vivo; however, the precise mechanism by which this efficient delivery occurs has yet to be elucidated. We found that apolipoprotein E (apoE), which plays a major role in the clearance and hepatocellular uptake of physiological lipoproteins, also acts as an endogenous targeting ligand for ionizable LNPs (iLNPs), but not cationic LNPs (cLNPs). The role of apoE was investigated using both in vitro studies employing recombinant apoE and in vivo studies in wild-type and apoE(-/-) mice. Receptor dependence was explored in vitro and in vivo using low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR(-/-))-deficient mice. As an alternative to endogenous apoE-based targeting, we developed a targeting approach using an exogenous ligand containing a multivalent N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc)-cluster, which binds with high affinity to the asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGPR) expressed on hepatocytes. Both apoE-based endogenous and GalNAc-based exogenous targeting appear to be highly effective strategies for the delivery of iLNPs to liver.
Aberrant low gamma-secretase activity is associated with most of the presenilin mutations that underlie familial Alzheimer's disease (fAD). However, the role of gamma-secretase in the more prevalent sporadic AD (sAD) remains unaddressed. Here, we report that human apolipoprotein E (ApoE), the most important genetic risk factor of sAD, interacts with gamma-secretase and inhibits it with substrate specificity in cell-autonomous manners through its conserved C-terminal region (CT). This ApoE CT-mediated inhibitory activity is differentially compromised in different ApoE isoforms, resulting in an ApoE2 > ApoE3 > ApoE4 potency rank order inversely correlating to their associated AD risk. Interestingly, in an AD mouse model, neuronal ApoE CT migrates to amyloid plaques in the subiculum from other regions and alleviates the plaque burden. Together, our data reveal a hidden role of ApoE as a gamma-secretase inhibitor with substrate specificity and suggest that this precision gamma-inhibition by ApoE may protect against the risk of sAD.
Mitochondria influence cellular function through both cell-autonomous and non-cell autonomous mechanisms, such as production of paracrine and endocrine factors. Here, we demonstrate that mitochondrial regulation of the secretome is more extensive than previously appreciated, as both genetic and pharmacological disruption of the electron transport chain caused upregulation of the Alzheimer's disease risk factor apolipoprotein E (APOE) and other secretome components. Indirect disruption of the electron transport chain by gene editing of SLC25A mitochondrial membrane transporters as well as direct genetic and pharmacological disruption of either complexes I, III, or the copper-containing complex IV of the electron transport chain elicited upregulation of APOE transcript, protein, and secretion, up to 49-fold. These APOE phenotypes were robustly expressed in diverse cell types and iPSC-derived human astrocytes as part of an inflammatory gene expression program. Moreover, age- and genotype-dependent decline in brain levels of respiratory complex I preceded an increase in APOE in the 5xFAD mouse model. We propose that mitochondria act as novel upstream regulators of APOE-dependent cellular processes in health and disease.
BACKGROUND: Nuclear erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), a transcription factor, is critically involved in the regulation of oxidative stress and inflammation. However, the role of endothelial Nrf2 in atherogenesis has yet to be defined. In addition, how endothelial Nrf2 is activated and whether Nrf2 can be targeted for the prevention and treatment of atherosclerosis is not explored. METHODS: RNA-sequencing and single-cell RNA sequencing analysis of mouse atherosclerotic aortas were used to identify the differentially expressed genes. In vivo endothelial cell (EC)-specific activation of Nrf2 was achieved by injecting adeno-associated viruses into ApoE(-/-) mice, while EC-specific knockdown of Nrf2 was generated in Cdh5(Cre)Cas9(floxed-stop)ApoE(-/-) mice. RESULTS: Endothelial inflammation appeared as early as on day 3 after feeding of a high cholesterol diet (HCD) in ApoE(-/-) mice, as reflected by mRNA levels, immunostaining and global mRNA profiling, while the immunosignal of the end-product of lipid peroxidation (LPO), 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE), started to increase on day 10. TNF-alpha, 4-HNE, and erastin (LPO inducer), activated Nrf2 signaling in human ECs by increasing the mRNA and protein expression of Nrf2 target genes. Knockdown of endothelial Nrf2 resulted in augmented endothelial inflammation and LPO, and accelerated atherosclerosis in Cdh5(Cre)Cas9(floxed-stop)ApoE(-/-) mice. By contrast, both EC-specific and pharmacological activation of Nrf2 inhibited endothelial inflammation, LPO, and atherogenesis. CONCLUSIONS: Upon HCD feeding in ApoE(-/-) mice, endothelial inflammation is an earliest event, followed by the appearance of LPO. EC-specific activation of Nrf2 inhibits atherosclerosis while EC-specific knockdown of Nrf2 results in the opposite effect. Pharmacological activators of endothelial Nrf2 may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of atherosclerosis.
Genetic variants in the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene affect the onset and progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The APOE Christchurch (APOE Ch) variant has been identified as the most prominent candidate for preventing the onset and progression of AD. In this study, we generated isogenic APOE3Ch/3Ch human-induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from APOE3/3 healthy control female iPSCs and induced them into astrocytes. RNA expression analysis revealed the inherent resilience of APOE3Ch/3Ch astrocytes to induce a reactive state in response to inflammatory cytokines. Moreover, cytokine treatment changed astrocytic morphology with more complexity in APOE3/3 astrocytes, but not in APOE3Ch/3Ch astrocytes, indicating resilience of the rare variant to a reactive state. Interestingly, we observed robust morphological alterations containing more intricate processes when cocultured with iPSC-derived cortical neurons, in which APOE3Ch/3Ch astrocytes reduced complexity compared with APOE3/3 astrocytes. To assess the impacts of tau propagation effects, we next developed a sophisticated and sensitive assay utilizing cortical neurons derived from human iPSCs, previously generated from donors of both sexes. We showed that APOE3Ch/3Ch astrocytes effectively mitigated tau propagation within iPSC-derived neurons. This study provides important experimental evidence of the characteristic functions exhibited by APOE3Ch/3Ch astrocytes, thereby offering valuable insights for the advancement of novel clinical interventions in AD research.
Age and apolipoprotein E (ApoE) are the mightiest risk factors for dementia and cardiovascular diseases, but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In human, ApoE has three isoforms, ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4, which are expressed by the polymorphic alleles: varepsilon2, varepsilon3, and varepsilon4. Among the three polymorphic alleles, apoE epsilon4 is the most risk gene. ApoE is the main ligand for the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor and the LDL receptor-related protein (LRP), functioning as the component of plasma lipoproteins in the transportation of lipids. Physiologically, ApoE is a multifunctional protein with central roles in lipid metabolism; it transports lipids, including cholesterol, through the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma. ApoE expression regulation and apoE gene polymorphism have an important connection with neurological or neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), ischemic stroke, and other diseases.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to examine the levels of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) apolipoprotein E (apoE) species in Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. METHODS: We analyzed two CSF cohorts of AD and control individuals expressing different APOE genotypes. Moreover, CSF samples from the TgF344-AD rat model were included. Samples were run in native- and SDS-PAGE under reducing or non-reducing conditions (with or without beta-mercaptoethanol). Immunoprecipitation combined with mass spectrometry or western blotting analyses served to assess the identity of apoE complexes. RESULTS: In TgF344-AD rats expressing a unique apoE variant resembling human apoE4, a ~35-kDa apoE monomer was identified, increasing at 16.5 months compared with wild-types. In humans, apoE isoforms form disulfide-linked dimers in CSF, except apoE4, which lacks a cysteine residue. Thus, controls showed a decrease in the apoE dimer/monomer quotient in the APOE epsilon3/epsilon4 group compared with epsilon3/epsilon3 by native electrophoresis. A major contribution of dimers was found in APOE epsilon3/epsilon4 AD cases, and, unexpectedly, dimers were also found in epsilon4/epsilon4 AD cases. Under reducing conditions, two apoE monomeric glycoforms at 36 kDa and at 34 kDa were found in all human samples. In AD patients, the amount of the 34-kDa species increased, while the 36-kDa/34-kDa quotient was lower compared with controls. Interestingly, under reducing conditions, a ~100-kDa apoE complex, the identity of which was confirmed by mass spectrometry, also appeared in human AD individuals across all APOE genotypes, suggesting the occurrence of aberrantly resistant apoE aggregates. A second independent cohort of CSF samples validated these results. CONCLUSION: These results indicate that despite the increase in total apoE content the apoE protein is altered in AD CSF, suggesting that function may be compromised.
The Apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is one of the main candidates in neuropsychiatric genetics, with hundreds of studies carried out in order to explore the possible role of polymorphisms in the APOE gene in a large number of neurological diseases, psychiatric disorders, and related endophenotypes. In the current article, we provide a comprehensive review of the structural and functional aspects of the APOE gene and its relationship with brain disorders. Evidence from genome-wide association studies and meta-analyses shows that the APOE gene has been significantly associated with several neurodegenerative disorders. Cellular and animal models show growing evidence of the key role of APOE in mechanisms of brain plasticity and behavior. Future analyses of the APOE gene might find a possible role in other neurological diseases and psychiatric disorders and related endophenotypes. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE)'s ϵ4 alle is the most important genetic risk factor for late onset Alzheimer's Disease (AD). Cell-surface heparan sulfate (HS) is a cofactor for ApoE/LRP1 interaction and the prion-like spread of tau pathology between cells. 3-O-sulfo (3-O-S) modification of HS has been linked to AD through its interaction with tau, and enhanced levels of 3-O-sulfated HS and 3-O-sulfotransferases in the AD brain. In this study, we characterized ApoE/HS interactions in wildtype ApoE3, AD-linked ApoE4, and AD-protective ApoE2 and ApoE3-Christchurch. Glycan microarray and SPR assays revealed that all ApoE isoforms recognized 3-O-S. NMR titration localized ApoE/3-O-S binding to the vicinity of the canonical HS binding motif. In cells, the knockout of HS3ST1-a major 3-O sulfotransferase-reduced cell surface binding and uptake of ApoE. 3-O-S is thus recognized by both tau and ApoE, suggesting that the interplay between 3-O-sulfated HS, tau and ApoE isoforms may modulate AD risk.
The secreted lipid transporter apolipoprotein E (APOE) plays important roles in atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's disease and has been implicated as a suppressor of melanoma progression. The APOE germline genotype predicts human melanoma outcomes, with APOE4 and APOE2 allele carriers exhibiting prolonged and reduced survival, respectively, relative to APOE3 homozygotes. While the APOE4 variant was recently shown to suppress melanoma progression by enhancing antitumor immunity, further work is needed to fully characterize the melanoma cell-intrinsic effects of APOE variants on cancer progression. Using a genetically engineered mouse model, we showed that human germline APOE genetic variants differentially modulate melanoma growth and metastasis in an APOE2>APOE3>APOE4 manner. The low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) receptor mediated the cell-intrinsic effects of APOE variants on melanoma progression. Protein synthesis was a tumor cell-intrinsic process differentially modulated by APOE variants, with APOE2 promoting translation via LRP1. These findings reveal a gain-of-function role for the APOE2 variant in melanoma progression, which may aid in predicting melanoma patient outcomes and understanding the protective effect of APOE2 in Alzheimer's disease. SIGNIFICANCE: APOE germline variants impact melanoma progression through disparate mechanisms, such as the protein synthesis-promoting function of the APOE2 variant, indicating that germline genetic variants are causal contributors to metastatic outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by cognitive dysfunction and amyloid plaques composed of the amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta). APOE is the greatest genetic risk for AD with APOE4 increasing risk up to ~ 15-fold compared to APOE3. Evidence suggests that levels and lipidation of the apoE protein could regulate AD progression. In glia, apoE is lipidated via cholesterol efflux from intracellular pools, primarily by the ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1). Therefore, increasing ABCA1 activity is suggested to be a therapeutic approach for AD. CS-6253 (CS) is a novel apoE mimetic peptide that was developed to bind and stabilize ABCA1 and maintain its localization into the plasma membrane therefore promoting cholesterol efflux. The goal of this study was to determine whether CS could modulate apoE levels and lipidation, Abeta pathology, and behavior in a model that expresses human APOE and overproduce Abeta. METHODS: In vitro, APOE3-glia or APOE4-glia were treated with CS. In vivo, male and female, E3FAD (5xFAD(+/-)/APOE3(+/+)) and E4FAD (5xFAD(+/-)/APOE4(+/+)) mice were treated with CS via intraperitoneal injection at early (from 4 to 8 months of age) and late ages (from 8 to 10 months of age). ApoE levels, ABCA1 levels and, apoE lipidation were measured by western blot and ELISA. Abeta and amyloid levels were assessed by histochemistry and ELISA. Learning and memory were tested by Morris Water Maze and synaptic proteins were measured by Western blot. RESULTS: CS treatment increased apoE levels and cholesterol efflux in primary glial cultures. In young male E3FAD mice, CS treatment increased soluble apoE and lipid-associated apoE, reduced soluble oAbeta and insoluble Abeta levels as well as Abeta and amyloid deposition, and improved memory and synaptic protein levels. CS treatment did not induce any therapeutic benefits in young female E3FAD and E4FAD mice or in any groups when treatment was started at later ages. CONCLUSIONS: CS treatment reduced Abeta pathology and improved memory only in young male E3FAD, the cohort with the least AD pathology. Therefore, the degree of Abeta pathology or Abeta overproduction may impact the ability of targeting ABCA1 to be an effective AD therapeutic. This suggests that ABCA1-stabilizing treatment by CS-6253 works best in conditions of modest Abeta levels.
