Androgen receptor; Steroid hormone receptors are ligand-activated transcription factors that regulate eukaryotic gene expression and affect cellular proliferation and differentiation in target tissues. Transcription factor activity is modulated by bound coactivator and corepressor proteins like ZBTB7A that recruits NCOR1 and NCOR2 to the androgen response elements/ARE on target genes, negatively regulating androgen receptor signaling and androgen-induced cell proliferation. Transcription activation is also down-regulated by NR0B2. Activated, but not phosphorylated, by HIPK3 and ZIPK/DA [...] 
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly diverse group of cancers, and subtyping is necessary to better identify molecular-based therapies. In this study, we analyzed gene expression (GE) profiles from 21 breast cancer data sets and identified 587 TNBC cases. Cluster analysis identified 6 TNBC subtypes displaying unique GE and ontologies, including 2 basal-like (BL1 and BL2), an immunomodulatory (IM), a mesenchymal (M), a mesenchymal stem-like (MSL), and a luminal androgen receptor (LAR) subtype. Further, GE analysis allowed us to identify TNBC cell line models representative of these subtypes. Predicted "driver" signaling pathways were pharmacologically targeted in these cell line models as proof of concept that analysis of distinct GE signatures can inform therapy selection. BL1 and BL2 subtypes had higher expression of cell cycle and DNA damage response genes, and representative cell lines preferentially responded to cisplatin. M and MSL subtypes were enriched in GE for epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and growth factor pathways and cell models responded to NVP-BEZ235 (a PI3K/mTOR inhibitor) and dasatinib (an abl/src inhibitor). The LAR subtype includes patients with decreased relapse-free survival and was characterized by androgen receptor (AR) signaling. LAR cell lines were uniquely sensitive to bicalutamide (an AR antagonist). These data may be useful in biomarker selection, drug discovery, and clinical trial design that will enable alignment of TNBC patients to appropriate targeted therapies.
The new generation androgen receptor (AR) pathway inhibitor enzalutamide can prolong the survival of patients with metastatic prostate cancer. However, resistance to enzalutamide inevitably develops in these patients, and the underlying mechanisms of this resistance are not fully defined. Here we demonstrate that the kinesin family member 15 (KIF15) contributes to enzalutamide resistance by enhancing the AR signaling in prostate cancer cells. KIF15 directly bound the N-terminus of AR/AR-V7 and prevented AR/AR-V7 proteins from degradation by increasing the protein association of ubiquitin-specific protease 14 (USP14) with AR/AR-V7. In turn, the transcriptionally active AR stimulated KIF15 expression. KIF15 inhibitors alone or in combination with enzalutamide significantly suppressed enzalutamide-resistant prostate cancer cell growth and xenograft progression. These findings highlight a key role of KIF15 in enabling prostate cancer cells to develop therapy resistance to enzalutamide and rationalize KIF15 as a potential therapeutic target. SIGNIFICANCE: These findings demonstrate how reciprocal activation between KIF15 and AR contributes to enzalutamide resistance in prostate cancer and highlights cotargeting KIF15 and AR as a therapeutic strategy for these tumors.
Glycans, with their variable compositions and highly dynamic conformations, vastly expand the heterogeneity of whatever factor or cell they are attached to. These properties make them crucial contributors to biological function and organismal health and also very difficult to study. That may be changing as we look to the future of glycobiology.
Aggregates of chondroitin-keratan sulfate proteoglycan (aggrecan) and hyaluronic acid (hyaluronan) are the major space-filling components of cartilage. A glycoprotein, link protein (LP; 40-48 kDa) stabilizes the aggregate by binding to both hyaluronic acid and aggrecan. In the absence of LP, aggregates are smaller (as estimated by rotary shadowing of electron micrographs) and less stable (they dissociate at pH 5) than they are in the presence of LP. The proteoglycan aggregate, including LP, is dissociated in the presence of chaotropes such as 4 M guanidine hydrochloride. On removal of the chaotrope, the complex will reassociate. This forms the basis of the isolation of LP from cartilage and has been described in detail elsewhere. Tryptic digestion of the proteoglycan aggregates results in a high molecular weight product that consists of hyaluronic acid to which is bound LP and the N-terminal globular domain of aggrecan (hyaluronic acid binding region; HABR) in a 1:1 stoichiometry. The amino acid sequences of LP and HABR are surprisingly similar. The amino acid sequence can be divided into three domains; an N-terminal domain that falls into the immunoglobulin super-family and two C-terminal domains that are similar to each other. The DNA structure echoes this similarity, in that the major domains are reflected in three separate exons in both LP and HABR. The two C-terminal domains are largely responsible for the association with HA and are related to two recently described hyaluronate-binding proteins, CD44 and TSG-6. A variety of approaches, including analysis of the forms of LP found in vivo, rotary shadowing and analysis of the sequence in the immunoglobulin-like domain, have shed considerable light on the structure-function relationships of LP. This review describes the structure and function of LP in detail, focusing on what can be inferred from the similarity of LP, HABR and related molecules such as immunoglobulins and lymphocyte HA-receptors.
Water homeostasis during fetal development is of crucial physiologic importance. The successful formation and development of the placenta is critical to maintain normal fetal growth and homeostasis. The expression of several aquaporins (AQPs ) was found from blastocyst stages to term placenta and fetal membranes. Therefore, AQPs are proposed to play important roles in normal pregnancy, fetal growth, and homeostasis of amniotic fluid volume, and water handling in other organs. However, the functional importance of AQPs in fetal development remains to be elucidated.
This review summarizes the recent advances in understanding the development and function of the cardiac conduction system using genetically modified mice. Null mice for different cardiac connexins confirmed their suspected roles in cardiac conduction and, in addition, unraveled unexpected roles in cardiac morphogenesis. Genetically modified mice with LacZ-labeled conduction system cells are indispensable tools to the further understanding of the mechanisms governing the development of this system in the mammalian heart. Mouse models also addressed the role and contribution of specific signaling molecules, such as PRKAG2, Nkx2.5, ALK3, and Tbx5, in the development of the cardiac conduction system and the pathogenesis of cardiac dysfunction in humans.
After the initial discovery of intermediate filament (IF)-forming proteins in 1968, a decade would elapse before they were revealed to comprise a diverse group of proteins which undergo tissue-, developmental stage-, differentiation-, and context-dependent regulation. Our appreciation for just how large (n = 70), conserved, complex, and dynamic IF genes and proteins are became even sharper upon completion of the human genome project. While there has been extraordinary progress in understanding the multimodal roles of IFs in cells and tissues, even revealing them as direct causative agents in a broad array of human genetic disorders, the link between individual IFs and cell differentiation has remained elusive. Here, we review evidence that demonstrates a role for IFs in lineage determination, cell differentiation, and tissue homeostasis. A major theme in this review is the function of IFs as sensors and transducers of mechanical forces, intersecting microenvironmental cues and fundamental processes through cellular redox balance.
Reactive cardiac hypertrophy (CH) is an increase in heart mass in response to hemodynamic overload. Exercise-induced CH emerges as an adaptive response with improved cardiac function, in contrast to pathological CH that represents a risk factor for cardiovascular health. The Na(+)/H(+) exchanger (NHE-1) is a membrane transporter that not only regulates intracellular pH but also intracellular Na(+) concentration. In the scenario of cardiovascular diseases, myocardial NHE-1 is activated by a variety of stimuli, such as neurohumoral factors and mechanical stress, leading to intracellular Na(+) overload and activation of prohypertrophic cascades. NHE-1 hyperactivity is intimately linked to heart diseases, including ischemia-reperfusion injury, maladaptive CH and heart failure. In this review, we will present evidence to support that the NHE-1 hyperactivity constitutes a "switch on/off" for the pathological phenotype during CH development. We will also discuss some classical and novel strategies to avoid NHE-1 hyperactivity, and that are therefore worthwhile to improve cardiovascular health.
New information concerning the effects of prolactin (PRL) on metabolic processes warrants reevaluation of its overall metabolic actions. PRL affects metabolic homeostasis by regulating key enzymes and transporters associated with glucose and lipid metabolism in several target organs. In the lactating mammary gland, PRL increases the production of milk proteins, lactose, and lipids. In adipose tissue, PRL generally suppresses lipid storage and adipokine release and affect adipogenesis. A specific case is made for PRL in the human breast and adipose tissues, where it acts as a circulating hormone and an autocrine/paracrine factor. Although its overall effects on body composition are both modest and species-specific, PRL may be involved in the manifestation of insulin resistance.
In a cell, the chromatin state is controlled by the highly regulated interplay of epigenetic mechanisms ranging from DNA methylation and incorporation of different histone variants to posttranslational modification of histones and ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling. These changes alter the structure of the chromatin to either facilitate or restrict the access of transcription machinery to DNA. These epigenetic modifications function to exquisitely orchestrate the expression of different genes, and together constitute the epigenome of a cell. In the skin, different epigenetic regulators form a regulatory network that operates to guarantee skin stem cell maintenance while controlling differentiation to multiple skin structures. In this review, we will discuss recent findings on epigenetic mechanisms of skin control and their relationship to skin pathologies.
Cetaceans (dolphins, whales, and porpoises) have a long, dramatically divergent evolutionary history compared with terrestrial mammals. Throughout their 55-60 million years of evolution, cetaceans acquired a compelling set of characteristics that include echolocation ability (in odontocetes), complex auditory and communicative capacities, and complex social organization. Moreover, although cetaceans have not shared a common ancestor with primates for over 90 million years, they possess a set of cognitive attributes that are strikingly convergent with those of many primates, including great apes and humans. In contrast, cetaceans have evolved a highly unusual combination of neurobiological features different from that of primates. As such, cetacean brains offer a critical opportunity to address questions about how complex behavior can be based on very different neuroanatomical and neurobiological evolutionary products. Cetacean brains and primate brains are arguably most meaningfully conceived as alternative evolutionary routes to neurobiological and cognitive complexity. In this article, we summarize data on brain size and hemisphere surface configuration in several cetacean species and present an overview of the cytoarchitectural complexity of the cerebral cortex of the bottlenose dolphin.
Development of a multicellular organism is accomplished through a series of events that are preprogrammed in the genome. These events encompass cellular proliferation, lineage commitment, lineage progression, lineage expression, cellular inhibition, and regulated apoptosis. The sequential progression of cells through these events results in the formation of the differentiated cells, tissues, and organs that constitute an individual. Although most cells progress through this sequence during development, a few cells leave the developmental continuum to become reserve precursor cells. The reserve precursor cells are involved in the continual maintenance and repair of the tissues and organs throughout the life span of the individual. Until recently it was generally assumed that the precursor cells in postnatal individuals were limited to lineage-committed progenitor cells specific for various tissues. However, studies by Young, his colleagues, and others have demonstrated the presence of two categories of precursor cells that reside within the organs and tissues of postnatal animals. These two categories of precursor cells are lineage-committed (multipotent, tripotent, bipotent, and unipotent) progenitor cells and lineage-uncommitted pluripotent (epiblastic-like, ectodermal, mesodermal, and endodermal) stem cells. These reserve precursor cells provide for the continual maintenance and repair of the organism after birth.
Extracellular Ca2+-sensing receptors (CaRs) are the molecular basis by which specialized cells detect and respond to changes in the extracellular [Ca2+] ([Ca2+]o). CaRs belong to the family C of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). Activation of CaRs triggers signaling pathways that modify numerous cell functions. Multiple ligands regulate the activation of CaRs including multivalent cations, L-amino acids, and changes in ionic strength and pH. CaRs in parathyroid cells play a central role in systemic Ca2+ homeostasis in terrestrial tetrapods. Mutations of the CaR gene in humans cause diseases in which serum and urine [Ca2+] and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels are altered. CaR homologues are also expressed in organs critical to Ca2+ transport in ancient and modern fish, suggesting that similar receptors may have long been involved in Ca2+ homeostasis in lower vertebrates before parathyroid glands developed in terrestrial vertebrates. CaR mRNA and protein are also expressed in tissues not directly involved in Ca2+ homeostasis. This implies that there may be other biological roles for CaRs. Studies of CaR-knockout mice confirm the importance of CaRs in the parathyroid gland and kidney. The functions of CaRs in tissues other than kidney and parathyroid gland, however, remain to be elucidated.
The androgen receptor (AR) is a drug target in breast cancer, and AR-targeted therapies have induced tumor responses in breast cancer patients. In this review, we summarized the role of AR in breast cancer based on preclinical and clinical data. Response to AR-targeted therapies in unselected breast cancer populations is relatively low. Preclinical and clinical data show that AR antagonists might have a role in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative/AR-positive tumors. The prognostic value of AR for patients remains uncertain due to the use of various antibodies and cut-off values for immunohistochemical assessment. To get more insight into the role of AR in breast cancer, we additionally performed a retrospective pooled analysis to determine the prognostic value of the AR using mRNA profiles of 7270 primary breast tumors. Our analysis shows that a higher AR mRNA level is associated with improved disease outcome in patients with ER-positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative tumors, but with worse disease outcome in HER2-positive subgroups. In conclusion, next to AR expression, incorporation of additional tumor characteristics will potentially make AR targeting a more valuable therapeutic strategy in breast cancer.
During embryonic development, the liver emerges from the foregut as a thickening of the ventral endodermal epithelium. The embryonic liver then develops into a bud of cells that proliferates and differentiates to eventually form the largest gland of the body. Prior to birth, the primary function of the liver is hematopoietic, and the organ receives little innervation during early development. Postnatally, the role of the liver changes and many different nerve types modulate its function. Although the liver shares a common embryonic origin with other foregut derivatives, such as the gallbladder and the pancreas, the development of its innervation exhibits distinct characteristics. In this review, we summarize what is known about the development of the hepatic innervation, draw comparisons with the intrinsic innervation of the gastrointestinal tract and associated organs, and discuss the potential role of molecular signals in guiding the nerves that innervate the liver.
Breast cancer (BCa) is the second most common cancer worldwide and the most prevalent cancer in women. The majority of BCa cases are positive (+) for the estrogen receptor (ER(+), 80%) and progesterone receptor (PR(+), 65%). Estrogen and progesterone hormones are known to be involved in cancer progression, and thus hormonal deprivation is used as an effective treatment for ER(+)PR(+) BCa subtypes. However, some ER(+)PR(+) BCa patients develop resistance to such therapies. Meanwhile, chemotherapy is the only available treatment for ER(-)PR(-) BCa tumors. Another hormone receptor known as the androgen receptor (AR) has also been found to be widely expressed in human breast carcinomas. However, the mechanisms of AR and its endogenous androgen ligands is not well-understood in BCa and its biological role in this hormone-related disease remains unclear. In this review, we aim to address the importance of the AR in BCa diagnosis and prognosis, current AR-targeting approaches in BCa, and the potential for AR-downstream molecules to serve as therapeutic targets.
Vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) originate from multiple types of progenitor cells. In the embryo, the most well studied SMC progenitor is the cardiac neural crest stem cell. Smooth muscle differentiation in the neural crest lineage is controlled by a combination of cell intrinsic factors, including Pax3, Tbx1, FoxC1, and serum response factor, interacting with various extrinsic factors in the local environment such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), Wnts, endothelin (ET)-1, and FGF8. Additional sources of multipotential cells that give rise to vascular SMCs in the embryo include proepicardial cells and possibly endothelial progenitor cells. In the adult, vascular SMCs must continually repair arterial injuries and maintain functional mass in response to changing demands upon the vessel wall. Recent evidence suggests that this is accomplished, in part, by recruiting multipotential vascular progenitors from bone marrow-derived stem cells as well as from less well defined sources within adult tissues themselves. This article will review our current understanding of the origins of vascular SMCs from multipotential stem and progenitor cells in developing as well as adult vasculature.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as critical regulators of numerous biological processes by modulating gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. It has become increasingly clear that almost all aspects of skeletal muscle development involve regulation by miRNAs. Many of these miRNAs have distinct expression profiles in skeletal muscles, under the regulation by the myogenic program. In the last few years the field has seen a rapid expansion of our knowledge of myogenic miRNAs that target a wide range of muscle genes to coordinately control the myogenic process. In this review we provide an up-to-date list of reported myogenic miRNAs and survey their expression patterns, regulation of biogenesis, and gene targets in skeletal muscles. Emerging themes of miRNA regulation in the context of skeletal myogenesis will also be discussed.
The region between the DNA-binding domain and the ligand-binding domain of nuclear receptors is termed the hinge region. Although this flexible linker is poorly conserved, diverse functions have been ascribed to it. For the androgen receptor (AR), the hinge region and in particular the (629)RKLKKL(634) motif, plays a central role in controlling AR activity, not only because it acts as the main part of the nuclear translocation signal, but also because it regulates the transactivation potential and intranuclear mobility of the receptor. It is also a target site for acetylation, ubiquitylation and methylation. The interplay between these different modifications as well as the phosphorylation at serine 650 will be discussed here. The hinge also has an important function in AR binding to classical versus selective androgen response elements. In addition, the number of coactivators/corepressors that might act via interaction with the hinge region is still growing. The importance of the hinge region is further illustrated by the different somatic mutations described in patients with androgen insensitivity syndrome and prostate cancer. In conclusion, the hinge region serves as an integrator for signals coming from different pathways that provide feedback to the control of AR activity.
Regeneration of traumatically injured skeletal muscles is severely limited. Moreover, the regenerative capacity of skeletal muscle declines with aging, further exacerbating the problem. Recent evidence supports that delivery of muscle satellite cells to the injured muscles enhances muscle regeneration and reverses features of aging, including reduction in muscle mass and regenerative capacity. However, direct delivery of satellite cells presents a challenge at a translational level due to inflammation and donor cell death, motivating the need to develop engineered matrices for muscle satellite cell delivery. This review will highlight important aspects of satellite cell and their niche biology in the context of muscle regeneration, and examine recent progresses in the development of engineered cell delivery matrices designed for skeletal muscle regeneration. Understanding the interactions of muscle satellite cells and their niche in both native and engineered systems is crucial to developing muscle pathology-specific cell- and biomaterial-based therapies.
