C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4; Receptor for the C-X-C chemokine CXCL12/SDF-1 that transduces a signal by increasing intracellular calcium ion levels and enhancing MAPK1/MAPK3 activation. Involved in the AKT signaling cascade. Plays a role in regulation of cell migration, e.g. during wound healing. Acts as a receptor for extracellular ubiquitin; leading to enhanced intracellular calcium ions and reduced cellular cAMP levels. Binds bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) et mediates LPS-induced inflammatory response, including TNF secretion by monocytes. Involved in hematopoiesis and in car [...] 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1R) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIPR) receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors involved in glucose homeostasis. Diabetogenic conditions decrease beta-arrestin 2 (ARRB2) levels in human islets. In mouse beta cells, ARRB2 dampens insulin secretion by partially uncoupling cyclic AMP (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling at physiological doses of GLP-1, whereas at pharmacological doses, the activation of extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK)/cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) requires ARRB2. In contrast, GIP-potentiated insulin secretion needs ARRB2 in mouse and human islets. The GIPR-ARRB2 axis is not involved in cAMP/PKA or ERK signaling but does mediate GIP-induced F-actin depolymerization. Finally, the dual GLP-1/GIP agonist tirzepatide does not require ARRB2 for the potentiation of insulin secretion. Thus, ARRB2 plays distinct roles in regulating GLP-1R and GIPR signaling, and we highlight (1) its role in the physiological context and the possible functional consequences of its decreased expression in pathological situations such as diabetes and (2) the importance of assessing the signaling pathways engaged by the agonists (biased/dual) for therapeutic purposes.
CXCR7 is an atypical chemokine receptor that recruits beta-arrestin (ARRB2) and internalizes into clathrin-coated intracellular vesicles where the complex acts as a scaffold for cytoplasmic kinase assembly and signal transduction. Here, we report that CXCR7 was elevated in the majority of prostate cancer (PCa) cases with neuroendocrine features (NEPC). CXCR7 markedly induced mitotic spindle and cell cycle gene expression. Mechanistically, we identified Aurora Kinase A (AURKA), a key regulator of mitosis, as a novel target that was bound and activated by the CXCR7-ARRB2 complex. CXCR7 interacted with proteins associated with microtubules and golgi, and, as such, the CXCR7-ARRB2-containing vesicles trafficked along the microtubules to the pericentrosomal golgi apparatus, where the complex interacted with AURKA. Accordingly, CXCR7 promoted PCa cell proliferation and tumor growth, which was mitigated by AURKA inhibition. In summary, our study reveals a critical role of CXCR7-ARRB2 in interacting and activating AURKA, which can be targeted by AURKA inhibitors to benefit a subset of patients with NEPC.
OBJECTIVE: Mutations in BMPR2 (bone morphogenetic protein receptor 2) are associated with familial and sporadic pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). The functional and molecular link between loss of BMPR2 in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMC) and PAH pathogenesis warrants further investigation, as most investigations focus on BMPR2 in pulmonary artery endothelial cells. Our goal was to determine whether and how decreased BMPR2 is related to the abnormal phenotype of PASMC in PAH. METHODS: SMC-specific Bmpr2(-/-) mice (BKO(SMC)) were created and compared to controls in room air, after 3 weeks of hypoxia as a second hit, and following 4 weeks of normoxic recovery. Echocardiography, right ventricular systolic pressure, and right ventricular hypertrophy were assessed as indices of pulmonary hypertension. Proliferation, contractility, gene and protein expression of PASMC from BKO(SMC) mice, human PASMC with BMPR2 reduced by small interference RNA, and PASMC from PAH patients with a BMPR2 mutation were compared to controls, to investigate the phenotype and underlying mechanism. RESULTS: BKO(SMC) mice showed reduced hypoxia-induced vasoconstriction and persistent pulmonary hypertension following recovery from hypoxia, associated with sustained muscularization of distal pulmonary arteries. PASMC from mutant compared to control mice displayed reduced contractility at baseline and in response to angiotensin II, increased proliferation and apoptosis resistance. Human PASMC with reduced BMPR2 by small interference RNA, and PASMC from PAH patients with a BMPR2 mutation showed a similar phenotype related to upregulation of pERK1/2 (phosphorylated extracellular signal related kinase 1/2)-pP38-pSMAD2/3 mediating elevation in ARRB2 (beta-arrestin2), pAKT (phosphorylated protein kinase B) inactivation of GSK3-beta, CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) nuclear translocation and reduction in RHOA (Ras homolog family member A) and RAC1 (Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1). Decreasing ARRB2 in PASMC with reduced BMPR2 restored normal signaling, reversed impaired contractility and attenuated heightened proliferation and in mice with inducible loss of BMPR2 in SMC, decreasing ARRB2 prevented persistent pulmonary hypertension. CONCLUSIONS: Agents that neutralize the elevated ARRB2 resulting from loss of BMPR2 in PASMC could prevent or reverse the aberrant hypocontractile and hyperproliferative phenotype of these cells in PAH.
Protein-fragment complementation assays (PCAs) are widely used for investigating protein interactions. However, the fragments used are structurally compromised and have not been optimized nor thoroughly characterized for accurately assessing these interactions. We took advantage of the small size and bright luminescence of NanoLuc to engineer a new complementation reporter (NanoBiT). By design, the NanoBiT subunits (i.e., 1.3 kDa peptide, 18 kDa polypeptide) weakly associate so that their assembly into a luminescent complex is dictated by the interaction characteristics of the target proteins onto which they are appended. To ascertain their general suitability for measuring interaction affinities and kinetics, we determined that their intrinsic affinity (KD = 190 muM) and association constants (kon = 500 M(-1) s(-1), koff = 0.2 s(-1)) are outside of the ranges typical for protein interactions. The accuracy of NanoBiT was verified under defined biochemical conditions using the previously characterized interaction between SME-1 beta-lactamase and a set of inhibitor binding proteins. In cells, NanoBiT fusions to FRB/FKBP produced luminescence consistent with the linear characteristics of NanoLuc. Response dynamics, evaluated using both protein kinase A and beta-arrestin-2, were rapid, reversible, and robust to temperature (21-37  degrees C). Finally, NanoBiT provided a means to measure pharmacology of kinase inhibitors known to induce the interaction between BRAF and CRAF. Our results demonstrate that the intrinsic properties of NanoBiT allow accurate representation of protein interactions and that the reporter responds reliably and dynamically in cells.
Omega-3 fatty acids (omega-3 FAs) have potential anti-inflammatory activity in a variety of inflammatory human diseases, but the mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we show that stimulation of macrophages with omega-3 FAs, including eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and other family members, abolished NLRP3 inflammasome activation and inhibited subsequent caspase-1 activation and IL-1beta secretion. In addition, G protein-coupled receptor 120 (GPR120) and GPR40 and their downstream scaffold protein beta-arrestin-2 were shown to be involved in inflammasome inhibition induced by omega-3 FAs. Importantly, omega-3 FAs also prevented NLRP3 inflammasome-dependent inflammation and metabolic disorder in a high-fat-diet-induced type 2 diabetes model. Our results reveal a mechanism through which omega-3 FAs repress inflammation and prevent inflammation-driven diseases and suggest the potential clinical use of omega-3 FAs in gout, autoinflammatory syndromes, or other NLRP3 inflammasome-driven inflammatory diseases.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: The NACHT, LRR, and pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome induces inflammation in response to organ injury, but little is known about its regulation. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) provide the first signal required for activation of the inflammasome and stimulate aerobic glycolysis to generate lactate. We examined whether lactate and the lactate receptor, Gi-protein-coupled receptor 81 (GPR81), regulate TLR induction of signal 1 and limit inflammasome activation and organ injury. METHODS: Primary mouse macrophages and human monocytes were incubated with TLR4 agonists and lactate and assayed for levels of pro-interleukin (IL)1beta, NLRP3, and caspase-1 (CASP1); release of IL1beta; and activation of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) and caspase-1. Small interfering RNAs were used to reduce levels of GPR81 and arrestin beta-2 (ARRB2), and an NF-kappaB luciferase reporter transgene was transfected in RAW 264.7 cells. Cell lysates were analyzed by immunoprecipitation with an antibody against GPR81. Acute hepatitis was induced in C56BL/6N mice by administration of lipopolysaccharide and D-galactosamine. Acute pancreatitis was induced by administration of lipopolysaccharide and cerulein. Some mice were given intraperitoneal injections of sodium lactate or small interfering RNA against Gpr81. Activation of NF-kappaB in tissue macrophages was assessed in mice that expressed a reporter transgene. RESULTS: In macrophages and monocytes, increasing concentrations of lactate reduced TLR4-mediated induction of Il1B, Nlrp3, and Casp1; activation of NF-kappaB; release of IL1beta; and cleavage of CASP1. GPR81 and ARRB2 physically interacted and were required for these effects. The administration of lactate reduced inflammation and organ injury in mice with immune hepatitis; this reduction required Gpr81 dependence in vivo. Lactate also prevented activation of NF-kappaB in macrophages of mice, and, when given after injury, reduced the severity of acute pancreatitis and acute liver injury. CONCLUSIONS: Lactate negatively regulates TLR induction of the NLRP3 inflammasome and production of IL1beta, via ARRB2 and GPR81. Lactate could be a promising immunomodulatory therapy for patients with acute organ injury.
Virus infection may induce excessive interferon (IFN) responses that can lead to host tissue injury or even death. beta-arrestin 2 regulates multiple cellular events through the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling pathways. Here we demonstrate that beta-arrestin 2 also promotes virus-induced production of IFN-beta and clearance of viruses in macrophages. beta-arrestin 2 interacts with cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) and increases the binding of dsDNA to cGAS to enhance cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) production and the downstream stimulator of interferon genes (STING) and innate immune responses. Mechanistically, deacetylation of beta-arrestin 2 at Lys171 facilitates the activation of the cGAS-STING signaling and the production of IFN-beta. In vitro, viral infection induces the degradation of beta-arrestin 2 to facilitate immune evasion, while a beta-blocker, carvedilol, rescues beta-arrestin 2 expression to maintain the antiviral immune response. Our results thus identify a viral immune-evasion pathway via the degradation of beta-arrestin 2, and also hint that carvedilol, approved for treating heart failure, can potentially be repurposed as an antiviral drug candidate.
Previous study showed that higher expression of prolactin (PRL) was found in CRPC samples compared with hormone-naive prostate cancer (HNPC) and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) samples. We further investigate the function of PRL in prostate cancer (PCa) and explored its downstream effects. We found heterogeneous expression of the PRLR in clinical prostate samples. The VCaP and 22Rv1 cells exhibited PRLR expression. Among the downstream proteins, STAT5B was the dominant subtype in clinical samples and cell lines. Human recombinant PRL stimulation of PCa cells with PRLR expression resulted in increased phosphorylation of STAT5B(pSTAT5B) and progression of PCa in vitro and in vivo, and STAT5B knockdown can suppress the malignant behavior of PCa. To understand the mechanism further, we performed Bioinformatic analysis, ChIP qPCR, and luciferase reporter gene assay. The results revealed that ARRB2 was the transcription target gene of STAT5B, and higher expression of ARRB2 was related to higher aggression and poorer prognosis of PCa. Additionally, Gene set enrichment analysis indicated that higher expression of ARRB2 was significantly enriched in the MAPK signaling pathway. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) demonstrated elevated pSTAT5B, ARRB2, and pERK1/2 expression levels in CRPC tissues compared to HNPC and BPH. Mechanically, ARRB2 enhanced the activation of the MAPK pathway by binding to ERK1/2, thereby promoting the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 (pERK1/2). In conclusion, our study demonstrated that PRL stimulation can promote the progression of PCa through STAT5B/ARRB2 pathway and activation of MAPK signaling, which can be suppressed by intervention targeting STAT5B. Blockade of the STAT5B can be a potential therapeutic target for PCa.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Recent literature has implicated a key role for mast cells in murine models of colonic inflammation, but their role in human ulcerative colitis (UC) is not well established. A major advance has been the identification of mrgprb2 (human orthologue, MRGPX2) as mediating IgE-independent mast cell activation. We sought to define mechanisms of mast cell activation and MRGPRX2 in human UC. METHODS: Colon tissues were collected from patients with UC for bulk RNA sequencing and lamina propria cells were isolated for MRGPRX2 activation studies and single-cell RNA sequencing. Genetic association of all protein-altering G-protein coupled receptor single-nucleotide polymorphism was performed in an Ashkenazi Jewish UC case-control cohort. Variants of MRGPRX2 were transfected into Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) and human mast cell (HMC) 1.1 cells to detect genotype-dependent effects on beta-arrestin recruitment, IP-1 accumulation, and phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase. RESULTS: Mast cell-specific mediators and adrenomedullin (proteolytic precursor of PAMP-12, an MRGPRX2 agonist) are up-regulated in inflamed compared to uninflamed UC. MRGPRX2 stimulation induces carboxypeptidase secretion from inflamed UC. Of all protein-altering GPCR alleles, a unique variant of MRGPRX2, Asn62Ser, was most associated with and was bioinformatically predicted to alter arrestin recruitment. We validated that the UC protective serine allele enhances beta-arrestin recruitment, decreases IP-1, and increases phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase with MRGPRX2 agonists. Single-cell RNA sequencing defines that adrenomedullin is expressed by activated fibroblasts and epithelial cells and that interferon gamma is a key upstream regulator of mast cell gene expression. CONCLUSION: Inflamed UC regions are distinguished by MRGPRX2-mediated activation of mast cells, with decreased activation observed with a UC-protective genetic variant. These results define cell modules of UC activation and a new therapeutic target.
METHODS: The differential expressed genes (DEGs) were screened from the gene expression profile GSE30994 related to PRAD and then analyzed by protein-protein interaction (PPI) to screen the hub gene. Subsequently, the relation between hub gene and pan cancers, PRAD prognosis, and immunotherapy was analyzed. Besides, the effects of hub gene on the growth and metastasis of PRAD cell lines and inflammatory factors (IFs) were detected by functional experiments. RESULTS: 276 upregulated and 1,861 downregulated DEGs were analyzed from GSE30994 gene expression profiles. Through enrichment analysis, it was found that upregulated DEGs were significantly enriched in nitric oxide-mediated signal transduction, insulin signaling pathway, etc. Through PPI networks, ARRB2 was determined as the hub gene that was highly expressed in pan cancers, including PRAD, and contributed to poor prognosis of PRAD patients. Immunoassay showed that ARRB2 was associated with B cells, NK cells, endothelial cells, etc. and also connected with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). Next, the signature model analysis revealed that ARRB2 had a clinical value in predicting PRAD prognosis. In functional experiments, ARRB2 was highly expressed in PRAD cell lines, promoted PRAD cell growth and metastasis, and positively associated with IFs. CONCLUSION: ARRB2 has a good prognostic ability in PRAD, and it could be a potential target of PRAD immunotherapy, which offers new directions for PRAD research.
In this study, we aimed to develop an invasion-related risk signature and prognostic model for personalized treatment and prognosis prediction in skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM), as invasion plays a crucial role in this disease. We identified 124 differentially expressed invasion-associated genes (DE-IAGs) and selected 20 prognostic genes (TTYH3, NME1, ORC1, PLK1, MYO10, SPINT1, NUPR1, SERPINE2, HLA-DQB2, METTL7B, TIMP1, NOX4, DBI, ARL15, APOBEC3G, ARRB2, DRAM1, RNF213, C14orf28, and CPEB3) using Cox and LASSO regression to establish a risk score. Gene expression was validated through single-cell sequencing, protein expression, and transcriptome analysis. Negative correlations were discovered between risk score, immune score, and stromal score using ESTIMATE and CIBERSORT algorithms. High- and low-risk groups exhibited significant differences in immune cell infiltration and checkpoint molecule expression. The 20 prognostic genes effectively differentiated between SKCM and normal samples (AUCs >0.7). We identified 234 drugs targeting 6 genes from the DGIdb database. Our study provides potential biomarkers and a risk signature for personalized treatment and prognosis prediction in SKCM patients. We developed a nomogram and machine-learning prognostic model to predict 1-, 3-, and 5-year overall survival (OS) using risk signature and clinical factors. The best model, Extra Trees Classifier (AUC = 0.88), was derived from pycaret's comparison of 15 classifiers. The pipeline and app are accessible at https://github.com/EnyuY/IAGs-in-SKCM.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Alcoholic fatty liver (AFL) is an early form of alcoholic liver disease (ALD) that usually manifests as lipid synthesis abnormalities in hepatocytes. beta-arrestin2 (Arrb2) is involved in multiple biological processes. The present study aimed to explore the role of Arrb2 in the regulation of lipid metabolism in AFL and the underlying mechanism and identify potential targets for the treatment of AFL. METHODS: The expression of Arrb2 was detected in liver tissues obtained from AFL patients and Gao-binge AFL model mice. In addition, we specifically knocked down Arrb2 in AFL mouse liver in vivo and used Arrb2-siRNA or pEX3-Arrb2 to silence or overexpress Arrb2 in AML-12 cells in vitro to explore the functional role and underlying regulatory mechanism of Arrb2 in AFL. Finally, we investigated whether Arrb2 could cause changes in hepatic lipid metabolites, thereby leading to dysregulation of lipid metabolism based on liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis. RESULTS: Arrb2 was up-regulated in the livers of AFL patients and AFL mice. The in vivo and in vitro results confirmed that Arrb2 could induce lipid accumulation and metabolism disorders. Mechanistically, Arrb2 induced hepatic metabolism disorder via AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) pathway. The results of LC-MS analysis revealed that hepatic lipid metabolites with the most significant differences were primary bile acids. CONCLUSIONS: Arrb2 induces hepatic lipid metabolism disorders via AMPK pathway in AFL. On one hand, Arrb2 increases fatty acid synthesis. On the other hand, Arrb2 could increase the cholesterol synthesis, thereby leading to the up-regulation of primary bile acid levels.
Background and aim: Modulating biological functions of endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) is essential for therapeutic angiogenesis in ischemic vascular diseases. This study aimed to explore the role and molecular mechanisms of beta-arrestin 2 (Arrb2) in EPCs biology and angiogenic therapy. Methods: The influence of Arrb2 on postischemic neovascularization was evaluated in Arrb2-deficient mice. The proliferation, apoptosis, and various functions of EPCs were analyzed in vitro by manipulating the expression of Arrb2. Finally, the in vivo effect of Arrb2 on EPC-mediated neovascularization was investigated in a mouse model of hind-limb ischemia (HLI). Results: Arrb2-deficient mice exhibited impaired blood flow recovery based on laser Doppler measurements and reduced capillary density in the adductor muscle after unilateral HLI. Arrb2-deficient mice also showed restricted intraplug angiogenesis in subcutaneously implanted Matrigel plugs. In vitro, lentivirus-mediated Arrb2 overexpression promoted EPC proliferation, migration, adhesion, and tube formation, whereas Arrb2 knockdown had opposite effects. In addition, the overexpression of Arrb2 in EPCs protected them from hypoxia-induced apoptosis and improved intraplug angiogenesis ex vivo. Mechanistically, Arrb2 interacted with and activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 and protein kinase B (Akt) signaling pathways. Finally, the transplantation of EPCs overexpressing Arrb2 resulted in a significantly higher blood flow restoration in ischemic hind limb and higher capillary density during histological analysis compared with control or Arrb2-knockdown EPC-treated nude mice. Conclusions: The data indicated that Arrb2 augmented EPC-mediated neovascularization through the activation of ERK and Akt signaling pathways. This novel biological function of Arrb2 might provide a potential therapeutic option to promote EPCs in the treatment of ischemic vascular diseases.
Nonvisual arrestins (beta-arrestin-1 and beta-arrestin-2) are adaptor proteins that function to regulate G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling and trafficking. beta-arrestins are ubiquitously expressed and function to inhibit GPCR/G protein coupling, a process called desensitization, and promote GPCR trafficking and arrestin-mediated signaling. beta-arrestin-mediated endocytosis of GPCRs requires the coordinated interaction of beta-arrestins with clathrin, adaptor protein 2 (AP2), and phosphoinositides. These interactions are facilitated by a conformational change in beta-arrestin that is thought to occur upon binding to a phosphorylated activated GPCR. In this review, we provide an overview of the key interactions involved in beta-arrestin-mediated trafficking of GPCRs.
Methadone is the major opioid substitution therapy for opioid dependence. Dosage is highly variable and is often controlled by the patient and prescriber according to local and national policy and guidelines. Nevertheless many genetic factors have been investigated including those affecting its metabolism (CYP2B6-consistent results), efflux transport (P-gp-inconsistent results), target mu-opioid receptor (mu-opioid receptor-inconsistent results) and a host of other receptors (DRD2) and signaling elements (GIRK2 and ARRB2; not replicated). None by themselves have been able to substantially explain dosage variation (the major but not sole end point). When multiple genes have been combined such as ABCB1, CYP2B6, OPRM1 and DRD2 a greater contribution to dosage variation was found but not as yet replicated. As stabilization of dosage needs to be made rapidly, it is imperative that larger internationally based studies be instigated so that genetic contribution to dosage can be properly assessed, which may or may not tailor to different ethnic groups and each country's policy towards an outcome that benefits all.
PURPOSE: This study aims to explore novel biomarkers related to the coagulation process and tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) infiltration in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). METHODS: The macrophage M2-related genes were obtained by Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) in bulk RNA-seq data, while the TAM marker genes were identified by analyzing the scRNA-seq data, and the coagulation-associated genes were obtained from MSigDB and KEGG databases. Survival analysis was performed for the intersectional genes. A risk score model was subsequently constructed based on the survival-related genes for prognosis prediction and validated in external datasets. RESULTS: In total, 33 coagulation and macrophage-related (COMAR) genes were obtained, 19 of which were selected for the risk score model construction. Finally, 10 survival-associated genes (APOE, ARRB2, C1QB, F13A1, FCGR2A, FYN, ITGB2, MMP9, OLR1, and VSIG4) were involved in the COMAR risk score model. According to the risk score, patients were equally divided into low- and high-risk groups, and the prognosis of patients in the high-risk group was significantly worse than that in the low-risk group. The ROC curve indicated that the risk score model had high sensitivity and specificity, which was validated in multiple external datasets. Moreover, the model also had high efficacy in predicting the clinical outcomes of LUAD patients who received anti-PD-1/PD-L1 immunotherapy. CONCLUSION: The COMAR risk score model constructed in this study has excellent predictive value for the prognosis and immunotherapeutic clinical outcomes of patients with LUAD, which provides potential biomarkers for the treatment and prognostic prediction.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most lethal cancers worldwide. The expression of beta-arrestin2 (beta-Arr2, ARRB2) in CRC has been well investigated; however, its exact mechanism causing the cancer progression remains unclear. In this study, we discovered that the expression level of ARRB2 was significantly upregulated in CRC as compared to the normal tissues by employing the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data, western blot analysis, and immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, the level of ARRB2 was correlated with the patients' overall survival by Kaplan-Meier analysis. The higher expression of ARRB2 promoted CRC cell growth, enhanced the cell motility, and blocked cell apoptosis, which is crucial for tumor growth. Lastly, the suppression of ARRB2 expression was enough to attenuate the progression of CRC induced by azoxymethane/dextran sodium sulfate. Interestingly, we also found that the knockdown of ARRB2 decreased several cancer pathways mediated by the expression of Wilms tumor 1 associated protein (WTAP), which led to the inhibition of cell proliferation and migration. Altogether, our results demonstrated that ARRB2 promoted the growth and migration of CRC cells by regulating the WTAP expression.
The basic function of beta-arrestin 2 (Arrb2) is to negatively regulate the G-protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway through facilitating receptor desensitization and internalization. Arrb2 has also been reported to play various roles in cancer pathology including the proliferation, migration, invasion, metastasis, and apoptosis of solid tumors. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the tumorigenic capacities of Arrb2 have not been elucidated. Here, we show a novel function of Arrb2: Arrb2 facilitates the degradation of HIF-1alpha, which is a master regulator of oxygen homeostasis. We also demonstrate that Arrb2 interacts with HIF-1alpha and stimulates ubiquitin-mediated 26S proteasomal degradation of HIF-1alpha by recruiting PHD2 and pVHL. Overexpression of Arrb2 in human glioblastoma cells suppresses HIF-1alpha signaling, tumor growth, and angiogenesis. Consistent with this antitumorigenic effect of Arrb2, low Arrb2 expression levels correlate with high HIF-1alpha expression and poor glioblastoma patient survival. These results collectively reveal a novel function of Arrb2 in the oxygen-sensing mechanism that directly regulates HIF-1alpha stability in human cancers and suggest Arrb2 as a new potential therapeutic target for glioblastoma.
BACKGROUND: The epigenetic status of patients 6-month post-COVID-19 infection remains largely unexplored. The existence of long-COVID, or post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC), suggests potential long-term changes. Long-COVID includes symptoms like fatigue, neurological issues, and organ-related problems, regardless of initial infection severity. The mechanisms behind long-COVID are unclear, but virus-induced epigenetic changes could play a role. METHODS AND RESULTS: Our study explores the lasting epigenetic impacts of SARS-CoV-2 infection. We analyzed genome-wide DNA methylation patterns in an Italian cohort of 96 patients 6 months after COVID-19 exposure, comparing them to 191 healthy controls. We identified 42 CpG sites with significant methylation differences (FDR < 0.05), primarily within CpG islands and gene promoters. Dysregulated genes highlighted potential links to glutamate/glutamine metabolism, which may be relevant to PASC symptoms. Key genes with potential significance to COVID-19 infection and long-term effects include GLUD1, ATP1A3, and ARRB2. Furthermore, Horvath's epigenetic clock showed a slight but significant age acceleration in post-COVID-19 patients. We also observed a substantial increase in stochastic epigenetic mutations (SEMs) in the post-COVID-19 group, implying potential epigenetic drift. SEM analysis identified 790 affected genes, indicating dysregulation in pathways related to insulin resistance, VEGF signaling, apoptosis, hypoxia response, T-cell activation, and endothelin signaling. CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides valuable insights into the epigenetic consequences of COVID-19. Results suggest possible associations with accelerated aging, epigenetic drift, and the disruption of critical biological pathways linked to insulin resistance, immune response, and vascular health. Understanding these epigenetic changes could be crucial for elucidating the complex mechanisms behind long-COVID and developing targeted therapeutic interventions.
The pathogenesis of herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) needs to be fully explored. beta-Arrestin 2 (Arrb2) is highly expressed in brain tissues and plays a key role in the regulation of systemic immune reactions by modulating various signaling pathways. However, the expression of Arrb2 in microglial cells and its influence on HSE prognosis is still undefined. We explore the pathophysiological effect of Arrb2 in the brain using experimental HSE mice. The expression of Arrb2 in microglia was decreased significantly 48 hours following HSV-1 infection. Arrb2 overexpression transgenic (TG) mice had a significantly lower mortality and survival rate was improved by 40% compared to wild-type mice. Arrb2 suppressed the generation of proinflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha and IL-6 and increased anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-10 and IL-4 expression. Arrb2 also inhibited the activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB in microglial cells. Arrb2 TG mice attenuated the blood-brain barrier breakdown and relieved cerebral edema, meanwhile, Arrb2 improved mice neurological function compared with wild-type mice. Overall, Arrb2 favored microglia of the M2 phenotype, attenuated brain proinflammatory responses, protected the blood vessel wall integrity, reduced HSV-1-induced neurological impairment, and improved the survival rate in HSE mice.
