5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2C; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various drugs and psychoactive substances, including ergot alkaloid derivatives, 1-2,5,- dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl-2-aminopropane (DOI) and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathway [...] 
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Liver fibrosis is a chronic disease characterized by different etiological agents; dysregulated interactions between hepatocytes and HSCs contribute to this disease. beta-arrestin 1 (ARRB1) plays an important role in liver fibrosis; however, the effect of ARRB1 on the crosstalk between hepatocytes and HSCs in liver fibrosis is unknown. The aim of this study is to investigate how ARRB1 modulates hepatocyte and HSC activation during liver fibrosis. APPROACH AND RESULTS: Normal and fibrotic human liver and serum samples were obtained. CCl 4 -induced liver fibrosis and methionine-choline deficiency-induced NASH models were constructed. Primary hepatocytes and HSCs were isolated, and human hepatic LO2 and stellate LX2 cells were used. Small extracellular vesicles (EVs) were purified, and key proteins were identified. ARRB1 was up-regulated in hepatocytes and associated with autophagic blockage in liver fibrosis. ARRB1 increased the release of hepatocyte-derived small EVs by inhibiting multivesicular body lysosomal degradation and activating Rab27A, thereby activating HSCs. Proteomic analyses showed that mannan-binding lectin serine protease 1 (MASP1) was enriched in hepatocyte-derived small EVs and activated HSCs via p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) signaling. ARRB1 up-regulated MASP1 expression in hepatocytes. MASP1 promoted liver fibrosis in mice. Clinically, MASP1 expression was increased in the serum and liver tissue of patients with liver fibrosis. CONCLUSIONS: ARRB1 up-regulates the release of hepatocyte-derived MASP1-enriched small EVs by regulating the autophagic-lysosomal/multivesicular body pathway and Rab27A. Hepatocyte-derived MASP1 activates HSCs to promote liver fibrogenesis through p38 MAPK/ATF2 signaling. Thus, MASP1 is a pivotal therapeutic target in liver fibrosis.
The hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) is involved in the process of hepatocellular carcinoma via the activation of various oncogenes. Our previous study indicated that ARBB1 (arrestin beta 1) promotes hepatocellular carcinogenesis (HCC). However, the role of ARRB1 in HBx-related HCC remains unclear. Herein, we identified that ARRB1 was upregulated by HBx in vivo and in vitro. Arrb1 deficiency suppressed HBx-induced hepatocellular carcinogenesis in several mouse models. Furthermore, knockdown of ARRB1 blocked HBx-induced macroautophagic/autophagic flux and disrupted the formation of autophagosomes. ARRB1 interacted with HBx, and the autophagic core protein MAP1LC3/LC3, a scaffolding protein, was essential for complete autophagy. Inhibition of autophagy by 3-methyladenine or interference of ATG5 or ATG7 attenuated HBx-induced cell cycle acceleration and the subsequent proliferative response via the induction of G(1)/S arrest. The absence of autophagy abolished the phosphorylation of CDK2 and the activity of the CDK2-CCNE1 complex. Our results demonstrate that ARRB1 plays a critical role in HBV-related HCC via modulating autophagy and the CDKN1B-CDK2-CCNE1-E2F1 axis and indicate that ARRB1 may be a potential therapeutic target for HCC.Abbreviations: ARRB1: arrestin beta 1; ACTB: actin beta; AMPK: adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase; ATG5: autophagy related 5; ATG7: autophagy related 7; Baf A1: bafilomycin A(1); CDK2: cyclin dependent kinase 2; CDKN1B/p27Kip1: cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1B; CQ: chloroquine; E2F1: E2F transcription factor 1; FBS: fetal bovine serum; GPCRs: G protein-coupled receptors; GST: glutathione S-transferase; HCC: hepatocellular carcinoma; HBV: hepatitis B virus; HBx: hepatitis B virus X protein; HMGB1: high mobility group box 1; HIF1A/HIF-1alpha: hypoxia inducible factor 1 subunit alpha; IHC: immunohistochemistry; JAK1: Janus kinase 1; LOX: lysyl oxidase; MAP1LC3B/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MKI67: marker of proliferation Ki-67; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MAPK: mitogen-activated protein kinase; 3-MA: 3-methyladenine; NFKB/NF-kappaB: nuclear factor kappa B; PIK3CA: phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha; PIK3C3: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit type 3; PHHs: primary human hepatocytes; RB1: RB transcriptional corepressor 1; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; STAT: signal transducer and activator of transcription; TACR1/NK1R: tachykinin receptor 1.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is associated with the dysregulation of lipid metabolism and hepatic inflammation. The causal mechanism underlying NASH is not fully elucidated. This study investigated the role of beta-Arrestin1 (ARRB1) in the progression of NASH. METHODS: Liver tissue from patients with NASH and controls were obtained to evaluate ARRB1 expression. NASH models were established in Arrb1-knockout and wild-type mice fed either a high-fat diet (HFD) for 26 weeks or a methionine/choline-deficient (MCD) diet for 6 weeks. RESULTS: ARRB1 expression was reduced in liver samples from patients with NASH. Reduced Arrb1 levels were also detected in murine NASH models. Arrb1 deficiency accelerated steatohepatitis development in HFD-/MCD-fed mice (accompanied by the upregulation of lipogenic genes and downregulation of beta-oxidative genes). Intriguingly, ARRB1 was found to interact with growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) and facilitated the transportation of GDF15 precursor (pro-GDF15) to the Golgi apparatus for cleavage and maturation. Treatment with recombinant GDF15 ablated the lipid accumulation in the presence of Arrb1 deletion both in vitro and in vivo. Re-expression of Arrb1 in the NASH models ameliorated the liver disease, and this effect was greater in the presence of pro-GDF15 overexpression. By contrast, the effect of pro-GDF15 overexpression alone was impaired in Arrb1-deficient mice. In addition, the severity of liver disease in patients with NASH was negatively correlated with ARRB1 expression. CONCLUSION: ARRB1 acts as a vital regulator in the development of NASH by facilitating the translocation of GDF15 to the Golgi apparatus and its subsequent maturation. Thus, ARRB1 is a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of NASH. LAY SUMMARY: Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is associated with the progressive dysfunction of lipid metabolism and a consequent inflammatory response. Decreased ARRB1 is observed in patients with NASH and murine NASH models. Re-expression of Arrb1 in the murine NASH model ameliorated liver disease, an effect which was more pronounced in the presence of pro-GDF15 overexpression, highlighting a promising strategy for NASH therapy.
Oxygen and nutrient deprivation are common features of solid tumors. Although abnormal alternative splicing (AS) has been found to be an important driving force in tumor pathogenesis and progression, the regulatory mechanisms of AS that underly the adaptation of cancer cells to harsh microenvironments remain unclear. Here, we found that hypoxia- and nutrient deprivation-induced asparagine endopeptidase (AEP) specifically cleaved DDX3X in a HIF1A-dependent manner. This cleavage yields truncated carboxyl-terminal DDX3X (tDDX3X-C), which translocates and aggregates in the nucleus. Unlike intact DDX3X, nuclear tDDX3X-C complexes with an array of splicing factors and induces AS events of many pre-mRNAs; for example, enhanced exon skipping (ES) in exon 2 of the classic tumor suppressor PRDM2 leads to a frameshift mutation of PRDM2. Intriguingly, the isoform ARRB1-Deltaexon 13 binds to glycolytic enzymes and regulates glycolysis. By utilizing in vitro assays, glioblastoma organoids, and animal models, we revealed that AEP/tDDX3X-C promoted tumor malignancy via these isoforms. More importantly, high AEP/tDDX3X-C/ARRB1-Deltaexon 13 in cancerous tissues was tightly associated with poor patient prognosis. Overall, our discovery of the effect of AEP-cleaved DDX3X switching on alternative RNA splicing events identifies a mechanism in which cancer cells adapt to oxygen and nutrient shortages and provides potential diagnostic and/or therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND: In the treatment of type 2 diabetes, GLP-1 receptor agonists lower blood glucose concentrations, body weight, and have cardiovascular benefits. The efficacy and side effects of GLP-1 receptor agonists vary between people. Human pharmacogenomic studies of this inter-individual variation can provide both biological insight into drug action and provide biomarkers to inform clinical decision making. We therefore aimed to identify genetic variants associated with glycaemic response to GLP-1 receptor agonist treatment. METHODS: In this genome-wide analysis we included adults (aged >/=18 years) with type 2 diabetes treated with GLP-1 receptor agonists with baseline HbA(1c) of 7% or more (53 mmol/mol) from four prospective observational cohorts (DIRECT, PRIBA, PROMASTER, and GoDARTS) and two randomised clinical trials (HARMONY phase 3 and AWARD). The primary endpoint was HbA(1c) reduction at 6 months after starting GLP-1 receptor agonists. We evaluated variants in GLP1R, then did a genome-wide association study and gene-based burden tests. FINDINGS: 4571 adults were included in our analysis, of these, 3339 (73%) were White European, 449 (10%) Hispanic, 312 (7%) American Indian or Alaskan Native, and 471 (10%) were other, and around 2140 (47%) of the participants were women. Variation in HbA(1c) reduction with GLP-1 receptor agonists treatment was associated with rs6923761G-->A (Gly168Ser) in the GLP1R (0.08% [95% CI 0.04-0.12] or 0.9 mmol/mol lower reduction in HbA(1c) per serine, p=6.0 x 10(-5)) and low frequency variants in ARRB1 (optimal sequence kernel association test p=6.7 x 10(-8)), largely driven by rs140226575G-->A (Thr370Met; 0.25% [SE 0.06] or 2.7 mmol/mol  [SE 0.7] greater HbA(1c) reduction per methionine, p=5.2 x 10(-6)). A similar effect size for the ARRB1 Thr370Met was seen in Hispanic and American Indian or Alaska Native populations who have a higher frequency of this variant (6-11%) than in White European populations. Combining these two genes identified 4% of the population who had a 30% greater reduction in HbA(1c) than the 9% of the population with the worse response. INTERPRETATION: This genome-wide pharmacogenomic study of GLP-1 receptor agonists provides novel biological and clinical insights. Clinically, when genotype is routinely available at the point of prescribing, individuals with ARRB1 variants might benefit from earlier initiation of GLP-1 receptor agonists. FUNDING: Innovative Medicines Initiative and the Wellcome Trust.
BACKGROUND: beta-adrenergic receptor (beta-AR) overactivation is a major pathological cue associated with cardiac injury and diseases. AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase), a conserved energy sensor, regulates energy metabolism and is cardioprotective. However, whether AMPK exerts cardioprotective effects via regulating the signaling pathway downstream of beta-AR remains unclear. METHODS: Using immunoprecipitation, mass spectrometry, site-specific mutation, in vitro kinase assay, and in vivo animal studies, we determined whether AMPK phosphorylates beta-arrestin-1 at serine (Ser) 330. Wild-type mice and mice with site-specific mutagenesis (S330A knock-in [KI]/S330D KI) were subcutaneously injected with the beta-AR agonist isoproterenol (5 mg/kg) to evaluate the causality between beta-adrenergic insult and beta-arrestin-1 Ser330 phosphorylation. Cardiac transcriptomics was used to identify changes in gene expression from beta-arrestin-1-S330A/S330D mutation and beta-adrenergic insult. RESULTS: Metformin could decrease cAMP/PKA (protein kinase A) signaling induced by isoproterenol. AMPK bound to beta-arrestin-1 and phosphorylated Ser330 with the highest phosphorylated mass spectrometry score. AMPK activation promoted beta-arrestin-1 Ser330 phosphorylation in vitro and in vivo. Neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes overexpressing beta-arrestin-1-S330D (active form) inhibited the beta-AR/cAMP/PKA axis by increasing PDE (phosphodiesterase) 4 expression and activity. Cardiac transcriptomics revealed that the differentially expressed genes between isoproterenol-treated S330A KI and S330D KI mice were mainly involved in immune processes and inflammatory response. beta-arrestin-1 Ser330 phosphorylation inhibited isoproterenol-induced reactive oxygen species production and NLRP3 (NOD-like receptor protein 3) inflammasome activation in neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes. In S330D KI mice, the beta-AR-activated cAMP/PKA pathways were attenuated, leading to repressed inflammasome activation, reduced expression of proinflammatory cytokines, and mitigated macrophage infiltration. Compared with S330A KI mice, S330D KI mice showed diminished cardiac fibrosis and improved cardiac function upon isoproterenol exposure. However, the cardiac protection exerted by AMPK was abolished in S330A KI mice. CONCLUSIONS: AMPK phosphorylation of beta-arrestin-1 Ser330 potentiated PDE4 expression and activity, thereby inhibiting beta-AR/cAMP/PKA activation. Subsequently, beta-arrestin-1 Ser330 phosphorylation blocks beta-AR-induced cardiac inflammasome activation and remodeling.
Atherogenesis and dyslipidemia increase the risk of cardiovascular disease, which is the leading cause of death in developed countries. While blood lipid levels have been studied as disease predictors, their accuracy in predicting cardiovascular risk is limited due to their high interindividual and interpopulation variability. The lipid ratios, atherogenic index of plasma (AIP = log TG/HDL-C) and the Castelli risk index 2 (CI2 = LDL-C/HDL-C), have been proposed as better predictors of cardiovascular risk, but the genetic variability associated with these ratios has not been investigated. This study aimed to identify genetic associations with these indexes. The study population (n = 426) included males (40%) and females (60%) aged 18-52 years (mean 39 years); the Infinium GSA array was used for genotyping. Regression models were developed using R and PLINK. AIP was associated with variation on APOC3, KCND3, CYBA, CCDC141/TTN, and ARRB1 (p-value < 2.1 x 10(-6)). The three former were previously associated with blood lipids, while CI2 was associated with variants on DIPK2B, LIPC, and 10q21.3 rs11251177 (p-value 1.1 x 10(-7)). The latter was previously linked to coronary atherosclerosis and hypertension. KCND3 rs6703437 was associated with both indexes. This study is the first to characterize the potential link between genetic variation and atherogenic indexes, AIP, and CI2, highlighting the relationship between genetic variation and dyslipidemia predictors. These results also contribute to consolidating the genetics of blood lipid and lipid indexes.
beta-Arrestin 1 (ARRB1) has been recognized as a multifunctional adaptor protein in the last decade, beyond its original role in desensitizing G protein-coupled receptor signaling. Here, we identify that ARRB1 plays essential roles in mediating gastric cancer (GC) cell metabolism and proliferation, by combining cohort analysis and functional investigation using patient-derived preclinical models. Overexpression of ARRB1 was associated with poor outcome of GC patients and knockdown of ARRB1 impaired cell proliferation both ex vivo and in vivo. Intriguingly, ARRB1 depicted diverse subcellular localizations during a passage of organoid cultures (7 d) to exert dual functions. Further analysis revealed that nuclear ARRB1 binds with transcription factor E2F1 triggering up-regulation of proliferative genes, while cytoplasmic ARRB1 modulates metabolic flux by binding with the pyruvate kinase M2 isoform (PKM2) and hindering PKM2 tetramerization, which reduces pyruvate kinase activity and leads to cellular metabolism shifts from oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis. As ARRB1 localization was shown mostly in the cytoplasm in human GC samples, therapeutic potential of the ARRB1-PKM2 axis was tested, and we found tumor proliferation could be attenuated by the PKM2 activator DASA-58, especially in ARRB1(high) organoids. Together, the data in our study highlight a spatiotemporally dependent role of ARRB1 in mediating GC cell metabolism and proliferation and implies reactivating PKM2 may be a promising therapeutic strategy in a subset of GC patients.
Recruitment of fibroblasts to tumors and their activation into cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) is a strategy used by tumor cells to direct extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, invasion, and metastasis, highlighting the need to investigate the molecular mechanisms driving CAF function. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) regulates the communication between cancer and stroma and facilitates the progression of serous ovarian cancer (SOC). By binding to Endothelin A (ET(A)) and B (ET(B)) receptors, ET-1 enables the recruitment of beta-arrestin1 (beta-arr1) and the formation of signaling complexes that coordinate tumor progression. However, how ET-1 receptors might "educate" human ovarian fibroblasts (HOFs) to produce altered ECM and promote metastasis remains to be elucidated. This study identifies ET-1 as a pivotal factor in the activation of CAFs capable of proteolytic ECM remodeling and the generation of heterotypic spheroids containing cancer cells with a propensity to metastasize. An autocrine/paracrine ET-1/ET(A/B)R/beta-arr1 loop enhances HOF proliferation, upregulates CAF marker expression, secretes pro-inflammatory cytokines, and increases collagen contractility, and cell motility. Furthermore, ET-1 facilitates ECM remodeling by promoting the lytic activity of invadosome and activation of integrin beta1. In addition, ET-1 signaling supports the formation of heterotypic HOF/SOC spheroids with enhanced ability to migrate through the mesothelial monolayer, and invade, representing metastatic units. The blockade of ET(A/B)R or beta-arr1 silencing prevents CAF activation, invadosome function, mesothelial clearance, and the invasive ability of heterotypic spheroids. In vivo, therapeutic inhibition of ET(A/B)R using bosentan (BOS) significantly reduces the metastatic potential of combined HOFs/SOC cells, associated with enhanced apoptotic effects on tumor cells and stromal components. These findings support a model in which ET-1/beta-arr1 reinforces tumor/stroma interaction through CAF activation and fosters the survival and metastatic properties of SOC cells, which could be counteracted by ET(A/B)R antagonists.
Nonvisual arrestins (beta-arrestin-1 and beta-arrestin-2) are adaptor proteins that function to regulate G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling and trafficking. beta-arrestins are ubiquitously expressed and function to inhibit GPCR/G protein coupling, a process called desensitization, and promote GPCR trafficking and arrestin-mediated signaling. beta-arrestin-mediated endocytosis of GPCRs requires the coordinated interaction of beta-arrestins with clathrin, adaptor protein 2 (AP2), and phosphoinositides. These interactions are facilitated by a conformational change in beta-arrestin that is thought to occur upon binding to a phosphorylated activated GPCR. In this review, we provide an overview of the key interactions involved in beta-arrestin-mediated trafficking of GPCRs.
Breast cancer (BC) is a disease with morbidity ranking the first of women worldwidely. In current study, 11 DE-miRNAs, consisting of four FKBP4 related DE-miRNAs and seven FKBP5 related DE-miRNAs, were screened. Four hundred and eighty two predicted lncRNAs were found for DE-miRNAs. Then, expression and prognostic results of nine of top 20 lncRNAs of BC were significantly identified. LINC00662 and LINC00963 expression were significantly associated with patients' overall survival (OS). Then, nine potential upstream transcription factors were identified in motifs of DE-miRNAs. Three hundred and twenty target genes were identified for GO annotation and KEGG pathway analysis, which were mainly enriched in cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in apoptotic process. Construction and analysis in PPI network showed that RAB7A was selected as a hub gene with the topest connectivity scores. Differential expression analysis of nine in top ten hub genes of BC were significantly identified. RAB7A and ARRB1 expression were significantly related with BC patients' OS.
Cancer cells use actin-based membrane protrusions, invadopodia, to degrade stroma and invade. In serous ovarian cancer (SOC), the endothelin A receptor (ET(A)R) drives invadopodia by a not fully explored coordinated function of beta-arrestin1 (beta-arr1). Here, we report that beta-arr1 links the integrin-linked kinase (ILK)/betaPIX complex to activate Rac3 GTPase, acting as a central node in the adhesion-based extracellular matrix (ECM) sensing and degradation. Downstream, Rac3 phosphorylates PAK1 and cofilin and promotes invadopodium-dependent ECM proteolysis and invasion. Furthermore, ET(A)R/ILK/Rac3 signaling supports the communication between cancer and mesothelial cells, favoring SOC cell adhesion and transmigration. In vivo, ambrisentan, an ET(A)R antagonist, inhibits the adhesion and spreading of tumor cells to intraperitoneal organs, and invadopodium marker expression. As prognostic factors, high EDNRA/ILK expression correlates with poor SOC clinical outcome. These findings provide a framework for the ET-1R/beta-arr1 pathway as an integrator of ILK/Rac3-dependent adhesive and proteolytic signaling to invadopodia, favoring cancer/stroma interactions and metastatic behavior.
Inflammation in the epididymis and testis contributes significantly to male infertility. Alternative therapeutic avenues treating epididymitis and orchitis are expected since current therapies using antibiotics have limitations associated to side effects and are commonly ineffective for inflammation due to nonbacterial causes. Here, we demonstrated that type 1 parathyroid hormone receptor (PTH1R) and its endogenous agonists, parathyroid hormone (PTH) and PTH-related protein (PTHrP), were mainly expressed in the Leydig cells of testis as well as epididymal epithelial cells. Screening the secretin family G protein-coupled receptor identified that PTH1R in the epididymis and testis was down-regulated in mumps virus (MuV)- or lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation. Remarkably, activation of PTH1R by abaloparatide (ABL), a Food and Drug Administration-approved treatment for postmenopausal osteoporosis, alleviated MuV- or LPS-induced inflammatory responses in both testis and epididymis and significantly improved sperm functions in both mouse model and human samples. The anti-inflammatory effects of ABL were shown to be regulated mainly through the Gq and beta-arrestin-1 pathway downstream of PTH1R as supported by the application of ABL in Gnaq(+/-) and Arrb1(-/-) mouse models. Taken together, our results identified an important immunoregulatory role for PTH1R signaling in the epididymis and testis. Targeting to PTH1R might have a therapeutic effect for the treatment of epididymitis and orchitis or other inflammatory disease in the male reproductive system.
The advent of targeted therapeutics in human cancer has begun to find novel druggable targets and, in this context, the endothelin-1 receptor (ET-1R), namely ETA receptor (ETAR) and ETB receptor, among the GPCR family represents a class of highly druggable molecules in cancer. ET-1R are aberrantly expressed in human malignancies, potentially representing prognostic factors. Their activation by ligand stimulation initiate signaling cascades activating different downstream effectors, allowing precise control over multiple signaling pathways. ET-1R regulates cell proliferation, survival, motility, cytoskeletal changes, angiogenesis, metastasis as well as drug resistance. The molecular events underlying these responses are the activation of transcriptional factors and coactivators, and downstream genes, acting as key players in tumor growth and progression. ET-1R represent crucial cancer targets that have been exploited for ET-1R therapeutics. Importantly, efforts to explore new information of ETAR in cancer have uncovered that their functions are crucially regulated by multifunctional scaffold protein beta-arrestins (beta-arrs) which orchestrate the multidimensionality of ETAR signaling into highly regulated and distinct signaling complexes, a property that is highly advantageous for tumor signaling. Moreover, the role of beta-arr1 in ET-1 signaling in cancer highlights why the pleiotropic effects of ET-1 and its dynamic signaling are more complex than previously recognized. In order to improve therapeutic strategies that interfere with the widespread effects of ET-1R, it is important to consider antagonists able to turn the receptors "off" selectively controlling beta-arr1-dependent signaling, highlighting the possibility that targeting ETAR/beta-arr1 may display a large therapeutic window in cancer.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a malignant disease worldwide. It is implicated in high cancer-related mortality rates in humans. beta-Arrestin1 (ARRB1) has been demonstrated to be related to the development of several cancers, while the relationship between ARRB1 and metastasis in HCC is unknown. METHODS: A tissue microarray of 68 tissues from HCC patients with or without metastasis was collected. Wild-type and ARRB1 knockout mice were used to examine the role of ARRB1 in metastasis in vivo. The level of ARRB1 in HCC tissues, mouse liver tissues, and cell lines was determined by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, and immunohistochemistry. Migration, invasion, and motility capacities of HCC cells were determined by transwell assay and wound healing assay. Vein injection of nude mice model was used to reveal the metastatic abilities of HCC cell lines. For the mechanism study, we investigated the effects of ARRB1 on the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers in HCC. RESULTS: We reveal that ARRB1 accelerates metastasis in HCC and that ARRB1 deficiency inhibits hepatocarcinogenesis and reverses EMT in mice. ARRB1 regulates HCC cell migration and invasion and suppresses HCC metastasis in vivo. Furthermore, we show that ARRB1 promotes EMT through the phosphorylation of ERK1/2. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that ARRB1 promotes HCC invasion and metastasis through p-ERK1/2-mediated EMT and that suppression of ARRB1 or p-ERK1/2 may offer potential therapeutic targets for HCC therapy.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) constitute the largest known superfamily for signal transduction and transmission, and they control a variety of physiological and pathological processes. GPCR adaptor beta-arrestins (ARRBs) play a role in cancerous proliferation. However, the effect of ARRBs in inflammation-mediated hepatocellular carcinogenesis is unknown. Here we show that ARRB1, but not ARRB2, is upregulated in inflammation-associated hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and paracancerous tissues in humans. A genotoxic carcinogen, diethylnitrosamine (DEN), significantly induces hepatic inflammation, TNF-alpha production and ARRB1 expression. Although ARRB1 deficiency does not affect hepatic inflammation and TNF-alpha production, it markedly represses hepatocellular carcinogenesis by suppressing malignant proliferation in DEN-treated mice. Furthermore, TNF-alpha directly induces hepatic ARRB1 expression and enhances ARRB1 interaction with Akt by binding to boost Akt phosphorylation, resulting in malignant proliferation of liver cells. Our data suggest that ARRB1 enhances hepatocellular carcinogenesis by inflammation-mediated Akt signalling and that ARRB1 may be a potential therapeutic target for HCC.
The beta(1)-adrenoceptor (beta(1)AR) is a G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that couples(1) to the heterotrimeric G protein G(s). G-protein-mediated signalling is terminated by phosphorylation of the C terminus of the receptor by GPCR kinases (GRKs) and by coupling of beta-arrestin 1 (betaarr1, also known as arrestin 2), which displaces G(s) and induces signalling through the MAP kinase pathway(2). The ability of synthetic agonists to induce signalling preferentially through either G proteins or arrestins-known as biased agonism(3)-is important in drug development, because the therapeutic effect may arise from only one signalling cascade, whereas the other pathway may mediate undesirable side effects(4). To understand the molecular basis for arrestin coupling, here we determined the cryo-electron microscopy structure of the beta(1)AR-betaarr1 complex in lipid nanodiscs bound to the biased agonist formoterol(5), and the crystal structure of formoterol-bound beta(1)AR coupled to the G-protein-mimetic nanobody(6) Nb80. betaarr1 couples to beta(1)AR in a manner distinct to that(7) of G(s) coupling to beta(2)AR-the finger loop of betaarr1 occupies a narrower cleft on the intracellular surface, and is closer to transmembrane helix H7 of the receptor when compared with the C-terminal alpha5 helix of G(s). The conformation of the finger loop in betaarr1 is different from that adopted by the finger loop of visual arrestin when it couples to rhodopsin(8). beta(1)AR coupled to betaarr1 shows considerable differences in structure compared with beta(1)AR coupled to Nb80, including an inward movement of extracellular loop 3 and the cytoplasmic ends of H5 and H6. We observe weakened interactions between formoterol and two serine residues in H5 at the orthosteric binding site of beta(1)AR, and find that formoterol has a lower affinity for the beta(1)AR-betaarr1 complex than for the beta(1)AR-G(s) complex. The structural differences between these complexes of beta(1)AR provide a foundation for the design of small molecules that could bias signalling in the beta-adrenoceptors.
Acromegaly is a chronic disorder usually diagnosed late in the disease evolution. Such delayed diagnosis, together with the inability to achieve the treatment goals of normalizing biochemical disease markers and controlling tumour mass may result in substantial morbidity and mortality. Somatostatin analogues (SSA) are accepted as first-line medical therapy or as second-line therapy in patients undergoing unsuccessful surgery and are considered a cornerstone in the treatment of acromegaly. However, because a high percentage of patients experience SSA medical treatment failure, the identification of biomarkers associated with a successful or unsuccessful response to all classes of medical therapy would help in the choice of treatment and potentially allow for a quicker normalization of biochemical parameters. The current treatment algorithms for acromegaly are based upon a "trial-and-error" approach with additional treatment options provided when disease is not controlled. In many other diseases, therapeutic algorithms have been evolving towards personalized treatment with the medication that best matches individual disease characteristics, using biomarkers that identify therapeutic response. Additionally, a personalized approach to complementary treatment of comorbidities present in the acromegalic patient is also required. This review will discuss the development of a potential treatment algorithm for acromegaly addressing the biochemical control of the disease as well of its associated comorbidities, under a personalized approach based upon markers of prognostic and predictive significance, such as tumour size, MRI adenoma signal, GH value after acute octreotide test, granular adenoma pattern, Ki-67, somatostatin receptor phenotype, aryl hydrocarbon-interacting protein expression, gsp mutations, RAF kinase activity, E-cadherin and beta-arrestin-1.
BACKGROUND: Receptor signaling is central to vascular endothelial function and is dysregulated in vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis and pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Signaling pathways involved in endothelial function include vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs) and G protein-coupled receptors, which classically activate distinct intracellular signaling pathways and responses. The mechanisms that regulate these signaling pathways have not been fully elucidated and it is unclear what nodes for cross talk exist between these diverse signaling pathways. For example, multifunctional beta-arrestin (ARRB) adapter proteins are best known as regulators of G protein-coupled receptor signaling, but their role at other receptors and their physiological importance in the setting of vascular disease are unclear. METHODS: We used a combination of human samples from PAH, human microvascular endothelial cells from lung, and Arrb knockout mice to determine the role of ARRB1 in endothelial VEGFR3 signaling. In addition, a number of biochemical analyses were performed to determine the interaction between ARRB1 and VEGFR3, signaling mediators downstream of VEGFR3, and the internalization of VEGFR3. RESULTS: Expression of ARRB1 and VEGFR3 was reduced in human PAH, and the deletion of Arrb1 in mice exposed to hypoxia led to worse PAH with a loss of VEGFR3 signaling. Knockdown of ARRB1 inhibited VEGF-C-induced endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and tube formation, along with reduced VEGFR3, Akt, and endothelial nitric oxide synthase phosphorylation. This regulation was mediated by direct ARRB1 binding to the VEGFR3 kinase domain and resulted in decreased VEGFR3 internalization. CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate a novel role for ARRB1 in VEGFR regulation and suggest a mechanism for cross talk between G protein-coupled receptors and VEGFRs in PAH. These findings also suggest that strategies to promote ARRB1-mediated VEGFR3 signaling could be useful in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension and other vascular disease.
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is a type of aggressive leukemia with inferior prognosis. Although activating mutations of NOTCH1 are observed in most T-ALL cases, these mutations alone are not sufficient to drive the full development of T-ALL. beta-Arrestins (ARRB) are versatile and multifunctional adapter proteins that regulate diverse cellular functions, including promoting the development of cancer. However, the role of ARRBs in T-ALL has largely remained elusive. In this study, we showed that ARRB1 is expressed at low levels in assayed T-ALL clinical samples and cell lines. Exogenous ARRB1 expression inhibited T-ALL proliferation and improved the survival of T-ALL xenograft animals. ARRB1 facilitated NOTCH1 ubiquitination and degradation through interactions with NOTCH1 and DTX1. Mechanistically, the oncogenic miRNA (oncomiR) miR-223 targets the 3'-UTR of ARRB1 (BUTR) and inhibits its expression in T-ALL. Furthermore, overexpression of the ARRB1-derived miR-223 sponge suppressed T-ALL cell proliferation and induced apoptosis. Collectively, these results demonstrate that ARRB1 acts as a tumor suppressor in T-ALL by promoting NOTCH1 degradation, which is inhibited by elevated miR-223, suggesting that ARRB1 may serve as a valid drug target in the development of novel T-ALL therapeutics.Significance: These findings highlight a novel tumor suppressive function of the adaptor protein beta-arrestin1 in T-ALL.
