Plasma membrane calcium-transporting ATPase 3; This magnesium-dependent enzyme catalyzes the hydrolysis of ATP coupled with the transport of calcium out of the cell.
Primary aldosteronism is considered the commonest cause of secondary hypertension. In affected individuals, aldosterone is produced in an at least partially autonomous fashion in adrenal lesions (adenomas, [micro]nodules or diffuse hyperplasia). Over the past decade, next-generation sequencing studies have led to the insight that primary aldosteronism is largely a genetic disorder. Sporadic cases are due to somatic mutations, mostly in ion channels and pumps, and rare cases of familial hyperaldosteronism are caused by germline mutations in an overlapping set of genes. More than 90% of aldosterone-producing adenomas carry somatic mutations in K(+) channel Kir3.4 (KCNJ5), Ca(2+) channel Ca(V)1.3 (CACNA1D), alpha-1 subunit of the Na(+)/K(+) ATPase (ATP1A1), plasma membrane Ca(2+) transporting ATPase 3 (ATP2B3), Ca(2+) channel Ca(V)3.2 (CACNA1H), Cl(-) channel ClC-2 (CLCN2), beta-catenin (CTNNB1), and/or G-protein subunits alpha q/11 (GNAQ/11). Mutations in some of these genes have also been identified in aldosterone-producing (micro)nodules, suggesting a disease continuum from a single cell, acquiring a somatic mutation, via a nodule to adenoma formation, and from a healthy state to subclinical to overt primary aldosteronism. Individual glands can have multiple such lesions, and they can occur on both glands in bilateral disease. Familial hyperaldosteronism, typically with early onset, is caused by germline mutations in steroid 11-beta hydroxylase/ aldosterone synthase (CYP11B1/2), CLCN2, KCNJ5, CACNA1H, and CACNA1D.
Hypertension is a common medical condition and affects approximately 20% of the population in developed countries. Primary aldosteronism is the most common form of secondary hypertension and affects 8-13% of patients with hypertension. The two most common causes of primary aldosteronism are aldosterone-producing adenoma and bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Familial hyperaldosteronism types I, II and III are the known genetic syndromes, in which both adrenal glands produce excessive amounts of aldosterone. However, only a minority of patients with primary aldosteronism have one of these syndromes. Several novel susceptibility genes have been found to be mutated in aldosterone-producing adenomas: KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CTNNB1, CACNA1D, CACNA1H and ARMC5 This review describes the genes currently known to be responsible for primary aldosteronism, discusses the origin of aldosterone-producing adenomas and considers the future clinical implications based on these novel insights.
Primary aldosteronism (PA) is the most common form of secondary arterial hypertension, with a prevalence of approximately 20% in patients with resistant hypertension. In the last decade, somatic pathogenic variants in KCNJ5, CACNA1D, ATP1A1 and ATP2B3 genes, which are involved in maintaining intracellular ionic homeostasis and cell membrane potential, were described in aldosterone-producing adenomas (aldosteronomas). All variants in these genes lead to the activation of calcium signaling, the major trigger for aldosterone production. Genetic causes of familial hyperaldosteronism have been expanded through the report of germline pathogenic variants in KCNJ5, CACNA1H and CLCN2 genes. Moreover, PDE2A and PDE3B variants were associated with bilateral PA and increased the spectrum of genetic etiologies of PA. Of great importance, the genetic investigation of adrenal lesions guided by the CYP11B2 staining strongly changed the landscape of somatic genetic findings of PA. Furthermore, CYP11B2 staining allowed the better characterization of the aldosterone-producing adrenal lesions in unilateral PA. Aldosterone production may occur from multiple sources, such as solitary aldosteronoma or aldosterone-producing nodule (classical histopathology) or clusters of autonomous aldosterone-producing cells without apparent neoplasia denominated aldosterone-producing micronodules (non-classical histopathology). Interestingly, KCNJ5 mutational status and classical histopathology of unilateral PA (aldosteronoma) have emerged as relevant predictors of clinical and biochemical outcome, respectively. In this review, we summarize the most recent advances in the pathogenesis of PA and discuss their impact on clinical outcome.
PURPOSE OF THE REVIEW: Primary aldosteronism (PA) is the leading cause of secondary hypertension, accounting for over 10% of patients with high blood pressure. It is characterized by autonomous production of aldosterone from the adrenal glands leading to low-renin levels. The two most common forms arise from bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia (BAH) and aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA). We discuss recent discoveries in the genetics of PA. RECENT FINDINGS: Most APAs harbor variants in the KCNJ5, CACNA1D, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, and CTNNB1 genes. With the exception of beta-catenin (CTNNB1), all other causative genes encode ion channels; pathogenic variants found in PA lead to altered ion transportation, cell membrane depolarization, and consequently aldosterone overproduction. Some of these genes are found mutated in the germline state (CYP11B2, CLCN2, KCNJ5, CACNA1H, and CACNA1D), leading then to familial hyperaldosteronism, and often BAH rather than single APAs. Several genetic defects in the germline or somatic state have been identified in PA. Understanding how these molecular abnormalities lead to excess aldosterone contributes significantly to the elucidation of the pathophysiology of low-renin hypertension. It may also lead to new and more effective therapies for this disease acting at the molecular level.
Benign adrenocortical adenomas and hyperplasia are relatively common and include a spectrum of distinct entities, which diagnosis depends on the macroscopic aspect and the secretion profile. Recent advances in genomics have proposed high-throughput molecular characterization of adrenal tumors, thereby improving our knowledge on the pathophysiology and tumorigenesis of these tumors. Genomic (exome and chromosome alteration profiles), epigenomic (micro-RNAs expression and methylation profiles) and transcriptomic (gene expression profiles) studies highlighted the major roles of intracellular calcium signaling in aldosterone-producing adenomas (APA), of protein kinase A (PKA)/cAMP pathway in cortisol-producing tumors, and of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in non-secreting tumors. Exome sequencing revealed new major drivers in all tumor types, including KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CACNA1D and CACNA1H mutations in APA, PRKACA mutations in cortisol-producing adenomas (CPA) and ARMC5 mutations in primary macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (PMAH). The clinical impact of these findings is just starting to evolve. The identification of genetic syndromes, such as germline ARMC5 mutations in PMAH, has allowed genetic counseling. Key molecular alterations could serve as a basis for the development of targeted medical treatments for benign adrenal tumors. The recent developments in genomics, including single-cell technologies, and in proteomics and metabolomics will probably offer new perspectives for characterizing benign adrenal tumorigenesis.
Primary aldosteronism (PA), a condition characterized by autonomous aldosterone hypersecretion, constitutes the most common cause of secondary hypertension. Over the last decade, major breakthroughs have been made in the field of genetics underpinning PA. The advent and wide application of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology led to the identification of several somatic and germline mutations associated with sporadic and familial forms of PA. Somatic mutations in ion-channel genes that participate in aldosterone biosynthesis, including KCNJ5, CACNA1D, ATP1A1, and ATP2B3, have been implicated in the development of aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs). On the other hand, germline variants in CLCN2, KCNJ5, CACNA1H, and CACNA1D genes have been implicated in the pathogenesis of the familial forms of PA, FH-II, FH-III, and F-IV, as well as PA associated with seizures and neurological abnormalities. However, recent studies have shown that the prevalence of PA is higher than previously thought, indicating the need for an improvement of our diagnostic tools. Further research is required to recognize mild forms of PA and to investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms.
Primary hyperaldosteronism (PAH) is the most frequent cause of secondary arterial hypertension. Most PAHs occur sporadically, but 5% of cases have a hereditary origin (familial PAH). Four forms of familial PAH have been described. Type I familial PAH is produced by a fusion of the CYP11B2 and CYP11B1 genes, in this way the synthesis of aldosterone becomes to be regulated by ACTH instead of by angiotensin II. In type II, III and IV familial PAH there is an increase in the transcription and expression of CYP11B2 responsible for aldosterone synthesis due to a germinal mutation in CLCN2, KCNJ5 and CACNA1H, respectively. On the other hand, somatic mutations have been identified in 50% of sporadic PAHs, with gain-of-function mutations at the level of KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3 and CACNA1D being the most common. This review provides a detailed description of the different forms of familial PAH and the molecular profile of patients with sporadic PAH.
Primary aldosteronism is characterized by at least partially autonomous production of the adrenal steroid hormone aldosterone and is the most common cause of secondary hypertension. The most frequent subforms are idiopathic hyperaldosteronism and aldosterone-producing adenoma. Rare causes include unilateral hyperplasia, adrenocortical carcinoma and Mendelian forms (familial hyperaldosteronism). Studies conducted in the last eight years have identified somatic driver mutations in a substantial portion of aldosterone-producing adenomas, including the genes KCNJ5 (encoding inwardly rectifying potassium channel GIRK4), CACNA1D (encoding a subunit of L-type voltage-gated calcium channel Ca(V)1.3), ATP1A1 (encoding a subunit of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase), ATP2B3 (encoding a Ca(2+)-ATPase), and CTNNB1 (encoding ss-catenin). In addition, aldosterone-producing cells were recently reported to form small clusters (aldosterone-producing cell clusters) beneath the adrenal capsule. Such clusters accumulate with age and appear to be more frequent in individuals with idiopathic hyperaldosteronism. The fact that they are associated with somatic mutations implicated in aldosterone-producing adenomas also suggests a precursor function for adenomas. Rare germline variants of CYP11B2 (encoding aldosterone synthase), CLCN2 (encoding voltage-gated chloride channel ClC-2), KCNJ5, CACNA1H (encoding a subunit of T-type voltage-gated calcium channel Ca(V)3.2), and CACNA1D have been reported in different subtypes of familial hyperaldosteronism. Collectively, these studies suggest that primary aldosteronism is largely due to genetic mutations in single genes, with potential implications for diagnosis and therapy.
Advances in genomics over the past two decades have allowed for elucidation of the genetic alterations leading to the development of adrenocortical tumors and/or hyperplasias. These molecular changes were initially discovered through the study of rare familial tumor syndromes such as McCune-Albright Syndrome, Carney complex, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, with the identification of alterations in genes and molecular pathways that subsequently led to the discovery of aberrations in these or related genes and pathways in sporadic tumors. Genetic alterations in GNAS, PRKAR1A, PRKACA, PRKACB, PDE11A, and PDE8B, that lead to aberrant cyclic adenosine monophosphate-protein (cAMP) kinase A signaling, were found to play a major role in the development of benign cortisol-producing adrenocortical tumors and/or hyperplasias, whereas genetic defects in KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CACNA1D, CACNA1H, and CLCN2 were implicated in the development of benign aldosterone-producing tumors and/or hyperplasias through modification of intracellular calcium signaling. Germline ARMC5 defects were found to cause the development of primary bilateral macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia with glucocorticoid and/or mineralocorticoid oversecretion. Adrenocortical carcinoma was linked primarily to aberrant p53 signaling and/or Wnt-beta-catenin signaling, as well as IGF2 overexpression, with frequent genetic alterations in TP53, ZNRF3, CTNNB1, and 11p15. This review focuses on the genetic underpinnings of benign cortisol- and aldosterone-producing adrenocortical tumors/hyperplasias and adrenocortical carcinoma.
BACKGROUND: Intellectual disability is a form of neurodevelopmental disorders that begin in childhood and is characterized by substantial intellectual difficulties as well as difficulties in conceptual, social, and practical areas of living. Several genetic and nongenetic factors contribute to its development; however, its most severe forms are generally attributed to single-gene defects. High-throughput technologies and data sharing contributed to the diagnosis of hundreds of single-gene intellectual disability subtypes. METHOD: We applied exome sequencing to identify potential variants causing syndromic intellectual disability in six Sudanese patients from four unrelated families. Data sharing through the Varsome portal corroborated the diagnosis of one of these patients and a Tunisian patient investigated through exome sequencing. Sanger sequencing validated the identified variants and their segregation with the phenotypes in the five studied families. RESULT: We identified three pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in CCDC82, ADAT3, and HUWE1 and variants of uncertain significance in HERC2 and ATP2B3. The patients with the CCDC82 variants had microcephaly and spasticity, two signs absent in the two previously reported families with CCDC82-related intellectual disability. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, we report new patients with pathogenic mutations in the genes CCDC82, ADAT3, and HUWE1. We also highlight the possibility of extending the CCDC82-linked phenotype to include spastic paraplegia and microcephaly.
BACKGROUND: Primary aldosteronism, the excessive production of the steroid hormone aldosterone, is the most common cause of secondary hypertension. Common subforms include bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and aldosterone-producing adenoma. OBJECTIVES: The goal of this review is to summarize important publications on the genetic basis of primary aldosteronism. RESULTS: Somatic mutations in the KCNJ5, CACNA1D, ATP1A1, and ATP2B3 genes have been described as causes of aldosterone-producing adenomas. They eventually all lead to increased cellular calcium influx and aldosterone production. The mechanisms of rare CTNNB1 mutations are less defined. Correlations between mutations and different histologic characteristics as well as gender and ethnicity remain unexplained. Recent publications suggest that bilateral hyperplasia is at least partially due to so-called aldosterone-producing cell clusters, often with mutations in CACNA1D. Rare familial forms show mutations in the CYP11B2, CLCN2, KCNJ5, CACNA1H, or CACNA1D genes. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that a significant fraction of primary aldosteronism is due to somatic mutations in single genes.
The last decade witnessed the emergence of genomics, a set of high-throughput molecular measurements in biological samples. These pan-genomic and agnostic approaches have revolutionized the molecular biology and genetics of malignant and benign tumors. These techniques have been applied successfully to adrenocortical tumors. Exome sequencing identified new major drivers in all tumor types, including KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3 and CACNA1D mutations in aldosterone-producing adenomas (APA), PRKACA mutations in cortisol-producing adenomas (CPA), ARMC5 mutations in primary bilateral macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (PBMAH) and ZNRF3 mutations in adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC). Moreover, the various genomic approaches - including exome sequencing, transcriptome, miRNome, genome and methylome - converge into a single molecular classification of adrenocortical tumors. Especially for ACC, two main molecular groups have emerged, showing major differences in outcomes. These ACC groups differ by their gene expression profiles, but also by recurrent mutations and specific DNA hypermethylation patterns in the subgroup of poor outcome. The clinical impact of these findings is just starting. The main altered signaling pathways now become therapeutic targets. The molecular groups of diseases individualize robust subtypes within diseases such as APA, CPA, PBMAH and ACC. A revised nosology of adrenocortical tumors should impact the clinical research. Obvious consequences also include genetic counseling for the new genetic diseases such as ARMC5 mutations in PBMAH, and a better prognostication of ACC based on targeted measurements of a few discriminant molecular alterations. Identifying the main molecular groups of adrenocortical tumors by extensively gathering the molecular variations is a significant step forward towards precision medicine.
Primary aldosteronism (PA) is the most common and curable form of secondary hypertension. It is caused in the majority of cases by either unilateral aldosterone overproduction due to an aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA) or by bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Recent advances in genome technology have allowed researchers to unravel part of the genetic abnormalities underlying the development of APA and familial hyperaldosteronism. Recurrent somatic mutations in genes coding for ion channels (KCNJ5 and CACNA1D) and ATPases (ATP1A1 and ATP2B3) regulating intracellular ionic homeostasis and cell membrane potential have been identified in APA. Similar germline mutations of KCNJ5 were identified in a severe familial form of PA, familial hyperaldosteronism type 3 (FH3), whereas de novo germline CACNA1D mutations were found in two cases of hyperaldosteronism associated with a complex neurological disorder. These results have allowed a pathophysiological model of APA development to be established. This model involves modifications in intracellular ionic homeostasis and membrane potential, accounting for  approximately 50% of all tumors, associated with specific gender differences and severity of PA. In this review, we describe the different genetic abnormalities associated with PA and discuss the mechanisms whereby they lead to increased aldosterone production and cell proliferation. We also address some of the foreseeable consequences that genetic knowledge may contribute to improve diagnosis and patient care.
Over the past six years, the genetic basis of a significant fraction of primary aldosteronism (PA) cases has been solved. Breakthrough discoveries include the role of somatic variants in the KCNJ5, CACNA1D, ATP1A1, and ATP2B3 genes as causes of aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs), and the recognition of three novel hyperaldosteronism syndromes with germline variants in the KCNJ5, CACNA1D, and CACNA1H genes. The description of somatic variants in CACNA1D and ATP1A1 in aldosterone-producing cell clusters (APCCs) suggests that these clusters are precursors of some aldosterone-producing adenomas. Yet, a number of questions remain unanswered. These include the genetic basis of about 40% of APAs without somatic variants in known genes. Do technical issues explain this finding, or are the unexplained APAs due to somatic copy number variation or rare variants in thus-far undiscovered genes? Similarly, the role of CTNNB1 (beta catenin) variants in APA pathogenesis is still unclear. The major question to be solved is the genetic basis of bilateral adrenal hyperplasia (BAH). Is BAH due to the bilateral occurrence of APCCs, to germline variants, or perhaps due to unknown serum factors? Lastly, the etiology of unsolved cases of apparently familial hyperaldosteronism remains to be discovered. It is expected that genetic studies over the next few years will lead to answers to at least some of the questions raised.
Familial hyperaldosteronism has been with us for 50 years, and somatic mutations responsible for aldosterone producing adenomas for five. This brief review covers advancement in each of these genetic bases of primary aldosteronism over these very different time scales, focusing on diagnosis, management and unanswered questions. Given the increasing clinical recognition of primary aldosteronism as public health issue, its heightened risk profile and the availability of targeted surgical/medical treatment, many of the current questions posed may be answered over the next five years.
Primary aldosteronism is the most common cause of secondary hypertension, incurring significant cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Our understanding of this disease has evolved substantially during the past decade. Recently, the molecular basis of primary aldosteronism has begun to be unraveled, with the discovery of mutations in potassium channel (KCNJ5), ATPases (ATP1A1, ATP2B3), and calcium channel (CACNA1D), and aberrant Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. The most recent data suggest that 95% of cases are sporadic, whereas 5% of cases are hereditary. Pathologic correlates of primary aldosteronism include adrenal cortical hyperplasia, adenoma, and carcinoma. Although the most common clinical presentation is bilateral adrenal cortical hyperplasia, this entity is usually treated medically. Therefore, in the setting of primary aldosteronism, surgical pathologists are most commonly exposed to adrenocortical adenomas and the odd occasional carcinoma. This review provides an update on the current knowledge of primary aldosteronism and discusses the clinicopathologic correlations of this important disease.
BACKGROUND: Somatic gene mutations that facilitate inappropriate intracellular calcium entrance have been identified in most aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs). Studies suggest that angiotensin II and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) augment aldosterone production from APAs. Little is known, however, regarding possible variations in response to hormonal stimuli between APAs with different aldosterone-driver mutations. OBJECTIVE: To analyze the transcript expression of type 1 angiotensin II receptors (AGTR1), ACTH receptors (MC2R), and melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein (MRAP) in APAs with known aldosterone-driver somatic mutations. METHODS: RNA was isolated from APAs with mutations in: KCNJ5 (n = 14), ATP1A1 (n = 14), CACNA1D (n = 14), and ATP2B3 (n = 5), and from normal adjacent adrenal tissue (n = 45). Transcript expression of MC2R, MRAP, AGTR1, aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2), 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1), and 11beta-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) were quantified using quantitative RT-PCR and normalized to beta-actin. RESULTS: Compared to adjacent normal adrenal tissue, APAs had higher transcript levels of CYP11B2 (2,216.4 [1,112.0, 2,813.5]-fold, p < 0.001), MC2R (2.88 [2.00, 4.52]-fold, p < 0.001), and AGTR1 (1.80 [1.02, 2.80]-fold, p < 0.001]), and lower transcript levels of MRAP, CYP17A1, and CYP11B1 (0.28-0.36, p < 0.001 for all). MC2R and CYP11B2 transcripts were lower in APAs with KCNJ5 vs. other mutations (p < 0.01 for both). MC2R expression correlated positively with that of AGTR1 in APAs harboring KCNJ5 and CACNA1D mutations, and with MRAP expression in APAs harboring ATPase mutations. CONCLUSIONS: While MC2R and AGTR1 are expressed in all APAs, differences were observed based on the underlying aldosterone-driver somatic mutations. In tandem, our findings suggest that APAs with ATPase-mutations are more responsive to ACTH than KCNJ5-mutated APAs.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Aldosterone regulation in the adrenal plays an important role in blood pressure. The commonest curable cause of hypertension is primary aldosteronism. Recently, mutations in novel genes have been identified to cause primary aldosteronism. Elucidating the mechanism of action of these genetic abnormalities may help understand the cause of primary aldosteronism and the physiological regulation of aldosterone in the zona glomerulosa. RECENT FINDINGS: KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CACNA1D, CTNNB1, and CACNA1H mutations are causal of primary aldosteronism. ARMC5 may cause bilateral lesions resulting in primary aldosteronism.LGR5, DACH1, and neuron-specific proteins are highly expressed in the zona glomerulosa and regulate aldosterone production. SUMMARY: Most mutations causing primary aldosteronism are in genes encoding cation channels or pumps, leading to increased calcium influx. Genotype-phenotype analyses identified two broad subtypes of aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs), zona fasciculata-like and zona glomerulosa-like, and the likelihood of under-diagnosed zona glomerulosa-like APAs because of small size. Zona fasciculata-like APAs are only associated with KCNJ5 mutations, whereas zona glomerulosa-like APAs are associated with mutations in ATPase pumps, CACNA1D, and CTNNB1. The frequency of APAs, and the multiplicity of causal mutations, suggests a pre-existing drive for these mutations. We speculate that these mutations are selected for protecting against tonic inhibition of aldosterone in human zona glomerulosa, which express genes inhibiting aldosterone production.
