Adenosine receptor A2b; Receptor for adenosine. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase.
Healthy kidneys maintain fluid and electrolyte homoeostasis by adjusting urine volume and composition according to physiological needs. The final urine composition is determined in the last tubular segment: the collecting duct. Water permeability in the collecting duct is regulated by arginine vasopressin (AVP). Secretion of AVP from the neurohypophysis is regulated by a complex signalling network that involves osmosensors, barosensors and volume sensors. AVP facilitates aquaporin (AQP)-mediated water reabsorption via activation of the vasopressin V2 receptor (AVPR2) in the collecting duct, thus enabling concentration of urine. In nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI), inability of the kidneys to respond to AVP results in functional AQP deficiency. Consequently, affected patients have constant diuresis, resulting in large volumes of dilute urine. Primary forms of NDI result from mutations in the genes that encode the key proteins AVPR2 and AQP2, whereas secondary forms are associated with biochemical abnormalities, obstructive uropathy or the use of certain medications, particularly lithium. Treatment of the disease is informed by identification of the underlying cause. Here we review the clinical aspects and diagnosis of NDI, the various aetiologies, current treatment options and potential future developments.
BACKGROUND: Vasopressors are administered to critically ill patients with vasodilatory shock not responsive to volume resuscitation, and less often in cardiogenic shock, and hypovolemic shock. OBJECTIVES: The objectives are to review safety and efficacy of vasopressors, pathophysiology, agents that decrease vasopressor dose, predictive biomarkers, beta1-blockers, and directions for research. METHODS: The quality of evidence was evaluated using Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE). RESULTS: Vasopressors bind adrenergic: alpha1, alpha2, beta1, beta2; vasopressin: AVPR1a, AVPR1B, AVPR2; angiotensin II: AG1, AG2; and dopamine: DA1, DA2 receptors inducing vasoconstriction. Vasopressor choice and dose vary because of patients and physician practice. Adverse effects include excessive vasoconstriction, organ ischemia, hyperglycemia, hyperlactatemia, tachycardia, and tachyarrhythmias. No randomized controlled trials of vasopressors showed a significant difference in 28-day mortality rate. Norepinephrine is the first-choice vasopressor in vasodilatory shock after adequate volume resuscitation. Some strategies that decrease norepinephrine dose (vasopressin, angiotensin II) have not decreased 28-day mortality while corticosteroids have decreased 28-day mortality significantly in some (two large trials) but not all trials. In norepinephrine-refractory patients, vasopressin or epinephrine may be added. A new vasopressor, angiotensin II, may be useful in profoundly hypotensive patients. Dobutamine may be added because vasopressors may decrease ventricular contractility. Dopamine is recommended only in bradycardic patients. There are potent vasopressors with limited evidence (e.g. methylene blue, metaraminol) and novel vasopressors in development (selepressin). CONCLUSIONS: Norepinephrine is first choice followed by vasopressin or epinephrine. Angiotensin II and dopamine have limited indications. In future, predictive biomarkers may guide vasopressor selection and novel vasopressors may emerge.
The advances in our understanding of the pathophysiology of defects in the antidiuretic hormone, the V2 receptor and the water channel, owing to mutations in the prepro-AVP-NPII, AVPR2 and AQP2 genes respectively, is providing insight into inherited diabetes insipidus as well as the more numerous sporadic cases. Further structure-function analyses of these mutated genes will increase our understanding of normal vasopressin-regulated water transport across the kidney epithelium at the molecular level.
Body fluid homeostasis is essential for normal life. In the maintenance of water balance, the most important factor and regulated process is the excretory function of the kidneys. The kidneys are capable to compensate not only the daily fluctuations of water intake but also the consequences of fluid loss (respiration, perspiration, sweating, hemorrhage). The final volume and osmolality of the excreted urine is set in the collecting duct via hormonal regulation. The hormone of water conservation is the vasopressin (AVP), and a large volume of urine is produced and excreted in the absence of AVP secretion or if AVP is ineffective in the kidneys. The aquaporin-2 water channel (AQP2) is expressed in the principal cells, and it plays an essential role in the reabsorption of water in the collecting ducts via type 2 vasopressin receptor (V2R)-mediated mechanism. If neural or hormonal regulation fails to operate the normal function of AVP-V2R-AQP2 system, it can result in various diseases such as diabetes insipidus (DI) or nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate diuresis (NSIAD). The DI is characterized by excessive production of hyposmotic urine ("insipidus" means tasteless) due to the inability of the kidneys to concentrate urine. In this chapter, we focus and discuss the pathophysiology of nephrogenic DI (NDI) and the potential therapeutic interventions in the light of the current experimental data.
Polyuria-polydipsia syndrome can be caused by central diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus or primary polydipsia. To avoid confusion with diabetes mellitus, the name 'central diabetes insipidus' was changed in 2022 to arginine vasopressin (AVP) deficiency and 'nephrogenic diabetes insipidus' was renamed as AVP resistance. To differentiate the three entities, various osmotic and non-osmotic copeptin-based stimulation tests have been introduced in the past decade. The hypertonic saline test plus plasma copeptin measurement emerged as the test with highest diagnostic accuracy, replacing the water deprivation test as the gold standard in differential diagnosis of the polyuria-polydipsia syndrome. The mainstay of treatment for AVP deficiency is AVP replacement with desmopressin, a synthetic analogue of AVP specific for AVP receptor 2 (AVPR2), which usually leads to rapid improvements in polyuria and polydipsia. The main adverse effect of desmopressin is dilutional hyponatraemia, which can be reduced by regularly performing the so-called desmopressin escape method. Evidence from the past few years suggests an additional oxytocin deficiency in patients with AVP deficiency. This potential deficiency should be further evaluated in future studies, including feasible provocation tests for clinical practice and interventional trials with oxytocin substitution.
Aberrant G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) expression is highly prevalent in cortisol-secreting primary bilateral macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (PBMAH) and unilateral adenomas. The aberrant expression of diverse GPCRs and their ligands play an important role in the over-function of various endocrine tumours. Examples include aberrant expression of MC2R, 5-HT4R, AVPR1A, LHCGR, and GnRHR in primary aldosteronism; GCGR, LHCGR, and 5-HT4R in phaeochromocytomas and paragangliomas; TRHR, GnRHR, GIPR, and GRP101 in pituitary somatotroph tumours; AVPR2, D2DR, and SSTR5 in pituitary corticotroph tumours; GLP1R, GIPR, and somatostatin receptors in medullary thyroid carcinoma; and SSTRs, GLP1R, and GIPR in other neuroendocrine tumours. The genetic mechanisms causing the ectopic expression of GIPR in cortisol-secreting PBMAHs and unilateral adenomas have been identified, but distinct mechanisms are implicated in other endocrine tumours. Development of functional imaging targeting aberrant GPCRs should be useful for identification and for specific therapies of this wide spectrum of tumours. The aim of this review is to show that the regulation of endocrine tumours by aberrant GPCR is not restricted to cortisol-secreting adrenal lesions, but also occurs in tumours of several other organs.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI), the kidney is unable to concentrate urine despite elevated concentrations of the antidiuretic hormone arginine-vasopressin. In congenital NDI, polyuria and polydipsia are present from birth and should be immediately recognized to avoid severe episodes of dehydration. Unfortunately, NDI is still often recognized late after a 'diagnostic odyssey' involving false leads and dangerous treatments.Once diagnosed, appropriate treatment can be started. Moreover, laboratory studies have identified promising new compounds, which may help achieve urinary concentration independent of vasopressin. RECENT FINDINGS: MAGED2 mutations caused X-linked polyhydramnios with prematurity and a severe but transient form of antenatal Bartter's syndrome.We distinguish two types of hereditary NDI: a 'pure' type with loss of water only and a complex type with loss of water and ions. Mutations in the AVPR2 or AQP2 genes, encoding the vasopressin V2 receptor and the water channel Aquaporin2, respectively, lead to a 'pure' NDI with loss of water but normal conservation of ions. Mutations in genes that encode membrane proteins involved in sodium chloride reabsorption in the thick ascending limb of Henle's loop lead to Bartter syndrome, a complex polyuric-polydipsic disorder often presenting with polyhydramnios. A new variant of this was recently identified: seven families were described with transient antenatal Bartter's syndrome, polyhydramnios and MAGED2 mutations.Multiple compounds have been identified experimentally that may stimulate urinary concentration independently of the vasopressin V2 receptor. These compounds may provide new treatments for patients with X-linked NDI. SUMMARY: A plea for early consideration of the diagnosis of NDI, confirmation by phenotypic and/or genetic testing and appropriate adjustment of treatment in affected patients.
V2 vasopressin receptor (V2R) is a member of the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family in which many disease-causing mutations have been identified and thus generated much interest. Loss-of-function V2R mutations cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) whereas gain-of-function mutations cause nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (NSIAD). The mechanisms underlying a V2R loss-of-function can be theoretically classified as either protein expression, localization (ER retention) or functional disorders. Functional analyses have revealed however that these mechanisms are likely to be complex. Strikingly, V2R mutations at the same site can result in opposite phenotypes, e.g., R137H and R137L/C cause NDI and NSIAD, respectively. These findings support the notion that the constitutive activation of GPCRs might be often associated with their instability and denaturation. Thus, functional analysis of disease-causing V2R mutations may not only reveal potential new treatment strategies using pharmacochaperones for NDI and inverse agonists for NSIAD, but also provide a greater understanding of the physiological functions of GPCRs and highlight the new paradigms, i.e., biased agonism and protean agonism.
In nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, the kidney is unable to concentrate urine despite normal or elevated concentrations of the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP). In congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI), the obvious clinical manifestations of the disease, that is polyuria and polydipsia, are present at birth and need to be immediately recognized to avoid severe episodes of dehydration. Most (>90%) congenital NDI patients have mutations in the AVPR2 gene, the Xq28 gene coding for the vasopressin V2 (antidiuretic) receptor. In <10% of the families studied, congenital NDI has an autosomal recessive inheritance and mutations of the aquaporin-2 gene (AQP2), ie, the vasopressin-sensitive water channel, have been identified. When studied in vitro, most AVPR2 mutations lead to receptors that are trapped intracellularly and are unable to reach the plasma membrane. A minority of the mutant receptors reach the cell surface but are unable to bind AVP or to trigger an intracellular cyclic adenosine-monophosphate (cAMP) signal. Similarly AQP2 mutant proteins are trapped intracellularly and cannot be expressed at the luminal membrane. The acquired form of NDI is much more common than the congenital form, is almost always less severe, and is associated with downregulation of AQP2. The advances described here are examples of "bedside physiology" and provide diagnostic tools for physicians caring for these patients.
Hip fractures represent a serious health risk in the elderly, causing substantial morbidity and mortality. There is now a considerable volume of literature suggesting that chronic hyponatremia increases the adjusted odds ratio (OR) for both falls and fractures in the elderly. Hyponatremia appears to contribute to falls and fractures by two mechanisms. First, it produces mild cognitive impairment, resulting in unsteady gait and falls; this is probably due to the loss of glutamate (a neurotransmitter involved in gait function) as an osmolyte during brain adaptation to chronic hyponatremia. Second, hyponatremia directly contributes to osteoporosis and increased bone fragility by inducing increased bone resorption to mobilize sodium stores in bone. Low extracellular sodium directly stimulates osteoclastogenesis and bone resorptive activity through decreased cellular uptake of ascorbic acid and the induction of oxidative stress; these effects occur in a sodium level-dependent manner. Hyponatremic patients have elevated circulating arginine-vasopressin (AVP) levels, and AVP acting on two receptors expressed in osteoblasts and osteoclasts, Avpr1alpha and Avpr2, can increase bone resorption and decrease osteoblastogenesis. Should we be screening for low serum sodium in patients with osteoporosis or assessing bone mineral density (BMD) in patients with hyponatremia? The answers to these questions have not been established. Definitive answers will require randomized controlled studies that allocate elderly individuals with mild hyponatremia to receive either active treatment or no treatment for hyponatremia, to determine whether correction of hyponatremia prevents gait disturbances and changes in BMD, thereby reducing the risk of fractures. Until such studies are conducted, physicians caring for elderly patients must be aware of the association between hyponatremia and bone disorders. As serum sodium is a readily available, simple, and affordable biochemical measurement, clinicians should look for hyponatremia in elderly patients, especially in those receiving medications that can cause hyponatremia. Furthermore, elderly patients with an unsteady gait and/or confusion should be evaluated for the presence of mild hyponatremia, and if present, treatment should be initiated. Finally, elderly patients presenting with an orthopedic injury should have serum sodium checked and hyponatremia corrected, if present.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a common monogenic disorder marked by numerous progressively enlarging kidney cysts. Mettl3, a methyltransferase that catalyzes the abundant N(6)-methyladenosine (m(6)A) RNA modification, is implicated in development, but its role in most diseases is unknown. Here, we show that Mettl3 and m(6)A levels are increased in mouse and human ADPKD samples and that kidney-specific transgenic Mettl3 expression produces tubular cysts. Conversely, Mettl3 deletion in three orthologous ADPKD mouse models slows cyst growth. Interestingly, methionine and S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) levels are also elevated in ADPKD models. Moreover, methionine and SAM induce Mettl3 expression and aggravate ex vivo cyst growth, whereas dietary methionine restriction attenuates mouse ADPKD. Finally, Mettl3 activates the cyst-promoting c-Myc and cAMP pathways through enhanced c-Myc and Avpr2 mRNA m(6)A modification and translation. Thus, Mettl3 promotes ADPKD and links methionine utilization to epitranscriptomic activation of proliferation and cyst growth.
Almost 90% of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is due to mutations in the arginine-vasopressin receptor 2 gene (AVPR2). We retrospectively examined all the published mutations/variants in AVPR2. We planned to perform a comprehensive review of all the AVPR2 mutations/variants and to test whether any amino acid change causing a missense mutation is significantly more or less common than others. We performed a Medline search and collected detailed information regarding all AVPR2 mutations and variants. We performed a frequency comparison between mutated and wild-type amino acids and codons. We predicted the mutation effect or reported it based on published in vitro studies. We also reported the ethnicity of each mutation/variant carrier. In summary, we identified 211 AVPR2 mutations which cause NDI in 326 families and 21 variants which do not cause NDI in 71 NDI families. We described 15 different types of mutations including missense, frameshift, inframe deletion, deletion, insertion, nonsense, duplication, splicing and combined mutations. The missense mutations represent the 55.83% of all the NDI published families. Arginine and tyrosine are significantly (P = 4.07E-08 and P = 3.27E-04, respectively) the AVPR2 most commonly mutated amino acids. Alanine and glutamate are significantly (P = 0.009 and P = 0.019, respectively) the least mutated AVPR2 amino acids. The spectrum of mutations varies from rare gene variants or polymorphisms not causing NDI to rare mutations causing NDI, among which arginine and tyrosine are the most common missense. The AVPR2 mutations are spread world-wide. Our study may serve as an updated review, comprehensive of all AVPR2 variants and specific gene locations. J. Cell. Physiol. 217: 605-617, 2008. (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus which can be inherited or acquired, is characterized by an inability to concentrate urine despite normal or elevated plasma concentrations of the antidiuretic hormone, arginine-vasopressine (AVP). Polyuria, with hyposthenuria and polydipsia are the cardinal clinical manifestations of the disease. Hypercalcemia, hypokaliemia, lithium administration and chronic renal failure are the principal causes of acquired nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. About 90 percent of patients with congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus are males with X-linked recessive nephrogenic diabetes insipidus who have mutations in the arginine-vasopressin receptor 2 (AVPR2) gene that codes for the vasopressin V2 receptor. The gene is located in chromosome region Xq28. In about 10 percent of the families studied, congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus has an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. In these cases, mutations have been identified in the aquaporin-2 gene (AQP2), which is located in chromosome region 12q13 and codes for the vasopressin-sensitive water channel. Other inherited disorders with mild, moderate or severe inability to concentrate urine include Bartter's syndrome and Cystinosis. Identification of the molecular defect underlying congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is of immediate clinical significance because early diagnosis and treatment of affected infants can avert the physical and mental retardation associated with episodes of dehydration.
INTRODUCTION: Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a common genetic disease in which renal enlargement and loss of function is caused by progressive expansion of tubular cysts. To reverse the detrimental effects of PKD gene mutation(s) and to slow cystic expansion, new drug therapies are required. AREAS COVERED: The underlying cell biology leading to identification of molecular targets for PKD is reviewed. Specific focus is on studies published at the early pre-clinical level. These include genetic and epigenetic modulators, and drugs to slow cystic expansion and disease progression. Discussion of specific drugs and clinical trials is not within the scope of this article. Literature research methods included EndNote and PubMed online searches using keyword combinations: polycystic kidneys disease, pre-clinical, molecular targets, signal transduction, genetic modulators, epigenetic, therapeutic, receptors, kinases. Where possible, the most recent citations concerning a given target are referenced. EXPERT OPINION: It is suggested that the most promising targets for future therapeutic development are those that target upstream signaling events at cell membranes, such as the vasopressin-2 receptor (AVPR2), EGFR/ErbB2, and the beta-1-integrin receptor, as well as the intracellular integrator kinase, c-Src.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI), which can be inherited or acquired, is characterized by an inability to concentrate urine despite normal or elevated plasma concentrations of the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP). Polyuria, with hyposthenuria, and polydipsia are the cardinal clinical manifestations of the disease. About 90% of patients with congenital NDI are males with X-linked recessive NDI (OMIM 304800) who have mutations in the arginine-vasopressin receptor 2 (AVPR2) gene that codes for the vasopressin V2 receptor. In about 10% of the families studied, congenital NDI has an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant mode of inheritance (OMIM 222000 and 125800). In these families, mutations have been identified in the aquaporin-2 gene (AQP2) (OMIM 107777), which codes for the vasopressin-sensitive water channel. Most missense AVPR2 mutations lead to receptors that are trapped intracellularly; a few mutant receptors reach the cell surface but are unable to bind AVP or to properly trigger an intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate signal. Similarly, most AQP2 mutant proteins are also misrouted. Prior knowledge of AVPR2 or AQP2 mutations in NDI families and perinatal mutation testing is of direct clinical value because early diagnosis and treatment can avert the physical and mental retardation associated with repeated episodes of dehydration.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is defined as an inability to concentrate urine due to a complete or partial alteration of the renal tubular response to arginine vasopressin hormone, resulting in excessive diluted urine excretion. Hereditary forms are caused by molecular defects in the genes encoding either of the two main renal effectors of the arginine vasopressin pathway: the AVPR2 gene, which encodes for the type 2 vasopressin receptor, or the AQP2 gene, which encodes for the water channel aquaporin-2. About 90% of cases of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus result from loss-of-function variants in the AVPR2 gene, which are inherited in a X-linked recessive manner. The remaining 10% of cases result from loss-of-function variants in the AQP2 gene, which can be inherited in either a recessive or a dominant manner. The main symptoms of the disease are polyuria, chronic dehydration and hypernatremia. These symptoms usually occur in the first year of life, although some patients present later. Diagnosis is based on abnormal response in urinary osmolality after water restriction and/or administration of exogenous vasopressin. Treatment involves ensuring adequate water intake on demand, possibly combined with thiazide diuretics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and a low-salt and protein diet. In this review, we provide an update on current understanding of the molecular basis of inherited nephrogenic insipidus diabetes.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, which can be inherited or acquired, is characterized by an inability to concentrate urine despite normal or elevated plasma concentrations of the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin. Polyuria, with hyposthenuria, and polydipsia are the cardinal clinical manifestations of the disease. About 90% of patients with congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus are males with the X-linked recessive form of the disease (OMIM 304800) who have mutations in the arginine vasopressin receptor 2 gene (AVPR2), which codes for the vasopressin V2 receptor. The gene is located in chromosomal region Xq28. In <10% of the families studied, congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus has an autosomal-recessive or autosomal-dominant (OMIM 222000 and 125800, respectively) mode of inheritance. Mutations have been identified in the aquaporin-2 gene (AQP2), which is located in chromosome region 12q13 and codes for the vasopressin-sensitive water channel. When studied in vitro, most AVPR2 mutations result in receptors that are trapped intracellularly and are unable to reach the plasma membrane. A few mutant receptors reach the cell surface but are unable to bind arginine vasopressin or to properly trigger an intracellular cyclic AMP signal. Similarly, aquaporin-2 mutant proteins are misrouted and cannot be expressed at the luminal membrane. Chemical or pharmacological chaperones have been found to reverse the intracellular retention of aquaporin-2 and arginine vasopressin receptor 2 mutant proteins. Because many hereditary diseases stem from the intracellular retention of otherwise functional proteins, this mechanism may offer a new therapeutic approach to the treatment of those diseases that result from errors in protein kinesis.
Classically, G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) promote signaling at the plasma membrane through activation of heterotrimeric Galphabetagamma proteins, followed by the recruitment of GPCR kinases and betaarrestin (betaarr) to initiate receptor desensitization and internalization. However, studies demonstrated that some GPCRs continue to signal from internalized compartments, with distinct cellular responses. Both betaarr and Gbetagamma contribute to such non-canonical endosomal G protein signaling, but their specific roles and contributions remain poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that the vasopressin V(2) receptor (V(2)R)-betaarr complex scaffolds Gbetagamma at the plasma membrane through a direct interaction with betaarr, enabling its transport to endosomes. Gbetagamma subsequently potentiates Galpha(s) endosomal translocation, presumably to regenerate an endosomal pool of heterotrimeric G(s). This work shines light on the mechanism underlying G protein subunits translocation from the plasma membrane to the endosomes and provides a basis for understanding the role of betaarr in mediating sustained G protein signaling.
Because of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) disorder on production or function we can observe dysnatremia. In the absence of production by posterior pituitary, central diabetes insipidus (DI) occurs with hypernatremia. There are hereditary autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or X- linked forms. When ADH is secreted but there is an alteration on his receptor AVPR2, it is a nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in acquired or hereditary form. We can make difference on AVP levels and/or on desmopressine response which is negative in nephrogenic forms. Hyponatremia occurs when there is an excess of ADH production: it is a euvolemic hypoosmolar hyponatremia. The most frequent etiology is SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate secretion of ADH), a diagnostic of exclusion which is made after eliminating corticotropin deficiency and hypothyroidism. In case of brain injury the differential diagnosis of cerebral salt wasting (CSW) syndrome has to be discussed, because its treatment is perfusion of isotonic saline whereas in SIADH, the treatment consists in administration of hypertonic saline if hyponatremia is acute and/or severe. If not, fluid restriction demeclocycline or vaptans (antagonists of V2 receptors) can be used in some European countries. Four types of SIADH exist; 10 % of cases represent not SIADH but SIAD (syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis) due to a constitutive activation of vasopressin receptor that produces water excess. c 2013 Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) provides an excellent model for the benefits and insights that can be gained from studying rare diseases. The discovery of underlying genes identified key molecules involved in urinary concentration, including the type 2 vasopressin receptor AVPR2 and the water channel AQP2, which constitute obvious pharmacologic targets. Subsequently developed drugs targeting AVPR2 not only provide potential benefit to some patients with NDI, but are now used for much more common clinical applications as diverse as nocturnal enuresis and heart failure. Yet, the story is still evolving: clinical observations and animal experiments continue to discover new ways to affect urinary concentration. These novel pathways can potentially be exploited for therapeutic gain. Here we review the (patho)physiology of water homoeostasis, the current status of clinical management, and potential new treatments.
