Vasopressin V1a receptor; Receptor for arginine vasopressin. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate a phosphatidyl- inositol-calcium second messenger system. Has been involved in social behaviors, including affiliation and attachment. Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Vasopressin/oxytocin receptor subfamily.
BACKGROUND: Vasopressors are administered to critically ill patients with vasodilatory shock not responsive to volume resuscitation, and less often in cardiogenic shock, and hypovolemic shock. OBJECTIVES: The objectives are to review safety and efficacy of vasopressors, pathophysiology, agents that decrease vasopressor dose, predictive biomarkers, beta1-blockers, and directions for research. METHODS: The quality of evidence was evaluated using Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE). RESULTS: Vasopressors bind adrenergic: alpha1, alpha2, beta1, beta2; vasopressin: AVPR1a, AVPR1B, AVPR2; angiotensin II: AG1, AG2; and dopamine: DA1, DA2 receptors inducing vasoconstriction. Vasopressor choice and dose vary because of patients and physician practice. Adverse effects include excessive vasoconstriction, organ ischemia, hyperglycemia, hyperlactatemia, tachycardia, and tachyarrhythmias. No randomized controlled trials of vasopressors showed a significant difference in 28-day mortality rate. Norepinephrine is the first-choice vasopressor in vasodilatory shock after adequate volume resuscitation. Some strategies that decrease norepinephrine dose (vasopressin, angiotensin II) have not decreased 28-day mortality while corticosteroids have decreased 28-day mortality significantly in some (two large trials) but not all trials. In norepinephrine-refractory patients, vasopressin or epinephrine may be added. A new vasopressor, angiotensin II, may be useful in profoundly hypotensive patients. Dobutamine may be added because vasopressors may decrease ventricular contractility. Dopamine is recommended only in bradycardic patients. There are potent vasopressors with limited evidence (e.g. methylene blue, metaraminol) and novel vasopressors in development (selepressin). CONCLUSIONS: Norepinephrine is first choice followed by vasopressin or epinephrine. Angiotensin II and dopamine have limited indications. In future, predictive biomarkers may guide vasopressor selection and novel vasopressors may emerge.
Aberrant G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) expression is highly prevalent in cortisol-secreting primary bilateral macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (PBMAH) and unilateral adenomas. The aberrant expression of diverse GPCRs and their ligands play an important role in the over-function of various endocrine tumours. Examples include aberrant expression of MC2R, 5-HT4R, AVPR1A, LHCGR, and GnRHR in primary aldosteronism; GCGR, LHCGR, and 5-HT4R in phaeochromocytomas and paragangliomas; TRHR, GnRHR, GIPR, and GRP101 in pituitary somatotroph tumours; AVPR2, D2DR, and SSTR5 in pituitary corticotroph tumours; GLP1R, GIPR, and somatostatin receptors in medullary thyroid carcinoma; and SSTRs, GLP1R, and GIPR in other neuroendocrine tumours. The genetic mechanisms causing the ectopic expression of GIPR in cortisol-secreting PBMAHs and unilateral adenomas have been identified, but distinct mechanisms are implicated in other endocrine tumours. Development of functional imaging targeting aberrant GPCRs should be useful for identification and for specific therapies of this wide spectrum of tumours. The aim of this review is to show that the regulation of endocrine tumours by aberrant GPCR is not restricted to cortisol-secreting adrenal lesions, but also occurs in tumours of several other organs.
Conduct disorder (CD) is a moderately heritable psychiatric disorder of childhood and adolescence characterized by aggression toward people and animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft, and serious violation of rules. Genome-wide scans using linkage and association methods have identified a number of suggestive genomic regions that are pending replication. A small number of candidate genes (e.g., GABRA2, MAOA, SLC6A4, AVPR1A) are associated with CD related phenotypes across independent studies; however, failures to replicate also exist. Studies of gene-environment interplay show that CD genetic predispositions also contribute to selection into higher-risk environments, and that environmental factors can alter the importance of CD genetic factors and differentially methylate CD candidate genes. The field's understanding of CD etiology will benefit from larger, adequately powered studies in gene identification efforts; the incorporation of polygenic approaches in gene-environment interplay studies; attention to the mechanisms of risk from genes to brain to behavior; and the use of genetically informative data to test quasi-causal hypotheses about purported risk factors.
BACKGROUND: Pain is the quintessential symptom for individuals suffering from sickle cell disease (SCD). Although the degree of suffering and the cost of treatment are staggering, SCD continues to be grossly understudied, including a lack of data for pain-related genes and prevalence of polymorphisms in this population. This lack of data adds to the inadequacy of pain therapy in this population. Pain genetics investigators have recently examined allele frequencies of single-nucleotide polymorphisms from candidate genes in people who have SCD. One of the genes identified was the arginine vasopressin receptor 1A gene (AVPR1A) and its associated single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs10877969. Progress in explaining pain-related polymorphisms associated with SCD can be facilitated by understanding the literature. Aim/Design: The purpose of this literature review was to describe mechanisms of the polymorphic gene AVPR1A and the phenotypic variations associated with its SNPs relative to health conditions and pain. METHODS: Published studies were included if the research addressed AVPR1A and was a full article in a peer-reviewed journal, in the English language, a human or animal study, and published 2009 to present. Abstracts were included if they were in English and provided information not found in a full article. RESULTS: The results of this review revealed that AVPR1A is associated with behavioral phenotypes, which include pair bonding, autism spectrum disorder, musical aptitude, infidelity, altruism, monogamy, mating, substance abuse, and alcohol preference. In addition, there were associations with pain, stress pain by sex, and sickle cell pain. CONCLUSION: Summary of this literature could provide insights into future pain research of this SNP in people with SCD.
It is known that stress influences immune cell function. The underlying molecular mechanisms are unclear. We recently reported that many chemokine receptors (CRs) heteromerize with alpha(1)-adrenoceptors (alpha(1)-ARs) through which CRs are regulated. Here, we show that arginine vasopressin receptor 1A (AVPR1A) heteromerizes with all human CRs, except chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor (CXCR)1, in recombinant systems and that such heteromers are detectable in THP-1 cells and human monocytes. We demonstrate that ligand-free AVPR1A differentially regulates the efficacy of CR partners to mediate chemotaxis and that AVPR1A ligands disrupt AVPR1A:CR heteromers, which enhances chemokine (C-C motif) receptor (CCR)1-mediated chemotaxis and inhibits CCR2-, CCR8-, and CXCR4-mediated chemotaxis. Using bioluminescence resonance energy transfer to monitor G protein activation and CRISPR/Cas9 gene-edited THP-1 cells lacking AVPR1A or alpha(1B)-AR, we show that CRs that share the propensity to heteromerize with alpha(1B/D)-ARs and AVPR1A exist and function within interdependent hetero-oligomeric complexes through which the efficacy of CRs to mediate chemotaxis is controlled. Our findings suggest that hetero-oligomers composed of CRs, alpha(1B/D)-ARs, and AVPR1A may enable stress hormones to regulate immune cell trafficking.
The brain vasopressin system mediates various social behaviors as has been studied mostly in males. Only recently, advances in social neuroscience revealed that central vasopressin signaling via its V1a and V1b receptors also facilitates female social behavior, including maternal behavior. In this review, we show how maternal care, maternal motivation and maternal aggression of lactating rat mothers are modulated in a V1 receptor subtype- and brain region-specific manner. Measuring local release pattern of vasopressin via intracerebral microdialysis in the behaving rat mother as well as using pharmacological approaches to activate or block vasopressin receptors with subsequent behavioral observation provide detailed insight into the functional role of the vasopressin system in maternal behavior. In this context, the complementary rat animal model of high (HAB) and low anxiety-related behavior (LAB) is particularly helpful due to the genetically determined high activity of the vasopressin gene in HAB rats, which also underlies their high levels of maternal behavior. Furthermore, first studies in humans indicate that the vasopressin system in general and the V1a receptor in more particular might mediate mothering.
The Syndrome of Inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH) presents with excess ADH release caused by a range of conditions; including pneumonia, brain tumors, certain lung cancers, and diseases of the hypothalamus. It presents with significant reduction in both sodium and chloride concentrations in the blood. However, reports examining the acid base status indicate a normal serum bicarbonate concentration and systemic acid base homeostasis. The mechanisms for the absence of abnormalities in acid base homeostasis remain speculative. This mini review is highlighting the recent advances in renal molecular physiology to provide answers for the maintenance of acid base status and serum bicarbonate in a physiological range.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by impaired social interactions, communication deficits, and repetitive behavior. Although the mechanisms underlying its etiology and manifestations are poorly understood, several lines of evidence from rodent and human studies suggest involvement of the evolutionarily highly-conserved oxytocin (OXT) and arginine-vasopressin (AVP), as these neuropeptides modulate various aspects of mammalian social behavior. As far as we know, there is no comprehensive review of the roles of the OXT and AVP systems in the development of ASD from the genetic aspect. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge regarding associations between ASD and single-nucleotide variants of the human OXT-AVP pathway genes OXT, AVP, AVP receptor 1a (AVPR1a), OXT receptor (OXTR), the oxytocinase/vasopressinase (LNPEP), and ADP-ribosyl cyclase (CD38).
There is an agreement about joint genetic and environmental background of musical reception and performance. Musical abilities tend to cluster in families. The studies done on a random population, twins and families of gifted musicians provided a strong support for genetic contribution. Modern biomolecular techniques exploring linkage analysis, variation of gene copy number, scanning for whole-genome expression helped to identify genes, or chromosome regions associated with musical aptitude. Some studies were focused on rare ability to recognize tone without reference that is known as a perfect pitch where a far ethnic differentiation was established. On the other hand, gene deletion leading to dysfunction in amusical individuals also indicated appropriate loci "by negation." The strongest support for an association of genes with musicality was provided for genes: AVPR1 (12q14.2), SLC6A4 (17q11.2), GALM (2p22), PCDH7 (4p15.1), GATA2 (3q21.3), and few others as well for 4q22, 4q23, and 8q13-21 chromosome bands.
This review examines evidence for the involvement of two nonapeptides, oxytocin (OT) and arginine vasopressin (AVP), in modulating the social and emotional brain in humans. We discuss research in nonclinical subjects before examining their role in various psychopathologies, mainly autism. We look at the effects of the intranasal administration of OT, and the measurement of plasma OT that appears to index brain oxytocinergic tone. Preliminary evidence for a link between intranasal OT administration and brain mirror neurons is examined. The role of AVP and its receptor AVPR1a is described, with effects that often oppose and complement those of OT in determining social and emotional behavior. The few studies involving the intranasal administration of AVP are discussed in some detail, including a first study of AVP and stress and a study of AVP and empathy. Paradigms borrowed from behavioral economics combined with a neurogenetic approach are described. These studies suggest an involvement of OT and AVP in other-regarding behaviors such as human altruism. Accumulating evidence for a role for OT, AVP, and more recently CD38 in psychopathology is described, mainly in disorders characterized by social and emotional deficits, such as autism. We end the chapter with suggestions for future research directions.
Both medical and evolutionary genetics increasingly emphasize the importance of subtle, quantitative measures of phenotype. One such 'endophenotype,' the distribution of vasopressin 1a receptor (V1aR), is a recent focus for studies of social behavior. In animal studies, the neural distribution of V1aR has been linked to both social attachment and patterns of sexual fidelity. At a genetic level, a microsatellite in the cis-regulatory region of the avpr1a locus has been linked to variation in both brain and behavior. Both sets of data become more complex as the mechanistic and evolutionary details are examined more fully. I briefly summarize recent work from animal and human studies of avpr1a and highlight parallels between comparative and clinical approaches.
OBJECTIVES: Speech sound disorder (SSD) is one of the most common communication disorders, with a prevalence rate of 16% at 3 years of age, and an estimated 3.8% of children still presenting speech difficulties at 6 years of age. Several studies have identified promising associations between communication disorders and genes in brain and neuronal pathways; however, there have been few studies focusing on SSD and its associated endophenotypes. On the basis of the hypothesis that neuronal genes may influence endophenotypes common to communication disorders, we focused on three genes related to brain and central nervous system functioning: the dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) gene, the arginine-vasopressin receptor 1a (AVPR1A) gene, and the microcephaly-associated protein gene (ASPM). METHODS: We examined the association of these genes with key endophenotypes of SSD - phonological memory measured through multisyllabic and nonword repetition, vocabulary measured using the Expressive One Word Picture Vocabulary Test and Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, and reading decoding measured using the Woodcock Reading Mastery Tests Revised - as well as with the clinical phenotype of SSD. We genotyped tag single nucleotide polymorphisms in these genes and examined 498 individuals from 180 families. RESULTS: These data show that several single nucleotide polymorphisms in all three genes were associated with phonological memory, vocabulary, and reading decoding, with P less than 0.05. Notably, associations in AVPR1A (rs11832266) were significant after multiple testing correction. Gene-level tests showed that DRD2 was associated with vocabulary, ASPM with vocabulary and reading decoding, and AVPR1A with all three endophenotypes. CONCLUSION: Endophenotypes common to SSD, language impairment, and reading disability are all associated with these neuronal pathway genes.
BACKGROUND: The liability to addiction has been shown to be highly genetically correlated across drug classes, suggesting nondrug-specific mechanisms. METHODS: In 757 subjects, we performed association analysis between 1536 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 106 candidate genes and a drug use disorder diagnosis (DUD). RESULTS: Associations (p </= .0008) were detected with three SNPs in the arginine vasopressin 1A receptor gene, AVPR1A, with a gene-wise p value of 3 x 10(-5). Bioinformatic evidence points to a role for rs11174811 (microRNA binding site disruption) in AVPR1A function. Based on literature implicating AVPR1A in social bonding, we tested spousal satisfaction as a mediator of the association of rs11174811 with the DUD. Spousal satisfaction was significantly associated with DUD in males (p < .0001). The functional AVPR1A SNP, rs11174811, was associated with spousal satisfaction in males (p = .007). Spousal satisfaction was a significant mediator of the relationship between rs11174811 and DUD. We also present replication of the association in males between rs11174811 and substance use in one clinically ascertained (n = 1399) and one epidemiologic sample (n = 2231). The direction of the association is consistent across the clinically-ascertained samples but reversed in the epidemiologic sample. Lastly, we found a significant impact of rs11174811 genotype on AVPR1A expression in a postmortem brain sample. CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study call for expansion of research into the role of the arginine vasopressin and other neuropeptide system variation in DUD liability.
Vasopressin is a stress hormone. However, vasopressin levels are inappropriately low in septic shock. Vasopressin stimulates AVPR1a, AVPR1b, AVPR2 and purinergic receptors. Vasopressin increases blood pressure by occupying AVPR1a receptors on vascular smooth muscle. An increase in ventricular afterload due to vasopressor administration limits ventricular systolic ejection, an effect that becomes increasingly important as systolic contractility is decreased. Stimulation of AVPR1a receptors may also decrease edemagenesis. Stimulation of AVPR1b by vasopressin releases ACTH and cortisol. AVPR2 stimulation increases retention of water by increasing cyclic AMP. Yet, vasopressin infusion may increase urine output, creatinine clearance and improve renal function in septic shock. Vasopressin has many effects on immune function such as altering cytokines, neuroimmunity, prostaglandins, humoral immunity and immune cells. For example, vasopressin decreases sepsis-induced pulmonary inflammation, could have renal anti-inflammatory effects and may decrease prostaglandin levels in a dose-dependent manner. Vasopressin may also modulate responses to stress by expression and release from immune cells. Interestingly, there are vasopressin receptors on immune cells. Many small clinical studies of vasopressin infusion in septic shock have shown that vasopressin infusion increases blood pressure, decreases requirements for norepinephrine and improves renal function. However, vasopressin could decrease coronary, cerebral and mesenteric perfusion. A multicenter trial of vasopressin versus norepinephrine in septic shock found no overall difference in mortality. Vasopressin may decrease mortality in patients with less severe septic shock. Vasopressin plus corticosteroid treatment may decrease mortality compared to corticosteroids plus norepinephrine. Potential mechanisms are that vasopressin plus corticosteroids beneficially alter immunity in septic shock.
Converging evidence from both human and animal studies has highlighted the pervasive role of two neuropeptides, oxytocin (OXT) and arginine vasopressin (AVP), in mammalian social behaviours. Recent molecular genetic studies of the human arginine vasopressin 1a (AVPR1a) and oxytocin (OXTR) receptors have strengthened the evidence regarding the role of these two neuropeptides in a range of normal and pathological behaviours. Significant association between both AVPR1a repeat regions and OXTR single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with risk for autism has been provisionally shown which was mediated by socialization skills in our study. AVPR1a has also been linked to eating behaviour in both clinical and non-clinical groups, perhaps reflecting the social and ritualistic side of eating behaviour. Evidence also suggests that repeat variations in AVPR1a are associated with two other social domains in Homo sapiens: music and altruism. AVPR1a was associated with dance and musical cognition which we theorize as reflecting the ancient role of this hormone in social interactions executed by vocalization, ritual movement and dyadic (mother-offspring) and group communication. Finally, we have shown that individual differences in allocation of funds in the dictator game, a laboratory game of pure altruism, is predicted by length of the AVPR1a RS3 promoter-region repeat echoing the mechanism of this hormone's action in the vole model of affiliative behaviours and facilitation of positive group interactions. While still in its infancy, the current outlook for molecular genetic investigations of AVP-OXT continues to be fascinating. Future studies should profitably focus on pharmacogenomic and genomic imaging strategies facilitated by the ease and efficacy of manipulating AVP-OXT neurotransmission by intranasal administration. Importantly, physiological measures, behavioural paradigms and brain activation can be informed by considering between-group and also within-group individual differences defined by common polymorphisms. Ultimately, investigators should strive to develop a cohesive model explaining how genomic variations are translated into individual and group differences in higher-order social behaviours.
Arginine vasopressin (AVP) signaling is altered in preeclampsia and physiologic stress. AVP is implicated in fluid homeostasis and cardiovascular (CV) function, which is disrupted in some progeny from preeclamptic pregnancies. However, whether altered fetal AVP signaling occurs in preeclampsia is unknown. Here, we measured CV-related transcripts (e.g., AVP receptors) in cord blood via quantitative PCR. Chronic hypertension decreased AVPR1b, AVPR2, OXTR, LNPEP, and CUL5. AVPR1a, AVPR1b, and AVPR2 were decreased while OXTR was increased in preeclamptic cord blood. In sum, we found prenatal exposure to hypertension in pregnancy alters fetal AVP signaling and may thereby prime offspring CV disease risk.
Diagnosing low-grade and high-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (LG-ESS and HG-ESS) is a challenge. This study aimed to identify biomarkers. 22 ESS cases were analyzed using Illumina microarrays. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified via Limma. DEGs were analyzed with String and Cytoscape. Core genes were enriched with GO and KEGG, their pan-cancer implications and immune aspects were studied. 413 DEGs were found by exome sequencing, 2174 by GSE85383 microarray. 36 common genes were identified by Venn analysis, and 10 core genes including RBFOX1, PCDH7, FAT1 were selected. Core gene GO enrichment included cell adhesion, T cell proliferation, and KEGG focused on related pathways. Expression was evaluated across 34 cancers, identifying immune DEGs IGF1 and AVPR1A. Identifying the DEGs not only helps improve our understanding of LG-ESS, HG-ESS but also promises to be potential biomarkers for differential diagnosis between LG-ESS and HG-ESS and new therapeutic targets.
To date, much of the work in rodents implicating vasopressin (Avp) in the regulation of social behavior has focused on its action via the Avp 1a receptor (Avpr1a). However, there is mounting evidence that the Avp 1b receptor (Avpr1b) also plays a significant role in Avp's modulation of social behavior. The Avpr1b is heavily expressed on the anterior pituitary cortiocotrophs where it acts as an important modulator of the endocrine stress response. In the brain, the Avpr1b is prominent in the CA2 region of the hippocampus, but can also be found in areas such as the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and the olfactory bulb. Studies that have employed genetic knockouts or pharmacological manipulation of the Avpr1b point to the importance of central Avpr1b in the modulation of social behavior. However, there continues to be a knowledge gap in our understanding of where in the brain this is occurring, as well as how and if the central actions of Avp acting via the Avpr1b interact with the stress axis. In this review we focus on the genetic and pharmacological studies that have implicated the Avpr1b in the neural regulation of social behaviors, including social forms of aggressive behavior, social memory, and social motivation. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Oxytocin, Vasopressin, and Social Behavior.
Amateur choral singing is a common pastime and worthy of study, possibly conferring benefits to health and social behaviour. Participants might be expected to possess musical ability and share some behavioural characteristics. Polymorphisms in genes concerned with serotonergic neurotransmission are associated with both behaviour and musical aptitude. Those investigated previously include the variable number tandem repeats RS1, RS3 and AVR in the AVPR1A (arginine vasopressin receptor 1a) gene and STin2 in the SLC6A4 (solute carrier family 6 [neurotransmitter transporter, serotonin], member 4) gene, as well as the SLC6A4 promoter region polymorphism, 5-HTTLPR. We conducted a genetic association study on 523 participants to establish whether alleles at these polymorphisms occur more commonly in choral singers than in those not regularly participating in organised musical activity (non-musicians). We also analysed tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for AVPR1A and SLC6A4 to determine whether other variants in these genes were associated with singer/non-musician status. At the STin2 polymorphism, overall association with singer/non-musician status was evident at P = 0.006. The 9-repeat (P = 0.04) and 12-repeat (P = 0.04) alleles were more common in singers and the 10-repeat allele less so (P = 0.009). Odds ratios were 0.73 (95% CI 0.57-0.94) for the 10-repeat allele and 2.47 (95% CI 0.88-6.94) for the rarer 9-repeat allele. No overall association was detected at P<0.05 between any other polymorphism and singer/non-musician status. Our null findings with respect to RS3, RS1 and AVR, polymorphisms associated with musical ability by other authors, suggest that choir membership may depend partly on factors other than musical ability. In a related musical project involving one participating choir, a new 40-part unaccompanied choral work, "Allele", was composed and broadcast on national radio. In the piece, each singer's part incorporated their personal RS3 genotype.
