Apolipoprotein E; APOE is an apolipoprotein, a protein associating with lipid particles, that mainly functions in lipoprotein-mediated lipid transport between organs via the plasma and interstitial fluids. APOE is a core component of plasma lipoproteins and is involved in their production, conversion and clearance. Apoliproteins are amphipathic molecules that interact both with lipids of the lipoprotein particle core and the aqueous environment of the plasma. As such, APOE associates with chylomicrons, chylomicron remnants, very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) and intermediate density  [...] 
Butyrylcholinesterase (EC 3.1.1.8; BChE) is a sister enzyme of acetylcholinesterase. Though BChE lacks obvious physiological functions, it is of toxicological and pharmacological importance in detoxifying or catabolising ester-containing drugs. Furthermore, individuals deficient in BChE appear asymptomatic, apart from a heightened sensitivity to the muscle relaxants suxamethonium and mivacurium, two BChE substrates used as myorelaxant. Although many acquired conditions may affect BChE activity, BChE deficiency is mainly due to mutations in the BCHE gene (OMIM 177400). Currently, more than 70 natural mutations have been documented in human BCHE. They have an adverse effect on BChE activity by affecting the catalytic functioning or the protein expression. However, the atypical variant (rs1799807) is the most frequently involved in prolonged apnea.
BACKGROUND: Globally, gastric cancer (GC) is a category of prevalent malignant tumors. Its high occurrence and fatality rates represent a severe threat to public health. According to recent research, lipid metabolism (LM) reprogramming impacts immune cells' ordinary function and is critical for the onset and development of cancer. Consequently, the article conducted a sophisticated bioinformatics analysis to explore the potential connection between LM and GC. METHODS: We first undertook a differential analysis of the TCGA queue to recognize lipid metabolism-related genes (LRGs) that are differentially expressed. Subsequently, we utilized the LASSO and Cox regression analyses to create a predictive signature and validated it with the GSE15459 cohort. Furthermore, we examined somatic mutations, immune checkpoints, tumor immune dysfunction and exclusion (TIDE), and drug sensitivity analyses to forecast the signature's immunotherapy responses. RESULTS: Kaplan-Meier (K-M) curves exhibited considerably longer OS and PFS (p<0.001) of the low-risk (LR) group. PCA analysis and ROC curves evaluated the model's predictive efficacy. Additionally, GSEA analysis demonstrated that a multitude of carcinogenic and matrix-related pathways were much in the high-risk (HR) group. We then developed a nomogram to enhance its clinical practicality, and we quantitatively analyzed tumor-infiltrating immune cells (TIICs) using the CIBERSORT and ssGSEA algorithms. The low-risk group has a lower likelihood of immune escape and more effective in chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Eventually, we selected BCHE as a potential biomarker for further research and validated its expression. Next, we conducted a series of cell experiments (including CCK-8 assay, Colony formation assay, wound healing assay and Transwell assays) to prove the impact of BCHE on gastric cancer biological behavior. DISCUSSION: Our research illustrated the possible consequences of lipid metabolism in GC, and we identified BCHE as a potential therapeutic target for GC. The LRG-based signature could independently forecast the outcome of GC patients and guide personalized therapy.
Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), an enzyme primarily found in the liver, plasma, and brain, has been recognized for its role in the hydrolysis of choline esters. Recent studies have shed light on its involvement in lipid metabolism, revealing its potential as a crucial player in maintaining lipid homeostasis. However, the interactions between external factors and BChE activity in lipid metabolic pathways remain a complex subject of study. This review summarizes the current knowledge regarding BChE activity and lipid metabolism and seeks to clarify the nature of this relationship as causal or consequential. Evidence supports the role of BChE in energy homeostasis disruption, such as obesity and related metabolic disorders, where it exhibits lipolytic activity and mediates fatty acid use and storage. The unexpected functions of BChE in lipoprotein synthesis and the impact of polymorphic variants of the BCHE gene suggest a central role in lipid metabolism; however, further investigation is needed to confirm and describe these functions, especially considering the metabolic context. Furthermore, exploring therapeutic interventions in lipid metabolism disorders contributes to elucidating their implications on BChE activity, but attention to the metabolic status and genotypes as possible factors in this interaction is needed. In summary, further research in this field holds promise for improving our understanding of the complex interplay between BChE and lipid metabolism, and its potential clinical applications. However, the available data corroborate the dual role of BChE activity, both as a critical responsive element to metabolic challenges and as a predisposition factor to metabolic diseases.
The plasma enzyme butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) is of clinical interest because of the occurrence of genetic variants with decreased ability to hydrolyse, and therefore inactivate, muscle-relaxant drugs such as suxamethonium. Analysis of BChE involves the determination of both enzyme activity and biochemical phenotypes which are used to determine the risk of so-called 'scoline apnoea'. Problems in analysis arise from both the lack of a universally accepted reference method and the variety of substrates and conditions employed for the determination of activity and phenotypes. Phenotype is determined by the use of specific enzyme inhibitors that produce phenotype-specific patterns of 'inhibitor numbers'. DNA analysis is now possible, and true genotypes can be obtained. The nomenclature in use for cholinesterase studies can cause problems in interpretation and reporting as there is poor understanding of the difference between phenotype and genotype, and terms are often, inappropriately, transposed. Techniques for both biochemical and molecular analysis of the enzyme are discussed.
Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) is a nonspecific cholinesterase enzyme that hydrolyzes choline-based esters. BChE plays a critical role in maintaining normal cholinergic function like acetylcholinesterase (AChE) through hydrolyzing acetylcholine (ACh). Selective BChE inhibition has been regarded as a viable therapeutic approach in Alzheimer's disease. As of now, a limited number of selective BChE inhibitors are available. To identify BChE inhibitors rapidly and efficiently, we have screened 8998 compounds from several annotated libraries against an enzyme-based BChE inhibition assay in a quantitative high-throughput screening (qHTS) format. From the primary screening, we identified a group of 125 compounds that were further confirmed to inhibit BChE activity, including previously reported BChE inhibitors (e.g., bambuterol and rivastigmine) and potential novel BChE inhibitors (e.g., pancuronium bromide and NNC 756), representing diverse structural classes. These BChE inhibitors were also tested for their selectivity by comparing their IC(50) values in BChE and AChE inhibition assays. The binding modes of these compounds were further studied using molecular docking analyses to identify the differences between the interactions of these BChE inhibitors within the active sites of AChE and BChE. Our qHTS approach allowed us to establish a robust and reliable process to screen large compound collections for potential BChE inhibitors.
: Late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) is clinically characterized by a progressive decline of memory and other cognitive functions leading to the loss of the ability to perform everyday activities. Only a few drugs have been approved to treat AD dementia over the past century since the first AD patient was diagnosed. Drugs increasing the availability of neurotransmitters at synapses in the brain are used clinically in the treatment of AD dementia, and cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs) are the mainstay of the therapy. A detrimental effect on cognitive function has been reported in patients with pharmacological inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) by ChEIs and reduced butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) activity due to the single nucleotide polymorphisms. The BChE K-variant (rs1803274), the most common genetic variant of the BCHE gene, was thought to reduce enzyme activity reflecting the lower clinical response to rivastigmine in AD patients. During ChEIs therapy, patients carrying reduced-activity BChE do not present such improved attention like patients with the wild-type enzyme. On the other hand, alterations in the BCHE gene causing enzyme activity reduction may delay AD onset in patients at risk by preserving the level of cortical acetylcholine (ACh). Based on our previous results, we conclude that SNPs localized outside of the coding sequence, in 5'UTR (rs1126680) and/or intron 2 (rs55781031) of the BCHE gene, but not solely K-variant alteration (p.A539T) itself, are responsible for reduced enzyme activity. Therefore, we suspect that not BChE-K itself, but these coexisting SNPs (rs1126680 and rs55781031), could be associated with deleterious changes in cognitive decline in patients treated with ChEIs. Based on the results, we suggest that SNPs (rs1126680) and/or (rs55781031) genotyping should be performed to identify subjects at risk for lowered efficacy ChEIs therapy, and such patients should be treated with a lower rivastigmine dosage. Finally, our sequence analysis of the N-terminal end of N-BChE revealed evolutionarily conserved amino acid residues that can be involved in disulfide bond formation and anchoring of N-BChE in the cell membrane.
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) exist in a variety of oligomeric forms, each with defined cellular and subcellular distributions. Although crystal structures of AChE and BChE have been available for many years, structures of the physiologically relevant ChE tetramer were only recently solved by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) single-particle analysis. Here, we briefly review how these structures contribute to our understanding of cholinesterase oligomerization, highlighting the advantages of using cryo-EM to resolve structures of protein assemblies that cannot be expressed recombinantly. We argue that the next frontier in cholinesterase structural biology is to image membrane-anchored ChE oligomers directly in their native environment-the cell.
BACKGROUND: In developed countries, the most common gynecologic malignancy is endometrial carcinoma (EC), making the identification of EC biomarkers extremely essential. As a natural enzyme, butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE) is found in hepatocytes and plasma. There is a strong correlation between BCHE gene mutations and cancers and other diseases. The aim of this study was to analyze the role of BCHE in patients with EC. METHODS: A variety of analyses were conducted on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data, including differential expression analysis, enrichment analysis, immunity, clinicopathology, and survival analysis. The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database was used to validate outcomes. Using R tools, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and Gene Ontology (GO) analyses revealed the potential mechanisms of BCHE in EC. Sangerbox tools were used to delve into the relations between BCHE expression and tumor microenvironment, including microsatellite instability (MSI), tumor neoantigen count (TNC), and tumor mutation burden (TMB). BCHE's genetic alteration analysis was conducted by cBioPortal. In addition, the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) was used to validate the outcomes by immunohistochemistry, and an analysis of the protein-protein interaction network (PPI) was performed with the help of the STRING database. RESULTS: Based on our results, BCHE was a significant independent prognostic factor for patients with EC. The prognosis with EC was affected by age, stage, grade, histological type, and BCHE. GSEA showed that BCHE was closely related to pathways regulating immune response, including transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathways and cancer immunotherapy through PD1 blockade pathways. The immune analysis revealed that CD4+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) were negatively correlated with BCHE expression and the immune checkpoint molecules CD28, ADORA2A, BTNL2, and TNFRSF18 were all significantly related to BCHE. BCHE expression was also associated with TMB by genetic alteration analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Identifying BCHE as a biomarker for EC might help predict its prognosis and could have important implications for immunotherapy.
Structural information of butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) and its variants associated with several diseases are discussed here. Pure human BChE has been proved safe and effective in treating organophosphorus (OPs) poisoning and has completed Phase 1 and 2 pharmacokinetic (PK) and safety studies. The introduction of specific mutations into native BChE to endow it a self-reactivating property has gained much progress in producing effective OPs hydrolases. The hydrolysis ability of native BChE on cocaine has been confirmed but was blocked to clinical application due to poor PK properties. Several BChE mutants with elevated cocaine hydrolysis activity were published, some of which have shown safety and efficiency in treating cocaine addiction of human. The increased level of BChE in progressed Alzheimer's disease patients made it a promising target to elevate acetylcholine level and attenuate cognitive status. A variety of selective BChE inhibitors with high inhibitory activity published in recent years are reviewed here. BChE could influence the weight and insulin secretion and resistance of BChE knockout (KO) mice through hydrolyzing ghrelin. The BChE-ghrelin pathway could also regulate aggressive behaviors of BChE-KO mice.
Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), also known as pseudocholinesterase and serum cholinesterase, is an isoenzyme of acetylcholinesterase (AChE). It mediates the degradation of acetylcholine, especially under pathological conditions. Proverbial pharmacological applications of BChE, its mutants and modulators consist of combating Alzheimer's disease (AD), influencing multiple sclerosis (MS), addressing cocaine addiction, detoxifying organophosphorus poisoning and reflecting the progression or prognosis of some diseases. Of interest, recent reports have shed light on the relationship between BChE and lipid metabolism. It has also been proved that BChE is going to increase abnormally as a compensator for AChE in the middle and late stages of AD, and BChE inhibitors can alleviate cognitive disorders and positively influence some pathological features in AD model animals, foreboding favorable prospects and potential applications. Herein, the selective BChE inhibitors and BChE-related multitarget-directed ligands published in the last three years were briefly summarized, along with the currently known pharmacological applications of BChE, aiming to grasp the latest research directions. Thereinto, some emerging strategies for designing BChE inhibitors are intriguing, and the modulators based on target combination of histone deacetylase and BChE against AD is unprecedented. Furthermore, the involvement of BChE in the hydrolysis of ghrelin, the inhibition of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) uptake, and the down-regulation of LDL receptor (LDLR) expression suggests its potential to influence lipid metabolism disorders. This compelling prospect likely stimulates further exploration in this promising research direction.
In this review, the current progress in the research and development of butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) reactivators is summarised and the advantages or disadvantages of these reactivators are critically discussed. Organophosphorus compounds such as nerve agents (sarin, tabun, VX) or pesticides (chlorpyrifos, diazinon) cause irreversible inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and BChE in the human body. While AChE inhibition can be life threatening due to cholinergic overstimulation and crisis, selective BChE inhibition has presumably no adverse effects. Because BChE is mostly found in plasma, its activity is important for the scavenging of organophosphates before they can reach AChE in the central nervous system. Therefore, this enzyme in combination with its reactivator can be used as a pseudo-catalytic scavenger of organophosphates. Three structural types of BChE reactivators were found, i.e. bisquaternary salts, monoquaternary salts and uncharged compounds. Although the reviewed reactivators have certain limitations, the promising candidates for BChE reactivation were found in each structural group.
Acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) typically hydrolyze the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. The multifunctional enzyme BChE is associated with lipid metabolism through an undefined mechanism. Based on lipid-related studies and by comparing the structural similarities between lipases and BChE we postulated that the association of BChE with lipid metabolism could occur through hydrolytic activity. Utilizing purified BChE enzymes from different sources and several lipases as controls, the ability of BChE to hydrolyze 4-methylumbelliferyl (4-mu) palmitate is investigated. Using lectin affinity, inhibition kinetics, and molecular modeling, we demonstrated that purified BChE hydrolyzed 4-mu palmitate at pH 8 as effectively as wheat germ lipase. The affinity K(m) value of the enzymes for 4-mu palmitate as substrate is found as 10.4 muM, 34.2 muM, 129.8 muM, and 186 muM for wheat germ lipase, purified BChE, pancreatic lipase, and commercial BChE, respectively. Analysis of the inhibitory effect of 4-mu palmitate on BChE using butyrylthiocholine as substrate revealed competitive inhibition with K(i) and IC(50) values of 448 muM and 987.2 muM, respectively. The binding affinity and interactions of 4-mu palmitate with BChE and pancreatic lipase were predicted by molecular docking. These results suggest that BChE possesses lipolytic activity. The possibility that BChE hydrolyzes not only 4-mu palmitate but also other types of lipids will lead to a new approach to those disease states associated with increased BChE activity/expression.
Hydrolysis of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine by acetylcholinesterase (ACHE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE) is the rate-limiting step in the termination of cholinergic signaling at neuromuscular junctions. A growing body of evidence suggests that these enzymes also play a role in tumorigenesis. The ACHE and BCHE genes are amplified, mutated, and/or aberrantly expressed in a variety of human tumor types. These changes could be the result of chromosome breakage, since there is an unusually high frequency of chromosomal abnormalities near the map positions of these genes (3q26-ter and 11p-ter, respectively) in such tumors, particularly hemopoietic malignancies. Both ACHE and BCHE contain the consensus peptide motif S/T-P-X-Z, which is found in many substrates of cdc2-related protein kinases. Here we consider the intriguing possibility that phosphorylation by cdc2-related kinases may be the molecular mechanism linking cholinesterases with tumor cell proliferation. We also discuss the notion that inhibition of these enzymes by commonly used organophosphorous poisons may be tumorigenic in humans.
Measuring various biochemical and cellular components in the blood is a routine procedure in clinical practice. Human serum contains hundreds of diverse proteins secreted from all cells and tissues in healthy and diseased states. Moreover, some serum proteins have specific strong interactions with other blood components, but most interactions are probably weak and transient. One of the serum proteins is butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), an enzyme existing mainly as a glycosylated soluble tetramer that plays an important role in the metabolism of many drugs. Our results suggest that BChE interacts with plasma proteins and forms much larger complexes than predicted from the molecular weight of the BChE tetramer. To investigate and isolate such complexes, we developed a two-step strategy to find specific protein-protein interactions by combining native size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) with affinity chromatography with the resin that specifically binds BChE. Second, to confirm protein complexes' specificity, we fractionated blood serum proteins by density gradient ultracentrifugation followed by co-immunoprecipitation with anti-BChE monoclonal antibodies. The proteins coisolated in complexes with BChE were identified by mass spectroscopy. These binding studies revealed that BChE interacts with a number of proteins in the human serum. Some of these interactions seem to be more stable than transient. BChE copurification with ApoA-I and the density of some fractions containing BChE corresponding to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL) during ultracentrifugation suggest its interactions with HDL. Moreover, we observed lower BChE plasma activity in individuals with severely reduced HDL levels (</=20 mg/dL). The presented two-step methodology for determination of the BChE interactions can facilitate further analysis of such complexes, especially from the brain tissue, where BChE could be involved in the pathogenesis and progression of AD.
Open innovation initiatives provide opportunities for collaboration and sharing of knowledge and experience between industry, academia, and government institutions. Through open innovation, Merck is offering a Mini Library of 80 carefully selected compounds from previous research and development projects to a broader scientific community for testing in academic drug discovery projects. These compounds are predominantly drug-like and cover a broad range of molecular targets. They could potentially interact with other enzymes, receptors, transporters, and ion channels of interest. The Mini Library was tested on seven in-house enzymes (bacterial MurA, MurC ligase, and DdlB enzyme, human MAO-A/B, human BChE, and murine AChE), and several hits were identified. A follow-up series of structural analogues provided by Merck gave a more detailed insight into the accessibility and the quality of the hit compounds. For example, sartan derivatives were moderate inhibitors of MurC, whereas bisarylureas were potent, selective, nanomolar inhibitors of hMAO-B. Importantly, 3-n-butyl-substituted indoles were identified as low nanomolar selective inhibitors of hBChE. All in all, the hit derivatives provide new starting points for the further exploration of the chemical space of high-quality enzyme inhibitors.
We report the implementation of coordination complexes containing two types of cationic moieties, i. e. pyridinium and ammonium quaternary salt, as potential inhibitors of human cholinesterase enzymes. Utilization of ligands containing NNO-coordination site and binding zinc metal ion allowed mono- and tetra-nuclear complexes to be obtained with corner and grid structural type, respectively, thus affecting the overall charge of the compounds (from +1 to +8). We were able to examine for the first time the multivalency effect of metallosupramolecular species on their inhibitory abilities towards acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE). Importantly, resolution of the crystal structures of the obtained enzyme-substrate complexes provided a better understanding of the inhibition process at the molecular level.
Affinity chromatography on procainamide-Sepharose has been an important step in the purification of butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) since its introduction in 1978. The procainamide affinity gel has limitations. In the present report a new affinity gel called Hupresin(R) was evaluated for its ability to purify truncated, recombinant human butyrylcholinesterase (rHuBChE) expressed in a stably transfected Chinese Hamster Ovary cell line. We present a detailed example of the purification of rHuBChE secreted into 3940 mL of serum-free culture medium. The starting material contained 13,163 units of BChE activity (20.9 mg). rHuBChE was purified to homogeneity in a single step by passage over 82 mL of Hupresin(R) eluted with 0.1 M tetramethylammonium bromide in 20 mM TrisCl pH 7.5. The fraction with the highest specific activity of 630 units/mg contained 11 mg of BChE. Hupresin(R) is superior to procainamide-Sepharose for purification of BChE, but is not suitable for purifying native AChE because Hupresin(R) binds AChE so tightly that AChE is not released with buffers, but is desorbed with denaturing solvents such as 50% acetonitrile or 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Procainamide-Sepharose will continue to be useful for purification of AChE.
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) play important roles in human neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. In this study, machine learning methods were applied to develop quantitative structure-activity relationship models for the prediction of novel AChE and BChE inhibitors based on data from quantitative high-throughput screening assays. The models were used to virtually screen an in-house collection of  approximately 360K compounds. The optimal models achieved good performance with area under the receiver operating characteristic curve values ranging from 0.83 +/- 0.03 to 0.87 +/- 0.01 for the prediction of AChE/BChE inhibition activity and selectivity. Experimental validation showed that the best-performing models increased the assay hit rate by several folds. We identified 88 novel AChE and 126 novel BChE inhibitors, 25% (AChE) and 53% (BChE) of which showed potent inhibitory effects (IC(50) < 5 muM). In addition, structure-activity relationship analysis of the BChE inhibitors revealed scaffolds for chemistry design and optimization. In conclusion, machine learning models were shown to efficiently identify potent and selective inhibitors against AChE and BChE and novel structural series for further design and development of potential therapeutics against neurodegenerative disorders.
Sets of 346 herbicides in use and 163 no longer in use were collected from open access online sources and compared in silico with cholinesterases inhibitors (ChI) and drugs in terms of physicochemical profile and estimated toxic effects on human health. The screening revealed at least one potential adverse consequence for each herbicide class assigned according to their mode of action on weeds. The classes with most toxic warnings were K1, K3/N, F1 and E. The selection of 11 commercial herbicides for in vitro biological tests on human acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), the enzymes involved in neurotoxicity and detoxification of various xenobiotics, respectively, was based mainly on the structural similarity with inhibitors of cholinesterases. Organophosphate anilofos and oxyacetanilide flufenacet were the most potent inhibitors of AChE (25 muM) and BChE (6.4 muM), respectively. Glyphosate, oxadiazon, tembotrione and terbuthylazine were poor inhibitors with an estimated IC(50) above 100 muM, while for glyphosate the IC(50) was above 1 mM. Generally, all of the selected herbicides inhibited with a slight preference towards BChE. Cytotoxicity assays showed that anilofos, bensulide, butamifos, piperophos and oxadiazon were cytotoxic for hepatocytes (HepG2) and neuroblastoma cell line (SH-SY5Y). Time-independent cytotoxicity accompanied with induction of reactive oxygen species indicated rapid cell death in few hours. Our results based on in silico and in vitro analyses give insight into the potential toxic outcome of herbicides in use and can be applied in the design of new molecules with a less impact on humans and the environment.
Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), a member of the human serine hydrolase family, is an essential enzyme for cholinergic neurotransmission as it catalyzes the hydrolysis of acetylcholine. It also plays central roles in apoptosis, lipid metabolism, and xenobiotic detoxification. On the other side, abnormal levels of BChE are directly associated with the formation of pathogenic states such as neurodegenerative diseases, psychiatric and cardiovascular disorders, liver damage, diabetes, and cancer. Thus, selective and sensitive detection of BChE level in living organisms is highly crucial and is of great importance to further understand the roles of BChE in both physiological and pathological processes. However, it is a very complicated task due to the potential interference of acetylcholinesterase (AChE), the other human cholinesterase, as these two enzymes share a very similar substrate scope. To this end, optical imaging probes have attracted immense attention in recent years as they have modular structures, which can be tuned precisely to satisfy high selectivity toward BChE, and at the same time they offer real time and nondestructive imaging opportunities with a high spatial and temporal resolution. Here, we summarize BChE selective imaging probes by discussing the critical milestones achieved during the development process of these molecular sensors over the years. We put a special emphasis on design principles and biological applications of highly promising new generation activity-based probes. We also give a comprehensive outlook for the future of BChE-responsive probes and highlight the ongoing challenges. This collection marks the first review article on BChE-responsive imaging agents.
