B1 bradykinin receptor; This is a receptor for bradykinin. Could be a factor in chronic pain and inflammation.
Acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome (ALI/ARDS) is a life-threatening syndrome induced by various diseases, including COVID-19. In the progression of ALI/ARDS, activated neutrophils play a central role by releasing various inflammatory mediators, including elastase. Sivelestat is a selective and competitive inhibitor of neutrophil elastase. Although its protective effects on attenuating ALI/ARDS have been confirmed in several models of lung injury, clinical trials have presented inconsistent results on its therapeutic efficacy. Therefore, in this report, we used a network pharmacology approach coupled with animal experimental validation to unravel the concrete therapeutic targets and biological mechanisms of sivelestat in treating ALI/ARDS. In bioinformatic analyses, we found 118 targets of sivelestat against ALI/ARDS, and identified six hub genes essential for sivelestat treatment of ALI/ARDS, namely ERBB2, GRB2, PTK2, PTPN11, ESR1, and CCND1. We also found that sivelestat targeted several genes expressed in human lung microvascular endothelial cells after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment at 4 h (ICAM-1, PTGS2, RND1, BCL2A1, TNF, CA2, and ADORA2A), 8 h (ICAM-1, PTGS2, RND1, BCL2A1, MMP1, BDKRB1 and SLC40A1), and 24 h (ICAM-1). Further animal experiments showed that sivelestat was able to attenuate LPS-induced ALI by inhibiting the overexpression of ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and PTGS2 and increasing the phosphorylation of PTK2. Taken together, the bioinformatic findings and experimentative data indicate that the therapeutic effects of sivelestat against ALI/ARDS mainly focus on the early stage of ALI/ARDS by pharmacological modulation of inflammatory reaction, vascular endothelial injury, and cell apoptosis-related molecules.
OBJECTIVE: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune multisystem disease with poorly understood pathogenesis and ineffective treatment options. Soluble CD13 (sCD13), generated by the cleavage of cell surface CD13 via matrix metalloproteinase 14 (MMP14), signals through the bradykinin receptor B1 (B1R) to elicit pro-inflammatory, pro-arthritic, and pro-angiogenic responses. In this study, we explored the antifibrotic potential of targeting the sCD13-B1R axis in SSc. METHODS: The expression of CD13, B1R, and MMP14 was examined in SSc skin and explanted dermal fibroblasts. The efficacy of B1R antagonists in the inhibition on fibrosis was determined in vitro and in vivo. RESULTS: Expression of the genes for CD13, B1R, and MMP14 was elevated in skin biopsies from patients with diffuse cutaneous (dc) SSc. Notably, single-cell analysis of SSc skin biopsies revealed the highest BDKRB1 expression in COL8A1-positive myofibroblasts, a population exclusively seen in SSc. Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) induced the expression of BDKRB1 and production of sCD13 by dcSSc skin fibroblasts. Treatment of dcSSc fibroblasts with sCD13 promoted fibrotic gene expression, signaling, cell proliferation, migration, and gel contraction. The pro-fibrotic responses of sCD13 or TGFbeta were prevented by a B1R antagonist. Mice lacking Cd13 or Bdkrb1 were resistant to bleomycin-induced skin fibrosis and inflammation. Pharmacological B1R inhibition had a comparable antifibrotic effect. CONCLUSION: These results are the first to demonstrate a key role for sCD13 in SSc skin fibrosis and suggest that targeting the sCD13-B1R signaling axis is a promising novel therapeutic approach for SSc.
Patient phenotypes in pharmacological pain treatment varies between individuals, which could be partly assigned to their genotypes regarding the targets of classical analgesics (OPRM1, PTGS2) or associated signalling pathways (KCNJ6). Translational and genetic research have identified new targets, for which new analgesics are being developed. This addresses voltage-gated sodium, calcium and potassium channels, for which SCN9A, CACNA1B, KCNQ2 and KCNQ3, respectively, are primary gene candidates because they code for the subunits of the respective channels targeted by analgesics currently in clinical development. Mutations in voltage gated transient receptor potential (TRPV) channels are known from genetic pain research and may modulate the effects of analgesics under development targeting TRPV1 or TRPV3. To this add ligand-gated ion channels including nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, ionotropic glutamate-gated receptors and ATP-gated purinergic P2X receptors with most important subunits coded by CHRNA4, GRIN2B and P2RX7. Among G protein coupled receptors, delta-opioid receptors (coded by OPRD1), cannabinoid receptors (CNR1 and CNR2), metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR5 coded by GRM5), bradykinin B(1) (BDKRB1) and 5-HT(1A) (HTR1A) receptors are targeted by new analgesic substances. Finally, nerve growth factor (NGFB), its tyrosine kinase receptor (NTRK1) and the fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) have become targets of interest. For most of these genes, functional variants have been associated with neuro-psychiatric disorders and not yet with analgesia. However, research on the genetic modulation of pain has already identified variants in these genes, relative to pain, which may facilitate the pharmacogenetic assessments of new analgesics. The increased number of candidate pharmacogenetic modulators of analgesic actions may open opportunities for the broader clinical implementation of genotyping information.
Bradykinin, a member of the kallikrein-kinin system (KKS), is a potent, short-lived vasoactive peptide that acts as a vasodilator and an inflammatory mediator in a number of signaling mechanisms. Bradykinin induced signaling is mediated through kinin B1 (BDKRB1) and B2 (BDKRB2) transmembrane receptors coupled with different subunits of G proteins (G(alphai)/G(alpha0), G(alphaq) and G(beta1gamma2)). The bradykinin-mediated signaling mechanism activates excessive pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-6, IL-1beta, IL-8 and IL-2. Upregulation of these cytokines has implications in a wide range of clinical conditions such as inflammation leading to fibrosis, cardiovascular diseases, and most recently, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). In SARS-CoV-2 infection, bradykinin is found to be at raised levels and is reported to trigger a diverse array of symptoms. All of this brings bradykinin to the core point as a molecule of immense therapeutic value. Our understanding of its involvement in various pathways has expanded with time. Therefore, there is a need to look at the overall picture that emerges from the developments made by deciphering the bradykinin mediated signaling mechanisms involved in the pathological conditions. It will help devise strategies for developing better treatment modalities in the implicated diseases. This review summarizes the current state of knowledge on bradykinin mediated signaling in the diverse conditions described above, with a marked emphasis on the therapeutic potential of targeting the bradykinin receptor.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to investigate the expression patterns of a specific set of genes involved in the inflammation process in children with Down Syndrome (DS) and children without the syndrome (control group) to identify differences that may be related to the immune abnormalities observed in DS individuals. METHOD: RNA samples were obtained from peripheral blood, and gene expression was quantified using the TaqMan(R) Array Plate Human Inflammation Kit, which facilitated the investigation into 92 inflammation-related genes and four reference genes using real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). RESULTS: Twenty genes showed differential expression in children with DS; 12 were overexpressed (PLA2G2D, CACNA1D, ALOX12, VCAM1, ICAM1, PLCD1, ADRB1, HTR3A, PDE4C, CASP1, PLA2G5, and PLCB4), and eight were underexpressed (LTA4H, BDKRB1, ADRB2, CD40LG, ITGAM, TNFRSF1B, ITGB1, and TBXAS1). After statistically correcting for the false discovery rate, only the genes BDKRB1 and LTA4H showed differential expression, and both were underexpressed within the DS group. CONCLUSION: DS children showed differential expression of inflammation-related genes that were not located on chromosome 21 compared with children without DS. The BDKRB1 and LTA4H genes may differentiate the case and control groups based on the inflammatory response, which plays an important role in DS pathogenesis.
AIM: To evaluate coagulation related gene model as a biomarker for predicting prognosis of gliomas. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The mRNA expression and clinical data of glioma were downloaded from the TCGA and CGGA databases. Coagulation-related genes were downloaded from the KEGG database. The expression model was constructed using LASSO regression. The GBM data were divided into high and low-risk expression groups based on the median risk score, and the differences in overall survival and progression-free survival between them were calculated. The prognostic model was further validated using the TCGA-LGG and CGGA glioma databases, respectively. The accuracy of the risk score was calculated by ROC analysis for 1 year and 3 years. RESULTS: Four model genes, namely the SERPINA5, PLAUR, BDKRB1, and PTGIR, were identified, and the risk score was calculated as follows: risk score= SERPINA5*0.126264111304559 + PLAUR*0.288587629696211 + BDKRB1*0.349215422945011 + PTGIR*0.17334527969703, respectively. Based on glioma data from three groups, patients were divided into high and low-risk groups according to the median risk score. The overall survival, progression-free survival, and risk scores of the high-risk score group were worse than the low-risk group. The ROC curve analysis showed that the AUC values of the coagulation-related gene model at 1 year, 3 years, and 5 years were more than 0.65, validating the reliability of the prognostic model. CONCLUSION: This study established the correlation between the coagulation-related gene model and glioma prognosis, providing deeper insight into the mechanism and treatment of glioma.
Pharmacological research in mice and human genetic analyses suggest that the kallikrein-kinin system (KKS) may regulate anxiety. We examined the role of the KKS in anxiety and stress in both species. In human genetic association analysis, variants in genes for the bradykinin precursor (KNG1) and the bradykinin receptors (BDKRB1 and BDKRB2) were associated with anxiety disorders (p < 0.05). In mice, however, neither acute nor chronic stress affected B1 receptor gene or protein expression, and B1 receptor antagonists had no effect on anxiety tests measuring approach-avoidance conflict. We thus focused on the B2 receptor and found that mice injected with the B2 antagonist WIN 64338 had lowered levels of a physiological anxiety measure, the stress-induced hyperthermia (SIH), vs controls. In the brown adipose tissue, a major thermoregulator, WIN 64338 increased expression of the mitochondrial regulator Pgc1a and the bradykinin precursor gene Kng2 was upregulated after cold stress. Our data suggests that the bradykinin system modulates a variety of stress responses through B2 receptor-mediated effects, but systemic antagonists of the B2 receptor were not anxiolytic in mice. Genetic variants in the bradykinin receptor genes may predispose to anxiety disorders in humans by affecting their function.
Previous proteomic and transcriptional analyses of multiple sclerosis lesions revealed modulation of the renin-angiotensin and the opposing kallikrein-kinin pathways. Here we identify kinin receptor B1 (Bdkrb1) as a specific modulator of immune cell entry into the central nervous system (CNS). We demonstrate that the Bdkrb1 agonist R838 (Sar-[D-Phe]des-Arg(9)-bradykinin) markedly decreases the clinical symptoms of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in SJL mice, whereas the Bdkrb1 antagonist R715 (Ac-Lys-[D-betaNal(7), Ile(8)]des-Arg(9)-bradykinin) resulted in earlier onset and greater severity of the disease. Bdkrb1-deficient (Bdkrb1(-/-)) C57BL/6 mice immunized with a myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein fragment, MOG(35-55), showed more severe disease with enhanced CNS-immune cell infiltration. The same held true for mixed bone marrow-chimeric mice reconstituted with Bdkrb1(-/-) T lymphocytes, which showed enhanced T helper type 17 (T(H)17) cell invasion into the CNS. Pharmacological modulation of Bdkrb1 revealed that in vitro migration of human T(H)17 lymphocytes across blood-brain barrier endothelium is regulated by this receptor. Taken together, these results suggest that the kallikrein-kinin system is involved in the regulation of CNS inflammation, limiting encephalitogenic T lymphocyte infiltration into the CNS, and provide evidence that Bdkrb1 could be a new target for the treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
CONTEXT: Cancer Pain is considered a common and significant clinical problem in malignant neoplasms, comprising 20% to 50% of all patients with tumor progression. Laser photobiomodulation (L-PBM) has been used in a multitude of pain events, ranging from acute trauma to chronic articular. However, L-PBM has never been tested in cancer pain. OBJECTIVES: Evaluate hyperalgesia, edema, COX-1, COX-2, IL-10, and Bdkrb1 mRNA in low-level laser irradiated Walker-256 tumor-bearing rats. METHODS: Rat hind paw injected with Walker Tumor-256 (W-256) and divided into six groups of 6 rats: G1 (control) - W-256 injected, G2- W-256 + Nimesulide, G3- W-256 + 1 J, G4- W-256 + 3 Jand G5- W256 + 6 J. Laser parameters: lambda = 660 nm, 3.57 W/cm(2), O = 0.028 cm(2). Mechanical hyperalgesia was evaluated by Randall-Selitto test. Plethysmography measured edema; mRNA levels of COX-1, COX-2, IL-10, and Bdkrb1were analyzed. RESULTS: It was found that the W-256 + 1 J group showed a decrease in paw edema, a significant reduction in pain threshold. Higher levels of IL-10 and lower levels of COX-2 and Bdkrb1 were observed. CONCLUSION: Results suggest that 1 J L-PBM reduced the expression of COX-2 and Bdkrb1 and increasing IL-10 gene expression, promoting analgesia to close levels to nimesulide.
Two subtypes of mammalian bradykinin receptors, B1 and B2 (BDKRB1 and BDKRB2), have been defined based on their pharmacological properties. The B1 type kinin receptors have weak affinity for intact BK or Lys-BK but strong affinity for kinin metabolites without the C-terminal arginine (e.g., des-Arg9-BK and Lys-des-Arg9-BK, also called des-Arg10-kallidin), which are generated by kininase I. The B1 receptor expression is up-regulated following tissue injury and inflammation (hyperemia, exudation, hyperalgesia, etc.). In the present study, we have cloned and sequenced the gene encoding human B1 receptor from a human genomic library. The human B1 receptor gene contains three exons separated by two introns. The first and the second exon are noncoding, while the coding region and the 3'-flanking region are located entirely on the third exon. The exon-intron arrangement of the human B1 receptor gene shows significant similarity with the genes encoding the B2 receptor subtype in human, mouse, and rat. Sequence analysis of the 5'-flanking region revealed the presence of a consensus TATA box and of numerous candidate transcription factor binding sequences. Primer extension experiments have shown the existence of multiple transcription initiation sites situated downstream and upstream from the consensus TATA box. Genomic Southern blot analysis indicated that the human B1 receptor is encoded by a single-copy gene.
Purpose: The plasma kallikrein-kinin system is activated during vascular injury caused by diabetic retinopathy (DR), being involved in hyperpermeability and inflammation. Bradykinin B1 receptor (B1R) is expressed in human retina, and its levels are increased in murine models of diabetes. Experimental studies reveal that B1R antagonists ameliorate retinal injury caused by diabetes in rodents. Thus, the aim of this study was to investigate the association between the rs12050217A/G polymorphism in the BDKRB1 gene, the gene that codifies B1R, and DR in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients. Methods: We analyzed 636 T2DM patients and 443 non-diabetic subjects. T2DM patients were categorized by the presence of non-proliferative DR (NPDR, n = 267), proliferative DR (PDR, n = 197), and absence of DR (n = 172). The BDKRB1 rs12050217A/G polymorphism was genotyped by real-time PCR using TaqMan MGB probes. Results: The genotype frequencies of the BDKRB1 rs12050217A/G polymorphism are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and did not differ between T2DM patients and non-diabetic subjects (P > 0.05). The presence of the genotypes containing the rs12050217 G allele was less frequent in patients with PDR when compared to patients with NPDR and without DR (32.0%, 41.9%, and 43.0%, P = 0.045, respectively). Interestingly, the presence of G allele was associated with ~40% protection for PDR, which was confirmed after correction for the presence of hypertension, ethnicity, age, HDL, and gender (odds ratio = 0.616, 95% confidence interval 0.385-0.986, P = 0.043). Conclusion: For the first time, we showed that BDKRB1 rs12050217 G allele is associated with protection for the advanced stage of DR in T2DM patients; however, further studies are needed to confirm this finding.
Mesenchymal stem cells are an ideal source for regenerative medicine. For clinical use, cell culture should be done at stable conditions, thus the use of serum should be avoided because of the batch-to-batch variations of serum. Although several kinds of serum-free media are available, a method to confirm whether they contain serum has not been established yet. During studies on effect of adipocyte mesenchymal stem cells (Ad-MSCs) on pain using a human pain gene array, we noticed that BDKRB1 gene was constantly upregulated when serum was used in the culture medium. In this study, we attempted to establish further the potential of this gene as a new marker indicative of the presence of serum in media. Using a real-time quantitative PCR gene array screening containing 84 functional genes, we verified BDKRB1 as a specific gene upregulated in the presence of serum. The expression of BDKRB1 in Ad-MSCs was induced not only by bovine serum but also by human serum. The BDKRB1 expression was induced even when Ad-MSCs was cultured with 0.1% serum in the medium. We concluded that BDKRB1 is a valuable marker to detect traces of both human and animal serum in Ad-MSCs cultures. Our study provides a new method to confirm the absence of serum in media and ensure a stable cell culture condition.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to analyze the differences in the expression of pain-related genes in conjunctival epithelial cells among symptomatic contact lens (CL) wearers (SCLWs), asymptomatic CL wearers (ACLWs), and non-CL wearers (non-CLWs). METHODS: For this study, 60 participants (20 non-CLWs, 40 CLWs) were enrolled. The CLW group comprised 20 ACLWs and 20 SCLWs according to the Contact Lens Dry Eye Questionnaire short form(c). Conjunctival cells were collected using impression cytology, and RNA was isolated and used to determine the expression levels of 85 human genes involved in neuropathic and inflammatory pain. The effects of CL wear and discomfort were evaluated using mixed-effects ANOVA with partially nested fixed-effects model. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed to assign biological meaning to sets of differentially expressed genes. RESULTS: Six genes (CD200, EDN1, GRIN1, PTGS1, P2RX7, and TNF) were significantly upregulated in CLWs compared to non-CLWs. Eleven genes (ADORA1, BDKRB1, CACNA1B, DBH, GRIN1, GRM1, HTR1A, PDYN, PTGS1, P2RX3, and TNF) were downregulated in SCLWs compared to ACLWs. These genes were mainly related to pain, synaptic transmission and signaling, ion transport, calcium transport and concentration, and cell-cell signaling. CONCLUSIONS: CL wear modified the expression of pain- and inflammation-related genes in conjunctival epithelial cells. These changes may be in part, along with other mechanisms, responsible for CL discomfort in SCLWs.
This study aimed to investigate the intrinsic mechanisms of Qishen granules (QSG) in the treatment of HF, and to provide new evidence and insights for its clinical application. Information on QSG ingredients was collected from Traditional Chinese medicine systems pharmacology (TCMSP), TCM@Taiwan, TCMID, and Batman, and input into SwissTargetPrediction to identify the compound targets. HF-related targets were detected from Therapeutic Target Database (TTD), Disgenet-Gene, Drugbank database, and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database. The overlap targets of QSG and HF were identified for pathway enrichment analysis by utilizing the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of QSG-HF was constructed, following by the generation of core targets, construction of core modules, and KEGG analysis of the core functional modules. There were 1909 potential targets predicted from the 243 bioactive compounds in QSG which shared 129 common targets with HF-related targets. KEGG pathway analysis of common targets indicated that QSG could regulated 23 representative pathways. In the QSG-HF PPI network analysis, 10 key targets were identified, including EDN1, AGT, CREB1, ACE, CXCR4, ADRBK1, AGTR1, BDKRB1, ADRB2, and F2. Further cluster and enrichment analysis suggested that neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, renin secretion, vascular smooth muscle contraction, and the renin-angiotensin system might be core pathways of QSG for HF. Our study elucidated the possible mechanisms of QSG from a systemic and holistic perspective. The key targets and pathways will provide new insights for further research on the pharmacological mechanism of QSG.
BACKGROUND Glucocorticoids (GCs)-induced glaucoma is a common adverse effect of prolonged GCs use. To better understand the effects of GCs on aqueous humor (AH) outflow, we analyzed the dataset GSE37474 using bioinformatics analysis to identify gene changes and pathways in the anterior segment of the human eye induced by dexamethasone (DEX). MATERIAL AND METHODS The GSE37474 dataset downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database was examined in this study. GEO2R was utilized to analyze data and identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway were constructed using the DAVID database followed by construction of a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network performed using Cytoscape software. Finally, modules and hub genes were screened out using MCODE and cytoHubba plugin, respectively. RESULTS A set of 252 DEGs were screened. Among the DEGs, 143 genes were upregulated and 109 were downregulated. GO analysis indicated that some of the DEGs participated in extracellular matrix (ECM) organization and cholesterol homeostasis. Additionally, KEGG pathways were predominantly enriched in tyrosine metabolism and ECM-receptor interaction. From the PPI network, 2 modules were identified, and 10 hub genes were screened out, including CCL2, FOS, IGF1, PTGS2, CCL5, EDN1, IL11, F3, PMCH, and BDKRB1. The 2 module genes primarily participate in the TNF signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and the Jak-STAT signaling pathway. CONCLUSIONS The present study identi fi ed some significant DEGs, hub genes, pathways, and modules in the human anterior segment induced by DEX. These results demonstrate that DEX changes the expression of certain genes and pathways to resist aqueous humor outflow, which could be new targets for developing novel and more effective approaches of diagnosis and therapy for GCs-induced glaucoma.
BACKGROUND: Bradykinin (BK) and its biologically active metabolite des-Arg9 bradykinin (DABK) play a pivotal role in inflammation. Since chorioamnionitis is the leading cause of preterm birth and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) derived from the amnion is key to labor initiation, we investigated if bradykinin peptides are part of the regulatory network of PGE2 synthesis in human amnion at parturition. METHODS: Human amnion tissue was obtained from term and preterm birth for the study of the changes of the bradykinin system at parturition. Cultured primary human amnion fibroblasts, the major source of PGE2, were used to study the effects of bradykinin peptides on PTGS2 expression and PGE2 production as well as the effects of infection mediators on bradykinin receptors. RESULTS: Bradykinin peptides and their receptors BDKRB1 and BDKRB2 were present in human amnion, and their abundance increased in term and preterm labor. However, transcripts of the genes encoding the bradykinin precursor and its proteolytic cleavage enzymes were hardly detectable in human amnion despite the increased abundance of bradykinin peptides in term and preterm labor, suggesting that there is an alternative source of bradykinin peptides for human amnion and their actions are enhanced in human amnion at parturition. In-vitro studies in cultured human amnion fibroblasts showed that both BK and DABK increased the expression of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), the rate-limiting enzyme in prostaglandin synthesis, and subsequent PGE2 production. These effects of BK and DABK were mediated through BDKRB2 and BDKRB1 receptors, respectively, with subsequent activation of the p38 and ERK1/2 pathways. Moreover, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and serum amyloid A1 (SAA1), the important mediators of infectious inflammation, induced the expression of both BDKRB1 and BDKRB2 through toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Induction of BDKRB1 and BDKRB2 expression by LPS and SAA1 enhanced BK- or DABK-induced PTGS2 expression and PGE2 production in human amnion fibroblasts. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated for the first time that the human amnion is a target tissue of bradykinin peptides and the bradykinin system may be part of the regulatory network of PTGS2 expression and PGE2 production in human amnion fibroblasts at both term and preterm birth, which may be enhanced by infection.
Major factors contribute to mental stress and enhance the progression of late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). The factors that lead to neurodegeneration, such as tau protein hyperphosphorylation and increased amyloid-beta production, can be mimicked in animal stress models. The present study identifies differentially expressed genes (DEGs) data and its corresponding predictive image analysis in rat models. The gene expression profile of GSE72062, GSE85162, GSE143951 and GSE85238 was downloaded from NCBI, GEO archive to analyse DEGs. Functional enrichment and pathway relationship networks, gene signal, protein interaction and micro-RNA interaction DEGs networks were constructed and investigated. The image analysis of histopathological slides of rat brain images corresponding to AD microarray-based DEGs profile was undertaken using the convolution neural networks (ConvNets) model. Enrichment of network in terms of GO concluded with 10 DEGs, namely ARHGAP32, GNA11, NR5A1, GNAT3, FOSL1, HELZ2, NMUR2, BDKRB1, RPL3L and RPL39L as potential gene targets to control neurodegeneration and progression of sporadic AD. The image analysis of AD microarray-based DEGs profile builds a successful predictive model of 89% and 61% training and test accuracy with a minimum of 2.480% loss using transfer learning, VGG16 model. Interestingly, the ARHGAP32 gene, a Rho GTPase activating class, was identified to have a functional relationship with two significant genes BCL2 and MMP9, that are well explored in AD. The current investigation upgrades the traditional pre-clinical AD research using microarray data analysis and ConvNets. The model successfully predicts DEG from histopathology slides of rat brain samples, paving the way for image analysis to determine the underlying molecular makeup of the test samples.
Previous studies suggest immunological alterations in patients with first-episode psychosis (FEP). Some studies show that antipsychotic compounds may cause immunomodulatory effects. To evaluate the immunological changes and the possible immunomodulatory effects in FEP, we recruited patients with FEP (n = 67) and matched controls (n = 38), aged 18-40 years, from the catchment area of the Helsinki University Hospital and the City of Helsinki, Finland. Fasting peripheral blood samples were collected between 8 and 10 a.m. in 10 ml PAXgene tubes. We applied the NanoString nCounter in-solution hybridization technology to determine gene expression levels of 147 candidate genes reflecting activation of the immune system. Cases had higher gene expression levels of BDKRB1 and SPP1/osteopontin compared with controls. Of the individual medications used as monotherapy, risperidone was associated with a statistically significant upregulation of 11 immune system genes, including cytokines and cytokine receptors (SPP1, IL1R1, IL1R2), pattern recognition molecules (TLR1, TLR2 and TLR6, dectin-1/CLEC7A), molecules involved in apoptosis (FAS), and some other molecules with functions in immune activation (BDKRB1, IGF1R, CR1). In conclusion, risperidone possessed strong immunomodulatory properties affecting mainly innate immune response in FEP patients, whereas the observed effects of quetiapine and olanzapine were only marginal. Our results further emphasize the importance of understanding the immunomodulatory mechanisms of antipsychotic treatment, especially in terms of specific compounds, doses and duration of medication in patients with severe mental illness. Future studies should evaluate the response pre- and post-treatment, and the possible role of this inflammatory activation for the progression of psychiatric and metabolic symptoms.
Activated fibroblasts are the central effector cells of the progressive fibrotic process in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Characterizing the genomic phenotype of isolated fibroblasts is essential to understanding IPF pathogenesis. Comparing the genomic phenotype of non-cultured pulmonary fibroblasts from advanced IPF patients' and normal lungs revealed novel genes, biological processes and concomitant pathways previously unreported in IPF fibroblasts. We demonstrate altered expression in proteasomal constituents, ubiquitination-mediators, Wnt, apoptosis and vitamin metabolic pathways and cell cycle regulators, suggestive of loss of cellular homeostasis. Specifically, FBXO32, CXCL14, BDKRB1 and NMNAT1 were up-regulated, while RARA and CDKN2D were down-regulated. Paradoxically, pro-apoptotic inducers TNFSF10, BAX and CASP6 were also found to be increased. This comprehensive description of altered gene expression in isolated IPF fibroblasts underscores the complex biological processes characteristic of IPF and may provide a foundation for future research into this devastating disease.
