Bombesin receptor subtype-3; Role in sperm cell division, maturation, or function. This receptor mediates its action by association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
INTRODUCTION: Diabetes mellitus and obesity are important health issues; increasing in prevalence, both in the USA and globally. There are only limited pharmacological treatments, and although bariatric surgery is effective, new effective pharmacologic treatments would be of great value. This review covers one area of increasing interest that could yield new novel treatments of obesity/diabetes mellitus. It involves recognition of the central role the G-protein-coupled receptor, bombesin receptor subtype 3 (BRS-3) plays in energy/glucose metabolism. AREAS COVERED: Since the initial observation that BRS-3 knockout mice develop obesity, hypertension, impaired glucose metabolism and hyperphagia, there have been numerous studies of the mechanisms involved and the development of selective BRS-3 agonists/antagonists, which have marked effects on body weight, feeding and glucose/insulin homeostasis. In this review, each of these areas is briefly reviewed. EXPERT OPINION: BRS-3 plays an important role in glucose/energy homeostasis. The development of potent, selective BRS-3 agonists demonstrates promise as a novel approach to treat obesity/diabetic states. One important question that needs to be addressed is whether BRS-3 agonists need to be centrally acting. This is particularly important in light of recent animal and human studies that report transient cardiovascular side effects with centrally acting oral BRS agonists.
Human bombesin receptors, GRPR and NMBR, are two of the most frequently overexpressed G-protein-coupled-receptors by lung-cancers. Recently, GRPR/NMBR are receiving considerable attention because they act as growth factor receptors often in an autocrine manner in different lung-cancers, affect tumor angiogenesis, their inhibition increases the cytotoxic potency of tyrosine-kinase inhibitors reducing lung-cancer cellular resistance/survival and their overexpression can be used for sensitive tumor localization as well as to target cytotoxic agents to the cancer. The orphan BRS-3-receptor, because of homology is classified as a bombesin receptor but has received little attention, despite the fact that it is also reported in a number of studies in lung-cancer cells and has growth effects in these cells. To address its potential importance, in this study, we examined the frequency/relative quantitative expression of human BRS-3 compared to GRPR/NMBR and the effects of its activation on cell-signaling/growth in 13 different human lung-cancer cell-lines. Our results showed that BRS-3 receptor is expressed in 92% of the cell-lines and that it is functional in these cells, because its activation stimulates phospholipase-C with breakdown of phosphoinositides and changes in cytosolic calcium, stimulates ERK/MAPK and stimulates cell growth by EGFR transactivation in some, but not all, the lung-cancer cell-lines. These results suggest that human BRS-3, similar to GRPR/NMBR, is frequently ectopically-expressed by lung-cancer cells in which, it is functional, affecting cell signaling/growth. These results suggest that similar to GRPR/NMBR, BRS-3 should receive increased attention as possible approach for the development of novel treatments and/or diagnosis in lung-cancer.
Bombesin (Bn) receptor subtype 3(BRS-3) is an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor of the Bn family, which does not bind any natural Bn peptide with high affinity. Receptor knockout studies show that the animals develop diabetes, obesity, altered temperature control, and other central nervous system (CNS)/endocrine/gastrointestinal changes. It is present in CNS, peripheral tissues, and tumors; however, its role in normal physiology/pathophysiology, as well as its receptor localization/pharmacology is largely unknown, in part due to the lack of a convenient, specific, direct radiolabeled ligand. This study was designed to address this problem and to develop and characterize a specific radiolabeled ligand for BRS-3. The peptide antagonist Bantag-1 had >10,000-fold selectivity for human BRS-3 (hBRS-3) over other mammalian Bn receptors (BnRs) [i.e., gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR) and neuromedin B receptor (NMBR)]. Using iodogen and basic conditions, it was radiolabeled to high specific activity (2200 Ci/mmol) and found to bind with high affinity/specificity to hBRS-3. Binding was saturable, rapid, and reversible. The ligand only interacted with known BRS-3 ligands, and not with other specific GRPR/NMBR ligands or ligands for unrelated receptors. The magnitude of (125)I-Bantag-1 binding correlated with BRS-3 mRNA expression and the magnitude of activation of phospholipase C in lung cancer cells, as well as readily identifying BRS-3 in lung cancer cells and normal tissues, allowing the direct assessment of BRS-3 receptor pharmacology/numbers on cells containing BRS-3 with other BnRs, which is usually the case. This circumvents the need for subtraction assays, which are now frequently used to assess BRS-3 indirectly using radiolabeled pan-ligands, which interact with all BnRs.
Bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS3) is an important orphan G protein-coupled receptor that regulates energy homeostasis and insulin secretion. As a member of the bombesin receptor (BnR) family, the lack of known endogenous ligands and high-resolution structure has hindered the understanding of BRS3 signaling and function. We present two cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of BRS3 in complex with the heterotrimeric G(q) protein in its active states: one bound to the pan-BnR agonist BA1 and the other bound to the synthetic BRS3-specific agonist MK-5046. These structures reveal the architecture of the orthosteric ligand pocket underpinning molecular recognition and provide insights into the structural basis for BRS3's selectivity and low affinity for bombesin peptides. Examination of conserved micro-switches suggests a shared activation mechanism among BnRs. Our findings shed light on BRS3's ligand selectivity and signaling mechanisms, paving the way for exploring its therapeutic potential for diabetes, obesity, and related metabolic disorders.
This review summarizes the recent findings of the roles of bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3) in various patho-physiological conditions. Studies have demonstrated that two mammalians bombesin-like peptides, GRP and NMB, exhibit a large range of functions by binding to three receptors. Knockout studies showed that the mice BRS-3 has important effects on tumor growth, energy homeostasis, glucose regulation, satiety, and lung development (1,7). BRS-3 is an orphan receptor whose natural ligand is unknown. However, several agonists and antagonists have been synthesized which facilitate its characterization, (D-Tyr6, beta-Ala11, Phe13, Nle14) Bn-(6-14) and MK-5046 are agonists, whereas ML-18 and Bantag-1 are antagonists. With the development of several selective, high-affinity BRS-3 agonists and antagonists, recent studies provided some insights into the biological effects of BRS-3 in several disease states including lung cancer, obesity, diabetes mellitus, asthma, and kidney diseases.
The hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN) is a highly complex brain region that is crucial for homeostatic regulation through neuroendocrine signaling, outflow of the autonomic nervous system, and projections to other brain areas. In the past years, single-cell datasets of the hypothalamus have contributed immensely to the current understanding of the diverse hypothalamic cellular composition. While the PVN has been adequately classified functionally, its molecular classification is currently still insufficient. To address this, we created a detailed atlas of PVN transcriptomic cell types by integrating various PVN single-cell datasets into a recently published hypothalamus single-cell transcriptome atlas. Furthermore, we functionally profiled transcriptomic cell types, based on relevant literature, existing retrograde tracing data, and existing single-cell data of a PVN-projection target region. Finally, we validated our findings with immunofluorescent stainings. In our PVN atlas dataset, we identify the well-known different neuropeptide types, each composed of multiple novel subtypes. We identify Avp-Tac1, Avp-Th, Oxt-Foxp1, Crh-Nr3c1, and Trh-Nfib as the most important neuroendocrine subtypes based on markers described in literature. To characterize the preautonomic functional population, we integrated a single-cell retrograde tracing study of spinally projecting preautonomic neurons into our PVN atlas. We identify these (presympathetic) neurons to cocluster with the Adarb2(+) clusters in our dataset. Further, we identify the expression of receptors for Crh, Oxt, Penk, Sst, and Trh in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, a key region that the pre-parasympathetic PVN neurons project to. Finally, we identify Trh-Ucn3 and Brs3-Adarb2 as some centrally projecting populations. In conclusion, our study presents a detailed overview of the transcriptomic cell types of the murine PVN and provides a first attempt to resolve functionality for the identified populations.
Bombesin-receptor-subtype-3 (BRS-3) is an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor of the bombesin (Bn) family whose natural ligand is unknown and which does not bind any natural Bn-peptide with high affinity. It is present in the central nervous system, peripheral tissues, and tumors; however, its role in normal physiology/pathophysiology is largely unknown because of the lack of selective ligands. Recently, MK-5046 [(2S)-1,1,1-trifluoro-2-[4-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)phenyl]-3-(4-[1-(trifluoromethyl)cyclopropyl]methyl-1H-imidazol-2-yl)propan-2-ol] and Bantag-1 [Boc-Phe-His-4-amino-5-cyclohexyl-2,4,5-trideoxypentonyl-Leu-(3-dimethylamino) benzylamide N-methylammonium trifluoroacetate], a nonpeptide agonist and a peptide antagonist, respectively, for BRS-3 have been described, but there have been limited studies on their pharmacology. We studied MK-5046 and Bantag-1 interactions with human Bn-receptors-human bombesin receptor subtype-3 (hBRS-3), gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRP-R), and neuromedin B receptor (NMB-R)-and compared them with the nonselective, peptide-agonist [d-Tyr6,betaAla11,Phe13,Nle14]Bn-(6-14) (peptide #1). Receptor activation was detected by activation of phospholipase C (PLC), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), focal adhesion kinase (FAK), paxillin, and Akt. In hBRS-3 cells, the relative affinities were Bantag-1 (1.3 nM) > peptide #1 (2 nM) > MK-5046 (37-160 nM) > GRP, NMB (>10 muM), and the binding-dose-inhibition curves were broad (>4 logs), with Hill coefficients differing significantly from unity. Curve-fitting demonstrated high-affinity (MK-5046, Ki = 0.08 nM) and low-affinity (MK-5046, Ki = 11-29 nM) binding sites. For PLC activation in hBRS-3 cells, the relative potencies were MK-5046 (0.02 nM) > peptide #1 (6 nM) > GRP, NMB, Bantag-1 (>10 muM), and MK-5046 had a biphasic dose response, whereas peptide #1 was monophasic. Bantag-1 was a specific hBRS-3-antagonist. In hBRS-3 cells, MK-5046 was a full agonist for activation of MAPK, FAK, Akt, and paxillin; however, it was a partial agonist for phospholipase A2 (PLA2) activation. The kinetics of activation/duration of action for PLC/MAPK activation of MK-5046 and peptide #1 differed, with peptide #1 causing more rapid stimulation; however, MK-5046 had more prolonged activity. Our study finds that MK-5046 and Bantag-1 have high affinity/selectivity for hBRS-3. The nonpeptide MK-5046 and peptide #1 agonists differ markedly in their receptor coupling, ability to activate different signaling cascades, and kinetics/duration of action. These results show that their hBRS-3 receptor activation is not always concordant and could lead to markedly different cellular responses.
Bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3) is an orphan G-protein coupled receptor which is classified in the bombesin receptor (BnR) family with which it shares high homology. It is present widely in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues and primarily receptor-knockout studies suggest it is involved in metabolic-glucose-insulin homeostasis, feeding and other CNS behaviors, gastrointestinal motility and cancer growth. However, the role of BRS-3 physiologically or in pathologic disorders has been not well defined because the natural ligand is unknown. Until recently, no selective agonists/antagonists were available; however, recently synthetic high-affinity agonists, chiral-diazepines nonpeptide-analogs (3F, 9D, 9F, 9G) with low CNS penetrance, were described, but are not well-categorized pharmacologically or in different labarotory species. The present study characterizes the affinities, potencies, selectivities of the chiral-diazepine BRS-3 agonists in human and rodents (mice,rat). In human BRS-3 receptors, the relative affinities of the chiral-diazepines was 9G>9D>9F>3F; each was selective for BRS-3. For stimulating PLC activity, in h-BRS-3 each of the four chiral diazepine analogs was fully efficacious and their relative potencies were: 9G (EC50: 9 nM)>9D (EC50: 9.4 nM)>9F (EC50: 39 nM)>3F (EC50: 48 nM). None of the four chiral diazepine analogs activated r,m,h-GRPR/NMBR. The nonpeptide agonists showed marked differences from each other and a peptide agonist in receptor-coupling-stiochiometry and in affinities/potencies in different species. These results demonstrate that chiral diazepine analogs (9G, 9D, 9F, 3F) have high/affinity/potency for the BRS-3 receptor in human and rodent cells, but different coupling-relationships and species differences from a peptide agonist.
The three mammalian bombesin (Bn) receptors (gastrin-releasing peptide [GRP] receptor, neuromedin B [NMB] receptor, BRS-3) are one of the classes of G protein-coupled receptors that are most frequently over-express/ectopically expressed by common, important malignancies. Because of the clinical success of somatostatin receptor-mediated imaging and cytotoxicity with neuroendocrine tumors, there is now increasing interest in pursuing a similar approach with Bn receptors. In the last few years then have been more than 200 studies in this area. In the present paper, the in vitro and in vivo results, as well as results of human studies from many of these studies are reviewed and the current state of Bn receptor-mediated imaging or cytotoxicity is discussed. Both Bn receptor-mediated imaging studies as well as Bn receptor-mediated tumoral cytotoxic studies using radioactive and non-radioactive Bn-based ligands are covered.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) play an important role in physiology and disease and represent the most productive drug targets. Orphan GPCRs, with their endogenous ligands unknown, were considered a source of drug targets and consequently attract great interest to identify their endogenous cognate ligands for deorphanization. However, a contrary view to the ubiquitous existence of endogenous ligands for every GPCR is that there might be a significant overlooked fraction of orphan GPCRs that function constitutively in a ligand-independent manner only. Here, we investigated the evolution of the bombesin receptor-ligand family in vertebrates in which one member-bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS3)-is a potential orphan GPCR. With analysis of 17 vertebrate BRS3 structures and 10 vertebrate BRS3 functional data, our results demonstrated that nonplacental vertebrate BRS3 still connects to the original ligands-neuromedin B (NMB) and gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP)-because of adaptive evolution, with significantly changed protein structure, especially in three altered key residues (Q127R, P205S, and R294H) originally involved in ligand binding/activation, whereas the placental mammalian BRS3 lost the binding affinity to NMB/GRP and constitutively activates Gs/Gq/G12 signaling in a ligand-independent manner. Moreover, the N terminus of placental mammalian BRS3 underwent positive selection, exhibiting significant structural differences compared to nonplacental vertebrate BRS3, and this domain plays an important role in constitutive activity of placental mammalian BRS3. In conclusion, constitutively active BRS3 is a genuinely orphan GPCR in placental mammals, including human. To our knowledge, this study identified the first example that might represent a new group of genuinely orphan GPCRs that will never be deorphanized by the discovery of a natural ligand and provided new perspectives in addition to the current ligand-driven GPCR deorphanization.
This review consolidates current knowledge on mammalian parental care, focusing on its neural mechanisms, evolutionary origins, and derivatives. Neurobiological studies have identified specific neurons in the medial preoptic area as crucial for parental care. Unexpectedly, these neurons are characterized by the expression of molecules signaling satiety, such as calcitonin receptor and BRS3, and overlap with neurons involved in the reproductive behaviors of males but not females. A synthesis of comparative ecology and paleontology suggests an evolutionary scenario for mammalian parental care, possibly stemming from male-biased guarding of offspring in basal vertebrates. The terrestrial transition of tetrapods led to prolonged egg retention in females and the emergence of amniotes, skewing care toward females. The nocturnal adaptation of Mesozoic mammalian ancestors reinforced maternal care for lactation and thermal regulation via endothermy, potentially introducing metabolic gate control in parenting neurons. The established maternal care may have served as the precursor for paternal and cooperative care in mammals and also fostered the development of group living, which may have further contributed to the emergence of empathy and altruism. These evolution-informed working hypotheses require empirical validation, yet they offer promising avenues to investigate the neural underpinnings of mammalian social behaviors.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes the results of recent studies regarding the biology and pharmacology of novel synthetic agonists and antagonists of the bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3). RECENT FINDINGS: All three mammalian bombesin receptors including gastrin-releasing peptide receptor, the neuromedin B receptor, and the BRS-3 have been shown to regulate energy balance and appetite and satiety. Studies indicate that the orphan BRS-3 is an important regulator of body weight, energy expenditure, and glucose homeostasis. Endogenous bombesin-like peptides bombesin, gastrin-releasing peptide, and neuromedin B receptor do not bind to BRS-3 and the endogenous BRS-3 ligand remains unknown. The novel synthesis of selective, high-affinity BRS-3 agonists and antagonists has recently been accomplished and showed that BRS-3 regulates energy balance independent of other established pathways and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in the pancreatic islet cells. The availability of new BRS-3 selective agonists and antagonists will facilitate further elucidation of its role in energy homeostasis, and provides a potential approach for the pharmacological treatment of obesity and type 2 diabetes. SUMMARY: The native ligand of the G protein-coupled BRS-3 has not been identified as of now. However, novel synthesis of small-molecule, high-affinity agonists and antagonists on the BRS-3 was used in the recent studies and demonstrated an important role of BRS-3 in the regulation of energy homeostasis and glucose metabolism.
There is increased interest in the Bn-receptor family because they are frequently over/ectopically expressed by tumors and thus useful as targets for imaging or receptor-targeted-cytotoxicity. The synthetic Bn-analog, [D-Tyr(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13), Nle(14)]Bn(6-14) [Univ.Lig] has the unique property of having high affinity for all three human BNRs (GRPR, NMBR, BRS-3), and thus could be especially useful for this approach. However, the molecular basis of this property is unclear and is the subject of this study. To accomplish this, site-directed mutagenesis was used after identifying potentially important amino acids using sequence homology analysis of all BnRs with high affinity for Univ.Lig compared to the Cholecystokinin-receptor (CCK(A)R), which has low affinity. Using various criteria 74 amino acids were identified and 101 mutations made in GRPR by changing each to those of CCK(A)R or to alanine. 22 GRPR mutations showed a significant decrease in affinity for Univ.Lig (>2-fold) with 2 in EC2[D97N, G112V], 1 in UTM6[Y284A], 2 in EC4[R287N, H300S] showing >10-fold decrease in Univ.Lig affinity. Additional mutations were made to explore the molecular basis for these changes. Our results show that high affinity for Univ.Lig by human Bn-receptors requires positively charged amino acids in extracellular (EC)-domain 4 and to a lesser extent EC2 and EC3 suggesting charge-charge interactions may be particularly important for determining the general high affinity of this ligand. Furthermore, transmembrane amino acids particularly in UTM6 are important contributing both charge-charge interactions as well as interaction with a tyrosine residue in close proximity suggesting possible receptor-peptide cation-pi or H-bonding interactions are also important for determining its high affinity.
Amphibian bombesin and its related peptides consist a family of neuropeptides in many vertebrate species. Bombesin and two major bombesin-like peptide in mammals, gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) and neuromedin B (NMB), have been shown to elicit various physiological effects. These include inhibition of feeding, smooth muscle contraction, exocrine and endocrine secretions, thermoregulation, blood pressure and sucrose regulations and cell growth. Receptors for GRP and NMB (GRP-R and NMB-R), as well as third subtype of bombesin-like peptide receptor (BRS-3) have been cloned. These receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors and are expressed in various brain regions and in the digestive tract. In this paper, we will summarize studies on these peptides and their receptors, with special reference to research using gene-knockout mice. These studies clearly demonstrated the role of three receptors in vivo and in vitro. We will also discuss the phylogeny of these receptors.
Bombesin-like receptor 3 (BRS-3) is an X-linked orphan Gq-coupled receptor that regulates food intake, metabolic rate, body temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, and insulin secretion. Most BRS-3 actions occur via the brain, through mechanisms including regulating sympathetic outflow. Ablation of Brs3 causes obesity, while synthetic agonists produce weight loss.
Studies on bombesin-like peptides (BLP) and their respective mammalian receptors (Bn-r) have demonstrated a significant biological impact on a broad array of physiological and pathophysiological conditions. Pharmacological experiments in vitro and in vivo as well as utilization of genetic rodent models of the gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRP-R/BB2-receptor), neuromedin B receptor (NMB-R/BB1-receptor), and the bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3/BB3-receptor) further delineated their role in health and disease. All three mammalian bombesin receptors have been shown to possess some role in the regulation of energy balance and appetite and satiety. Compelling experimental evidence has accumulated indicating that the orphan BRS-3 is an important regulator of body weight, energy expenditure, and glucose homeostasis. BRS-3 possesses no high affinity to the endogenous bombesin-like peptides (BLP) bombesin, GRP, and NMB, and its endogenous ligand remains unknown. Recently, the synthesis of novel, selective high-affinity BRS-3 agonists and antagonists has been accomplished and has demonstrated that BRS-3 regulates energy balance independent of other established pathways. Accordingly, the availability of new BRS-3 selective agonists and antagonists will facilitate further elucidation of its role in energy homeostasis and provides a potential approach for the pharmacological treatment of obesity.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Mammalian bombesin-related peptides, gastrin-releasing peptide and neuromedin B actions are mediated by two receptors (BB1-receptor, BB2-receptor), which are closely related to the orphan receptor BRS-3 (BB3-receptor). The purpose of this review is to highlight advances in the understanding of these peptides in physiology/disease states. RECENT FINDINGS: Pharmacologic/receptor-knockout studies show involvement of these receptors in a number of new processes/diseases. Neuromedin B/BB1-receptor is an important physiological regulator of pituitary-thyroid function; in mediating behavior, especially feas/anxiety; in mediating satiety through different cascades than gastrin-releasing peptide/BB2 receptors and for its autocrine tumor-growth effects. Gastrin-releasing peptide/BB2-receptor plays important roles in mediating signals for pruritus, lung development/injury, small intestinal mucosal defense, and central nervous system processes such as learning/memory. The signaling mechanisms of its potent growth effects are being elucidated and their possible therapeutic targets identified. BB3-receptor knockout mice provided insights for their obesity/glucose intolerance and demonstrated that this receptor may be important in the lung response to injury, tumor growth and gastrointestinal motility. Each receptor is frequently overexpressed in human tumors and has potent growth effects. This effect is being explored to develop new antitumor treatments, such as bombesin-receptor ligands conjugated to cytotoxic agents. SUMMARY: This receptor family is involved in an increasing number of central nervous system/peripheral processes physiologically and in disease states, and increased understanding of its role may lead to novel treatments.
Bombesin (Bn) is a 14-amino acid peptide isolated from the skin of the frog Bombina bombina. The mammalian homologs of this peptide include three forms of gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP): GRP-10, GRP-27, and GRP-29, and a 10-amino acid peptide referred to as neuromedin-B (NMB). These peptides evoke a number of responses, including hyperthermia, bradycardia, inhibition of gastric emptying and inhibition of food intake, by activating one of three G protein-coupled receptors: an NMB-R or BB(1), a GRP-R or BB(2) and an orphan Bn receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3) or BB(3). Bombesin, GRP, and NMB have a role in the short-term control of food intake. These peptides reduce meal size (MS) and they prolong the intermeal interval (IMI), the time between the first and second meals. Studies have shown that the vagus and the splanchnic nerves in the upper gastrointestinal tract, which communicate with the feeding areas of the hindbrain, are necessary for reduction of MS and prolongation of the IMI by Bn, GRP, and NMB. In addition, one-tenth of the intraperitoneal dose of Bn, GRP, and NMB given in either the left gastric artery, which supplies the stomach, or the cranial mesenteric artery, which supplies the intestine, or the femoral vein, also reduces MS and prolongs the IMI. Thus, a potential neurocrine or an endocrine mode of action for these peptides requires further investigation.
Bombesin-like receptor 3 (BRS3), an orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), plays important roles in our biological system while the exact mechanisms behind it are less known. To get insights of the biological effects upon BRS3 activation, we utilized quantitative proteomics approach to explore the dynamic protein profiling during the stimulation by its ligand. At different time points after stimulation with BRS3 surrogate agonist, the protein profiling in BRS3 overexpressed HEK 293 cells BRS3 (HEK 293-BRS3) was analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS. In total, 1593 cellular proteins were confidently identified and quantified, including 146 proteins dysregulated at multiple time points and 319 proteins only altered at one time point. Data analysis indicated that BRS3 activation could regulate cell death, survival, and protein synthesis, particularly mRNA translation. Key signaling pathways were revealed for BRS3 signal transduction. In particular, 21 of our identified proteins are involved in the rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway. The promotion of mTOR was further confirmed through monitoring its indicative targets upon BRS3 activation. Upon the inhibition of mTOR by rapamycin, cell proliferation was dramatically reversed. Our proteomics data collectively demonstrate that BRS3 activation will lead to cascades of signal transduction and promote cell proliferation. The developed strategy might be utilized to discover the roles of other GPCRs and improve our understanding of their unknown functions.
The mammalian bombesin (Bn)-receptor family [gastrin-releasing peptide-receptor (GRPR-receptor), neuromedin B-receptor (NMB receptor)], their natural ligands, GRP/NMB, as well as the related orphan receptor, BRS-3, are widely distributed, and frequently overexpressed by tumors. There is increased interest in agonists for this receptor family to explore their roles in physiological/pathophysiological processes, and for receptor-imaging/cytotoxicity in tumors. However, there is minimal data on human pharmacology of Bn receptor agonists and most results are based on nonhuman receptor studies, particular rodent-receptors, which with other receptors frequently differ from human-receptors. To address this issue we compared hNMB-/GRP-receptor affinities and potencies/efficacies of cell activation (assessing phospholipase C activity) for 24 putative Bn-agonists (12 natural, 12 synthetic) in four different cells with these receptors, containing native receptors or receptors expressed at physiological densities, and compared the results to native rat GRP-receptor containing cells (AR42J-cells) or rat NMB receptor cells (C6-glioblastoma cells). There were close correlations (r=0.92-99, p<0.0001) between their affinities/potencies for the two hGRP- or hNMB-receptor cells. Twelve analogs had high affinities (</= 1 nM) for hGRP receptor with 15 selective for it (greatest=GRP, NMC), eight had high affinity/potencies for hNMB receptors and four were selective for it. Only synthetic Bn analogs containing beta-alanine(11) had high affinity for hBRS-3, but also had high affinities/potencies for all GRP-/hNMB-receptor cells. There was no correlation between affinities for human GRP receptors and rat GRP receptors (r=0.131, p=0.54), but hNMB receptor results correlated with rat NMB receptor (r=0.71, p<0.0001). These results elucidate the human and rat GRP-receptor pharmacophore for agonists differs markedly, whereas they do not for NMB receptors, therefore potential GRP-receptor agonists for human studies (such as Bn receptor-imaging/cytotoxicity) must be assessed on human Bn receptors. The current study provides affinities/potencies on a large number of potential agonists that might be useful for human studies.
