Delta-type opioid receptor; G-protein coupled receptor that functions as receptor for endogenous enkephalins and for a subset of other opioids. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling leads to the inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity. Inhibits neurotransmitter release by reducing calcium ion currents and increasing potassium ion conductance. Plays a role in the perception of pain and in opiate-mediated analgesia.  [...] 
The review summarizes the data on pro- and eukaryotic RNA (C5-cytosine) methyltransferases. The structure, intracellular location, RNA targets, and catalytic mechanisms of these enzymes, as well as the functional role of methylated cytosine residues in RNA are presented. The functions of RNA (C5-cytosine) methyltransferases unassociated with their methylation activity are discussed. Special attention is given to the similarities and differences in the structures and mechanisms of action of RNA and DNA methyltransferases. The data on the association of mutations in the RNA (C5-cytosine) methyltransferases genes and human diseases are presented.
Ergothioneine and ovothiol A are sulfur-containing histidine derivatives produced by microorganisms including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Trypanosoma cruzi or Erwinia amylovora and may also play important roles in human physiology. Based on our recent identification of thiohistidine biosynthetic enzymes from Mycobacterium smegmatis and Erwinia tasmaniensis we investigate several aspects of sulfur-based redox biochemistry. For example, we are characterizing the catalytic mechanism of two thiohistidine biosynthetic enzymes which afford O2-dependent sulfur insertion into the C(5)-H and C(2)-H bonds of the imidazolyl side chain of histidine.
Eculizumab, a monoclonal antibody (mAb) directed against complement protein C5, is considered to be the current standard of care for patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. This study describes the generation and preclinical attributes of ALXN1210, a new long-acting anti-C5 mAb, obtained through select modifications to eculizumab to both largely abolish target-mediated drug disposition (TMDD) and increase recycling efficiency via the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn). To attenuate the effect of TMDD on plasma terminal half-life (t1/2), histidine substitutions were engineered into the complementarity-determining regions of eculizumab to enhance the dissociation rate of the mAb:C5 complex in the acidic early endosome relative to the slightly basic pH of blood. Antibody variants with optimal pH-dependent binding to C5 exhibited little to no TMDD in mice in the presence of human C5. To further enhance the efficiency of FcRn-mediated recycling of the antibody, two additional substitutions were introduced to increase affinity for human FcRn. These substitutions yielded an additional doubling of the t(1/2) of surrogate anti-mouse C5 antibodies with reduced TMDD in transgenic mice expressing the human FcRn. In conclusion, ALXN1210 is a promising new therapeutic candidate currently in clinical development for treatment of patients with PNH and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
5-Methylcytosine (m(5) C) is an RNA modification prevalent on tRNAs, where it can protect tRNAs from endonucleolytic cleavage to maintain protein synthesis. The NSUN family (NSUN1-7 in humans) of RNA methyltransferases are capable of installing the methyl group onto the C(5) position of cytosines in RNA. NSUNs are implicated in a wide range of (patho)physiological processes, but selective and cell-active inhibitors of these enzymes are lacking. Here, we use cysteine-directed activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) to discover azetidine acrylamides that act as stereoselective covalent inhibitors of human NSUN2. Despite targeting a conserved catalytic cysteine in the NSUN family, the NSUN2 inhibitors show negligible cross-reactivity with other human NSUNs and exhibit good proteome-wide selectivity. We verify that the azetidine acrylamides inhibit the catalytic activity of recombinant NSUN2, but not NSUN6, and demonstrate that these compounds stereoselectively disrupt NSUN2-tRNA interactions in cancer cells, leading to a global reduction in tRNA m(5) C content. Our findings thus highlight the potential to create isotype-selective and cell-active inhibitors of NSUN2 with covalent chemistry targeting a conserved catalytic cysteine.
The bispecific antibody gefurulimab (also known as ALXN1720) was developed to provide patients with a subcutaneous treatment option for chronic disorders involving activation of the terminal complement pathway. Gefurulimab blocks the enzymatic cleavage of complement component 5 (C5) into the biologically active C5a and C5b fragments, which triggers activation of the terminal complement cascade. Heavy-chain variable region antigen-binding fragment (VHH) antibodies targeting C5 and human serum albumin (HSA) were isolated from llama immune-based libraries and humanized. Gefurulimab comprises an N-terminal albumin-binding VHH connected to a C-terminal C5-binding VHH via a flexible linker. The purified bispecific VHH antibody has the expected exact size by mass spectrometry and can be formulated at greater than 100 mg/mL. Gefurulimab binds tightly to human C5 and HSA with dissociation rate constants at pH 7.4 of 54 pM and 0.9 nM, respectively, and cross-reacts with C5 and serum albumin from cynomolgus monkeys. Gefurulimab can associate with C5 and albumin simultaneously, and potently inhibits the terminal complement activity from human serum initiated by any of the three complement pathways in Wieslab assays. Electron microscopy and X-ray crystallography revealed that the isolated C5-binding VHH recognizes the macroglobulin (MG) 4 and MG5 domains of the antigen and thereby is suggested to sterically prevent C5 binding to its activating convertase. Gefurulimab also inhibits complement activity supported by the rare C5 allelic variant featuring an R885H substitution in the MG7 domain. Taken together, these data suggest that gefurulimab may be a promising candidate for the potential treatment of complement-mediated disorders.
This review article presents advances in cholesterol chemistry since 2000. Various transformations (chemical, enzymatic, electrochemical, etc.) of cholesterol are presented. A special emphasis is given to cholesterol oxidation reactions, but also substitution of the 3beta-hydroxyl group, addition to the C5-C6 double bond, C-H functionalization, and C-C bond forming reactions are discussed.
Nucleoside modifications in tRNA anticodons regulate ribosome dynamics during translation elongation and, thereby, fine-tune global protein synthesis rates. The highly conserved eukaryotic Elongator complex conducts specific C5-substitutions in tRNA wobble base uridines. It harbors two copies of each of its six individual subunits, which are all equally important for its activity. Here, we summarize recent developments focusing on the architecture of the Elongator complex, showing an asymmetric subunit arrangement, and its functional implications. In addition, we discuss the role of its proposed active site, its individual subunits and temporarily associated regulatory factors. Finally, we aim to provide mechanistic explanations for the link between mutations in Elongator subunits and the onset of several severe human pathologies.
As part of the innate immune system, the complement system recognises a wide range of non-self structures present on pathogens or altered self cells. Its activation elicits proteolytic cascades which eventually results in the cleavage of the C5 protein into two fragments, C5a and C5b. The small anaphylatoxin C5a induces a variety of biological responses upon binding to the 7TM receptors C5aR and the C5L2, while the large C5b fragment nucleates formation of the membrane attack complex capable of killing susceptible pathogens by the formation of a pore structure in association with complement components C6, C7, C8, and C9. A number of regulatory molecules help to control C5 mediated immune responses towards host cells, but in several major inflammatory conditions including sepsis and arthritis, C5a is believed to contribute significantly to disease etiology. Inhibition of membrane attack complex assembly is already approved for treatment of paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. A number of recent crystal structures have provided a comprehensive insight into the architecture and properties of intact C5 and its fragments, and how pathogens interfere with their function. Here we review the functional and structural aspects of C5 and its fragments, the pathological conditions associated with them, and strategies employed by pathogens to interfere with the biological function of C5. Structural insight and elucidation of evasion strategies employed by pathogens present a unique opportunity for promoting the development of novel selective C5 inhibitors with therapeutic applications.
Cytosine methylation at the C5-position-generating 5-methylcytosine (5mC)-is a DNA modification found in many eukaryotic organisms, including fungi, plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates, albeit its levels vary greatly in different organisms. In mammals, cytosine methylation occurs predominantly in the context of CpG dinucleotides, with the majority (60-80%) of CpG sites in their genomes being methylated. DNA methylation plays crucial roles in the regulation of chromatin structure and gene expression and is essential for mammalian development. Aberrant changes in DNA methylation and genetic alterations in enzymes and regulators involved in DNA methylation are associated with various human diseases, including cancer and developmental disorders. In mammals, DNA methylation is mediated by two families of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts), namely Dnmt1 and Dnmt3 proteins. Over the last three decades, genetic manipulations of these enzymes, as well as their regulators, in mice have greatly contributed to our understanding of the biological functions of DNA methylation in mammals. In this chapter, we discuss genetic studies on mammalian Dnmts, focusing on their roles in embryogenesis, cellular differentiation, genomic imprinting, and human diseases.
Oligodeoxynucleotides with stretches of cytidine residues associate into a four-stranded structure, the i-motif, in which two head-to-tail, intercalated, parallel-stranded duplexes are held together by hemiprotonated C.C+ pairs. We have investigated the possibility of forming an i-motif structure with C-rich ribonucleic acids. The four C-rich RNAs studied, r(UC5), r(C5), r(C5U) and r(UC3), associate into multiple intercalated structures at acidic pH. r(UC5) forms two i-motif structures that differ by their intercalation topologies. We report on a structural study of the main form and we analyze the small conformational differences found by comparison with the DNA i-motif. The stacking topology of the main structure avoids one of the six 2'-OH/2'-OH repulsive contacts expected in a fully intercalated structure. The C3'-endo pucker of the RNA sugars and the orientation of the intercalated C.C+ pairs result in a modest widening of the narrow grooves at the steps where the hydroxyl groups are in close contact. The free energy of the RNA i-motif, on average -4 kJ mol(-1) per C.C+ pair, is half of the value found in DNA i-motif structures.
A previous study had demonstrated that Leptospira enolase is secreted extracellularly by a yet unknown mechanism and reassociates with the bacterial membrane. Surface-anchored leptospiral enolase displays plasminogen binding activity. In this work, we explored the consequences of this interaction and also assessed whether Leptospira enolase might display additional moonlighting functions by interacting with other host effector proteins. We first demonstrated that enolase-bound plasminogen is converted to its active form, plasmin. The protease plasmin targets human fibrinogen and vitronectin, but not the complement proteins C3b and C5. Leptospira enolase also acts as an immune evasion protein by interacting with the negative complement regulators C4b binding protein and factor H. Once bound to enolase, both regulators remain functional as cofactors of factor I, mediating cleavage of C4b and C3b. In conclusion, enolase may facilitate leptospiral survival and dissemination, thus contributing to bacterial virulence. The identification and characterization of moonlighting proteins is a growing field of bacterial pathogenesis, as these multifaceted proteins may represent potential future therapeutic targets to fight bacterial infections.
The kynurenine pathway is the major pathway of l-tryptophan catabolism in eukaryotes and some bacteria. In this pathway, kynureninase catalyzes the hydrolysis of l-kynurenine (in bacteria) or 3-hydroxy-l-kynurenine (in eukaryotes) to give anthranilic acid or 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid, respectively, and l-alanine. Kynureninase is a member of the aminotransferase superfamily and contains pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP) as cofactor. The enzyme is a dimer of two identical subunits, with the active site containing residues contributed from both subunits. The reaction of kynureninase is formally a retro-Claisen reaction, and thus requires extensive acid-base catalysis. The pH dependence of the reaction of Pseudomonas fluorescens kynureninase shows two pKa's, a base with 6.5 and an acid with 8.8, on kcat/Km, and one pKa of 6.8 on kcat. The effects of mutagenesis of Tyr-226 and (31)P NMR results suggest that the basic group with pKa of 6.5 is the phosphate group of the PLP, which accepts a proton from the amino acid substrate zwitterion to initiate transaldimination. The external aldimine of kynurenine and PLP is then deprotonated by the epsilon-amino group of Lys-227 to give a quinonoid intermediate, which is reprotonated at C-4' to give a ketimine. Addition of water to the gamma-carbonyl, assisted by Lys-227, then gives a gem-diol, which undergoes Cbeta-Cgamma cleavage to give the first product, anthranilic acid, and an enamine intermediate. The enamine is protonated at the beta-carbon, resulting in a pyruvate ketimine. Deprotonation at C-4' and reprotonation of the alpha-carbon gives the external aldimine of l-alanine, which releases the second product, l-alanine. The reaction specificity of kynureninases is determined in part by active site residues, Trp64, Gly281, and Thr282 in P. fluorescens, and the homologous His102, Ser332, and Asn333 in human kynureninase. Asn333 can form a hydrogen bond to the 3-OH of 3-hydroxykynurenine in the human enzyme. Halogenation of kynurenine at C-5 increases activity with both enzymes, but halogenation at C-3 only increases activity for human kynureninase. The effect of halogenation at C-5 may be due to hydrophobic or van der Waals effects, and the effect of halogenation at C-3 for the human enzyme may be due to halogen bonding.
Multicellular organisms developed the concept of specialized cells that perform specific functions. Examples are neurons and fibroblast to name just two out of more than 200. These cellular differences are established based on the same sequence information stored in the cell nucleus of all cells of an organism. The sequence information needs consequently different interpretations by the different cell types. During cellular development this interpretation of the genetic code has to be tightly regulated in space and time. Interpretation of the sequence information involves the controlled activation and silencing of specific genes so that certain proteins are made in one cell type but not in others. This involves an additional regulatory information layer beyond the pure base sequence. One aspect of this regulatory information layer relies on functional groups that are attached to the C(5) position of the canonical base dC. Currently four regulatory, non-canonical bases with a methyl (CH(3) )-, a hydroxymethyl (CH(2) OH)-, a formyl (CHO)- and a carboxyl (COOH)- group are known. While 5-methyl-cytidine is long recognised to be a regulatory base in the genome, the other three bases and the enzymes responsible for generating them, were just recently discovered.
Modular serine proteases are central to the complement cascade of the mammalian humoral immune system. These proteases form protein complexes through multi-domain interactions to achieve their proteolytic activity. We review the structural insights into complement initiation by auto-activation of the hetero-tetrameric proteases of the large danger-recognition protein complexes, amplification and labelling of particles by the formation and activity of C3 convertases, and regulation by convertase dissociation and degradation to prevent 'bystander' damage to healthy host cells and tissues. The data reveal that complex formation and large domain-domain rearrangements underlie the proteolytic reactions of the complement cascade, which enables the host to recognize and clear invading microbes and host debris from its blood and fluids surrounding tissues.
CLYBL encodes a ubiquitously expressed mitochondrial enzyme, conserved across all vertebrates, whose cellular activity and pathway assignment are unknown. Its homozygous loss is tolerated in seemingly healthy individuals, with reduced circulating B(12) levels being the only and consistent phenotype reported to date. Here, by combining enzymology, structural biology, and activity-based metabolomics, we report that CLYBL operates as a citramalyl-CoA lyase in mammalian cells. Cells lacking CLYBL accumulate citramalyl-CoA, an intermediate in the C5-dicarboxylate metabolic pathway that includes itaconate, a recently identified human anti-microbial metabolite and immunomodulator. We report that CLYBL loss leads to a cell-autonomous defect in the mitochondrial B(12) metabolism and that itaconyl-CoA is a cofactor-inactivating, substrate-analog inhibitor of the mitochondrial B(12)-dependent methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT). Our work de-orphans the function of human CLYBL and reveals that a consequence of exposure to the immunomodulatory metabolite itaconate is B(12) inactivation.
Adenovirus (AdV) infection of the respiratory epithelium is common but poorly understood. Human AdV species C types, such as HAdV-C5, utilize the Coxsackie-adenovirus receptor (CAR) for attachment and subsequently integrins for entry. CAR and integrins are however located deep within the tight junctions in the mucosa where they would not be easily accessible. Recently, a model for CAR-independent AdV entry was proposed. In this model, human lactoferrin (hLF), an innate immune protein, aids the viral uptake into epithelial cells by mediating interactions between the major capsid protein, hexon, and yet unknown host cellular receptor(s). However, a detailed understanding of the molecular interactions driving this mechanism is lacking. Here, we present a new cryo-EM structure of HAdV-5C hexon at high resolution alongside a hybrid structure of HAdV-5C hexon complexed with human lactoferrin (hLF). These structures reveal the molecular determinants of the interaction between hLF and HAdV-C5 hexon. hLF engages hexon primarily via its N-terminal lactoferricin (Lfcin) region, interacting with hexon's hypervariable region 1 (HVR-1). Mutational analyses pinpoint critical Lfcin contacts and also identify additional regions within hLF that critically contribute to hexon binding. Our study sheds more light on the intricate mechanism by which HAdV-C5 utilizes soluble hLF/Lfcin for cellular entry. These findings hold promise for advancing gene therapy applications and inform vaccine development. IMPORTANCE: Our study delves into the structural aspects of adenovirus (AdV) infections, specifically HAdV-C5 in the respiratory epithelium. It uncovers the molecular details of a novel pathway where human lactoferrin (hLF) interacts with the major capsid protein, hexon, facilitating viral entry, and bypassing traditional receptors such as CAR and integrins. The study's cryo-EM structures reveal how hLF engages hexon, primarily through its N-terminal lactoferricin (Lfcin) region and hexon's hypervariable region 1 (HVR-1). Mutational analyses identify critical Lfcin contacts and other regions within hLF vital for hexon binding. This structural insight sheds light on HAdV-C5's mechanism of utilizing soluble hLF/Lfcin for cellular entry, holding promise for gene therapy and vaccine development advancements in adenovirus research.
The complement cascade is regulated by a series of proteins that inhibit complement convertase activity. These regulatory proteins, most of which possess binding sites for C3b and/or C4b, can be roughly divided into two groups, one that controls inappropriate complement convertase activity on the surface of cells, and another that controls convertase activity on immune complexes in serum. In this review we focus upon the structural and functional comparisons of the CR1 and CR2 proteins of man and mouse. A single gene encodes these proteins in the mouse while the human requires two. The analysis of mice lacking the CR1/CR2 proteins demonstrates the requirement of these proteins for the regulation of complement convertase activity within lymphatic tissue immune complexes that is not efficiently controlled by other membrane bound or serum regulatory proteins.
The human complement system plays a crucial role in immune defense. However, its erroneous activation contributes to many serious inflammatory diseases. Since most unwanted complement effector functions result from C5 cleavage into C5a and C5b, development of C5 inhibitors, such as clinically approved monoclonal antibody eculizumab, are of great interest. Here, we developed and characterized two anti-C5 nanobodies, UNbC5-1 and UNbC5-2. Using surface plasmon resonance, we determined a binding affinity of 119.9 pM for UNbC5-1 and 7.7 pM for UNbC5-2. Competition experiments determined that the two nanobodies recognize distinct epitopes on C5. Both nanobodies efficiently interfered with C5 cleavage in a human serum environment, as they prevented red blood cell lysis via membrane attack complexes (C5b-9) and the formation of chemoattractant C5a. The cryo-EM structure of UNbC5-1 and UNbC5-2 in complex with C5 (3.6 A resolution) revealed that the binding interfaces of UNbC5-1 and UNbC5-2 overlap with known complement inhibitors eculizumab and RaCI3, respectively. UNbC5-1 binds to the MG7 domain of C5, facilitated by a hydrophobic core and polar interactions, and UNbC5-2 interacts with the C5d domain mostly by salt bridges and hydrogen bonds. Interestingly, UNbC5-1 potently binds and inhibits C5 R885H, a genetic variant of C5 that is not recognized by eculizumab. Altogether, we identified and characterized two different, high affinity nanobodies against human C5. Both nanobodies could serve as diagnostic and/or research tools to detect C5 or inhibit C5 cleavage. Furthermore, the residues targeted by UNbC5-1 hold important information for therapeutic inhibition of different polymorphic variants of C5.
C3 is a central protein of the complement system, which is important to immune defense and provides a link between innate and adaptive immunity. Three pathways of complement activation converge at the activation of C3 yielding a diverse set of biological responses. This versatile and flexible molecule interacts with various proteins to fulfill its functions. Here we review recent insights gained from the crystal structure determinations of human, native C3 and its physiological down-regulation product C3c. The data provided, for the first time, a complete and detailed view of the composition and arrangement of the domains in C3. Comparison of C3 with C3c indicates marked flexibility of the molecule, particularly in the alpha-chain. We discuss the observed domain rearrangements, conformational changes and the location of various protein binding sites. These detailed, and structural, insights are important for developing models of the molecular mechanisms underlying the diverse biological activities of this large and complex molecule.
Ribonuclease P (RNase P) is a ubiquitous ribonucleoprotein complex responsible for the biosynthesis of tRNA. This enzyme from Escherichia coli contains a catalytic RNA subunit (M1 ribozyme) and a protein subunit (C5 cofactor). M1 ribozyme cleaves an RNA helix that resembles the acceptor stem and T-stem structure of its natural tRNA substrate. When covalently linked with a guide sequence, M1 RNA can be engineered into a sequence-specific endonuclease, M1GS ribozyme, which can cleave any target RNA sequences that base pair with the guide sequence. Recent studies indicate that M1GS ribozymes efficiently cleave the mRNAs of herpes simplex virus 1, human cytomegalovirus, and cancer causing BCR-ABL proteins in vitro and effectively inhibit the expression of these mRNAs in cultured cells. Moreover, RNase P ribozyme variants that are more active than the wild type M1 RNA can be generated using in vitro selection procedures and the selected variants are also more effective in inhibiting gene expression in cultured cells. These results demonstrate that engineered RNase P ribozymes represent a novel class of promising gene-targeting agents for applications in both basic research and clinical therapy. This review discusses the principle underlying M1GS-mediated gene inactivation and methodologies involved in effective M1GS construction, expression in vivo and emerging prospects of this technology for gene therapy.
