Carbonic anhydrase 12; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide. Belongs to the alpha-carbonic anhydrase family.
Doxorubicin is limited in its therapeutic utility due to its life-threatening cardiovascular side effects. Here, we present an integrated drug discovery pipeline combining human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes (iCMs), CRISPR interference and activation (CRISPRi/a) bidirectional pooled screens, and a small-molecule screening to identify therapeutic targets mitigating doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity (DIC) without compromising its oncological effects. The screens revealed several previously unreported candidate genes contributing to DIC, including carbonic anhydrase 12 (CA12). Genetic inhibition of CA12 protected iCMs against DIC by improving cell survival, sarcomere structural integrity, contractile function, and calcium handling. Indisulam, a CA12 antagonist, can effectively attenuate DIC in iCMs, engineered heart tissue, and animal models. Mechanistically, doxorubicin-induced CA12 potentiated a glycolytic activation in cardiomyocytes, contributing to DIC by interfering with cellular metabolism and functions. Collectively, our study provides a roadmap for future drug discovery efforts, potentially leading to more targeted therapies with minimal off-target toxicity.
Nuclear receptors (NRs) are widely expressed transcription factors that bind small, lipophilic compounds and regulate diverse biological processes. In the small intestine, NRs are known to act as sensors that control transcriptional responses to endogenous and exogenous signals, yet their downstream effects have not been characterized extensively. Here, we investigate the activation of six different NRs individually in human intestinal organoids using small molecules agonists. We observe changes in key enterocyte functions such as lipid, glucose, and amino acid absorption, the regulation of electrolyte balance, and drug metabolism. Our findings reinforce PXR, LXR, FXR, and PPARalpha as regulators of lipid absorption. Furthermore, known hepatic effects of AHR and VDR activation were recapitulated in the human small intestine. Finally, we identify unique target genes for intestinal PXR activation (ERG28, TMEM97, and TM7SF2), LXR activation (RAB6B), and VDR activation (CA12). This study provides an unbiased and comprehensive transcriptomic description of individual NR pathways in the human small intestine. By gaining a deeper understanding of the effects of individual NRs, we might better harness their pharmacological and therapeutic potential.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Compared with other molecular subtypes, hormone receptor-positive breast cancer often shows worse neoadjuvant chemotherapy efficacy. This study aims to explore the relationship between the oestrogen receptor (ER)-related genes carbonic anhydrase 12 (CA12) and trefoil factor 3 (TFF3) and their predictive value of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. METHODS: We investigated the relationships between CA12, TFF3 and ER status and their predictive value of anthracycline-taxane neoadjuvant chemotherapy in 115 female breast cancer patients via real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and 4 GEO datasets: GSE41998, GSE25065, GSE20194 and GSE20271. Then, the effects of CA12 and TFF3 on the chemotherapy drugs doxorubicin and docetaxel were verified in vitro in the breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and BT474. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The GEO datasets and RT-PCR results showed that the relative expression of both CA12 and TFF3 was higher in oestrogen receptor-positive samples compared with the other samples (p < 0.05). CA12 was significantly correlated with TFF3 (p < 0.05). In MCF-7 cells, inhibition of TFF3 induced downregulation of CA12 and ESR1 (p < 0.05) at both the mRNA and the protein levels, while inhibition of CA12 also downregulated TFF3 and ESR1 (p < 0.05). In BT474 cells, inhibition of TFF3 downregulated CA12 and ESR1 (p < 0.05) at both the mRNA and the protein levels, while inhibition of CA12 led to slight upregulation of TFF3 and ESR1 (p > 0.05). Moreover, GEO datasets and RT-PCR results showed that CA12 and TFF3 were more highly expressed in nonpathological complete response (non-pCR) samples than in pCR samples (p < 0.05). Cell viability assays of MCF-7 and BT474 cells showed that inhibiting CA12 and TFF3 could enhance sensitivity to doxorubicin and docetaxel (p < 0.05). WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: CA12 and TFF3 were correlated with each other, and their high expression might explain the worse efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer patients.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive motor and extra-motor neurodegenerative disease. This systematic review aimed to examine MRI biomarkers and neuropsychological assessments of the hippocampal and parahippocampal regions in patients with ALS. METHODS: A systematic review was conducted in the Scopus and PubMed databases for studies published between January 2000 and July 2023. The inclusion criteria were (1) MRI studies to assess hippocampal and parahippocampal regions in ALS patients, and (2) studies reporting neuropsychological data in patients with ALS. RESULTS: A total of 46 studies were included. Structural MRI revealed hippocampal atrophy, especially in ALS-FTD, involving specific subregions (CA1, dentate gyrus). Disease progression and genetic factors impacted atrophy patterns. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) showed increased mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AD), radial diffusivity (RD), and decreased fractional anisotropy (FA) in the hippocampal tracts and adjacent regions, indicating loss of neuronal and white matter integrity. Functional MRI (fMRI) revealed reduced functional connectivity (FC) between the hippocampus, parahippocampus, and other regions, suggesting disrupted networks. Perfusion MRI showed hypoperfusion in parahippocampal gyri. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) found changes in the hippocampus, indicating neuronal loss. Neuropsychological tests showed associations between poorer memory and hippocampal atrophy or connectivity changes. CA1-2, dentate gyrus, and fimbria atrophy were correlated with worse memory. CONCLUSIONS: The hippocampus and the connected regions are involved in ALS. Hippocampal atrophy disrupted connectivity and metabolite changes correlate with cognitive and functional decline. Specific subregions can be particularly affected. The hippocampus is a potential biomarker for disease monitoring and prognosis.
The physiologically hypoxic intervertebral disc and cartilage rely on the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) family of transcription factors to mediate cellular responses to changes in oxygen tension. During homeostatic development, oxygen-dependent prolyl hydroxylases, circadian clock proteins and metabolic intermediates control the activities of HIF1 and HIF2 in these tissues. Mechanistically, HIF1 is the master regulator of glycolytic metabolism and cytosolic lactate levels. In addition, HIF1 regulates mitochondrial metabolism by promoting flux through the tricarboxylic acid cycle, inhibiting downsteam oxidative phosphorylation and controlling mitochondrial health through modulation of the mitophagic pathway. Accumulation of metabolic intermediates from HIF-dependent processes contribute to intracellular pH regulation in the disc and cartilage. Namely, to prevent changes in intracellular pH that could lead to cell death, HIF1 orchestrates a bicarbonate buffering system in the disc, controlled by carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) and CA12, sodium bicarbonate cotransporters and an intracellular H(+)/lactate efflux mechanism. In contrast to HIF1, the role of HIF2 remains elusive; in disorders of the disc and cartilage, its function has been linked to both anabolic and catabolic pathways. The current knowledge of hypoxic cell metabolism and regulation of HIF1 activity provides a strong basis for the development of future therapies designed to repair the degenerative disc.
PURPOSE: To identify whether there are functional abnormalities in the retina of amblyopic eyes using multifocal electroretinography (mfERG). METHODS: This is a prospective study of patients >/= 7 years of age identified with unilateral amblyopia (strabismic or anisometropic). Multifocal ERG and flash ERG were performed to compare parameters between the amblyopic and non-amblyopic fellow eyes. A complete analysis of the five ring averages was done including the central ring. RESULTS: Thirty-eight patients were included: mean age was 14.3 +/- 7.3 years; 18 patients were strabismic and 20 were anisometropic. Amblyopic eye responses across the rings in multifocal ERG were diminished compared with fellow non-amblyopic eyes with significant differences detected in the central rings (p = 0.001). On the other hand, flash ERG did not show any consistently significant differences. When divided by severity, amplitudes of central rings were significantly lower in severely amblyopic eyes compared with non-amblyopic eyes (p = 0.001), while in mild amblyopia, no significant differences were observed. No significant difference was observed between anisometropic and strabismic amblyopic eyes. CONCLUSIONS: Using multifocal ERG, significantly decreased amplitudes were observed in amblyopic eyes compared with normal fellow eyes in the central ring. This correlated with the severity of amblyopia. No difference was observed when comparing the two groups of amblyopia (strabismic and anisometropic). Those findings may help clarify the pathophysiology of amblyopia better and open the door for new objective ways to monitor the response to amblyopia treatment but this needs to be further studied.
BACKGROUND: This study explores the repurposing of Auranofin (AF), an anti-rheumatic drug, for treating non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) adenocarcinoma and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Drug repurposing in oncology offers a cost-effective and time-efficient approach to developing new cancer therapies. Our research focuses on evaluating AF's selective cytotoxicity against cancer cells, identifying RNAseq-based biomarkers to predict AF response, and finding the most effective co-therapeutic agents for combination with AF. METHODS: Our investigation employed a comprehensive drug screening of AF in combination with eleven anticancer agents in cancerous PDAC and NSCLC patient-derived organoids (n = 7), and non-cancerous pulmonary organoids (n = 2). Additionally, we conducted RNA sequencing to identify potential biomarkers for AF sensitivity and experimented with various drug combinations to optimize AF's therapeutic efficacy. RESULTS: The results revealed that AF demonstrates a preferential cytotoxic effect on NSCLC and PDAC cancer cells at clinically relevant concentrations below 1 microM, sparing normal epithelial cells. We identified Carbonic Anhydrase 12 (CA12) as a significant RNAseq-based biomarker, closely associated with the NF-kappaB survival signaling pathway, which is crucial in cancer cell response to oxidative stress. Our findings suggest that cancer cells with low CA12 expression are more susceptible to AF treatment. Furthermore, the combination of AF with the AKT inhibitor MK2206 was found to be particularly effective, exhibiting potent and selective cytotoxic synergy, especially in tumor organoid models classified as intermediate responders to AF, without adverse effects on healthy organoids. CONCLUSION: Our research offers valuable insights into the use of AF for treating NSCLC and PDAC. It highlights AF's cancer cell selectivity, establishes CA12 as a predictive biomarker for AF sensitivity, and underscores the enhanced efficacy of AF when combined with MK2206 and other therapeutics. These findings pave the way for further exploration of AF in cancer treatment, particularly in identifying patient populations most likely to benefit from its use and in optimizing combination therapies for improved patient outcomes.
Acquired resistance to oxaliplatin is considered as the primary reason for failure in colorectal cancer (CRC) therapy. Identifying the underlying resistance mechanisms may improve CRC treatment. The present study aims to identify the key genes involved in acquired oxaliplatin-resistant in CRC by confirming the oxaliplatin resistance index (OX-RI). To this aim, two public microarray datasets regarding oxaliplatin-resistant CRC cells with different OX-RI, GSE42387, and GSE76092 were downloaded from GEO database to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The results indicated that the OX-RI affects the gene expression pattern significantly. Then, 54 common DEGs in both datasets including 18 up- and 36 down-regulated genes were identified. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis revealed 13 up- (MAGEA6, TGM2, MAGEA4, SCHIP1, ECI2, CD33, AKAP12, MAGEA12, CALD1, WFDC2, VSNL1, HMGA2, and MAGEA2B) and 12 down-regulated (PDZK1IP1, FXYD3, ALDH2, CEACAM6, QPRT, GRB10, TM4SF4, LGALS4, ALDH3A1, USH1C, KCNE3, and CA12) hub genes. In the next step, two novel up-regulated hub genes including ECI2 and SCHIP1 were identified to be related to oxaliplatin resistance. Functional enrichment and pathway analysis indicated that metabolic pathways, proliferation, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition may play dominant roles in CRC progression and oxaliplatin resistance. In the next procedure, two in vitro oxaliplatin-resistant sub-lines including HCT116/OX-R4.3 and HCT116/OX-R10 cells with OX-IR 3.93 and 10.06 were established, respectively. The results indicated the up-regulation of TGM2 and HMGA2 in HCT116/OX-R10 cells with high OX-RI and down-regulation of FXYD3, LGALS4, and ECI2 in both cell types. Based on the results, TGM2, HMGA2, FXYD3, and LGALS4 genes are related to oxaliplatin-resistant CRC and may serve as novel therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND: Color vision deficiencies are a group of vision disorders, characterized by abnormal color discrimination. They include red-green color blindness, yellow-blue color blindness and achromatopsia, among others. The deficiencies are caused by mutations in the genes coding for various components of retinal cones. Gene therapy is rising as a promising therapeutic modality. The purpose of this review article is to explore the available literature on gene therapy in the different forms of color vision deficiencies. METHODS: A thorough literature review was performed on PubMed using the keywords: color vision deficiencies, gene therapy, achromatopsia and the various genes responsible for this condition (OPN1LW, OPN1MW, ATF6, CNGA3, CNGB3, GNAT2, PDE6H, and PDE6C). RESULTS: Various adenovirus vectors have been deployed to test the efficacy of gene therapy for achromatopsia in animals and humans. Gene therapy trials in humans and animals targeting mutations in CNGA3 have been performed, demonstrating an improvement in electroretinogram (ERG)-investigated cone cell functionality. Similar outcomes have been reported for experimental studies on other genes (CNGB3, GNAT2, M- and L-opsin). It has also been reported that delivering the genes via intravitreal rather than subretinal injections could be safer. There are currently 3 ongoing human clinical trials for the treatment of achromatopsia due to mutations in CNGB3 and CNGA3. CONCLUSION: Experimental studies and clinical trials generally showed improvement in ERG-investigated cone cell functionality and visually elicited behavior. Gene therapy is a promising novel therapeutic modality in color vision deficiencies.
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) promote metastasis and tumor cell extravasation, survival, and growth. In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the presence of TAM subpopulations correlates with poor outcome. In this issue of the JCI, Ning et al. report on their use of cell culture, mouse models, and human data sets to investigate the interactions between aerobic glycolysis and carbonic anhydrase XII (CA12) expression in HCC. Aerobic glycolysis promoted CA12 upregulation in TAMs, which induced a protumoral phenotype to promote tumor growth and metastasis. Tumor cell factors derived from HCC samples induced CA12 upregulation in tumor-infiltrating TAMs via the HIF1alpha pathway. In preclinical models of HCC, CA12 inhibition reduced tumor growth and lung metastasis and reduced TAM infiltrate. Notably, dual treatment with anti-PD1 and CA12 inhibitors synergistically attenuated tumor growth and metastasis and enhanced survival compared with either treatment alone. These findings suggest that targeting CA12 in combination with immune-checkpoint blockade may provide treatment options for HCC.
Macrophages constitute a major immune component in tumor tissues, but how these cells adapt to and survive in the nutrient-depleted and lactic acid-induced acidic tumor microenvironments is not yet fully understood. Here, we found that levels of carbonic anhydrase XII (CA12) expression were significantly and selectively upregulated on macrophages in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Transient glycolytic activation of peritumoral monocytes induced sustained expression of CA12 on tumor-infiltrating macrophages via autocrine cytokines and HIF1alpha pathways. On the one hand, CA12 mediated the survival of macrophages in relatively acidic tumor microenvironments, while on the other hand, it induced macrophage production of large amounts of C-C motif chemokine ligand 8 (CCL8), which enhanced cancer cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and facilitated tumor metastasis. Consistently, the accumulation of CA12+ macrophages in tumor tissues was associated with increased tumor metastatic potential and reduced survival of patients with HCC. Selective targeting of tumor-infiltrating macrophages with a CA12 inhibitor reduced tumor growth in mice and was sufficient to synergistically enhance the therapeutic efficacy of immune-checkpoint blockade. We suggest that CA12 activity is a previously unappreciated mechanism regulating the accumulation and functions of macrophages in tumor microenvironments and therefore represents a selective vulnerability that could be exploited in future designs for antitumor immunotherapeutic strategies.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a malignant tumor with high heterogeneity and poor prognosis. In this study, we sought to identify the value of platelet-related genes in prognosis and heterogeneity of PDAC through multiple transcriptomic methods. METHODS: Based on datasets from Gene Expression Omnibus and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), platelet-related genes were screened out, and the TCGA cohort (n = 171) was identified into two subtypes by unsupervised clustering. The platelet-related risk score model (PLRScore) was constructed by univariate Cox and LASSO regression, and the predictive ability was evaluated by Kaplan-Meier test and time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. The results were validated in two other external validation sets, ICGC-CA (n = 140) and GSE62452 (n = 66). Furthermore, predictive nomogram containing clinical characteristics and PLRScore was established. In addition, we determined the possible correlation between PLRScore and immune infiltration and response of immunotherapy. Finally, we analyzed the heterogeneity of our signature in various types of cells using single-cell analysis. RESULTS: Platelet-related subtypes that have significant difference of overall survival and immune states (p < 0.05) were identified. PLRScore model based on four-gene signature (CEP55, LAMA3, CA12, SCN8A) was constructed to predict patient prognosis. The AUCs of training cohort were 0.697, 0.687 and 0.675 for 1-, 3-and 5-year, respectively. Further evaluation of the validation cohorts yielded similar results. In addition, PLRScore was associated with immune cell infiltration and immune checkpoint expression, and had promising ability to predict response to immunotherapy of PDAC. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, the platelet-related subtypes were identified and the four-gene signature was constructed and validated. It may provide new insights into the therapeutic decision-making and molecular targets of PDAC.
Saliva testing, a non-invasive alternative to serum testing, may be an effective modality for diagnosis and for prognosis prediction of oral cancer, as well as for monitoring post therapy status, by measuring specific salivary macromolecules, examining proteomic or genomic targets such as enzymes, cytokines, growth factors, metalloproteinases, endothelin, telomerase, cytokeratines, mRNA's and DNA transcripts. Salivary analysis has been shown to be a useful diagnostic tool also for distant malignancies such as breast cancer. In recent years, significant alterations have been demonstrated in the saliva of oral cancer patients in the epithelial tumor markers--Cyfra 21-1, TPS and CA12, various oxidative stress-related salivary parameters as ROS and RNS, biochemical and immunological parameters as IGF and MMP's and RNA transcripts of IL8, IL-1B, DUSP1, HA3, OAZ1, S100P, and SAT. Collectively these accumulated data are predicted to alter the field of oral cancer diagnosis by employing highly sensitive new tools which will enable both medical professionals and the patients themselves to monitor their saliva for diagnosis and prognosis prediction, as they relate to oral cancer. At this point however, the aim of salivary analysis is mainly for screening which may be helpful in the future.
AIM: Ovarian cancer is a common cause of death in women worldwide. The purpose of this article was to report a case series and draw physicians' attention to the benefits of histpathologic techniques in determining uncommon metastatic diseases. METHODS: In this study, we report a case series of axillary involvement of ovarian cancer in 6 patients. The data were collected between 2006 and 2015 by analyzing patient's characteristics, and biochemical and immunohistochemical features. No pathologic lesions were detected in breasts. Specific immunohistochemical methods such as GCDFP-15, CA12-5, WT-1, and PAX-8 supported evidence of metastasis from ovarian cancer to axillary lymph nodes. RESULTS: Biochemical tests showed increased levels of CA12-5 in all patients. In 5 patients, GCDFP-15 was negative and WT-1 was positive with specific immunohistochemical staining. PAX-8 was positive in 3 of 5 patients. CONCLUSIONS: Physicians need to be aware that histopathologic and immunohistochemical results can make a significant contribution in determining the true primary tissue of metastatic adenocarcinoma, even in the absence of typical clinical findings.
INTRODUCTION: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD) is among the deadliest forms of cancer globally. Carbonic anhydrase 12 (CA12) is known to play central roles in regulating many cancers, but its function in the context of PAAD is rarely discussed. This study was, therefore, designed to assess the expression of CA12 in PAAD and to explore its underlying mechanistic role in this cancer type. METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining was used to measure CA12 expression in PAAD samples. The functionality of pancreatic cancer cells expressing varying levels of CA12 was assessed through wound healing, Transwell, and CCK-8 assays. In addition, flow cytometry was used to measure apoptosis and cell cycle progression in these same cells, while Western blotting was used to analyze the expression of proteins associated with the NF-kappaB signaling pathway. RESULTS: PAAD tissue samples exhibited significant CA12 downregulation (P < 0.001), and lower CA12 expression was, in turn, associated with poorer overall survival (P < 0.001). CA12 overexpression significantly impaired the proliferation of PAAD cell lines, instead inducing their apoptotic death and G0/G1 phase cell cycle arrest (P < 0.05). We additionally found that CA12 may exert its tumor suppressive roles via modulating the NF-kappaB signaling pathway. CONCLUSION: These results indicate that CA12 functions as a tumor suppressor in PAAD and may thus be a novel therapeutic target that can be used to guide PAAD patient treatment.
PURPOSE: Our aim was to report the characteristics and long-term surgical outcomes of three subgroups of horizontal strabismus in a single institution (divided by strabismus subtype) in a developing country and look into pre-operative factors predictive of surgical success. METHODS: Two hundred and forty-four complete charts of patients, divided into 152 esotropes (ET) and 92 exotropes (XT) who had undergone horizontal strabismus surgeries, were retrospectively reviewed. Charts of patients with muscle palsy, Duane syndrome and consecutive strabismus were excluded; 172 patients were included divided into partially accommodative ET, congenital ET and intermittent XT. Surgical success was defined as a post-operative angle deviation of 12 prism diopters or less. RESULTS: The mean follow-up period of all patients was 31.64 +/- 23.12 months. The subgroups were divided into partially accommodative ET (60 patients), congenital ET (60 patients), and intermittent XT (52 patients). Esotropes (both partially accommodative and congenital) presented earlier (p < 0.001). Also, partially accommodative ET had a significantly higher spherical equivalent (SE) compared to congenital ET patients, who had a higher SE than intermittent XT (p < 0.001). Congenital ET patients had a significantly larger angle of deviation (for both far and near) than both partially accommodative ET and intermittent XT patients (p < 0.001). The overall success rate was 72.67% for the whole group with no significant differences among subgroups. Success rate of partially accommodative ET surgery was 78.33% compared to that of congenital ET at 66.67% and intermittent XT at 73.07%. Significant post-operative improvement in sensory fusion was observed mainly for patients with partially accommodative esotropia and intermittent exotropia. CONCLUSION: Our results showed that esotropes (both partially accommodative and congenital) presented earlier, with a higher spherical equivalent in the partially accommodative ET subgroup, while the congenital ET subgroup had the largest angle of deviation for both distance and near. The overall surgical success rate for horizontal strabismus surgery was 72.67% with the 3 subgroups having similar success rates. A younger age at presentation and absence of amblyopia were positively correlated with surgical success in the partially accommodative esotropia group.
BACKGROUND: The goal of our study was to screen tumor grade-related lncRNAs and mRNAs to reveal the underlying molecular mechanism of esophagus squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). METHODS: The lncRNA and mRNA sequencing data were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Tumor grade correlation analysis of lncRNAs and mRNAs was executed, followed by the functional enrichment analysis of all tumor grade-related mRNAs. The differentially expression mRNAs (DEmRNAs) and differentially expressed lncRNAs (DElncRNAs) were obtained. PPI network and DEmRNA-DElncRNA interaction analysis were constructed. The functional annotation of the DEmRNAs co-expressed with DElncRNAs was performed. The expression levels of the candidate genes were validated using qRT-PCR. RESULTS: A total of 1864 tumor grade-related mRNAs (846 positively related and 1018 negatively related) and 552 tumor grade-related lncRNAs (331 positively related and 221 negatively related) were obtained. The top 10 significantly grade-related mRNAs and lncRNAs included CA12, FABP4, DECR1, BAIAP2, IL1RAPL2, PPARD, LAD1, TSPAN10, LDOC1, ZNF853, RP11-25G10.2, RP11-557H15.3, RP11-521D12.5, CHKB-AS1, RP11-219B4.3, CH17-335B8.4, RP11-99 J16-A.2, CTB-111H14.1, ADNP-AS1, and JHDM1D-AS1. SFN, IL1RAPL2, and RP11-25G10.2 were overlapped from grade 1, grade 2, and grade 3. PPI network showed that top 10 proteins with higher degrees, including GNAI1, RAP2B, GNAZ, SHH, ADCY1, PRKAR2B, SH3GL1, GNA15, and ARRB1. A DElncRNAs-nearby DEmRNAs network was constructed to obtain hub lncRNAs including ADAMTS9-AS2, RP11-210 M15.2, RP11-13 K12.1, ZBED3-AS1, and RP11-25G10.2. Except for RP11-25G10.2, ADAMTS9-AS1, ZBED3-AS1, SFN, ATP1A2, and GNA15 were consistent with our TCGA analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Alterations of DEmRNAs and DElncRNAs may provide key insights into the molecular mechanisms of ESCC.
Cancer cells reprogram their metabolic machineries to enter into permanent glycolytic pathways. The full reason for such reprogramming takes place is unclear. However, this metabolic switch is not made in vain for the lactate that is generated and exported outside cells is reused by other cells. This results in the generation of a pH gradient between the low extracellular pH that is acidic (pHe) and the higher cytosolic alkaline or near neutral pH (pHi) environments that are tightly regulated by the overexpression of several pumps and ion channels (e.g. NHE-1, MCT-1, V-ATPase, CA9, and CA12). The generation of this unique pH gradient serves as a determining factor in defining "tumor fitness". Tumor fitness is the capacity of the tumor to invade and metastasize due to its ability to reduce the efficiency of the immune system and confer resistance to chemotherapy. In this article, we highlight the importance of tumor microenvironment in mediating the failure of chemotherapeutic agents.
