Carbonic anhydrase 13; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide; Belongs to the alpha-carbonic anhydrase family.
BACKGROUND: The hippocampus, with its complex subfields, is linked to numerous neuropsychiatric traits. While most research has focused on its global structure or a few specific subfields, a comprehensive analysis of hippocampal substructures and their genetic correlations across a wide range of neuropsychiatric traits remains underexplored. Given the hippocampus's high heritability, considering hippocampal and subfield volumes (HASV) as endophenotypes for neuropsychiatric conditions is essential. METHODS: We analyzed MRI-derived volumetric data of hippocampal and subfield structures from 41,525 UK Biobank participants. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on 24 HASV traits were conducted, followed by genetic correlation, overlap, and Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses with 10 common neuropsychiatric traits. Polygenic risk scores (PRS) based on HASV traits were also evaluated for predicting these traits. RESULTS: Our analysis identified 352 independent genetic variants surpassing a significance threshold of 2.1 x 10(-9) within the 24 HASV traits, located across 93 chromosomal regions. Notably, the regions 12q14.3, 17q21.31, 12q24.22, 6q21, 9q33.1, 6q25.1, and 2q24.2 were found to influence multiple HASVs. Gene set analysis revealed enrichment of neural differentiation and signaling pathways, as well as protein binding and degradation. Of 240 HASV-neuropsychiatric trait pairs, 75 demonstrated significant genetic correlations (P < 0.05/240), revealing 433 pleiotropic loci. Particularly, genes like ACBD4, ARHGAP27, KANSL1, MAPT, ARL17A, and ARL17B were involved in over 50 HASV-neuropsychiatric pairs. Leveraging Mendelian randomization analysis, we further confirmed that atrophy in the left hippocampus, right hippocampus, right hippocampal body, and right CA1-3 region were associated with an increased risk of developing Parkinson's disease (PD). Furthermore, PRS for all four HASVs were significantly linked to a higher risk of Parkinson's disease (PD), with the highest hazard ratio (HR) of 1.30 (95% CI 1.18-1.43, P = 6.15 x 10(-)(8)) for right hippocampal volume. CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight the extensive distribution of pleiotropic genetic determinants between HASVs and neuropsychiatric traits. Moreover, they suggest a significant potential for effectively managing and intervening in these diseases during their early stages.
Cellular senescence is an aging mechanism characterized by cell cycle arrest and a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Preclinical studies demonstrate that senolytic drugs, which target survival pathways in senescent cells, can counteract age-associated conditions that span several organs. The comparative efficacy of distinct senolytic drugs for modifying aging and senescence biomarkers in vivo has not been demonstrated. Here, we established aging- and senescence-related plasma proteins and tissue transcripts that changed in old versus young female and male mice. We investigated responsivity to acute treatment with venetoclax, navitoclax, fisetin or luteolin versus transgenic senescent cell clearance in aged p16-InkAttac mice. We discovered that age-dependent changes in plasma proteins, including IL-23R, CCL5 and CA13, were reversed by senotherapeutics, which corresponded to expression differences in tissues, particularly in the kidney. In plasma from humans across the lifespan, IL-23R increased with age. Our results reveal circulating factors as candidate mediators of senescence-associated interorgan signal transduction and translationally impactful biomarkers of systemic senescent cell burden.
Metastatic progression is the leading cause of mortality in breast cancer. However, molecular mechanisms that govern this process remain unclear. In this study, we found that carbonic anhydrase 13 (CA13) plays a potential role in suppressing bone metastasis. iRFP713-labeled iCSCL-10A (iRFP-iCSCL-10A) breast cancer cells, which exhibit the hallmarks of cancer stem cells, exerted the ability of bone metastasis in hind legs after 5-week injections, whereas no metastasis was observed in control iRFP713-labeled MCF-10A (iRFP-MCF10A) cells. Transcriptome analysis indicated that the expression of several genes, including metabolism-related CA13, was reduced in bone metastatic iRFP-iCSCL-10A cells. In vitro and in vivo analyses demonstrated that overexpression of CA13 in iRFP-iCSCL-10A cells suppressed migration, invasion, and bone metastasis, together with the reduction of VEGF-A and M-CSF expression. Furthermore, we found that breast cancer patients with a low CA13 expression had significantly shorter overall survival and disease-free survival rates compared to those with higher CA13 expression. These findings suggest that CA13 may act as a novel prognostic biomarker and would be a therapeutic candidate for the prevention of bone metastasis in breast cancer.
OBJECTIVE: Lynch syndrome is caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes leading to microsatellite instability (MSI) and colorectal cancer. Mesalazine, commonly used for the treatment of UC, reduces MSI in vitro. Here, we tested natural compounds for such activity and applied mesalazine and thymoquinone in a Msh2(loxP/loxP) Villin-Cre mouse model for Lynch syndrome. DESIGN: Flow cytometry was used for quantitation of mutation rates at a CA13 microsatellite in human colon cancer (HCT116) cells that had been stably transfected with pIREShyg2-enhanced green fluorescent protein/CA13, a reporter for frameshift mutations. Mice were treated for 43 weeks with mesalazine, thymoquinone or control chow. Intestines were analysed for tumour incidence, tumour multiplicity and size. MSI testing was performed from microdissected normal intestinal or tumour tissue, compared with mouse tails and quantified by the number of mutations per marker (NMPM). RESULTS: Besides mesalazine, thymoquinone significantly improved replication fidelity at 1.25 and 2.5 microM in HCT116 cells. In Msh2(loxP/loxP) Villin-Cre mice, tumour incidence was reduced by mesalazine from 94% to 69% (p=0.04) and to 56% (p=0.003) by thymoquinone. The mean number of tumours was reduced from 3.1 to 1.4 by mesalazine (p=0.004) and to 1.1 by thymoquinone (p<0.001). Interestingly, MSI was reduced in normal intestinal tissue from 1.5 to 1.2 NMPM (p=0.006) and to 1.1 NMPM (p=0.01) by mesalazine and thymoquinone, respectively. Thymoquinone, but not mesalazine, reduced MSI in tumours. CONCLUSIONS: Mesalazine and thymoquinone reduce tumour incidence and multiplicity in Msh2(loxP/loxP) Villin-Cre mice by reduction of MSI independent of a functional mismatch repair system. Both substances are candidate compounds for chemoprevention in Lynch syndrome mutation carriers.
Reelin plays a key role in neuronal migration and lamination in the cortex and hippocampus. Animal studies have shown that reelin expression decreases with age. The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of reelin in all layers of the human hippocampal formation across three age groups. We used immunohistochemistry in formalin fixed and paraffin embedded hippocampal tissue from infants (1-10 months; n = 9), children (4-10 years; n = 4), and adults (45-60 years; n = 6) to stain for reelin. Expression was quantified (measured as the number of positive reelin cells/mm(2) ) in the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus (DG), the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus (ML), the hippocampal fissure (HF), stratum lacunosum moleculare (SLM), CA4/Hilus and the stratum pyramidale layer of CA3, CA2, and CA1. Expression of reelin was highest in the HF irrespective of age, followed by the SLM and ML. Minimal to no expression was seen in the stratum pyramidale layer of CA1-3. With age, reelin expression decreased and was statistically significant from infancy to childhood in the HF (p = .02). This study confirms that reelin expression decreases with age in the human hippocampus, and shows for the first time that the major decrease occurs between infancy and early childhood.
For decades estrogen was thought of only as a "sex hormone," as it plays a fundamental role in regulating behavioral and physiological events essential for successful procreation. In recent years, estrogen has been shown to exert effects on the structure and function of the hippocampus and cortex. The discovery of a new estrogen receptor (ER-beta) and localization of ER-alpha and ER-beta mRNAs in the pyramidal cells of the rat hippocampus and ER-beta mRNA in rat cortex have provided new insight into how estrogen may directly modulate the structure and function of these neurons. Moreover, recent in vivo (125)I-estrogen binding studies have shown that nuclear estrogen binding sites are widely distributed in the pyramidal cells throughout CA1-3 of the hippocampus and laminae II-VI of the isocortex, demonstrating that ER mRNAs are translated into biologically active protein. The functional impact of estrogen receptor localization in the cortex and hippocampus may prove relevant to the emerging role for estrogen as a protective factor in neurodegenerative injury. This potential role is further highlighted by the recent findings that the expression of ER-alpha and ER-beta changes following ischemic brain injury and that these changes correlate with the hormonal modulation of protective factors. These data provide the first evidence that the expression of ERs in the adult cortex is not static, but instead, responsive to neuronal injury and perhaps additional factors that influence the cortical environment and status of these neurons. Together, these data indicate that estrogen has a far greater effect on the hippocampus and isocortex than previously thought. Furthermore, these new findings challenge our current thinking about steroid hormones and their mechanism(s) of action in regions associated with learning and memory and affected by the neurodegenerative conditions of aging.
A series of histamine (HST)-related compounds were synthesized and tested for their activating properties on five physiologically relevant human Carbonic Anhydrase (hCA) isoforms (I, II, Va, VII and XIII). The imidazole ring of HST was replaced with different 5-membered heterocycles and the length of the aliphatic chain was varied. For the most interesting compounds some modifications on the terminal amino group were also performed. The most sensitive isoform to activation was hCA I (K(A) values in the low micromolar range), but surprisingly none of the new compounds displayed activity on hCA II. Some derivatives (1, 3a and 22) displayed an interesting selectivity for activating hCA I over hCA II, Va, VII and XIII.
INTRODUCTION: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) segmentation algorithms make it possible to study detailed medial temporal lobe (MTL) substructures as hippocampal subfields and amygdala subnuclei, offering opportunities to develop biomarkers for preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD). METHODS: We identified the MTL substructures significantly associated with tau-positron emission tomography (PET) signal in 581 non-demented individuals from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-3). We confirmed our results in our UCLouvain cohort including 110 non-demented individuals by comparing volumes between individuals with different visual Braak's stages and clinical diagnosis. RESULTS: Four amygdala subnuclei (cortical, central, medial, and accessory basal) were associated with tau in amyloid beta-positive (Abeta+) clinically normal (CN) individuals, while the global amygdala and hippocampal volumes were not. Using UCLouvain data, we observed that both Braak I-II and Abeta+ CN individuals had smaller volumes in these subnuclei, while no significant difference was observed in the global structure volumes or other subfields. CONCLUSION: Measuring specific amygdala subnuclei, early atrophy may serve as a marker of temporal tauopathy in preclinical AD, identifying individuals at risk of progression. HIGHLIGHTS: Amygdala atrophy is not homogeneous in preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD). Tau pathology is associated with atrophy of specific amygdala subnuclei, specifically, the central, medial, cortical, and accessory basal subnuclei. Hippocampal and amygdala volume is not associated with tau in preclinical AD. Hippocampus and CA1-3 volume is reduced in preclinical AD, regardless of tau.
Target deconvolution is essential for elucidating the molecular mechanisms, therapeutic efficacy, and off-target toxicity of small-molecule drugs. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) is a robust and popular method for identifying drug-protein interactions. Nevertheless, classical implementation of TPP using isobaric labeling of peptides is tedious, time-consuming, and costly. This prompts the adoption of a label-free approach with data-independent acquisition (DIA), but with substantial compromise in protein coverage and precision. To address these shortcomings, we improvised a spike-in proteome strategy for DIA with TPP to counteract the reduction in protein quantity following sample heating. Protein coverage, data completeness, and quantification precision are significantly improved as result. Additionally, a calibration algorithm was developed to correct for spike-in effects on fold changes. The integration of DIA-TPP with the matrix-augmented pooling strategy (MAPS) to increase experiment throughput demonstrates performance comparable to that of existing TMT-TPP-MAPS. With this spike-in proteome strategy, we also successfully identified the thermal stabilization of CA13 by dorzolamide hydrochloride as well as GSTZ1 and tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 1 of opicapone that eluded detection without spike-in proteome.
BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori gastritis increases gastric cancer risk. Microsatellite instability-type mutations are secondary to deficient DNA mismatch repair. H. pylori gastritis is more frequent in patients with microsatellite instability-positive gastric cancers, and H. pylori organisms independently of inflammation can reduce DNA mismatch repair protein levels, raising the hypothesis that H. pylori organisms might lead to mutagenesis during infection. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mutations were detected using a green fluorescent protein reporter vector (pEGFP-CA13). Gastric cancer AGS cells transfected with pEGFP-CA13 were cocultured with H. pylori or Escherichia coli. The numbers of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-positive cells were determined, and GFP, hMSH2, and hMLH1 protein levels were measured by Western blot. The effect of H. pylori on CpG methylation status of hMLH1 was determined by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: GFP levels and GFP-positive cell numbers in AGS cells cocultured with H. pylori significantly increased, as the levels of hMLH1 and hMSH2 dropped. H. pylori cocultures induced low-level CpG methylation of the hMLH1 promoter. Sequence analysis of cells cocultured with H. pylori showed an increased number of frameshift mutations and point mutations as compared to cells not cocultured with H. pylori (p = .03 and p = .001, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report showing that H. pylori bacteria may lead to accumulation of genomic mutations, independently of underlying inflammation. This is associated with reduced DNA mismatch repair, and is at least in part associated with CpG methylation of the hMLH1 promoter. These data support the notion that H. pylori-induced mutations and epigenetic alterations in gastric epithelial cells during chronic gastritis may contribute to an increased risk of gastric cancer associated with H. pylori infection.
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is an important form of structural and functional plasticity in the mature mammalian brain. The existing consensus is that GABA regulates the initial integration of adult-born neurons, similar to neuronal development during embryogenesis. Surprisingly, virus-based anatomical tracing revealed that very young, one-week-old, new granule cells in male C57Bl/6 mice receive input not only from GABAergic interneurons, but also from multiple glutamatergic cell types, including mature dentate granule cells, area CA1-3 pyramidal cells and mossy cells. Consistently, patch-clamp recordings from retrovirally labeled new granule cells at 7-8 days post retroviral injection (dpi) show that these cells respond to NMDA application with tonic currents, and that both electrical and optogenetic stimulation can evoke NMDA-mediated synaptic responses. Furthermore, new dentate granule cell number, morphology and excitatory synaptic inputs at 7 dpi are modified by voluntary wheel running. Overall, glutamatergic and GABAergic innervation of newly born neurons in the adult hippocampus develops concurrently, and excitatory input is reorganized by exercise.
AIMS: Previous studies suggest potential associations between epilepsy, anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs), and levels of vitamin D and vitamin D-binding protein (VDBP). This study aims to investigate the causal relationships among these variables using Mendelian Randomization (MR) methods. METHODS: Using summary data from genome-wide association studies on serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] levels (N = 417,580), VDBP concentrations (N = 65,589), and various types of epilepsy (Ncases = 27,559), MR analyses were conducted to determine bidirectional causal relationships among these variables. Additionally, eQTL data from eQTLGen (N = 31,684) were employed to model the effects of AEDs and evaluate their causal impact on both biomarkers. RESULTS: No causal relationships were found between serum 25(OH)D or VDBP levels and epilepsy. Although genetically predicted focal epilepsy risk was potentially associated with increased serum 25(OH)D levels (OR 1.031, 95% CI: 1.006-1.058, p = 0.017), and a higher genetic risk of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy was linked to lower VDBP levels (OR 0.977, 95% CI: 0.961-0.993, p = 0.004), both associations lost significance after multiple correction. Furthermore, significant associations were observed between serum 25(OH)D levels and AED target genes SCN4A, GABBR1, CA13, ALDH5A1, and CA8. No significant associations were found between AED target genes and VDBP levels after correction. CONCLUSION: No causal relationships were found between genetically determined serum 25(OH)D levels, VDBP, and epilepsy or its subtypes. Furthermore, the use of AEDs, such as Carbamazepine, Oxcarbazepine, Progabide, and Valproic Acid, reduces serum 25(OH)D levels, while not affect VDBP levels.
In adults, albuminuria represents a risk factor for cardiovascular disease and is associated with hypertension and obesity. Pediatric data from the general population are inconsistent and largely based on randomly collected urine. A possible association between antenatal programming and albuminuria at school age has still to be investigated. The purpose of this study is to assess albuminuria in first morning void urine samples in a population-based pediatric cohort and to investigate cross-sectionally the association with factors related to cardiovascular risk. Moreover, we investigate the possible association of antenatal factors with albuminuria. A first morning void urine sample was collected in the population-based GECKO (Groningen Expert Center for Kids with Obesity) Drenthe cohort at the age of 12 years. We investigated cross-sectionally associations between albuminuria and body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC), blood pressure (BP) and antenatal factors. The prevalence of U(ACR) (urinary albumin-creatinine ratio) >/= 3 mg/mmol was 3.3% (95%CI 2.3-4.2). In a multivariate linear regression model, U(AC) was negatively associated with z-BMI (beta-0.08, p = 0.013) and positively with z-systolic BP (beta 0.09, p = 0.006), model significance p = 0.002. U(ACR) was negatively associated with z-BMI (beta - 0.13, p < 0.001) and positively with z-diastolic BP (beta 0.09, p = 0.003), model significance p = 0.001. Albuminuria was not significantly associated with antenatal factors such as gestational age and standardized birth weight. CONCLUSIONS:  Albuminuria in first morning void urine in 12-year-olds has a lower prevalence than previously reported by randomly collected samples. A negative association between albuminuria and BMI is confirmed. A positive association with blood pressure, but no association with antenatal factors was found. WHAT IS KNOWN: * While, in adults, albuminuria is a recognized risk factor for cardiovascular disease and is associated with hypertension and obesity, pediatric data are inconsistent and largely based on randomly collected urine. * A possible association between antenatal programming and albuminuria at school age has still to be investigated. WHAT IS NEW: * In this population study on first morning void urine samples from 12-year-olds of the general population, albuminuria is negatively associated with body mass index, and positively associated with blood pressure, while there is no association with antenatal factors. * The prevalence of albuminuria at 12 years is lower than previously reported in studies based on randomly collected urine samples, probably due to elimination of orthostatic proteinuria.
The functional role of the hippocampal formation in episodic memory has been studied using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) for many years. The hippocampus can be segmented into three major anteroposterior sections, called head, body and tail, and into the Cornu Ammonis (CA), dentate gyrus (DG), and subiculum (Sub) subfields based on its transverse axis. However, the exact role of these subregions and subfields in memory processes is less understood. In the present study we combined ultra-high-resolution structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) at 4.7 T with an event-related high-resolution fMRI paradigm based on the 'Designs' subtest of the Wechsler Memory Scale to investigate how the hippocampal subfields and longitudinal subregions are involved in encoding and retrieval of item, spatial, and associative memories. Our results showed that during memory encoding, regardless of the type of memory being learned, all subregions and all subfields were active. During the retrieval phase, on the other hand, we observed an anterior to posterior gradient in hippocampal activity for all subfields and all types of memory. Our findings also confirmed presence of an anterior to posterior gradient in hippocampal activity during spatial learning. Comparing subfield activities to each other revealed that the DG was more active than the CA1-3 and Sub during both encoding and retrieval. Finally, our results showed that for every subfield, encoding vs. retrieval activity differences were larger in the hippocampal head than in the hippocampal body and tail. Furthermore, these encoding vs. retrieval activity differences were similar in all subfields, highlighting the importance of studying both the longitudinal and transverse axis specialization simultaneously. Current findings further elucidate the structure-function relationship between the human hippocampus and episodic memory.
The carbonic anhydrase (CA) protein family consists of twelve active isozymes in humans and thirteen in most other mammals. The most recently discovered members of this family include cytosolic CA XIII and membrane-bound CAs XIV and XV. In this article we will review the characterization and inhibition profiles of these isozymes. CA XIII is expressed in the kidney as well as in the gastrointestinal and reproductive tracts, and therefore it may have a role in various physiological processes. The inhibition studies with CA XIII have shown that this isozyme can be inhibited efficiently with some sulfonamide inhibitors, while it is resistant to inhibition with chloride and bicarbonate ions. CA XIV is a membrane-bound enzyme that is expressed in numerous organs such as the brain, kidney, eye, liver and epididymis, where it has a role in the regulation of acid-base balance. The inhibitory properties of CA XIV have been studied, but no specific inhibitors have been found for this isozyme. The membrane-bound CA XV is an exceptional member of this protein family, because it is expressed in numerous species but absent in humans and chimpanzees. A detailed biochemical characterization of this isozyme is under way in our laboratories.
The carbonic anhydrase (CA) family has recently become an important target for the drug design of inhibitors with potential use as diagnostic and therapeutic tools. However, given the high degree of sequence and structure similarity among the different CA isoforms, no CA-directed drug developed so far has displayed selectivity for a specific isozyme. Since X-Ray crystallography is a very useful tool for the rational drug design of selective enzyme inhibitors, in recent years extensive research efforts have been devoted to the structural studies of all catalytically active &alpha;-CA isoforms, with the consequent resolution of the crystallographic structures of nearly all such enzyme isoforms. In this paper we review the progress that has recently been made in this field. In particular, we summarize the main structural features of hCA XIII and hCA IX, the most recently characterized human CA isoforms, and recapitulate how 3D structures of these enzymes, together with kinetic experiments, have been used either to deepen our knowledge on the structural features responsible of the catalytic properties of this protein family or to obtain important information for the rational drug design of inhibitors with better selectivity properties.
The hippocampus is a central modulator of the HPA-axis, impacting the regulation of stress on brain structure, function, and behavior. The current study assessed whether three different types of 3 months mental Training Modules geared towards nurturing (a) attention-based mindfulness, (b) socio-affective, or (c) socio-cognitive skills may impact hippocampal organization by reducing stress. We evaluated mental training-induced changes in hippocampal subfield volume and intrinsic functional connectivity, by combining longitudinal structural and resting-state fMRI connectivity analysis in 332 healthy adults. We related these changes to changes in diurnal and chronic cortisol levels. We observed increases in bilateral cornu ammonis volume (CA1-3) following the 3 months compassion-based module targeting socio-affective skills (Affect module), as compared to socio-cognitive skills (Perspective module) or a waitlist cohort with no training intervention. Structural changes were paralleled by relative increases in functional connectivity of CA1-3 when fostering socio-affective as compared to socio-cognitive skills. Furthermore, training-induced changes in CA1-3 structure and function consistently correlated with reductions in cortisol output. Notably, using a multivariate approach, we found that other subfields that did not show group-level changes also contributed to changes in cortisol levels. Overall, we provide a link between a socio-emotional behavioural intervention, changes in hippocampal subfield structure and function, and reductions in cortisol in healthy adults.
Intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection of streptozotocin (STZ) is a widely-accepted animal model of sporadic Alzheimer's disease (sAD). The present study evaluated the ability of dimethyl fumarate (DMF), an agent with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, to prevent spatial memory impairments and hippocampal neurodegeneration mediated by ICV injection of STZ in 4-month-old rats. Rodent chow containing DMF (0.4%) or standard rodent chow was made available on day 0. Rat body weight and food intake were measured daily for whole the experiment (21days). STZ or vehicle (SHAM) ICV injections were performed on days 2 and 4. Spatial reference and working memory were evaluated using the Morris water maze on days 14-21. Cells containing Fluoro-Jade B (neurodegeneration marker), IL-6, IL-10 were quantified in the hippocampus and choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) in the basal forebrain. The disruption of spatial memory and a high density of hippocampal CA1-3 cells labeled with Fluoro-Jade B or containing IL-6 or IL-10 were observed in the STZ group but not in the STZ+DMF group, as compared to the SHAM or SHAM+DMF groups. STZ vs. STZ+DMF differences were found: worse reference memory acquisition, fewer ChAT-positive neurons in the medial septum (Ch1), more Fluoro-Jade-positive CA1 hippocampal cells in STZ rats. DMF therapy in a rodent model of sAD prevented the disruption of spatial reference and working memory, loss of Ch1 cholinergic cells and hippocampal neurodegeneration as well as the induction of IL-6 and IL-10 in CA1. These beneficial cognitive and molecular effects validate the anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective properties of DMF in the hippocampus.
Interferon Gamma gamma (IFN-gamma) 13-CA-repeats polymorphism is associated with a variety of diseases; here we report its association with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) metastasis in a retrospective analysis of a cohort of 220 NPC patients in the northern China. The results showed that the distributions of CA13-/CA13-genotypes were significantly higher in the patients with lymph node metastasis (P<0.05) and distant metastasis (P<0.001); there was a significant difference between NPC patients with stage I+II and those with stage III+IV regarding CA13+/CA13-(P<0.001) and CA13-/CA13- genotypes (P<0.001); further analysis showed a more pronounced difference between NPC patients with stage I+II+III and those with stage IV for CA13-/CA13-genotype (P<0.001), whereas no difference was found for CA13+/CA13- genotype (P=0.790). Thus, we identify that IFN-gamma 13-CA-repeat polymorphism is significantly associated with the metastasis of NPC, which may provide insights into its prognosis and individualized treatment.
