Carbonic anhydrase 2; Essential for bone resorption and osteoclast differentiation (By similarity). Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide. Can hydrate cyanamide to urea. Involved in the regulation of fluid secretion into the anterior chamber of the eye. Contributes to intracellular pH regulation in the duodenal upper villous epithelium during proton- coupled peptide absorption. Stimulates the chloride-bicarbonate exchange activity of SLC26A6.
RyRs are large homotetrameric proteins that are approximately 4/5 cytoplasmic and approximately 1/5 transmembrane and luminal in mass. Mutations in RyRs produce human disease and many of these disease-causing mutations are in the cytoplasmic domains. To elucidate the mechanisms of a disease and to develop interventions, it is crucial to determine how the alterations in the cytoplasmic domains communicate with the transmembrane pore of this channel. One of the major activators of all three RyR isoforms is Ca2+ and some of the disease-causing mutations are thought to alter the sensitivity of the channels to Ca2+ activation. This review examines the current state of structural understanding of the RyR channel activation.
TRPM2 is the second member of the transient receptor potential melastatin-related (TRPM) family of cation channels. The protein is widely expressed including in the brain, immune system, endocrine cells, and endothelia. It embodies both ion channel functionality and enzymatic ADP-ribose (ADPr) hydrolase activity. TRPM2 is a Ca(2+)-permeable nonselective cation channel embedded in the plasma membrane and/or lysosomal compartments that is primarily activated in a synergistic fashion by intracellular ADP-ribose (ADPr) and Ca(2+). It is also activated by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS/NOS) and enhanced by additional factors, such as cyclic ADPr and NAADP, while inhibited by permeating protons (acidic pH) and adenosine monophosphate (AMP). Activation of TRPM2 leads to increases in intracellular Ca(2+) levels, which can serve signaling roles in inflammatory and secretory cells through release of vesicular mediators (e.g., cytokines, neurotransmitters, insulin) and in extreme cases can induce apoptotic and necrotic cell death under oxidative stress.
Lysosomal calcium (Ca(2+)) release is critical to cell signaling and is mediated by well-known lysosomal Ca(2+) channels. Yet, how lysosomes refill their Ca(2+) remains hitherto undescribed. Here, from an RNA interference screen in Caenorhabditis elegans, we identify an evolutionarily conserved gene, lci-1, that facilitates lysosomal Ca(2+) entry in C. elegans and mammalian cells. We found that its human homolog TMEM165, previously designated as a Ca(2+)/H(+) exchanger, imports Ca(2+) pH dependently into lysosomes. Using two-ion mapping and electrophysiology, we show that TMEM165, hereafter referred to as human LCI, acts as a proton-activated, lysosomal Ca(2+) importer. Defects in lysosomal Ca(2+) channels cause several neurodegenerative diseases, and knowledge of lysosomal Ca(2+) importers may provide previously unidentified avenues to explore the physiology of Ca(2+) channels.
TRPM5 is a Ca(2+)-activated cation channel that mediates signaling in taste and other chemosensory cells. Within taste cells, TRPM5 is the final element in a signaling cascade that starts with the activation of G protein-coupled receptors by bitter, sweet, or umami taste molecules and that requires the enzyme PLCbeta2. PLCbeta2 breaks down PIP2 into DAG and IP3, and the ensuing release of Ca(2+) from intracellular stores activates TRPM5. Since its initial discovery in the taste system, TRPM5 has been found to be distributed in sparse chemosensory cells located throughout the digestive track, in the respiratory system, and in the olfactory system. It is also found in pancreatic islets, where it contributes to insulin secretion. This review highlights recent work on the mechanisms of the activation of the TRPM5 channel and its regulation by voltage, phosphoinositides, temperature, and pH. The distribution of the channel in the body and its functional contribution to various sensory and nonsensory processes are discussed.
The Drosophila "transient receptor potential" channel is the prototypical TRP channel, belonging to and defining the TRPC subfamily. Together with a second TRPC channel, trp-like (TRPL), TRP mediates the transducer current in the fly's photoreceptors. TRP and TRPL are also implicated in olfaction and Malpighian tubule function. In photoreceptors, TRP and TRPL are localised in the ~30,000 packed microvilli that form the photosensitive "rhabdomere"-a light-guiding rod, housing rhodopsin and the rest of the phototransduction machinery. TRP (but not TRPL) is assembled into multimolecular signalling complexes by a PDZ-domain scaffolding protein (INAD). TRPL (but not TRP) undergoes light-regulated translocation between cell body and rhabdomere. TRP and TRPL are also found in photoreceptor synapses where they may play a role in synaptic transmission. Like other TRPC channels, TRP and TRPL are activated by a G protein-coupled phospholipase C (PLCbeta4) cascade. Although still debated, recent evidence indicates the channels can be activated by a combination of PIP2 depletion and protons released by the PLC reaction. PIP2 depletion may act mechanically as membrane area is reduced by cleavage of PIP2's bulky inositol headgroup. TRP, which dominates the light-sensitive current, is Ca(2+) selective (P Ca:P Cs >50:1), whilst TRPL has a modest Ca(2+) permeability (P Ca:P Cs ~5:1). Ca(2+) influx via the channels has profound positive and negative feedback roles, required for the rapid response kinetics, with Ca(2+) rapidly facilitating TRP (but not TRPL) and also inhibiting both channels. In trp mutants, stimulation by light results in rapid depletion of microvillar PIP2 due to lack of Ca(2+) influx required to inhibit PLC. This accounts for the "transient receptor potential" phenotype that gives the family its name and, over a period of days, leads to light-dependent retinal degeneration. Gain-of-function trp mutants with uncontrolled Ca(2+) influx also undergo retinal degeneration due to Ca(2+) cytotoxicity. In vertebrate retina, mice knockout studies suggest that TRPC6 and TRPC7 mediate a PLCbeta4-activated transducer current in intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells, expressing melanopsin. TRPA1 has been implicated as a "photo-sensing" TRP channel in human melanocytes and light-sensitive neurons in the body wall of Drosophila.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive oxygen derivatives. Initially, they were considered as metabolic by-products (of mitochondria in particular), which consistently lead to aging and disease. Over the last decades, however, it became increasingly apparent that virtually all eukaryotic cells possess specifically ROS-producing enzymes, namely, NOX NADPH oxidases. In most mammals, there are seven NOX isoforms: three closely related isoforms, NOX1, 2, 3, which are activated by cytoplasmic subunits; NOX4, which appears to be constitutively active; and the EF-hand-containing Ca(2+)-activated isoforms NOX5 and DUOX1 and 2. Loss-of-function mutations in NOX genes can lead to serious human disease. NOX2 deficiency leads to primary immune deficiency, while DUOX2 deficiency presents as congenital hypothyroidism. Nox-deficient mice provide important tools to explore the physiological functions of various NADPH oxidases as a loss of function in Nox2, Nox3, and Duox2 leads to a spontaneous phenotype. The genetic absence of Nox1, Nox4, and Duox1 does not result in an obvious mouse phenotype (the NOX5 gene is absent in rodents and can therefore not be studied using knockout mice). Since the discovery of the NOX family at the turn of the millennium, much progress in understanding the biochemistry and the physiology of NOX has been made; however many questions remain unanswered to date. This chapter is an overview of our present knowledge on mammalian NOX/DUOX enzymes.
The discovery of molecular players in capacitative calcium (Ca(2+)) entry, also referred to as store-operated Ca(2+) entry (SOCE), supposed a great advance in the knowledge of cellular mechanisms of Ca(2+) entry, which are essential for a broad range of cellular functions. The identification of STIM1 and STIM2 proteins as the sensors of Ca(2+) stored in the endoplasmic reticulum unraveled the mechanism by which depletion of intracellular Ca(2+) stores is communicated to store-operated Ca(2+) channels located in the plasma membrane, triggering the activation of SOCE and intracellular Ca(2+)-dependent signaling cascades. Initial studies suggested a dominant function of STIM1 in SOCE and SOCE-dependent cellular functions compared to STIM2, especially those that participate in immune responses. Consequently, most of the subsequent studies focused on STIM1. However, during the last years, STIM2 has been demonstrated to play a more relevant and complex function than initially reported, being even important to sustain normal life in mice. These studies have led to reconsider the role of STIM2 in SOCE and its relevance in cellular physiology. This review is intended to summarize and provide an overview of the current data available about this exciting isoform, STIM2, and its actual position together with STIM1 in the mechanism of SOCE.
Calsequestrin is the major Ca(2+) binding protein in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), serves as the main Ca(2+) storage and buffering protein and is an important regulator of Ca(2+) release channels in both skeletal and cardiac muscle. It is anchored at the junctional SR membrane through interactions with membrane proteins and undergoes reversible polymerization with increasing Ca(2+) concentration. Calsequestrin provides high local Ca(2+) at the junctional SR and communicates changes in luminal Ca(2+) concentration to Ca(2+) release channels, thus it is an essential component of excitation-contraction coupling. Recent studies reveal new insights on calsequestrin trafficking, Ca(2+) binding, protein evolution, protein-protein interactions, stress responses and the molecular basis of related human muscle disease, including catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT). Here we provide a comprehensive overview of calsequestrin, with recent advances in structure, diverse functions, phylogenetic analysis, and its role in muscle physiology, stress responses and human pathology.
Smooth muscle cells display distinctive expression and organization of contractile filament proteins, which reflect a unique method of contractile regulation. As the focus of this review, the smoothelin and smoothelin-like family members represent a family of poorly understood muscle proteins that appear to act as structural components of the contractile apparatus. The protein family is characterized by the presence a single C-terminal type-2 calponin homology (CH) domain. Often used as the preferred marker of differentiated contractile smooth muscle cells, smoothelin A and B (SMTN-A and SMTN-B) may influence the contractile potential of smooth muscle cells. The more recently identified smoothelin-like proteins (SMTNL1 and SMTNL2) have more diverse functional implications. SMTNL1 is linked to the regulation of smooth muscle contractility and adaptations of both smooth and skeletal muscle to hypertension, pregnancy, and exercise training. The SMTNL1 protein is suggested to play multiple roles in muscle through functional interactions with contractile regulators (e.g., calmodulin, tropomyosin, and myosin phosphatase) as well as transcriptional control of the contractile phenotype and Ca(2+)-sensitizing capacity. These effects are associated with acute, reversible changes to the contractile state or long-term adaptations mediated by transcriptional changes in expression of contractile proteins. SMTNL2 remains essentially uncharacterized; however, its expression is high in skeletal muscle and could be associated with differentiating myocytes. Finally, emerging opportunities exist to understand the significance of smoothelins as disease-associated markers and in some cases as specific modulators of pathophysiology.
Extracellular Ca2+-sensing receptors (CaRs) are the molecular basis by which specialized cells detect and respond to changes in the extracellular [Ca2+] ([Ca2+]o). CaRs belong to the family C of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). Activation of CaRs triggers signaling pathways that modify numerous cell functions. Multiple ligands regulate the activation of CaRs including multivalent cations, L-amino acids, and changes in ionic strength and pH. CaRs in parathyroid cells play a central role in systemic Ca2+ homeostasis in terrestrial tetrapods. Mutations of the CaR gene in humans cause diseases in which serum and urine [Ca2+] and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels are altered. CaR homologues are also expressed in organs critical to Ca2+ transport in ancient and modern fish, suggesting that similar receptors may have long been involved in Ca2+ homeostasis in lower vertebrates before parathyroid glands developed in terrestrial vertebrates. CaR mRNA and protein are also expressed in tissues not directly involved in Ca2+ homeostasis. This implies that there may be other biological roles for CaRs. Studies of CaR-knockout mice confirm the importance of CaRs in the parathyroid gland and kidney. The functions of CaRs in tissues other than kidney and parathyroid gland, however, remain to be elucidated.
BACKGROUND: Notch3 (neurogenic locus notch homolog protein 3) is implicated in vascular diseases, including pulmonary hypertension (PH)/pulmonary arterial hypertension. However, molecular mechanisms remain elusive. We hypothesized increased Notch3 activation induces oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and downstream redox signaling, associated with procontractile pulmonary artery state, pulmonary vascular dysfunction, and PH development. METHODS: Studies were performed in TgNotch3(R169C) mice (harboring gain-of-function [GOF] Notch3 mutation) exposed to chronic hypoxia to induce PH, and examined by hemodynamics. Molecular and cellular studies were performed in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells from pulmonary arterial hypertension patients and in mouse lung. Notch3-regulated genes/proteins, ER stress, ROCK (Rho-associated kinase) expression/activity, Ca(2+) transients and generation of reactive oxygen species, and nitric oxide were measured. Pulmonary vascular reactivity was assessed in the presence of fasudil (ROCK inhibitor) and 4-phenylbutyric acid (ER stress inhibitor). RESULTS: Hypoxia induced a more severe PH phenotype in TgNotch3(R169C) mice versus controls. TgNotch3(R169C) mice exhibited enhanced Notch3 activation and expression of Notch3 targets Hes Family BHLH Transcription Factor 5 (Hes5), with increased vascular contraction and impaired vasorelaxation that improved with fasudil/4-phenylbutyric acid. Notch3 mutation was associated with increased pulmonary vessel Ca(2+) transients, ROCK activation, ER stress, and increased reactive oxygen species generation, with reduced NO generation and blunted sGC (soluble guanylyl cyclase)/cGMP signaling. These effects were ameliorated by N-acetylcysteine. pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells from patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension recapitulated Notch3/Hes5 signaling, ER stress and redox changes observed in PH mice. CONCLUSIONS: Notch3 GOF amplifies vascular dysfunction in hypoxic PH. This involves oxidative and ER stress, and ROCK. We highlight a novel role for Notch3/Hes5-redox signaling and important interplay between ER and oxidative stress in PH.
Calcium ions (Ca(2+)) are involved in nearly every aspect of cellular life. They are one of the most abundant elements in mammals and play a vital role in physiological and biochemical processes acting mainly as intracellular messengers. In spermatozoa, several key functions are regulated by cytoplasmic Ca(2+) concentration such as sperm capacitation, chemotaxis, hyperactive motility, and acrosome reaction. The sperm-specific ion channel CatSper is the principal calcium channel in sperm mediating the calcium influx into the sperm flagellum and acting as an essential modulator of downstream mechanisms involved in fertilization. This review aims to provide insights into the structure, localization, and function of the mammalian CatSper channel, primarily human and mice. The activation of CatSper by progesterone and prostaglandins, as well as the ligand-independent regulation of the channel by a change in the membrane voltage and intracellular pH are going to be addressed. Finally, major questions, challenges, and perspectives are discussed.
Connexin gap junctions comprise assembled channels penetrating two plasma membranes for which gating regulation is associated with a variety of factors, including voltage, pH, Ca(2+), and phosphorylation. Functional studies have established that various parts of the connexin peptides are related to channel closure and electrophysiology studies have provided several working models for channel gating. The corresponding structural models supporting these findings, however, are not sufficient because only small numbers of closed connexin structures have been reported. To fully understand the gating mechanisms, the channels should be visualized in both the open and closed states. Electron crystallography and X-ray crystallography studies recently revealed three-dimensional structures of connexin channels in a couple of states in which the main difference is the conformation of the N-terminal domain, which have helped to clarify the structure in regard to channel closure. Here the closure models for connexin gap junction channels inferred from structural and functional studies are described in the context of each domain of the connexin protein associated with gating modulation.
Calcium homeostasis modulator 1 (CALHM1), formerly known as FAM26C, was recently identified as a physiologically important plasma membrane ion channel. CALHM1 and its Caenorhabditis elegans homolog, CLHM-1, are regulated by membrane voltage and extracellular Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)]o). In the presence of physiological [Ca(2+)]o ( approximately 1.5 mM), CALHM1 and CLHM-1 are closed at resting membrane potentials but can be opened by strong depolarizations. Reducing [Ca(2+)]o increases channel open probability, enabling channel activation at negative membrane potentials. Together, voltage and Ca(2+) o allosterically regulate CALHM channel gating. Through convergent evolution, CALHM has structural features that are reminiscent of connexins and pannexins/innexins/LRRC8 (volume-regulated anion channel (VRAC)) gene families, including four transmembrane helices with cytoplasmic amino and carboxyl termini. A CALHM1 channel is a hexamer of CALHM1 monomers with a functional pore diameter of  approximately 14 A. CALHM channels discriminate poorly among cations and anions, with signaling molecules including Ca(2+) and ATP able to permeate through its pore. CALHM1 is expressed in the brain where it plays an important role in cortical neuron excitability induced by low [Ca(2+)]o and in type II taste bud cells in the tongue that sense sweet, bitter, and umami tastes where it functions as an essential ATP release channel to mediate nonsynaptic neurotransmitter release. CLHM-1 is expressed in C. elegans sensory neurons and body wall muscles, and its genetic deletion causes locomotion defects. Thus, CALHM is a voltage- and Ca(2+) o-gated ion channel, permeable to large cations and anions, that plays important roles in physiology.
Sperm motility is linked to the activation of signaling pathways that trigger movement. These pathways are mainly dependent on Ca(2+), which acts as a secondary messenger. The maintenance of adequate Ca(2+) concentrations is possible thanks to proper concentrations of other ions, such as K(+) and Na(+), among others, that modulate plasma membrane potential and the intracellular pH. Like in every cell, ion homeostasis in spermatozoa is ensured by a vast spectrum of ion channels supported by the work of ion pumps and transporters. To achieve success in fertilization, sperm ion channels have to be sensitive to various external and internal factors. This sensitivity is provided by specific channel structures. In addition, novel sperm-specific channels or isoforms have been found with compositions that increase the chance of fertilization. Notably, the most significant sperm ion channel is the cation channel of sperm (CatSper), which is a sperm-specific Ca(2+) channel required for the hyperactivation of sperm motility. The role of other ion channels in the spermatozoa, such as voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels (VGCCs), Ca(2+)-activated Cl-channels (CaCCs), SLO K(+) channels or voltage-gated H(+) channels (VGHCs), is to ensure the activation and modulation of CatSper. As the activation of sperm motility differs among metazoa, different ion channels may participate; however, knowledge regarding these channels is still scarce. In the present review, the roles and structures of the most important known ion channels are described in regard to regulation of sperm motility in animals.
Nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP) potently releases Ca(2+) from acidic intracellular endolysosomal Ca(2+) stores. It is widely accepted that two types of two-pore channels, termed TPC1 and TPC2, are responsible for the NAADP-mediated Ca(2+) release but the underlying mechanisms regulating their gating appear to be different. For example, although both TPC1 and TPC2 are activated by NAADP, TPC1 appears to be additionally regulated by cytosolic Ca(2+) . Ion conduction and permeability also differ markedly. TPC1 and TPC2 are permeable to a range of cations although biophysical experiments suggest that TPC2 is slightly more selective for Ca(2+) over K(+) than TPC1 and hence capable of releasing greater quantities of Ca(2+) from acidic stores. TPC1 is also permeable to H(+) and therefore may play a role in regulating lysosomal and cytosolic pH, possibly creating localised acidic domains. The significantly different gating and ion conducting properties of TPC1 and TPC2 suggest that these two ion channels may play complementary physiological roles as Ca(2+) -release channels of the endolysosomal system.
TRPM5 is a cation channel that it is essential for transduction of bitter, sweet and umami tastes. Signaling of these tastes involves the activation of G protein-coupled receptors that stimulate phospholipase C (PLC) beta2, leading to the breakdown of phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2) into diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol trisphosphate (IP3), and release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores. TRPM5 forms a nonselective cation channel that is directly activated by Ca2+ and it is likely to be the downstream target of this signaling cascade. Therefore, study of TRPM5 promises to provide insight into fundamental mechanisms of taste transduction. This review highlights recent work on the mechanisms of activation of the TRPM5 channel. The mouse TRPM5 gene encodes a protein of 1,158 amino acids that is proposed to have six transmembrane domains and to function as a tetramer. TRPM5 is structurally most closely related to the Ca(2+)-activated channel TRPM4 and it is more distantly related to the cold-activated channel TRPM8. In patch clamp recordings, TRPM5 channels are activated by micromolar concentrations of Ca2+ and are permeable to monovalent but not divalent cations. TRPM5 channel activity is strongly regulated by voltage, phosphoinositides and temperature, and is blocked by acid pH. Study of TRPM4 and TRPM8, which show similar modes of regulation, has yielded insights into possible structural domains of TRPM5. Understanding the structural basis for TRPM5 function will ultimately allow the design of pharmaceuticals to enhance or interfere with taste sensations.
The plasma membrane Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger (NCX) plays a critical role in the maintenance of Ca(2+) homeostasis in a variety of tissues. NCX accomplishes this task by either lowering or increasing the intracellular Ca(2+) concentration, a process which depends on electrochemical gradients. During each cycle, three Na(+) are transported in the opposite direction to one Ca(2+), resulting in an electrogenic transport that can be measured as an ionic current.The residues involved in ion translocation are unknown. A residue thought to be important for Na(+) and/or Ca(2+) transport, Ser(110), was replaced with a cysteine, and the properties of the resulting exchanger mutant were analyzed using the giant patch technique. Data indicate that this residue, located in transmembrane segment 2 (part of the alpha-1 repeat), is important for both Na(+) and Ca(2+) translocations. Using cysteine susceptibility analysis, we demonstrated that Ser(110) is exposed to the cytoplasm when the exchanger is in the inward state configuration.
Phytases are phosphatases which stepwise remove phosphates from phytic acid or its salts. beta-Propeller phytase (BPPhy) belongs to a special class of microbial phytases that is regarded as most diverse, isolated and characterized from different microbes, mainly from Bacillus spp. BPPhy class is unique for its Ca(2+)-dependent catalytic activity, strict substrate specificity, active at neutral to alkaline pH and high thermostability. Numerous sequence and structure based studies have revealed unique attributes and catalytic properties of this class, as compared to other classes of phytases. Recent studies including cloning and expression and genetic engineering approaches have led to improvements in BPPhy which provide an opportunity for extended utilization of this class of phytases in improving animal nutrition, human health, plant growth promotion, and environmental protection, etc. This review describes the sources and diversity of BPPhy genes, biochemical properties, Ca(2+) dependence, current developments in structural elucidation, heterogeneous expression and catalytic improvements, and multifarious applications of BPPhy.
Peroxiredoxin 6 (Prdx6) is a Ca(2+)-independent intracellular phospholipase A(2) (called aiPLA(2)) that is localized to cytosol, lysosomes, and lysosomal-related organelles. Activity is minimal at cytosolic pH but is increased significantly with enzyme phosphorylation, at acidic pH, and in the presence of oxidized phospholipid substrate; maximal activity with phosphorylated aiPLA(2) is  approximately 2 micromol/min/mg protein. Prdx6 is a "moonlighting" protein that also expresses glutathione peroxidase and lysophosphatidylcholine acyl transferase activities. The catalytic site for aiPLA(2) activity is an S32-H26-D140 triad; S32-H26 is also the phospholipid binding site. Activity is inhibited by a serine "protease" inhibitor (diethyl p-nitrophenyl phosphate), an analog of the PLA(2) transition state [1-hexadecyl-3-(trifluoroethyl)-sn-glycero-2-phosphomethanol (MJ33)], and by two naturally occurring proteins (surfactant protein A and p67(phox)), but not by bromoenol lactone. aiPLA(2) activity has important physiological roles in the turnover (synthesis and degradation) of lung surfactant phospholipids, in the repair of peroxidized cell membranes, and in the activation of NADPH oxidase type 2 (NOX2). The enzyme has been implicated in acute lung injury, carcinogenesis, neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, male infertility, and sundry other conditions, although its specific roles have not been well defined. Protein mutations and animal models are now available to further investigate the roles of Prdx6-aiPLA(2) activity in normal and pathological physiology.
