Carbonic anhydrase 4; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide. May stimulate the sodium/bicarbonate transporter activity of SLC4A4 that acts in pH homeostasis. It is essential for acid overload removal from the retina and retina epithelium, and acid release in the choriocapillaris in the choroid; Belongs to the alpha-carbonic anhydrase family.
BACKGROUND: Exploration of the genes with abnormal expression during the development of breast cancer is essential to provide a deeper understanding of the mechanisms involved. Transcriptome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis of invasive ductal carcinoma and paracancerous tissues from the same patient were performed to identify the key genes and signaling pathways related to breast cancer development. METHODS: Samples of breast tumor tissue and paracancerous breast tissue were obtained from 6 patients. Sequencing used the Illumina HiSeq platform. All. Only perfectly matched clean reads were mapped to the reference genome database, further analyzed and annotated based on the reference genome information. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using the DESeq R package (1.10.1) and DEGSeq R package (1.12.0). Using KOBAS software to execute the KEGG bioinformatics analyses, enriched signaling pathways of DEGs involved in the occurrence of breast cancer were determined. Subsequently, quantitative real time PCR was used to verify the accuracy of the expression profile of key DEGs from the RNA-seq result and to explore the expression patterns of novel cancer-related genes on 8 different clinical individuals. RESULTS: The transcriptomic sequencing results showed 937 DEGs, including 487 upregulated and 450 downregulated genes in the breast cancer specimens. Further quantitative gene expression analysis was performed and captured 252 DEGs (201 downregulated and 51 upregulated) that showed the same differential expression pattern in all libraries. Finally, 6 upregulated DEGs (CST2, DRP2, CLEC5A, SCD, KIAA1211, DTL) and 6 downregulated DEGs (STAC2, BTNL9, CA4, CD300LG, GPIHBP1 and PIGR), were confirmed in a quantitative real time PCR comparison of breast cancer and paracancerous breast tissues from 8 clinical specimens. KEGG analysis revealed various pathway changes, including 20 upregulated and 21 downregulated gene enrichment pathways. The extracellular matrix-receptor (ECM-receptor) interaction pathway was the most enriched pathway: all genes in this pathway were DEGs, including the THBS family, collagen and fibronectin. These DEGs and the ECM-receptor interaction pathway may perform important roles in breast cancer. CONCLUSION: Several potential breast cancer-related genes and pathways were captured, including 7 novel upregulated genes and 76 novel downregulated genes that were not found in other studies. These genes are related to cell proliferation, movement and adhesion. They may be important for research into breast cancer mechanisms, particularly CST2 and CA4. A key signaling pathway, the ECM-receptor interaction signal pathway, was also identified as possibly involved in the development of breast cancer.
AIMS: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a deadly disease that is resistant to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapies. Emerging evidence suggests that NDRG1 may be an important target for the development of new therapies for PDAC. Herein, we investigated the novel roles of NDRG1 and Combretastatin A-4 (CA-4) in the treatment of PDAC ICB resistance. METHODS: Enrichment of MHC class I was detected by RNA sequence and verified by RT-qPCR and immunoblotting in NDRG1-knockdown human pancreatic cancer cell lines. The protein degradation mode was found by stimulation with various inhibitors, and the autophagy degradation pathway was found by immunoprecipitation and immunolocalization. The roles of NDRG1 and MHC-I in immunotherapy were investigated by orthotopic solid tumors, histology, immunohistochemistry, multiplex immunofluorescence staining and flow cytometry. RESULTS: Here, we identified a previously undescribed role of NDRG1 in activating major histocompatibility complex class 1 (MHC-1) expression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells through lysosomal-autophagy-dependent degradation. In mouse models of PDAC, either tumor cell overexpression or pharmacologic activation of NDRG1 leads to MHC-1 upregulation in tumor cells, which in turn promotes the infiltration and activity of CD8 + T cells, enhances anti-tumor immunity, and overcomes resistance to ICB therapy. Moreover, combination therapy of CA-4 and ICB overcomes the drug resistance of pancreatic cancer to ICB therapy. In PDAC patients, NDRG1 expression correlates with high MHC-1 expression and better survival. CONCLUSION: Our results reveal NDRG1 in PDAC cancer cells as a tumor suppressor and suggest that pharmaceutically targeting NDRG1 is a promising way to overcome pancreatic cancer resistance to immunotherapy and provides a potential therapeutic strategy for the treatment of pancreatic cancer patients.
BACKGROUND: One of the most studied anti-cancer compounds of the last several decades is the microtubule targeting agent and cis-stilbene, combretastatin A4 (CA4). Despite promising results at the pre-clinical level, future clinical use of CA4 as a monotherapy is in question due to metabolic vulnerability and conformational instability. OBJECTIVE: Thus, medicinal chemists have focused on synthesizing derivatives with improved pharmokinetic profile. One common strategy has been the incorporation of the ethylene linker into a ring system, thus preventing the isomerization of CA4 into the virtually inactive trans-isomer. Although many structurally stable and potent analogues of CA4 have been designed and synthesized, several analogues have been discovered to possess anti-proliferative properties seemingly independent of microtubule targeting. The presence of such analogues suggests that CA4 may also possess nonmicrotubule targets, which reveals the necessity for future structure activity relationship studies and optimization of any non-microtubule targeting. Furthermore, analogues of CA4 not inhibiting microtubule polymerization can no longer be assumed to be inactive. CONCLUSION: Future clinical development of the CA4 pharmacophore requires that attention should be paid to abnormal CA4 analogues, which appear to retain cytotoxicity independent of canonical microtubule inhibition.
OBJECTIVE: Diagnosing parathyroid carcinoma (PC) is complicated and controversial that early diagnosis and intervention are often difficult. Therefore, we aimed to elucidate the protein signatures of PC through quantitative proteomic analyses to aid in the early and accurate diagnosis of PC. DESIGN: We conducted a retrospective cohort study. METHODS: We performed liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples. For the analyses, 23 PC and 15 parathyroid adenoma (PA) tissues were collected from 6 tertiary hospitals in South Korea. RESULTS: The mean age of the patients was 52 years, and 63% were women. Proteomic expression profiling revealed 304 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) with a cut-off of P < .05 and fold change >1.5. Among DEPs, we identified a set of 5 proteins that can discriminate PC from PA: carbonic anhydrase 4 (CA4), alpha/beta hydrolase domain-containing protein 14B (ABHD14B), laminin subunit beta-2 (LAMB2), CD44 antigen (CD44), and alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 1 (ORM1) that exhibited the highest area under the curve of 0.991 in neural network model. The nuclear percentage of CA4 and LAMB2 in immunohistochemistry was significantly lower in PC tissue than in the PA (CA4: 2.77 +/- 1.96%, 26.2 +/- 3.45%, P < .001; LAMB2: 6.86 +/- 3.46%, 38.54 +/- 4.13%, P < .001). The most enriched canonical pathways in PC included glycoprotein-6 signaling and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). CONCLUSIONS: We identified key proteins differentially expressed between PC and PA using proteomic analyses of parathyroid neoplasms. These findings may help to diagnose PC accurately and elucidate potential therapeutic targets.
The combretastatins are isolated from South African tree combretum caffrum kuntze. The lead compound combretastatin A-4 has displayed remarkable cytotoxic effect in a wide variety of preclinical tumor models and inhibits tubulin polymerization by interacting at colchicine binding site of microtubule. However, the structural simplicity of C A-4 is favorable for synthesis of various derivatives projected to induce rapid and selective vascular shutdown in tumors. Majority of the molecules have shown excellent antiproliferative activity and are able to inhibit tubulin polymerization as well as possible mechanisms of action have been investigated. In this review article, the synthesis and structure-activity relationships of C A-4 and immense number of its synthetic derivatives with various modifications on the A, B-rings, bridge carbons and their anti mitotic activities are discussed.
Brain tumors are fast proliferating and destructive within the brain microenvironment. Effective chemotherapeutic strategies are currently lacking which combat this deadly disease curatively. The glioma-specific chloride ion channel represents a specific target for therapy. Chlorotoxin (CTX), a peptide derived from scorpion venom, has been shown to be specific and efficacious in blocking glioma Cl(-) channel activity. Here, we report on two new derivatives (termed CA4 and CTX-23) designed and generated on the basis of the peptide sequence alignments of CTX and BmKCT. The novel peptides CA4 and CTX-23 are both effective in reducing glioma cell proliferation. In addition, CTX, CA4 and CTX-23 impact on cell migration and spheroid migration. These effects are accompanied by diminished cell extensions and increased nuclear sizes. Furthermore, we found that CA4 and CTX-23 are selective with low toxicity against primary neurons and astrocytes. In the ex vivo VOGiM, which maintain the entire brain tumor microenvironment, both CTX and CA4 display anti-tumor activity and reduce tumor volume. Hence, CTX and CA4 reveal anti-angiogenic properties with endothelial and angiogenic hotspots disrupting activities. These data report on the identification of two novel CTX derivatives with multiple anti-glioma properties including anti-angiogenesis.
We describe the use of natural product combretastatin A4 (CA4) as a versatile new payload for the construction of antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs). Cetuximab conjugates consisting of CA4 derivatives were site-specially prepared by disulfide re-bridging approach using cleavable and non-cleavable linkers. These ADCs retained antigen binding and internalization efficiency and exhibited high potencies against cancer cell lines in vitro. The conjugates also demonstrated significant antitumor activities in EGFR-positive xenograft models without observed toxicities. CA4 appears to be a viable payload option for ADCs research and development.
Inhibition of carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1) has pharmacologic applications in the treatment of glaucoma, a disease affecting a large number of people and characterized by an elevated intraocular pressure (IOP). At least three isoforms, CA II, IV and XII are targeted by the sulfonamide inhibitors, some of which are clinically used drugs. Acetazolamide, methazolamide and dichlorophenamide are first generation CA inhibitors (CAIs) still used as systemic drugs for the management of this disease. Dorzolamide and brinzolamide represent the second generation inhibitors, being used topically, as eye drops, with less side effects compared to the first generation drugs. Third generation inhibitors have been developed by using the tail approach, but they did not reach the clinics yet. The most promising such derivatives are the sulfonamides incorporating either tails with nitric oxide releasing moieties or hybrid drugs possessing prostaglandin (PG) F agonist moieties in their molecules. Recently, the dithiocarbamates have also been described as CAIs possessing IOP lowering effects in animal models of glaucoma. CAIs are used alone or in combination with other drugs such as adrenergic agonist/antagonists, or PG analogs, being an important component of the antiglaucoma drugs armamentarium.
Although significant progress over several decades has been evidenced in cancer therapy, there remains a need for the development of novel and effective therapeutic strategies to treat several relapsed and intractable cancers. In this regard, tubulin protein has become one of the efficient and major targets for anticancer drug discovery. Considering the antimitotic ability, several tubulin inhibitors have been developed to act against various cancers. Among various tubulin inhibitors available, combretastatin-A4 (CA-4), a naturally occurring lead molecule, offers exceptional cytotoxicity (including the drugresistant cell lines) and antivascular effects. Although CA-4 offers exceptional therapeutic efficacy, several new advancements have been proposed, in terms of structural modification via A and B rings, as well as cis-olefinic bridging, which provide highly efficient analogs with improved tubulin-binding efficiency to meet the anticancer drug development requirements. This review systematically emphasizes the recent trends and latest developments in the anticancer drug design and discovery using CA-4 analogs as the tubulin inhibiting agents by highlighting their structure-activity relationships (SAR) and resultant pharmacological efficacies.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a human prion disease with different etiologies. To determine the spectrum of tau pathologies in CJD, we assessed phospho-Tau (pTau) immunoreactivities in 75 sporadic CJD cases including an evaluation of the entorhinal cortex and six hippocampal subregions. Twelve cases (16%) showed only small tau-immunoreactive neuritic profiles. Fifty-two (69.3%) showed additional tau pathology in the medial temporal lobe compatible with primary age related tauopathy (PART). In 22/52 cases the lower pTau immunoreactivity load in the entorhinal cortex as compared to subiculum, dentate gyrus or CA4 region of the hippocampus was significantly different from the typical distribution of the Braak staging. A further 11 cases (14.7%) showed widespread tau pathologies compatible with features of primary tauopathies or the gray matter type of ageing-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG). Prominent gray matter ARTAG was also observed in two out of three additionally examined V203I genetic CJD cases. Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid revealed prominent increase of total tau protein in cases with widespread tau pathology, while pTau (T181) level was increased only in four. This correlated with immunohistochemical observations showing less pathology with anti-pTau T181 antibody when compared to anti-pTau S202/T205, T212/S214 and T231. The frequency of tau pathologies is not unusually high in sporadic CJD and does not precisely relate to PrP deposition. However, the pattern of hippocampal tau pathology often deviates from the stages of Braak. Currently applied examination of cerebrospinal fluid pTau (T181) level does not reliably reflect primary tauopathies, PART and ARTAG seen in CJD brains.
CRISPR-Cas provides adaptive immunity in prokaryotes. Type III CRISPR systems detect invading RNA and activate the catalytic Cas10 subunit, which generates a range of nucleotide second messengers to signal infection. These molecules bind and activate a diverse range of effector proteins that provide immunity by degrading viral components and/or by disturbing key aspects of cellular metabolism to slow down viral replication. Here, we focus on the uncharacterised effector Csx23, which is widespread in Vibrio cholerae. Csx23 provides immunity against plasmids and phage when expressed in Escherichia coli along with its cognate type III CRISPR system. The Csx23 protein localises in the membrane using an N-terminal transmembrane alpha-helical domain and has a cytoplasmic C-terminal domain that binds cyclic tetra-adenylate (cA4), activating its defence function. Structural studies reveal a tetrameric structure with a novel fold that binds cA4 specifically. Using pulse EPR, we demonstrate that cA4 binding to the cytoplasmic domain of Csx23 results in a major perturbation of the transmembrane domain, consistent with the opening of a pore and/or disruption of membrane integrity. This work reveals a new class of cyclic nucleotide binding protein and provides key mechanistic detail on a membrane-associated CRISPR effector.
The hippocampus has a critical role in cognition and human memory and is one of the most studied structures in the brain. Despite more than 400 years of research, little is known about the Ammon's horn region cornu ammonis 2 (CA2) subfield in comparison to other subfield regions (CA1, CA3, and CA4). Recent findings have shown that CA2 plays a bigger role than previously thought. Here, we review understanding of hippocampus and CA2 ontogenesis, together with basic and clinical findings about the potential role of this region in neurodegenerative disease. The CA2 has widespread anatomical connectivity, unique signaling molecules, and intrinsic electrophysiological properties. Experimental studies using in vivo models found that the CA2 region has a role in cognition, especially in social memory and object recognition. In models of epilepsy and hypoxia, the CA2 exhibits higher resilience to cell death and hypoxia in comparison with neighboring regions, and while hippocampal atrophy remains poorly understood in Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), findings from postmortem PD brain demonstrates clear accumulation of alpha-synuclein pathology in CA2, and the CA2-CA3 region shows relatively more atrophy compared with other hippocampal subfields. Taken together, there is a growing body of evidence suggesting that the CA2 can be an ideal hallmark with which to differentiate different neurodegenerative stages of PD. Here, we summarize these recent data and provide new perspectives/ideas for future investigations to unravel the contribution of the CA2 to neurodegenerative diseases.
Due to the three domains of the colchicine-site which is conducive to the combination with small molecule compounds, colchicine-site on the tubulin has become a common target for antitumor drug development, and accordingly, a large number of tubulin inhibitors binding to the colchicine-site have been reported and evaluated over the past years. In this study, tubulin inhibitors targeting the colchicine-site and their application as antitumor agents were reviewed based on the literature from 2015 to 2019. Tubulin inhibitors were classified into ten categories according to the structural features, including colchicine derivatives, CA-4 analogs, chalcone analogs, coumarin analogs, indole hybrids, quinoline and quinazoline analogs, lignan and podophyllotoxin derivatives, phenothiazine analogs, N-heterocycle hybrids and others. Most of them displayed potent antitumor activity, including antiproliferative effects against Multi-Drug-Resistant (MDR) cell lines and antivascular properties, both in vitro and in vivo. In this review, the design, synthesis and the analysis of the structure-activity relationship of tubulin inhibitors targeting the colchicine-site were described in detail. In addition, multi-target inhibitors, anti-MDR compounds, and inhibitors bearing antitumor activity in vivo are further listed in tables to present a clear picture of potent tubulin inhibitors, which could be beneficial for medicinal chemistry researchers.
Microtubules are dynamic polymers that occur in eukaryotic cells and play important roles in cell division, motility, transport and signaling. They form during the process of polymerization of alpha- and beta-tubulin dimers. Tubulin is a significant and heavily researched molecular target for anticancer drugs. Combretastatins are natural cis-stilbenes that exhibit cytotoxic properties in cultured cancer cells in vitro. Combretastatin A-4 (3'-hydroxy-3,4,4',5-tetramethoxy-cis-stilbene; CA-4) is a potent cytotoxic cis-stilbene that binds to beta-tubulin at the colchicine-binding site and inhibits tubulin polymerization. The prodrug CA-4 phosphate is currently in clinical trials as a chemotherapeutic agent for cancer treatment. Numerous series of stilbene analogs have been studied in search of potent cytotoxic agents with the requisite tubulin-interactive properties. Microtubule-interfering agents include numerous CA-4 and transresveratrol analogs and other synthetic stilbene derivatives. Importantly, these agents are active in both tumor cells and immature endothelial cells of tumor blood vessels, where they inhibit the process of angiogenesis. Recently, computer-aided virtual screening was used to select potent tubulin-interactive compounds. This review covers the role of stilbene derivatives as a class of antitumor agents that act by targeting microtubule assembly dynamics. Additionally, we present the results of molecular modeling of their binding to specific sites on the alpha- and beta-tubulin heterodimer. This has enabled the elucidation of the mechanism of stilbene cytotoxicity and is useful in the design of novel agents with improved anti-mitotic activity. Tubulin-interactive agents are believed to have the potential to play a significant role in the fight against cancer.
The privileged structures have been widely used as a valuable template in new drug discovery. 1,2-Diaryl or vicinal diaryl is a simple scaffold found in many drugs and naturally occurring compounds. From synthetic point of view, the vicinal diaryl derivatives are easily accessible due to their facile and expedient syntheses. These scaffolds have shown numerous interesting pharmacological activities against various diseases with lot of clinical potentials. This review aims to highlight the evidence of vicinal diaryl motif as a privileged scaffold in COX-2 inhibitors and CA-4 analogs.
The human hippocampal formation is relevant for various aspects of memory and learning, and the different hippocampal regions are differentially affected by neuropsychiatric disorders. Therefore, the hippocampal formation has been subject of numerous cytoarchitectonic and other mapping studies, which resulted in divergent parcellation schemes. To understand the principles of hippocampal architecture, it is necessary to integrate different levels of hippocampal organisation, going beyond one modality. We here applied a multimodal mapping approach combining cyto- and multi-receptorarchitectonic analyses, and generated probabilistic maps in stereotaxic space of the identified regions. Cytoarchitecture in combination with the regional and laminar distribution of 15 neurotransmitter receptors visualized by in vitro receptor autoradiography were analysed in seven hemispheres from 6 unfixed shock frozen and serially sectioned brains. Cytoarchitectonic delineations for generation of probabilistic maps were carried out on histological sections from ten fixed, paraffin embedded and serially sectioned brains. Nine cyto- and receptorarchitectonically distinct regions were identified within the hippocampal formation (i.e., fascia dentata, cornu Ammonis (CA) regions 1-4, prosubiculum, subiculum proper, presubiculum and parasubiculum), as well as the hippocampal-amygdaloid transition area and the periallocortical transsubiculum. Subsequently generated probabilistic maps quantify intersubject variability in the size and extent of these cyto- and receptorarchitectonically distinct regions. The regions did not differ in their volume between the hemispheres and gender. Receptor mapping revealed additional subdivisions which could not be detected by cytoarchitectonic analysis alone. They correspond to parcellations previously found in immunohistochemical and connectivity studies. The multimodal approach enabled the definition of regions not consistently reported, e.g., CA4 region or prosubiculum. The ensuing detailed probabilistic maps of the hippocampal formation constitute the basis for future architectonically informed analyses of in vivo neuroimaging studies.
Reelin plays a key role in neuronal migration and lamination in the cortex and hippocampus. Animal studies have shown that reelin expression decreases with age. The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of reelin in all layers of the human hippocampal formation across three age groups. We used immunohistochemistry in formalin fixed and paraffin embedded hippocampal tissue from infants (1-10 months; n = 9), children (4-10 years; n = 4), and adults (45-60 years; n = 6) to stain for reelin. Expression was quantified (measured as the number of positive reelin cells/mm(2) ) in the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus (DG), the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus (ML), the hippocampal fissure (HF), stratum lacunosum moleculare (SLM), CA4/Hilus and the stratum pyramidale layer of CA3, CA2, and CA1. Expression of reelin was highest in the HF irrespective of age, followed by the SLM and ML. Minimal to no expression was seen in the stratum pyramidale layer of CA1-3. With age, reelin expression decreased and was statistically significant from infancy to childhood in the HF (p = .02). This study confirms that reelin expression decreases with age in the human hippocampus, and shows for the first time that the major decrease occurs between infancy and early childhood.
Tubulin protein is one of several members of a small family of globular proteins. It offers a potential target for anticancer drug design and development. Combretastatin A-4 (CA-4) is a potent anticancer and antiangiogenesis natural substance isolated from Combretum caffrum. Modifications on the CA-4 structure have led to a great number of novel CA-4 derivatives as potent tubulin inhibitors and high cytotoxic anticancer agents is becoming an interesting field, leading to a breakthrough in the treatment of cancer. In this review, the recent developments of novel CA-4 derivatives via the modifications on the A- and B-ring and the double bond as anticancer agents are discussed.
Microtubules are involved in many critical cellular processes including cell division, cell shape maintenance, vesicle transportation and motility regulation. Disruption of tubulin dynamics is a well-validated cancer drug target with several FDA approved, highly efficacious tubulin inhibitors targeting the taxane or the vinca binding sites. Despite the tremendous successes for these clinical tubulin inhibitors, their limitations are also apparent, particularly in the development of transporter mediated drug resistance. While currently there are no FDA approved inhibitors targeting the colchicine binding site in tubulin, extensive preclinical studies have suggested that colchicine binding site inhibitors (CBSIs) have significantly less susceptibility to transporter medicated drug resistance. The presence of one or more heterocyclic moieties is often critical for the antiproliferative activities for most of these CBSIs. This article aims to review the structures and antiproliferative activities of most recently developed heterocyclic CBSIs from 2013 to present. We focus this review on compounds that are designed based on the CA-4, chalcone and PTOX scaffolds which are well established to interact with the colchicine binding site in tubulin.
Combretastatin A-4 (CA-4) is a natural anti-cancer agent isolated in 1989 from the African willow tree, Combretum caffrum. Due to its chemical simplicity, this (Z)-stilbene has been the subject of many structural modifications mainly to improve its chemical and metabolic stability. Beside a large number of synthetic analogues, isoCombretastatin A-4 (isoCA-4), has proved to be a solution of choice since this non-natural isomer of CA-4 is stable, easier to synthesize and has equivalent antitumor properties as CA-4. In this review, we will present the structure-activity relationships (SARs) around isoCA-4 since its discovery in 2007. In a first part, we will describe some alternatives to replace the phenol B-ring of isoCA-4, then we will focus on the variations made on the 1,1-ethylene double bond and then, we will evocate very recent exiting results concerning the possible replacements of the 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl A-ring of isoCA-4 by suitable heterocycles.
