Carbonic anhydrase 5B, mitochondrial; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide; Belongs to the alpha-carbonic anhydrase family.
PURPOSE: To clarify the expression profiles of ion channels and transporters of metabolic substrates among heterogeneous cultured human corneal endothelial cells (cHCECs) distinct in their effectiveness in reconstituting the corneal endothelium. METHODS: Integrated proteomics for cell lysates by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was carried out from three aliquots of cHCECs enriched in either cluster of definition (CD)44-/+ (mature) cHCECs or CD44++/+++ cell-state transition (CST) cHCECs. The expression profiles of cations/anions, monocarboxylic acid transporters (MCTs), and solute carrier (SLC) family proteins, as well as carbonic anhydrases (CAs), were investigated. RESULTS: The polarized expression of cations/anions, MCTs, and SLC family proteins, as well as CAs, was clarified for mature and CST cHCECs. Most SLC4 family members, including SLC4A11 and SLC4A4 (NBCe1), were upregulated in the CST cHCECs, whereas SLC9A1 (Na+/H+ exchanger isoform one [NHE1]) and CA5B were detected only in the mature cHCECs. In addition, SLC25A42, catalyzing the entry of coenzyme A into the mitochondria, and SLC25A18, functioning as a mitochondrial glutamate carrier 2 (both relevant for providing the substrates for mitochondrial bioenergetics), were selectively expressed in the mature cHCECs. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings may suggest the relevance of qualifying the polarized expression of these ion channels and transporter-like proteins to ensure not only the suitability but also the in vivo biological functionality of cHCECs selected for use in a cell-injection therapy.
Many cancer-related genes are regulated by an epigenetic mechanism through modification of the methylation status of CpG sites at the promoter. This study was carried out at a genome-wide scale to mine genes in which the methylation of CpG sites is altered in breast cancer tissues. Differential methylation hybridization analysis was conducted using a chromosomal DNA mixture of ten normal and cancer tissue sets. A CpG microarray harboring 237,220 CpG sites of the whole genome was interrogated and the resulting methylation level differences, as well as the RNA expression differences, between the normal and cancer sets for selected genes were verified in breast cell lines by methylation-specific PCR and real-time PCR analyses. As a result, we identified and verified novel genes that were hypermethylated in breast cancer, such as NRN1, CA5B and RPIA. Pathway analysis of the genes with altered methylation patterns identified the involvement of a differentiation-related network of genes whose activity may be heavily regulated by STAT1 in breast tumorigenesis. Our results suggest that epigenetic dysregulation of cellular processes relevant to STAT1-dependent cellular differentiation may be intimately involved in breast carcinogenesis. These findings lend credence to the possibility of using tumor-specific alterations in methylation patterns as biomarkers in estimating prognosis and assessing treatment options for breast cancer.
PURPOSE: Four mitochondrial metabolic liver enzymes require bicarbonate, which is provided by the carbonic anhydrase isoforms VA (CAVA) and VB (CAVB). Defective hepatic bicarbonate production leads to a unique combination of biochemical findings: hyperammonemia, elevated lactate and ketone bodies, metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, and excretion of carboxylase substrates. This study aimed to test for CAVA or CAVB deficiencies in a group of 96 patients with early-onset hyperammonemia and to prove the disease-causing role of the CAVA variants found. METHODS: We performed CA5A and CA5B sequencing in the described cohort and developed an expression system using insect cells, which enabled the characterization of wild-type CAVA, clinical mutations, and three variants that affect functional residues. RESULTS: In 10 of 96 patients, mutations in CA5A were identified on both alleles but none in CA5B. Exhibiting decreased enzyme activity or thermal stability, all CAVA mutations were proven to cause disease, whereas the three variants showed no relevant effect. CONCLUSION: CAVA deficiency is a differential diagnosis of early-onset and life-threatening metabolic crisis, with hyperammonemia, hyperlactatemia, and ketonuria as apparently obligate signs. It seems to be more common than other rare metabolic diseases, and early identification may allow specific treatment of hyperammonemia and ultimately prevent neurologic sequelae.Genet Med 18 10, 991-1000.
BACKGROUND: We sought to validate global microarray results indicating the differential expression of 383 genes in Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) from patients with pancreatic cancer (PC) and to further evaluate their PC diagnostic potential. METHODS AND MATERIALS: In total, 177 patients were recruited (47 healthy controls (HC), 35 chronic pancreatitis (CP) patients, and 95 PC patients). PBMC expressions of six genes from our previous study (ANXA3, ARG1, CA5B, F5, SSBP2, and TBC1D8) along with four new genes (MIC1, NGAL, MUC1, and MUC16) were analyzed using multiplex Q-RT PCR. RESULTS: Differential expressions of 5 of the 6 genes previously identified by PBMC microarray were validated in this study. Multivariate models for PBMC gene expression were attempted to determine if any combination was diagnostically superior to CA19-9 alone. We found that addition of PBMC CA5B, F5, SSBP2, and MIC1 expression levels to CA19-9 significantly improved CA19-9's diagnostic abilities when comparing resectable PC to CP patients (p=0.023). CONCLUSIONS: Results of our previous study were validated, indicating reproducibility of PC-associated PBMC expression profiling. We identified a score-based model that can differentiate resectable PC from CP better than CA19-9, potentiating that PBMC differential expression analysis may offer a novel tool for early PC diagnosis.
BACKGROUND: Understanding the molecular basis of susceptibility factors to the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection is a global health imperative. It is well-established that males are more likely to acquire SARS-CoV-2 infection and exhibit more severe outcomes. Similarly, exposure to air pollutants and pre-existing respiratory chronic conditions, such as asthma and chronic obstructive respiratory disease (COPD) confer an increased risk to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). METHODS: We investigated molecular patterns associated with risk factors in 398 candidate genes relevant to COVID-19 biology. To accomplish this, we downloaded DNA methylation and gene expression data sets from publicly available repositories (GEO and GTEx Portal) and utilized data from an empirical controlled human exposure study conducted by our team. RESULTS: First, we observed sex-biased DNA methylation patterns in autosomal immune genes, such as NLRP2, TLE1, GPX1, and ARRB2 (FDR < 0.05, magnitude of DNA methylation difference Deltabeta > 0.05). Second, our analysis on the X-linked genes identified sex associated DNA methylation profiles in genes, such as ACE2, CA5B, and HS6ST2 (FDR < 0.05, Deltabeta > 0.05). These associations were observed across multiple respiratory tissues (lung, nasal epithelia, airway epithelia, and bronchoalveolar lavage) and in whole blood. Some of these genes, such as NLRP2 and CA5B, also exhibited sex-biased gene expression patterns. In addition, we found differential DNA methylation patterns by COVID-19 status for genes, such as NLRP2 and ACE2 in an exploratory analysis of an empirical data set reporting on human COVID-9 infections. Third, we identified modest DNA methylation changes in CpGs associated with PRIM2 and TATDN1 (FDR < 0.1, Deltabeta > 0.05) in response to particle-depleted diesel exhaust in bronchoalveolar lavage. Finally, we captured a DNA methylation signature associated with COPD diagnosis in a gene involved in nicotine dependence (COMT) (FDR < 0.1, Deltabeta > 0.05). CONCLUSION: Our findings on sex differences might be of clinical relevance given that they revealed molecular associations of sex-biased differences in COVID-19. Specifically, our results hinted at a potentially exaggerated immune response in males linked to autosomal genes, such as NLRP2. In contrast, our findings at X-linked loci such as ACE2 suggested a potentially distinct DNA methylation pattern in females that may interact with its mRNA expression and inactivation status. We also found tissue-specific DNA methylation differences in response to particulate exposure potentially capturing a nitrogen dioxide (NO(2)) effect-a contributor to COVID-19 susceptibility. While we identified a molecular signature associated with COPD, all COPD-affected individuals were smokers, which may either reflect an association with the disease, smoking, or may highlight a compounded effect of these two risk factors in COVID-19. Overall, our findings point towards a molecular basis of variation in susceptibility factors that may partly explain disparities in the risk for SARS-CoV-2 infection.
BACKGROUND: It is well known that many malignancies, including pancreatic cancer (PC), possess the ability to evade the immune system by indirectly downregulating the mononuclear cell machinery necessary to launch an effective immune response. This knowledge, in conjunction with the fact that the trancriptome of peripheral blood mononuclear cells has been shown to be altered in the context of many diseases, including renal cell carcinoma, lead us to study if any such alteration in gene expression exists in PC as it may have diagnostic utility. METHODS AND FINDINGS: PBMC samples from 26 PC patients and 33 matched healthy controls were analyzed by whole genome cDNA microarray. Three hundred eighty-three genes were found to be significantly different between PC and healthy controls, with 65 having at least a 1.5 fold change in expression. Pathway analysis revealed that many of these genes fell into pathways responsible for hematopoietic differentiation, cytokine signaling, and natural killer (NK) cell and CD8+ T-cell cytotoxic response. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis identified an eight-gene predictor set, consisting of SSBP2, Ube2b-rs1, CA5B, F5, TBC1D8, ANXA3, ARG1, and ADAMTS20, that could distinguish PC patients from healthy controls with an accuracy of 79% in a blinded subset of samples from treatment naive patients, giving a sensitivity of 83% and a specificity of 75%. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we report the first in-depth comparison of global gene expression profiles of PBMCs between PC patients and healthy controls. We have also identified a gene predictor set that can potentially be developed further for use in diagnostic algorithms in PC. Future directions of this research should include analysis of PBMC expression profiles in patients with chronic pancreatitis as well as increasing the number of early-stage patients to assess the utility of PBMCs in the early diagnosis of PC.
Among events limiting the effectiveness of cancer chemotherapy are the general lack of preferential uptake of anticancer drugs by tumor cells and the occurrence of drug resistance. An approach has been undertaken to explore whether or not such events can be favorably altered or circumvented therapeutically by development of a new class of anticancer molecules, cytotoxic liponucleotide analogs. The design of cytotoxic liponucleotide analogs encompasses both biochemical and biophysical aspects of liponucleotide and glycerophospholipid structure and metabolism. Several cytotoxic liponucleotide analogs of cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol (CDPdiacylglycerol/dCDPdiacylglycerol), containing the 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl moiety, were tested for antitumor activity. Multispecies ara-CDPdiacylglycerol (1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine 5'-diphosphate diacylglycerol), which contains egg lecithin-derived mixed fatty acyl chains, was more active than 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine (ara-C), a clinically used anticancer drug, against leukemia L5178Y and P388 ascites cells in mice. At identical single doses (50 mg/kg per day times 4) administered intraperitoneally, ara-CDPdiacylglycerol prolonged the life spans of L5178Y tumor-bearing mice 93%, while ara-C prolonged life by 18%. Ara-CDPdiacylglycerol increased life spans of P388 tumor-bearing mice by 357% at doses of 50 mg/kg per day times 4; the maximum increase with ara-C was 159% (85 mg/kg per day times 4). Against a P388 ara-C-resistant cell line (P/Ara-C, kinase deficient) in mice, ara-CDPdiacylglycerol prolonged survival times by 34% at a dose of 50 mg/kg per day times 4 and by 55% at 75 mg/kg per day times 4; the drug was not active against two other ara-C-resistant murine leukemia mutants (CA 55, CA5b). With cell line-derived human colon carcinoma HCT-15 grown in mice immunosuppressed with anti-thymocyte serum, ara-CDPdiacylglycerol at a single daily dose of 50 mg/kg per day times 4 significantly reduced tumor weights to 21% of the controls; the same dose schedule of ara-C caused no observable reduction of tumor weights. Results of these preliminary antitumor evaluations indicate that cytotoxic liponucleotide analogs should be investigated further to determine their potential as antineoplastic molecules.
Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are undesired effects of medicines that can harm patients and are a significant source of attrition in drug development. ADRs are anticipated by routinely screening drugs against secondary pharmacology protein panels. However, there is still a lack of quantitative information on the links between these off-target proteins and the reporting of ADRs in humans. Here, we present a systematic analysis of associations between measured and predicted in vitro bioactivities of drugs and adverse events (AEs) in humans from two sources of data: the Side Effect Resource, derived from clinical trials, and the Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event Reporting System, derived from postmarketing surveillance. The ratio of a drug's therapeutic unbound plasma concentration over the drug's in vitro potency against a given protein was used to select proteins most likely to be relevant to in vivo effects. In examining individual target bioactivities as predictors of AEs, we found a trade-off between the positive predictive value and the fraction of drugs with AEs that can be detected. However, considering sets of multiple targets for the same AE can help identify a greater fraction of AE-associated drugs. Of the 45 targets with statistically significant associations to AEs, 30 are included on existing safety target panels. The remaining 15 targets include 9 carbonic anhydrases, of which CA5B is significantly associated with cholestatic jaundice. We include the full quantitative data on associations between measured and predicted in vitro bioactivities and AEs in humans in this work, which can be used to make a more informed selection of safety profiling targets.
Hearing loss affects around 5% of the global population. Two preliminary studies have described genetic variants in sporadic individuals with hearing loss from Pakistan. Here we extend these studies to determine the spectrum of variants in a cohort of individuals with no previous history of hearing loss. Individuals with hearing loss born to consanguineous couples were identified from special schools. Audiograms were assessed. DNA from participants negative for GJB2 pathogenic variants was subjected to exome sequencing. Data were filtered to include variants with frequencies < 0.01 in the public databases. The effects of the missense variants on respective amino acids were analyzed by using PyMol software. Among the 44 participants, hearing loss was moderate for two individuals; 14 exhibited moderately-severe hearing loss while 25 had a severe degree of hearing loss. Hearing loss was reported to have been progressive in four participants and was currently profound in three participants. Variants were unambiguously identified in 17 genes, of which the majority affected SLC26A4. CDH23, MYO15A and OTOF were other significant contributors. Deleterious variants detected in two genes suggest new associations for hearing loss. Molecular characterization of hearing loss in our cohort revealed high genetic heterogeneity with a 75% diagnostic rate.
