Carbonic anhydrase 7; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide; Belongs to the alpha-carbonic anhydrase family.
The recent development of single-cell transcriptomics highlighted the existence of a new lineage of mature absorptive cells in the human intestinal epithelium. This subpopulation is characterized by the specific expression of Bestrophin 4 (BEST4) and of other marker genes including OTOP2, CA7, GUCA2A, GUCA2B, and SPIB. BEST4(+) cells appear early in development and are present in all regions of the small and large intestine at a low abundance (<5% of all epithelial cells). Location-specific gene expression profiles in BEST4(+) cells suggest their functional specialization in each gut region, as exemplified by the small intestine-specific expression of the ion channel CFTR. The putative roles of BEST4(+) cells include sensing and regulation of luminal pH, tuning of guanylyl cyclase-C signaling, transport of electrolytes, hydration of mucus, and secretion of antimicrobial peptides. However, most of these hypotheses lack functional validation, notably because BEST4(+) cells are absent in mice. The presence of BEST4(+) cells in human intestinal organoids indicates that this in vitro model should be suitable to study their role. Recent studies showed that BEST4(+) cells are also present in the intestinal epithelium of macaque, pig, and zebrafish and, here, we report their presence in rabbits, which suggests that these species could be appropriate animal models to study BEST4(+) cells during the development of diseases and their interactions with environmental factors such as diet or the microbiota. In this review, we summarize the existing literature regarding BEST4(+) cells and emphasize the description of their predicted roles in the intestinal epithelium in health and disease.NEW & NOTEWORTHY BEST4(+) cells are a novel subtype of mature absorptive cells in the human intestinal epithelium highlighted by single-cell transcriptomics. The gene expression profile of BEST4(+) cells suggests their role in pH regulation, electrolyte secretion, mucus hydration, and innate immune defense. The absence of BEST4(+) cells in mice requires the use of alternative animal models or organoids to decipher the role of this novel type of intestinal epithelial cells.
BACKGROUND: Carbonic anhydrases (CAs) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of human cancers. Carbonic anhydrase VII (CA7), a member of the CA gene family, was recently demonstrated to be expressed in several human tissues including colon. Nevertheless, the expression and clinical relevance of CA7 in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) has not been investigated. METHODS: Real-time PCR, western blot, and immunohistochemistry analyses were used to determine CA7 expression in CRC clinical samples. The correlation of CA7 expression with clinicopathologic features was assessed in 228 patients from Luoyang, China (training cohort) and validated in 151 patients from Shanghai, China (validation cohort). Kaplan-Meier and Cox proportional regression analyses were used to estimate the association between CA7 expression and patients' survival. RESULTS: CA7 expression was frequently downregulated in CRC tissues at both the mRNA and protein levels. Reduced expression of CA7 was significantly correlated with poor differentiation, positive lymph node metastasis, advanced TNM stage and unfavorable clinical outcome not only in the training cohort but also in the validation set. Survival analysis indicated that patients with lower CA7 expression had a significantly shorter disease-specific survival (DSS) than those with higher CA7 expression. Importantly, further stage-based analyses revealed that decreased CA7 expression significantly predicted poor DSS and was an independent adverse prognostic indicator for patients with early stage tumors in both cohorts. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that decreased expression of CA7 correlates with disease progression and predicts poor prognosis in CRC, especially for patients with early stage tumors.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to develop liposomes (LP) containing a curcumin (CU) analog CA7 to enhance its pharmacokinetic profile and anti-cervical cancer (CC) effects. METHODS: Single-factor and Box-Behnken experiments were conducted to optimize the formulation of CA7-loaded liposomes (CA7-LP). The in vitro release, stability, biocompatibility, and pharmacokinetic of CA7-LP were evaluated. The biological effects of CA7-LP on Hela cells were assessed using MTT assays, colony formation assays, wound healing assays, and flow cytometry. Additionally, the anti-CC efficacy of CA7-LP was tested in mouse models of transplanted tumors. RESULTS: The optimal formulation of CA7-LP exhibited a particle size of 92.43 +/- 1.52 nm, a polydispersity index of 0.27 +/- 0.01, an encapsulation efficiency of 97.79 +/- 1.49%, a drug loading of 3.23 +/- 0.20%, and a zeta potential of -6.69 +/- 0.77 mV. Transmission electron microscopy confirmed that a spherical morphology was exhibited by CA7-LP. The cumulative in vitro release of CA7-LP was found to be 2.84 times greater than that of CA7, and stability at room temperature was maintained for at least 90 d. Furthermore, a significantly higher uptake of CA7-LP by Hela cells was observed compared to curcumin and CA7, leading to enhanced inhibition of cell proliferation, migration and cell cycle, as well as increased apoptosis (p < 0.05). In vivo studies revealed that CA7-LP exhibited superior pharmacokinetic properties compared to CA7 (AUC: 3.58-fold, C(max): 5.65-fold, t(1/2z): 1.2-fold). The anti-CC effects of CA7-LP were found to be comparable to those of Cisplatin injection, with a better safety profile. CONCLUSION: The newly developed CA7-LP is considered a promising candidate for the treatment of CC, demonstrating high potential for clinical application.
Colorectal cancer affects the colon or rectum and is a common global health issue, with 1.1 million new cases occurring yearly. The study aimed to identify gene signatures for the early detection of CRC using machine learning (ML) algorithms utilizing gene expression data. The TCGA-CRC and GSE50760 datasets were pre-processed and subjected to feature selection using the LASSO method in combination with five ML algorithms: Adaboost, Random Forest (RF), Logistic Regression (LR), Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB), and Support Vector Machine (SVM). The important features were further analyzed for gene expression, correlation, and survival analyses. Validation of the external dataset GSE142279 was also performed. The RF model had the best classification accuracy for both datasets. A feature selection process resulted in the identification of 12 candidate genes, which were subsequently reduced to 3 (CA2, CA7, and ITM2C) through gene expression and correlation analyses. These three genes achieved 100% accuracy in an external dataset. The AUC values for these genes were 99.24%, 100%, and 99.5%, respectively. The survival analysis showed a significant logrank p-value of 0.044 for the final gene signatures. The analysis of tumor immunocyte infiltration showed a weak correlation with the expression of the gene signatures. CA2, CA7, and ITM2C can serve as gene signatures for the early detection of CRC and may provide valuable information for prognostic and therapeutic decision making. Further research is needed to fully understand the potential of these genes in the context of CRC.
Vascular endothelial cells (VECs) that form the inner wall of blood vessels can be injured by high glucose-induced autophagy and apoptosis. Although the role of long noncoding RNA in regulating cell fate has received widespread attention, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) that can both regulate autophagy and apoptosis need to be discovered. In this study, we identified that a small chemical molecule, 3-benzyl-5-([2-nitrophenoxy] methyl)-dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one (3BDO), synthesized by us, could inhibit VEC autophagy and apoptosis induced by a high concentration of glucose. To find new lncRNAs that regulate autophagy and apoptosis in VECs, we performed lncRNA microarray analysis. We found and verified an upregulated lncRNA named CA7-4 that was induced by a high concentration of glucose could be downregulated by 3BDO most obviously among all of the detected lncRNAs. Meanwhile, we investigated the mechanism of CA7-4 in regulating VEC autophagy and apoptosis. The results showed that CA7-4 facilitated endothelial autophagy and apoptosis as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) by decoying MIR877-3P and MIR5680. Further study elucidated that MIR877-3P could trigger the decrease of CTNNBIP1 (catenin beta interacting protein 1) by combining with its 3' UTR and then upregulating CTNNB1 (catenin beta 1); MIR5680 inhibited the phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) by targeting and decreasing DPP4 (dipeptidyl peptidase 4). Therefore, CA7-4, MIR877-3P and MIR5680 represent new signal pathways that regulate VEC autophagy and apoptosis under the high-glucose condition.Abbreviations: 3BDO: 3-benzyl-5-([2-nitrophenoxy] methyl)-dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one; 3' UTR: 3' untranslated region; AGO2: argonaute RISC catalytic component 2; AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase/protein kinase AMP-activated; BAX/BCL2L4: BCL2 associated X, apoptosis regulator; BCL2: BCL2 apoptosis regulator; CASP3: caspase 3; ceRNA: competing endogenous RNA; CTNNB1: catenin beta 1; CTNNBIP1/ICAT: catenin beta interacting protein 1; DPP4: dipeptidyl peptidase 4; FGF2/FGF-2: fibroblast growth factor 2; HG: high concentration glucose (30 mM glucose); lncRNA: long noncoding RNA; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; miRNA: microRNA; MIR4778-3P: microRNA 4778-3p; MIR561-3P: microRNA 561-3p; MIR5680: microRNA 5680; MIR877-3P: microRNA 877-3p; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; Mut: mutant; NC: negative control; NG: normal concentration glucose (5.5 mM glucose); PARP1: poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1; qPCR: quantitative real-time PCR; RNA-FISH: RNA- fl uorescence in situ hybridization; ROS: reactive oxygen species; RT-PCR: reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction; siRNA: small interfering RNA; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; TGFB2-OT1: TGFB2 overlapping transcript 1; TUNEL: terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling; VECs: vascular endothelial cells; WT: wild type.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. Although CRC has been comprehensively characterized at the molecular level, the tumor heterogeneity hinders the identification of reliable diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers. Molecular stratification of CRC is based on prevalent gene mutations and transcription profiles but its significance for clinical practice remains obscure. Indeed, activating mutations in the genes KRAS, NRAS and BRAF are the only predictive biomarkers for anti-EGFR antibody therapy routinely tested the clinic for advanced stages of CRC. Gene expression signatures are important for clarifying the molecular mechanisms of CRC development and progression, but only two such tests for predicting recurrence risk are commercially available. The aim of our study was to propose a diagnostic approach based on mutation and gene expression analysis that can be routinely applied in the clinic for defining the most appropriate treatment strategy for each patient. We used qPCR to determine the presence of KRAS mutations and measure the transcription levels of a panel of 26 genes in 24 CRC patients. Statistical analyses were applied to check for associations between clinico-pathological and molecular parameters. Our results reveal novel data concerning CRC carcinogenesis: almost universal downregulation of EGFR; differential role of the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha and IL-6; overexpression of the vitamin B12 transporter transcobalamin 1; tumor-suppressor function of SETD2, CA7 and GUCA2B. The practical application of these findings has yet to be clarified.
BACKGROUND: A recently published transcript set is suitable for gene expression-based discrimination of normal colonic and colorectal cancer (CRC) biopsy samples. Our aim was to test the discriminatory power of the CRC-specific transcript set on independent biopsies and on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples. METHODS: Total RNA isolations were performed with the automated MagNA Pure 96 Cellular RNA Large Volume Kit (Roche) from fresh frozen biopsies stored in RNALater (CRC (n = 15) and healthy colonic (n = 15)), furthermore from FFPE specimens including CRC (n = 15) and normal adjacent tissue (NAT) (n = 15) specimens next to the tumor. After quality and quantity measurements, gene expression analysis of a colorectal cancer-specific marker set with 11 genes (CA7, COL12A1, CXCL1, CXCL2, CHI3L1, GREM1, IL1B, IL1RN, IL8, MMP3, SLC5A7) was performed with array real-time PCR using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche) and RealTime ready assays on LightCycler480 System (Roche). In situ hybridization for two selected transcripts (CA7, CXCL1) was performed on NAT (n = 3), adenoma (n = 3) and CRC (n = 3) FFPE samples. RESULTS: Although analytical parameters of automatically isolated RNA samples showed differences between fresh frozen biopsy and FFPE samples, both quantity and the quality enabled their application in gene expression analyses. CRC and normal fresh frozen biopsy samples could be distinguished with 93.3% sensitivity and 86.7% specificity and FFPE samples with 96.7 and 70.0%, respectively. In situ hybridization could confirm the upregulation of CXCL1 and downregulation of CA7 in colorectal adenomas and tumors compared to healthy controls. CONCLUSION: According to our results, gene expression analysis of the analyzed colorectal cancer-specific marker set can also be performed from FFPE tissue material. With the addition of an automated workflow, this marker set may enhance the objective classification of colorectal neoplasias in the routine procedure in the future.
Objective: To investigate the CRISPR genotypes (clusters) and regional distribution of Yersinia pestis in Qinghai-plateau. Methods: One hundred and two isolates of Y. pestis isolated from human plague patients, host animal and insect vectors from Qinghai-plateau were selected. The DNAs were extracted using the traditional sodium dodecyl sulfate decomposition and phenol-chloroform method. Three CRISPR loci YPa, YPb and YPc of 102 isolates of Y. pesits were amplified and sequenced, and then the CRISPR sequence analysis was carried out by comparing the latest published CRISPR spacer dictionary and the NCBI database to identify the spacer and spacer array. CRISPR genotyping of isolates of Y. pesits were finally conducted according to the polymorphism of the spacer arrays and the regional distribution pattern of isolates of Y. pesits in Qinghai-plateau was described. Results: Forty spacers including 22 of YPa, 13 of YPb and 5 of YPc were observed among 102 isolates of Y. pestis in Qinghai-plateau, of which 5 spacers (a1', a103, a104, b4'' and b4''') were firstly identified. Meanwhile, 16, 10, and 5 different spacer arrays were obtained in YPa, YPb and YPc respectively, including 11 new spacer arrays detected in this study. One hundred and two isolates were divided into 24 CRISPR genotypes and classified into 9 CRISPR clusters (Cb4, Cb4', Cb2, Ca37, Ca7, Ca7', CaDelta5', Ca35' and Cc3'). Each dominant cluster presented significant aggregation geographically: Ca7 were found in Yushu, Nangqian, Chenduo, Zaduo, Zhiduo and Qumalai countries. Ca7' were found in Xunhua, Tongren, Zeku, Tongde, Maqin and Guinan countries. CaDelta5' were restricted to Qilian, Gangcha, Menyuan and Datong countries. CaDelta35' were found in Huangyuan, Haiyan, Gangcha, Tianjun, Delingha, Wulan, Doulan, Gonghe, Xinghai, Guide and Tongde countries. Conclusion: CRISPR-based genotyping analyses showed complicated population of Y. pestis in Qinghai-plateau. Four clusters, Ca7, Ca7', CaDelta5' and Ca35' were the most epidemic dominant four clusters and presented obvious regional distribution patterns, which instructed us to strengthen the surveillance and prevention and control by CRISPR-genotyping technique.
In ovo delivery of prebiotics and synbiotics in chickens allows for the development of intestinal microflora prior to hatching, which boosts their robustness. The goal of this study was to determine the transcriptomic profile of the spleen (S), cecal tonsils (CT), and large intestine (LI) of adult chickens injected with prebiotics and synbiotics in ovo. On day 12 of embryo development, incubating eggs were injected with prebiotics: inulin alone (P1) or in combination with Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis IBB2955 (S1), galactooligosaccharides (GOS) alone (P2) or in combination with Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris IBB477 (S2); control group (C) was mock injected with physiological saline. Gene expression analysis was conducted using an Affymetrix Chicken Gene 1.1 ST Array Strip. Most of the differentially expressed genes (DEG) were detected in the cecal tonsils of P2 (378 DEG), and were assigned to gene ontology categories: lymphocyte proliferation, activation and differentiation, and cytokine production. Ingenuity pathway analysis of the DEG (CT of P2) indicated the inhibition of humoral and cellular immune responses, e.g., role of NFAT in regulation of immune responses, phagocytosis, production of nitric oxide, NF-kappaB, IL-8, and CXCR4 signaling. The DEG with the highest up-regulation from S1 and P2 were involved in gene expression (PAPOLA, RPL27A, RPLP1, and RPS29) from P1 and P2 in transport (BEST4, SLC9A3, and SLC13A2), metabolism (OGT, ALPP, CA4, and CA7), signaling (FGG, G3BP2, UBB, G3BP2, CACNA1G, and ATP6V0A4), and immune responses (MSMB, LGALS3, CABIN1, CXCR5, PAX5, and TNFRSF14). Two DEG influencing the complement system (SERPING1 and MIR1674) were down-regulated in P2 and S1. In conclusion, GOS injected in ovo provided the most potent stimulation of the host transcriptome. This is likely due to its strong bifidogenic effect, which triggers proliferation of indigenous embryonic microflora in ovo, and indirectly influences gene expression regulation in host tissues, especially cecal tonsils.
The relationships between maturation and anthropometric and physical performance characteristics are dynamic and often asynchronous; confounding the capability to accurately evaluate performance during adolescence. This study aimed to (i) examine the influence of chronological age (CA) and somatic maturation (YPHV) upon anthropometric and physical performance parameters, and (ii) identify the transition/change time points in these relationships using segmental regression. N = 969 soccer players (8-18 years of age) completed anthropometric and physical test assessments, including a countermovement jump (CMJ), agility T test, 10 and 20 m sprints, and multistage fitness test (MSFT). When modeled against CA and YPHV, results identified time point phases with increased rates of stature (CA-7.5, YPHV-8.6 cm/y at 10.7-15.2 years or -3.2 to +0.8 YPHV) and body mass gain (CA-7.1, YPHV-7.5 kg/y at 11.9-16.1 years or -1.6 to +4.0 YPHV), followed by gain reductions. Increased rates of sprint performance development (31%-43% gains) occurred at 11.8-15.8 CA or -1.8 to +1.2 YPHV, with gains subsiding thereafter. CMJ, T test, and MSFT gains appeared relatively linear with no change in developmental rate apparent. Developmental tempos did again, however, subside at circa (CMJ and T test) to post-PHV (MSFT). Based on our sample and analysis, periods of increased developmental rates (stature, mass, sprint) were apparent alongside progressive gains for other physical measures, before all subsided at particular age and maturation time points. Findings highlight dynamic asynchronous development of players, physical attributes, and the need to account for the influence of maturation on athletic performance until post-PHV.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is major cancer-related death. The aim of this study was to identify differentially expressed and differentially methylated genes, contributing to explore the molecular mechanism of CRC. METHODS: Firstly, the data of gene transcriptome and genome-wide DNA methylation expression were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. Secondly, functional analysis of differentially expressed and differentially methylated genes was performed, followed by protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis. Thirdly, the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset and in vitro experiment was used to validate the expression of selected differentially expressed and differentially methylated genes. Finally, diagnosis and prognosis analysis of selected differentially expressed and differentially methylated genes was performed. RESULTS: Up to 1958 differentially expressed (1025 up-regulated and 993 down-regulated) genes and 858 differentially methylated (800 hypermethylated and 58 hypomethylated) genes were identified. Interestingly, some genes, such as GFRA2 and MDFI, were differentially expressed-methylated genes. Purine metabolism (involved IMPDH1), cell adhesion molecules and PI3K-Akt signaling pathway were significantly enriched signaling pathways. GFRA2, FOXQ1, CDH3, CLDN1, SCGN, BEST4, CXCL12, CA7, SHMT2, TRIP13, MDFI and IMPDH1 had a diagnostic value for CRC. In addition, BEST4, SHMT2 and TRIP13 were significantly associated with patients' survival. CONCLUSIONS: The identified altered genes may be involved in tumorigenesis of CRC. In addition, BEST4, SHMT2 and TRIP13 may be considered as diagnosis and prognostic biomarkers for CRC patients.
In this study, we investigated the potential in vitro anti-HSV-1 activities of the Cassiopea andromeda jellyfish tentacle extract (TE) and its fractions, as well as computational work on the thymidine kinase (TK) inhibitory activity of the identified secondary metabolites. The LD50, secondary metabolite identification, preparative and analytical chromatography, and in silico TK assessment were performed using the Spearman-Karber, GC-MS, silica gel column chromatography, RP-HPLC, LC-MS, and docking methods, respectively. The antiviral activity of TE and the two purified compounds C(a2) and C(a7) against HSV-1 in Vero cells was evaluated by MTT and RT-PCR assays. The LD(50) (IV, mouse) values of TE, Ca2, and Ca7 were 104.0 +/- 4, 5120 +/- 14, and 197.0 +/- 7 (mug/kg), respectively. They exhibited extremely effective antiviral activity against HSV-1. The CC(50) and MNTD of TE, C(a2), and C(a7) were (125, 62.5), (25, 12.5), and (50, 3.125) mug/ml, respectively. GC-MS analysis of the tentacle extract revealed seven structurally distinct chemical compositions. Four of the seven compounds had a steroid structure. According to the docking results, all compounds showed binding affinity to the active sites of both thymidine kinase chains. Among them, the steroid compound Pregn-5-ene-3,11-dione, 17,20:20,21 bis [methylenebis(oxy)]-, cyclic 3-(1,2-ethane diyl acetal) (C(a2)) exhibited the highest affinity for both enzyme chains, surpassing that of standard acyclovir. In silico data confirmed the experimental results. We conclude that the oxosteroid C(a2) may act as a potent agent against HSV-1.
Sinhalese and Vedda people are respectively the major ethnic group and the descendants of the probably earliest inhabitants of Sri Lanka, both believed to have a long history of settlement on the island. However, very little information is available on the origin and possible migration patterns of the two populations. Some studies have focused on (CA) dinucleotide repeat variations located in the mitochondrial hypervariable region 3 (HVS3) (base pairs 514-524) as a useful biomarker to understand migration patterns of different populations. Hence, here we analyze these repeat variations in these two ethnic groups to understand their historical roots and possible patterns of gene flow. Blood samples were collected from healthy, maternally unrelated individuals (N = 109) and mitochondrial D-loop was amplified and sequenced. The (CA)(4) dinucleotide repeat in hypervariable region 3 was detected in the majority of Vedda samples while the remaining samples were defined by a (CA)(5) cluster. In contrast, the (CA)(5) repeat was the most frequent among Sinhalese followed by (CA)(4) and (CA)(7) repeats. Haplogroup diversity of (CA)(4) variation indicated that the majority of Sinhalese individuals grouped into the M30 haplogroup while Vedda clustered into the R5a2b and U7a2 haplogroups. No significant differences in diversity measures were observed among the two populations. However, Multidimensional Scaling indicated a separate clustering for aboriginal Vedda and contemporary Sinhalese populations. Results from this study can be used together with mitochondrial DNA information from hypervariable regions 1 and 2 to perform anthropological and forensic investigations in the two populations studied.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common and lethal malignant lesions. Determining how the identified risk factors drive the formation and development of CRC could be an essential means for effective therapeutic development. Aiming this, we investigated how the altered gene expression resulting from exposure to putative CRC risk factors contribute to prognostic biomarker identification. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were first identified for CRC and other eight risk factors. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) through the molecular pathway and gene ontology (GO), as well as protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, were then conducted to predict the functions of these DEGs. Our identified genes were explored through the dbGaP and OMIM databases to compare with the already identified and known prognostic CRC biomarkers. The survival time of CRC patients was also examined using a Cox Proportional Hazard regression-based prognostic model by integrating transcriptome data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). In this study, PPI analysis identified 4 sub-networks and 8 hub genes that may be potential therapeutic targets, including CXCL8, ICAM1, SOD2, CXCL2, CCL20, OIP5, BUB1, ASPM and IL1RN. We also identified seven signature genes (PRR5.ARHGAP8, CA7, NEDD4L, GFR2, ARHGAP8, SMTN, OIP5) in independent analysis and among which PRR5. ARHGAP8 was found in both multivariate analyses and in analyses that combined gene expression and clinical information. This approach provides both mechanistic information and, when combined with predictive clinical information, good evidence that the identified genes are significant biomarkers of processes involved in CRC progression and survival.
Mice may be useful for studies of skeletal aging, but there are limited data on changes in bone structure and strength over their life span. We obtained bones from female and male BALB/c mice at ages 2, 4, 7, 12, and 20 months and evaluated their structural, densitometric, and mechanical properties. MicroCT of the mid-diaphysis of the femur and radius indicated that during skeletal growth (2-7 months) bone cross-sectional size (area, moment of inertia) increased rapidly; during aging (7-20 months) cortical area was maintained, while moment of inertia continued to increase. Bones from females were smaller than those from males at young ages but not at later ages. Changes in whole-bone stiffness and strength reflected the changes in bone size, with a rapid increase from 2 to 7 months, followed by little or no change. In contrast, energy-to-fracture declined with aging. Cortical tissue mineral density increased during growth and was maintained with aging. MicroCT of trabecular bone revealed age-related changes that were site-dependent. The proximal tibia showed a clear pattern of age-related decline in trabecular BV/TV, with progressive decreases after 4 months in both sexes; lumbar vertebra L5 had more modest age-related declines; in contrast, caudal vertebra Ca7 had increasing BV/TV with aging. Overall, we found no evidence that females had more pronounced age-related deterioration than males. We conclude that bones from aging female and male BALB/c mice exhibit many of the changes seen in humans and are therefore a clinically relevant model for studies of skeletal aging.
BACKGROUND: Deoxycholic acid (DCA), implicated in the pathogenesis of gall stones and colorectal cancer, is mainly formed by bacterial deconjugation (cholylglycine hydrolase (CGH)) and 7 alpha-dehydroxylation (7 alpha-dehydroxylase (7 alpha-DH)) of conjugated cholic acid (CA) in the caecum/proximal colon. Despite this, most previous studies of CGH and 7 alpha-DH have been in faeces rather than in caecal contents. In bacteria, CA increases 7 alpha-DH activity by substrate-enzyme induction but little is known about CA concentrations or CA/7 alpha-DH induction in the human colon. AIMS AND METHODS: Therefore, in fresh "faeces", and in caecal aspirates obtained during colonoscopy from 20 patients, we: (i) compared the activities of CGH and 7 alpha-DH, (ii) measured 7 alpha-DH in patients with "low" and "high" percentages of DCA in fasting serum (less than and greater than the median), (iii) studied CA concentrations in the right and left halves of the colon, and examined the relationships between (iv) 7 alpha-DH activity and CA concentration in caecal samples (evidence of substrate-enzyme induction), and (v) 7 alpha-DH and per cent DCA in serum. RESULTS: Although mean CGH activity in the proximal colon (18.3 (SEM 4.40) x10(-2) U/mg protein) was comparable with that in "faeces" (16.0 (4.10) x10(- 2) U/mg protein), mean 7 alpha-DH in the caecum (8.54 (1.08) x10(-4) U/mg protein) was higher (p<0.05) than that in the left colon (5.72 (0.85) x10(-4) U/mg protein). At both sites, 7 alpha-DH was significantly greater in the "high" than in the "low" serum DCA subgroups. CA concentrations in the right colon (0.94 (0.08) micromol/ml) were higher than those in the left (0.09 (0.03) micromol/ml; p<0.001) while in the caecum (but not in the faeces) there was a weak (r=0.58) but significant (p<0.005) linear relationship between 7 alpha-DH and CA concentration. At both sites, 7 alpha-DH was linearly related (p<0.005) to per cent DCA in serum. INTERPRETATION/SUMMARY: These results: (i) confirm that there are marked regional differences in bile acid metabolism between the right and left halves of the colon, (ii) suggest that caecal and faecal 7 alpha-DH influence per cent DCA in serum (and, by inference, in bile), and (iii) show that the substrate CA induces the enzyme 7 alpha-DH in the caecum.
The purpose of this work was to synthesize a series of symmetrical analogs (CA2-CA7) of curcumin and determine their efficacy as antioxidant and anticancer agents in vitro. The six analogs were successfully synthesized and characterized, one of which, CA6, had not been previously reported in the literature. With the exception of CA2, the analogs had lower predicted aqueous solubilities and higher partition coefficients than curcumin. Two analogs, CA2 and CA3, had lower potencies as anticancer agents compared with curcumin, while CA6 had a slightly higher IC50 value. Two different trends in the antioxidant capabilities of curcumin and its analogs were determined when assessed in vitro or in cell culture. The in vitro DPPH assay clearly showed curcumin as the strongest antioxidant as compared with the analogs when tested at the same concentration or at their IC50 value. The cell culture-based reactive oxygen species/reactive nitrogen species assay indicated that CA3 and CA6 were equal to curcumin in their free radical scavenging ability at the same concentration, but when curcumin and its analogs were tested at their respective IC50 values, CA4 and CA5 showed excellent antioxidant capacities. These results indicate that in cell culture, the ability of these analogs to produce antioxidant effects may be tied to their downstream effects.
The time course of physiological and psychological markers during cold acclimation (CA) was explored. The experiment included 17 controlled (i.e., until the rectal temperature reached 35.5 degrees C or 170 min had elapsed; for the CA-17 session, the subjects (n = 14) were immersed in water for the same amount of time as that used in the CA-1 session) head-out water immersions at a temperature of 14 degrees C over 20 days. The data obtained in this study suggest that the subjects exhibited a thermoregulatory shift from peripheral-to-central to solely central input thermoregulation, as well as from shivering to non-shivering thermogenesis throughout the CA. In the first six CA sessions, a hypothermic type of acclimation was found; further CA (CA-7 to CA-16) led to a transitional shift to a hypothermic-insulative type of acclimation. Interestingly, when the subjects were immersed in water for the same time as that used in the CA-1 session (CA-17), the CA led to a hypothermic type of acclimation. The presence of a metabolic type of thermogenesis was evident only under thermoneutral conditions. Cold-water immersion decreased the concentration of cold-stress markers, reduced the activity of the innate immune system, suppressed specific immunity to a lesser degree and yielded less discomfort and cold sensation. We found a negative correlation between body mass index and Delta metabolic heat production before and after CA.
