Carbonic anhydrase 9; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide. Participates in pH regulation. May be involved in the control of cell proliferation and transformation. Appears to be a novel specific biomarker for a cervical neoplasia.
Hypoxia and acidity provide microenvironment for selection under evolutionary pressure and proliferation in cancer cells. Carbonic anhydrases (CAs) are a superfamily of metalloenzymes present in all life kingdoms, equilibrating the reactions among CO(2), bicarbonate and H(+). CA9, a membrane-associated alpha-CA, has been a drug target for various cancers. Whereas iron is essential not only for cancer cells but also for all the lives on earth, little is known on the association among hypoxia, iron metabolism, extracellular acidity and redox regulation. Malignant mesothelioma (MM), an aggressive tumor with poor prognosis, is an intriguing model in that asbestos-associated pathogenesis includes excess iron environment during carcinogenesis. Re-analysis of rat asbestos-induced MM model revealed an inverse association between high CA9 expression and survival. Here we used human MMs to identify the molecular events surrounding CA9 from the viewpoint of iron metabolism. CA9 expression was significantly higher in MM cells than in MeT-5A mesothelial cells, which was further amplified under hypoxia (1%O(2)) with increased catalytic Fe(II). CA9 suppression by inhibitors (S4 and U104) decreased viability and migration of MM cells, accompanied by overexpression of TFRC, IREB1/2 and FPN1(SLC40A1) and by downregulation of FTH/FTL. This expressional pattern was similar to that of erastin-induced ferroptosis in the same cells. Furthermore, we observed mitochondrial fission and enhanced autophagy with increased catalytic Fe(II) in both mitochondria and lysosomes after CA9 inhibition, accompanied by increased peroxides, mitochondrial O(2)(-) and lipid peroxidation. The eventual cell death was significantly inhibited by deferoxamine, ferrostatin-1 and Z-VAD-FMK, suggesting a mixed cell death of ferroptosis and apoptosis. Therefore, CA9 plays a role in equilibrating among hypoxia, iron metabolism and redox regulation in MM cells.
Ovarian cancer is an aggressive gynecological tumor characterized by a high relapse rate and chemoresistance. Ovarian cancer exhibits the cancer hallmark of elevated glycolysis, yet effective strategies targeting cancer cell metabolic reprogramming to overcome therapeutic resistance in ovarian cancer remain elusive. Here, we revealed that epigenetic silencing of Otubain 2 (OTUB2) is a driving force for mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming in ovarian cancer, which promotes tumorigenesis and chemoresistance. Mechanistically, OTUB2 silencing destabilizes sorting nexin 29 pseudogene 2 (SNX29P2), which subsequently prevents hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1alpha) from von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor-mediated degradation. Elevated HIF-1alpha activates the transcription of carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) and drives ovarian cancer progression and chemoresistance by promoting glycolysis. Importantly, pharmacological inhibition of CA9 substantially suppressed tumor growth and synergized with carboplatin in the treatment of OTUB2-silenced ovarian cancer. Thus, our study highlights the pivotal role of OTUB2/SNX29P2 in suppressing ovarian cancer development and proposes that targeting CA9-mediated glycolysis is an encouraging strategy for the treatment of ovarian cancer.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Maintenance of acid-base homeostasis is required for normal physiology, metabolism, and development. It is not clear how cell death is activated in response to changes in pH. We performed a screen to identify agents that induce cell death in a pH-dependent manner (we call this alkaliptosis) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cancer (PDAC) cells and tested their effects in mice. METHODS: We screened a library of 254 compounds that interact with G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to identify those with cytotoxic activity against a human PDAC cell line (PANC1). We evaluated the ability of JTC801, which binds the opiod receptor and has analgesic effects, to stimulate cell death in human PDAC cell lines (PANC1, MiaPaCa2, CFPAC1, PANC2.03, BxPc3, and CAPAN2), mouse pancreatic cancer-associated stellate cell lines, primary human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells, and 60 cancer cell lines (the NCI-60 panel). Genes encoding proteins in cell death and GPCR signaling pathways, as well as those that regulate nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activity, were knocked out, knocked down, or expressed from transgenes in cancer cell lines. JTC801 was administered by gavage to mice with xenograft tumors, C57BL/6 mice with orthographic pancreatic tumors grown from Pdx1-Cre;KRas(G12D/+);Tp53(R172H/+) (KPC) cells, mice with metastases following tail-vein injection of KPC cells, and Pdx-1-Cre;Kras(G12D/+) mice crossed with Hmgb1(flox/flox) mice (KCH mice). Pancreata were collected from mice and analyzed for tumor growth and by histology and immunohistochemistry. We compared gene and protein expression levels between human pancreatic cancer tissues and patient survival times using online R2 genomic or immunohistochemistry analyses. RESULTS: Exposure of human PDAC cell lines (PANC1 and MiaPaCa2) to JTC801 did not induce molecular markers of apoptosis (cleavage of caspase 3 or poly [ADP ribose] polymerase [PARP]), necroptosis (interaction between receptor-interacting serine-threonine kinase 3 [RIPK3] and mixed lineage kinase domain like pseudokinase [MLKL]), or ferroptosis (degradation of glutathione peroxidase 4 [GPX4]). Inhibitors of apoptosis (Z-VAD-FMK), necroptosis (necrosulfonamide), ferroptosis (ferrostatin-1), or autophagy (hydroxychloroquine) did not prevent JTC801-induced death of PANC1 or MiaPaCa2 cells. The cytotoxic effects of JTC801 in immortalized fibroblast cell lines was not affected by disruption of genes that promote apoptosis (Bax(-/-)/Bak(-/-) cells), necroptosis (Ripk1(-/-), Ripk3(-/-), or Mlkl(-/-) cells), ferroptosis (Gpx4(-/-) cells), or autophagy (Atg3(-/-), Atg5(-/-), Atg7(-/-), or Sqstm1(-/-) cells). We found JTC801 to induce a pH-dependent form cell death (alkaliptosis) in cancer cells but not normal cells (hepatocytes, bone marrow CD34(+) progenitor cells, peripheral blood mononuclear cells, or dermal fibroblasts) or healthy tissues of C57BL/6 mice. JTC801 induced alkaliptosis in cancer cells by activating NF-kappaB, which repressed expression of the carbonic anhydrase 9 gene (CA9), whose product regulates pH balance in cells. In analyses of Cancer Genome Atlas data and tissue microarrays, we associated increased tumor level of CA9 mRNA or protein with shorter survival times of patients with pancreatic, kidney, or lung cancers. Knockdown of CA9 reduced the protective effects of NF-kappaB inhibition on JTC801-induced cell death and intracellular alkalinization in PANC1 and MiaPaCa2 cell lines. Oral administration of JTC801 inhibited growth of xenograft tumors (from PANC1, MiaPaCa2, SK-MEL-28, PC-3, 786-0, SF-295, HCT116, OV-CAR3, and HuH7 cells), orthotropic tumors (from KPC cells), lung metastases (from KPC cells) of mice, and slowed growth of tumors in KCH mice. CONCLUSIONS: In a screen of agents that interact with GPCR pathways, we found JTC801 to induce pH-dependent cell death (alkaliptosis) specifically in cancer cells such as PDAC cells, by reducing expression of CA9. Levels of CA9 are increased in human cancer tissues. JTC801 might be developed for treatment of pancreatic cancer.
Chronic hepatitis B is a global health problem and current treatments only suppress hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, highlighting the need for new curative treatments. Oxygen levels influence HBV replication and we previously reported that hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) activate the basal core promoter (BCP). Here we show that the hypoxic-dependent increase in BCP-derived transcripts is dependent on N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modifications in the 5' stem loop that regulate RNA half-life. Application of a probe-enriched long-read sequencing method to accurately map the HBV transcriptome showed an increased abundance of pre-genomic RNA under hypoxic conditions. Mapping the transcription start sites of BCP-RNAs identified a role for hypoxia to regulate pre-genomic RNA splicing that is dependent on m6A modification. Bioinformatic analysis of published single cell RNA-seq of murine liver showed an increased expression of the RNA demethylase ALKBH5 in the peri-central low oxygen region. In vitro studies with a human hepatocyte derived HepG2-NTCP cell line showed increased ALKBH5 gene expression under hypoxic conditions and a concomitant reduction in m6A-modified HBV BCP-RNA and host RNAs. Silencing the demethylase reduced the level of BCP-RNAs and host gene (CA9, NDRG1, VEGFA, BNIP3, FUT11, GAP and P4HA1) transcripts and this was mediated via reduced HIFalpha expression. In summary, our study highlights a previously unrecognized role for ALKBH5 in orchestrating viral and cellular transcriptional responses to low oxygen.
In contrast to single-pharmacophore DNA-encoded libraries, where only one chemical moiety is linked to DNA, dual-pharmacophore DNA-encoded chemical libraries feature the display of two independent small-molecules in close proximity. This, in principle, allows to explore adjacent epitopes on a pharmaceutical target of choice and hence the discovery of simultaneously binding pairs of fragments, by virtue of the chelate effect.
The physiologically hypoxic intervertebral disc and cartilage rely on the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) family of transcription factors to mediate cellular responses to changes in oxygen tension. During homeostatic development, oxygen-dependent prolyl hydroxylases, circadian clock proteins and metabolic intermediates control the activities of HIF1 and HIF2 in these tissues. Mechanistically, HIF1 is the master regulator of glycolytic metabolism and cytosolic lactate levels. In addition, HIF1 regulates mitochondrial metabolism by promoting flux through the tricarboxylic acid cycle, inhibiting downsteam oxidative phosphorylation and controlling mitochondrial health through modulation of the mitophagic pathway. Accumulation of metabolic intermediates from HIF-dependent processes contribute to intracellular pH regulation in the disc and cartilage. Namely, to prevent changes in intracellular pH that could lead to cell death, HIF1 orchestrates a bicarbonate buffering system in the disc, controlled by carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) and CA12, sodium bicarbonate cotransporters and an intracellular H(+)/lactate efflux mechanism. In contrast to HIF1, the role of HIF2 remains elusive; in disorders of the disc and cartilage, its function has been linked to both anabolic and catabolic pathways. The current knowledge of hypoxic cell metabolism and regulation of HIF1 activity provides a strong basis for the development of future therapies designed to repair the degenerative disc.
Metastatic tumors are often hypoxic exhibiting a decrease in extracellular pH (~6.5) due to a metabolic transition described by the Warburg Effect. This shift in tumor cell metabolism alters the tumor milieu inducing tumor cell proliferation, angiogenesis, cell motility, invasiveness, and often resistance to common anti-cancer treatments; hence hindering treatment of aggressive cancers. As a result, tumors exhibiting this phenotype are directly associated with poor prognosis and decreased survival rates in cancer patients. A key component to this tumor microenvironment is carbonic anhydrase IX (CA IX). Knockdown of CA IX expression or inhibition of its activity has been shown to reduce primary tumor growth, tumor proliferation, and also decrease tumor resistance to conventional anti-cancer therapies. As such several approaches have been taken to target CA IX in tumors via small-molecule, anti-body, and RNAi delivery systems. Here we will review recent developments that have exploited these approaches and provide our thoughts for future directions of CA IX targeting for the treatment of cancer.
Temozolomide (TMZ) is a standard chemotherapeutic drug used in the treatment of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM); however, resistance to this drug is common. SRY-Box 9 (SOX9) expression is associated with a poor prognosis of patients with GBM and with resistance to TMZ. Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine the effects of SOX9 inhibition on the sensitivity of glioma cells to TMZ treatment. We knocked down the expression of SOX9 (SOX9KD) via lentiviral infection in two glioblastoma (U87 and U251) cell lines, and the cells were then subjected to gene microarray, Gene Ontology and KEGG analysis pathway, all of which revealed a close association between SOX9 and the carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) gene. The TMZ-mediated apoptosis of glioma cells was significantly increased in the cells in the SOX9KD group. The potential underlying mechanism involved the downregulation of SOX9 and CA9 expression, which in turn decreased Akt phosphorylation, downregulated BCL‑2 expression, and upregulated BAX expression, as assessed by western blot analysis and RT-qPCR. The effects were found to be substantially enhanced in the cells in the SOX9KD group treated with TMZ. Subsequently, considering the association between SOX9 and CA9, the effects of CA9 inhibition, using a CA9 inhibitor (U‑104), on the chemosensitivity of glioma cells to TMZ were assessed. The results revealed that the use of U‑104 + TMZ effectively induced glioma cell death, compared to treatment with TMZ alone. The underlying mechanisms were similar to those observed with the silencing of SOX9 in the TMZ-treated glioma cells. On the whole, the findings of this study establish the SOX9/CA9-mediated oncogenic pathway in glioma, the inhibition of which enhances the sensitivity of glioma cells to TMZ treatment, and thus highlights the value of developing small molecules or antibodies against the SOX9/CA9 pathway, for combination therapy with TMZ, in the more efficient management of glioma.
PURPOSE: Lactate is a key metabolite produced by glycolytic metabolism, yet it also serves as an energy source for cancer cells. Lactate accumulation in the tumor microenvironment (TME) has been demonstrated to correlate with immunosuppressive TME and tumor progression. As a highly glycolytic tumor, it is crucial to decipher the underlying mechanism in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). METHODS: Bioinformation analysis was used to identify lactate mediated carbonic anhydrase IX (CA9) upregulation. CCK-8, colony formation and mouse xenograft assay were utilized to study the effect of CA9 in PDAC. ECAR, OCR and pHi measurement confirmed the impacts of CA9 in Warburg phenotype. Using confocal microscopy, flow cytometry, qRT-PCR, co-IP, we validated the signaling pathways in PDAC to regulate reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. RESULTS: We confirmed that CA9 is highly expressed in PDAC and positively regulated by lactate levels. CA9 can enhance the proliferative and migratory capabilities of PDAC cells. Pharmacologic inhibition or knockdown of CA9 significantly reduce pHi, increase the intracellular lactate and reverse the Warburg phenotype. The intracellular lactate accumulation caused by CA9 knockdown upregulates ROS and mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, it was discovered that the competitive binding of CA9 with FUS inhibits the facilitation of FUS on NOX4 pre-mRNA splicing. CONCLUSION: Collectively, our data illustrate that CA9 has a direct regulatory role in pHi homeostasis and ROS production, providing a potential therapeutic target for PDAC treatment.
Hypoxia is a crucial factor in tumour aggressiveness and its treatment resistance, particularly in human brain cancer. Tumour resistance against radiation- and chemo- therapy is facilitated by oxygenation reduction at tumour areas. HIF-1alpha regulated genes are mostly responsible for this type of resistance. Among these genes, carbonic anhydrase isoform 9 (CA9) is highly overexpressed in many types of cancer especially in high grade brain cancer like GBM. CA IX contributes to tumour environment acidification by catalyzing the carbon dioxide hydration to bicarbonate and protons, leading to the acquisition of metastasic phenotypes and chemoresistance to weakly basic anticancer drugs and therefore to inadequate application of radio-therapeutic or chemotherapeutic anti-cancer treatment strategies. Inhibition of this enzymatic activity by application of specific chemical CA9 inhibitors (sulphonamide derivative compounds) or indirect inhibitors like HIF-1alpha inhibitors (chetomin) or molecular inhibitors like CA9-siRNA leads to reversion of these processes, leading to the CA9 functional role inhibition during tumourigenesis. Hypoxia significantly influences the tumour microenvironment behaviour via activation of genes involved in the adaptation to the hypoxic stress. It also represents an important cancer prognosis indicator and is associated with aggressive growth, malignant progression, metastasis and poor treatment response. The main objective in malignant GBM therapy is either to eradicate the tumour or to convert it into a controlled, quiescent chronic disease. Sulfonamide derivative compounds with CA9 inhibitory characteristics represent one of the optimal treatment options beside other CA9 inhibitory agents or chemical inhibitory compounds against its main regulating transcription factor which is the hypoxia induced HIF-1alpha when applied against human cancers with hypoxic regions like GBM, bearing potential for an effective role in human brain tumour therapeutic strategies. Glycolytic inhibitors, when added in controlled doses under hypoxia, lead to a reduced accumulation of HIF-1alpha and can function as indirect hypoxia regulated genes inhibitors like CA9. These may be used as alternative or in conjunction with other direct inhibitors like the sulphonamide derivate compounds, chetomin or specific siRNAs, or other different chemical compounds possessing similar functionality making them as optimal tools for optimized therapy development in cancer treatment, especially against human brain cancer. Further experimental analysis towards the tumour stage specific inhibitory CA9 characteristics determination are necessary to find the optimal therapeutic solutions among the different available modalities; whether they are direct or indirect chemical, molecular or natural inhibitors to be able to set up successful treatment approaches against the different human tumour diseases.
Alterations in tumour metabolism and acid/base regulation result in the formation of a hostile environment, which fosters tumour growth and metastasis. Acid/base homoeostasis in cancer cells is governed by the concerted interplay between carbonic anhydrases (CAs) and various transport proteins, which either mediate proton extrusion or the shuttling of acid/base equivalents, such as bicarbonate and lactate, across the cell membrane. Accumulating evidence suggests that some of these transporters interact both directly and functionally with CAIX to form a protein complex coined the 'transport metabolon'. Transport metabolons formed between bicarbonate transporters and CAIX require CA catalytic activity and have a function in cancer cell migration and invasion. Another type of transport metabolon is formed by CAIX and monocarboxylate transporters. In this complex, CAIX functions as a proton antenna for the transporter, which drives the export of lactate and protons from the cell. Since CAIX is almost exclusively expressed in cancer cells, these transport metabolons might serve as promising targets to interfere with tumour pH regulation and energy metabolism. This review provides an overview of the current state of research on the function of CAIX in tumour acid/base transport and discusses how CAIX transport metabolons could be exploited in modern cancer therapy.
The recent classification of renal tumors has been proposed according to genetic characteristics as well as morphological difference. In this review, we summarize the immunohistochemical characteristics of each entity of renal tumors. Regarding translocation renal cell carcinoma (RCC), TFE3, TFEB and ALK protein expression is crucial in establishing the diagnosis of Xp11.2 RCC, renal carcinoma with t(6;11)(p21;q12), and renal carcinoma with ALK rearrangement, respectively. In dialysis-related RCC, neoplastic cells of acquired cystic disease-associated RCC are positive for alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR), but negative for cytokeratin (CK) 7, whereas clear cell papillary RCC shows the inverse pattern. The diffuse positivity for carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) is diagnostic for clear cell RCC. Co-expression of CK7 and CA9 is characteristic of multilocular cystic RCC. CK7 and AMACR are excellent markers for papillary RCC and mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinoma. CD82 and epithelial-related antigen (MOC31) may be helpful in the distinction between chromophobe RCC and renal oncocytoma. WT1 and CD57 highlights the diagnosis of metanephric adenoma. The combined panel of PAX2 and PAX8 may be useful in the diagnosis of metastatic RCC.
BACKGROUND: Surface nanostructures in titanium (Ti) oral implants are critical for rapid osseointegration. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the growth of osteoblast-like (Saos-2) and epithelial-like (Ca9-22) cells on nanopatterned Ti films. METHODS: Ti films with 500 nm grooves and pillars were fabricated by nanoimprinting, and seeded with Saos-2 and Ca9-22 cells. Cell viability and morphology were assessed by cell proliferation assay and scanning electron microscopy, respectively. RESULTS: As assessed after 1 hour, proliferation of Saos-2 cells was most robust on grooved films than on pillared and smooth films, in this order. These cells approximately doubled on grooved and pillared substrates in 24 hours and after 5 days, but not on smooth surfaces. In contrast, Ca9-22 cells favored smooth surfaces, followed by grooved and pillared films. Indeed, cells sparsely adhered to pillared films over 5 days of incubation (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The data show that Saos-2 and Ca9-22 cells respond differently to different nanostructures, and highlight the potential use of nanopatterns to promote bone regeneration or to prevent epithelial downgrowth at the implant-bone interface.
Cancer cells in acidic tumor regions are aggressive and a key therapeutic target, but distinguishing between acid-exposed and hypoxic cells is challenging. Here, we use carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) antibodies to mark acidic areas in both hypoxic and respiring tumor areas, along with an HRE-GFP reporter for hypoxia, to isolate distinct cell populations from 3D tumor spheroids. Transcriptomic analysis of CA9-positive, hypoxia-negative cells highlights enriched fatty acid desaturase activity. Inhibiting or silencing stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (SCD1) induces ferroptosis in CA9-positive acidic cancer cells and delays mouse tumor growth, an effect enhanced by omega-3 fatty acid supplementation. Using acid-exposed cancer cells and patient-derived tumor organoids, we show that SCD1 inhibition increases acidic cancer cell reliance on external mono-unsaturated fatty acids, depriving hypoxic cells of essential resources. This bystander effect provides unbiased evidence for a lack of full overlap between hypoxic and acidic tumor compartments, highlighting a rationale for targeting desaturase activity in cancer.
A strong hypoxic environment has been observed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells, which contributes to drug resistance, tumor progression, and metastasis. Therefore, we performed bioinformatics analyses to investigate potential targets for the treatment of PDAC. To identify potential genes as effective PDAC treatment targets, we selected all genes whose expression level was related to worse overall survival (OS) in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database and selected only the genes that matched with the genes upregulated due to hypoxia in pancreatic cancer cells in the dataset obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Although the extracted 107 hypoxia-responsive genes included the genes that were slightly enriched in angiogenic factors, TCGA data analysis revealed that the expression level of endothelial cell (EC) markers did not affect OS. Finally, we selected CA9 and PRELID2 as potential targets for PDAC treatment and elucidated that a CA9 inhibitor, U-104, suppressed pancreatic cancer cell growth more effectively than 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and PRELID2 siRNA treatment suppressed the cell growth stronger than CA9 siRNA treatment. Thus, we elucidated that specific inhibition of PRELID2 as well as CA9, extracted via exhaustive bioinformatic analyses of clinical datasets, could be a more effective strategy for PDAC treatment.
The development of hypoxic microenvironments within many types of solid tumors imposes a significant stress on cancer cells to which they must respond appropriately in order to survive and grow. Tumor-specific, hypoxia-induced upregulation of Carbonic Anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a component of the complex response of cancer cells to the evolving low oxygen environment. Here, we discuss evidence from in vivo tumor models employing inhibition or enhancement of CAIX expression, using gene depletion or overexpression strategies, respectively, or inhibition of its catalytic activity, using CAIX-specific small molecules or antibodies, to demonstrate that CAIX is a functional mediator of tumor growth and metastasis. We also discuss the functional contribution of CAIX to several specific biological processes critical for cancer progression, including pH regulation and cell survival, adhesion, migration and invasion, the maintenance of cancer stem cell function, and the acquisition of chemo and radioresistant properties. The demonstration of CAIX as a functional mediator of cancer progression provides a biological rationale for its use as a cancer-specific, clinically relevant therapeutic target.
Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is expressed in many solid tumors in response to hypoxia and plays an important role in tumor acid-base homeostasis under these conditions. It is also constitutively expressed in the majority of renal cell carcinoma. Its functional inhibition with small molecules has recently been shown to retard tumor growth in murine models of cancer, reduce metastasis and tumor stem cell expansion. Additionally, CAIX is a promising antigen for targeted drug delivery approaches. Initially validated with anti-CAIX antibodies, the tumor-homing capacity of high-affinity small-molecule ligands of CAIX has recently been demonstrated. Indeed, conjugates formed of CAIX ligands and potent cytotoxic drugs could eradicate CAIX-expressing solid tumors in mice. These results suggest that CAIX is a promising target for the development of novel therapies for the treatment of solid tumors.
Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is overexpressed by cancer cells from many tumor types, and is a component of the pH regulatory system invoked by these cells to combat the deleterious effects of a high rate of glycolytic metabolism. CAIX functions to help produce and maintain an intracellular pH (pHi) favorable for tumor cell growth and survival, while at the same time participating in the generation of an increasingly acidic extracellular space, facilitating tumor cell invasiveness. Pharmacologic interference of CAIX catalytic activity using monoclonal antibodies or CAIX-specific small molecule inhibitors, consequently disrupting pH regulation by cancer cells, has been shown recently to impair primary tumor growth and metastasis. Many of these agents are in preclinical or clinical development and constitute a novel, targeted strategy of cancer therapy.
PURPOSE: Ferroptosis is a type of regulatory cell death, caused by excessive lipid peroxidation This study aimed to explore whether ionizing radiation could induce ferroptosis in glioma cells and whether carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) knockdown could enhance the killing effect of ionizing radiation on hypoxic glioma cells through ferroptosis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The protein levels of Acyl-CoA Synthetase Long Chain Family Member 4 (ACSL4) were detected by Western blot in glioma cells irradiated by different doses of X-ray. The relative mRNA levels of ferroptosis markers and intracellular iron-associated proteins were detected by Real-time qPCR. Lipid peroxidation of glioma cells was detected by oxidation-sensitive probe C11-BODIPY581/591 staining. CCK-8 Assay was used to detect cell viability after X-ray irradiation. Cloning formation assay was used to assess the radiosensitivity of glioma cells. The exposure of cell surface calreticulin was measured by immunofluorescence staining. RESULTS: X-ray induced lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis markers expression in U251 and GL261 glioma cells. Knockdown of CA9 in hypoxic glioma cells significantly altered the expression of iron regulation-related proteins and enhanced X-ray-induced ferroptosis and radiosensitivity. The ferroptosis inhibitor significantly improved the survival of cells irradiated by X-ray, while ferroptosis inducers (FINs) enhanced the lethal effect of X-ray on cells. Enhancing ferroptosis in glioma cells promoted the exposure and release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). CONCLUSIONS: Ionizing radiation can induce ferroptosis in glioma cells. CA9 knockdown can enhance the radiosensitivity of hypoxic glioma cells and overcome the resistance of ferroptosis under hypoxia. Enhancing ferroptosis will become a new idea to improve the efficacy of radiotherapy for glioma.
Cancer cells reprogram their metabolic machineries to enter into permanent glycolytic pathways. The full reason for such reprogramming takes place is unclear. However, this metabolic switch is not made in vain for the lactate that is generated and exported outside cells is reused by other cells. This results in the generation of a pH gradient between the low extracellular pH that is acidic (pHe) and the higher cytosolic alkaline or near neutral pH (pHi) environments that are tightly regulated by the overexpression of several pumps and ion channels (e.g. NHE-1, MCT-1, V-ATPase, CA9, and CA12). The generation of this unique pH gradient serves as a determining factor in defining "tumor fitness". Tumor fitness is the capacity of the tumor to invade and metastasize due to its ability to reduce the efficiency of the immune system and confer resistance to chemotherapy. In this article, we highlight the importance of tumor microenvironment in mediating the failure of chemotherapeutic agents.
