Voltage-dependent calcium channel subunit alpha-2/delta-1; The alpha-2/delta subunit of voltage-dependent calcium channels regulates calcium current density and activation/inactivation kinetics of the calcium channel. Plays an important role in excitation- contraction coupling (By similarity).
Primary aldosteronism is considered the commonest cause of secondary hypertension. In affected individuals, aldosterone is produced in an at least partially autonomous fashion in adrenal lesions (adenomas, [micro]nodules or diffuse hyperplasia). Over the past decade, next-generation sequencing studies have led to the insight that primary aldosteronism is largely a genetic disorder. Sporadic cases are due to somatic mutations, mostly in ion channels and pumps, and rare cases of familial hyperaldosteronism are caused by germline mutations in an overlapping set of genes. More than 90% of aldosterone-producing adenomas carry somatic mutations in K(+) channel Kir3.4 (KCNJ5), Ca(2+) channel Ca(V)1.3 (CACNA1D), alpha-1 subunit of the Na(+)/K(+) ATPase (ATP1A1), plasma membrane Ca(2+) transporting ATPase 3 (ATP2B3), Ca(2+) channel Ca(V)3.2 (CACNA1H), Cl(-) channel ClC-2 (CLCN2), beta-catenin (CTNNB1), and/or G-protein subunits alpha q/11 (GNAQ/11). Mutations in some of these genes have also been identified in aldosterone-producing (micro)nodules, suggesting a disease continuum from a single cell, acquiring a somatic mutation, via a nodule to adenoma formation, and from a healthy state to subclinical to overt primary aldosteronism. Individual glands can have multiple such lesions, and they can occur on both glands in bilateral disease. Familial hyperaldosteronism, typically with early onset, is caused by germline mutations in steroid 11-beta hydroxylase/ aldosterone synthase (CYP11B1/2), CLCN2, KCNJ5, CACNA1H, and CACNA1D.
BACKGROUND: Calcium ions are involved in several human cellular processes including corticogenesis, transcription, and synaptogenesis. Nevertheless, the relationship between calcium channelopathies (CCs) and intellectual disability (ID)/global developmental delay (GDD) has been poorly investigated. We hypothesised that CCs play a major role in the development of ID/GDD and that both gain- and loss-of-function variants of calcium channel genes can induce ID/GDD. As a result, we performed a systematic review to investigate the contribution of CCs, potential mechanisms underlying their involvement in ID/GDD, advancements in cell and animal models, treatments, brain anomalies in patients with CCs, and the existing gaps in the knowledge. We performed a systematic search in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, OMIM, ClinGen, Gene Reviews, DECIPHER and LOVD databases to search for articles/records published before March 2021. The following search strategies were employed: ID and calcium channel, mental retardation and calcium channel, GDD and calcium channel, developmental delay and calcium channel. MAIN BODY: A total of 59 reports describing 159 cases were found in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, and LOVD databases. Variations in ten calcium channel genes including CACNA1A, CACNA1C, CACNA1I, CACNA1H, CACNA1D, CACNA2D1, CACNA2D2, CACNA1E, CACNA1F, and CACNA1G were found to be associated with ID/GDD. Most variants exhibited gain-of-function effect. Severe to profound ID/GDD was observed more for the cases with gain-of-function variants as compared to those with loss-of-function. CACNA1E, CACNA1G, CACNA1F, CACNA2D2 and CACNA1A associated with more severe phenotype. Furthermore, 157 copy number variations (CNVs) spanning calcium genes were identified in DECIPHER database. The leading genes included CACNA1C, CACNA1A, and CACNA1E. Overall, the underlying mechanisms included gain- and/ or loss-of-function, alteration in kinetics (activation, inactivation) and dominant-negative effects of truncated forms of alpha1 subunits. Forty of the identified cases featured cerebellar atrophy. We identified only a few cell and animal studies that focused on the mechanisms of ID/GDD in relation to CCs. There is a scarcity of studies on treatment options for ID/GDD both in vivo and in vitro. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that CCs play a major role in ID/GDD. While both gain- and loss-of-function variants are associated with ID/GDD, the mechanisms underlying their involvement need further scrutiny.
Autophagy is a highly conserved catabolic process and a major cellular pathway for the degradation of long-lived proteins and cytoplasmic organelles. An increasing body of evidence has unveiled autophagy as an indispensable biological function that helps to maintain normal tissue homeostasis and metabolic fitness that can also lead to severe consequences for the normal cellular functioning when altered. Recent accumulating data point to autophagy as a key player in a wide variety of physiological and pathophysiological conditions in the human endometrium, one of the most proficient self-regenerating tissues in the human body and an instrumental player in placental species reproductive function. The current review highlights the most recent findings regarding the process of autophagy in the normal and cancerous endometrial tissue. Current research efforts aiming to therapeutically exploit autophagy and the methodological approaches used are discussed.Abbreviations: 3-MA: 3-methyladenine; ACACA (acetyl-CoA carboxylase alpha); AICAR: 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboximide riboside; AKT: AKT serine/threonine kinase; AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase; ATG: autophagy related; ATG12: autophagy related 12; ATG16L1: autophagy related 16 like 1; ATG3: autophagy related 3; ATG4C: autophagy related 4C cysteine peptidase; ATG5: autophagy related 5; ATG7: autophagy related 7; ATG9: autophagy related 9; Baf A1: bafilomycin A(1); BAX: BCL2 associated X, apoptosis regulator; BCL2: BCL2 apoptosis regulator; BECN1: beclin 1; CACNA1D: calcium voltage-gated channel subunit alpha1 D; CASP3: caspase 3; CASP7: caspase 7; CASP8: caspase 8; CASP9: caspase 9; CD44: CD44 molecule (Indian blood group); CDH1: cadherin 1; CDKN1A: cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1A; CDKN2A: cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A; CMA: chaperone-mediated autophagy; CQ: chloroquine; CTNNB1: catenin beta 1; DDIT3: DNA damage inducible transcript 3; EC: endometrial cancer; EGFR: epidermal growth factor receptor; EH: endometrial hyperplasia; EIF4E: eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E; EPHB2/ERK: EPH receptor B2; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; ERBB2: er-b2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2; ERVW-1: endogenous retrovirus group W member 1, envelope; ESR1: estrogen receptor 1; FSH: follicle-stimulating hormone; GCG/GLP1: glucagon; GFP: green fluorescent protein; GIP: gastric inhibitory polypeptide; GLP1R: glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor; GLS: glutaminase; H2AX: H2A.X variant histone; HIF1A: hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha; HMGB1: high mobility group box 1; HOTAIR: HOX transcript antisense RNA; HSPA5: heat shock protein family A (HSP70) member 5; HSPA8: heat shock protein family A (HSP70) member 8; IGF1: insulin like growth factor 1; IL27: interleukin 27; INS: insulin; ISL: isoliquiritigenin; KRAS: KRAS proto-oncogene, GTPase; LAMP2: lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2; lncRNA: long-non-coding RNA; MAP1LC3A/LC3A: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MAPK8: mitogen-activated protein kinase 8; MAPK9: mitogen-activated protein kinase 9; MPA: medroxyprogesterone acetate; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MTORC1: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase complex 1; MTORC2: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase complex 2; MYCBP: MYC-binding protein; NFE2L2: nuclear factor, erythroid 2 like 2; NFKB: nuclear factor kappa B; NFKBIA: NFKB inhibitor alpha; NK: natural killer; NR5A1: nuclear receptor subfamily 5 group A member 1; PARP1: poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1; PAX2: paired box 2; PDK1: pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1; PDX: patient-derived xenograft; PIK3C3/Vps34: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit type 3; PIK3CA: phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha; PIK3R1: phosphoinositide-3-kinase regulatory subunit 1; PIKFYVE: phosphoinositide kinase, FYVE-type zinc finger containing; PPD: protopanaxadiol; PRKCD: protein kinase C delta; PROM1/CD133: prominin 1; PtdIns3K: class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PtdIns3P: phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate; PTEN: phosphatase and tensin homolog; RB1CC1/FIP200: RB1 inducible coiled-coil 1; RFP: red fluorescent protein; RPS6KB1/S6K1: ribosomal protein S6 kinase B1; RSV: resveratrol; SGK1: serum/glucocorticoid regulated kinase 1; SGK3: serum/glucocorticoid regulated kinase family member 3; SIRT: sirtuin; SLS: stone-like structures; SMAD2: SMAD family member 2; SMAD3: SMAD family member 3; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; TALEN: transcription activator-like effector nuclease; TGFBR2: transforming growth factor beta receptor 2; TP53: tumor protein p53; TRIB3: tribbles pseudokinase 3; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; ULK4: unc-51 like kinase 4; VEGFA: vascular endothelial growth factor A; WIPI2: WD repeat domain, phosphoinositide interacting 2; XBP1: X-box binding protein 1; ZFYVE1: zinc finger FYVE domain containing 1.
Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a rare disease characterized by an unregulated insulin release, leading to hypoglycaemia. It is the most frequent cause of persistent and severe hypoglycaemia in the neonatal period and early childhood. Mutations in 16 different key genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1, UCP2, HNF4A, HNF1A, HK1, KCNQ1, CACNA1D, FOXA2, EIF2S3, PGM1 and PMM2) that are involved in regulating the insulin secretion from pancreatic beta-cells have been described to be responsible for the underlying molecular mechanisms of CHI. CHI can also be associated with specific syndromes and can be secondary to intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), maternal diabetes, birth asphyxia, etc. It is important to diagnose and promptly initiate appropriate management as untreated hypoglycaemia can be associated with significant neurodisability. CHI can be histopathologically classified into diffuse, focal and atypical forms. Advances in molecular genetics, imaging techniques (18F-fluoro-l-dihydroxyphenylalanine positron emission tomography/computed tomography scanning), novel medical therapies and surgical advances (laparoscopic pancreatectomy) have changed the management and improved the outcome of patients with CHI. This review article provides an overview of the background, clinical presentation, diagnosis, molecular genetics and therapy for children with different forms of CHI.
Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are recognized as one of the commonest congenital heart diseases (CHD), accounting for up to 40% of all cardiac malformations, and occur as isolated CHDs as well as together with other cardiac and extracardiac congenital malformations in individual patients and families. The genetic etiology of VSD is complex and extraordinarily heterogeneous. Chromosomal abnormalities such as aneuploidy and structural variations as well as rare point mutations in various genes have been reported to be associated with this cardiac defect. This includes both well-defined syndromes with known genetic cause (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome and Holt-Oram syndrome) and so far undefined syndromic forms characterized by unspecific symptoms. Mutations in genes encoding cardiac transcription factors (e.g., NKX2-5 and GATA4) and signaling molecules (e.g., CFC1) have been most frequently found in VSD cases. Moreover, new high-resolution methods such as comparative genomic hybridization enabled the discovery of a high number of different copy number variations, leading to gain or loss of chromosomal regions often containing multiple genes, in patients with VSD. In this chapter, we will describe the broad genetic heterogeneity observed in VSD patients considering recent advances in this field.
Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (HH) is characterized by unregulated insulin release, leading to persistently low blood glucose concentrations with lack of alternative fuels, which increases the risk of neurological damage in these patients. It is the most common cause of persistent and recurrent hypoglycemia in the neonatal period. HH may be primary, Congenital HH (CHH), when it is associated with variants in a number of genes implicated in pancreatic development and function. Alterations in fifteen genes have been recognized to date, being some of the most recently identified mutations in genes HK1, PGM1, PMM2, CACNA1D, FOXA2 and EIF2S3. Alternatively, HH can be secondary when associated with syndromes, intra-uterine growth restriction, maternal diabetes, birth asphyxia, following gastrointestinal surgery, amongst other causes. CHH can be histologically characterized into three groups: diffuse, focal or atypical. Diffuse and focal forms can be determined by scanning using fluorine-18 dihydroxyphenylalanine-positron emission tomography. Newer and improved isotopes are currently in development to provide increased diagnostic accuracy in identifying lesions and performing successful surgical resection with the ultimate aim of curing the condition. Rapid diagnostics and innovative methods of management, including a wider range of treatment options, have resulted in a reduction in co-morbidities associated with HH with improved quality of life and long-term outcomes. Potential future developments in the management of this condition as well as pathways to transition of the care of these highly vulnerable children into adulthood will also be discussed.
Increased cardiac contractility during the fight-or-flight response is caused by beta-adrenergic augmentation of Ca(V)1.2 voltage-gated calcium channels(1-4). However, this augmentation persists in transgenic murine hearts expressing mutant Ca(V)1.2 alpha(1C) and beta subunits that can no longer be phosphorylated by protein kinase A-an essential downstream mediator of beta-adrenergic signalling-suggesting that non-channel factors are also required. Here we identify the mechanism by which beta-adrenergic agonists stimulate voltage-gated calcium channels. We express alpha(1C) or beta(2B) subunits conjugated to ascorbate peroxidase(5) in mouse hearts, and use multiplexed quantitative proteomics(6,7) to track hundreds of proteins in the proximity of Ca(V)1.2. We observe that the calcium-channel inhibitor Rad(8,9), a monomeric G protein, is enriched in the Ca(V)1.2 microenvironment but is depleted during beta-adrenergic stimulation. Phosphorylation by protein kinase A of specific serine residues on Rad decreases its affinity for beta subunits and relieves constitutive inhibition of Ca(V)1.2, observed as an increase in channel open probability. Expression of Rad or its homologue Rem in HEK293T cells also imparts stimulation of Ca(V)1.3 and Ca(V)2.2 by protein kinase A, revealing an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that confers adrenergic modulation upon voltage-gated calcium channels.
IMPORTANCE: The E-cadherin gene, CDH1, and the alpha-E-catenin gene, CTNNA1, were previously identified as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) susceptibility genes, explaining 25% to 50% of HDGC cases. The genetic basis underlying disease susceptibility in the remaining 50% to 75% of patients with HDGC is still unknown. OBJECTIVE: To assess the incidence rate of CDH1 germline alterations in HDGC, identify new susceptibility genes that can be used for screening of HDGC, and provide a genetic landscape for HDGC. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cohort study conducted retrospective whole-exome and targeted sequencing of 284 leukocyte samples and 186 paired tumor samples from Chinese patients with HDGC over a long follow-up period (median, 21.7 [range, 0.6-185.9] months). Among 10 431 patients diagnosed with gastric cancer between January 1, 2002, and August 31, 2018, 284 patients who met the criteria for HDGC were included. Data were analyzed from August 1 to 30, 2020. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Incidence rate of CDH1 germline alterations, identification of new HDGC susceptibility genes, and genetic landscape of HDGC. RESULTS: Among 284 Chinese patients, 161 (56.7%) were female, and the median age was 35 (range, 20-75) years. The frequency of CDH1 germline alterations was 2.8%, whereas the frequency of CDH1 somatic alterations was 25.3%. The genes with the highest incidence (>10%) of private germline alterations (including insertions and deletions) in the HDGC cohort were MUC4, ABCA13, ZNF469, FCGBP, IGFN1, RNF213, and SSPO, whereas previously reported germline alterations of CTNNA1, BRCA2, STK11, PRSS1, ATM, MSR1, PALB2, BRCA1, and RAD51C were observed at low frequencies (median, 4 [range, 1-12] cases). Furthermore, enrichment of the somatic variant signature of exposure to aflatoxin suggested potential interaction between genetics and environment in HDGC. Double-hit events in genes such as CACNA1D were observed, which suggested that these events might serve as important mechanisms for HDGC tumorigenesis. In addition, germline variants of FSIP2, HSPG2, and NCKAP5 and somatic alterations of FGFR3, ASPSCR1, CIC, DGCR8, and LZTR1 were associated with poor overall survival among patients with HDGC. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study provided a genetic landscape for HDGC. The study's findings challenged the previously reported high germline alteration rate of CDH1 in HDGC and identified new potential susceptibility genes. Analyses of variant signatures and double-hit events revealed potentially important mechanisms for HDGC tumorigenesis. Findings from the present study may provide helpful information for further investigations of HDGC.
Hypertension is a common medical condition and affects approximately 20% of the population in developed countries. Primary aldosteronism is the most common form of secondary hypertension and affects 8-13% of patients with hypertension. The two most common causes of primary aldosteronism are aldosterone-producing adenoma and bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Familial hyperaldosteronism types I, II and III are the known genetic syndromes, in which both adrenal glands produce excessive amounts of aldosterone. However, only a minority of patients with primary aldosteronism have one of these syndromes. Several novel susceptibility genes have been found to be mutated in aldosterone-producing adenomas: KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CTNNB1, CACNA1D, CACNA1H and ARMC5 This review describes the genes currently known to be responsible for primary aldosteronism, discusses the origin of aldosterone-producing adenomas and considers the future clinical implications based on these novel insights.
Tightly controlled Ca(2+) influx through voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels (Cavs) is indispensable for proper physiological function. Thus, it is not surprising that Cav loss and/or gain of function have been implicated in human pathology. Deficiency of Cav1.3 L-type Ca(2+) channels (LTCCs) causes deafness and bradycardia, whereas several genetic variants of CACNA1D, the gene encoding the pore-forming alpha1 subunit of Cav1.3, have been linked to various disease phenotypes, such as hypertension, congenital hypoglycemia, or autism. These variants include not only common polymorphisms associated with an increased disease risk, but also rare de novo missense variants conferring high risk. This review provides a concise summary of disease-associated CACNA1D variants, whereas the main focus lies on de novo germline variants found in individuals with a neurodevelopmental disorder of variable severity. Electrophysiological recordings revealed activity-enhancing gating changes induced by these de novo variants, and tools to predict their pathogenicity and to study the resulting pathophysiological consequences will be discussed. Despite the low number of affected patients, potential phenotype-genotype correlations and factors that could impact the severity of symptoms will be covered. Since increased channel activity is assumed as the disease-underlying mechanism, pharmacological inhibition could be a treatment option. In the absence of Cav1.3-selective blockers, dihydropyridine LTCC inhibitors clinically approved for the treatment of hypertension may be used for personalized off-label trials. Findings from in vitro studies and treatment attempts in some of the patients seem promising as outlined. Taken together, due to advances in diagnostic sequencing techniques the number of reported CACNA1D variants in human diseases is constantly rising. Evidence from in silico, in vitro, and in vivo disease models can help to predict the pathogenic potential of such variants and to guide diagnosis and treatment in the clinical practice when confronted with patients harboring CACNA1D variants.
The identification of rare disease-causing variants in humans by large-scale next-generation sequencing (NGS) studies has also provided us with new insights into the pathophysiological role of de novo missense variants in the CACNA1D gene that encodes the pore-forming alpha1-subunit of voltage-gated Cav1.3 L-type Ca(2+) channels. These CACNA1D variants have been identified somatically in aldosterone-producing adenomas as well as germline in patients with neurodevelopmental and in some cases endocrine symptoms. In vitro studies in heterologous expression systems have revealed typical gating changes that indicate enhanced Ca(2+) influx through Cav1.3 channels as the underlying disease-causing mechanism. Here we summarize the clinical findings of 12 well-characterized individuals with a total of 9 high-risk pathogenic CACNA1D variants. Moreover, we propose how information from somatic mutations in aldosterone-producing adenomas could be used to predict the potential pathogenicity of novel germline variants. Since these pathogenic de novo variants can cause a channel-gain-of function, we also discuss the use of L-type Ca(2+) channel blockers as a potential therapeutic option.
Primary aldosteronism is characterized by at least partially autonomous production of the adrenal steroid hormone aldosterone and is the most common cause of secondary hypertension. The most frequent subforms are idiopathic hyperaldosteronism and aldosterone-producing adenoma. Rare causes include unilateral hyperplasia, adrenocortical carcinoma and Mendelian forms (familial hyperaldosteronism). Studies conducted in the last eight years have identified somatic driver mutations in a substantial portion of aldosterone-producing adenomas, including the genes KCNJ5 (encoding inwardly rectifying potassium channel GIRK4), CACNA1D (encoding a subunit of L-type voltage-gated calcium channel Ca(V)1.3), ATP1A1 (encoding a subunit of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase), ATP2B3 (encoding a Ca(2+)-ATPase), and CTNNB1 (encoding ss-catenin). In addition, aldosterone-producing cells were recently reported to form small clusters (aldosterone-producing cell clusters) beneath the adrenal capsule. Such clusters accumulate with age and appear to be more frequent in individuals with idiopathic hyperaldosteronism. The fact that they are associated with somatic mutations implicated in aldosterone-producing adenomas also suggests a precursor function for adenomas. Rare germline variants of CYP11B2 (encoding aldosterone synthase), CLCN2 (encoding voltage-gated chloride channel ClC-2), KCNJ5, CACNA1H (encoding a subunit of T-type voltage-gated calcium channel Ca(V)3.2), and CACNA1D have been reported in different subtypes of familial hyperaldosteronism. Collectively, these studies suggest that primary aldosteronism is largely due to genetic mutations in single genes, with potential implications for diagnosis and therapy.
Benign adrenocortical adenomas and hyperplasia are relatively common and include a spectrum of distinct entities, which diagnosis depends on the macroscopic aspect and the secretion profile. Recent advances in genomics have proposed high-throughput molecular characterization of adrenal tumors, thereby improving our knowledge on the pathophysiology and tumorigenesis of these tumors. Genomic (exome and chromosome alteration profiles), epigenomic (micro-RNAs expression and methylation profiles) and transcriptomic (gene expression profiles) studies highlighted the major roles of intracellular calcium signaling in aldosterone-producing adenomas (APA), of protein kinase A (PKA)/cAMP pathway in cortisol-producing tumors, and of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in non-secreting tumors. Exome sequencing revealed new major drivers in all tumor types, including KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CACNA1D and CACNA1H mutations in APA, PRKACA mutations in cortisol-producing adenomas (CPA) and ARMC5 mutations in primary macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (PMAH). The clinical impact of these findings is just starting to evolve. The identification of genetic syndromes, such as germline ARMC5 mutations in PMAH, has allowed genetic counseling. Key molecular alterations could serve as a basis for the development of targeted medical treatments for benign adrenal tumors. The recent developments in genomics, including single-cell technologies, and in proteomics and metabolomics will probably offer new perspectives for characterizing benign adrenal tumorigenesis.
Primary aldosteronism (PA) is the most common form of secondary arterial hypertension, with a prevalence of approximately 20% in patients with resistant hypertension. In the last decade, somatic pathogenic variants in KCNJ5, CACNA1D, ATP1A1 and ATP2B3 genes, which are involved in maintaining intracellular ionic homeostasis and cell membrane potential, were described in aldosterone-producing adenomas (aldosteronomas). All variants in these genes lead to the activation of calcium signaling, the major trigger for aldosterone production. Genetic causes of familial hyperaldosteronism have been expanded through the report of germline pathogenic variants in KCNJ5, CACNA1H and CLCN2 genes. Moreover, PDE2A and PDE3B variants were associated with bilateral PA and increased the spectrum of genetic etiologies of PA. Of great importance, the genetic investigation of adrenal lesions guided by the CYP11B2 staining strongly changed the landscape of somatic genetic findings of PA. Furthermore, CYP11B2 staining allowed the better characterization of the aldosterone-producing adrenal lesions in unilateral PA. Aldosterone production may occur from multiple sources, such as solitary aldosteronoma or aldosterone-producing nodule (classical histopathology) or clusters of autonomous aldosterone-producing cells without apparent neoplasia denominated aldosterone-producing micronodules (non-classical histopathology). Interestingly, KCNJ5 mutational status and classical histopathology of unilateral PA (aldosteronoma) have emerged as relevant predictors of clinical and biochemical outcome, respectively. In this review, we summarize the most recent advances in the pathogenesis of PA and discuss their impact on clinical outcome.
Primary hyperaldosteronism (PAH) is the most frequent cause of secondary arterial hypertension. Most PAHs occur sporadically, but 5% of cases have a hereditary origin (familial PAH). Four forms of familial PAH have been described. Type I familial PAH is produced by a fusion of the CYP11B2 and CYP11B1 genes, in this way the synthesis of aldosterone becomes to be regulated by ACTH instead of by angiotensin II. In type II, III and IV familial PAH there is an increase in the transcription and expression of CYP11B2 responsible for aldosterone synthesis due to a germinal mutation in CLCN2, KCNJ5 and CACNA1H, respectively. On the other hand, somatic mutations have been identified in 50% of sporadic PAHs, with gain-of-function mutations at the level of KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3 and CACNA1D being the most common. This review provides a detailed description of the different forms of familial PAH and the molecular profile of patients with sporadic PAH.
BACKGROUND: Primary aldosteronism is predominantly caused by excessive aldosterone production from the adrenal cortex, and the aldosterone-producing structures could take many forms, like adenomas, nodules, micronodules, and so on. Most studies of primary aldosteronism were limited to the hotspot driver genes responsible for autonomous aldosterone production; however, the panoramic genetic architecture and genomic alterations of aldosterone-producing structures and their adjacent hyperplasia glands remain unknown. METHODS: In this study, whole-exome sequencing and transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) analyses were performed using functional nodules and matched hyperplasia tissues, which were microdissected guided by aldosterone synthase immunohistochemistry. Phylogenetic trees were constructed based on the shared and unique mutations, gene mutation spectrums, and clonal characteristics. RESULTS: The rates of mutations represented higher means of functional nodules than hyperplasia samples, and the little mutational overlap was shown between the 2 groups on phylogenetic trees. The mutations of the aldosterone driver gene (KCNJ5 or CACNA1D) were only observed in functional nodules and indicated almost the largest values of cancer cell fraction. Moreover, the functional nodules also harbored some potential variants related to cell proliferation, which were not detected in hyperplasia tissues. Transcriptome analysis suggested that only 25.5% upregulated and 23.3% downregulated genes overlapped between functional nodules and hyperplasia tissues. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated a genetic and transcriptome landscape of aldosterone-producing structures and adjacent hyperplasia glands in primary aldosteronism. The results indicated independent clonal origins on functional nodules and hyperplasia tissues, and little mutual evolutionary relationship was found on their phylogenetic trees.
Advances in genomics over the past two decades have allowed for elucidation of the genetic alterations leading to the development of adrenocortical tumors and/or hyperplasias. These molecular changes were initially discovered through the study of rare familial tumor syndromes such as McCune-Albright Syndrome, Carney complex, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, with the identification of alterations in genes and molecular pathways that subsequently led to the discovery of aberrations in these or related genes and pathways in sporadic tumors. Genetic alterations in GNAS, PRKAR1A, PRKACA, PRKACB, PDE11A, and PDE8B, that lead to aberrant cyclic adenosine monophosphate-protein (cAMP) kinase A signaling, were found to play a major role in the development of benign cortisol-producing adrenocortical tumors and/or hyperplasias, whereas genetic defects in KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CACNA1D, CACNA1H, and CLCN2 were implicated in the development of benign aldosterone-producing tumors and/or hyperplasias through modification of intracellular calcium signaling. Germline ARMC5 defects were found to cause the development of primary bilateral macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia with glucocorticoid and/or mineralocorticoid oversecretion. Adrenocortical carcinoma was linked primarily to aberrant p53 signaling and/or Wnt-beta-catenin signaling, as well as IGF2 overexpression, with frequent genetic alterations in TP53, ZNRF3, CTNNB1, and 11p15. This review focuses on the genetic underpinnings of benign cortisol- and aldosterone-producing adrenocortical tumors/hyperplasias and adrenocortical carcinoma.
BACKGROUND: Primary aldosteronism (PA) has been broadly dichotomized into unilateral and bilateral forms. Adrenal vein sampling (AVS) lateralization indices (LI) >/=2 to 4 are the standard-of-care to recommend unilateral adrenalectomy for presumed unilateral PA. We aimed to assess the rates and characteristics of residual PA after AVS-guided adrenalectomy. METHODS: We conducted an international, retrospective, cohort study of patients with PA from 7 referral centers who underwent unilateral adrenalectomy based on LI>/=4 on baseline and/or cosyntropin-stimulated AVS. Aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2) immunohistochemistry and next generation sequencing were performed on available formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded adrenal tissue. RESULTS: The cohort included 283 patients who underwent AVS-guided adrenalectomy, followed for a median of 326 days postoperatively. Lack of PA cure was observed in 16% of consecutive patients, and in 22 patients with lateralized PA on both baseline and cosyntropin-stimulated AVS. Among patients with residual PA postoperatively, 73% had multiple CYP11B2 positive areas within the resected adrenal tissue (versus 23% in those cured), wherein CACNA1D mutations were most prevalent (63% versus 33% in those cured). In adjusted regression models, independent predictors of postoperative residual PA included Black versus White race (odds ratio, 5.10 [95% CI, 1.45-17.86]), AVS lateralization only at baseline (odds ratio, 8.93 [95% CI 3.00-26.32] versus both at baseline and after cosyntropin stimulation), and CT-AVS disagreement (odds ratio, 2.75 [95% CI, 1.20-6.31]). CONCLUSIONS: Multifocal, asymmetrical bilateral PA is relatively common, and it cannot be excluded by robust AVS lateralization. Long-term postoperative monitoring should be routinely pursued, to identify residual PA and afford timely initiation of targeted medical therapy.
Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) is a heterogeneous condition with dysregulated insulin secretion which persists in the presence of low blood glucose levels. It is the most common cause of severe and persistent hypoglycaemia in neonates and children. Recent advances in genetics have linked congenital HH to mutations in 14 different genes that play a key role in regulating insulin secretion (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1, UCP2, HNF4A, HNF1A, HK1, PGM1, PPM2, CACNA1D, FOXA2). Histologically, congenital HH can be divided into 3 types: diffuse, focal and atypical. Due to the biochemical basis of this condition, it is essential to diagnose and treat HH promptly in order to avoid the irreversible hypoglycaemic brain damage. Recent advances in the field of HH include new rapid molecular genetic testing, novel imaging methods (18F-DOPA PET/CT), novel medical therapy (long-acting octreotide formulations, mTOR inhibitors, GLP-1 receptor antagonists) and surgical approach (laparoscopic surgery). The review article summarizes the current diagnostic methods and management strategies for HH in children.
Germline de novo missense variants of the CACNA1D gene, encoding the pore-forming alpha1 subunit of Cav1.3 L-type Ca2+ channels (LTCCs), have been found in patients with neurodevelopmental and endocrine dysfunction, but their disease-causing potential is unproven. These variants alter channel gating, enabling enhanced Cav1.3 activity, suggesting Cav1.3 inhibition as a potential therapeutic option. Here we provide proof of the disease-causing nature of such gating-modifying CACNA1D variants using mice (Cav1.3AG) containing the A749G variant reported de novo in a patient with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual impairment. In heterozygous mutants, native LTCC currents in adrenal chromaffin cells exhibited gating changes as predicted from heterologous expression. The A749G mutation induced aberrant excitability of dorsomedial striatum-projecting substantia nigra dopamine neurons and medium spiny neurons in the dorsal striatum. The phenotype observed in heterozygous mutants reproduced many of the abnormalities described within the human disease spectrum, including developmental delay, social deficit, and pronounced hyperactivity without major changes in gross neuroanatomy. Despite an approximately 7-fold higher sensitivity of A749G-containing channels to the LTCC inhibitor isradipine, oral pretreatment over 2 days did not rescue the hyperlocomotion. Cav1.3AG mice confirm the pathogenicity of the A749G variant and point toward a pathogenetic role of altered signaling in the dopamine midbrain system.
