Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1C; Pore-forming, alpha-1C subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents. Mediates influx of calcium ions into the cytoplasm, and thereby triggers calcium release from the sarcoplasm (By similarity). Plays an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in the heart. Required for normal heart development and normal regulation of heart rhythm. Required for normal contraction of smooth muscle cells in blood vessels and in the intestine. Essential for normal blood pressure regulation via  [...] 
BACKGROUND: Calcium ions are involved in several human cellular processes including corticogenesis, transcription, and synaptogenesis. Nevertheless, the relationship between calcium channelopathies (CCs) and intellectual disability (ID)/global developmental delay (GDD) has been poorly investigated. We hypothesised that CCs play a major role in the development of ID/GDD and that both gain- and loss-of-function variants of calcium channel genes can induce ID/GDD. As a result, we performed a systematic review to investigate the contribution of CCs, potential mechanisms underlying their involvement in ID/GDD, advancements in cell and animal models, treatments, brain anomalies in patients with CCs, and the existing gaps in the knowledge. We performed a systematic search in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, OMIM, ClinGen, Gene Reviews, DECIPHER and LOVD databases to search for articles/records published before March 2021. The following search strategies were employed: ID and calcium channel, mental retardation and calcium channel, GDD and calcium channel, developmental delay and calcium channel. MAIN BODY: A total of 59 reports describing 159 cases were found in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, and LOVD databases. Variations in ten calcium channel genes including CACNA1A, CACNA1C, CACNA1I, CACNA1H, CACNA1D, CACNA2D1, CACNA2D2, CACNA1E, CACNA1F, and CACNA1G were found to be associated with ID/GDD. Most variants exhibited gain-of-function effect. Severe to profound ID/GDD was observed more for the cases with gain-of-function variants as compared to those with loss-of-function. CACNA1E, CACNA1G, CACNA1F, CACNA2D2 and CACNA1A associated with more severe phenotype. Furthermore, 157 copy number variations (CNVs) spanning calcium genes were identified in DECIPHER database. The leading genes included CACNA1C, CACNA1A, and CACNA1E. Overall, the underlying mechanisms included gain- and/ or loss-of-function, alteration in kinetics (activation, inactivation) and dominant-negative effects of truncated forms of alpha1 subunits. Forty of the identified cases featured cerebellar atrophy. We identified only a few cell and animal studies that focused on the mechanisms of ID/GDD in relation to CCs. There is a scarcity of studies on treatment options for ID/GDD both in vivo and in vitro. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that CCs play a major role in ID/GDD. While both gain- and loss-of-function variants are associated with ID/GDD, the mechanisms underlying their involvement need further scrutiny.
Pregabalin is a potent ligand for the alpha-2-delta subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels in the central nervous system that exhibits potent anticonvulsant, analgesic, and anxiolytic activity in a range of animal models. In addition, pregabalin has been shown to be a highly effective adjunctive therapy for partial seizures in clinical trials. Potent binding to the alpha-2-delta site reduces depolarization-induced calcium influx with a consequential modulation in excitatory neurotransmitter release. Pregabalin has no demonstrated effects on GABAergic mechanisms. Pregabalin demonstrates highly predictable and linear pharmacokinetics, a profile that makes it easy to use in clinical practice. Absorption is extensive, rapid, and proportional to dose. Time to maximal plasma concentration is approximately 1 h and steady state is achieved within 24-48 h. These characteristics reflect the observed onset of efficacy as early as day two in clinical trials. High bioavailability, a mean elimination half life (t(1/2)) of 6.3 h, and dose-proportional maximal plasma concentrations and total exposures predict a dose-response relationship in clinical practice and allow an effective starting dose of 150 mg/day in clinical practice without need for titration. Administration with food has no clinically relevant effect on the amount of pregabalin absorbed, providing for a dosing regimen uncomplicated by meals. Pregabalin does not bind to plasma proteins and is excreted virtually unchanged (<2% metabolism) by the kidneys. It is not subject to hepatic metabolism and does not induce or inhibit liver enzymes such as the cytochrome P450 system. Therefore, pregabalin is unlikely to cause, or be subject to, pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions--an expectation that has been confirmed in clinical pharmacokinetic studies. However, dose adjustment may be necessary in patients with renal insufficiency. Thus, the pharmacological and pharmacokinetic profiles of pregabalin provide a predictable basis for its use in clinical practice.
Overeating disorders largely contribute to worldwide incidences of obesity. Available treatments are limited. Here, we discovered that long-term chemogenetic activation of ventrolateral periaqueductal gray (vlPAG) GABAergic cells rescue obesity of high-fat diet-induced obesity (DIO) mice. This was associated with the recovery of enhanced mIPSCs, decreased food intake, increased energy expenditure, and inguinal white adipose tissue (iWAT) browning. In vivo calcium imaging confirmed vlPAG GABAergic suppression for DIO mice, with corresponding reduction in intrinsic excitability. Single-nucleus RNA sequencing identified transcriptional expression changes in GABAergic cell subtypes in DIO mice, highlighting Cacna2d1 as of potential importance. Overexpressing CACNA2D1 in vlPAG GABAergic cells of DIO mice rescued enhanced mIPSCs and calcium response, reversed obesity, and therefore presented here as a potential target for obesity treatment.
BACKGROUND: Calcium voltage-gated channel auxiliary subunit alpha 2/delta 1 (CACNA2D1), a gene encoding a voltage-gated calcium channel, has been reported as an oncogene in several cancers. However, its role in colon cancer (CC) remains unclear. This study aimed to investigate the function of CACNA2D1 and its effect on the microenvironment in CC. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis was performed on samples collected from 200 patients with CC who underwent curative colectomy. Knockdown experiments were performed using CACNA2D1 siRNA in the human CC cell lines HCT116 and RKO, and cell proliferation, cycle, apoptosis, and migration were then analyzed. The fibroblast cell line CCD-18Co was co-cultured with CC cell lines to determine the effect of CACNA2D1 on fibroblasts and the relationship between CACNA2D1 and the cancer microenvironment. Gene expression profiles of cells were analyzed using microarray analysis. RESULTS: IHC revealed that high CACNA2D1 expression was an independent poor prognostic factor in patients with CC and that CACNA2D1 expression and the stroma are correlated. CACNA2D1 depletion decreased cell proliferation and migration; CACNA2D1 knockdown increased the number of cells in the sub-G1 phase and induced apoptosis. CCD-18Co and HCT116 or RKO cell co-culture revealed that CACNA2D1 affects the cancer microenvironment via fibroblast regulation. Furthermore, microarray analysis showed that the p53 signaling pathway and epithelial-mesenchymal transition-associated pathways were enhanced in CACNA2D1-depleted HCT116 cells. CONCLUSIONS: CACNA2D1 plays an important role in the progression and the microenvironment of CC by regulating fibroblasts and may act as a biomarker for disease progression and a therapeutic target for CC.
Voltage-gated ion channels (VGICs) comprise multiple structural units, the assembly of which is required for function(1,2). Structural understanding of how VGIC subunits assemble and whether chaperone proteins are required is lacking. High-voltage-activated calcium channels (Ca(V)s)(3,4) are paradigmatic multisubunit VGICs whose function and trafficking are powerfully shaped by interactions between pore-forming Ca(V)1 or Ca(V)2 Ca(V)alpha(1) (ref. (3)), and the auxiliary Ca(V)beta(5) and Ca(V)alpha(2)delta subunits(6,7). Here we present cryo-electron microscopy structures of human brain and cardiac Ca(V)1.2 bound with Ca(V)beta(3) to a chaperone-the endoplasmic reticulum membrane protein complex (EMC)(8,9)-and of the assembled Ca(V)1.2-Ca(V)beta(3)-Ca(V)alpha(2)delta-1 channel. These structures provide a view of an EMC-client complex and define EMC sites-the transmembrane (TM) and cytoplasmic (Cyto) docks; interaction between these sites and the client channel causes partial extraction of a pore subunit and splays open the Ca(V)alpha(2)delta-interaction site. The structures identify the Ca(V)alpha(2)delta-binding site for gabapentinoid anti-pain and anti-anxiety drugs(6), show that EMC and Ca(V)alpha(2)delta interactions with the channel are mutually exclusive, and indicate that EMC-to-Ca(V)alpha(2)delta hand-off involves a divalent ion-dependent step and Ca(V)1.2 element ordering. Disruption of the EMC-Ca(V) complex compromises Ca(V) function, suggesting that the EMC functions as a channel holdase that facilitates channel assembly. Together, the structures reveal a Ca(V) assembly intermediate and EMC client-binding sites that could have wide-ranging implications for the biogenesis of VGICs and other membrane proteins.
alpha(2)delta proteins are membrane-anchored extracellular glycoproteins which are abundantly expressed in the brain and the peripheral nervous system. They serve as regulatory subunits of voltage-gated calcium channels and, particularly in nerve cells, regulate presynaptic and postsynaptic functions independently from their role as channel subunits. alpha(2)delta proteins are the targets of the widely prescribed anti-epileptic and anti-allodynic drugs gabapentin and pregabalin, particularly for the treatment of neuropathic pain conditions. Recently, the human genes (CACNA2D1-4) encoding for the four known alpha(2)delta proteins (isoforms alpha(2)delta-1 to alpha(2)delta-4) have been linked to a large variety of neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders including epilepsy, autism spectrum disorders, bipolar disorders, schizophrenia, and depressive disorders. Here, we provide an overview of the hitherto identified disease associations of all known alpha(2)delta genes, hypothesize on the pathophysiological mechanisms considering their known physiological roles, and discuss the most immanent future research questions. Elucidating their specific physiological and pathophysiological mechanisms may open the way for developing entirely novel therapeutic paradigms for treating brain disorders.
alpha2delta-1, commonly known as a voltage-activated Ca(2+) channel subunit, is a binding site of gabapentinoids used to treat neuropathic pain and epilepsy. However, it is unclear how alpha2delta-1 contributes to neuropathic pain and gabapentinoid actions. Here, we show that Cacna2d1 overexpression potentiates presynaptic and postsynaptic NMDAR activity of spinal dorsal horn neurons to cause pain hypersensitivity. Conversely, Cacna2d1 knockdown or ablation normalizes synaptic NMDAR activity increased by nerve injury. alpha2delta-1 forms a heteromeric complex with NMDARs in rodent and human spinal cords. The alpha2delta-1-NMDAR interaction predominantly occurs through the C terminus of alpha2delta-1 and promotes surface trafficking and synaptic targeting of NMDARs. Gabapentin or an alpha2delta-1 C terminus-interfering peptide normalizes NMDAR synaptic targeting and activity increased by nerve injury. Thus, alpha2delta-1 is an NMDAR-interacting protein that increases NMDAR synaptic delivery in neuropathic pain. Gabapentinoids reduce neuropathic pain by inhibiting forward trafficking of alpha2delta-1-NMDAR complexes.
Short QT Syndrome (SQTS) is a rare but dangerous condition characterised by abbreviated repolarisation, atrial and ventricular arrhythmias and risk of sudden death. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) are a first line protection against sudden death, but adjunct pharmacology is beneficial and desirable. Areas covered: The genetic basis for genotyped SQTS variants (SQT1-SQT8) and evidence for arrhythmia substrates from experimental and simulation studies are discussed. The main ion channel/transporter targets for antiarrhythmic pharmacology are considered in respect of potential genotype-specific and non-specific treatments for the syndrome. Expert opinion: Potassium channel blockade is valuable for restoring repolarisation and QT interval, though genotype-specific limitations exist in the use of some K(+) channel inhibitors. A combination of K(+) current inhibition during the action potential plateau, with sodium channel inhibition that collectively result in delaying repolarisation and post-repolarisation refractoriness is likely to be valuable in prolonging effective refractory period and wavelength for re-entry. Genotype-specific K(+) channel inhibition is limited by a lack of targeted inhibitors in clinical use, though experimentally available selective inhibitors now exist. The relatively low proportion of successfully genotyped cases justifies an exome or genome sequencing approach, to reveal new mediators and targets, as demonstrated recently for SLC4A3 in SQT8.
Lactylation is a novel post-translational modification of proteins. Although the histone lactylation modification has been reported to be involved in glucose metabolism, its role and molecular pathways in gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) are still unclear. This study aims to elucidate the histone lactylation modification landscapes of GDM patients and explore lactylation-modification-related genes involved in GDM. We employed a combination of RNA-seq analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis to identify upregulated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with hyperhistone lactylation modification in GDM. We demonstrated that the levels of lactate and histone lactylation were significantly elevated in GDM patients. DEGs were involved in diabetes-related pathways, such as the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, Jak-STAT signaling pathway, and mTOR signaling pathway. ChIP-seq analysis indicated that histone lactylation modification in the promoter regions of the GDM group was significantly changed. By integrating the results of RNA-seq and ChIP-seq analysis, we found that CACNA2D1 is a key gene for histone lactylation modification and is involved in the progression of GDM by promoting cell vitality and proliferation. In conclusion, we identified the key gene CACNA2D1, which upregulated and exhibited hypermodification of histone lactylation in GDM. These findings establish a theoretical groundwork for the targeted therapy of GDM.
In nerve cells the ubiquitous second messenger calcium regulates a variety of vitally important functions including neurotransmitter release, gene regulation, and neuronal plasticity. The entry of calcium into cells is tightly regulated by voltage-gated calcium channels, which consist of a heteromultimeric complex of a pore forming alpha(1), and the auxiliary beta and alpha(2)delta subunits. Four genes (Cacna2d1-4) encode for the extracellular membrane-attached alpha(2)delta subunits (alpha(2)delta-1 to alpha(2)delta-4), out of which three isoforms (alpha(2)delta-1 to -3) are strongly expressed in the central nervous system. Over the years a wealth of studies has demonstrated the classical role of alpha(2)delta subunits in channel trafficking and calcium current modulation. Recent studies in specialized neuronal cell systems propose roles of alpha(2)delta subunits beyond the classical view and implicate alpha(2)delta subunits as important regulators of synapse formation. These findings are supported by the identification of novel human disease mutations associated with alpha(2)delta subunits and by the fact that alpha(2)delta subunits are the target of the anti-epileptic and anti-allodynic drugs gabapentin and pregabalin. Here we review the recently emerging evidence for specific as well as redundant neuronal roles of alpha(2)delta subunits and discuss the mechanisms for establishing and maintaining specificity.
The alpha2delta-1 protein coded by Cacna2d1 is dramatically up-regulated in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons and spinal dorsal horn following sensory nerve injury in various animal models of neuropathic pain. Cacna2d1 overexpression potentiates presynaptic and postsynaptic NMDAR activity of spinal dorsal horn neurons to cause pain hypersensitivity. The alpha2delta-1-NMDAR interaction promotes surface trafficking and synaptic targeting of NMDARs in neuropathic pain caused by chemotherapeutic agents and peripheral nerve injury, as well as in other pathological conditions such as in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) with neurogenic hypertension and in the brain with ischemic stroke. The lentiviral transfection method was used to construct a human embryonic kidney HEK293T cell line that could stably express alpha2delta-1-NMDAR complex. A stably transfected cell line was observed by florescence microscope, and identified by RT-qPCR and Western blotting. The results showed that the HEK293T cell line was successfully transfected and the genes could be stably expressed. Subsequently, the transfected cell line was successfully developed into a target drug screening system using patch clamp techniques. It provides a promising cell model for further research on the interaction mechanism of alpha2delta-1-NMDAR complex and drug screening for chronic pain and related diseases with low side effects.
We illustrate the growing power of the BXD family of mice (recombinant inbred strains from a cross of C57BL/6J and DBA/2J mice) and companion bioinformatic tools to study complex genome-phenome relations related to glaucoma. Over the past 16 years, our group has integrated powerful murine resources and web-accessible tools to identify networks modulating visual system traits-from photoreceptors to the visual cortex. Recent studies focused on retinal ganglion cells and glaucoma risk factors, including intraocular pressure (IOP), central corneal thickness (CCT), and susceptibility of cellular stress. The BXD family was exploited to define key gene variants and then establish linkage to glaucoma in human cohorts. The power of this experimental approach to precision medicine is highlighted by recent studies that defined cadherin 11 (Cdh11) and a calcium channel (Cacna2d1) as genes modulating IOP, Pou6f2 as a genetic link between CCT and retinal ganglion cell (RGC) death, and Aldh7a1 as a gene that modulates the susceptibility of RGCs to death after elevated IOP. The role of three of these gene variants in glaucoma is discussed, along with the pathways activated in the disease process.
BACKGROUND: Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is characterized by weakening and dilatation of the aortic wall in the abdomen. The aim of this study was to gain insight into cell-specific mechanisms involved in AAA pathophysiology by analyzing the (phospho)proteome of vascular smooth muscle cells derived from patients with AAA compared with those of healthy donors. METHODS: A (phospho)proteomics analysis based on tandem mass spectrometry was performed on vascular smooth muscle cells derived from patients with AAA (n=24) and healthy, control individuals (C-SMC, n=8). Following protein identification and quantification using MaxQuant, integrative inferred kinase activity analysis was used to calculate kinase activity scores. RESULTS: Expression differences between vascular smooth muscle cells derived from patients with AAA and healthy, control individuals were predominantly found in proteins involved in ECM (extracellular matrix) remodeling (THSD4 [thrombospondin type-1 domain-containing protein 4] and ADAMTS1 [A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs 1]), energy metabolism (GYS1 [glycogen synthase 1] and PCK2 [phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 2, mitochondrial]), and contractility (CACNA2D1 [calcium voltage-dependent channel subunit alpha-2/delta-1] and TPM1 [tropomyosin alpha-1 chain]). Phosphorylation patterns on proteins related to actin cytoskeleton organization dominated the phosphoproteome of vascular smooth muscle cells derived from patients with AAA . Besides, phosphorylation changes on proteins related to energy metabolism (GYS1), contractility (PARVA [alpha-parvin], PPP1R12A [protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 12A], and CALD1 [caldesmon 1]), and intracellular communication (GJA1 [gap junction alpha-1 protein]) were seen. Kinase activity of NUAK1 (NUAK family SNF1-like kinase 1), FYN (tyrosine-protein kinase Fyn), MAPK7 (mitogen-activated protein kinase 7), and STK10 (serine/threonine kinase 10) was different in vascular smooth muscle cells derived from patients with AAA compared with those from healthy, control individuals. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed changes in expression and phosphorylation levels of proteins involved in various processes responsible for AAA progression and development (eg, energy metabolism, ECM remodeling, actin cytoskeleton organization, contractility, intracellular communication, and cell adhesion). These newly identified proteins, phosphosites, and related kinases provide further insight into the underlying mechanism of vascular smooth muscle cell dysfunction within the aneurysmal wall. Our omics data thereby offer the opportunity to study the relevance, either as drug target or biomarker, of these proteins in AAA development.
Many neurological disorders show an increased prevalence of GluA2-lacking, Ca(2+)-permeable AMPA receptors (CP-AMPARs), which dramatically alters synaptic function. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this distinct synaptic plasticity remains enigmatic. Here, we show that nerve injury potentiates postsynaptic, but not presynaptic, CP-AMPARs in the spinal dorsal horn via alpha2delta-1. Overexpressing alpha2delta-1, previously regarded as a Ca(2+) channel subunit, augments CP-AMPAR levels at the cell surface and synapse. Mechanistically, alpha2delta-1 physically interacts with both GluA1 and GluA2 via its C terminus, inhibits the GluA1/GluA2 heteromeric assembly, and increases GluA2 retention in the endoplasmic reticulum. Consequently, alpha2delta-1 diminishes the availability and synaptic expression of GluA1/GluA2 heterotetramers in the spinal cord in neuropathic pain. Inhibiting alpha2delta-1 with gabapentin or disrupting the alpha2delta-1-AMPAR complex fully restores the intracellular assembly and synaptic dominance of heteromeric GluA1/GluA2 receptors. Thus, alpha2delta-1 is a pivotal AMPAR-interacting protein that controls the subunit composition and Ca(2+) permeability of postsynaptic AMPARs.
The normal heartbeat is conditioned by transient increases in the intracellular free Ca(2+) concentration. Ca(2+) influx in cardiomyocytes is regulated by the activity of the heteromeric L-type voltage-activated Ca(V)1.2 channel. A complex network of interactions between the different proteins forming the ion channel supports the kinetics and the activation gating of the Ca(2+) influx. Alterations in the biophysical and biochemical properties or in the biogenesis in any of these proteins can lead to serious disturbances in the cardiac rhythm. The multi-subunit nature of the channel complex is better comprehended by examining the high-resolution three-dimensional structure of the closely related Ca(V)1.1 channel. The architectural map identifies precise interaction loci between the different subunits and paves the way for elucidating the mechanistic basis for the regulation of Ca(2+) balance in cardiac myocytes under physiological and pathological conditions.
BACKGROUND: Primary electrical disorders (PEDs) are a group of cardiac rhythm abnormalities that occur in the absence of detectable structural heart disease and are a significant cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD). The initiation of cardiac muscle contraction and relaxation is orchestrated by the action potential (AP), generated through ionic changes across the membrane. Mutations in the AP-related gene CACNA2D1 have been identified as a causative factor for PED. METHODS: We recruited a Chinese family with a history of arrhythmia. The proband has experienced palpitations and chest tightness for over 40 years, with symptoms worsening over the past year. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was used to determine the genetic etiologies in this family. RESULTS: A novel heterozygous missense mutation (NM_000722.3: c.1685G > C;p.G562A) of CACNA2D1 gene was detected. Genotyping of the proband's parents indicated that the arrhythmia phenotype in the proband was caused by a de novo mutation. CONCLUSIONS: WES was utilized to explore the genetic etiology in a family with arrhythmia, leading to the identification of a novel mutation in the CACNA2D1 gene. This study not only expands the mutation spectrum of the CACNA2D1 gene but also contributes to genetic counseling and clinical diagnosis for this family.
Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecologic cancer with increasing incidence. The dysregulation of intracellular calcium plays a crucial role in cancer progression. However, the relationship between calcium-related genes and prognosis remains unclear. In this study, we aimed to establish a risk model based on calcium-related genes for prognosis prediction in patients with EC. The TCGA-total set was divided into a training set and a testing set (1:1). The four-gene prognostic signature (CACNA2D1, SLC8A1, TRPM4 and CCL2) was established and classified all EC patients into a low-risk or high-risk group. This model was validated in both the testing dataset and the total set. The EC patients with high RiskScores showed significantly shorter overall survival than those with low RiskScores, and this trend was consistent among most subgroups. Moreover, an enrichment analysis confirmed that calcium-related and estrogen-response signalings were significantly enriched in the high-risk group. The knockdown of CACNA2D1 by siRNA or its blocker, amlodipine (AM) inhibited cell proliferation and induced cycle arrest in vitro. The calcium channel blocker AM inhibited cell proliferation and induced cycle arrest in vitro. AM also showed marked tumor inhibition effects in vivo. In summary, the prognostic model constructed by four calcium-related genes can reliably predict the outcomes of EC patients, and a calcium channel blocker, AM, has significant potential for EC treatment.
Our previous studies have confirmed that alpha2delta1 has the potential to function as a cancer stem cell marker, and CACNA2D1 is the coding gene of alpha2delta1. But it is unclear how microRNAs regulate the expression of the CACNA2D1 gene in laryngeal cancer cells. We detected the expressions of alpha2delta1 protein, microRNA-107, and CACNA2D1 in 40 pairs of laryngeal cancer tissues and adjacent normal tissues. Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma cells, TU212 and TU686, were cultured and transfected in the blank control group, the agomiR negative control group, the agomiR-107 group, the antagomiR negative control group, or the antagomiR-107 group, and the dual-luciferase reporter assay was employed to assess the regulatory effect of microRNA-107 on CACNA2D1. Then, the effects of microRNA-107 on the biological function of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma cells were detected by qRT-PCR, Western blot, MTT, cell migration/invasion assay, and cell colony-formation assay. Our data suggested that the protein level of alpha2delta1, encoded by CACNA2D1, in laryngeal carcinoma tissues was higher than that in adjacent normal tissues, while the expression of microRNA-107 was significantly decreased in laryngeal carcinoma tissues. The dual-luciferase reporter gene assay confirmed that microRNA-107 bound to the 3'-UTR two positions (202-209, 902-908) of CACNA2D1 mRNA. Moreover, the expression of CACNA2D1 and alpha2delta1 protein were significantly decreased in TU212 and TU686 cells transfected with microRNA-107 expression vectors (P < 0.05), and proliferation, clone formation, migration, and invasion of these cells were also reduced. Furthermore, after knocking down microRNA-107, exactly opposite results were obtained. Overexpression of microRNA-107 can inhibit the proliferation and invasion of laryngeal carcinoma cells in vitro.
Fibromyalgia is a common disorder that is characterized by chronic widespread pain, tenderness to light palpation, fatigue and sleep disturbances. The present lack of a well-accepted model of the disorder has hampered progress towards adequate treatment. A review of potential models to explain the pathophysiology underlying its primary symptom (i.e., chronic widespread pain) lends insight on the therapeutic potential of novel therapies. Following this, a mechanistic evaluation of those medications that are under consideration for the treatment of the disorder is offered. Adequate treatment will be likely to involve the identification of biologic subgroups within the greater fibromyalgia construct. Key insights from basic research are the basis for increased optimism for effective relief among patients and clinicians.
Voltage-gated calcium channels consist of the main pore-forming alpha1 subunit, together, except in the case of the T-type channels, with beta and alpha2delta and sometimes gamma subunits, which are collectively termed auxiliary or accessory subunits. This review will concentrate on the properties and role of the alpha2delta subunits of these channels. These proteins are largely extracellular, membrane-associated proteins which influence the trafficking, localization, and biophysical properties of the channels. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Calcium channels.
