Voltage-dependent calcium channel gamma-8 subunit; Regulates the activity of L-type calcium channels that contain CACNA1C as pore-forming subunit (By similarity). Regulates the trafficking and gating properties of AMPA-selective glutamate receptors (AMPARs). Promotes their targeting to the cell membrane and synapses and modulates their gating properties by slowing their rates of activation, deactivation and desensitization and by mediating their resensitization. Does not show subunit-specific AMPA receptor regulation and regulates all AMPAR subunits. Belongs to the PMP-22/EMP/MP20 fami [...] 
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder prevalent in school-age children. At present, however, its etiologies and risk factors are unknown. Transmembrane alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor regulatory protein gamma-8 (TARP gamma-8, also known as calcium voltage-gated channel auxiliary subunit gamma 8 (CACNG8)) is an auxiliary AMPA receptor (AMPAR) subunit. Here, we report an association between TARP gamma-8 and ADHD, whereby adolescent TARP gamma-8 knockout (KO) mice exhibited ADHD-like behaviors, including hyperactivity, impulsivity, anxiety, impaired cognition, and memory deficits. Human single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis also revealed strong associations between intronic alleles in CACNG8 genes and ADHD susceptibility. In addition, synaptosomal proteomic analysis revealed dysfunction of the AMPA glutamate receptor complex in the hippocampi of TARP gamma-8 KO mice. Proteomic analysis also revealed dysregulation of dopaminergic and glutamatergic transmissions in the prefrontal cortices of TARP gamma-8 KO mice. Methylphenidate (MPH), which is commonly used to treat ADHD, significantly rescued the major behavioral deficits and abnormal synaptosomal proteins in TARP gamma-8 KO mice. Notably, MPH significantly reversed the up-regulation of Grik2 and Slc6a3 in the prefrontal cortex. MPH also significantly improved synaptic AMPAR complex function by up-regulating other AMPAR auxiliary proteins in hippocampal synaptosomes. Taken together, our results suggest that TARP gamma-8 is involved in the development of ADHD in humans. This study provides a useful alternative animal model with ADHD-like phenotypes related to TARP gamma-8 deficiency, which has great potential for the development of new therapies.
Melanomas frequently metastasize to distant organs and especially intracranial metastases still represent a major clinical challenge. Epigenetic reprogramming of intracranial metastases is thought to be involved in therapy failure, but so far only little is known about patient-specific DNA-methylation differences between intra- and extracranial melanoma metastases. Hierarchical clustering of the methylomes of 24 patient-matched intra- and extracranial melanoma metastases pairs revealed that intra- and extracranial metastases of individual patients were more similar to each other than to metastases in the same tissue from other patients. Therefore, a personalized analysis of each metastases pair was done by a Hidden Markov Model to classify methylation levels of individual CpGs as decreased, unchanged or increased in the intra- compared to the extracranial metastasis. The predicted DNA-methylation alterations were highly patient-specific differing in the number and methylation states of altered CpGs. Nevertheless, four important general observations were made: (i) intracranial metastases of most patients mainly showed a reduction of DNA-methylation, (ii) cytokine signaling was most frequently affected by differential methylation in individual metastases pairs, but also MAPK, PI3K/Akt and ECM signaling were often altered, (iii) frequently affected genes were mainly involved in signaling, growth, adhesion or apoptosis, and (iv) an enrichment of functional terms related to channel and transporter activities supports previous findings for a brain-like phenotype. In addition, the derived set of 17 signaling pathway genes that distinguished intra- from extracranial metastases in more than 50% of patients included well-known oncogenes (e.g. PRKCA, DUSP6, BMP4) and several other genes known from neuronal disorders (e.g. EIF4B, SGK1, CACNG8). Moreover, associations of gene body methylation alterations with corresponding gene expression changes revealed that especially the three signaling pathway genes JAK3, MECOM, and TNXB differ strongly in their expression between patient-matched intra- and extracranial metastases. Our analysis contributes to an in-depth characterization of DNA-methylation differences between patient-matched intra- and extracranial melanoma metastases and may provide a basis for future experimental studies to identify targets for new therapeutic approaches.
The need for improved medications for psychiatric and neurological disorders is clear. Difficulties in finding such drugs demands that all strategic means be utilized for their invention. The discovery of forebrain specific AMPA receptor antagonists, which selectively block the specific combinations of principal and auxiliary subunits present in forebrain regions but spare targets in the cerebellum, was recently disclosed. This discovery raised the possibility that other auxiliary protein systems could be utilized to help identify new medicines. Discussion of the TARP-dependent AMPA receptor antagonists has been presented elsewhere. Here we review the diversity of protein complexes of neurotransmitter receptors in the nervous system to highlight the broad range of protein/protein drug targets. We briefly outline the structural basis of protein complexes as drug targets for G-protein-coupled receptors, voltage-gated ion channels, and ligand-gated ion channels. This review highlights heterodimers, subunit-specific receptor constructions, multiple signaling pathways, and auxiliary proteins with an emphasis on the later. We conclude that the use of auxiliary proteins in chemical compound screening could enhance the detection of specific, targeted drug searches and lead to novel and improved medicines for psychiatric and neurological disorders.
AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs) mediate rapid signal transmission at excitatory synapses in the brain. Glutamate binding to the receptor's ligand-binding domains (LBDs) leads to ion channel activation and desensitization. Gating kinetics shape synaptic transmission and are strongly modulated by transmembrane AMPAR regulatory proteins (TARPs) through currently incompletely resolved mechanisms. Here, electron cryo-microscopy structures of the GluA1/2 TARP-gamma8 complex, in both open and desensitized states (at 3.5 A), reveal state-selective engagement of the LBDs by the large TARP-gamma8 loop ('beta1'), elucidating how this TARP stabilizes specific gating states. We further show how TARPs alter channel rectification, by interacting with the pore helix of the selectivity filter. Lastly, we reveal that the Q/R-editing site couples the channel constriction at the filter entrance to the gate, and forms the major cation binding site in the conduction path. Our results provide a mechanistic framework of how TARPs modulate AMPAR gating and conductance.
AIMS: Disruptions in cardiac ion channels have shown to influence the impaired cardiac contraction in heart failure. We sought to determine the altered gene expression profile of this category in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) patients and relate the altered gene expression with the clinical signs present in our patients, such as ventricular dysfunction and sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (SMVT). METHODS AND RESULTS: Left ventricular (LV) tissue samples were used in RNA-sequencing technique to elucidate the transcriptomic changes of 13 DCM patients compared to controls (n = 10). We analyzed the differential gene expression of cardiac ion channels, and we found a total of 34 altered genes. We found that the calcium channel CACNG8 mRNA and protein levels were down-regulated and highly and inversely related with LV ejection fraction (LVEF) (r = -0.78, P<0.01). Furthermore, the potassium channels KCNN3 and KCNJ2 mRNA and protein levels were up-regulated and showed also a significant and inverse correlation with LVEF (r = -0.61, P<0.05; r = -0.60, P<0.05) in patients with SMVT. CONCLUSION: A broad set of deregulated genes have been identified by RNA-sequencing technique. The relationship of CACNG8, KCNN3 and KCNJ2 with LVEF, and the up-regulation of KCNN3 and KCNJ2 in all patients with SMVT, irrespective of CACNG8 expression, suggest a significant role for these three ion flux related genes in the LV dysfunction present in this cardiomyopathy and an important relationship between KCNN3 and KCNJ2 up-regulation and the presence of SMVT.
A higher incidence of chronic atrophic gastritis (CAG) is generally considered as a precancerous lesion in gastric cancer (GC). The aim of this study was to identify potential molecules involved in the pathogenesis of CAG in the Tibetan plateau, hoping to help the diagnosis and management of the disease. Atrophic and non-atrophic gastric mucosal tissue samples were collected from seven patients with chronic gastritis (CG). Differentially expressed lncRNAs, circRNAs, miRNAs, and mRNAs between CAG and chronic non-atrophic gastritis (CNAG) groups were identified based on DNBSEQ-G99 RNA sequencing. Subsequently, competitive endogenous RNA (ceRNA) regulatory networks (lncRNA/circRNA-miRNA-mRNA networks) were constructed. Two datasets (GSE153224 and GSE163416), involving data from non-Tibetan plateau areas, were used to further screen out Tibetan plateau key mRNAs, followed by the common genes of Tibetan plateau key and ferroptosis-related mRNAs were also identified. Functional enrichment analyses were performed to investigate the biological functions of Tibetan plateau mRNAs in the CAG. A total of seven lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA relationship pairs and 424 circRNA-miRNA-mRNA relationship pairs were identified in this study. The relationship pairs of hsa_circ_0082984-hsa-miR-204-5p-CACNG8, lncRNA DRAIC/has_circ_0008561-hsa-miR-34a-5p-AR/GXYLT2, lncRNA GAS1RR/RGMB-AS1/hsa_circ_0008561-hsa-miR-3614-5p-TMEM216/SUSD5, and LINC00941/hsa_circ_0082984-hsa-miR-873-3p-TMC5 can be involved in the pathogenesis of CAG. Additionally, eight common genes of Tibetan plateau key and ferroptosis-related differentially expressed mRNAs (DEmRNAs) (CBS, SLC2A4, STAT3, ALOX15B, ATF3, IDO1, NOX4, and SOCS1) were identified in CAG. The common genes of Tibetan plateau key and ferroptosis-related DEmRNAs can play a role in the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. This study identified important molecular biomarkers that may be involved in regulating the pathological mechanisms of CAG in the Tibetan plateau, which provides potential research directions for future research.
Members of the alpha-amino-3-hydroxyl-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid (AMPA) subtype of ionotropic glutamate receptors mediate the majority of fast synaptic transmission within the mammalian brain and spinal cord, representing attractive targets for therapeutic intervention. Here, we describe novel AMPA receptor modulators that require the presence of the accessory protein CACNG8, also known as transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory protein gamma8 (TARP-gamma8). Using calcium flux, radioligand binding, and electrophysiological assays of wild-type and mutant forms of TARP-gamma8, we demonstrate that these compounds possess a novel mechanism of action consistent with a partial disruption of the interaction between the TARP and the pore-forming subunit of the channel. One of the molecules, 5-[2-chloro-6-(trifluoromethoxy)phenyl]-1,3-dihydrobenzimidazol-2-one (JNJ-55511118), had excellent pharmacokinetic properties and achieved high receptor occupancy following oral administration. This molecule showed strong, dose-dependent inhibition of neurotransmission within the hippocampus, and a strong anticonvulsant effect. At high levels of receptor occupancy in rodent in vivo models, JNJ-55511118 showed a strong reduction in certain bands on electroencephalogram, transient hyperlocomotion, no motor impairment on rotarod, and a mild impairment in learning and memory. JNJ-55511118 is a novel tool for reversible AMPA receptor inhibition, particularly within the hippocampus, with potential therapeutic utility as an anticonvulsant or neuroprotectant. The existence of a molecule with this mechanism of action demonstrates the possibility of pharmacological targeting of accessory proteins, increasing the potential number of druggable targets.
Transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins (TARPs) govern AMPA receptor cell surface expression and distinct physiological properties including agonist affinity, desensitization and deactivation kinetics. The prototypical TARP, STG or gamma2 and TARPs gamma3, gamma4, gamma7 and gamma8 are all expressed to varying degrees in the mammalian brain and differentially regulate AMPAR gating parameters. Positive allosteric AMPA receptor modulators or ampakines alter receptor rates of agonist binding/unbinding, channel opening and can offset receptor desensitization and deactivation. The effects of the two ampakines, CX614 and cyclothiazide (CTZ) were evaluated on homomeric GluR1-flip receptors and GluR2-flop receptors expressed on HEK293 cells by transient transfection with or without different TARPs gamma2, gamma3, gamma4 or gamma8 genes. gamma4 was the most robust TARP in increasing the affinities of CX614 and CTZ on GluR1-flip receptors, but had no such effect on GluR2-flop receptors. However, gamma8 gave the most significant increases in affinities of CX614 and CTZ on GluR2-flop. These data show that TARPs differentially affect the surface expression and kinetics of the AMPA receptor, as well as the pharmacology of ampakines for the AMPA receptor. The modulatory effects of TARPs on ampakine pharmacology are complex, being dependent on both the TARP subtype and the AMPA receptor subtypes/isoforms.
Voltage-gated L-type calcium channels (VLCC) are distributed widely throughout the brain. Among the genes involved in schizophrenia (SCZ), genes encoding VLCC subunits have attracted widespread attention. Among the four subunits comprising the VLCC (alpha - 1, alpha -2/delta, beta, and gamma), the gamma subunit that comprises an eight-member protein family is the least well understood. In our study, to further investigate the risk susceptibility by the gamma subunit gene family to SCZ, we conducted a large-scale association study in Han Chinese individuals. The SNP rs17645023 located in the intergenic region of CACNG4 and CACNG5 was identified to be significantly associated with SCZ (OR = 0.856, P = 5.43 x 10(-5)). Similar results were obtained in the meta-analysis with the current SCZ PGC data (OR = 0.8853). We also identified a two-SNP haplotype (rs10420331-rs11084307, P = 1.4 x 10(-6)) covering the intronic region of CACNG8 to be significantly associated with SCZ. Epistasis analyses were conducted, and significant statistical interaction (OR = 0.622, P = 2.93 x 10(-6), Pperm < 0.001) was observed between rs192808 (CACNG6) and rs2048137 (CACNG5). Our results indicate that CACNG4, CACNG5, CACNG6 and CACNG8 may contribute to the risk of SCZ. The statistical epistasis identified between CACNG5 and CACNG6 suggests that there may be an underlying biological interaction between the two genes.
Lymphoma is one of the leading causes of cancer and cancer deaths and yet has not been amenable to population screening. The role of methylated DNA markers (MDMs) in the detection of lymphoma has not been extensively studied. We aimed to discover, validate, and test tissue-derived MDMs of lymphoma in archival plasma specimens. Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) was performed on a discovery set of frozen tissues. MDMs identified were converted to methylation-specific PCR assays and validated on independent formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. Target enrichment long-probe quantitative-amplified signal (TELQAS) assays were developed and assayed in plasma-extracted, bisulfite-converted DNA from independent treatment-naive lymphoma patients and healthy controls. Prediction of cancer status was modeled using random forest model with in silico cross-validation. After discovery and validation in tissue, 16 TELQAS assays (ZNF503, VWA5B1, HOXA9, GABRG3, ITGA5, MAX.chr17.7190, BNC1, CDK20, MAX.chr4.4069, TPBG, DNAH14, SYT6, CACNG8, FAM110B, ADRA1D, and NRN1) were selected for testing in plasma. These detected 78% (95% CI, 74%-82%) of lymphoma cases at 90% specificity. Excluding marginal zone and T-cell lymphomas, sensitivity increased to 84% (80%-88%). MDMs in plasma show promise to detect lymphoma and are candidates for inclusion in multi-cancer detection studies.
Cone-rod dystrophies (CORDs) are a heterogeneous group of inherited retinopathies (IRDs) with more than 30 already known disease-causing genes. Uncertain phenotypes and extended range of intra- and interfamilial heterogenicity make still difficult to determine a precise genotype-phenotype correlation. Here, we used a next-generation sequencing approach to study a Sicilian family with a suspected form of CORD. Affected family members underwent ophthalmological examinations and a proband, blind from 50 years, underwent whole genome and exome sequencing. Variant analysis was enriched by pathway analysis and relevant variants were, then, investigated in other family members and in 100 healthy controls from Messina. CORD diagnosis with an intricate pattern of symptoms was confirmed by ophthalmological examinations. A total of about 50,000 variants were identified in both proband's genome and exome. All affected family members presented specific genotypes mainly determined by mutated GUCY2D gene, and different phenotypical traits, mainly related to focus and color perception. Thus, we looked for possible modifier genes. According to relationship with GUCY2D, predicted functional effects, eye localization, and ocular disease affinity, only 9 variants, carried by 6 genes (CACNG8, PAX2, RXRG, CCDC175, PDE4DIP and LTF), survived the filtering. These genes encode key proteins involved in cone development and survival, and retina neurotransmission. Among analyzed variants, CACNG8c.*6819A>T and the new CCDC175 c.76C>T showed extremely low frequency in the control group, suggesting a key role on disease phenotypes. Such discovery could enforce the role of modifier genes into CORD onset/progression, contributing to improve diagnostic test towards a better personalized medicine.
RATIONALE: The development and progression of alcohol use disorder (AUD) are widely viewed as maladaptive neuroplasticity. The transmembrane alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor (AMPAR) regulatory protein gamma8 (TARP gamma-8) is a molecular mechanism of neuroplasticity that has not been evaluated in AUD or other addictions. OBJECTIVE: To address this gap in knowledge, we evaluated the mechanistic role of TARP gamma-8 bound AMPAR activity in the basolateral amygdala (BLA) and ventral hippocampus (vHPC) in the positive reinforcing effects of alcohol, which drive repetitive alcohol use throughout the course of AUD, in male C57BL/6 J mice. These brain regions were selected because they exhibit high levels of TARP gamma-8 expression and send glutamate projections to the nucleus accumbens (NAc), which is a key nucleus in the brain reward pathway. METHODS AND RESULTS: Site-specific pharmacological inhibition of AMPARs bound to TARP gamma-8 in the BLA via bilateral infusion of the selective negative modulator JNJ-55511118 (0-2 microg/microl/side) significantly decreased operant alcohol self-administration with no effect on sucrose self-administration in behavior-matched controls. Temporal analysis showed that reductions in alcohol-reinforced response rate occurred > 25 min after the onset of responding, consistent with a blunting of the positive reinforcing effects of alcohol in the absence of nonspecific behavioral effects. In contrast, inhibition of TARP gamma-8 bound AMPARs in the vHPC selectively decreased sucrose self-administration with no effect on alcohol. CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals a novel brain region-specific role of TARP gamma-8 bound AMPARs as a molecular mechanism of the positive reinforcing effects of alcohol and non-drug rewards.
Fast excitatory synaptic transmission in the mammalian central nervous system is mediated by glutamate-activated alpha-amino-5-methyl-3-hydroxy-4-isoxazole propionate (AMPA) receptors. In neurons, AMPA receptors coassemble with transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins (TARPs). Assembly with TARP gamma8 alters the biophysical properties of the receptor, producing resensitization currents in the continued presence of glutamate. Using single-channel recordings, we show that under resensitizing conditions, GluA2 AMPA receptors primarily transition to higher conductance levels, similar to activation of the receptors in the presence of cyclothiazide, which stabilizes the open state. To study the conformation associated with these states, we have used single-molecule FRET and show that this high-conductance state exhibits tighter coupling between subunits in the extracellular parts of the receptor. Furthermore, the dwell times for the transition from the tightly coupled state to the decoupled states correlate to longer open durations of the channels, thus correlating conformation and function at the single-molecule level.
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid(AMPA)-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs) are the predominant excitatory neurotransmitter receptors in the brain, where they mediate synaptic transmission and plasticity. Excessive AMPAR activation leads to diseases such as epilepsy. AMPAR properties are modulated by auxiliary proteins and foremost by the transmembrane AMPAR regulatory proteins (TARPs). These distribute in unique expression patterns across the brain, rendering AMPAR/TARP complexes promising targets for region-specific therapeutic intervention. TARP gamma8 is predominantly expressed in the forebrain and is enriched in the hippocampus, a region associated with temporal lobe epilepsy. Recent high-throughput medicinal chemistry screens have identified multiple promising compounds that selectively target AMPARs associated with gamma8 and hold promise for epilepsy treatment. However, how these modulators target the receptor complex is currently unknown. Here, we use a combination of ligand docking, molecular dynamics simulations, and electrophysiology to address this question. We identify a conserved oxindole isostere, shared between three structurally diverse modulators (LY-3130481, JNJ-55511118, and JNJ-61432059) as the major module engaging gamma8 by an H-bond to Asn-172 (gamma8). The remaining variable region of each molecule likely targets the receptor complex in ligand-selective modes. Functional data reveal parallels in the underlying modulatory action of two prominent compounds. This work will aid development of refined AMPAR epilepsy therapeutics and facilitate to uncover the mechanisms by which TARPs modulate the receptor.
Neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and schizophrenia are associated with altered neuronal excitability, resulting from dysfunctions in the molecular architecture and physiological regulation of ion channels and synaptic transmission. Ion channels and synapses are regarded as suitable therapeutic targets in modern pharmacology. Cannabinoids have received great attention as an original therapeutic approach for their effects on human health due to their ability to modulate the neurotransmitter release through interaction with the endocannabinoid system. In our study, we explored the effect of cannabinol (CBN) through next-generation sequencing analysis of NSC-34 cell physiology. Our findings revealed that CBN strongly influences the ontologies related to ion channels and synapse activity at all doses tested. Specifically, the genes coding for calcium and potassium voltage-gated channel subunits, and the glutamatergic and GABAergic receptors (Cacna1b, Cacna1h, Cacng8, Kcnc3, Kcnd1, Kcnd2, Kcnj4, Grik5, Grik1, Slc17a7, Gabra5), were up-regulated. Conversely, the genes involved into serotoninergic and cholinergic pathways (Htr3a, Htr3b, Htr1b, Chrna3, Chrnb2, Chrnb4), were down-regulated. These findings highlight the influence of CBN in the expression of genes involved into ion influx and synaptic transmission.
The CACNG1 gene on chromosome 17q24 encodes an integral membrane protein that was originally isolated as the regulatory gamma subunit of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels from skeletal muscle. The existence of an extended family of gamma subunits was subsequently demonstrated upon identification of CACNG2 (22q13), CACNG3 (16p12-p13), and CACNG4 and CACNG5 (17q24). In this study, we describe a cluster of three novel gamma subunit genes, CACNG6, CACNG7, and CACNG8, located in a tandem array on 19q13.4. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that this array is paralogous to the cluster containing CACNG1, CACNG5, and CACNG4, respectively, on chromosome 17q24. We developed sensitive RT-PCR assays and examined the expression profile of each member of the gamma subunit gene family, CACNG1-CACNG8. Analysis of 24 human tissues plus 3 dissected brain regions revealed that CACNG1 through CACNG8 are all coexpressed in fetal and adult brain and differentially transcribed among a wide variety of other tissues. The expression of distinct complements of gamma subunit isoforms in different cell types may be an important mechanism for regulating Ca2+ channel function.
TARP [transmembrane AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid) receptor regulatory protein] gamma-8 is an auxiliary subunit of AMPA receptors that is widely distributed in the hippocampus. It has been shown that TARP gamma-8 promotes surface expression of AMPA receptors; however, how TARP gamma-8 regulates the expression of AMPA receptors remains unclear. In the present study, we examined the effect of TARP glycosylation on AMPA receptor trafficking. We first showed that TARP gamma-8 is an N-glycosylated protein, which contains two glycosylation sites, Asn53 and Asn56, and compared this with the glycosylation of TARP gamma-2 and the AMPA receptor auxiliary protein CNIH-2 (cornichon homologue 2). We next examine the effect of TARP glycosylation on TARP trafficking and also on AMPA receptor surface expression. We find that TARP gamma-8 glycosylation is critical for surface expression of both TARP gamma-8 and GluA1 in heterologous cells and neurons. Specifically, knockdown of TARP gamma-8 causes a decrease in both total and surface AMPA receptors. We find that the expression of unglycosylated TARP gamma-8 in cultured neurons is unable to restore GluA1 expression fully. Furthermore, when the maturation of TARP gamma-8 is impaired, a large pool of immature GluA1 is retained intracellularly. Taken together, our data reveal an important role for the maturation of TARP gamma-8 in the trafficking and function of the AMPA receptor complex.
In the brain, AMPA receptors mediate fast excitatory neurotransmission, the dysfunction of which leads to neuropsychiatric disorders. Synaptic function of AMPA receptors is tightly controlled by a protein group called transmembrane AMPAR regulatory proteins (TARPs). TARP gamma-8 (also known as CACNG8) preferentially expresses in the hippocampus, cortex and subcortical regions that are critical for emotion generation indicating its association with psychiatric disorders. Here, we identified rs10420324 (T/G), a SNP located in the human CACNG8 gene, regulated reporter gene expression in vitro and TARP gamma-8 expression in the human brain. A guanine at the locus (rs10420324G) suppressed transcription likely through modulation of a local G-quadruplex DNA structure. Consistent with these observations, the frequency of rs10420324G was higher in patients with anti-social personality disorder (ASPD) than in controls, indicating that rs10420324G in CACNG8 is more voluntary for ASPD. We then characterized the behavior of TARP gamma-8 knockout and heterozygous mice and found that consistent with ASPD patients who often exhibit impulsivity, aggression, risk taking, irresponsibility and callousness, a decreased gamma-8 expression in mice displayed similar behaviors. Furthermore, we found that a decrease in TARP gamma-8 expression impaired synaptic AMPAR functions in layer 2-3 pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex, a brain region that inhibition leads to aggression, thus explaining, at least partially, the neuronal basis for the behavioral abnormality. Taken together, our study indicates that TARP gamma-8 expression level is associated with ASPD, and that the TARP gamma-8 knockout mouse is a valuable animal model for studying this psychiatric disease.
Nonselective glutamate alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor antagonists are efficacious in chronic pain but have significant tolerability issues, likely arising from the ubiquitous expression of AMPA receptors in the central nervous system (CNS). Recently, LY3130481 has been shown to selectively block AMPA receptors coassembled with the auxiliary protein, transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory protein (TARP) gamma8, which is highly expressed in the hippocampus but also in pain pathways, including anterior cingulate (ACC) and somatosensory cortices and the spinal cord, suggesting that selective blockade of gamma8/AMPA receptors may suppress nociceptive signaling with fewer CNS side effects. The potency of LY3130481 on recombinant gamma8-containing AMPA receptors was modulated by coexpression with other TARPs; gamma2 subunits affected activity more than gamma3 subunits. Consistent with these findings, LY3130481 had decreasing potency on receptors from rat hippocampal, cortical, spinal cord, and cerebellar neurons that was replicated in tissue from human brain. LY3130481 partially suppressed, whereas the nonselective AMPA antagonist GYKI53784 completely blocked, AMPA receptor-dependent excitatory postsynaptic potentials in ACC and spinal neurons in vitro. Similarly, LY3130481 attenuated short-term synaptic plasticity in spinal sensory neurons in vivo in response to stimulation of peripheral afferents. LY3130481 also significantly reduced nocifensive behaviors after intraplantar formalin that was correlated with occupancy of CNS gamma8-containing AMPA receptors. In addition, LY3130481 dose-dependently attenuated established gait impairment after joint damage and tactile allodynia after spinal nerve ligation, all in the absence of motor side effects. Collectively, these data demonstrate that LY3130481 can suppress excitatory synaptic transmission and plasticity in pain pathways containing gamma8/AMPA receptors and significantly reduce nocifensive behaviors, suggesting a novel, effective, and safer therapy for chronic pain conditions.
BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: 6-[(1S)-1-[1-[5-(2-hydroxyethoxy)-2-pyridyl]pyrazol-3-yl]ethyl]- 3H-1,3-benzothiazol-2-one (LY3130481 or CERC-611) is a selective antagonist of AMPA receptors containing transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory protein (TARP) gamma-8 that is under development for epilepsy. The present study provided a broad inquiry into its anticonvulsant properties. LY3130481 was anticonvulsant in multiple acute seizure provocation models in mice and rats. In addition, LY3130481 was effective against absence seizures in the GAERS genetic model and in the Frings mouse model. Likewise, LY3130481 attenuated convulsions in mice and rats with long-term induction of seizures (e.g., corneal, pentylenetetrazole, hippocampal, and amygdala kindled seizures). In slices of epileptic human cortex, LY3130481 significantly decreased neuronal firing frequencies. LY3130481 displaced from rat brain a radioligand specific for AMPA receptors associated with TARP gamma-8 whereas non-TARP-selective molecules did not. Binding was also observed in hippocampus freshly transected from a patient. RESULTS & CONCLUSION: Taken as a whole, the findings reported here establish the broad anticonvulsant efficacy of LY3130481 indicating that blockade of AMPA receptors associated with TARP gamma-8 is sufficient for these protective effects.
