Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1F; [Isoform 1]: Voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCC) mediate the entry of calcium ions into excitable cells and are also involved in a variety of calcium-dependent processes, including muscle contraction, hormone or neurotransmitter release, gene expression, cell motility, cell division and cell death. The isoform alpha-1F gives rise to L-type calcium currents. Long-lasting (L-type) calcium channels belong to the 'high-voltage activated' (HVA) group. They are blocked by dihydropyridines (DHP), phenylalkylamines, and by benzot [...] 
BACKGROUND: Calcium ions are involved in several human cellular processes including corticogenesis, transcription, and synaptogenesis. Nevertheless, the relationship between calcium channelopathies (CCs) and intellectual disability (ID)/global developmental delay (GDD) has been poorly investigated. We hypothesised that CCs play a major role in the development of ID/GDD and that both gain- and loss-of-function variants of calcium channel genes can induce ID/GDD. As a result, we performed a systematic review to investigate the contribution of CCs, potential mechanisms underlying their involvement in ID/GDD, advancements in cell and animal models, treatments, brain anomalies in patients with CCs, and the existing gaps in the knowledge. We performed a systematic search in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, OMIM, ClinGen, Gene Reviews, DECIPHER and LOVD databases to search for articles/records published before March 2021. The following search strategies were employed: ID and calcium channel, mental retardation and calcium channel, GDD and calcium channel, developmental delay and calcium channel. MAIN BODY: A total of 59 reports describing 159 cases were found in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, and LOVD databases. Variations in ten calcium channel genes including CACNA1A, CACNA1C, CACNA1I, CACNA1H, CACNA1D, CACNA2D1, CACNA2D2, CACNA1E, CACNA1F, and CACNA1G were found to be associated with ID/GDD. Most variants exhibited gain-of-function effect. Severe to profound ID/GDD was observed more for the cases with gain-of-function variants as compared to those with loss-of-function. CACNA1E, CACNA1G, CACNA1F, CACNA2D2 and CACNA1A associated with more severe phenotype. Furthermore, 157 copy number variations (CNVs) spanning calcium genes were identified in DECIPHER database. The leading genes included CACNA1C, CACNA1A, and CACNA1E. Overall, the underlying mechanisms included gain- and/ or loss-of-function, alteration in kinetics (activation, inactivation) and dominant-negative effects of truncated forms of alpha1 subunits. Forty of the identified cases featured cerebellar atrophy. We identified only a few cell and animal studies that focused on the mechanisms of ID/GDD in relation to CCs. There is a scarcity of studies on treatment options for ID/GDD both in vivo and in vitro. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that CCs play a major role in ID/GDD. While both gain- and loss-of-function variants are associated with ID/GDD, the mechanisms underlying their involvement need further scrutiny.
X-linked retinopathies represent a significant proportion of monogenic retinal disease. They include progressive and stationary conditions, with and without syndromic features. Many are X-linked recessive, but several exhibit a phenotype in female carriers, which can help establish diagnosis and yield insights into disease mechanisms. The presence of affected carriers can misleadingly suggest autosomal dominant inheritance. Some disorders (such as RPGR-associated retinopathy) show diverse phenotypes from variants in the same gene and also highlight limitations of current genetic sequencing methods. X-linked disease frequently arises from loss of function, implying potential for benefit from gene replacement strategies. We review X-inactivation and X-linked inheritance, and explore burden of disease attributable to X-linked genes in our clinically and genetically characterised retinal disease cohort, finding correlation between gene transcript length and numbers of families. We list relevant genes and discuss key clinical features, disease mechanisms, carrier phenotypes and novel experimental therapies. We consider in detail the following: RPGR (associated with retinitis pigmentosa, cone and cone-rod dystrophy), RP2 (retinitis pigmentosa), CHM (choroideremia), RS1 (X-linked retinoschisis), NYX (complete congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB)), CACNA1F (incomplete CSNB), OPN1LW/OPN1MW (blue cone monochromacy, Bornholm eye disease, cone dystrophy), GPR143 (ocular albinism), COL4A5 (Alport syndrome), and NDP (Norrie disease and X-linked familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR)). We use a recently published transcriptome analysis to explore expression by cell-type and discuss insights from electrophysiology. In the final section, we present an algorithm for genes to consider in diagnosing males with non-syndromic X-linked retinopathy, summarise current experimental therapeutic approaches, and consider questions for future research.
Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are recognized as one of the commonest congenital heart diseases (CHD), accounting for up to 40% of all cardiac malformations, and occur as isolated CHDs as well as together with other cardiac and extracardiac congenital malformations in individual patients and families. The genetic etiology of VSD is complex and extraordinarily heterogeneous. Chromosomal abnormalities such as aneuploidy and structural variations as well as rare point mutations in various genes have been reported to be associated with this cardiac defect. This includes both well-defined syndromes with known genetic cause (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome and Holt-Oram syndrome) and so far undefined syndromic forms characterized by unspecific symptoms. Mutations in genes encoding cardiac transcription factors (e.g., NKX2-5 and GATA4) and signaling molecules (e.g., CFC1) have been most frequently found in VSD cases. Moreover, new high-resolution methods such as comparative genomic hybridization enabled the discovery of a high number of different copy number variations, leading to gain or loss of chromosomal regions often containing multiple genes, in patients with VSD. In this chapter, we will describe the broad genetic heterogeneity observed in VSD patients considering recent advances in this field.
In the present era of evolving gene-based therapies for inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs), it has become increasingly important to verify the genotype in every case, to identify all subjects eligible for treatment. Moreover, combined insight concerning phenotypes and genotypes is crucial for improved understanding of thevisual impairment, prognosis, and inheritance. The objective of this study was to investigate to what extent renewed comprehensive genetic testing of patients diagnosed with IRD but with previously inconclusive DNA test results can verify the genotype, if confirmation of the genotype has an impact on the understanding of the clinical picture, and, to describe the genetic spectrum encountered in a Swedish IRD cohort. The study included 279 patients from the retinitis pigmentosa research registry (comprising diagnosis within the whole IRD spectrum), hosted at the Department of Ophthalmology, Skane University hospital, Sweden. The phenotypes had already been evaluated with electrophysiology and other clinical tests, e.g., visual acuity, Goldmann perimetry, and fundus imaging at the first visit, sometime between 1988-2015 and the previous-in many cases, multiple-genetic testing, performed between 1995 and 2020 had been inconclusive. All patients were aged 0-25 years at the time of their first visit. Renewed genetic testing was performed using a next generation sequencing (NGS) IRD panel including 322 genes (Blueprint Genetics). Class 5 and 4 variants, according to ACMG guidelines, were considered pathogenic. Of the 279 samples tested, a confirmed genotype was determined in 182 (65%). The cohort was genetically heterogenous, including 65 different genes. The most prevailing were ABCA4 (16.5%), RPGR (6%), CEP290 (6%), and RS1 (5.5%). Other prevalent genes were CACNA1F (3%), PROM1 (3%), CHM (3%), and NYX (3%). In 7% of the patients there was a discrepancy between the diagnosis made based on phenotypical or genotypical findings alone. To conclude, repeated DNA-analysis was beneficial also in previously tested patients and improved our ability to verify the genotype-phenotype association increasing the understanding of how visual impairment manifests, prognosis, and the inheritance pattern. Moreover, repeated testing using a widely available method could identify additional patients eligible for future gene-based therapies.
BACKGROUNDS: Unilateral high myopia (uHM), commonly observed in patients with retinal diseases or only with high myopia, is frequently associated with amblyopia with poor prognosis. This study aims to reveal the clinical and genetic spectrum of uHM in a large Chinese cohort. METHODS: A total of 75 probands with simplex uHM were included in our Pediatric and Genetic Eye Clinic. Patients with significant posterior anomalies other than myopic fundus changes were excluded. Variants were detected by exome sequencing and then analyzed through multiple-step bioinformatic and co-segregation analysis and finally confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Genetic findings were correlated with associated clinical data for analysis. RESULTS: Among the 75 probands with a mean age of 6.21 +/- 4.70 years at the presentation, myopic fundus of C1 and C2 was observed in 73 (97.3%) probands. Surprisingly, specific peripheral changes were identified in 63 eyes involving 36 (48.0%) probands after extensive examination, including peripheral retinal avascular zone (74.6%, 47/63 eyes), neovascularization (54.0%), fluorescein leakage (31.7%), peripheral pigmentary changes (31.7%), and others. Exome sequencing identified 21 potential pathogenic variants of 13 genes in 20 of 75 (26.7%) probands, including genes for Stickler syndrome (COL11A1 and COL2A1; 6/20), FEVR (FZD4, LRP5, and TSPAN12; 5/20), and others (FBN1, GPR179, ZEB2, PAX6, GPR143, OPN1LW, FRMD7, and CACNA1F; 9/20). For the peripheral retinal changes in the 20 probands, variants in Stickler syndrome-related genes were predominantly associated with retinal pigmentary changes, lattice degeneration, and retinal avascular region, while variants in genes related to FEVR were mainly associated with the avascular zone, neovascularization, and fluorescein leakage. CONCLUSIONS: Genetic defects were identified in about one-fourth of simplex uHM patients in which significant consequences may be hidden under a classic myopic fundus in up to half. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic genetic study on simplex uHM to date. In addition to routine care of strabismus and amblyopia, careful examination of the peripheral retina and genetic screening is warranted for patients with uHM in order to identify signs of risk for retinal detachment and other complications and provide meaningful genetic counseling.
Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is a severe facial pain disease of unknown cause and unclear genetic background. To examine the existing knowledge about genetics in TN, we performed a systematic study asking about the prevalence of familial trigeminal neuralgia, and which genes that have been identified in human TN studies and in animal models of trigeminal pain. MedLine, Embase, Cochrane Library and Web of Science were searched from inception to January 2021. 71 studies were included in the systematic review. Currently, few studies provide information about the prevalence of familial TN; the available evidence indicates that about 1-2% of TN cases have the familial form. The available human studies propose the following genes to be possible contributors to development of TN: CACNA1A, CACNA1H, CACNA1F, KCNK1, TRAK1, SCN9A, SCN8A, SCN3A, SCN10A, SCN5A, NTRK1, GABRG1, MPZ gene, MAOA gene and SLC6A4. Their role in familial TN still needs to be addressed. The experimental animal studies suggest an emerging role of genetics in trigeminal pain, though the animal models may be more relevant for trigeminal neuropathic pain than TN per se. In summary, this systematic review suggests a more important role of genetic factors in TN pathogenesis than previously assumed.
PURPOSE: This study was conducted to investigate potential candidate pathogenic genes in early-onset high myopia (eoHM) in families with eoHM. METHODS: Whole-exome sequencing was performed on probands with eoHM to identify potential pathogenic genes. Sanger sequencing was used to verify the identified gene mutations causing eoHM in first-degree relatives of the proband. The identified mutations were screened out by bioinformatics analysis combined with segregation analysis. RESULTS: A total of 131 variant loci, involving 97 genes, were detected in the 30 families. A total of 28 genes (37 variants), which were carried by 24 families, were verified and analyzed by Sanger sequencing. We identified five genes and 10 loci associated with eoHM, which have not been reported in previous research. Hemizygous mutations in COL4A5, NYX, and CACNA1F were detected in this study. Inherited retinal disease-associated genes were found in 76.67% (23/30) of families. Genes that can be expressed in the retina in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database were found in 33.33% (10/30) of families. Mutations in the genes associated with eoHM, including CCDC111, SLC39A5, P4HA2, CPSF1, P4HA2, and GRM6, were detected. The mutual correlation between candidate genes and phenotype of fundus photography was revealed in our study. The eoHM candidate gene mutation types contain five categories: missense mutations (78.38%), nonsense (8.11%), frameshift mutation (5.41%), classical splice site mutation (5.41%), and initiation codon mutation (2.70%). CONCLUSIONS: Candidate genes carried by patients with eoHM are closely related to inherited retinal diseases. Genetic screening in children with eoHM facilitates the early identification and intervention of syndromic hereditary ocular disorders and certain hereditary ophthalmopathies.
Since the initial identification of native calcium currents, significant progress has been made towards our understanding of the molecular and cellular contributions of voltage-gated calcium channels in multiple physiological processes. Moreover, we are beginning to comprehend their pathophysiological roles through both naturally occurring channelopathies in humans and mice and through targeted gene deletions. The data illustrate that small perturbations in voltage-gated calcium channel function induced by genetic alterations can affect a wide variety of mammalian developmental, physiological and behavioral functions. At least in those instances wherein the channelopathies can be attributed to gain-of-function mechanisms, the data point towards new therapeutic strategies for developing highly selective calcium channel antagonists.
The association of exosomal RNA profiling and pathogenesis of moyamoya disease (MMD) and intracranial Atherosclerotic disease (ICAD) is unknown. In this study, we investigated the RNA profiles of sEV (small extracellular vesicles)/exosomes in patients with MMD and ICAD. Whole blood samples were collected from 30 individuals, including 10 patients with MMD, 10 patients with ICAD, and 10 healthy individuals. Whole transcriptome analysis was performed using the GeneChip WT Pico Reagent kit. Transcriptional correlation was verified using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). The association between functional dysregulation and candidate RNAs was studied in vitro. In total, 1,486 downregulated and 2,405 upregulated RNAs differed significantly between patients with MMD and healthy controls. Differential expression of six circRNAs was detected using qPCR. Among these significantly differentially expressed RNAs, IPO11 and PRMT1 circRNAs were upregulated, whereas CACNA1F circRNA was downregulated. This is the first study showing that the differential expression of exosomal RNAs associated with MMD pathogenesis, such as overexpression of IPO11 and PRMT1 circRNAs, may be related to angiogenesis in MMD. The downregulation of CACNA1F circRNA may be related to vascular occlusion. These results propose the utility of exosomal RNAs as biological markers in MMD.
BACKGROUND/AAIMS: Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) is an inherited retinal disease that is often associated with high myopia and can be caused by pathological variants in multiple genes, most commonly CACNA1F, NYX and TRPM1. High myopia is associated with retinal degeneration and increased risk for retinal detachment. Slowing the progression of myopia in patients with CSNB would likely be beneficial in reducing risk, but before interventions can be considered, it is important to understand the natural history of myopic progression. METHODS: This multicentre, retrospective study explored CSNB caused by variants in CACNA1F, NYX or TRPM1 in patients who had at least 6 measurements of their spherical equivalent of refraction (SER) before the age of 18. A mixed-effect model was used to predict progression of SER overtime and differences between genotypes were evaluated. RESULTS: 78 individuals were included in this study. All genotypes showed a significant myopic predicted SER at birth (-3.076D, -5.511D and -5.386D) for CACNA1F, NYX and TRPM1 respectively. Additionally, significant progression of myopia per year (-0.254D, -0.257D and -0.326D) was observed for all three genotypes CACNA1F, NYX and TRPM1, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with CSNB tend to be myopic from an early age and progress to become more myopic with age. Patients may benefit from long-term myopia slowing treatment in the future and further studies are indicated. Additionally, CSNB should be considered in the differential diagnosis for early-onset myopia.
In this study, we investigated the clinical and genetic characteristics of 19 Korean patients with congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) at two tertiary hospitals. Clinical evaluations, including fundus photography, spectral-domain optical coherence tomography, and electroretinography, were performed. Genetic analyses were conducted using targeted panel sequencing or whole exome sequencing. The median age was 5 (3-21) years at the initial examination, 2 (1-8) years at symptom onset, and 11 (5-28) years during the final visit. Genetic mutations were identified as CNGB1 and GNAT1 for the Riggs type (n = 2), TRPM1 and NYX for the complete type (n = 3), and CACNA1F (n = 14) for the incomplete type. Ten novel variants were identified, and best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and spherical equivalents (SE) were related to each type of CSNB. The Riggs and TRPM1 complete types presented mild myopia and good BCVA without strabismus and nystagmus, whereas the NYX complete and incomplete types showed mixed SE and poor BCVA with strabismus and nystagmus. This is the first case series of Korean patients with CSNB, and further studies with a larger number of subjects should be conducted to correlate the clinical and genetic aspects of CSNB.
BACKGROUND: Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) is an inherited retinal disorder. Most of patients have myopia. This study aims to describe the clinical and genetic characteristics of fifty-nine patients with CSNB and investigate myopic progression under genetic cause. RESULTS: Sixty-five variants were detected in the 59 CSNB patients, including 32 novel and 33 reported variants. The most frequently involved genes were NYX, CACNA1F, and TRPM1. Myopia (96.61%, 57/59) was the most common clinical finding, followed by nystagmus (62.71%, 37/59), strabismus (52.54%, 31/59), and nyctalopia (49.15%, 29/59). An average SE of -7.73 +/- 3.37 D progressed to -9.14 +/- 2.09 D in NYX patients with myopia, from - 2.24 +/- 1.53 D to -4.42 +/- 1.43 D in those with CACNA1F, and from - 5.21 +/- 2.89 D to -9.24 +/- 3.16 D in those with TRPM1 during the 3-year follow-up; the TRPM1 group showed the most rapid progression. CONCLUSIONS: High myopia and strabismus are distinct clinical features of CSNB that are helpful for diagnosis. The novel variants identified in this study will further expand the knowledge of variants in CSNB and help explore the molecular mechanisms of CSNB.
Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) is an inherited retinal disease (IRD) that causes night blindness in childhood with heterogeneous genetic, electrophysical, and clinical characteristics. The development of sequencing technologies and gene therapy have increased the ease and urgency of diagnosing IRDs. This study describes seven Taiwanese patients from six unrelated families examined at a tertiary referral center, diagnosed with CSNB, and confirmed by genetic testing. Complete ophthalmic exams included best corrected visual acuity, retinal imaging, and an electroretinogram. The effects of identified novel variants were predicted using clinical details, protein prediction tools, and conservation scores. One patient had an autosomal dominant CSNB with a RHO variant; five patients had complete CSNB with variants in GRM6, TRPM1, and NYX; and one patient had incomplete CSNB with variants in CACNA1F. The patients had Riggs and Schubert-Bornschein types of CSNB with autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked inheritance patterns. This is the first report of CSNB patients in Taiwan with confirmed genetic testing, providing novel perspectives on molecular etiology and genotype-phenotype correlation of CSNB. Particularly, variants in TRPM1, NYX, and CACNA1F in our patient cohort have not previously been described, although their clinical significance needs further study. Additional study is needed for the genotype-phenotype correlation of different mutations causing CSNB. In addition to genetic etiology, the future of gene therapy for CSNB patients is reviewed and discussed.
BACKGROUND: X-linked cone-rod dystrophy (CORDX) is one form of inherited retinal disorders (IRDs) characterized by progressive dysfunction of photoreceptor. Three types of CORDX were reported and CACNA1F gene defect can cause CORDX3. The aim of this study was to investigate the pathogenic variant in a Chinese family with IRD. METHODS: The two affected subjects including the proband and his elder sister underwent ophthalmic examinations. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in the proband at first, then co-segregation analysis was performed in the family by Sanger sequencing. Minigene approach was used to verify the effect of the mutation on the splicing of CACNA1F. X-chromosomal inactivation assay was performed to evaluate the inactivation patterns of the female carriers. RESULTS: The ophthalmic examination results of the proband fit the clinical description of CORDX3, and the female patient presented with only mild symptoms due to mildly skewed X-chromosomal inactivation (ratio 67: 33). Molecular genetic testing identified a novel splice-site mutation c.3847-2A > G in CACNA1F (NM_005183.4) gene in the patients, which inherited from their asymptomatic mother. Minigene approach confirmed that c.3847-2A > G could affect the splicing of CACNA1F. CONCLUSION: Our study identified a novel splice-site mutation in the CACNA1F gene, which expanded the mutational spectrum of CACNA1F-releated diseases and demonstrated the importance of combining clinical and genetic testing in the diagnosis of IRDs.
BACKGROUND: Congenital Stationary Night Blindness (CSNB) constitutes a group of non-progressive retinal disorders characterized by disturbances in scotopic vision and/or by a delay in adaptation to darkness, as well as by low visual acuity, myopia, nystagmus, and strabismus. Color vision and fundus appearance tend to be normal. To date, several CACNA1F gene variants have been linked to a CSNB phenotype but only few reports have focused on the optic nerve in this disease. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twelve patients underwent standard ophthalmological and genetic evaluation including spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), full-field electroretinography (ffERG), kinetic perimetry, fundus photography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and next-generation sequencing (NGS). Bilateral thinning of the peripapillary nerve fiber layer (pRNFL) and the ganglion cell complex (GCC) supported involvement of the optic nerves. MRI, when available, was assessed for gross intracranial optic pathway abnormalities. RESULTS: All patients were shown to carry pathogenic variants in the CACNA1F gene, and all showed signs of optic nerve involvement. All patients showed a certain degree of myopic refractive error. Low average pRNFL thickness was evident in all patients. In three of them, pRNFL thickness was evaluated longitudinally and was proven to be stable over time. MRI imaging was unremarkable in all cases. CONCLUSION: Our data support the hypothesis that CACNA1F could be related to early-onset or congenital optic nerve involvement without any signs of a progressive optic neuropathy. Even though additional data from larger cohorts and longer follow-up periods are needed to further support and confirm our findings, there is a clear significance to our findings in the preparation for future CACNA1F gene therapy trials.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the molecular causes of Schubert-Bornschein (S-B) congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB), clinically characterize in detail, and assess genotype-phenotype correlations for retinal function and structure. DESIGN: Retrospective, longitudinal, single-center case series. PARTICIPANTS: One hundred twenty-two patients with S-B CSNB attending Moorfields Eye Hospital, United Kingdom. METHODS: All case notes, results of molecular genetic testing, and OCT were reviewed. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Molecular genetics, presenting complaints, rates of nystagmus, nyctalopia, photophobia, strabismus, color vision defects and spherical equivalent refraction (SER). Retinal thickness, outer nuclear layer (ONL) thickness, and ganglion cell layer + inner plexiform layer (GCL+IPL) thickness from OCT imaging. RESULTS: X-linked (CACNA1F and NYX) and autosomal recessive (TRPM1, GRM6, GPR179 and CABP4) genotypes were identified. The mean (+/- standard deviation) reported age of onset was 4.94 +/- 8.99 years. Over the follow-up period, 95.9% of patients reported reduced visual acuity (VA), half had nystagmus, and 64.7% reported nyctalopia. Incomplete CSNB (iCSNB) patients more frequently had nystagmus and photophobia. Nyctalopia was similar for iCSNB and complete CSNB (cCSNB). Color vision data were limited but more defects were found in iCSNB. None of these clinical differences met statistical significance. There was no significant difference between groups in VA, with a mean of 0.46 logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution, and VA remained stable over the course of follow-up. Complete congenital stationary night blindness patients, specifically those with NYX and TRPM1 variants, were more myopic. CACNA1F patients showed the largest refractive variability, and the CABP4 patient was hyperopic. No significant differences were found in OCT structural analysis during the follow-up period. CONCLUSIONS: Retinal structure in CSNB is stationary and no specific genotype-structure correlates were identified. Visual acuity seems to be relatively stable, with rare instances of progression. FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE(S): Proprietary or commercial disclosure may be found in the Footnotes and Disclosures at the end of this article.
OBJECTIVES: The present review systematically summarized existing publications regarding the genetic associations between voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted to gather pertinent studies in three online databases. Two authors independently screened the included records based on the selection criteria. Discrepancies in each step were settled through discussions. RESULTS: From 1163 resulting searched articles, 28 were identified for inclusion. The most prominent among the VGCCs variants found in ASD were those falling within loci encoding the alpha subunits, CACNA1A, CACNA1B, CACNA1C, CACNA1D, CACNA1E, CACNA1F, CACNA1G, CACNA1H, and CACNA1I as well as those of their accessory subunits CACNB2, CACNA2D3, and CACNA2D4. Two signaling pathways, the IP3-Ca(2+) pathway and the MAPK pathway, were identified as scaffolds that united genetic lesions into a consensus etiology of ASD. CONCLUSIONS: Evidence generated from this review supports the role of VGCC genetic variants in the pathogenesis of ASD, making it a promising therapeutic target. Future research should focus on the specific mechanism that connects VGCC genetic variants to the complex ASD phenotype.
Calcium channels are an integral component in maintaining cellular function. Alterations may lead to channelopathies, primarily manifested in the central nervous system. This study describes the clinical and genetic features of a unique 12-year-old boy harboring two congenital calcium channelopathies, involving the CACNA1A and CACNA1F genes, and provides an unadulterated view of the natural history of sporadic hemiplegic migraine type 1 (SHM1) due to the patient's inability to tolerate any preventative medication. The patient presents with episodes of vomiting, hemiplegia, cerebral edema, seizure, fever, transient blindness, and encephalopathy. He is nonverbal, nonambulatory, and forced to have a very limited diet due to abnormal immune responses. The SHM1 manifestations apparent in the subject are consistent with the phenotype described in the 48 patients identified as part of a systematic literature review. The ocular symptoms of CACNA1F align with the family history of the subject. The presence of multiple pathogenic variants make it difficult to identify a clear phenotype-genotype correlation in the present case. Moreover, the detailed case description and natural history along with the comprehensive review of the literature contribute to the understanding of this complex disorder and point to the need for comprehensive clinical assessments of SHM1.
The CACNA1F gene encodes a member of the alpha-1F subunit family in the voltage-dependent calcium channel (Cav1.4) complex. Mutations in this gene result in incomplete congenital stationary night blindness (iCSNB2) in humans. And Cav1.4 mutation could affect the functions of the skeletal muscle. This study investigated the role of Cacna1f mutations in alteration of the skeletal muscle functions in a Cacna1f mutation rat model (Cacna1f(CSNB2) rat). We found that the muscle endurance behaviors of Cacna1f(CSNB2) rats were significantly lower than those of the wild-type rats. The high-frequency fatigue resistance of the soleus muscle was decreased in Cacna1f(CSNB2) rats under continuous tetanic stimulation. The expression levels of the syntaxin (SYN) proteins in the soleus of the Cacna1f(CSNB2) rats were lower than those of wild-type rats. SYN was expressed in the soleus muscle, but not in the extensor digitorum longus. The Cav1.4 protein was not detected in the skeletal muscle of Cacna1f(CSNB2) rats. The Cacna1f mRNA level in the soleus of Cacna1f(CSNB2) rats was decreased compared with that in wild-type rats. This study demonstrated for the first time that the Cacna1f mutation reduces the function of slow-twitch skeletal muscle. And it also demonstrated that the Cacna1f gene affects synapse-associated protein expression, which may block the signal transmission in synaptic connectivity of the retina and skeletal muscle in Cacna1f-mutant rats.
Cav1.4 L-type Ca(2+) channels are predominantly expressed in retinal neurons, particularly at the photoreceptor terminals where they mediate sustained Ca(2+) entry needed for continuous neurotransmitter release at their ribbon synapses. Cav1.4 channel gating properties are controlled by accessory subunits, associated regulatory proteins, and also alternative splicing. In humans, mutations in the CACNA1F gene encoding for Cav1.4 channels are associated with X-linked retinal disorders such as congenital stationary night blindness type 2. Mutations in the Cav1.4 protein result in a spectrum of altered functional channel activity. Several mouse models broadened our understanding of the role of Cav1.4 channels not only as Ca(2+) source at retinal synapses but also as synaptic organizers. In this review, we highlight different structural and functional phenotypes of Cav1.4 mutations that might also occur in patients with congenital stationary night blindness type 2. A further important yet mostly neglected aspect that we discuss is the influence of alternative splicing on channel dysfunction. We conclude that currently available functional phenotyping strategies should be refined and summarize potential specific therapeutic options for patients carrying Cav1.4 mutations. Importantly, the development of new therapeutic approaches will permit a deeper understanding of not only the disease pathophysiology but also the physiological function of Cav1.4 channels in the retina.
