Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1S; Pore-forming, alpha-1S subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents in skeletal muscle. Calcium channels containing the alpha-1S subunit play an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle via their interaction with RYR1, which triggers Ca(2+) release from the sarcplasmic reticulum and ultimately results in muscle contraction. Long-lasting (L-type) calcium channels belong to the 'high-voltage activated' (HVA) group.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle that presents as a hypermetabolic response to potent volatile anesthetic gases such as halothane, sevoflurane, desflurane, isoflurane and the depolarizing muscle relaxant succinylcholine, and rarely, in humans, to stressors such as vigorous exercise and heat. The incidence of MH reactions ranges from 1:10,000 to 1: 250,000 anesthetics. However, the prevalence of the genetic abnormalities may be as great as one in 400 individuals. MH affects humans, certain pig breeds, dogs and horses. The classic signs of MH include hyperthermia, tachycardia, tachypnea, increased carbon dioxide production, increased oxygen consumption, acidosis, hyperkalaemia, muscle rigidity, and rhabdomyolysis, all related to a hypermetabolic response. The syndrome is likely to be fatal if untreated. An increase in end-tidal carbon dioxide despite increased minute ventilation provides an early diagnostic clue. In humans the syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, while in pigs it is autosomal recessive. Uncontrolled rise of myoplasmic calcium, which activates biochemical processes related to muscle activation leads to the pathophysiologic changes. In most cases, the syndrome is caused by a defect in the ryanodine receptor. Over 400 variants have been identified in the RYR1 gene located on chromosome 19q13.1, and at least 34 are causal for MH. Less than 1 % of variants have been found in CACNA1S but not all of these are causal. Diagnostic testing involves the in vitro contracture response of biopsied muscle to halothane, caffeine, and in some centres ryanodine and 4-chloro-m-cresol. Elucidation of the genetic changes has led to the introduction of DNA testing for susceptibility to MH. Dantrolene sodium is a specific antagonist and should be available wherever general anesthesia is administered. Increased understanding of the clinical manifestation and pathophysiology of the syndrome, has lead to the mortality decreasing from 80 % thirty years ago to <5 % in 2006.
BACKGROUND: Gaps in our understanding of genetic susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia (MH) limit the application and interpretation of genetic diagnosis of the condition. Our aim was to define the prevalence and role of variants in the three genes implicated in MH susceptibility in the largest comprehensively phenotyped MH cohort worldwide. METHODS: We initially included one individual from each positive family tested in the UK MH Unit since 1971 to detect variants in RYR1, CACNA1S, or STAC3. Screening for genetic variants has been ongoing since 1991 and has involved a range of techniques, most recently next generation sequencing. We assessed the pathogenicity of variants using standard guidelines, including family segregation studies. The prevalence of recurrent variants of unknown significance was compared with the prevalence reported in a large database of sequence variants in low-risk populations. RESULTS: We have confirmed MH susceptibility in 795 independent families, for 722 of which we have a DNA sample. Potentially pathogenic variants were found in 555 families, with 25 RYR1 and one CACNA1S variants previously unclassified recurrent variants significantly over-represented (P<1x10(-7)) in our cohort compared with the Exome Aggregation Consortium database. There was genotype-phenotype discordance in 86 of 328 families suitable for segregation analysis. We estimate non-RYR1/CACNA1S/STAC3 susceptibility occurs in 14-23% of MH families. CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide current estimates of the role of variants in RYR1, CACNA1S, and STAC3 in susceptibility to MH in a predominantly white European population.
BACKGROUND: Calcium ions are involved in several human cellular processes including corticogenesis, transcription, and synaptogenesis. Nevertheless, the relationship between calcium channelopathies (CCs) and intellectual disability (ID)/global developmental delay (GDD) has been poorly investigated. We hypothesised that CCs play a major role in the development of ID/GDD and that both gain- and loss-of-function variants of calcium channel genes can induce ID/GDD. As a result, we performed a systematic review to investigate the contribution of CCs, potential mechanisms underlying their involvement in ID/GDD, advancements in cell and animal models, treatments, brain anomalies in patients with CCs, and the existing gaps in the knowledge. We performed a systematic search in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, OMIM, ClinGen, Gene Reviews, DECIPHER and LOVD databases to search for articles/records published before March 2021. The following search strategies were employed: ID and calcium channel, mental retardation and calcium channel, GDD and calcium channel, developmental delay and calcium channel. MAIN BODY: A total of 59 reports describing 159 cases were found in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, and LOVD databases. Variations in ten calcium channel genes including CACNA1A, CACNA1C, CACNA1I, CACNA1H, CACNA1D, CACNA2D1, CACNA2D2, CACNA1E, CACNA1F, and CACNA1G were found to be associated with ID/GDD. Most variants exhibited gain-of-function effect. Severe to profound ID/GDD was observed more for the cases with gain-of-function variants as compared to those with loss-of-function. CACNA1E, CACNA1G, CACNA1F, CACNA2D2 and CACNA1A associated with more severe phenotype. Furthermore, 157 copy number variations (CNVs) spanning calcium genes were identified in DECIPHER database. The leading genes included CACNA1C, CACNA1A, and CACNA1E. Overall, the underlying mechanisms included gain- and/ or loss-of-function, alteration in kinetics (activation, inactivation) and dominant-negative effects of truncated forms of alpha1 subunits. Forty of the identified cases featured cerebellar atrophy. We identified only a few cell and animal studies that focused on the mechanisms of ID/GDD in relation to CCs. There is a scarcity of studies on treatment options for ID/GDD both in vivo and in vitro. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that CCs play a major role in ID/GDD. While both gain- and loss-of-function variants are associated with ID/GDD, the mechanisms underlying their involvement need further scrutiny.
Periodic paralysis is a rare, dominantly inherited disorder of skeletal muscle in which episodic attacks of weakness are caused by a transient impairment of fiber excitability. Attacks of weakness are often elicited by characteristic environmental triggers, which were the basis for clinically delineating subtypes of periodic paralysis and are an important distinction for optimal disease management. All forms of familial periodic paralysis are caused by mutations of ion channels, often selectively expressed in skeletal muscle, that destabilize the resting potential. The missense mutations usually alter channel function through gain-of-function changes rather than producing a complete loss-of-function null. The knowledge of which channel gene harbors a variant, whether that variant is expected to (or known to) alter function, and how altered function impairs fiber excitability aides in the interpretation of patient signs and symptoms, the interpretation of gene test results, and how to optimize therapeutic intervention for symptom management and improve quality of life.
BACKGROUND: Fetal akinesia and arthrogryposis are clinically and genetically heterogeneous and have traditionally been refractive to genetic diagnosis. The widespread availability of affordable genome-wide sequencing has facilitated accurate genetic diagnosis and gene discovery in these conditions. METHODS: We performed next generation sequencing (NGS) in 190 probands with a diagnosis of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, distal arthrogryposis, fetal akinesia deformation sequence or multiple pterygium syndrome. This sequencing was a combination of bespoke neurogenetic disease gene panels and whole exome sequencing. Only class 4 and 5 variants were reported, except for two cases where the identified variants of unknown significance (VUS) are most likely to be causative for the observed phenotype. Co-segregation studies and confirmation of variants identified by NGS were performed where possible. Functional genomics was performed as required. RESULTS: Of the 190 probands, 81 received an accurate genetic diagnosis. All except two of these cases harboured class 4 and/or 5 variants based on the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines. We identified phenotypic expansions associated with CACNA1S, CHRNB1, GMPPB and STAC3. We describe a total of 50 novel variants, including a novel missense variant in the recently identified gene for arthrogryposis with brain malformations-SMPD4. CONCLUSIONS: Comprehensive gene panels give a diagnosis for a substantial proportion (42%) of fetal akinesia and arthrogryposis cases, even in an unselected cohort. Recently identified genes account for a relatively large proportion, 32%, of the diagnoses. Diagnostic-research collaboration was critical to the diagnosis and variant interpretation in many cases, facilitated genotype-phenotype expansions and reclassified VUS through functional genomics.
The periodic paralyses are a group of skeletal muscle channelopathies characterizeed by intermittent attacks of muscle weakness often associated with altered serum potassium levels. The underlying genetic defects include mutations in genes encoding the skeletal muscle calcium channel Ca(v)1.1, sodium channel Na(v)1.4, and potassium channels K(ir)2.1, K(ir)3.4, and possibly K(ir)2.6. Our increasing knowledge of how mutant channels affect muscle excitability has resulted in better understanding of many clinical phenomena which have been known for decades and sheds light on some of the factors that trigger attacks. Insights into the pathophysiology are also leading to new therapeutic approaches.
Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are recognized as one of the commonest congenital heart diseases (CHD), accounting for up to 40% of all cardiac malformations, and occur as isolated CHDs as well as together with other cardiac and extracardiac congenital malformations in individual patients and families. The genetic etiology of VSD is complex and extraordinarily heterogeneous. Chromosomal abnormalities such as aneuploidy and structural variations as well as rare point mutations in various genes have been reported to be associated with this cardiac defect. This includes both well-defined syndromes with known genetic cause (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome and Holt-Oram syndrome) and so far undefined syndromic forms characterized by unspecific symptoms. Mutations in genes encoding cardiac transcription factors (e.g., NKX2-5 and GATA4) and signaling molecules (e.g., CFC1) have been most frequently found in VSD cases. Moreover, new high-resolution methods such as comparative genomic hybridization enabled the discovery of a high number of different copy number variations, leading to gain or loss of chromosomal regions often containing multiple genes, in patients with VSD. In this chapter, we will describe the broad genetic heterogeneity observed in VSD patients considering recent advances in this field.
BACKGROUND: Clinical and molecular data on the occurrence and frequency of inherited neuromuscular disorders (NMD) in the Lebanese population is scarce. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to provide a retrospective overview of hereditary NMDs based on our clinical consultations in Lebanon. METHODS: Clinical and molecular data of patients referred to a multi-disciplinary consultation for neuromuscular disorders over a 20-year period (1999-2019) was reviewed. RESULTS: A total of 506 patients were diagnosed with 62 different disorders encompassing 10 classes of NMDs. 103 variants in 49 genes were identified. In this cohort, 81.4% of patients were diagnosed with motor neuron diseases and muscular dystrophies, with almost half of these described with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) (40.3% of patients). We estimate a high SMA incidence of 1 in 7,500 births in Lebanon. Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy were the second most frequently diagnosed NMDs (17% of patients). These disorders were associated with the highest number of variants (39) identified in this study. A highly heterogeneous presentation of Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease was notably identified. The least common disorders (5.5% of patients) involved congenital, metabolic, and mitochondrial myopathies, congenital myasthenic syndromes, and myotonic dystrophies. A review of the literature for selected NMDs in Lebanon is provided. CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates a high prevalence and underreporting of heterogeneous forms of NMDs in Lebanon- a major challenge with many novel NMD treatments in the pipeline. This report calls for a regional NMD patient registry.
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are a group of rare childhood disorders characterized by severe epilepsy and cognitive deficits. Numerous DEE genes have been discovered thanks to advances in genomic diagnosis, yet putative molecular links between these disorders are unknown. CDKL5 deficiency disorder (CDD, DEE2), one of the most common genetic epilepsies, is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the brain-enriched kinase CDKL5. To elucidate CDKL5 function, we looked for CDKL5 substrates using a SILAC-based phosphoproteomic screen. We identified the voltage-gated Ca(2+) channel Cav2.3 (encoded by CACNA1E) as a physiological target of CDKL5 in mice and humans. Recombinant channel electrophysiology and interdisciplinary characterization of Cav2.3 phosphomutant mice revealed that loss of Cav2.3 phosphorylation leads to channel gain-of-function via slower inactivation and enhanced cholinergic stimulation, resulting in increased neuronal excitability. Our results thus show that CDD is partly a channelopathy. The properties of unphosphorylated Cav2.3 closely resemble those described for CACNA1E gain-of-function mutations causing DEE69, a disorder sharing clinical features with CDD. We show that these two single-gene diseases are mechanistically related and could be ameliorated with Cav2.3 inhibitors.
This update begins with a section on inflammatory myopathies covering inclusion body myositis in younger patients, the possibility of a pathogenic role for anti-cN1A antibodies, and a negative trial of arimoclomol in inclusion body myositis. The potential study of Janus kinase inhibitors in dermatomyositis is discussed as well as the possible role of targeted therapy for immune checkpoint inhibitor neuromuscular complications. Next, studies of disease-modifying or potential disease-modifying therapies for inherited myopathies are addressed including the encouraging follow-up study of gene replacement therapy for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), a negative trial of tamoxifen in DMD, and the complex topic of gene therapy for X-linked myotubular myopathy. A newly identified condition of muscular dystrophy from 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase mutations is addressed along with possible therapy. Other papers regarding GNE myopathy and long-term outcome of enzyme replacement therapy in infantile onset Pompe disease round out that section. Updates on the expanding spectra of anoctamin-5 myopathies, caveolinopathies, and congenital and mylagic myopathies from CACNA1S mutations follow as well as extensive discussion of Valosin containing protein proteinopathies, comprehensive management of Becker muscular dystrophy, and gastrointestinal complications in adult DMD.
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) genetics are characterized by lower discoverability than most other psychiatric disorders. The contribution to biological understanding from previous genetic studies has thus been limited. We performed a multi-ancestry meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies across 1,222,882 individuals of European ancestry (137,136 cases) and 58,051 admixed individuals with African and Native American ancestry (13,624 cases). We identified 95 genome-wide significant loci (80 new). Convergent multi-omic approaches identified 43 potential causal genes, broadly classified as neurotransmitter and ion channel synaptic modulators (for example, GRIA1, GRM8 and CACNA1E), developmental, axon guidance and transcription factors (for example, FOXP2, EFNA5 and DCC), synaptic structure and function genes (for example, PCLO, NCAM1 and PDE4B) and endocrine or immune regulators (for example, ESR1, TRAF3 and TANK). Additional top genes influence stress, immune, fear and threat-related processes, previously hypothesized to underlie PTSD neurobiology. These findings strengthen our understanding of neurobiological systems relevant to PTSD pathophysiology, while also opening new areas for investigation.
Intracranial aneurysms (IAs) are a high-risk factor for life-threatening subarachnoid hemorrhage. Their etiology, however, remains mostly unknown at present. We conducted screening for sporadic somatic mutations in 65 IA tissues (54 saccular and 11 fusiform aneurysms) and paired blood samples by whole-exome and targeted deep sequencing. We identified sporadic mutations in multiple signaling genes and examined their impact on downstream signaling pathways and gene expression in vitro and an arterial dilatation model in mice in vivo. We identified 16 genes that were mutated in at least one IA case and found that these mutations were highly prevalent (92%: 60 of 65 IAs) among all IA cases examined. In particular, mutations in six genes (PDGFRB, AHNAK, OBSCN, RBM10, CACNA1E, and OR5P3), many of which are linked to NF-kappaB signaling, were found in both fusiform and saccular IAs at a high prevalence (43% of all IA cases examined). We found that mutant PDGFRBs constitutively activated ERK and NF-kappaB signaling, enhanced cell motility, and induced inflammation-related gene expression in vitro. Spatial transcriptomics also detected similar changes in vessels from patients with IA. Furthermore, virus-mediated overexpression of a mutant PDGFRB induced a fusiform-like dilatation of the basilar artery in mice, which was blocked by systemic administration of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib. Collectively, this study reveals a high prevalence of somatic mutations in NF-kappaB signaling pathway-related genes in both fusiform and saccular IAs and opens a new avenue of research for developing pharmacological interventions.
A review of the pharmacogenetics (PGt) and pathophysiology of calcium voltage-gated channel subunit alpha1 S (CACNA1S) mutations in malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 5 (MHS5; MIM #60188) is presented. Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a life-threatening hypermetabolic state of skeletal muscle usually induced by volatile, halogenated anesthetics and/or the depolarizing neuromuscular blocker succinylcholine. In addition to ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) mutations, several CACNA1S mutations are known to be risk factors for increased susceptibility to MH (MHS). However, the presence of these pathogenic CACNA1S gene variations cannot be used to positively predict MH since the condition is genetically heterogeneous with variable expression and incomplete penetrance. At present, one or at most six CACNA1S mutations display significant linkage or association either to clinically diagnosed MH or to MHS as determined by contracture testing. Additional pathogenic variants in CACNA1S, either alone or in combination with genes affecting Ca(2+) homeostasis, are likely to be discovered in association to MH as whole exome sequencing becomes more commonplace.
Ca(V)1.1 is specifically expressed in skeletal muscle where it functions as voltage sensor of skeletal muscle excitation-contraction (EC) coupling independently of its functions as L-type calcium channel. Consequently, all known Ca(V)1.1-related diseases are muscle diseases and the molecular and cellular disease mechanisms relate to the dual functions of Ca(V)1.1 in this tissue. To date, four types of muscle diseases are known that can be linked to mutations in the CACNA1S gene or to splicing defects. These are hypo- and normokalemic periodic paralysis, malignant hyperthermia susceptibility, Ca(V)1.1-related myopathies, and myotonic dystrophy type 1. In addition, the Ca(V)1.1 function in EC coupling is perturbed in Native American myopathy, arising from mutations in the Ca(V)1.1-associated protein STAC3. Here, we first address general considerations concerning the possible roles of Ca(V)1.1 in disease and then discuss the state of the art regarding the pathophysiology of the Ca(V)1.1-related skeletal muscle diseases with an emphasis on molecular disease mechanisms.
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are severe neurodevelopmental disorders often beginning in infancy or early childhood that are characterized by intractable seizures, abundant epileptiform activity on EEG, and developmental impairment or regression. CACNA1E is highly expressed in the central nervous system and encodes the alpha(1)-subunit of the voltage-gated Ca(V)2.3 channel, which conducts high voltage-activated R-type calcium currents that initiate synaptic transmission. Using next-generation sequencing techniques, we identified de novo CACNA1E variants in 30 individuals with DEE, characterized by refractory infantile-onset seizures, severe hypotonia, and profound developmental impairment, often with congenital contractures, macrocephaly, hyperkinetic movement disorders, and early death. Most of the 14, partially recurring, variants cluster within the cytoplasmic ends of all four S6 segments, which form the presumed Ca(V)2.3 channel activation gate. Functional analysis of several S6 variants revealed consistent gain-of-function effects comprising facilitated voltage-dependent activation and slowed inactivation. Another variant located in the domain II S4-S5 linker results in facilitated activation and increased current density. Five participants achieved seizure freedom on the anti-epileptic drug topiramate, which blocks R-type calcium channels. We establish pathogenic variants in CACNA1E as a cause of DEEs and suggest facilitated R-type calcium currents as a disease mechanism for human epilepsy and developmental disorders.
CACNA1S-related myopathy, due to pathogenic variants in the CACNA1S gene, is a recently described congenital muscle disease. Disease associated variants result in loss of gene expression and/or reduction of Cav1.1 protein stability. There is an incomplete understanding of the underlying disease pathomechanisms and no effective therapies are currently available. A barrier to the study of this myopathy is the lack of a suitable animal model that phenocopies key aspects of the disease. To address this barrier, we generated knockouts of the two zebrafish CACNA1S paralogs, cacna1sa and cacna1sb. Double knockout fish exhibit severe weakness and early death, and are characterized by the absence of Cav1.1 alpha1 subunit expression, abnormal triad structure, and impaired excitation-contraction coupling, thus mirroring the severe form of human CACNA1S-related myopathy. A double mutant (cacna1sa homozygous, cacna1sb heterozygote) exhibits normal development, but displays reduced body size, abnormal facial structure, and cores on muscle pathologic examination, thus phenocopying the mild form of human CACNA1S-related myopathy. In summary, we generated and characterized the first cacna1s zebrafish loss-of-function mutants, and show them to be faithful models of severe and mild forms of human CACNA1S-related myopathy suitable for future mechanistic studies and therapy development.
BACKGROUND: Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD) are a group of heterogeneous hereditary myopathies with similar clinical symptoms. Disease onset and progression are highly variable, with an elusive genetic background, and around 50% cases lacking molecular diagnosis. METHODS: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in 73 patients with clinically diagnosed LGMD. A filtering strategy aimed at identification of variants related to the disease included integrative analysis of WES data and human phenotype ontology (HPO) terms, analysis of genes expressed in muscle, analysis of the disease-associated interactome and copy number variants analysis. RESULTS: Genetic diagnosis was possible in 68.5% of cases. On average, 36.3 rare variants in genes associated with various muscle diseases per patient were found that could relate to the clinical phenotype. The putative causative mutations were mostly in LGMD-associated genes, but also in genes not included in the current LGMD classification (DMD, COL6A2, and COL6A3). In three patients, mutations in two genes were suggested as the joint cause of the disease (CAPN3+MYH7, COL6A3+CACNA1S, DYSF+MYH7). Moreover, a variety of phenotype-influencing variants were postulated, including in patients with an identified already known primary pathogenic mutation. CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that LGMD could be better described as oligogenic disorders in which dominant clinical presentation can result from the combined effect of mutations in a set of genes. In this view, the inter- and intrafamilial variability could reflect a specific genetic background and the presence of sets of phenotype-influencing or co-causative mutations in genes that either interact with the known LGMD-associated genes or are a part of the same pathways or structures.
BACKGROUND: Malignant Hyperthermia (MH) is a rare pharmacogenetic disorder, triggered by halogenated anesthetics and/or succinylcholine. In susceptible individuals, these drugs can activate an explosive life threatening clinical reaction. Leading symptoms are hypercarbia, muscle rigidity, and metabolic acidosis. MH is inherited in an autosomal-dominant manner and linked to mutations in the large ryanodine 1 gene (RYR1) gene in the majority of cases. Very few MH patients have been found to carry mutations in the CACNA1S gene. METHODS: For this review a large litterature search was carried out and the Swedish MH database consisting of 436 probands who have undergone in vitro muscle contraction test (IVCT) during 1984-2014 was analyzed. RESULTS: Twelve different MH causative mutations have been found in Swedish patients so far. These mutations lead to a disturbed calcium balance in striated muscle tissue. A muscle biopsy for the IVCT or finding of an approved causative mutation are required for the diagnosis. CONCLUSION: A Malignant Hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) patient should be anesthetized with trigger-free anesthesia. There are a few reports of MH-like reactions in patients unrelated to anesthesia. The outcome is dependent on early recognizing of the reaction and fast disconnection of the trigger agents and administration of dantrolene.
OBJECTIVE: To review the current knowledge about primary periodic paralyses (PPs). RESULTS: Periodic paralyses are a heterogeneous group of disorders, clinically characterized by episodes of flaccid muscle weakness, occurring at irregular intervals. PPs are divided into primary (hereditary) and secondary (acquired) forms of which the secondary PPs are much more common than the primary PPs. Primary PPs are due to mutations in genes encoding for subunits of channel proteins of the skeletal muscle membrane, such as the muscular sodium, potassium or calcium channels, or the SCL4A1 protein. Primary PPs include entities such as hyperkalemic PP, hypokalemic PP, paramyotonia congenita von Eulenburg, Andersen's syndrome, thyrotoxic PP, distal renal tubular acidosis, X-linked episodic muscle weakness syndrome and congenital myasthenic syndromes. Attacks of weakness or myotonia may be triggered or enhanced by vigorous exercise, cold, potassium-rich food, emotional stress, drugs such as glucocorticosteroids, insulin or diuretics, or pregnancy. Depending on the pathomechanism, episodes of weakness may respond to mild exercise, ingestion of potassium, carbohydrates, salbutamol, calcium gluconate, thiazide diuretics, carboanhydrase inhibitors, such as acetazolamide or dichlorphenamine, and episodes may be prevented by avoidance of potassium-rich food, or drugs, which increase serum potassium. CONCLUSION: This review presents and discusses current knowledge and recent advances in the etiology, molecular genetics, genotype-phenotype correlations, pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of primary PPs.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal inherited pharmacogenetic disorder related to pathogenic variants in the RYR1, CACNA1S, or STAC3 genes. Early recognition of the occurrence of MH and prompt medical treatment are indispensable to ensure a positive outcome. The purpose of this study was to provide valuable information for the early identification of MH by summarizing epidemiological and clinical features of MH. This scoping review followed the methodological framework recommended by Arksey and O'Malley. PubMed, Embase, and Web of science databases were searched for studies that evaluated the epidemical and clinical characteristics of MH. A total of 37 studies were included in this review, of which 26 were related to epidemiology and 24 were associated with clinical characteristics. The morbidity of MH varied from 0.18 per 100 000 to 3.9 per 100 000. The mortality was within the range of 0%-18.2%. Identified risk factors included sex, age, disorders associated with MH, and others. The most frequent initial clinical signs included hyperthermia, sinus tachycardia, and hypercarbia. The occurrence of certain signs, such as hypercapnia, delayed first temperature measurement, and peak temperature were associated with poor outcomes. The epidemiological and clinical features of MH varied considerably and some risk factors and typical clinical signs were identified. The main limitation of this review is that the treatment and management strategies were not assessed sufficiently due to limited information.
