Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type II subunit beta; Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase that functions autonomously after Ca(2+)/calmodulin-binding and autophosphorylation, and is involved in dendritic spine and synapse formation, neuronal plasticity and regulation of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) transport in skeletal muscle. In neurons, plays an essential structural role in the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton during plasticity by binding and bundling actin filaments in a kinase-independent manner. This structural function is required for correct targeti [...] 
The CACNA1C gene encodes the pore-forming subunit of the Ca(V)1.2 L-type Ca(2+) channel, a critical component of membrane physiology in multiple tissues, including the heart, brain, and immune system. As such, mutations altering the function of these channels have the potential to impact a wide array of cellular functions. The first mutations identified within CACNA1C were shown to cause a severe, multisystem disorder known as Timothy syndrome (TS), which is characterized by neurodevelopmental deficits, long-QT syndrome, life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias, craniofacial abnormalities, and immune deficits. Since this initial description, the number and variety of disease-associated mutations identified in CACNA1C have grown tremendously, expanding the range of phenotypes observed in affected patients. CACNA1C channelopathies are now known to encompass multisystem phenotypes as described in TS, as well as more selective phenotypes where patients may exhibit predominantly cardiac or neurological symptoms. Here, we review the impact of genetic mutations on Ca(V)1.2 function and the resultant physiological consequences.
BACKGROUND: Calcium ions are involved in several human cellular processes including corticogenesis, transcription, and synaptogenesis. Nevertheless, the relationship between calcium channelopathies (CCs) and intellectual disability (ID)/global developmental delay (GDD) has been poorly investigated. We hypothesised that CCs play a major role in the development of ID/GDD and that both gain- and loss-of-function variants of calcium channel genes can induce ID/GDD. As a result, we performed a systematic review to investigate the contribution of CCs, potential mechanisms underlying their involvement in ID/GDD, advancements in cell and animal models, treatments, brain anomalies in patients with CCs, and the existing gaps in the knowledge. We performed a systematic search in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, OMIM, ClinGen, Gene Reviews, DECIPHER and LOVD databases to search for articles/records published before March 2021. The following search strategies were employed: ID and calcium channel, mental retardation and calcium channel, GDD and calcium channel, developmental delay and calcium channel. MAIN BODY: A total of 59 reports describing 159 cases were found in PubMed, Embase, ClinVar, and LOVD databases. Variations in ten calcium channel genes including CACNA1A, CACNA1C, CACNA1I, CACNA1H, CACNA1D, CACNA2D1, CACNA2D2, CACNA1E, CACNA1F, and CACNA1G were found to be associated with ID/GDD. Most variants exhibited gain-of-function effect. Severe to profound ID/GDD was observed more for the cases with gain-of-function variants as compared to those with loss-of-function. CACNA1E, CACNA1G, CACNA1F, CACNA2D2 and CACNA1A associated with more severe phenotype. Furthermore, 157 copy number variations (CNVs) spanning calcium genes were identified in DECIPHER database. The leading genes included CACNA1C, CACNA1A, and CACNA1E. Overall, the underlying mechanisms included gain- and/ or loss-of-function, alteration in kinetics (activation, inactivation) and dominant-negative effects of truncated forms of alpha1 subunits. Forty of the identified cases featured cerebellar atrophy. We identified only a few cell and animal studies that focused on the mechanisms of ID/GDD in relation to CCs. There is a scarcity of studies on treatment options for ID/GDD both in vivo and in vitro. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that CCs play a major role in ID/GDD. While both gain- and loss-of-function variants are associated with ID/GDD, the mechanisms underlying their involvement need further scrutiny.
Timothy syndrome (TS) is a severe, multisystem disorder characterized by autism, epilepsy, long-QT syndrome and other neuropsychiatric conditions(1). TS type 1 (TS1) is caused by a gain-of-function variant in the alternatively spliced and developmentally enriched CACNA1C exon 8A, as opposed to its counterpart exon 8. We previously uncovered several phenotypes in neurons derived from patients with TS1, including delayed channel inactivation, prolonged depolarization-induced calcium rise, impaired interneuron migration, activity-dependent dendrite retraction and an unanticipated persistent expression of exon 8A(2-6). We reasoned that switching CACNA1C exon utilization from 8A to 8 would represent a potential therapeutic strategy. Here we developed antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) to effectively decrease the inclusion of exon 8A in human cells both in vitro and, following transplantation, in vivo. We discovered that the ASO-mediated switch from exon 8A to 8 robustly rescued defects in patient-derived cortical organoids and migration in forebrain assembloids. Leveraging a transplantation platform previously developed(7), we found that a single intrathecal ASO administration rescued calcium changes and in vivo dendrite retraction of patient neurons, suggesting that suppression of CACNA1C exon 8A expression is a potential treatment for TS1. Broadly, these experiments illustrate how a multilevel, in vivo and in vitro stem cell model-based approach can identify strategies to reverse disease-relevant neural pathophysiology.
PURPOSE: CACNA1C encodes the alpha-1-subunit of a voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel expressed in human heart and brain. Heterozygous variants in CACNA1C have previously been reported in association with Timothy syndrome and long QT syndrome. Several case reports have suggested that CACNA1C variation may also be associated with a primarily neurological phenotype. METHODS: We describe 25 individuals from 22 families with heterozygous variants in CACNA1C, who present with predominantly neurological manifestations. RESULTS: Fourteen individuals have de novo, nontruncating variants and present variably with developmental delays, intellectual disability, autism, hypotonia, ataxia, and epilepsy. Functional studies of a subgroup of missense variants via patch clamp experiments demonstrated differential effects on channel function in vitro, including loss of function (p.Leu1408Val), neutral effect (p.Leu614Arg), and gain of function (p.Leu657Phe, p.Leu614Pro). The remaining 11 individuals from eight families have truncating variants in CACNA1C. The majority of these individuals have expressive language deficits, and half have autism. CONCLUSION: We expand the phenotype associated with CACNA1C variants to include neurodevelopmental abnormalities and epilepsy, in the absence of classic features of Timothy syndrome or long QT syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is the first described and most common inherited arrhythmia. Over the last 25 years, multiple genes have been reported to cause this condition and are routinely tested in patients. Because of dramatic changes in our understanding of human genetic variation, reappraisal of reported genetic causes for LQTS is required. METHODS: Utilizing an evidence-based framework, 3 gene curation teams blinded to each other's work scored the level of evidence for 17 genes reported to cause LQTS. A Clinical Domain Channelopathy Working Group provided a final classification of these genes for causation of LQTS after assessment of the evidence scored by the independent curation teams. RESULTS: Of 17 genes reported as being causative for LQTS, 9 (AKAP9, ANK2, CAV3, KCNE1, KCNE2, KCNJ2, KCNJ5, SCN4B, SNTA1) were classified as having limited or disputed evidence as LQTS-causative genes. Only 3 genes (KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A) were curated as definitive genes for typical LQTS. Another 4 genes (CALM1, CALM2, CALM3, TRDN) were found to have strong or definitive evidence for causality in LQTS with atypical features, including neonatal atrioventricular block. The remaining gene (CACNA1C) had moderate level evidence for causing LQTS. CONCLUSIONS: More than half of the genes reported as causing LQTS have limited or disputed evidence to support their disease causation. Genetic variants in these genes should not be used for clinical decision-making, unless accompanied by new and sufficient genetic evidence. The findings of insufficient evidence to support gene-disease associations may extend to other disciplines of medicine and warrants a contemporary evidence-based evaluation for previously reported disease-causing genes to ensure their appropriate use in precision medicine.
L-type voltage-gated calcium channels play an essential role in various physiological systems including neuronal excitation and any mutation or dysfunction in the channel has significant impact on human brain function resulting in psychiatric diseases. Particular gain-of-function mutations in CACNA1C encoding Ca(V)1.2 have been associated with Timothy Syndrome, a devastating disease with a multi-organ phenotype. Efforts to understand the underlying pathophysiology and find therapeutic strategy have been spurred recently with the advances in stem cell technology, in particular those arising from patient-derived sources. In this review, we report on the recent advances in Timothy Syndrome research and on the methods used to study this disease.
Ca(v)1.2 channels play crucial roles in various neuronal and physiological processes. Here, we present cryo-EM structures of human Ca(v)1.2, both in its apo form and in complex with several drugs, as well as the peptide neurotoxin calciseptine. Most structures, apo or bound to calciseptine, amlodipine, or a combination of amiodarone and sofosbuvir, exhibit a consistent inactivated conformation with a sealed gate, three up voltage-sensing domains (VSDs), and a down VSD(II). Calciseptine sits on the shoulder of the pore domain, away from the permeation path. In contrast, when pinaverium bromide, an antispasmodic drug, is inserted into a cavity reminiscent of the IFM-binding site in Na(v) channels, a series of structural changes occur, including upward movement of VSD(II) coupled with dilation of the selectivity filter and its surrounding segments in repeat III. Meanwhile, S4-5(III) merges with S5(III) to become a single helix, resulting in a widened but still non-conductive intracellular gate.
Pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction caused by obesity can be associated with alterations in the levels of miRNAs. However, the role of miRNAs in such processes remains elusive. Here, we show that pancreatic islet miR-27a-5p, which is markedly increased in obese mice and impairs insulin secretion, is mainly delivered by visceral adipocyte-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs). Depleting miR-27a-5p significantly improved insulin secretion and glucose intolerance in db/db mice. Supporting the function of EV miR-27a-5p as a key pathogenic factor, intravenous injection of miR-27a-5p-containing EVs showed their distribution in mouse pancreatic islets. Tracing the injected adeno-associated virus (AAV)-miR-27a-5p (AAV-miR-27a) or AAV-FABP4-miR-27a-5p (AAV-FABP4-miR-27a) in visceral fat resulted in upregulating miR-27a-5p in EVs and serum and elicited mouse pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. Mechanistically, miR-27a-5p directly targeted L-type Ca2+ channel subtype CaV1.2 (Cacna1c) and reduced insulin secretion in beta-cells. Overexpressing mouse CaV1.2 largely abolished the insulin secretion injury induced by miR-27a-5p. These findings reveal a causative role of EV miR-27a-5p in visceral adipocyte-mediated pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction in obesity-associated type 2 diabetes mellitus.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To better understand the shared basis of language and mental health, this review examines the behavioral and neurobiological features of aberrant language in five major neuropsychiatric conditions. Special attention is paid to genes implicated in both language and neuropsychiatric disorders, as they reveal biological domains likely to underpin the processes controlling both. RECENT FINDINGS: Abnormal language and communication are common manifestations of neuropsychiatric conditions, and children with impaired language are more likely to develop psychiatric disorders than their peers. Major themes in the genetics of both language and psychiatry include master transcriptional regulators, like FOXP2; key developmental regulators, like AUTS2; and mediators of neurotransmission, like GRIN2A and CACNA1C.
The identification of a gain-of-function mutation in CACNA1C as the cause of Timothy syndrome, a rare disorder characterized by cardiac arrhythmias and syndactyly, highlighted roles for the L-type voltage-gated Ca(2+) channel Ca(V)1.2 in nonexcitable cells. Previous studies in cells and animal models had suggested that several voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels (VGCCs) regulated critical signaling events in various cell types that are not expected to support action potentials, but definitive data were lacking. VGCCs occupy a special position among ion channels, uniquely able to translate membrane excitability into the cytoplasmic Ca(2+) changes that underlie the cellular responses to electrical activity. Yet how these channels function in cells not firing action potentials and what the consequences of their actions are in nonexcitable cells remain critical questions. The development of new animal and cellular models and the emergence of large data sets and unbiased genome screens have added to our understanding of the unanticipated roles for VGCCs in nonexcitable cells. Here, we review current knowledge of VGCC regulation and function in nonexcitable tissues and cells, with the goal of providing a platform for continued investigation.
OBJECTIVES: This systematic review and meta-analysis focussed on insights into the relationship between CACNA1C-rs1006737 and ZNF804A-rs1344706 polymorphisms and cognitive performance in schizophrenia (SCZ) spectrum and bipolar disorder (BD) and provide some contributions for clinical practice. METHODS: We searched the websites databases (PubMED, PsycINFO, Web of Science, EMBASE and Cochrane Library) using eligibility and exclusion criteria to capture all potential studies, based on PICO model and according to the PRISMA. RESULTS: Eight articles were included in this systematic review (five referring to CACNA1C-rs1006737 and three related to ZNF804A-rs1344706 polymorphisms), with a total of 5759 participants (1751 SCZ patients, 348 BD patients, 3626 controls and 34 first-degree relatives). The results demonstrated that the pooled effect of CACNA1C-rs1006737 (risk difference RD = 0.08; 95% CI 0.02-0.15) was associated with altered cognitive function in patients with severe mental disorders, but not ZNF804A-rs1344706 polymorphism (RD = 0.19; 95% CI 0.09-0.48. CONCLUSION: The present meta-analysis provides evidence regarding slight association between CACNA1C-rs1006737 polymorphisms and cognitive performance in severe mental disorders, indicating that cognitive impairment in severe mental disorders associated with the CACNA1C rs1006737 risk variants could only be expressed when interacting with environmental exposures. This study is registered with PROSPERO, number CRD42021246726.
Recently, multiple genome-wide association studies have identified a genetic polymorphism (CACNA1C rs1006737) that appears to confer susceptibility for BD. This article aims to summarize the existing literature regarding the impact of rs1006737 on functional and structural neuroimaging intermediate phenotypes. Twenty eight articles, representing 2486 healthy participants, 369 patients with BD and 104 healthy first-degree relatives of patients with BD, are incorporated. Multiple studies have demonstrated structural differences, functional differences associated with emotion-related and frontal-executive tasks, and/or differences in behavioral task performance in risk allele carriers (AA or AG). Results comparing participants with BD to health controls are generally less pronounced than within-group genetic comparisons. The review concludes with an integration of how cardiovascular comorbidity may be a relevant mediator of the observed findings, and proposes future directions toward optimized therapeutic use of calcium channel blockers in BD.
Bipolar disorder is a serious psychiatric disorder, with a high heritability and unknown pathogenesis. Recent genome-wide association studies have identified the first loci, implicating genes such as CACNA1C and ANK3. The genes highlight several pathways, notably calcium signalling, as being of importance. Molecular studies suggest that the risk variants impact on gene regulation and expression. Preliminary studies using reprogrammed patient-derived cells report alterations in the transcriptome and in cellular adhesion and differentiation. Mouse models show that genes involved in circadian biology, acting via dopaminergic effects, reproduce aspects of the bipolar phenotype. These findings together represent significant advances in identification of the genetic and molecular basis of bipolar disorder, yet we are still far from an integrated, evidence-based understanding of its aetiopathogenesis.
One of the most consistent genetic findings to have emerged from bipolar disorder genome wide association studies (GWAS) is with CACNA1C, a gene that codes for the alpha(1C) subunit of the Ca(v)1.2 voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel (LTCC). Genetic variation in CACNA1C have also been associated with depression, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders, as well as changes in brain function and structure in control subjects who have no diagnosable psychiatric illness. These data are consistent with a continuum of shared neurobiological vulnerability between diverse-Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) defined-neuropsychiatric diseases. While involved in numerous cellular functions, Ca(v)1.2 is most frequently implicated in coupling of cell membrane depolarization to transient increase of the membrane permeability for calcium, leading to activation and, potentially, changes in intracellular signaling pathway activity, gene transcription, and synaptic plasticity. Ca(v)1.2 is involved in the proper function of numerous neurological circuits including those involving the hippocampus, amygdala, and mesolimbic reward system, which are strongly implicated in psychiatric disease pathophysiology. A number of behavioral effects of LTCC inhibitors have been described including antidepressant-like behavioral actions in rodent models. Clinical studies suggest possible treatment effects in a subset of patients with mood disorders. We review the genetic structure and variation of CACNA1C, discussing relevant human genetic and clinical findings, as well as the biological actions of Ca(v)1.2 that are most relevant to psychiatric illness.
Short QT Syndrome (SQTS) is a rare but dangerous condition characterised by abbreviated repolarisation, atrial and ventricular arrhythmias and risk of sudden death. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) are a first line protection against sudden death, but adjunct pharmacology is beneficial and desirable. Areas covered: The genetic basis for genotyped SQTS variants (SQT1-SQT8) and evidence for arrhythmia substrates from experimental and simulation studies are discussed. The main ion channel/transporter targets for antiarrhythmic pharmacology are considered in respect of potential genotype-specific and non-specific treatments for the syndrome. Expert opinion: Potassium channel blockade is valuable for restoring repolarisation and QT interval, though genotype-specific limitations exist in the use of some K(+) channel inhibitors. A combination of K(+) current inhibition during the action potential plateau, with sodium channel inhibition that collectively result in delaying repolarisation and post-repolarisation refractoriness is likely to be valuable in prolonging effective refractory period and wavelength for re-entry. Genotype-specific K(+) channel inhibition is limited by a lack of targeted inhibitors in clinical use, though experimentally available selective inhibitors now exist. The relatively low proportion of successfully genotyped cases justifies an exome or genome sequencing approach, to reveal new mediators and targets, as demonstrated recently for SLC4A3 in SQT8.
BACKGROUND: Childhood cardiomyopathies are progressive and often lethal disorders, forming the most common cause of heart failure in children. Despite severe outcomes, their genetic background is still poorly characterized. OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to characterize the genetics of severe childhood cardiomyopathies in a countrywide cohort. METHODS: The authors collected a countrywide cohort, KidCMP, of 66 severe childhood cardiomyopathies from the sole center in Finland performing cardiac transplantation. For genetic diagnosis, next-generation sequencing and subsequent validation using genetic, cell biology, and computational approaches were used. RESULTS: The KidCMP cohort presents remarkable early-onset and severe disorders: the median age of diagnosis was 0.33 years, and 17 patients underwent cardiac transplantation. The authors identified the pathogenic variants in 39% of patients: 46% de novo, 34% recessive, and 20% dominantly-inherited. The authors report NRAP underlying childhood dilated cardiomyopathy, as well as novel phenotypes for known heart disease genes. Some genetic diagnoses have immediate implications for treatment: CALM1 with life-threatening arrhythmias, and TAZ with good cardiac prognosis. The disease genes converge on metabolic causes (PRKAG2, MRPL44, AARS2, HADHB, DNAJC19, PPA2, TAZ, BAG3), MAPK pathways (HRAS, PTPN11, RAF1, TAB2), development (NEK8 and TBX20), calcium signaling (JPH2, CALM1, CACNA1C), and the sarcomeric contraction cycle (TNNC1, TNNI3, ACTC1, MYH7, NRAP). CONCLUSIONS: Childhood cardiomyopathies are typically caused by rare, family-specific mutations, most commonly de novo, indicating that next-generation sequencing of trios is the approach of choice in their diagnosis. Genetic diagnoses may suggest intervention strategies and predict prognosis, offering valuable tools for prioritization of patients for transplantation versus conservative treatment.
IMPORTANCE: The risk of mental disorders is consistently associated with variants in CACNA1C (L-type calcium channel Cav1.2) but it is not known why these channels are critical to cognition, and whether they affect the layer III pyramidal cells in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that are especially vulnerable in cognitive disorders. OBJECTIVE: To examine the molecular mechanisms expressed in layer III pyramidal cells in primate dorsolateral prefrontal cortices. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The design included transcriptomic analyses from human and macaque dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and connectivity, protein expression, physiology, and cognitive behavior in macaques. The research was performed in academic laboratories at Yale, Harvard, Princeton, and the University of Pittsburgh. As dorsolateral prefrontal cortex only exists in primates, the work evaluated humans and macaques. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Outcome measures included transcriptomic signatures of human and macaque pyramidal cells, protein expression and interactions in layer III macaque pyramidal cells using light and electron microscopy, changes in neuronal firing during spatial working memory, and working memory performance following pharmacological treatments. RESULTS: Layer III pyramidal cells in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex coexpress a constellation of calcium-related proteins, delineated by CALB1 (calbindin), and high levels of CACNA1C (Cav1.2), GRIN2B (NMDA receptor GluN2B), and KCNN3 (SK3 potassium channel), concentrated in dendritic spines near the calcium-storing smooth endoplasmic reticulum. L-type calcium channels influenced neuronal firing needed for working memory, where either blockade or increased drive by beta1-adrenoceptors, reduced neuronal firing by a mean (SD) 37.3% (5.5%) or 40% (6.3%), respectively, the latter via SK potassium channel opening. An L-type calcium channel blocker or beta1-adrenoceptor antagonist protected working memory from stress. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The layer III pyramidal cells in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex especially vulnerable in cognitive disorders differentially express calbindin and a constellation of calcium-related proteins including L-type calcium channels Cav1.2 (CACNA1C), GluN2B-NMDA receptors (GRIN2B), and SK3 potassium channels (KCNN3), which influence memory-related neuronal firing. The finding that either inadequate or excessive L-type calcium channel activation reduced neuronal firing explains why either loss- or gain-of-function variants in CACNA1C were associated with increased risk of cognitive disorders. The selective expression of calbindin in these pyramidal cells highlights the importance of regulatory mechanisms in neurons with high calcium signaling, consistent with Alzheimer tau pathology emerging when calbindin is lost with age and/or inflammation.
Coordinated expression of ion channels is crucial for cardiac rhythms, neural signaling, and cell cycle progression. Perturbation of this balance results in many disorders including cardiac arrhythmias. Prior work revealed association of mRNAs encoding cardiac Na(V)1.5 (SCN5A) and hERG1 (KCNH2), but the functional significance of this association was not established. Here, we provide a more comprehensive picture of KCNH2, SCN5A, CACNA1C, and KCNQ1 transcripts collectively copurifying with nascent hERG1, Na(V)1.5, Ca(V)1.2, or KCNQ1 channel proteins. Single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smFISH) combined with immunofluorescence reveals that the channel proteins are synthesized predominantly as heterotypic pairs from discrete molecules of mRNA, not as larger cotranslational complexes. Puromycin disrupted colocalization of mRNA with its encoded protein, as expected, but remarkably also pairwise mRNA association, suggesting that transcript association relies on intact translational machinery or the presence of the nascent protein. Targeted depletion of KCHN2 by specific shRNA resulted in concomitant reduction of all associated mRNAs, with a corresponding reduction in the encoded channel currents. This co-knockdown effect, originally described for KCNH2 and SCN5A, thus appears to be a general phenomenon among transcripts encoding functionally related proteins. In multielectrode array recordings, proarrhythmic behavior arose when I(Kr) was reduced by the selective blocker dofetilide at IC(50) concentrations, but not when equivalent reductions were mediated by shRNA, suggesting that co-knockdown mitigates proarrhythmic behavior expected from the selective reduction of a single channel species. We propose that coordinated, cotranslational association of functionally related ion channel mRNAs confers electrical stability by co-regulating complementary ion channels in macromolecular complexes.
The canonical G406R mutation that increases Ca(2+) influx through the CACNA1C-encoded Ca(V)1.2 Ca(2+) channel underlies the multisystem disorder Timothy syndrome (TS), characterized by life-threatening arrhythmias. Severe episodic hypoglycemia is among the poorly characterized non-cardiac TS pathologies. While hypothesized from increased Ca(2+) influx in pancreatic beta cells and consequent hyperinsulinism, this hypoglycemia mechanism is undemonstrated because of limited clinical data and lack of animal models. We generated a Ca(V)1.2 G406R knockin mouse model that recapitulates key TS features, including hypoglycemia. Unexpectedly, these mice do not show hyperactive beta cells or hyperinsulinism in the setting of normal intrinsic beta cell function, suggesting dysregulated glucose homeostasis. Patient data confirm the absence of hyperinsulinism. We discover multiple alternative contributors, including perturbed counterregulatory hormone responses with defects in glucagon secretion and abnormal hypothalamic control of glucose homeostasis. These data provide new insights into contributions of Ca(V)1.2 channels and reveal integrated consequences of the mutant channels driving life-threatening events in TS.
The L-type calcium channels (LTCCs) Ca(v)1.2 and Ca(v)1.3, encoded by the CACNA1C and CACNA1D genes, respectively, are important regulators of calcium influx into cells and are critical for normal brain development and plasticity. In humans, CACNA1C has emerged as one of the most widely reproduced and prominent candidate risk genes for a range of neuropsychiatric disorders, including bipolar disorder (BD), schizophrenia (SCZ), major depressive disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Separately, CACNA1D has been found to be associated with BD and autism spectrum disorder, as well as cocaine dependence, a comorbid feature associated with psychiatric disorders. Despite growing evidence of a significant link between CACNA1C and CACNA1D and psychiatric disorders, our understanding of the biological mechanisms by which these LTCCs mediate neuropsychiatric-associated endophenotypes, many of which are shared across the different disorders, remains rudimentary. Clinical studies with LTCC blockers testing their efficacy to alleviate symptoms associated with BD, SCZ, and drug dependence have provided mixed results, underscoring the importance of further exploring the neurobiological consequences of dysregulated Ca(v)1.2 and Ca(v)1.3. Here, we provide a review of clinical studies that have evaluated LTCC blockers for BD, SCZ, and drug dependence-associated symptoms, as well as rodent studies that have identified Ca(v)1.2- and Ca(v)1.3-specific molecular and cellular cascades that underlie mood (anxiety, depression), social behavior, cognition, and addiction.
