Beta-3 adrenergic receptor; Beta-adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine-induced activation of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins. Beta- 3 is involved in the regulation of lipolysis and thermogenesis.
Nociceptors are specialized sensory neurons that detect damaging or potentially damaging stimuli and are found in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and trigeminal ganglia. These neurons are critical for the generation of neuronal signals that ultimately create the perception of pain. Nociceptors are also primary targets for treating acute and chronic pain. Single-cell transcriptomics on mouse nociceptors has transformed our understanding of pain mechanisms. We sought to generate equivalent information for human nociceptors with the goal of identifying transcriptomic signatures of nociceptors, identifying species differences and potential drug targets. We used spatial transcriptomics to molecularly characterize transcriptomes of single DRG neurons from eight organ donors. We identified 12 clusters of human sensory neurons, 5 of which are C nociceptors, as well as 1 C low-threshold mechanoreceptors (LTMRs), 1 Abeta nociceptor, 2 Adelta, 2 Abeta, and 1 proprioceptor subtypes. By focusing on expression profiles for ion channels, G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), and other pharmacological targets, we provided a rich map of potential drug targets in the human DRG with direct comparison to mouse sensory neuron transcriptomes. We also compared human DRG neuronal subtypes to nonhuman primates showing conserved patterns of gene expression among many cell types but divergence among specific nociceptor subsets. Last, we identified sex differences in human DRG subpopulation transcriptomes, including a marked increase in calcitonin-related polypeptide alpha (CALCA) expression in female pruritogen receptor-enriched nociceptors. This comprehensive spatial characterization of human nociceptors might open the door to development of better treatments for acute and chronic pain disorders.
BACKGROUND: There is an unmet need of pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment options for migraine patients. Exercise can be used in the treatment of several pain conditions, including. However, what exact role exercise plays in migraine prevention is unclear. Here, we review the associations between physical exercise and migraine from an epidemiological, therapeutical and pathophysiological perspective. METHODS: The review was based on a primary literature search on the PubMed using the search terms "migraine and exercise". RESULTS: Low levels of physical exercise and high frequency of migraine has been reported in several large population-based studies. In experimental studies exercise has been reported as a trigger factor for migraine as well as migraine prophylaxis. Possible mechanisms for how exercise may trigger migraine attacks, include acute release of neuropeptides such as calcitonin gene-related peptide or alternation of hypocretin or lactate metabolism. Mechanisms for migraine prevention by exercise may include increased beta-endorphin, endocannabinoid and brain-derived neurotrophic factor levers in plasma after exercise. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, it seems that although exercise can trigger migraine attacks, regular exercise may have prophylactic effect on migraine frequency. This is most likely due to an altered migraine triggering threshold in persons who exercise regularly. However, the frequency and intensity of exercise that is required is still an open question, which should be addressed in future studies to delineate an evidence-based exercise program to prevent migraine in sufferers.
Procalcitonin (PCT) is the 116 amino acid precursor of the hormone calcitonin, produced by the C cells of the thyroid. Its synthesis is upregulated in bacterial infection and downregulated by viral infection. Consequently, with the increasing development of antibiotic resistance, interest has focused on the ability of this marker to not only diagnose infection but to tailor antibiotic treatment and help reduce the development of antibiotic resistance. The value of PCT depends on the specific clinical situation and pretest probability of disease. This article discusses the role of PCT in these different situations, namely primary care, the emergency department and the intensive care unit. The true cost effectiveness of this test remains difficult to prove as evidence for the potential impact of using PCT on slowing the development of bacterial resistance remains largely circumstantial.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize the history and current findings for creatinine as a renal biomarker and try to predict its future, looking at new biomarkers for kidneys (neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin and cystatin C) and comparing current development to other diseases (troponins and procalcitonin). RECENT FINDINGS: In general, biomarkers are used for diagnosis, severity classification, outcome prediction, and most importantly, outcome modification. Creatinine can be used for the first three (except for outcome modification). Multiple clinical studies have shown that new renal biomarkers, especially neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin and cystatin C, can diagnose acute kidney injury more rapidly and accurately, have a better relationship with disease severity, and predict outcome of patients with acute kidney injury more accurately, than creatinine. However, to prove the true superiority of the new renal biomarkers to creatinine, more clinical studies will be required. Such studies include interventional ones that can improve outcome (especially mortality) of patients with acute kidney injury and ones showing relationship of the markers with beneficial effects of specific interventions. SUMMARY: Unless enough evidence accumulates, considering the history, familiarity, and recent findings related to outcome, creatinine will continue to be used and dominate in clinical practice.
Development of new non-addictive analgesics requires advanced strategies to differentiate human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) into relevant cell types. Following principles of developmental biology and translational applicability, here we developed an efficient stepwise differentiation method for peptidergic and non-peptidergic nociceptors. By modulating specific cell signaling pathways, hPSCs were first converted into SOX10(+) neural crest, followed by differentiation into sensory neurons. Detailed characterization, including ultrastructural analysis, confirmed that the hPSC-derived nociceptors displayed cellular and molecular features comparable to native dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, and expressed high-threshold primary sensory neuron markers, transcription factors, neuropeptides, and over 150 ion channels and receptors relevant for pain research and axonal growth/regeneration studies (e.g., TRPV1, NA(V)1.7, NA(V)1.8, TAC1, CALCA, GAP43, DPYSL2, NMNAT2). Moreover, after confirming robust functional activities and differential response to noxious stimuli and specific drugs, a robotic cell culture system was employed to produce large quantities of human sensory neurons, which can be used to develop nociceptor-selective analgesics.
Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that gene alterations play a crucial role in LUAD development, progression, and prognosis. The present study aimed to identify the hub genes associated with LUAD. In the present study, we used TCGA database to screen the hub genes. Then, we validated the results by GEO datasets. Finally, we used cBioPortal, UALCAN, qRT-PCR, HPA database, TCGA database, and Kaplan-Meier plotter database to estimate the gene mutation, gene transcription, protein expression, clinical features of hub genes in patients with LUAD. A total of 5930 DEGs were screened out in TCGA database. Enrichment analysis revealed that DEGs were involved in the transcriptional misregulation in cancer, viral carcinogenesis, cAMP signaling pathway, calcium signaling pathway, and ECM-receptor interaction. The combining results of MCODE and CytoHubba showed that ADCY8, ADRB2, CALCA, GCG, GNGT1, and NPSR1 were hub genes. Then, we verified the above results by GSE118370, GSE136043, and GSE140797 datasets. Compared with normal lung tissues, the expression levels of ADCY8 and ADRB2 were lower in LUAD tissues, but the expression levels of CALCA, GCG, GNGT1, and NPSR1 were higher. In the prognosis analyses, the low expression of ADCY8 and ADRB2 and the high expression of CALCA, GCG, GNGT1, and NPSR1 were correlated with poor OS and poor PFS. The significant differences in the relationship of the expression of 6 hub genes and clinical features were observed. In conclusion, 6 hub genes will not only contribute to elucidating the pathogenesis of LUAD and may be potential therapeutic targets for LUAD.
Bloodstream infections are a major concern because of high levels of antibiotic consumption and of the increasing prevalence of antimicrobial resistance. Bacteraemia is identified in a small percentage of patients with signs and symptoms of sepsis. Biomarkers are widely used in clinical practice and they are useful for monitoring the infectious process. Procalcitonin (PCT) and C-reactive protein (CRP) have been most widely used, but even these have limited abilities to distinguish sepsis from other inflammatory conditions or to predict outcome. PCT has been used to guide empirical antibacterial therapy in patients with respiratory infections and help to determine if antibacterial therapy can be stopped. New biomarkers such as those in this review will discuss the major types of biomarkers of bloodstream infections/sepsis, including soluble triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 (sTREM-1), soluble urokinase-type plasminogen receptor (suPAR), proadrenomedullin (ProADM), and presepsin.
Innate lymphocytes maintain tissue homeostasis at mucosal barriers, with group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) producing type 2 cytokines and controlling helminth infection. While the molecular understanding of ILC2 responses has advanced, the complexity of microenvironmental factors impacting ILC2s is becoming increasingly apparent. Herein, we used single-cell analysis to explore the diversity of gene expression among lung lymphocytes during helminth infection. Following infection, we identified a subset of ILC2s that preferentially expressed Il5-encoding interleukin (IL)-5, together with Calca-encoding calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and its cognate receptor components. CGRP in concert with IL-33 and neuromedin U (NMU) supported IL-5 but constrained IL-13 expression and ILC2 proliferation. Without CGRP signaling, ILC2 responses and worm expulsion were enhanced. Collectively, these data point to CGRP as a context-dependent negative regulatory factor that shapes innate lymphocyte responses to alarmins and neuropeptides during type 2 innate immune responses.
The parabrachial nucleus (PBN) in the dorsal pons responds to bodily threats and transmits alarm signals to the forebrain. Parabrachial neuron activity is enhanced during chronic pain, and inactivation of PBN neurons in mice prevents the establishment of neuropathic, chronic pain symptoms. Chemogenetic or optogenetic activation of all glutamatergic neurons in the PBN, or just the subpopulation that expresses the Calca gene, is sufficient to establish pain phenotypes, including long-lasting tactile allodynia, that scale with the extent of stimulation, thereby promoting nociplastic pain, defined as diffuse pain without tissue inflammation or nerve injury. This review focuses on the role(s) of molecularly defined PBN neurons and the downstream nodes in the brain that contribute to establishing nociplastic pain.
A meta-analysis was performed to evaluate the accuracy of determination of procalcitonin (PCT) and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels for the diagnosis of bacterial infection. The analysis included published studies that evaluated these markers for the diagnosis of bacterial infections in hospitalized patients. PCT level was more sensitive (88% [95% confidence interval [CI], 80%-93%] vs. 75% [95% CI, 62%-84%]) and more specific (81% [95% CI, 67%-90%] vs. 67% [95% CI, 56%-77%]) than CRP level for differentiating bacterial from noninfective causes of inflammation. The Q value for PCT markers was higher (0.82 vs. 0.73). The sensitivity for differentiating bacterial from viral infections was also higher for PCT markers (92% [95% CI, 86%-95%] vs. 86% [95% CI, 65%-95%]); the specificities were comparable (73% [95% CI, 42%-91%] vs. 70% [95% CI, 19%-96%]). The Q value was higher for PCT markers (0.89 vs. 0.83). PCT markers also had a higher positive likelihood ratio and lower negative likelihood ratio than did CRP markers in both groups. On the basis of this analysis, the diagnostic accuracy of PCT markers was higher than that of CRP markers among patients hospitalized for suspected bacterial infections.
Over the past two decades, the body of literature on the clinical usefulness of procalcitonin (PCT) in adults has grown rapidly. Although this approach has led to increased insight, it has also prompted debate regarding its potential use in diagnosis and management of severe infection. Clinicians, however, are less familiar with the use of PCT in pediatric populations. In this review, we examine PCT as a marker of severe clinical pediatric conditions including its role in systemic inflammation, infection, and sepsis.
Headache disorders are common worldwide and often disabling. Until recently, treatments were borrowed from other branches of neurology and medicine. Monoclonal antibodies targeting calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) ligand and receptor, small molecule CGRP receptor antagonist gepants, serotonin(1F) agonists, new devices to deliver currently available drugs, and neuromodulation devices have recently been in the forefront of headache treatments that are rather specific for various headache disorders. These novel therapies are changing the field of headache medicine. Herein, we update the latest data available for these therapies.
Cluster headache is characterized by severe, unilateral headache attacks of orbital, supraorbital or temporal pain lasting 15-180 min accompanied by ipsilateral lacrimation, rhinorrhea and other cranial autonomic manifestations. Cluster headache attacks need fast-acting abortive agents because the pain peaks very quickly; sumatriptan injection is the gold standard acute treatment. First-line preventative drugs include verapamil and carbolithium. Other drugs demonstrated effective in open trials include topiramate, valproic acid, gabapentin and others. Steroids are very effective; local injection in the occipital area is also effective but its prolonged use needs caution. Monoclonal antibodies against calcitonin gene-related peptide are under investigation as prophylactic agents in both episodic and chronic cluster headache. A number of neurostimulation procedures including occipital nerve stimulation, vagus nerve stimulation, sphenopalatine ganglion stimulation and the more invasive hypothalamic stimulation are employed in chronic intractable cluster headache.
The skin is an immune-competent organ and this function may be impaired by exposure to chemicals, which may ultimately result in immune-mediated dermal disorders. Interindividual variability to chemical-induced skin immune reactions is associated with intrinsic individual characteristics and their genomes. In the last 30-40 years, several genes influencing susceptibility to skin immune reactions were identified. The aim of this review is to provide information regarding common genetic variations affecting skin immunotoxicity. The polymorphisms selected for this review are related to xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes (CYPA1 and CYPB1 genes), antioxidant defense (GSTM1, GSTT1, and GSTP1 genes), aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling pathway (AHR and ARNT genes), skin barrier function transepidermal water loss (FLG, CASP14, and SPINK5 genes), inflammation (TNF, IL10, IL6, IL18, IL31, and TSLP genes), major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and neuroendocrine system peptides (CALCA, TRPV1, ACE genes). These genes present variants associated with skin immune responses and diseases, as well as variants associated with protecting skin immune homeostasis following chemical exposure. The molecular and association studies focusing on these genetic variants may elucidate their functional consequences and contribution in the susceptibility to skin immunotoxicity. Providing information on how genetic variations affect the skin immune system may reduce uncertainties in estimating chemical hazards/risks for human health in the future.
Migraine is a common neurovascular condition. This disorder has a complex genetic background. Several single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or mutations within genes regulating glutamatergic neurotransmission, cortical excitability, ion channels, and solute carriers have been associated with polygenic and monogenic forms of migraine. SNPs within ACE, DBH, TRPM8, COMT, GABRQ, CALCA, TRPV1, and other genes have been reported to affect the risk of migraine or the associated clinical parameters. The distribution of some HLA alleles within the HLA-DRB1, HLA-DR2, HLA-B, and HLA-C regions have also been found to differ between migraineurs and healthy subjects. In addition, certain mitochondrial DNA changes and polymorphisms in this region have been shown to increase the risk of migraine. A few functional studies have investigated the molecular mechanisms contributing to these genetic factors in the development of migraine. Here we review studies evaluating the role of genetic polymorphisms and mRNA/miRNA dysregulation in migraine.
Lung neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) are a diverse group of tumors characterized by neuroendocrine (NE) differentiation. Among lung NENs, lung carcinoid (LC) is a rare tumor with unique characteristics. Recent research has highlighted the importance of transcription factors (TFs) in establishing gene expression programs in lung NENs such as small cell lung carcinoma. However, the TFs that control the gene expression of LC are largely unknown. In this study, we report the expression and potential function of a TF called Prospero homeobox protein1 (PROX1) in LC. Publicly available transcriptome data suggested that PROX1 was highly expressed in LC tissues, which was confirmed by immunohistochemical analysis on a tissue microarray. Knockdown of PROX1 did not impact the cellular viability of an LC-derived cell line, NCI-H727. Meanwhile, transcriptome analysis revealed that PROX1 knockdown altered the expression of genes involved in NE differentiation. ASCL1, CHGA, CALCA, and LINC00261 were suggested as downstream genes of PROX1. These findings indicate that PROX1 may play an important role in the NE identity of LC by regulating the expression of key target genes.
Critically ill patients are frequently at risk of sepsis or inflammatory conditions. Procalcitonin (PCT) is a biomarker for critically ill patients to differentiate sepsis from non-infectious triggers of the systemic inflammatory response syndrome. It has been recently shown that PCT is a valuable tool to guide antibiotic treatment in patients with bacteria infections. However, PCT is also less than a universal and perfect biomarker, and its physiologic role remains unknown. An increase in PCT is associated not only with localized bacterial infection, but also with non-infectious disease or other microbial infections. Numerous studies have suggested that use of PCT would reduce patients' exposure to antibiotics; however, the use of PCT-guided management of antibiotics strategy needs further study to validate their safety in daily practice in ICU settings. Data supporting this concept from randomized trials are still required. Future studies should focus on PCT kinetics. On the other hand, the need for biologic role of PCT shall be highlighted. Immunoneutralization of PCT will likely be a therapeutic approach for human sepsis only if its physiologic effects are elaborated. The aim of this review is to summarize and discuss the current evidence for PCT in a series of clinical settings.
The calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is implicated in the pathogenesis of several pain-related syndromes, including migraine. Targeting CGRP and its receptor by their antagonists and antibodies was a breakthrough in migraine therapy, but the need to improve efficacy and limit the side effects of these drugs justify further studies on the regulation of CGRP in migraine. The expression of the CGRP encoding gene, CALCA, is modulated by epigenetic modifications, including the DNA methylation, histone modification, and effects of micro RNAs (miRNAs), circular RNAs, and long-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). On the other hand, CGRP can change the epigenetic profile of neuronal and glial cells. The promoter of the CALCA gene has two CpG islands that may be specifically methylated in migraine patients. DNA methylation and lncRNAs were shown to play a role in the cell-specific alternative splicing of the CALCA primary transcript. CGRP may be involved in changes in neural cytoarchitecture that are controlled by histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and can be related to migraine. Inhibition of HDAC6 results in reduced cortical-spreading depression and a blockade of the CGRP receptor. CGRP levels are associated with the expression of several miRNAs in plasma, making them useful peripheral markers of migraine. The fundamental role of CGRP in inflammatory pain transmission may be epigenetically regulated. In conclusion, epigenetic connections of CGRP should be further explored for efficient and safe antimigraine therapy.
Diverse neurons in the parabrachial nucleus (PB) communicate with widespread brain regions. Despite evidence linking them to a variety of homeostatic functions, it remains difficult to determine which PB neurons influence which functions because their subpopulations intermingle extensively. An improved framework for identifying these intermingled subpopulations would help advance our understanding of neural circuit functions linked to this region. Here, we present the foundation of a developmental-genetic ontology that classifies PB neurons based on their intrinsic, molecular features. By combining transcription factor labeling with Cre fate-mapping, we find that the PB is a blend of two, developmentally distinct macropopulations of glutamatergic neurons. Neurons in the first macropopulation express Lmx1b (and, to a lesser extent, Lmx1a) and are mutually exclusive with those in a second macropopulation, which derive from precursors expressing Atoh1. This second, Atoh1-derived macropopulation includes many Foxp2-expressing neurons, but Foxp2 also identifies a subset of Lmx1b-expressing neurons in the Kolliker-Fuse nucleus (KF) and a population of GABAergic neurons ventrolateral to the PB ("caudal KF"). Immediately ventral to the PB, Phox2b-expressing glutamatergic neurons (some coexpressing Lmx1b) occupy the KF, supratrigeminal nucleus, and reticular formation. We show that this molecular framework organizes subsidiary patterns of adult gene expression (including Satb2, Calca, Grp, and Pdyn) and predicts output projections to the amygdala (Lmx1b), hypothalamus (Atoh1), and hindbrain (Phox2b/Lmx1b). Using this molecular ontology to organize, interpret, and communicate PB-related information could accelerate the translation of experimental findings from animal models to human patients.
The term peritonitis indicates an inflammatory process involving the peritoneum that is most frequently infectious in nature. Primary or spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) typically occurs when a bacterial infection spreads to the peritoneum across the gut wall or mesenteric lymphatics or, less frequently, from hematogenous transmission in combination with impaired immune system and in absence of an identified intra-abdominal source of infection or malignancy. The clinical presentation of SBP is variable. The condition may manifest as a relatively insidious colonization, without signs and symptoms, or may suddenly occur as a septic syndrome. Laboratory diagnostics play a pivotal role for timely and appropriate management of patients with bacterial peritonitis. It is now clearly established that polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) in peritoneal fluid is the mainstay for the diagnosis, whereas the role of additional biochemical tests is rather controversial. Recent evidence also suggests that automatic cell counting in peritoneal fluid may be a reliable approach for early screening of patients. According to available clinical and laboratory data, we have developed a tentative algorithm for efficient diagnosis of SBP, which is based on a reasonable integration between optimization of human/economical resources and gradually increasing use of invasive and expensive testing. The proposed strategy entails, in sequential steps, serum procalcitonin testing, automated cell count in peritoneal fluid, manual cell count in peritoneal fluid, peritoneal fluid culture and bacterial DNA testing in peritoneal fluid.
