Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1C; Pore-forming, alpha-1C subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents. Mediates influx of calcium ions into the cytoplasm, and thereby triggers calcium release from the sarcoplasm (By similarity). Plays an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in the heart. Required for normal heart development and normal regulation of heart rhythm. Required for normal contraction of smooth muscle cells in blood vessels and in the intestine. Essential for normal blood pressure regulation via  [...] 
Rationale: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is closely linked to follicular dysplasia and impaired bidirectional oocyte-granulosa cell (GC) communication. Given that PCOS is a heterogeneous, multifactorial endocrine disorder, it is important to clarify the pathophysiology of this ovarian disease and identify a specific treatment. Methods: We generated PCOS rat models based on neonatal tributyltin (TBT) exposure and studied the therapeutic effect and mechanism of resveratrol (RSV), a natural plant polyphenol. Transcriptome analysis was conducted to screen the significantly changed pathways, and a series of experiments, such as quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Western blot and phalloidin staining, were performed in rat ovaries. We also observed similar changes in human PCOS samples using Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database analysis and quantitative real-time PCR. Results: We first found that injury to transzonal projections (TZPs), which are specialized filopodia that mediate oocyte-GC communication in follicles, may play an important role in the etiology of PCOS. We successfully established PCOS rat models using TBT and found that overexpressed calcium-/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II beta (CaMKIIbeta) inhibited TZP assembly. In addition, TZP disruption and CAMK2B upregulation were also observed in samples from PCOS patients. Moreover, we demonstrated that RSV potently ameliorated ovarian failure and estrus cycle disorder through TZP recovery via increased cytoplasmic calcium levels and excessive phosphorylation of CaMKIIbeta. Conclusions: Our data indicated that upregulation of CaMKIIbeta may play a critical role in regulating TZP assembly and may be involved in the pathogenesis of PCOS associated with ovarian dysfunction. Investigation of TZPs and RSV as potent CaMKIIbeta activators provides new insight and a therapeutic target for PCOS, which is helpful for improving female reproduction.
The calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type 2 (CAMK2) family consists of four different isozymes, encoded by four different genes-CAMK2A, CAMK2B, CAMK2G, and CAMK2D-of which the first three have been associated recently with neurodevelopmental disorders. CAMK2D is one of the major CAMK2 proteins expressed in the heart and has been associated with cardiac anomalies. Although this CAMK2 isoform is also known to be one of the major CAMK2 subtypes expressed during early brain development, it has never been linked with neurodevelopmental disorders until now. Here we show that CAMK2D plays an important role in neurodevelopment not only in mice but also in humans. We identified eight individuals harboring heterozygous variants in CAMK2D who display symptoms of intellectual disability, delayed speech, behavioral problems, and dilated cardiomyopathy. The majority of the variants tested lead to a gain of function (GoF), which appears to cause both neurological problems and dilated cardiomyopathy. In contrast, loss-of-function (LoF) variants appear to induce only neurological symptoms. Together, we describe a cohort of individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders and cardiac anomalies, harboring pathogenic variants in CAMK2D, confirming an important role for the CAMK2D isozyme in both heart and brain function.
BACKGROUND: Inclusions of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43) has been designated limbic-predominant, age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE), with or without co-occurrence of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Approximately, 30-70% AD cases present TDP-43 proteinopathy (AD-TDP), and a greater disease severity compared to AD patients without TDP-43 pathology. However, it remains unclear to what extent TDP-43 dysfunction is involved in AD pathogenesis. METHODS: To investigate whether TDP-43 dysfunction is a prominent feature in AD-TDP cases, we evaluated whether non-conserved cryptic exons, which serve as a marker of TDP-43 dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TDP), accumulate in AD-TDP brains. We assessed a cohort of 192 post-mortem brains from three different brain regions: amygdala, hippocampus, and frontal cortex. Following RNA and protein extraction, qRT-PCR and immunoassays were performed to quantify the accumulation of cryptic RNA targets and phosphorylated TDP-43 pathology, respectively. RESULTS: We detected the accumulation of misspliced cryptic or skiptic RNAs of STMN2, KCNQ2, UNC13A, CAMK2B, and SYT7 in the amygdala and hippocampus of AD-TDP cases. The topographic distribution of cryptic RNA accumulation mimicked that of phosphorylated TDP-43, regardless of TDP-43 subtype classification. Further, cryptic RNAs efficiently discriminated AD-TDP cases from controls. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our results indicate that cryptic RNAs may represent an intriguing new therapeutic and diagnostic target in AD, and that methods aimed at detecting and measuring these species in patient biofluids could be used as a reliable tool to assess TDP-43 pathology in AD. Our work also raises the possibility that TDP-43 dysfunction and related changes in cryptic splicing could represent a common molecular mechanism shared between AD-TDP and FTLD-TDP.
Degradation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by selective autophagy (ER-phagy) is crucial for ER homeostasis. However, it remains unclear how ER scission is regulated for subsequent autophagosomal sequestration and lysosomal degradation. Here, we show that oligomerization of ER-phagy receptor FAM134B (also referred to as reticulophagy regulator 1 or RETREG1) through its reticulon-homology domain is required for membrane fragmentation in vitro and ER-phagy in vivo. Under ER-stress conditions, activated CAMK2B phosphorylates the reticulon-homology domain of FAM134B, which enhances FAM134B oligomerization and activity in membrane fragmentation to accommodate high demand for ER-phagy. Unexpectedly, FAM134B G216R, a variant derived from a type II hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy (HSAN) patient, exhibits gain-of-function defects, such as hyperactive self-association and membrane scission, which results in excessive ER-phagy and sensory neuron death. Therefore, this study reveals a mechanism of ER membrane fragmentation in ER-phagy, along with a signaling pathway in regulating ER turnover, and suggests a potential implication of excessive selective autophagy in human diseases.
Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMK2) is one of the first proteins shown to be essential for normal learning and synaptic plasticity in mice, but its requirement for human brain development has not yet been established. Through a multi-center collaborative study based on a whole-exome sequencing approach, we identified 19 exceedingly rare de novo CAMK2A or CAMK2B variants in 24 unrelated individuals with intellectual disability. Variants were assessed for their effect on CAMK2 function and on neuronal migration. For both CAMK2A and CAMK2B, we identified mutations that decreased or increased CAMK2 auto-phosphorylation at Thr286/Thr287. We further found that all mutations affecting auto-phosphorylation also affected neuronal migration, highlighting the importance of tightly regulated CAMK2 auto-phosphorylation in neuronal function and neurodevelopment. Our data establish the importance of CAMK2A and CAMK2B and their auto-phosphorylation in human brain function and expand the phenotypic spectrum of the disorders caused by variants in key players of the glutamatergic signaling pathway.
'Dominant mutations in CAMK2B, encoding a subunit of the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMK2), a serine/threonine kinase playing a key role in synaptic plasticity, learning and memory, underlie a recently characterized neurodevelopmental disorder (MRD54) characterized by delayed psychomotor development, mild to severe intellectual disability, hypotonia, and behavioral abnormalities. Targeted therapies to treat MRD54 are currently unavailable. In this review, we revise current knowledge on the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the altered neuronal function associated with defective CAMKIIbeta function. We also summarize the identified genotype-phenotype correlations and discuss the disease models that have been generated to profile the altered neuronal phenotype and understand the pathophysiology of this disease.
All viruses are obligate intracellular parasites that use host machinery to synthesize viral proteins. In infected eukaryotes, viral secreted and transmembrane proteins are synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Many viruses refashion ER membranes into bespoke factories where viral products accumulate while evading host pattern recognition receptors. ER processes are tightly regulated to maintain cellular homeostasis, so viruses must either conform to ER regulatory mechanisms or subvert them to ensure efficient viral replication. Reticulophagy is a catabolic process that directs lysosomal degradation of ER components. There is accumulating evidence that reticulophagy serves as a form of antiviral defense; we call this defense "xERophagy" to acknowledge its relationship to xenophagy, the catabolic degradation of microorganisms by macroautophagy/autophagy. In turn, viruses can subvert reticulophagy to suppress host antiviral responses and support efficient viral replication. Here, we review the evidence for functional interplay between viruses and the host reticulophagy machinery.Abbreviations: AMFR: autocrine motility factor receptor; ARF4: ADP-ribosylation factor 4; ARL6IP1: ADP-ribosylation factor-like 6 interacting protein 1; ATL3: atlastin GTPase 3; ATF4: activating transcription factor 4; ATF6: activating transcription factor 6; BPIFB3: BPI fold containing family B, member 3; CALCOCO1: calcium binding and coiled coil domain 1; CAMK2B: calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, beta; CANX: calnexin; CDV: canine distemper virus; CCPG1: cell cycle progression 1; CDK5RAP3/C53: CDK5 regulatory subunit associated protein 3; CIR: cargo-interacting region; CoV: coronavirus; CSNK2/CK2: casein kinase 2; CVB3: coxsackievirus B3; DAPK1: death associated protein kinase 1; DENV: dengue virus; DMV: double-membrane vesicles; EBOV: Ebola virus; EBV: Epstein-Barr Virus; EIF2AK3/PERK: eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 3; EMCV: encephalomyocarditis virus; EMV: extracellular microvesicle; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; ERAD: ER-associated degradation; ERN1/IRE1: endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus signalling 1; EV: extracellular vesicle; EV71: enterovirus 71; FIR: RB1CC1/FIP200-interacting region; FMDV: foot-and-mouth disease virus; HCMV: human cytomegalovirus; HCV: hepatitis C virus; HMGB1: high mobility group box 1; HSPA5/BiP: heat shock protein 5; IFN: interferon; IFNG/IFN-gamma: interferon gamma; KSHV: Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus; LIR: MAP1LC3/LC3-interacting region; LNP: lunapark, ER junction formation factor; MAP1LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; MAP3K5/ASK1: mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 5; MAPK/JNK: mitogen-activated protein kinase; MeV: measles virus; MHV: murine hepatitis virus; NS: non-structural; PDIA3: protein disulfide isomerase associated 3; PRR: pattern recognition receptor; PRRSV: porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus; RB1CC1/FIP200: RB1-inducible coiled-coil 1; RETREG1/FAM134B: reticulophagy regulator 1; RHD: reticulon homology domain; RTN3: reticulon 3; RTN3L: reticulon 3 long; sAIMs: shuffled Atg8-interacting motifs; SARS-CoV: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; SINV: Sindbis virus; STING1: stimulator of interferon response cGAMP interactor 1; SVV: Seneca Valley virus; SV40: simian virus 40; TEX264: testis expressed gene 264 ER-phagy receptor; TFEB: transcription factor EB; TRAF2: TNF receptor-associated factor 2; UIM: ubiquitin-interacting motif; UFM1: ubiquitin-fold modifier 1; UPR: unfolded protein response; VAPA: vesicle-associated membrane protein, associated protein A; VAPB: vesicle-associated membrane protein, associated protein B and C; VZV: varicella zoster virus; WNV: West Nile virus; XBP1: X-box binding protein 1; XBP1s: XBP1 spliced; xERophagy: xenophagy involving reticulophagy; ZIKV: Zika virus.
Glyphosate-containing herbicides are the most used agrochemicals in the world. Their indiscriminate application raises some concerns regarding the possible health and environmental hazards. In this study, we investigated in human neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y if oxidative stress, altered neurodevelopment and cell death pathways are involved in response to glyphosate and its metabolite aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA) exposures. MTT and LDH assays were carried out to assess the glyphosate and AMPA cytotoxicity. Lipid peroxides measured as malondialdehyde (MDA), nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and caspase-Glo 3/7 activity were evaluated. The neuroprotective role of melatonin (MEL), Trolox, N-acetylcysteine (NAC) and Sylibin against glyphosate- and AMPA-induced oxidative stress was examined. Glyphosate and AMPA effects on neuronal development related gene transcriptions, and gene expression profiling of cell death pathways by Real-Time PCR array were also investigated. Glyphosate (5 mM) and AMPA (10 mM) induced a significant increase in MDA levels, NO and ROS production and caspase 3/7 activity. Glyphosate exposure induced up-regulation of Wnt3a, Wnt5a, Wnt7a, CAMK2A, CAMK2B and down-regulation of GAP43 and TUBB3 mRNA expression involved in normal neural cell development. In relation to gene expression profiling of cell death pathways, of the 84 genes examined in cells a greater than 2-fold change was observed for APAF1, BAX, BCL2, CASP3, CASP7, CASP9, SYCP2, TNF, TP53, CTSB, NFkappaB1, PIK3C3, SNCA, SQSTMT, HSPBAP1 and KCNIPI mRNA expression for glyphosate and AMPA exposures. These gene expression data can help to define neurotoxic mechanisms of glyphosate and AMPA. Our results demonstrated that glyphosate and AMPA induced cytotoxic effects on neuronal development, oxidative stress and cell death via apoptotic, autophagy and necrotic pathways and confirmed that glyphosate environmental exposure becomes a concern. This study demonstrates that SH-SY5Y cell line could be considered an in vitro system for pesticide screening.
Regulation and functionality of species-specific alternative splicing has remained enigmatic to the present date. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIbeta (CaMKIIbeta) is expressed in several splice variants and plays a key role in learning and memory. Here, we identify and characterize several primate-specific CAMK2B splice isoforms, which show altered kinetic properties and changes in substrate specificity. Furthermore, we demonstrate that primate-specific CAMK2B alternative splicing is achieved through branch point weakening during evolution. We show that reducing branch point and splice site strengths during evolution globally renders constitutive exons alternative, thus providing novel mechanistic insight into cis-directed species-specific alternative splicing regulation. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we introduce a weaker, human branch point sequence into the mouse genome, resulting in strongly altered Camk2b splicing in the brains of mutant mice. We observe a strong impairment of long-term potentiation in CA3-CA1 synapses of mutant mice, thus connecting branch point-controlled CAMK2B alternative splicing with a fundamental function in learning and memory.
The loss of skeletal muscle mass is a major cause of falls and fractures in the elderly, leading to compromised independence and a decrease in the quality of life. However, only a few therapeutic interventions leading to marginal clinical benefits in patients with this condition are currently available. Therefore, the demand to further understand the pathology of muscle atrophy and establish a treatment modality for patients with muscle atrophy is significant. p38alpha mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38alpha MAPK) is a ubiquitous signaling molecule that is implicated in various cellular functions, including cell proliferation, differentiation, and senescence. In the present study, we generated a mutant line in which p38alpha MAPK is specifically abrogated in muscle tissues. Compared with the control mice, these mutant mice are significantly resistant to denervation-induced muscle atrophy, suggesting that p38alpha MAPK positively regulates muscle atrophy. We also identified CAMK2B as a potential downstream target of p38alpha MAPK and found that the pharmacological inhibition of CAMK2B activity suppresses denervation-induced muscle atrophy. Altogether, our findings identify p38alpha MAPK as a novel regulator of muscle atrophy and suggest that the suppression of intracellular signaling mediated by p38alpha MAPK serves as a potential target for the treatment of muscle atrophy.
The calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is a ubiquitous and central player in Ca(2+) signaling that is best known for its functions in the brain. In particular, the alpha isoform of CaMKII has been the subject of intense research and it has been established as a central regulator of neuronal plasticity. In contrast, little attention has been paid to CaMKIIbeta, the other predominant brain isoform that interacts directly with the actin cytoskeleton, and the functions of CaMKIIbeta in this organ remain largely unexplored. However, recently, the perturbation of CaMKIIbeta expression has been associated with multiple neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental diseases, highlighting CAMK2B as a gene of interest. Herein, after highlighting the main structural and expression differences between the alpha and beta isoforms, we will review the specific functions of CaMKIIbeta, as described so far, in neuronal development and plasticity, as well as its potential implication in brain diseases.
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMK2) is a key player in synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Mutations in Camk2a or Camk2b cause intellectual disability in humans, and severe plasticity and learning deficits in mice, indicating unique functions for each isoform. However, considering the high homology between CAMK2A and CAMK2B, it is conceivable that for critical functions, one isoform compensates for the absence of the other, and that the full functional spectrum of neuronal CAMK2 remains to be revealed.Here we show that germline as well as adult deletion of both CAMK2 isoforms in male or female mice is lethal. Moreover, Ca(2+)-dependent activity as well as autonomous activity of CAMK2 is essential for survival. Loss of both CAMK2 isoforms abolished LTP, whereas synaptic transmission remained intact. The double-mutants showed no gross morphological changes of the brain, and in contrast to the long-considered role for CAMK2 in the structural organization of the postsynaptic density (PSD), deletion of both CAMK2 isoforms did not affect the biochemical composition of the PSD. Together, these results reveal an essential role for CAMK2 signaling in early postnatal development as well as the mature brain, and indicate that the full spectrum of CAMK2 requirements cannot be revealed in the single mutants because of partial overlapping functions of CAMK2A and CAMK2B.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT CAMK2A and CAMK2B have been studied for over 30 years for their role in neuronal functioning. However, most studies were performed using single knock-out mice. Because the two isoforms show high homology with respect to structure and function, it is likely that some redundancy exists between the two isoforms, meaning that for critical functions CAMK2B compensates for the absence of CAMK2A and vice versa, leaving these functions to uncover. In this study, we generated Camk2a/Camk2b double-mutant mice, and observed that loss of CAMK2, as well as the loss of Ca(2+)-dependent and Ca(2+)-independent activity of CAMK2 is lethal. These results indicate that despite 30 years of research the full spectrum of CAMK2 functioning in neurons remains to be unraveled.
This study provides a comprehensive perspective on the deregulated pathways and impaired biological functions prevalent in human glioblastoma (GBM). In order to characterize differences in gene expression between individuals diagnosed with GBM and healthy brain tissue, we have designed and manufactured a specific, custom DNA microarray. The results obtained from differential gene expression analysis were validated by RT-qPCR. The datasets obtained from the analysis of common differential expressed genes in our cohort of patients were used to generate protein-protein interaction networks of functionally enriched genes and their biological functions. This network analysis, let us to identify 16 genes that exhibited either up-regulation (CDK4, MYC, FOXM1, FN1, E2F7, HDAC1, TNC, LAMC1, EIF4EBP1 and ITGB3) or down-regulation (PRKACB, MEF2C, CAMK2B, MAPK3, MAP2K1 and PENK) in all GBM patients. Further investigation of these genes and enriched pathways uncovered in this investigation promises to serve as a foundational step in advancing our comprehension of the molecular mechanisms underpinning GBM pathogenesis. Consequently, the present work emphasizes the critical role that the unveiled molecular pathways likely play in shaping innovative therapeutic approaches for GBM management. We finally proposed in this study a list of compounds that target hub of GBM-related genes, some of which are already in clinical use, underscoring the potential of those genes as targets for GBM treatment.
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have a notable role in the diagnosis and prognosis of cancer. However, the associations between lncRNA-related hub genes (LRHGs) expression and the corresponding outcomes have not been fully understood in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). Here, a total of 71 patients diagnosed with LUAD and 60 healthy volunteers at The First Affiliated Hospital of Huzhou University from April, 2023 to December, 2023 were enrolled in the present study. A LRHGs model was established using least absolute shrinkage and selection operator analyses of The Cancer Genome Atlas-LUAD datasets. The underlying mechanisms of the LRHGs were investigated via Gene Set Enrichment Analysis and Gene Set Variation Analysis. Additionally, the diagnostic role of serum HOXD cluster antisense RNA 2 (HOXD-AS2) was assessed by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. Lastly, TCGA-LUAD samples were divided into high- and low-HOXD-AS2 expression groups based on the median expression. The associations between HOXD-AS2 expression and miR-4538 as well as Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase Type II subunit Beta (CAMK2B) levels were conducted through Pearson correlation analysis. A comprehensive analysis identified 141 differentially expressed lncRNAs between 539 LUAD tissues and 59 normal samples. A prognostic marker for overall survival was established by constructing a predictive signature consisting of 9 LRHGs. Subsequently, 474 LUAD samples were categorized into a high or low-risk group based on the median of the risk score. An independent prognostic model was constructed to confirm the validity of this categorization. Further comparisons of the clinicopathological features and LRHG-related pathways were performed between the two groups. Examinations of LRHG expression in two LUAD clusters and of the association between LRHG expression and immune infiltration were also conducted. HOXD-AS2 expression was shown to be elevated in LUAD tissues compared with matched normal tissues, and the serum HOXD-AS2 level was also notably increased in LUAD samples compared with healthy controls. The results of the ROC analysis indicated that the sensitivity and specificity of HOXD-AS2 were higher than that of cytokeratin-19 fragment (CYFRA21-1), which is a serum marker for LUAD. Pearson analyses indicated that miR-4538 level was negatively associated with HOXD-AS2 expression, but CAMK2B level showed positive correlation in LUAD. The results of the present study therefore indicated that the constructed LRHG model, particularly HOXD-AS2, could independently diagnose and predict the prognosis of LUAD, which suggested the underlying mechanism of the HOXD-AS2/miR-4538/CAMK2B, and might offer efficient strategies for LUAD treatment.
BACKGROUND: Myotonic Dystrophy type I (DM1) is the most common muscular dystrophy in adults. Previous reports have highlighted that neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) deteriorate in skeletal muscle from DM1 patients and mouse models thereof. However, the underlying pathomechanisms and their contribution to muscle dysfunction remain unknown. METHODS: We compared changes in NMJs and activity-dependent signalling pathways in HSA(LR) and Mbnl1(DeltaE3/DeltaE3) mice, two established mouse models of DM1. RESULTS: Muscle from DM1 mouse models showed major deregulation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases II (CaMKIIs), which are key activity sensors regulating synaptic gene expression and acetylcholine receptor (AChR) recycling at the NMJ. Both mouse models exhibited increased fragmentation of the endplate, which preceded muscle degeneration. Endplate fragmentation was not accompanied by changes in AChR turnover at the NMJ. However, the expression of synaptic genes was up-regulated in mutant innervated muscle, together with an abnormal accumulation of histone deacetylase 4 (HDAC4), a known target of CaMKII. Interestingly, denervation-induced increase in synaptic gene expression and AChR turnover was hampered in DM1 muscle. Importantly, CaMKIIbeta/betaM overexpression normalized endplate fragmentation and synaptic gene expression in innervated Mbnl1(DeltaE3/DeltaE3) muscle, but it did not restore denervation-induced synaptic gene up-regulation. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that CaMKIIbeta-dependent and -independent mechanisms perturb synaptic gene regulation and muscle response to denervation in DM1 mouse models. Changes in these signalling pathways may contribute to NMJ destabilization and muscle dysfunction in DM1 patients.
To identify novel genes that are regulated by promoter methylation, a combinational approach involving in silico mining followed by molecular assay was performed. From the expression microarray data registered in the European bioinformatics institute (EBI), genes showing downregulation in breast cancer cells were initially screened and then selected by e-Northern analysis using the Unigene database. A series of these in silico methods identified CAMK2B and ARFGEF1 as candidates, and the two genes were revealed to be hypermethylated in breast cancer cell lines and hypomethylated in normal breast cell lines. Additionally, cancer cell lines showed downregulated expression of these genes. Furthermore, treatment of the cancer cell lines with a demethylation agent, 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine, recovered expression of CAMK2B and ARFGEF1, implying that hypermethyaltion silenced gene activity in cancer cells. Taken together, promoter methylations of CAMK2B and ARFGEF1 are novel epigenetic markers identified in breast cancer cell lines and can be utilized for the application to clinical cancer tissues.
Acitretin is an oral drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration that is commonly used to treat psoriasis. In recent years, acitretin has been identified as a candidate drug for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, but its role in neuronal development is still unclear. In this study, the human neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y was used as a model to study neuronal differentiation. We found that acitretin effectively promoted the differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells into neuronal cells and upregulated the expression of the neuronal marker beta-III tubulin and the mature neuronal marker NFH. Differentially expressed genes were identified by RNA sequencing and analyzed by bioinformatics approaches. The results showed that genes associated with neuron development-related pathways, such as SSPO and KCNT1, had significant changes in expression. Analysis showed that PRKCA and CAMK2B may play important roles in the process by which acitretin promotes neurodevelopment. Through whole-cell patch clamping and a microelectrode array assay, we found that acitretin-treated neurons generated electrical spikes similar to those generated by mature neurons. This study provided evidence to support an accessible and safe model of neuron-like cells and verified that acitretin can promote the differentiation of neurons and has the potential to treat brain tumors and neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases.
RESULTS: Abruption cases were more likely to experience preeclampsia, have shorter gestational age, and deliver infants with lower birthweight compared with controls. Models with MFGI effects provided improved fit than models with only maternal and fetal genotype main effects for SNP rs12530904 (p-value = 1.2e-04) in calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase [CaM kinase] II beta (CAMK2B), and, SNP rs73136795 (p-value = 1.9e-04) in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARG), both MB genes. We identified 320 SNPs in 45 maternally-imprinted genes (including potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily Q member 1 [KCNQ1], neurotrimin [NTM], and, ATPase phospholipid transporting 10 A [ATP10A]) associated with abruption. Top hits included rs2012323 (p-value = 1.6E-16) and rs12221520 (p-value1.3e-13) in KCNQ1, rs8036892 (p-value = 9.3E-17) and rs188497582 in ATP10A, rs12589854 (p-value = 2.9E-11) and rs80203467 (p-value = 4.6e-11) in maternally expressed 8, small nucleolar RNA host (MEG8), and rs138281088 in solute carrier family 22 member 2 (SLC22A2) (p-value = 6.8e-9). CONCLUSIONS: We identified novel PA-related maternal-fetal MB gene interactions and imprinting effects that highlight the role of the fetus in PA risk development. Findings can inform mechanistic investigations to understand the pathogenesis of PA.
