Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1S; Pore-forming, alpha-1S subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents in skeletal muscle. Calcium channels containing the alpha-1S subunit play an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle via their interaction with RYR1, which triggers Ca(2+) release from the sarcplasmic reticulum and ultimately results in muscle contraction. Long-lasting (L-type) calcium channels belong to the 'high-voltage activated' (HVA) group.
BACKGROUND: Azoospermia, characterized by the absence of spermatozoa in the ejaculate, affects approximately 1% of all men and 10 - 15% of infertile males, representing the most severe form of male infertility. It is classified into obstructive azoospermia (OA) and nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA), with the latter often resulting from unexplained failures in spermatogenesis. This study endeavored to clarify the molecular underpinnings of sper-matogenesis in NOA and to identify viable therapeutic targets. METHODS: We analyzed expression data from NOA and normal spermatogenesis samples obtained from the GEO database. Differential expression analysis was performed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). We then intersected these DEGs with genes known to be related to spermatogenesis to pinpoint spermatogenesis-related DEGs specific to NOA. Subsequent analyses, including gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichments, aimed to elucidate potential signaling pathways involved. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed to highlight hub genes, whose diagnostic potential was assessed by using ROC curve analysis. Additionally, miRNA and transcription factor (TF) regulatory network for hub genes were analyzed. The efficacy of identified hub genes as biomarkers was validated through RT-qPCR and Western blotting in a mouse model of NOA. RESULTS: This study identified 68 NOV-specific spermatogenesis-related genes. Enrichment analyses in GO and KEGG pathways highlighted their involvement in cellular processes related to reproduction in multicellular organism and endocrine and other factor-regulated calcium reabsorption. Seven hub genes were identified, with ROC curve analysis affirming their significant diagnostic value. Constructed networks revealed intricate interactions among miRNAs, hub genes, and TFs. CONCLUSIONS: We identified seven hub genes (CATSPER1, CATSPER3, CATSPER4, CATSPERG, OAZ3, ODF1, and SUN5) significantly associated with spermatogenesis in NOA, demonstrating their potential as biomarkers for diagnosing and monitoring the disease.
Sperm concentration and sperm motility are the two major causes of male infertility. Having spermatozoa in semen without motility or flagellum tail defect is a major concern needed to be investigated. The CatSper genes are the novel family of four sperm-specific Ca(2+)-permeable channels which plays an important role in sperm motility, acrosome reaction, sperm, and oocyte fusion. CatSper1, CatSper2, and CatSper3 are very well-studied genes for their role in asthenozoospermia, but the association of these genes with metabolic genes is still unstudied. Another unrevealed aspect is how ROS alter the function of CatSper genes. Among the Catsper family genes, the role of CatSper4 gene must be explored more. In this study, we have used the in silico approach to find the connection between the CatSper family gene with glycolytic genes and also the involvement of CATSPER4 protein in sperm flagellum using the STRING database. Connection of CATSPER1 protein with lipid metabolic gene is also found in Reactome database, and after that gene ontology of these genes was done by using DAVID and Enrichr databases. This analysis showed a strong interaction between CATSPER1, CATSPER2, and CATSPER3 protein with glycolytic protein (i.e., GAPDHS and PGK2), and CATSPER4 protein shows strong relation in the function of sperm flagellum. We also found a novel gene, i.e., APOB contributing to sperm motility. Gene ontology showed the role of APOB and glycolytic proteins in sperm motility. Enrichr analysis showed the association of APOB and glycolytic proteins in asthenozoospermia and CATSPER4 protein with sperm flagellum. Elsevier Pathway Collection also showed proteins involved in male infertility (i.e., GAPDHS). Therefore, we report the role of the CatSper4 gene in sperm tail function and the APOB novel gene involved in sperm motility. Understanding the molecular mechanism(s) of regulations of the CatSper family gene will help us to develop new therapeutic approaches in infertile males.
A number of physiological events, such as sperm hyperactivation, chemotaxis towards the egg, capacitation and acrosome reaction, are triggered by activation of sperm ion channels in response to a diverse range of chemical cues. Cation channel of sperm (CatSper), a sperm-specific ion channel, is unique in orchestrating the events for fertilization, and seems to be exclusively evolved for sperm function and male fertility. CatSper acts as a polymodal, chemosensory calcium channel and plays a vital role in the regulation of sperm hyperactivation. CatSper knockout models and application of patch clamp recordings have shown that it is indispensable for male fertility, and mutations and deletions in CatSper gene(s) may lead to infertility. In fact, mutations in CatSper1 and 2 have been identified in infertile individuals; however, CatSper3 and 4 have not been explored. Restricted localization and expression of CatSper in sperm offer an added advantage to developing gamete-based safe non-hormonal contraceptives. This review concisely covers identification, structure, function, and mechanism of action of CatSper channels. The functional importance of this complex ion channel in sperm motility and male fertility is highlighted for further research on male fertility, infertility, and contraception.
BACKGROUND: CatSper1 and CatSper2 are two recently identified channel-like proteins, which show sperm specific expression patterns. Through targeted mutagenesis in the mouse, CatSper1 has been shown to be required for fertility, sperm motility and for cAMP induced Ca2+ current in sperm. Both channels resemble a single pore forming repeat from a four repeat voltage dependent Ca2+ /Na+ channel. However, neither CatSper1 or CatSper2 have been shown to function as cation channels when transfected into cells, singly or in conjunction. As the pore forming units of voltage gated cation channels form a tetramer it has been suggested that the known CatSper proteins require additional subunits and/or interaction partners to function. RESULTS: Using in silico gene identification and prediction techniques, we have identified two further members of the CatSper family, CatSper3 and Catsper4. Each carries a single channel-forming domain with the predicted pore-loop containing the consensus sequence TxDxW. Each of the new CatSper genes has evidence for expression in the testis. Furthermore we identified coiled-coil protein-protein interaction domains in the C-terminal tails of each of the CatSper channels, implying that CatSper channels 1,2,3 and 4 may interact directly or indirectly to form a functional tetramer. CONCLUSIONS: The topological and sequence relationship of CatSper1 and CatSper2 to the four repeat Ca2+ /Na+ channels suggested other members of this family may exist. We have identified a further two novel CatSper genes, conserved in both the human and mouse genomes. Furthermore, all four of the CatSper proteins are predicted to contain a common coiled-coil protein-protein interaction domain in their C-terminal tail. Coupled with expression data this leads to the hypothesis that the CatSper proteins form a functional hetero-tetrameric channel in sperm.
OBJECTIVE: To find novel genetic causes of asthenozoospermia by comprehensively screening known candidate genes derived from mouse models. DESIGN: Case-control study. SETTING: A fertility center based in an academic hospital. PATIENT(S): Thirty men with isolated asthenozoospermia. INTERVENTION(S): Screening nine candidate genes for mutations: ADCY10, AKAP4, CATSPER1, CATSPER2, CATSPER3, CATSPER4, GAPDHS, PLA2G6, and SLC9A10. To account for a possible effect of heterozygous mutations, assessing imprinting of all candidate genes by studying the expression pattern of heterozygous SNPs in testis biopsies of five unrelated men. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Mutations found in patients only. RESULT(S): We identified 10 heterozygous asthenozoospermia-specific mutations in ADYC10 (n = 2), AKAP4 (n =1), CATSPER1 (n = 1), CATSPER2 (n = 1), CATSPER3 (n = 1), CATSPER4 (n = 3), and PLA2G6 (n = 1). These mutations were distributed over six patients. In silico analysis showed that 8 of the 10 mutations either had a negative BLOSUM score, were located in conserved residues, and/or were located in a functional domain. Expression analysis demonstrated that CATSPER1 and CATSPER4 are imprinted. CONCLUSION(S): Given their putative effect on protein structure, their location in conserved sequences or functional domains, and their absence in controls, the identified mutations may be a cause of asthenozoospermia in humans.
BACKGROUND: Sperm ion channel proteins (CatSpers) are essential for sperm hyperactivated motility, and then penetration through the zona pellucida. The CatSper class of proteins have well been characterized in the mouse and human. However, such data for pigs are not available. In the present study, we cloned the porcine CatSper 1-4 genes, analysed their spatial expression in various organs and temporal expression in the testes from birth until sexual maturity in Meishan boars. METHODS: Rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) was performed to clone the full length cDNAs of porcine CatSper genes and bioinformatics analysis of inferred CatSper proteins was also determined. Various organs were collected from 150 day-old pigs to characterize the spatial expression of CatSper genes by qualitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and testes from birth to 150 day-old boars were sampled to detect the temporal expression of CatSper genes by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. RESULTS: The mRNA sequences of CatSper1 (2452 bp), CatSper2 (2038 bp), CatSper3 (1408 bp), and CatSper4 (1799 bp), including full length of cDNAs, 5' and 3' flanks, were obtained. The bioinformatics analysis indicated that coding regions spanning the ion transport domains were conserved for different species analyzed. Among the four CatSpers, CatSper2, 3, and 4 were more conserved across species, compared with CatSper1. In addition, six conservative trans-membrane domains, a pore forming motif, and a coiled-coil motif were also identified. The spatial analysis from different organs showed that CatSper1 was detected in both testes and hypothalamus, CatSper2 was restricted in testes only, CatSper4 was expressed in testes and rete testes; whereas CatSper3 was more ubiquitously. CatSper3 and CatSper4 transcripts were also detected in ejaculated sperm. At Days 1 and 30 of age, CatSper mRNAs exhibited only sparse expression in the testes. However, these transcripts highly expressed at Day 60 and onward till sexual maturity (Day 150 of age). CONCLUSIONS: The spatial and temporal expression profiles of CatSper genes were reported herein for the first time in pigs. CatSper1, CatSper2 and CatSper4 were primarily expressed in testes, while CatSper3 transcript was prevalent in a variety of organs. CatSper3 and CatSper4 mRNAs were present in mature sperm cells. Substantial upregulation of CatSper genes was initiated at Day 60 and maintained this marked production until sexual maturity.
Recent genome-wide (GW) scans have identified several independent loci affecting human stature, but their contribution through the different skeletal components of height is still poorly understood. We carried out a genome-wide scan in 12,611 participants, followed by replication in an additional 7,187 individuals, and identified 17 genomic regions with GW-significant association with height. Of these, two are entirely novel (rs11809207 in CATSPER4, combined P-value = 6.1x10(-8) and rs910316 in TMED10, P-value = 1.4x10(-7)) and two had previously been described with weak statistical support (rs10472828 in NPR3, P-value = 3x10(-7) and rs849141 in JAZF1, P-value = 3.2x10(-11)). One locus (rs1182188 at GNA12) identifies the first height eQTL. We also assessed the contribution of height loci to the upper- (trunk) and lower-body (hip axis and femur) skeletal components of height. We find evidence for several loci associated with trunk length (including rs6570507 in GPR126, P-value = 4x10(-5) and rs6817306 in LCORL, P-value = 4x10(-4)), hip axis length (including rs6830062 at LCORL, P-value = 4.8x10(-4) and rs4911494 at UQCC, P-value = 1.9x10(-4)), and femur length (including rs710841 at PRKG2, P-value = 2.4x10(-5) and rs10946808 at HIST1H1D, P-value = 6.4x10(-6)). Finally, we used conditional analyses to explore a possible differential contribution of the height loci to these different skeletal size measurements. In addition to validating four novel loci controlling adult stature, our study represents the first effort to assess the contribution of genetic loci to three skeletal components of height. Further statistical tests in larger numbers of individuals will be required to verify if the height loci affect height preferentially through these subcomponents of height.
Mammalian spermatozoa comprises both coding and non-coding RNAs, which are traditionally believed to be a residual of spermatogenesis. The differential expression level of spermatozoal RNAs is also observed between fertile and infertile human, thereby anticipated as potential molecular marker of male fertility. This study investigated the transcriptome profile of goat (Capra hircus) spermatozoa. The sperm transcriptome was analyzed by three different methods viz. RLM-RACE, long-read RNA sequencing (RNAseq) in Nanopore platform, and short-read RNAseq in Illumina platform. The Illumina sequencing discovered 16,604 transcripts with 357 mRNAs having FPKM (fragments per kilobase per million mapped reads) of more than five. The spermatozoal RNA suite included mRNA (94%), rRNA (3%), miscRNA (1%), circRNA (1%), miRNA (1%), etc. This study also predicted circRNAs (127), lncRNAs (655), and imprinted genes (160) that have potential role in male reproduction. The gene ontology analysis revealed the involvement of spermatozoal RNA in regulating male meiosis (TET3, STAT5B), capacitation (ACRBP, CATSPER4), sperm motility (GAS8, TEKT2), spermatogenesis (ADAMTS2, CREB3L4), etc. The spermatozoal RNA were also associated with different biological pathways viz. Wnt signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway, AMPK signaling pathway, and MAPK signaling pathways having potential role in spermatogenesis. Overall, this study enlightened the suite of spRNA transcripts in goat and their relevance in male fertility for diagnostic approach.
CatSper is a voltage-dependent calcium channel located in the plasma membrane of the sperm flagellum and is responsible for triggering hyperactive motility. A homology model for the transmembrane region was built in which the arrangement of the subunits around the pseudo-four-fold symmetry axis was deduced by the pairing of conserved transmembranal cysteines across mammals. Directly emergent of the predicted quaternary structure is an architecture in which tetramers polymerize through additional, highly conserved cysteines, creating one or more double-rows channels extending the length of the principal piece of the mammalian sperm tail. The few species that are missing these cysteines are eusocial or otherwise monogamous, suggesting that sperm competition is selective for a disulfide-crosslinked macromolecular architecture. The model suggests testable hypotheses for how CatSper channel opening might behave in response to pH, 2-arachidonoylglycerol, and mechanical force. A flippase function is hypothesized, and a source of the concomitant disulfide isomerase activity is found in CatSper-associated proteins beta, delta and epsilon.
