Platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for homodimeric PDGFB and PDGFD and for heterodimers formed by PDGFA and PDGFB, and plays an essential role in the regulation of embryonic development, cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, chemotaxis and migration. Plays an essential role in blood vessel development by promoting proliferation, migration and recruitment of pericytes and smooth muscle cells to endothelial cells. Plays a role in the migration of vascular smooth muscle cells and the formation of neointima at v [...] 
Cobalamin (Cbl, vitamin B12) consists of a corrinoid structure with cobalt in the centre of the molecule. Neither humans nor animals are able to synthesize this vitamin. Foods of animal source are the only natural source of cobalamin in human diet. There are only two enzymatic reactions in mammalian cells that require cobalamin as cofactor. Methylcobolamin is a cofactor for methionine synthase. The enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA-mutase requires adenosylcobalamin as a cofactor. Therefore, serum concentrations of homocysteine (tHcy) and methylmalonic acid (MMA) will increase in cobalamin deficiency. The cobalamin absorption from diet is a complex process that involves different proteins: haptocorrin, intrinsic factor and transcobalamin (TC). Cobalamin that is bound to TC is called holotranscobalamin (holoTC) which is the metabolically active vitamin B12 fraction. HoloTC consists 6 and 20% of total cobalamin whereas 80% of total serum cobalamin is bound to another binding protein, haptocorrin. Cobalamin deficiency is common worldwide. Cobalamin malabsorption is common in elderly subjects which might explain low vitamin status. Subjects who ingest low amount of cobalamin like vegetarians develop vitamin deficiency. No single parameter can be used to diagnose cobalamin deficiency. Total serum cobalamin is neither sensitive nor it is specific for cobalamin deficiency. This might explain why many deficient subjects would be overlooked by utilizing total cobalamin as status marker. Concentration of holotranscobalamin (holoTC) in serum is an earlier marker that becomes decreased before total serum cobalamin. Concentrations of MMA and tHcy increase in blood of cobalamin deficient subjects. Despite limitations of these markers in patients with renal dysfunction, concentrations of MMA and tHcy are useful functional markers of cobalamin status. The combined use of holoTC and MMA assays may better indicate cobalamin status than either of them. Because Cbl deficiency is a risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases an early diagnosis of a low B12 status is required which should be followed by an effective treatment in order to prevent irreversible damages.
Binding of external factors to cell membrane receptors triggers intracellular signalling pathways that ultimately determine if the cell proliferates, differentiates or undergoes apoptosis. Activated receptors also initiate a cascade of events, called negative receptor signalling, that decreases the amplitude of positive signals and modulates the level of cell stimulation. Recent studies have revealed that negative signalling by receptor tyrosine kinases involves coordinated action of ubiquitin ligases (i.e. Cbl), adaptor proteins (i.e. Grb2 and CIN85), inhibitory molecules (i.e. Sprouty), cytoplasmic kinases (i.e. activated Cdc42-associated kinase) and phosphoinositol metabolites. These inhibitory signals are essential for normal cell functioning, and their deregulation often results in human diseases.
Casitas B lineage lymphoma (c-Cbl) is a multifunctional protein with a ubiquitin E3 ligase activity capable of degrading diverse sets of proteins. Although previous work had focused mainly on c-Cbl mutations in humans with hematological malignancies, recent emerging evidence suggests a critical role of c-Cbl in angiogenesis and human solid organ tumors. The combination of its unique structure, modular function, and ability to channelize cues from a rich network of signaling cascades, empowers c-Cbl to assume a central role in these disease models. This review consolidates the structural and functional insights based on recent studies that highlight c-Cbl as a target with tantalizing therapeutic potential in various models of angiogenesis and tumorigenesis.
Highly homologous E3 ubiquitin ligases, Cbl and Cbl-b, mediate ubiquitination of EGF receptor (EGFR), leading to its endocytosis and lysosomal degradation. Cbl and Cbl-b, are thought to function in a redundant manner by binding directly to phosphorylated Y1045 (pY1045) of EGFR and indirectly via the Grb2 adaptor. Unexpectedly, we found that inducible expression of Cbl or Cbl-b mutants lacking the E3 ligase activity but fully capable of EGFR binding does not significantly affect EGFR ubiquitination and endocytosis in human oral squamous cell carcinoma (HSC3) cells which endogenously express Cbl-b at a relatively high level. Each endogenous Cbl species remained associated with ligand-activated EGFR in the presence of an overexpressed counterpart species or its mutant, although Cbl-b overexpression partially decreased Cbl association with EGFR. Binding to pY1045 was the preferential mode for Cbl-b:EGFR interaction, whereas Cbl relied mainly on the Grb2-dependent mechanism. Overexpression of the E3-dead mutant of Cbl-b slowed down EGF-induced degradation of active EGFR, while this mutant and a similar mutant of Cbl did not significantly affect MAPK/ERK1/2 activity. EGF-guided chemotaxis migration of HSC3 cells was diminished by overexpression of the E3-dead Cbl-b mutant but was not significantly affected by the E3-dead Cbl mutant. By contrast, the inhibitory effect of the same Cbl mutant on the migration of OSC-19 cells expressing low Cbl-b levels was substantially stronger than that of the Cbl-b mutant. Altogether, our data demonstrate that Cbl and Cbl-b may operate independently through different modes of EGFR binding to jointly control receptor ubiquitination, endocytic trafficking, and signaling.
This review focuses on the Cbl-b muscle atrophy-associated ubiquitin ligase and its inhibitors. Herein, the role of E3 ubiquitin ligase-associated muscle atrophy genes (atrogenes), including MAFbx-1/agrogin-1 and MuRF-1, as well as another ubiquitin ligase, Cbl-b and its inhibitors, is discussed. Cbl-b plays an important role in unloading muscle atrophy caused by spaceflight and in bedridden patients: Cbl-b ubiquitinated and induced the degradation of IRS-1, a key intermediate in the IGF-1 signaling. Furthermore, a pentapetpide (DGpYMP), inhibited Cbl-b-mediated IRS-1 ubiquitination. This peptide-based Cbl-b inhibitor Cblin and its homologous peptides in foods presumably affect muscle atrophy under such conditions.
BACKGROUND: Mounting evidences shows that the ubiquitin‒proteasome pathway plays a pivotal role in tumor progression. The expression of 26S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory subunit 9 (PSMD9) is correlated with recurrence and radiotherapy resistance in several tumor types. However, the role and mechanism of PSMD9 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression remain largely unclear. METHODS: PSMD9 was identified as a prognosis-related biomarker for HCC based on analysis of clinical characteristics and RNA-seq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and the JP Project of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC-LIRI-JP). PSMD9 expression was analyzed in cancer tissues and adjacent noncancerous tissues via immunohistochemistry and Western blotting. Multiple in vivo and in vitro experimental techniques (such as CCK-8, colony formation, EdU, and Transwell assays; flow cytometry; Western blotting; quantitative RT-PCR; Coimmunoprecipitation assay and immunofluorescence confocal imaging) were used to assess the functions of PSMD9 in the pathogenesis of HCC. RESULTS: We found that the expression of PSMD9 was upregulated and associated with a poor prognosis in HCC patients. PSMD9 promoted HCC cell proliferation, migration, invasion and metastasis. Knockdown of PSMD9 significantly inhibited HCC cell proliferation by inducing G1/S cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that PSMD9 promoted HCC cell proliferation and metastasis via direct interaction with the E3 ubiquitin ligase c-Cbl, suppresses EGFR ubiquitination, influenced EGFR endosomal trafficking and degradation and subsequently activated ERK1/2 and Akt signaling. In addition, we showed that PSMD9 knockdown sensitized HCC cells to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib in vitro and in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our results indicate that PSMD9 drives HCC progression and erlotinib resistance by suppressing c-Cbl mediated EGFR ubiquitination and therefore can be a potential therapeutic target for HCC.
Vitamin B12, the "antipernicious anaemia factor", is a crystallisable cobalt-complex, which belongs to a group of unique "complete" corrinoids, named cobalamins (Cbl). In humans, instead of the "vitamin", two organometallic B12-forms are coenzymes in two metabolically important enzymes: Methyl-cobalamin, the cofactor of methionine synthase, and coenzyme B12 (adenosyl-cobalamin), the cofactor of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase. The cytoplasmatic methionine synthase catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from N-methyl-tetrahydrofolate to homocysteine to yield methionine and to liberate tetrahydrofolate. In the mitochondrial methylmalonyl-CoA mutase a radical process transforms methylmalonyl-CoA (a remains e.g. from uneven numbered fatty acids) into succinyl-CoA, for further metabolic use. In addition, in the human mitochondria an adenosyl-transferase incorporates the organometallic group of coenzyme B12. In all these enzymes, the bound B12-derivatives engage (or are formed) in exceptional organometallic enzymatic reactions. This chapter recapitulates the physiological chemistry of vitamin B12, relevant in the context of the metabolic transformation of B12-derivatives into the relevant coenzyme forms and their use in B12-dependent enzymes.
Obesity causes type 2 diabetes, atherosclerosis and cardiovascular diseases by inducing systemic insulin resistance. It is now recognized that obesity is related to chronic low-grade inflammation in adipose tissue. Specifically, activated immune cells infiltrate adipose tissue and cause inflammation. There is increasing evidence that activated macrophages accumulate in the hypertrophied adipose tissue of rodents and humans and induce systemic insulin resistance by secreting inflammatory cytokines. Accordingly, a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying macrophage activation in adipose tissue will facilitate the development of new therapeutic strategies. Currently, little is known about the regulation of macrophage activation, although E3 ubiquitin ligase Casitas B-lineage lymphoma (Cbl)-b was identified recently as a novel negative regulator of macrophage activation in adipose tissue. Cbl-b, which is a suppressor of T- and B-cell activation, inhibits intracellular signal transduction by targeting some tyrosine kinases. Notably, preventing Cbl-b-mediated macrophage activation improves obesity-induced insulin resistance in mice. c-Cbl is another member of the Cbl family that is associated with insulin resistance in obesity. These reports suggest that Cbl-b and c-Cbl are potential therapeutic targets for treating obesity-induced insulin resistance. In this review, we focus on the importance of Cbl-b in macrophage activation in aging-induced and high-fat diet-induced obesity.
Cbl proteins are ubiquitin ligases and multifunctional adaptor proteins that are implicated in the regulation of signal transduction in various cell types and in response to different stimuli. Cbl-associated proteins can assemble together at a given time or space inside the cell, and such an interactome can form signal competent networks that control many physiological processes. Dysregulation of spatial or temporal constraints in the Cbl interactome results in the development of human pathologies such as immune diseases, diabetes and cancer.
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clonal disorders characterized by increased production of mature blood cells. Philadelphia chromosome-negative MPNs (Ph-MPNs) consist of polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET), and primary myelofibrosis (PMF). A number of stem cell derived mutations have been identified in the past 10 years. These findings showed that JAK2V617F, as a diagnostic marker involving JAK2 exon 14 with a high frequency, is the best molecular characterization of Ph-MPNs. Somatic mutations in an endoplasmic reticulum chaperone, named calreticulin (CALR), is the second most common mutation in patients with ET and PMF after JAK2 V617F mutation. Discovery of CALR mutations led to the increased molecular diagnostic of ET and PMF up to 90%. It has been shown that JAK2V617F is not the unique event in disease pathogenesis. Some other genes' location such as TET oncogene family member 2 (TET2), additional sex combs-like 1 (ASXL1), casitas B-lineage lymphoma proto-oncogene (CBL), isocitrate dehydrogenase 1/2 (IDH1/IDH2), IKAROS family zinc finger 1 (IKZF1), DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A), suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS), enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), tumor protein p53 (TP53), runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) and high mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) have also identified to be involved in MPNs phenotypes. Here, current molecular biology and genetic mechanisms involved in MNPs with a focus on the aforementioned factors is presented.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signal modulates cell proliferation, migration, and survival. Aberrant activation of EGFR constitutes the major cause of various cancers. Receptor ubiquitination and degradation mediated by CBL proteins play negative regulatory roles and control the intensity and duration of the signaling. With the construction of stable cell lines inducibly expressing FLAG-tagged CBL or CBLB, we identified 102 and 82 stable interacting proteins of CBL and CBLB, respectively, through the affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (AP-MS) approach. Time-resolved profiling at six different time points combined with functional annotations of the temporal interactomes provides insights into the dynamic assembly of signal proteins upon EGFR signaling activation. Comparison between the interactomes of CBL and CBLB indicates their redundant but also complementary functions. Importantly, we validated the stable association of EPS15L1 and ITSN2 and temporal association of TNK2 to both CBL and CBLB through biochemical assays. Collectively, these results offer a useful resource for CBL and CBLB interactomes and highlight their prominent and diverse roles in the EGFR signaling network.
Casitas B-lineage lymphoma proto-oncogene-b (Cbl-b), a RING finger E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase, has been demonstrated to play a crucial role in establishing the threshold for T-cell activation and controlling peripheral T-cell tolerance via multiple mechanisms. Accumulating evidence suggests that Cbl-b also regulates innate immune responses and plays an important role in host defense to pathogens. Understanding the signaling pathways regulated by Cbl-b in innate and adaptive immune cells is therefore essential for efficient manipulation of Cbl-b in emerging immunotherapies for human disorders such as autoimmune diseases, allergic inflammation, infections, and cancer. In this article, we review the latest developments in the molecular structural basis of Cbl-b function, the regulation of Cbl-b expression, the signaling mechanisms of Cbl-b in immune cells, as well as the biological function of Cbl-b in physiological and pathological immune responses in animal models and human diseases.
Cellular uptake of vitamin B12-cisplatin conjugates was estimated via detection of their metal constituents (Co, Pt, and Re) by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Vitamin B12 (cyano-cob(iii)alamin) and aquo-cob(iii)alamin [Cbl-OH2](+), which differ in the beta-axial ligands (CN(-) and H2O, respectively), were included as control samples. The results indicated that B12 derivatives delivered cisplatin to both cellular cytosol and nuclei with an efficiency of one third compared to the uptake of free cisplatin cis-[Pt(II)Cl2(NH3)2]. In addition, uptake of charged B12 derivatives including [Cbl-OH2](+), [Co-CN-cis-PtCl(NH3)2](+), [Re-Co-CN-cis-PtCl(NH3)2](+), and [Co-CN-trans-Pt(Cyt)(NH3)2](2+) (Cyt = cytarabin) was high compared to neutral B12, which implied the existence of an additional internalization pathway for charged B12 vitamin analogs. The affinities of the charged B12 derivatives to the B12 transporters HC, IF and TC were similar to that of native vitamin B12.
Cbl was originally discovered in 1989 as the cellular homolog of the v-Cbl oncogene, the transforming gene of the Cas NS-1 murine retrovirus that causes myeloid leukemia and lymphomas in mice. Cbl is a member of a family of RING finger ubiquitin ligases that negatively regulate signaling by tyrosine kinases and that function as adaptor proteins to regulate signaling positively. Until the past 2 years, there was little evidence that Cbl proteins were involved in human malignancies. Recent publications have shown homozygous mutations in Cbl in human myeloid neoplasms. Although in vitro and animal transformation models suggested that mutant forms of Cbl acted as an oncogene, the cellular role suggested that the protein could serve as a tumor suppressor gene. The recent data begin to reconcile this paradox as the loss of ubiquitin ligase function (the tumor suppressor function) is coupled to the maintenance of the positive signaling function (the oncogene function). These data also provide insight into potential therapeutic approaches to myeloid disorders harboring Cbl mutations.
The E3 ubiquitin ligases Cbl has been found play an important role in regulating cellular proliferation and migration. Whereas, the excessive differentiation of osteoclast and/or its overexpressing of resorptive functions could lead the pathological bone homeostasis by overly bone matrix degradation. Since the first time of the important role of Cbl in the regulating osteoclast differentiation (also named osteoclastogenesis) has been reported in decades ago. The extensively studies have been conducted for in-depth exploring Cbl's definite role during osteoclastogenesis, as well as its cross talking with other signaling pathways (such as: Src and PI3K signaling) in bone homeostasis. Herein, our current study aims to briefly conclude the current studies of osteoclastogenesis and the regulatory role of Cbl, as well as its cross-talking in bone homeostasis.
Next generation sequencing has shown the frequent occurrence of point mutations in the ubiquitin E3 ligase c-Cbl in myeloid malignancies. Mouse models revealed a causal contribution of c-Cbl for the onset of such neoplasms. The point mutations typically cluster in the linker region and RING finger domain and affect both alleles by acquired uniparental disomy. The fast progress in the detection of c-Cbl mutations is contrasted by our scarce knowledge on their functional consequences. The c-Cbl protein displays several enzymatic functions by promoting the attachment of differentially composed ubiquitin chains and of the ubiquitin-like protein NEDD8 to its target proteins. In addition, c-Cbl functions as an adapter protein and undergoes phosphorylation-dependent inducible conformation changes. Studies on the impact of c-Cbl mutations on its functions as a dynamic and versatile adapter protein, its interactomes and on its various enzymatic activities are now important to allow the identification of druggable targets within the c-Cbl signaling network.
Receptors of the EGF receptor or ErbB family of growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases are frequently overexpressed in a variety of solid tumours, and the aberrant activation of their tyrosine kinase activities is thought to contribute to tumour growth and progression. Much effort has been put into developing inhibitors of ErbB receptors, and both antibody and small-molecule approaches have exhibited clinical success. Recently, a number of endogenous negative regulatory proteins have been identified that suppress the signalling activity of ErbB receptors in cells. These include intracellular RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligases such as cbl and Nrdp1 that mediate ErbB receptor degradation, and may include a wide variety of secreted and transmembrane proteins that suppress receptor activation by growth factor ligands. It will be of interest to determine the extent to which tumour cells suppress these pathways to promote their progression, and whether restoration of endogenous receptor-negative regulatory pathways may be exploited for therapeutic benefit.
Cellular organization of the cytoskeleton, assembly of intracellular signaling complexes and movement of membrane receptors into supramolecular activation complexes (SMACs) are crucial prerequisites for lymphocyte activation and function. Full T-cell activation requires costimulatory signals in addition to antigen-mediated signals. Costimulatory signals facilitate T-cell activation by inducing SMAC formation, resulting in sustained signal transduction, cell-cycle progression and cytokine production. The guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav1 and the Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) regulate the actin cytoskeleton in T cells and also regulate SMAC formation. In mice lacking the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b, the Vav-WASP signaling pathway is active in the absence of costimulation resulting in deregulated cytoskeletal reorganization, enhanced priming and expansion of autoreactive T cells, and the development of autoimmunity. This review discusses the role of Cbl-b, Vav and WASP in the regulation of SMAC formation and the implications for the maintenance of tolerance and the development of autoimmunity.
We sought to determine the relationship between age-related clonal hematopoiesis (CH) and chronic kidney disease (CKD). CH, defined as mosaic chromosome abnormalities (mCA) and/or driver mutations was identified in 5449 (2.9%) eligible UK Biobank participants (n = 190,487 median age = 58 years). CH was negatively associated with glomerular filtration rate estimated from cystatin-C (eGFR.cys; beta = -0.75, P = 2.37 x 10(-4)), but not with eGFR estimated from creatinine, and was specifically associated with CKD defined by eGFR.cys < 60 (OR = 1.02, P = 8.44 x 10(-8)). In participants without prevalent myeloid neoplasms, eGFR.cys was associated with myeloid mCA (n = 148, beta = -3.36, P = 0.01) and somatic driver mutations (n = 3241, beta = -1.08, P = 6.25 x 10(-5)) associated with myeloid neoplasia (myeloid CH), specifically mutations in CBL, TET2, JAK2, PPM1D and GNB1 but not DNMT3A or ASXL1. In participants with no history of cardiovascular disease or myeloid neoplasms, myeloid CH increased the risk of adverse outcomes in CKD (HR = 1.6, P = 0.002) compared to those without myeloid CH. Mendelian randomisation analysis provided suggestive evidence for a causal relationship between CH and CKD (P = 0.03). We conclude that CH, and specifically myeloid CH, is associated with CKD defined by eGFR.cys. Myeloid CH promotes adverse outcomes in CKD, highlighting the importance of the interaction between intrinsic and extrinsic factors to define the health risk associated with CH.
Minute doses of a complex cofactor cobalamin (Cbl, vitamin B12) are essential for metabolism. The nutritional chain for humans includes: (1) production of Cbl by bacteria in the intestinal tract of herbivores; (2) accumulation of the absorbed Cbl in animal tissues; (3) consumption of food of animal origin. Most biological sources contain both Cbl and its analogues, i.e. Cbl-resembling compounds physiologically inactive in animal cells. Selective assimilation of the true vitamin requires an interplay between three transporting proteins - haptocorrin (HC), intrinsic factor (IF), transcobalamin (TC) - and several receptors. HC is present in many biological fluids, including gastric juice, where it assists in disposal of analogues. Gastric IF selectively binds dietary Cbl and enters the intestinal cells via receptor-mediated endocytosis. Absorbed Cbl is transmitted to TC and delivered to the tissues with blood flow. The complex transport system guarantees a very efficient uptake of the vitamin, but failure at any link causes Cbl-deficiency. Early detection of a negative B12 balance is highly desirable to prevent irreversible neurological damages, anaemia and death in aggravated cases. The review focuses on the molecular mechanisms of cobalamin transport with emphasis on interaction of corrinoids with the specific proteins and protein-receptor recognition. The last section briefly describes practical aspects of recent basic research concerning early detection of B12-related disorders, medical application of Cbl-conjugates, and purification of corrinoids from biological samples.
