E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase CBL-C; Acts as an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase, which accepts ubiquitin from specific E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, and then transfers it to substrates promoting their degradation by the proteasome. Functionally coupled with the E2 ubiquitin-protein ligases UB2D1, UB2D2 and UB2D3. Regulator of EGFR mediated signal transduction; upon EGF activation, ubiquitinates EGFR. Isoform 1, but not isoform 2, inhibits EGF stimulated MAPK1 activation. Promotes ubiquitination of SRC phosphorylated at 'Tyr-419'. In collaboration with CD2AP may act as regulatory checkpoi [...] 
BACKGROUND: Remethylation defects are rare inherited disorders in which impaired remethylation of homocysteine to methionine leads to accumulation of homocysteine and perturbation of numerous methylation reactions. OBJECTIVE: To summarise clinical and biochemical characteristics of these severe disorders and to provide guidelines on diagnosis and management. DATA SOURCES: Review, evaluation and discussion of the medical literature (Medline, Cochrane databases) by a panel of experts on these rare diseases following the GRADE approach. KEY RECOMMENDATIONS: We strongly recommend measuring plasma total homocysteine in any patient presenting with the combination of neurological and/or visual and/or haematological symptoms, subacute spinal cord degeneration, atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome or unexplained vascular thrombosis. We strongly recommend to initiate treatment with parenteral hydroxocobalamin without delay in any suspected remethylation disorder; it significantly improves survival and incidence of severe complications. We strongly recommend betaine treatment in individuals with MTHFR deficiency; it improves the outcome and prevents disease when given early.
INTRODUCTION: Combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria, cblC type is an inborn error of intracellular cobalamin metabolism and the most common one. The age of onset ranges from prenatal to adult. The disease is characterised by an elevation of methylmalonic acid (MMA) and homocysteine and a decreased production of methionine. The aim is to review existing scientific literature of all late onset cblC patients in terms of clinical symptoms, diagnosis, and outcome. METHODS: A bibliographic database search was undertaken in PubMed (MEDLINE) complemented by a reference list search. We combined search terms regarding cblC disease and late onset. Two review authors performed the study selection, data extraction and quality assessment. RESULTS: Of the sixty-five articles included in this systematic review, we collected a total of 199 patients. The most frequent clinical symptoms were neuropathy/myelopathy, encephalopathy, psychiatric symptoms, thrombotic microangiopathy, seizures, kidney disease, mild to severe pulmonary hypertension with heart failure and thrombotic phenomena. There were different forms of supplementation used in the different studies collected and, within these studies, some patients received several treatments sequentially and/or concomitantly. The general outcome was: 64 patients recovered, 78 patients improved, 4 patients did not improve, or the disease progressed, and 12 patients died. CONCLUSIONS: Most scientific literature regarding the late onset cblC disease comes from case reports and case series. In most cases treatment initiation led to an improvement and even recovery of some patients. The lack of complete recovery underlines the necessity for increased vigilance in unclear clinical symptoms for cblC disease.
Cobalamin (vitamin B(12)) is required for activity of the enzymes methylmalonyl-CoA mutase and methionine synthase in human cells. Inborn errors affecting cobalamin uptake or metabolism are characterized by accumulation of the substrates for these enzymes, methylmalonic acid and homocysteine, in blood and urine. Inborn errors affecting synthesis of the adenosylcobalamin coenzyme required by methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (cblA and cblB) result in isolated methylmalonic aciduria; inborn errors affecting synthesis of the methylcobalamin coenzyme required by methionine synthase (cblE and cblG) result in isolated homocystinuria. Combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria is seen in patients with impaired intestinal cobalamin absorption (intrinsic factor deficiency, Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome) and with defects affecting synthesis of both cobalamin coenzymes (cblC, cblD, cblF and cblJ). A series of disorders caused by pathogenic variant mutations affecting gene regulators (transcription factors) of the MMACHC gene have recently been described (HCFC1 [cblX disorder] and deficiencies of THAP11, and ZNF143 [the cblK disorder]).
BACKGROUND: We sought to analyse MMACHC variants among 126 pedigrees with cobalamin (cbl) C deficiency and combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria by Sanger sequencing, characterize the spectrum of MMACHC gene variants, and perform prenatal genetic diagnosis by chorionic villus sampling among these pedigrees. METHODS: Peripheral blood was collected from 126 probands and their parents who visited the Genetic Counseling Clinic at our hospital between January 2014 and December 2017, and DNA was extracted from the blood. Then, we amplified the coding sequence and splicing regions of the MMACHC gene by PCR, and the PCR products were further sequenced to detect the variants in each pedigree. In 62 families, pregnant women were subjected to chorionic villus sampling for prenatal genetic diagnosis. RESULTS: In total, 31 distinct variants were detected in the 126 pedigrees, and the most frequent variants were c.609G > A (p.Trp203Ter), c.658_660delAAG (p.Lys220del), c.567dupT (p.Ile190Tyrfs*13) and c.80A > G (p.Gln27Arg). Two of these variants have not been previously reported in the literature. One variant [c.463_465delGGG (p.Gly155del)] is a small-scale deletion, and the other variant [c.637G>T(p.Glu213Ter)] is a nonsense mutation. Among the 62 pedigrees who received a prenatal diagnosis, 16 foetuses were normal, 34 foetuses were carriers of heterozygous variants, and the remaining 12 foetuses harboured compound heterozygous variants or homozygous variants. Couples whose foetuses were normal or carriers continued the pregnancy, whereas couples whose foetuses harboured compound heterozygous variants or homozygous variants decided to terminate the pregnancy. The follow-up results were consistent with the prenatal diagnosis. CONCLUSIONS: Two novel MMACHC variants were identified, and prenatal genetic diagnosis is an accurate and convenient method that helps avoid the delivery of combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria patients.
Cbl has emerged as a novel signal transducing protein downstream of a number of cell surface receptors coupled to tyrosine kinases. Identified as the protein product of the c-cbl proto-oncogene, the cellular homolog to the transforming gene of a murine retrovirus, Cbl comprises an N-terminal transforming region (Cbl-N), which contains a phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain, and a C-terminal modular region (Cbl-C) containing a RING finger motif, a large proline-rich region and a leucine zipper. Deletion of Cbl-C or small deletions N-terminal to the RING finger render Cbl oncogenic, whereas wild type Cbl is non-transforming, even if overexpressed. Cbl serves as a substrate of both receptor and non-receptor tyrosine kinases, and binds to adaptor proteins Grb2, Crk and the p85 subunit of PI-3-kinase. Additionally, both Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila Cbl homologs, SLI-1 and D-Cbl, respectively, have been identified as negative regulators of the LET-23/DER receptor tyrosine kinases. Finally, oncogenic mutants of Cbl, when expressed in fibroblasts, upregulate the signaling cascade downstream of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha in a Cbl-PTB domain-dependent manner. Together, these findings position Cbl as a central player in the regulation of tyrosine kinase signaling pathways. Identification of the Cbl-PTB domain binding motifs on tyrosine kinases and elucidation of the mechanisms of Cbl's negative regulatory effect may provide a new avenue to control tyrosine kinases for therapeutic purposes.
Vitamin B(12) (cobalamin, Cbl, B(12)) is a water-soluble micronutrient synthesized exclusively by a group of microorganisms. Human beings are unable to make B(12) and thus obtain the vitamin via intake of animal products, fermented plant-based foods or supplements. Vitamin B(12) obtained from the diet comprises three major chemical forms, namely hydroxocobalamin (HOCbl), methylcobalamin (MeCbl) and adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl). The most common form of B(12) present in supplements is cyanocobalamin (CNCbl). Yet, these chemical forms cannot be utilized directly as they come, but instead, they undergo chemical processing by the MMACHC protein, also known as CblC. Processing of dietary B(12) by CblC involves removal of the upper-axial ligand (beta-ligand) yielding the one-electron reduced intermediate cob(II)alamin. Newly formed cob(II)alamin undergoes trafficking and delivery to the two B(12)-dependent enzymes, cytosolic methionine synthase (MS) and mitochondrial methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT). The catalytic cycles of MS and MUT incorporate cob(II)alamin as a precursor to regenerate the coenzyme forms MeCbl and AdoCbl, respectively. Mutations and epimutations in the MMACHC gene result in cblC disease, the most common inborn error of B(12) metabolism, which manifests with combined homocystinuria and methylmalonic aciduria. Elevation of metabolites homocysteine and methylmalonic acid occurs because the lack of an active CblC blocks formation of the indispensable precursor cob(II)alamin that is necessary to activate MS and MUT. Thus, in patients with cblC disease, vitamin B(12) is absorbed and present in circulation in normal to high concentrations, yet, cells are unable to make use of it. Mutations in seemingly unrelated genes that modify MMACHC gene expression also result in clinical phenotypes that resemble cblC disease. We review current knowledge on structural and functional aspects of intracellular processing of vitamin B(12) by the versatile protein CblC, its partners and possible regulators.
Combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria, cblC type, is stated to be the most common inborn error of intracellular cobalamin metabolism. The disorder can display a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations, spanning the prenatal period through late adulthood. While increased homocysteine concentrations and impaired methyl group metabolism may contribute to disease-related complications, the characteristic macular and retinal degeneration seen in many affected patients appears to be unique to cblC disease. The early detection of cblC disease by newborn screening mandates a careful assessment of therapeutic approaches and provides a new opportunity to improve the outcome of affected patients. The following article reviews the current knowledge on the complications, pathophysiology, and outcome of cblC disease in an effort to better guide clinical practice and future therapeutic trials.
Methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cobalamin C (cblC) type, is the most common genetic type of functional cobalamin (vitamin B(12)) deficiency. This metabolic disease is characterized by marked heterogeneity of neurocognitive disease (microcephaly, seizures, developmental delay, ataxia, hypotonia) and variable extracentral nervous system involvement (failure to thrive, cardiovascular, renal, ocular) manifesting predominantly early in life, sometimes during gestation. To enhance awareness and understanding of renal disease associated with cblC defect, we studied biochemical, genetic, clinical, and histopathological data from 36 patients. Consistent clinical chemistry features of renal disease were intravascular hemolysis, hematuria, and proteinuria in all patients, with nephrotic-range proteinuria observed in three. Renal function ranged from normal to renal failure, with eight patients requiring (intermittent) dialysis. Two thirds were diagnosed with atypical (diarrhea-negative) hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS). Renal histopathology analyses of biopsy samples from 16 patients revealed glomerular lesions typical of thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA). Treatment with hydroxycobalamin improved renal function in the majority, including three in whom dialysis could be withdrawn. Neurological sequelae were observed in 44 % and cardiopulmonary involvement in 39 % of patients, with half of the latter group demonstrating pulmonary hypertension. Mortality reached 100 % in untreated patients and 79 and 56 % in those with cardiopulmonary or neurological involvement, respectively. In all patients presenting with unclear intravascular hemolysis, hematuria, and proteinuria, cblC defect should be ruled out by determination of blood/plasma homocysteine levels and/or genetic testing, irrespective of actual renal function and neurological status, to ensure timely diagnosis and treatment.
Combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria, cblC type, is an inborn error of intracellular cobalamin metabolism with a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations that is stated to be the most common inherited disorder of cobalamin metabolism. This metabolic disease is caused by mutations in the MMACHC gene and results in impaired intracellular synthesis of adenosylcobalamin and methylcobalamin, cofactors for the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase and methionine synthase enzymes. Elevated methylmalonic acid and homocysteine with decreased methionine production are the biochemical hallmarks of this disorder. Awareness of the diverse clinical presentations associated with cblC disease is necessary to provide a timely diagnosis, to guide management of affected individuals and to establish a framework for the future treatment of individuals detected through expanded newborn screening. This article reviews the biochemistry, clinical presentations, genotype-phenotype correlations, diagnosis and management of cblC disease.
The causes of cobalamin (B12, Cbl) deficiency are multifactorial. Whether nutritional due to poor dietary intake, or functional due to impairments in absorption or intracellular processing and trafficking events, the major symptoms of Cbl deficiency include megaloblastic anemia, neurological deterioration and in extreme cases, failure to thrive and death. The common biomarkers of Cbl deficiency (hyperhomocysteinemia and methylmalonic acidemia) are extremely valuable diagnostic indicators of the condition, but little is known about the changes that occur at the protein level. A mechanistic explanation bridging the physiological changes associated with functional B12 deficiency with its intracellular processers and carriers is lacking. In this article, we will cover the effects of B12 deficiency in a cblC-disrupted background (also referred to as MMACHC) as a model of functional Cbl deficiency. As will be shown, major protein changes involve the cytoskeleton, the neurological system as well as signaling and detoxification pathways. Supplementation of cultured MMACHC-mutant cells with hydroxocobalamin (HOCbl) failed to restore these variants to the normal phenotype, suggesting that a defective Cbl processing pathway produces irreversible changes at the protein level.
Inherited homocystinurias, have in common, accumulation of homocysteine with subsequent neurotoxicity; they also encompass two distinctive clinical entities: classical homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency and the rare inborn errors of cobalamin and folate metabolism. In the latter group, remethylation disorders of homocysteine to methionine (chiefly CblC defect and 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase [MTHFR] deficiency) are by far the most frequently encountered situations. The natural history of CBS deficiency is relatively well known and described. Similarly, clinical presentations of remethylation defects are becoming better recognized and reported. Conversely, few data are available regarding treatment of these disorders, especially for remethylation defects. In this review, after an overview of the metabolic pathophysiology and the clinical features of inherited homocystinurias due to CBS deficiency, CblC defect, and MTHFR deficiency, we focus on present and prospective therapeutic approaches.
The current German newborn screening (NBS) panel includes 13 inherited metabolic diseases (IMDs). In addition, a NBS pilot study in Southwest Germany identifies individuals with propionic acidemia (PA), methylmalonic acidemia (MMA), combined and isolated remethylation disorders (e.g., cobalamin [cbl] C and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase [MTHFR] deficiency), cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency, and neonatal cbl deficiency through one multiple-tier algorithm. The long-term health benefits of screened individuals are evaluated in a multicenter observational study. Twenty seven screened individuals with IMDs (PA [N = 13], MMA [N = 6], cblC deficiency [N = 5], MTHFR deficiency [N = 2] and CBS deficiency [N = 1]), and 42 with neonatal cbl deficiency were followed for a median of 3.6 years. Seventeen screened IMD patients (63%) experienced at least one metabolic decompensation, 14 of them neonatally and six even before the NBS report (PA, cbl-nonresponsive MMA). Three PA patients died despite NBS and immediate treatment. Fifteen individuals (79%) with PA or MMA and all with cblC deficiency developed permanent, mostly neurological symptoms, while individuals with MTHFR, CBS, and neonatal cbl deficiency had a favorable clinical outcome. Utilizing a combined multiple-tier algorithm, we demonstrate that NBS and specialized metabolic care result in substantial benefits for individuals with MTHFR deficiency, CBS deficiency, neonatal cbl deficiency, and to some extent, cbl-responsive MMA and cblC deficiency. However, its advantage is less evident for individuals with PA and cbl-nonresponsive MMA. SYNOPSIS: Early detection through newborn screening and subsequent specialized metabolic care improve clinical outcomes and survival in individuals with MTHFR deficiency and cystathionine-beta-synthase deficiency, and to some extent in cobalamin-responsive methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) and cblC deficiency while the benefit for individuals with propionic acidemia and cobalamin-nonresponsive MMA is less evident due to the high (neonatal) decompensation rate, mortality, and long-term complications.
Cobalamin C deficiency (cblC) is the most common inborn error of vitamin B(12) metabolism. This autosomal recessive disease is due to mutations in MMACHC gene, encoding a cyanocobalamin decyanase. It leads to hyperhomocysteinemia associated with hypomethioninemia and methylmalonic aciduria. Two distinct phenotypes have been described : early-onset forms occur before the age of one year and are characterized by a severe multisystem disease associating failure to thrive to neurological and ophthalmological manifestations. They are opposed to late-onset forms, less severe and heterogeneous. CblC deficiency-associated kidney lesions remain poorly defined. Thirty-eight cases have been described. Age at initial presentation varied from a few days to 28 years. Most of the patients presented renal thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) associated with acute renal failure, and 21 patients presented typical lesions of renal thrombotic microangiopathy on kidney biopsy. Prognosis was poor, leading to death in the absence of treatment, and related to the severity of renal lesions in the early-onset forms. Late-onset disease had better prognosis and most of patients were weaned off dialysis after treatment initiation. We suggest that all the patients with renal TMA be screened for cobalamin metabolism disorder, regardless of age and even in the absence of neurological symptoms, to rapidly initiate the appropriate treatment.
Combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria (cblC) is the most common inborn error of intracellular cobalamin metabolism and due to mutations in Methylmalonic Aciduria type C and Homocystinuria (MMACHC). Recently, mutations in the transcriptional regulators HCFC1 and RONIN (THAP11) were shown to result in cellular phenocopies of cblC. Since HCFC1/RONIN jointly regulate MMACHC, patients with mutations in these factors suffer from reduced MMACHC expression and exhibit a cblC-like disease. However, additional de-regulated genes and the resulting pathophysiology is unknown. Therefore, we have generated mouse models of this disease. In addition to exhibiting loss of Mmachc, metabolic perturbations, and developmental defects previously observed in cblC, we uncovered reduced expression of target genes that encode ribosome protein subunits. We also identified specific phenotypes that we ascribe to deregulation of ribosome biogenesis impacting normal translation during development. These findings identify HCFC1/RONIN as transcriptional regulators of ribosome biogenesis during development and their mutation results in complex syndromes exhibiting aspects of both cblC and ribosomopathies.
Mutations in MMACHC cause cobalamin C disease (cblC, OMIM 277400), the commonest inborn error of vitamin B(12) metabolism. In cblC, deficient activation of cobalamin results in methylcobalamin and adenosylcobalamin deficiency, elevating methylmalonic acid (MMA) and total plasma homocysteine (tHcy). We retrospectively reviewed the medical files of seven cblC patients: three compound heterozygotes for the MMACHC (NM_015506.3) missense variant c.158T>C p.(Leu53Pro) in trans with the common pathogenic mutation c.271dupA (p.(Arg91Lysfs*14), "compounds"), and four c.271dupA homozygotes ("homozygotes"). Compounds receiving hydroxocobalamin intramuscular injection monotherapy had age-appropriate psychomotor performance and normal ophthalmological examinations. In contrast, c.271dupA homozygotes showed marked psychomotor retardation, retinopathy and feeding problems despite penta-therapy (hydroxocobalamin, betaine, folinic acid, l-carnitine and acetylsalicylic acid). Pretreatment levels of plasma and urine MMA and tHcy were higher in c.271dupA homozygotes than in compounds. Under treatment, levels of the compounds approached or entered the reference range but not those of c.271dupA homozygotes (tHcy: compounds 9.8-32.9 muM, homozygotes 41.6-106.8 (normal (N) < 14); plasma MMA: compounds 0.14-0.81 muM, homozygotes, 10.4-61 (N < 0.4); urine MMA: compounds 1.75-48 mmol/mol creatinine, homozygotes 143-493 (N < 10)). Patient skin fibroblasts all had low cobalamin uptake, but this was milder in compound cells. Also, the distribution pattern of cobalamin species was qualitatively different between cells from compounds and from homozygotes. Compared to the classic cblC phenotype presented by c.271dupA homozygous patients, c.[158T>C];[271dupA] compounds had mild clinical and biochemical phenotypes and responded strikingly to hydroxocobalamin monotherapy.
BACKGROUND: cblC defect is the most common type of methylmalonic acidemia in China. Patients with late-onset form (>1 year) are often misdiagnosed due to heterogeneous symptoms. This study aimed to describe clinical characteristics and evaluate long-term outcomes of Chinese patients with late-onset cblC defect. METHODS: A total of 85 patients with late-onset cblC defect were enrolled. Clinical data, including manifestations, metabolites, molecular diagnosis, treatment and outcome, were summarized and analyzed. RESULTS: The age of onset ranged from 2 to 32.8 years old (median age 8.6 years, mean age 9.4 years). The time between first symptoms and diagnosis ranged from a few days to 20 years (median time 2 months, mean time 20.7 months). Neuropsychiatric symptoms were presented as first symptoms in 68.2% of cases, which were observed frequently in schoolchildren or adolescents. Renal involvement and cardiovascular disease were observed in 20% and 8.2% of cases, respectively, which occurred with the highest prevalence in preschool children. Besides the initial symptoms, the disease progressed in most patients and cognitive decline became the most frequent symptom overall. The levels of propionylcarnitine, propionylcarnitine / acetylcarnitine ratio, methylmalonic acid, methylcitric acid and homocysteine, were decreased remarkably after treatment (P<0.001). Twenty-four different mutations of MMACHC were identified in 78 patients, two of which were novel. The c.482G>A variant was the most frequent mutated allele in this cohort (25%). Except for 16 patients who recovered completely, the remaining patients were still left with varying degrees of sequelae in a long-term follow-up. The available data from 76 cases were analyzed by univariate analysis and multivariate logistic regression analysis, and the results showed that the time from onset to diagnosis (OR = 1.025, P = 0. 024) was independent risk factors for poor outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of late-onset cblC defect is often delayed due to poor awareness of its various and nonspecific symptoms, thus having an adverse effect on the prognosis. It should be considered in patients with unexplained neuropsychiatric and other conditions such as renal involvement, cardiovascular diseases or even multiple organ damage. The c.482G>A variant shows the highest frequency in these patients. Prompt treatment appears to be beneficial.
BACKGROUND: Methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, CblC type (OMIM #277400) is the most common disorder of cobalamin intracellular metabolism, an autosomal recessive disease, whose biochemical hallmarks are hyperhomocysteinemia, methylmalonic aciduria and low plasma methionine. Despite being a well-recognized disease for pediatricians, there is scarce awareness of its adult presentation. A thorough analysis and discussion of cobalamin C defect presentation in adult patients has never been extensively performed. This article reviews the published data and adds a new case of the latest onset of symptoms ever described for the disease. RESULTS: We present the emblematic case of a 45-year-old male, describing the diagnostic odyssey he ventured through to get to the appropriate treatment and molecular diagnosis. Furthermore, available clinical, biochemical and molecular data from 22 reports on cases and case series were collected, resulting in 45 adult-onset CblC cases, including our own. We describe the onset of the disease in adulthood, encompassing neurological, psychiatric, renal, ophthalmic and thromboembolic symptoms. In all cases treatment with intramuscular hydroxycobalamin was effective in reversing symptoms. From a molecular point of view adult patients are usually compound heterozygous carriers of a truncating and a non-truncating variant in the MMACHC gene. CONCLUSION: Adult onset CblC disease is a rare disorder whose diagnosis can be delayed due to poor awareness regarding its presenting insidious symptoms and biochemical hallmarks. To avoid misdiagnosis, we suggest that adult onset CblC deficiency is acknowledged as a separate entity from pediatric late onset cases, and that the disease is considered in the differential diagnosis in adult patients with atypical hemolytic uremic syndromes and/or slow unexplained decline in renal function and/or idiopathic neuropathies, spinal cord degenerations, ataxias and/or recurrent thrombosis and/or visual field defects, maculopathy and optic disc atrophy. Plasma homocysteine measurement should be the first line for differential diagnosis when the disease is suspected. To further aid diagnosis, it is important that genes belonging to the intracellular cobalamin pathway are included within gene panels routinely tested for atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome and chronic kidney disorders.
Cobalamin C (Cbl-C) defect causes methylmalonic acidemia, homocystinuria, intellectual disability and visual impairment, despite treatment adherence. While international guidelines recommend parenteral hydroxocobalamin (OH-Cbl) as effective treatment, dose adjustments remain unclear. We assessed OH-Cbl therapy impact on biochemical, neurocognitive and visual outcomes in early-onset Cbl-C patients treated with different OH-Cbl doses over 3 years. Group A (n = 5), diagnosed via newborn screening (NBS), received high-dose OH-Cbl (median 0.55 mg/kg/day); Group B1 (n = 3), NBS-diagnosed, received low-dose OH-Cbl (median 0.09 mg/kg/day); Group B2 (n = 12), diagnosed on clinical bases, received low-dose OH-Cbl (median 0.06 mg/kg/day). Biochemical analyses revealed better values of homocysteine, methionine and methylmalonic acid in Group A compared to Group B1 (p < 0.01, p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively) and B2 (p < 0.001, p < 0.01 and p < 0.001, respectively). Neurodevelopmental assessment showed better outcome in Group A compared to low-dose treated Groups B1 and B2, especially in Developmental Quotient, Hearing and Speech and Performance subscales without significant differences between Group B2 and Group B1. Maculopathy was detected in 100%, 66% and 83% of patients in the three groups, respectively. This study showed that "high-dose" OH-Cbl treatment in NBS-diagnosed children with severe early-onset Cbl-C defect led to a significant improvement in the metabolic profile and in neurocognitive outcome, compared to age-matched patients treated with a "low-dose" regimen. Effects on maculopathy seem unaffected by OH-Cbl dosage. Our findings, although observed in a limited number of patients, may contribute to improve the long-term outcome of Cbl-C patients.
The E3 ubiquitin ligase is an important regulator of cell signaling and proteostasis and is tightly controlled in many diseases, including cancer. Our study aimed to investigate the biological role of the E3 ubiquitin ligase CBLC in breast cancer and elucidate the specific mechanistic network underlying CBLC-mediated target substrate degradation, cell proliferation and metastasis. Here, we showed that CBLC expression was higher in breast cancer tissues and cells than that in normal tissues and cells. Higher expression of CBLC predicted a better prognosis for breast cancer patients. CBLC inhibited the proliferation, migration and invasion of breast cancer cells. Co-IP and immunofluorescence co-localization assays demonstrated that CBLC interacted with CTTN in the cytoplasm. CBLC promoted the degradation of CTTN through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway without affecting its mRNA level. The inhibitory effect of CBLC on breast cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion could partly be reversed by CTTN. Taken together, our study clarified the biological role of CBLC as a tumor suppressor and discovered its functional substrate, providing a molecular basis for CBLC/CTTN as a potential therapeutic target in breast cancer.
