Cholecystokinin receptor type A; Receptor for cholecystokinin. Mediates pancreatic growth and enzyme secretion, smooth muscle contraction of the gall bladder and stomach. Has a 1000-fold higher affinity for CCK rather than for gastrin. It modulates feeding and dopamine-induced behavior in the central and peripheral nervous system. This receptor mediates its action by association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system.
Sex hormones exert a profound influence on gendered behaviors. How individual sex hormone-responsive neuronal populations regulate diverse sex-typical behaviors is unclear. We performed orthogonal, genetically targeted sequencing of four estrogen receptor 1-expressing (Esr1(+)) populations and identified 1,415 genes expressed differentially between sexes or estrous states. Unique subsets of these genes were distributed across all 137 transcriptomically defined Esr1(+) cell types, including estrous stage-specific ones, that comprise the four populations. We used differentially expressed genes labeling single Esr1(+) cell types as entry points to functionally characterize two such cell types, BNSTpr(Tac1/Esr1) and VMHvl(Cckar/Esr1). We observed that these two cell types, but not the other Esr1(+) cell types in these populations, are essential for sex recognition in males and mating in females, respectively. Furthermore, VMHvl(Cckar/Esr1) cell type projections are distinct from those of other VMHvl(Esr1) cell types. Together, projection and functional specialization of dimorphic cell types enables sex hormone-responsive populations to regulate diverse social behaviors.
Intelligence as an ability to reason, think abstractly and adapt effectively to the environment is a subject of research in the field of psychology, neurobiology, and in the last twenty years genetics as well. Genetical testing of twins carried out from XX century indicated heritebility of intelligence, therefore confirmed an influence of genetic factor on cognitive processes. Studies on genetic background of intelligence focus on dopaminergic (DRD2, DRD4, COMT, SLC6A3, DAT1, CCKAR) and adrenergic system (ADRB2, CHRM2) genes as well as, neutrofins (BDNF) and oxidative stress genes (LTF, PRNP). Positive effect of investigated gene polymorphism was indicated by variation c.957C>T DRD2 gene (if in polymorphic site is thymine), polymorphism c.472G>A COMT gene (presence of adenine) and also gene ADRB2 c.46A->G (guanine), CHRM2 (thymine in place c.1890A>T) and BDNF (guanine in place c.472G>A) Obtained results indicate that intelligence is a feature dependent not only on genetic but also an environmental factor.
The cholecystokinin (CCK) and gastrin families of peptides act as hormones and neuropeptides on central and peripheral CCK receptors to mediate secretion and motility in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract in the physiological response to a normal meal. CCK and its receptors are also widely distributed in the central nervous system (CNS) and contribute to the regulation of satiety, anxiety, analgesia, and dopamine-mediated behavior. Although the wide distribution, myriad number of functions, and reported pharmacological heterogeneity of CCK receptors would suggest a large number of receptor subtypes, the application of modern molecular biological techniques has identified two CCK receptors, CCK-A receptor (CCK-AR) and CCK-B receptor (CCK-BR), that mediate the actions of CCK and gastrin; gastrin receptors have been found to be identical to CCK-BR. CCK-AR, found predominantly in the GI system and select areas of the CNS, have high affinity for CCK and the nonpeptide antagonist L-364,718, whereas CCK-BR, found predominantly in the CNS and select areas of the GI system, have high affinity for CCK and gastrin and the nonpeptide antagonist L-365,260. Both CCK-AR and CCK-BR are highly conserved between species, although there is some tissue-specific variation in expression. Recombinant receptor expression faithfully reproduces the native receptor pharmacology and signal transduction pathways, allowing direct comparisons of receptor function between species as well as serving as a convenient source of receptor. Our present knowledge of the chromosomal localization, receptor gene structure, and primary sequence will allow further studies in disease association, receptor regulation, and structure-function analysis.
The cholecystokinin A receptor (CCKAR) is expressed predominantly in the gallbladder and small intestine in the digestive system, where it is responsible for CCK's regulation of gallbladder and small intestinal motility. The effect of CCKAR on small intestinal transit is a physiological response for regulating intestinal cholesterol absorption. The Cckar gene has been identified to be an important gallstone gene, Lith13, in inbred mice by a powerful quantitative trait locus analysis. Knockout of the Cckar gene in mice enhances cholesterol cholelithogenesis by impairing gallbladder contraction and emptying, promoting cholesterol crystallization and crystal growth, and increasing intestinal cholesterol absorption. Clinical and epidemiological studies have demonstrated that several variants in the CCKAR gene are associated with increased prevalence of cholesterol cholelithiasis in humans. Dysfunctional gallbladder emptying in response to exogenously administered CCK-8 is often found in patients with cholesterol gallstones, and patients with pigment gallstones display an intermediate degree of gallbladder motility defect. Gallbladder hypomotility is also revealed in some subjects without gallstones under several conditions: pregnancy, total parenteral nutrition, celiac disease, oral contraceptives and conjugated estrogens, obesity, diabetes, the metabolic syndrome, and administration of CCKAR antagonists. The physical-chemical, genetic, and molecular studies of Lith13 show that dysfunctional CCKAR enhances susceptibility to cholesterol gallstones through two primary mechanisms: impaired gallbladder emptying is a key risk factor for the development of gallbladder hypomotility, biliary sludge (the precursor of gallstones), and microlithiasis, as well as delayed small intestinal transit augments cholesterol absorption as a major source for the hepatic hypersecretion of biliary cholesterol and for the accumulation of excess cholesterol in the gallbladder wall that further worsens impaired gallbladder motor function. If these two defects in the gallbladder and small intestine could be prevented by the potent CCKAR agonists, the risk of developing cholesterol gallstones could be dramatically reduced.
There is increased interest in the Bn-receptor family because they are frequently over/ectopically expressed by tumors and thus useful as targets for imaging or receptor-targeted-cytotoxicity. The synthetic Bn-analog, [D-Tyr(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13), Nle(14)]Bn(6-14) [Univ.Lig] has the unique property of having high affinity for all three human BNRs (GRPR, NMBR, BRS-3), and thus could be especially useful for this approach. However, the molecular basis of this property is unclear and is the subject of this study. To accomplish this, site-directed mutagenesis was used after identifying potentially important amino acids using sequence homology analysis of all BnRs with high affinity for Univ.Lig compared to the Cholecystokinin-receptor (CCK(A)R), which has low affinity. Using various criteria 74 amino acids were identified and 101 mutations made in GRPR by changing each to those of CCK(A)R or to alanine. 22 GRPR mutations showed a significant decrease in affinity for Univ.Lig (>2-fold) with 2 in EC2[D97N, G112V], 1 in UTM6[Y284A], 2 in EC4[R287N, H300S] showing >10-fold decrease in Univ.Lig affinity. Additional mutations were made to explore the molecular basis for these changes. Our results show that high affinity for Univ.Lig by human Bn-receptors requires positively charged amino acids in extracellular (EC)-domain 4 and to a lesser extent EC2 and EC3 suggesting charge-charge interactions may be particularly important for determining the general high affinity of this ligand. Furthermore, transmembrane amino acids particularly in UTM6 are important contributing both charge-charge interactions as well as interaction with a tyrosine residue in close proximity suggesting possible receptor-peptide cation-pi or H-bonding interactions are also important for determining its high affinity.
Receptors for cholcystokinin (CCK) can be pharmacologically classified into at least two distinct subtypes, CCKAR and CCKBR. In an effort to determine whether the CCKA and CCKB receptors may be associated with certain CNS or gastrointestinal diseases, we have localized and compared the human and mouse chromosomal loci encoded by the CCKAR and CCKBR genes. The gene encoding the CCKA receptor maps to a syntenic region of human chromosome 4 and mouse chromosome 5. The CCKB receptor gene, on the other hand, resides on a syntenic region of human chromosome 11 and distal mouse chromosome 7. Localization of the CCK receptors with two dopamine receptors, DRD5 (4p15.1-p15.3) and DRD4 (11p15), provides the interesting possibility of coinvolvement in neuropsychiatric or CNS illnesses.
OBJECTIVE: Cholecystokinin (CCK) plays an important role in the functioning of the central nervous system via an interaction with dopamine and other neurotransmitters. The dopaminergic system has been implicated in the maladaptive behaviors associated with drugs of abuse (e.g., alcohol and cocaine). We analyzed genetic variations in the promoter and coding regions of the CCK, CCKA-receptor (CCKAR) and CCKB-receptor (CCKBR) genes, and performed association analyses with alcoholism. METHOD: A total of 214 Japanese male patients with alcoholism (93 with delirium tremens, 49 with hallucinations, 38 with seizures and 83 without any of these symptoms) and 98 age-matched Japanese male controls were examined using PCR-based Single Strand Conformational Polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. RESULTS: A total of 8 variants in the CCK gene, 11 variants in the CCKAR gene and 9 variants in the CCKBR gene were detected in the present study. Nominally significant differences between alcoholics and controls were found at the -85 locus of the CCKAR gene (p = .035). In addition, patients displaying hallucinations showed a higher frequency of the homozygous genotype of the allele (GT)8 at the -388 locus of the CCKAR gene (p = .042) and homo- and heterozygous genotypes of the T allele at the -333 locus (p = .025), relative to other patients. However, these differences were not significant after Bonferroni correction. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that polymorphisms of the CCK, CCKAR and CCKBR genes do not play a major role in alcohol withdrawal symptoms (even though significant associations were found among polymorphisms at the -388 and -333 loci of the CCKAR gene and hallucinations, the rate was nonsignificant after Bonferroni correction).
Reports of the stimulated release of extracellular vesicles (EVs) are few, and the mechanisms incompletely understood. To our knowledge, the possibility that the activation of any one of the multitudes of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) expressed by a single cell-type might increase EV release has not been explored. Recently, we identified the expression of cholecystokinin (CCK), gastrin, gastrin/cholecystokinin types A and/or B receptors (CCKAR and/or -BR), and the bitter taste receptor, TAS2R14 in the human and mouse placenta. specifically, trophoblast. These GPCR(s) were also expressed in four different human trophoblast cell lines. The current objective was to employ two of these cell lines-JAR choriocarcinoma cells and HTR-8/SVneo cells derived from first-trimester human villous trophoblast-to investigate whether CCK, TAS2R14 agonists, and other GPCR ligands would each augment EV release. EVs were isolated from the cell-culture medium by filtration and ultracentrifugation. The preparations were enriched in small EVs (<200 nm) as determined by syntenin western blot before and after sucrose gradient purification, phycoerythrin (PE)-ADAM10 antibody labeling, and electron microscopy. Activation of TAS2R14, CCKBR, cholinergic muscarinic 1 & 3, and angiotensin II receptors, each increased EV release by 4.91-, 2.79-, 1.87-, and 3.11-fold, respectively (all p < .05 versus vehicle controls), without significantly changing EV diameter. A progressive increase of EV concentration in conditioned medium was observed over 24 hr consistent with the release of preformed EVs and de novo biogenesis. Compared to receptor-mediated stimulation, EV release by the calcium ionophore, A23187, was less robust (1.63-fold, p = .08). Diphenhydramine, a TAS2R14 agonist, enhanced EV release in JAR cells at a concentration 10-fold below that required to increase intracellular calcium. CCK activation of HTR-8/SVneo cells, which did not raise intracellular calcium, increased EV release by 2.06-fold (p < .05). Taken together, these results suggested that other signaling pathways may underlie receptor-stimulated EV release besides, or in addition to, calcium. To our knowledge, the finding that the activation of multiple GPCRs can stimulate EV release from a single cell-type is unprecedented and engenders a novel thesis that each receptor may orchestrate intercellular communication through the release of EVs containing a subset of unique cargo, thus mobilizing a specific integrated physiological response by a network of neighboring and distant cells.
Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) is a rare genetically heterogeneous disease and characterized by incomplete or absent puberty and infertility. It is worth noting that partial IHH patients could recover reproductive endocrine function following treatment, which is termed reversal. This study aimed to investigate clinical and genetic characteristics of IHH reversal patients. A total of 141 IHH male patients were enrolled and followed up regularly. Their clinical and genetic features were collected and analysed to discover something in common in reversal cases. These IHH patients with a median age of 21 years (interquartile range: 18-24) were divided into reversal group (n = 13) and non-reversal group (n = 128). IL17RD, ERBB4, DLX5, EGFR, SEMA4D, B3GNT1 and CCKAR RSVs were demonstrated in reversal cases for the first time. Pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) RSVs consisted of 3 RSVs (one each patient, including PROKR2 p.W178S, EGFR p.G630R and CCKAR p.S291del) in reversal group. Reversal of IHH could not be ignored in clinical follow-up. Patients with high levels of basal LH and T may harbour more possibility of reversal and worthy extra attention to identify whether reversal occurs or not. Relapse after reversal also needs to be monitored.
Schizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder associated with atypical handedness and language lateralization. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these functional changes are still poorly understood. Therefore, the present study was aimed at investigating whether variation in schizophrenia-related genes modulates individual lateralization patterns. To this end, we genotyped 16 single nucleotide polymorphisms that have previously been linked to schizophrenia on a meta-analysis level in a sample of 444 genetically unrelated healthy participants and examined the association of these polymorphisms with handedness, footedness and language lateralization. We found a significant association of the cholecystokinin-A receptor (CCKAR) gene variation rs1800857 and language lateralization assessed using the dichotic listening task. Individuals carrying the schizophrenia risk allele C of this polymorphism showed a marked reduction of the typical left-hemispheric dominance for language processing. Since the cholecystokinin A receptor is involved in dopamine release in the central nervous system, these findings suggest that genetic variation in this receptor may modulate language lateralization due to its impact on dopaminergic pathways.
Cholecystokinin A receptor (CCK(A)R) belongs to family A G-protein-coupled receptors and regulates nutrient homeostasis upon stimulation by cholecystokinin (CCK). It is an attractive drug target for gastrointestinal and metabolic diseases. One distinguishing feature of CCK(A)R is its ability to interact with a sulfated ligand and to couple with divergent G-protein subtypes, including G(s), G(i) and G(q). However, the basis for G-protein coupling promiscuity and ligand recognition by CCK(A)R remains unknown. Here, we present three cryo-electron microscopy structures of sulfated CCK-8-activated CCK(A)R in complex with G(s), G(i) and G(q) heterotrimers, respectively. CCK(A)R presents a similar conformation in the three structures, whereas conformational differences in the 'wavy hook' of the Galpha subunits and ICL3 of the receptor serve as determinants in G-protein coupling selectivity. Our findings provide a framework for understanding G-protein coupling promiscuity by CCK(A)R and uncover the mechanism of receptor recognition by sulfated CCK-8.
DNA methylation plays an important role in the occurrence and development of age-related cataracts (ARC). This study aims to reveal potential epigenetic biomarkers of ARC by detecting modifications to the DNA methylation patterns of genes shown to be related to ARC by transcriptomics. The MethylationEPIC BeadChip (850 K) was used to analyze the DNA methylation levels in ARC patients and unaffected controls, and the Pearson correlation test was used to perform genome-wide integration analysis of DNA methylation and transcriptome data. The Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases were used to perform functional analysis of the whole genome, promoter regions (TSS1500/TSS200), and the associated differentially methylated genes (DMG). Pyrosequencing was used to verify the methylation levels of the selected genes. The results showed that, compared with the control group, a total of 52,705 differentially methylated sites were detected in the ARC group, of which 13,858 were hypermethylated and 38,847 were hypomethylated. GO and KEGG analyses identified functions related to the cell membrane, the calcium signaling pathway, and their possible molecular mechanisms. Then, 57 DMGs with negative promoter methylation correlations were screened by association analysis. Pyrosequencing verified that the ARC group had higher methylation levels of C3 and CCKAR and lower methylation levels of NLRP3, LEFTY1, and GPR35 compared with the control group. In summary, our study reveals the whole-genome DNA methylation patterns and gene expression profiles in ARC, and the molecular markers of methylation identified herein may aid in the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of ARC.
Cholecystokinin receptors, CCK(A)R and CCK(B)R, are important neurointestinal peptide hormone receptors and play a vital role in food intake and appetite regulation. Here, we report three crystal structures of the human CCK(A)R in complex with different ligands, including one peptide agonist and two small-molecule antagonists, as well as two cryo-electron microscopy structures of CCK(B)R-gastrin in complex with G(i2) and G(q), respectively. These structures reveal the recognition pattern of different ligand types and the molecular basis of peptide selectivity in the cholecystokinin receptor family. By comparing receptor structures in different conformational states, a stepwise activation process of cholecystokinin receptors is proposed. Combined with pharmacological data, our results provide atomic details for differential ligand recognition and receptor activation mechanisms. These insights will facilitate the discovery of potential therapeutics targeting cholecystokinin receptors.
Cholecystokinin (CCK) is a peptide hormone that functions in digestive organs and the CNS. We previously showed that CCK downregulates peripheral pruritus by suppressing degranulation of mast cells. In this study, we demonstrated that CCK octapeptide (CCK8) was constitutively expressed in the epidermis of normal skin, whereas its expression was lost in acanthotic lesions of psoriasis. In contrast, CCKA receptor (CCKAR), a high-affinity receptor for CCK, was constitutively expressed in the epidermis of psoriatic skin lesions. Expression of CCK was also reduced in skin lesions of an imiquimod (IMQ)-induced psoriatic mouse model. Notably, the expression level of CCK inversely correlated with the severity of epidermal inflammation, raising the possibility that CCK from epidermal keratinocytes suppresses the psoriatic inflammation. To verify this hypothesis, we investigated the effects of sulfated CCK octapeptide (CCK8S) on the development of IMQ-induced psoriatic inflammation. i.p. injection of CCK8S suppressed the IMQ-induced psoriatic inflammation accompanied by reduced mRNA expression of IL-17, IL-22, and IL-6 but not of IL-23. The suppressive effect of CCK8S was completely restored by administration of CCKAR antagonist. In vitro studies showed that exogenous CCK8S suppressed IL-6 production in CCKAR-expressing cultured human keratinocytes, and blocking the endogenous CCK signaling with CCKAR antagonist markedly enhanced IL-6 production. When keratinocytes were stimulated with IL-17, the expression of endogenous CCK was significantly decreased. These findings suggest that CCK physiologically functions as a negative regulator of keratinocyte-based inflammation in an autocrine or paracrine manner, although decreased CCK may pathologically contribute to continuous and aggravated skin lesions such as psoriasis.
BACKGROUND: Genetic and epigenetic variations may be an important contributer to altered eating behaviors in childhood which may lead to weight gain and obesity later in life. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate epigenetic as well as genetic associations with appetite in young children. SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Participants were 32 non-obese and 32 obese African-American children aged 5-6 years. Saliva was collected from each child, and RNA and DNA were extracted for analysis. Individuals were genotyped for eating- and obesity-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms in seven candidate genes (FTO, MAOA, SH2B1, LEPR, DNMT3B, BDNF and CCKAR), and DNA methylation levels were measured in the upstream promoter region of each. Transcript levels of MAOA and FTO were also assessed. The Children's Eating Behavior Questionnaire (CEBQ) was used to assess the aspects of appetite. Child obesity was assessed using measured height and weight, and percent body fat was measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. RESULTS: Food responsiveness was higher and satiety responsiveness was lower among obese than non-obese female children (P = 0.001 and P = 0.031), but did not differ among male children. Epigenetic analysis of the BDNF promoter revealed associations with altered satiety responsiveness among female children (P < 0.01). CONCLUSION: The findings provide new evidence of epigenetic associations with altered appetite among young African-American girls.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common functional gastrointestinal disorder. According to the Rome III criteria, IBS is defined as recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort for at least 3 d per month during the previous 3 mo associated with two or more of the following symptoms: improvement with defecation, onset associated with a change in the frequency of stool and/or onset associated with a change in form or appearance of stool. There is growing evidence regarding the genetic contribution in IBS, however the precise etiology of IBS is still unknown. The evaluation of the genetic influence is based on twin studies, familial aggregation and genetic epidemiological investigations. Most studies showed a concordance for IBS significantly greater in monozygotic than in dizygotic twins. The majority of the studies have shown that familial aggregation may represent exposures to a similar environment, as well as the influence of genetic factors. Whereas no specific gene has been identified in association with IBS, recent studies have noticed the importance of polymorphisms in the promoter region of the serotonin reuptake transporter gene, G-protein beta 3 subunit gene (C825T), cholecystokinin receptor (CCKAR gene 779T>C), and high-producer tumor necrosis factor genotype. Further studies are necessary to determine how genetic factors influence the clinical manifestations and therapeutical response in IBS patients.
In the present study, we investigated expression pattern of Cholecystokinin type A receptor (CCKAR) in relation to its commonly studied polymorphism (rs1800857, T/C) in gallstone disease (GSD) patients and controls. A total of 502 subjects (272 GSD and 230 controls) were enrolled, and genotyping was performed by evaluating restriction fragments of PstI digested DNA. For analyzing expression pattern of CCKAR in relation to polymorphism, gallbladder tissue samples from 80 subjects (GSD-55; control-25) were studied. Expression of CCKAR mRNA was evaluated by reverse transcriptase-PCR and confirmed using real-time PCR. Protein expression was evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. We observed significantly (p < 0.0001) lower expression of CCKAR mRNA and protein in GSD tissues as compared with control. Significantly higher frequency of A1/A1 genotype (C/T transition) (p = 0.0005) was observed for GSD as compared with control. Expression of CCKAR protein was found to be significantly lower (p < 0.0001) in A1/A1 genotype as compared with other genotypes for GSD patients. Perhaps, this is the first report providing evidence of alteration in CCKAR expression in relation to its polymorphism elucidating the molecular pathway of the disease. Additional investigations with lager sample size are needed to confirm these findings.
The present study focused on 91 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 21 candidate genes to find associations with major depressive disorder (MDD). In total, 160 healthy controls and 177 patients with MDD were studied. We applied arrayed primer extension (APEX) based genotyping technology followed by association and haplotype analysis. SNPs in CCKAR, DRD1, DRD2, and HTR2C genes showed nominally significant associations with MDD. None of these associations remained significant after adjustment for multiple testing. Haplotype analysis revealed CCKAR haplotypes to be associated with MDD (global p=0.004). More precisely, we found the GAGT haplotype to be associated with increased risk for MDD (OR 7.42, 95% CI 2.13-25.85, p=0.002). This haplotype effect remained significant after Bonferroni correction (p=0.04 after Bonferroni's adjustment). Altogether we were able to find some nominal associations, but due to small sample size these results should be taken as exploratory. However, the effect of GAGT haplotype on the CCKAR gene may be considered as increasing the risk for MDD.
Neurodevelopmental changes may underlie the brain dysfunction seen in schizophrenia. While advances have been made in our understanding of the genetics of schizophrenia, little is known about how non-genetic factors interact with genes for schizophrenia. The present analysis of genes potentially associated with schizophrenia is based on the observation that hypoxia prevails in the embryonic and fetal brain, and that interactions between neuronal genes, molecular regulators of hypoxia, such as hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), and intrinsic hypoxia occur in the developing brain and may create the conditions for complex changes in neurodevelopment. Consequently, we searched the literature for currently hypothesized candidate genes for susceptibility to schizophrenia that may be subject to ischemia-hypoxia regulation and/or associated with vascular expression. Genes were considered when at least two independent reports of a significant association with schizophrenia had appeared in the literature. The analysis showed that more than 50% of these genes, particularly AKT1, BDNF, CAPON, CCKAR, CHRNA7, CNR1, COMT, DNTBP1, GAD1, GRM3, IL10, MLC1, NOTCH4, NRG1, NR4A2/NURR1, PRODH, RELN, RGS4, RTN4/NOGO and TNF, are subject to regulation by hypoxia and/or are expressed in the vasculature. Future studies of genes proposed as candidates for susceptibility to schizophrenia should include their possible regulation by physiological or pathological hypoxia during development as well as their potential role in cerebral vascular function.
INTRODUCTION: Auditory hallucinations is one of the core symptoms of psychosis. Two main different approaches have been made in recent years in order to understand this perceptual abnormality. The psycho-social approaches is trying to explain auditory hallucinations as a common human phenomenon that only environmental factors cause them to be pathological. It propose psychotherapeutic techniques based on the cognitive model, paying special attention to the emotional component. The neurobiological approach, specially with neuroimaging techniques, is giving us new information about abnormal activation in specific neural networks, particularly in language areas. It propose biological treatments with antipsychotics and transcranial magnetic stimulation. Neither of these approaches are listening to each other. Neither of them look at the molecular genetic vulnerability to auditory hallucinations in psychosis. DEVELOPMENT: From a review of the literature and our own findings, we present a genetic-environmental model of auditory hallucinations in psychoses. We hypothesize two types of genetic vulnerability: vulnerability to hearing voices -that could be related with genes that are expressed in language areas and are related with language abnormalities (FOXP2)-, and vulnerability to abnormal emotional response to voices -that could be related with genes that are involved in the regulation of dopamine in the limbic system (5-HTT, CCK-AR)-. Finally, environmental and cultural factors explain the content and social adjustment to auditory hallucinations. CONCLUSION: Our model allow the integration of many data from epidemiology and neuroimaging, to psychopharmacology in the understanding of the aetiology of auditory hallucinations.
