Retinoic acid receptor alpha; Receptor for retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors bind as heterodimers to their target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9- cis retinoic acid, and regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RXR/RAR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5. In the absence of ligand, the RXR-RAR heterodimers associate with a multiprotein complex containing transcription corepressors that induce histone deacetylation, chromatin condensation and transcr [...] 
CC chemokines, a subfamily of 27 chemotactic cytokines, are a component of intercellular communication, which is crucial for the functioning of the tumor microenvironment. Although many individual chemokines have been well researched, there has been no comprehensive review presenting the role of all known human CC chemokines in the hallmarks of cancer, and this paper aims at filling this gap. The first part of this review discusses the importance of CCL1, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CCL18, CCL19, CCL20, CCL21, CCL25, CCL27, and CCL28 in cancer. Here, we discuss the significance of CCL2 (MCP-1), CCL7, CCL8, CCL11, CCL13, CCL14, CCL15, CCL16, CCL17, CCL22, CCL23, CCL24, and CCL26. The presentation of each chemokine includes its physiological function and then the role in tumor, including proliferation, drug resistance, migration, invasion, and organ-specific metastasis of tumor cells, as well as the effects on angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. We also discuss the effects of each CC chemokine on the recruitment of cancer-associated cells to the tumor niche (eosinophils, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC), tumor-associated macrophages (TAM), tumor-associated neutrophils (TAN), regulatory T cells (T(reg))). On the other hand, we also present the anti-cancer properties of CC chemokines, consisting in the recruitment of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL).
Rationale: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly heterogeneous and malignant disease with the complex immune microenvironment, which ultimately influence clinic outcomes of patients. However, the spatial expression patterns of diverse immune cells among tumor microenvironment remain to be further deciphered. Methods: Spatial transcriptomics sequencing (ST) was implemented on two portions of HCC specimens. Differentially expressed genes, cell cycle phases, epithelial-mesenchymal features, pseudo-time and immune infiltration analysis were applied to demonstrate the intratumor heterogeneity and define the specific immune-related regions, and the results were further validated by a second analysis on another ST study. In vitro and in vivo experiments were conducted to confirm the functional mechanisms of key molecules such as CCL15, CCL19 and CCL21. Clinical tissue samples were used to assess their potential prognostic and therapeutic values. Results: Totally, 7553 spots were categorized into 15 subsets by hierarchical clustering, and malignant subsets with intratumor heterogeneity phenotypes were identified. Spatial heterogeneity from distinct sectors highlights specific chemokines: CCL15 is remarkable in the core region of the carcinoma sector and facilitates the immunosuppressive microenvironment by recruiting and polarizing M2-like macrophages in vitro and in vivo; High expression of CCL15 and CD163 respectively predicts poor prognosis of HCC patients, and the combined application of them has better predictive value. CCL19 and CCL21, sharing similar spatial expression patterns, are highly-correlated and prominent in the immune infiltration enrichment and recruit CD3(+) T cells and CD20(+) B cells to inhibit the growth of HCC, indicating a good prognosis of HCC patients. Conclusions: Taken together, our studies preliminarily reveal intratumor heterogeneity of HCC based on ST techniques and unravel the previously unexplored spatial expression patterns in the immune microenvironment. We also highlight the clinical significance and spatial discrepancy of key molecules, providing novel insight for further developing therapeutic strategies in HCC.
Tumor microenvironment (TME) consists of a dynamic network of non-tumoral stromal cells, including cancer-associated fibroblasts, endothelial cells, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), B and T cells. In the TME, TAMs support tumor initiation, progression, invasion and metastasis by promoting angiogenesis and immunosuppression of the tumor cells. There is close crosstalk between TAMs and tumor cells. Notably, chemokines are a significant messenger mediating the crosstalk between tumor cells and TAMs. TAMs can promote tumor progression via secretion of chemokines. Various chemokines secreted by tumors are involved in the generation and polarization of TAMs, the infiltration of TAMs in tumors, and the development of TAMs' suppressive function. This paper reviews CCL2-CCR2, CCL3/5-CCR5, CCL15-CCR1, CCL18-CCR8, CX3CL1/CCL26-CX3CR1, CXCL8-CXCR1/2, CXCL12-CXCR4/CXCR7 signaling pathways, their role in the recruitment, polarization and exertion of TAMs, and their correlation with tumor development, metastasis and prognosis. Furthermore, we present the current research progress on modulating the effects of TAMs with chemokine antagonists and discuss the prospects and potential challenges of using chemokine antagonists as therapeutic tools for cancer treatment. The TAMs targeting by chemokine receptor antagonists in combination with chemotherapy drugs, immune checkpoint inhibitors or radiotherapy appears to be a promising approach.
Eosinophils are terminally differentiated cells derived from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bone marrow. Several studies have confirmed the effective roles of eosinophils in asthmatic airway pathogenesis. However, their regulatory functions have not been well elucidated. Here, increased C-C chemokine ligand 6 (CCL6) in asthmatic mice and the human orthologs CCL15 and CCL23 that are highly expressed in asthma patients are described, which are mainly derived from eosinophils. Using Ccl6 knockout mice, further studies revealed CCL6-dependent allergic airway inflammation and committed eosinophilia in the bone marrow following ovalbumin (OVA) challenge and identified a CCL6-CCR1 regulatory axis in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Eosinophil differentiation and airway inflammation were remarkably decreased by the specific CCR1 antagonist BX471. Thus, the study identifies that the CCL6-CCR1 axis is involved in the crosstalk between eosinophils and HSCs during the development of allergic airway inflammation, which also reveals a potential therapeutic strategy for targeting G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) for future clinical treatment of asthma.
Macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha was identified 15 years ago as the first of now four members of the MIP-1 CC chemokine subfamily. These proteins termed CCL3 (MIP-1alpha), CCL4 (MIP-1beta), CCL9/10 (MIP-1delta), and CCL15 (MIP-1gamma) according to the revised nomenclature for chemokines are produced by many cells, particularly macrophages, dendritic cells, and lymphocytes. MIP-1 proteins, which act via G-protein-coupled cell surface receptors (CCR1, 3, 5), e.g. expressed by lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages (MPhi), are best known for their chemotactic and proinflammatory effects but can also promote homoeostasis. The encouraging results of preclinical studies in murine models of inflammation, i.e. asthma, arthritis, or multiple sclerosis, have led to the development of potent CCR3 and 5 antagonists, some of which are currently being tested in first clinical trials.
Heart failure (HF) causes substantial morbidity and mortality but its pathobiology is incompletely understood. The proteome is a promising intermediate phenotype for discovery of novel mechanisms. We measured 4877 plasma proteins in 13,900 HF-free individuals across three analysis sets with diverse age, geography, and HF ascertainment to identify circulating proteins and protein networks associated with HF development. Parallel analyses in Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study participants in mid-life and late-life and in Trondelag Health Study participants identified 37 proteins consistently associated with incident HF independent of traditional risk factors. Mendelian randomization supported causal effects of 10 on HF, HF risk factors, or left ventricular size and function, including matricellular (e.g. SPON1, MFAP4), senescence-associated (FSTL3, IGFBP7), and inflammatory (SVEP1, CCL15, ITIH3) proteins. Protein co-regulation network analyses identified 5 modules associated with HF risk, two of which were influenced by genetic variants that implicated trans hotspots within the VTN and CFH genes.
BACKGROUND: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a major cause of chronic liver diseases and has emerged as the leading factor in the pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). MyD88 contributes to the development of HCC. However, the underlying mechanism by which MyD88 in myofibroblasts regulates NAFLD-associated liver cancer development remains unknown. RESULTS: Myofibroblast MyD88-deficient (SMA(MyD88-/-)) mice were protected from diet-induced obesity and developed fewer and smaller liver tumors. MyD88 deficiency in myofibroblasts attenuated macrophage M2 polarization and fat accumulation in HCC tissues. Mechanistically, MyD88 signaling in myofibroblasts enhanced CCL9 secretion, thereby promoting macrophage M2 polarization. This process may depend on the CCR1 receptor and STAT6/ PPARbeta pathway. Furthermore, liver tumor growth was attenuated in mice treated with a CCR1 inhibitor. CCLl5 (homologous protein CCL9 in humans) expression was increased in myofibroblasts of HCC and was associated with shorter survival of patients with HCC. Thus, our results indicate that MyD88 in myofibroblasts promotes NAFLD-related HCC progression and may be a promising therapeutic target for HCC treatment. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that MyD88 in myofibroblasts can promote nonalcoholic fatty liver disease-related hepatocarcinogenesis by enhancing macrophage M2 polarization, which might provide a potential molecular therapeutic target for HCC.
Airway inflammation is accompanied by infiltration of inflammatory cells and an abnormal response of airway smooth muscle. These cells secrete chemokines and express the cell surface chemokine receptors that play an important role in the migration and degranulation of inflammatory cells. Omalizumab is a monoclonal antibody directed against immunoglobulin E, and its blocking of IgE signaling not only reduces inflammatory cell infiltration mediated by the Th2 immune response but also inhibits other immune responses. The chemokine CCL15 is influenced by omalizumab, and the source of CCL15 has been reported to be airway smooth muscle cells and basophils. CCL15 binds to its receptor CCR1, which has been reported to be expressed by various inflammatory cells and also by airway smooth muscle cells. Therefore, CCL15/CCR1 signaling could be a target for the treatment of asthma. We review the role of CCL15 in the pathogenesis of asthma and also discuss the influence of IgE-mediated immunomodulation via CCL15 and its receptor CCR1.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) expand in tumor-bearing host. They suppress anti-tumor immune response and promote tumor growth. Chemokines play a vital role in recruiting MDSCs into tumor tissue. They can also induce the generation of MDSCs in the bone marrow, maintain their suppressive activity, and promote their proliferation and differentiation. Here, we review CCL2/CCL12-CCR2, CCL3/4/5-CCR5, CCL15-CCR1, CX3CL1/CCL26-CX3CR1, CXCL5/2/1-CXCR2, CXCL8-CXCR1/2, CCL21-CCR7, CXCL13-CXCR5 signaling pathways, their role in MDSCs recruitment to tumor tissue, and their correlation with tumor development, metastasis and prognosis. Targeting chemokines and their receptors may serve as a promising strategy in immunotherapy, especially combined with other strategies such as chemotherapy, cyclin-dependent kinase or immune checkpoints inhibitors.
OBJECTIVE: Chemokines, which are chemotactic inflammatory mediators involved in controlling the migration and residence of all immune cells, are closely associated with brain inflammation, recognized as one of the potential processes/mechanisms associated with cognitive impairment. We aim to determine the chemokines which are significantly altered in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI), as well as the respective effect sizes, by performing a meta-analysis of chemokines in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood (plasma or serum). METHODS: We searched three databases (Pubmed, EMBASE and Cochrane library) for studies regarding chemokines. The three pairwise comparisons were as follows: AD vs HC, MCI vs healthy controls (HC), and AD vs MCI. The fold-change was calculated using the ratio of mean (RoM) chemokine concentration for every study. Subgroup analyses were performed for exploring the source of heterogeneity. RESULTS: Of 2338 records identified from the databases, 61 articles comprising a total of 3937 patients with AD, 1459 with MCI, and 4434 healthy controls were included. The following chemokines were strongly associated with AD compared with HC: blood CXCL10 (RoM, 1.92, p = 0.039), blood CXCL9 (RoM, 1.78, p < 0.001), blood CCL27 (RoM, 1.34, p < 0.001), blood CCL15 (RoM, 1.29, p = 0.003), as well as CSF CCL2 (RoM, 1.19, p < 0.001). In the comparison of AD with MCI, there was significance for blood CXCL9 (RoM, 2.29, p < 0.001), blood CX3CL1 (RoM, 0.77, p = 0.017), and blood CCL1 (RoM, 1.37, p < 0.001). Of the chemokines tested, blood CX3CL1 (RoM, 2.02, p < 0.001) and CSF CCL2 (RoM, 1.16, p = 0.004) were significant for the comparison of MCI with healthy controls. CONCLUSIONS: Chemokines CCL1, CCL2, CCL15, CCL27, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CX3CL1 might be most promising to serve as key molecular markers of cognitive impairment, although more cohort studies with larger populations are needed.
As a key immune cell in the brain, microglia are essential for protecting the central nervous system (CNS) from viral infections, including HIV. Microglia possess functional Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), a key viral sensor for activating interferon (IFN) signaling pathway-mediated antiviral immunity. We, therefore, studied the effect of poly (I:C), a synthetic ligand of TLR3, on the activation of the intracellular innate immunity against HIV in human iPSC-derived microglia (iMg). We found that poly (I:C) treatment of iMg effectively inhibits HIV infection/replication at both mRNA and protein levels. Investigations of the mechanisms revealed that TLR3 activation of iMg by poly (I:C) induced the expression of both type I and type III IFNs. Compared with untreated cells, the poly (I:C)-treated iMg expressed significantly higher levels of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) with known anti-HIV activities (ISG15, MxB, Viperin, MxA, and OAS-1). In addition, TLR3 activation elicited the expression of the HIV entry coreceptor CCR5 ligands (CC chemokines) in iMg. Furthermore, the transcriptional profile analysis showed that poly (I:C)-treated cells had the upregulated IFN signaling genes (ISG15, ISG20, IFITM1, IFITM2, IFITM3, IFITM10, APOBEC3A, OAS-2, MxA, and MxB) and the increased CC chemokine signaling genes (CCL1, CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, and CCL15). These observations indicate that TLR3 is a potential therapy target for activating the intracellular innate immunity against HIV infection/replication in human microglial cells. Therefore, further studies with animal models and clinical specimens are necessary to determine the role of TLR3 activation-driven antiviral response in the control and elimination of HIV in infected host cells.
Hypoxia, i.e., oxygen deficiency condition, is one of the most important factors promoting the growth of tumors. Since its effect on the chemokine system is crucial in understanding the changes in the recruitment of cells to a tumor niche, in this review we have gathered all the available data about the impact of hypoxia on beta chemokines. In the introduction, we present the chronic (continuous, non-interrupted) and cycling (intermittent, transient) hypoxia together with the mechanisms of activation of hypoxia inducible factors (HIF-1 and HIF-2) and NF-kappaB. Then we describe the effect of hypoxia on the expression of chemokines with the CC motif: CCL1, CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CCL7, CCL8, CCL11, CCL13, CCL15, CCL16, CCL17, CCL18, CCL19, CCL20, CCL21, CCL22, CCL24, CCL25, CCL26, CCL27, CCL28 together with CC chemokine receptors: CCR1, CCR2, CCR3, CCR4, CCR5, CCR6, CCR7, CCR8, CCR9, and CCR10. To better understand the effect of hypoxia on neoplastic processes and changes in the expression of the described proteins, we summarize the available data in a table which shows the effect of individual chemokines on angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and recruitment of eosinophils, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC), regulatory T cells (T(reg)), and tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) to a tumor niche.
Macrophages play a multifaceted role in cancer biology, with both pro-tumorigenic and anti-tumorigenic functions. Understanding the mechanisms underlying macrophage involvement in cancer progression is essential for the development of therapeutic strategies. Our study analyzed single-cell RNA sequencing data from 12 patients with liver cancer and identified a subpopulation of macrophages characterized by elevated expression of SPP1, which correlates with poor prognosis in liver cancer patients. These SPP1(+) macrophages induce upregulation of tumor stemness through a vitronectin (VTN)-dependent paracrine mechanism. Mechanistically, VTN derived from SPP1(+) macrophages promote integrin alphavbeta5/adenosine 5'-monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK)/Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1)/SYR-box transcription factor 4 (SOX4) signaling, mediating liver tumor stemness and progression. Conversely, CCL15 produced by liver cancer cells drives polarization of M0 macrophages toward an SPP1(+) macrophage phenotype, establishing a positive feedback loop of macrophage-tumor stemness. Furthermore, the presence of SPP1(+) macrophages confers chemoresistance in liver cancer, and inhibition of the macrophage-tumor feedback loop through targeting integrin alphavbeta5/YAP1 signaling sensitizes liver cancer cells to chemotherapy. Our study highlights the crucial role of SPP1(+) macrophages in liver cancer progression, providing novel insights for clinical liver cancer therapy.
BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) is an indispensable progression factor in Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC). CCL15 could be a peculiar proteomic biomarker of HCC with tumorigenesis and tumor invasion. OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to explore the relationship between HBx and CCL15 expression in HCC. METHODS: HBV-positive HCC pathological tissue samples and corresponding adjacent non-tumor liver tissues were collected. The expression of HBx and CCL15 was analyzed by immunohistochemistry, real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), and western blot analysis in tissues or in vitro. RESULTS: The levels of CCL15 mRNA and protein expression in HCC samples were observably higher than those of adjacent non-tumor liver tissues. The CCL15 was significantly associated with the expression of HBx in HBV-positive HCC samples. The up-regulation of HBx induced CCL15 expression in vitro. The high expression score of CCL15 was significant associated with the poor prognosis of HCC patients. CONCLUSION: The CCL15 expression was observably associated with HBx in HCC patients. The CCL15 may be considered as an indicator in the clinical management of HBV-associated HCC.
BACKGROUND: Structural cells are an important reservoir of chemokines that coordinate the influx of various immune cells to the lungs of asthmatics. Airway smooth muscle cells (ASMC) are an important source of these chemokines. CCL15 is a recently described chemo-attractant for neutrophils, eosinophils, monocytes and lymphocytes. OBJECTIVE: To determine the production and the regulation of CCL15 by ASMC and to investigate its production in asthmatic airways. METHODS: Human ASMC were obtained from main bronchial airway segments of patients with mild, moderate and severe asthma. To induce chemokine production, cells were incubated with IL-4, IL-13, TNF-alpha or IFN-gamma in presence or absence of dexamethasone, mithramycin A (SP-1 inhibitor) or the IKK-2 inhibitor, AS602868. CCL15 mRNA expression was evaluated by real-time PCR. Immunoreactive CCL15 was detected by immuno-fluorescence and CCL15 protein concentration in the supernatant was measured using ELISA. RESULTS: CCL15 is constitutively expressed in human ASMC and is strongly up-regulated by TNF-alpha. This up-regulation is inhibited by dexamethasone, mithramycin A and AS602868. TNF-alpha-induced CCL15 levels can be synergistically enhanced by the presence of IFN-gamma, at both the transcriptional and translation level. This synergism is NF-kappaB-dependent. Asthmatic biopsies demonstrated higher expression of CCL15 compared with non-asthmatic controls. CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Our results show that ASMC are a potent source of CCL15 in the airways and may directly participate in the recruitment of inflammatory cells to asthmatic airways. Targeting the production of CCL15 by ASMC might reduce the inflammatory response within the airways of asthmatic patients.
INTRODUCTION: The role of tumour secretory cytokines and peripheral circulatory cytokines in tumour progression has received increasing attention; however, the role of tumour-related inflammatory cytokines in colorectal cancer (CRC) remains unclear. In this study, the concentrations of various cytokines in the peripheral blood of healthy controls and patients with CRC at different stages were compared. METHODS: Peripheral blood samples from 4 healthy participants and 22 colorectal cancer patients were examined. Luminex beads were used to evaluate concentration levels of 40 inflammatory cytokines in peripheral blood samples. RESULTS: In peripheral blood, compared with healthy controls and early stage (I + II) CRC patients, advanced CRC (III + IV) patients had increased concentrations of mononuclear/macrophage chemotactic-related proteins (CCL7, CCL8, CCL15, CCL2, and MIF), M2 polarization-related factors (IL-1beta, IL-4), neutrophil chemotactic and N2 polarization-related cytokines (CXCL2, CXCL5, CXCL6, IL-8), dendritic cells (DCs) chemotactic-related proteins (CCL19, CCL20, and CCL21), Natural killer (NK) cell related cytokines (CXCL9, CXCL10), Th2 cell-related cytokines (CCL1, CCL11, CCL26), CXCL12, IL-2, CCL25, and CCL27, and decreased IFN-gamma and CX3CL1 concentrations. The differential upregulation of cytokines in peripheral blood was mainly concentrated in CRC patients with distant metastasis and was related to the size of the primary tumour; however, there was no significant correlation between cytokine levels in peripheral blood and the propensity and mechanism of lymph node metastasis. DISCUSSION: Different types of immune cells may share the same chemokine receptors and can co-localise in response to the same chemokines and exert synergistic pro-tumour or anti-tumour functions in the tumour microenvironment. Chemokines and cytokines affect tumour metastasis and prognosis and may be potential targets for treatment.
The melanoma tumor microenvironment is a complex milieu of cancer, inflammatory, and stromal cells. In this context, chemokines play a pivotal role in recruiting inflammatory cells and influence the tumor, exerting both pro-tumorigenic and anti-tumoral roles. Interactions between these cells is what ultimately hold together and transform the tumor into an efficient machine. A recent study found that chemokines CCL8, CCL15, and CCL20 were upregulated in melanoma cells when co-cultured with macrophages and were associated with poor survival rates. CCL8 and CCL15 also stimulated melanoma cell growth, invasion, and metastasis, and were highly expressed in tumors prone to metastasize, suggesting these chemokines are attractive and independent biomarkers. Understanding the intricated interactions within the tumor microenvironment could lead to prognostic biomarkers and to the development of new therapeutic strategies for melanoma. (c) 2024 The Author(s). The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) represent a key factor in the tumor immune microenvironment (TME), exerting significant influence over tumor migration, invasion, immunosuppressive features, and drug resistance. Collagen triple helix repeat containing 1 (CTHRC1), a 30 KDa protein which was secreted during the tissue-repair process, is highly expressed in several malignant tumors, including colorectal cancer (CRC). Previous studies demonstrated that CTHRC1 expression in TAMs was positively correlated to M2 macrophage polarization and liver metastasis, while our discovery suggesting a novel mechanism that CTHRC1 secreted from cancer cell could indirectly interplay with TAMs. In this study, the high expression level of CTHRC1 was evaluated in CRC based on GEO and TCGA databases. Further, CTHRC1 was detected high in all stages of CRC patients by ELISA and was correlated to poor prognosis. Multispectral imaging of IHC demonstrated that M2 macrophage infiltration was increased accompanied with CTHRC1 enrichment, suggesting that CTHRC1 may have chemotactic effect on macrophages. In vitro, CTHRC1 could have chemotactic ability of macrophage in the presence of HT-29 cell line. Cytokine microarray revealed that CTHRC1 could up-regulate the CCL15 level of HT-29, pathway analysis demonstrated that CTHRC1 could regulate CCL15 by controlling the TGFbeta activation and Smad phosphorylation level. In vivo, knocking down of CTHRC1 from CT-26 also inhibits tumor formation. In conclusion, CTHRC1 could promote the chemotactic ability of macrophages by up-regulating CCL15 via TGFbeta/Smad pathway; additionally, a high level of CTHRC1 could promote macrophage's M2 polarization. This discovery may be related to tumor immune tolerance and tumor immunotherapy resistance in CRC. KEY MESSAGES: CTHRC1 promotes CRC progression by up-regulating CCL15 via TGF-beta/Smad pathways to further recruit tumor-associated macrophages. By the means of autocrine or paracrine, CTHRC1 can indeed promote macrophage chemotaxis and enhance the infiltration of macrophages in tumor tissues but in the presence of tumor cells. CAFs were another source of CTHRC1, indicating CTHRC1 can infiltrate tumor islet as well as the stomal and be secreted from both tumor cells and CAFs. This study validated CTHRC1 as a potential immune therapy target CRC.
BACKGROUND: Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) play an important role in drug resistance in many tumors, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). However, how TAMs interact with HNSCC cells to induce drug resistance, especially under hypoxic conditions, is unclear. In this study, we investigated the mechanism of TAM-induced gefitinib resistance in HNSCC cells and sought for novel therapeutic strategies. METHODS: The effects of hypoxia-treated HNSCC cells on the migration and polarization of macrophages were analyzed. Recombinant cytokine proteins and neutralizing antibodies were used as controls. In addition, we assessed the cytotoxic effects of gefitinib on HNSCC cells treated with M2-type macrophage conditioned medium, and carried out a cytokine antibody array analysis, thereby revealing the key factor CCL15. The relationship between serum CCL15 expression levels and prognosis in HNSCC patients was analyzed. In addition, we performed bioinformatic analyses to pursue the mechanisms of CCL15-induced gefitinib resistance. Finally, metformin was used to evaluate the sensitizing effects of gefitinib treatment on HNSCC cells in vitro and in vivo. RESULTS: We found that HNSCC cells recruited macrophages by secreting VEGF and polarized the macrophages to the M2 phenotype through IL-6. Conversely, we found that M2-type TAMs promoted HNSCC cell resistance to gefitinib through paracrine CCL15 signaling. The serum CCL15 levels in HNSCC patients showed a significant correlation with patient prognosis. Furthermore, we found that M2-type TAMs could suppress the sensitivity of HNSCC cells to gefitinib through the CCL15-CCR1-NF-kappaB pathway. In addition, we found that metformin not only inhibited CCL15 expression in M2-type TAMs enhanced by hypoxia, but also suppressed CCR1 surface expression in HNSCC cells. Encouragingly, we found that metformin sensitized HNSCC cells to gefitinib treatment in vitro and in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: Based on our data we conclude that we have identified a novel interaction between M2-type TAMs and HNSCC cells that contributes to gefitinib resistance. We also found that metformin inhibited the cross-talk between macrophages and tumor cells, thereby eliciting therapeutic effects both in vitro and in vivo.
During cancer evolution, tumor cells attract and dynamically interact with monocytes/macrophages. To find biomarkers of disease progression in human melanoma, we used unbiased RNA sequencing and secretome analyses of tumor-macrophage co-cultures. Pathway analysis of genes differentially modulated in human macrophages exposed to melanoma cells revealed a general upregulation of inflammatory hallmark gene sets, particularly chemokines. A selective group of chemokines, including CCL8, CCL15, and CCL20, was actively secreted upon melanoma-macrophage co-culture. Because we previously described the role of CCL20 in melanoma, we focused our study on CCL8 and CCL15 and confirmed that in vitro both chemokines contributed to melanoma survival, proliferation, and 3D invasion through CCR1 signaling. In vivo, both chemokines enhanced primary tumor growth, spontaneous lung metastasis, and circulating tumor cell survival and lung colonization in mouse xenograft models. Finally, we explored the clinical significance of CCL8 and CCL15 expression in human skin melanoma, screening a collection of 67 primary melanoma samples, using multicolor fluorescence and quantitative image analysis of chemokine-chemokine receptor content at the single-cell level. Primary skin melanomas displayed high CCR1 expression, but there was no difference in its level of expression between metastatic and nonmetastatic cases. By contrast, comparative analysis of these two clinically divergent groups showed a highly significant difference in the cancer cell content of CCL8 (p = 0.025) and CCL15 (p < 0.0001). Kaplan-Meier curves showed that a high content of CCL8 or CCL15 in cancer cells correlated with shorter disease-free and overall survival (log-rank test, p < 0.001). Our results highlight the role of CCL8 and CCL15, which are highly induced by melanoma-macrophage interactions in biologically aggressive primary melanomas and could be clinically applicable biomarkers for patient profiling. (c) 2024 The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
