C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4; Receptor for the C-X-C chemokine CXCL12/SDF-1 that transduces a signal by increasing intracellular calcium ion levels and enhancing MAPK1/MAPK3 activation. Involved in the AKT signaling cascade. Plays a role in regulation of cell migration, e.g. during wound healing. Acts as a receptor for extracellular ubiquitin; leading to enhanced intracellular calcium ions and reduced cellular cAMP levels. Binds bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) et mediates LPS-induced inflammatory response, including TNF secretion by monocytes. Involved in hematopoiesis and in car [...] 
Natural history and mechanisms for persistent cognitive symptoms ("brain fog") following acute and often mild COVID-19 are unknown. In a large prospective cohort of people who underwent testing a median of 9 months after acute COVID-19 in the New York City/New Jersey area, we found that cognitive dysfunction is common; is not influenced by mood, fatigue, or sleepiness; and is correlated with MRI changes in very few people. In a subgroup that underwent cerebrospinal fluid analysis, there are no changes related to Alzheimer's disease or neurodegeneration. Single-cell gene expression analysis in the cerebrospinal fluid shows findings consistent with monocyte recruitment, chemokine signaling, cellular stress, and suppressed interferon response-especially in myeloid cells. Longitudinal analysis shows slow recovery accompanied by key alterations in inflammatory genes and increased protein levels of CXCL8, CCL3L1, and sTREM2. These findings suggest that the prognosis for brain fog following COVID-19 correlates with myeloid-related chemokine and interferon-responsive genes.
BACKGROUND: Non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) is treated with transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) followed by intravesical instillation of chemotherapy or Bacillus Calmette-Guerin therapy. However, these treatments have a high recurrence rate and side effects, emphasizing the need for alternative instillations. Previously, we revealed that expanded allogeneic human natural killer (NK) cells from peripheral blood are a promising cellular therapy for prostate cancer. However, whether NK cells exhibit a similar killing effect in bladder cancer (BCa) remains unknown. METHODS: Expansion, activation, and cryopreservation of allogeneic human NK cells obtained from peripheral blood were performed as we previously described. In vitro cytotoxicity was evaluated using the cell counting kit-8. The levels of perforin, granzyme B, interferon-gamma, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and chemokines (C-C-motif ligand [CCL]1, CCL2, CCL20, CCL3L1, and CCL4; C-X-C-motif ligand [CXCL]1, CXCL16, CXCL2, CXCL3, and CXCL8; and X-motif ligand 1 and 2) were determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The expression of CD107a, major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I), MHC-I polypeptide-related sequences A and B (MICA/B), cytomegalovirus UL16-binding protein-2/5/6 (ULBP-2/5/6), B7-H6, CD56, CD69, CD25, killer cell Ig-like receptors (KIR)2DL1, KIRD3DL1, NKG2D, NKp30, NKp46, and CD16 of NK cells or BCa and normal urothelial cells were detected using flow cytometry. Cytotoxicity was evaluated using lactate dehydrogenase assay in patient-derived organoid models. BCa growth was monitored in vivo using calipers in male NOD-scid IL2rg-/- mice subcutaneously injected with 5637 and NK cells. Differential gene expressions were investigated using RNA sequence analysis. The chemotaxis of T cells was evaluated using transwell migration assays. RESULTS: We revealed that the NK cells possess higher cytotoxicity against BCa lines with more production of cytokines than normal urothelial cells counterparts in vitro, demonstrated by upregulation of degranulation marker CD107a and increased interferon-gamma secretion, by MICA/B/NKG2D and B7H6/NKp30-mediated activation. Furthermore, NK cells demonstrated antitumor effects against BCa in patient-derived organoids and BCa xenograft mouse models. NK cells secreted chemokines, including CCL1/2/20, to induce T-cell chemotaxis when encountering BCa cells. CONCLUSIONS: The expanded NK cells exhibit potent cytotoxicity against BCa cells, with few toxic side effects on normal urothelial cells. In addition, NK cells recruit T cells by secreting a panel of chemokines, which supports the translational application of NK cell intravesical instillation after TURBT from bench to bedside for NMIBC treatment.
Mycobacterium avium complex pulmonary disease (MAC-PD) has a heterogeneous clinical course. However, immune profiles associated with MAC-PD clinical course are limited. We performed single-cell RNA sequencing of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 21 MAC-PD patients divided into three clinical courses: group A, spontaneous culture conversion; group B, stable disease without antibiotic treatment; and group C, progressive disease with antibiotic treatment. A lower proportion of NK cells and higher proportion of monocytes were noted in group C compared to combined groups A and B. The proportion of classical monocytes was higher in group C compared to groups A and B, while the proportion of non-classical monocytes decreased. EGR1, HSPA1A, HSPA1B, and CD83 were up-regulated in spontaneous culture conversion group A compared to progressive disease group C. Up-regulation of MYOM2 and LILRA4 and down-regulation of MT-ATP8, CD83, and CCL3L1 was found in progressive disease group C. PCBP1, FOS, RGCC, S100B, G0S2, AREG, and LYN were highly expressed in favorable treatment response compared to unfavorable response. Our findings may offer a comprehensive understanding of the host immune profiles that influence a particular MAC-PD clinical course and could suggest an immunological mechanism associated with the disease progression of MAC-PD.
Solid tumour and leukemic cells expressing chemokine receptors, metastasize to chemokine-secreting organs. Chemokines indirectly affect tumour development by attracting immunocompetent cells with pro- or anti-tumoral activities. Various membrane-associated and soluble proteases selectively cleave specific chemokines. Precursor plasma chemokines (CXCL7, CCL14) need to be proteolytically processed to obtain receptor affinity. Angiogenic CXC chemokines (CXCL1, CXCL8) have increased CXCR1/CXCR2 affinity after limited NH2-terminal processing, whereas truncated angiostatic chemokines (CXCL10) show lower CXCR3 affinity without loss of angiostatic potential. NH2-terminally cleaved monocyte chemotactic proteins (CCL2, CCL7, CCL8) have impaired capacity to attract tumour-associated macrophages and function as receptor antagonists for intact CC chemokines. Migration of Th1/CCR5+ and Th2/CCR4+ effector lymphocytes toward CCR5 (CCL5, CCL3L1) and CCR4 (CCL22) ligands is affected by cleavage. Although proteolytical processing of chemokines is well studied in vitro, the direct or indirect effects on tumour invasion and metastasis are only poorly evaluated.
Variations of gene copy number in the human genome are increasingly recognized as a genetic factor in phenotypic variation. Human CC chemokine ligand 3-like 1 gene (CCL3L1), which is located on human chromosome 17q11.2, is highly variable in copy number owing to having a hot spot for segmental duplications. CCL3L1, a natural ligand for HIV-1 co-receptor CCR5, is a potent HIV-1-suppressive chemokine. CCL3L1 copy number variation (CNV) is tightly linked to HIV-1/AIDS susceptibility, and a lower copy number is associated with an enhanced risk for acquiring HIV-1 and also progressing more rapidly to AIDS and death. In this article we review recent studies to evaluate the association between the CCL3L1 copy number and HIV-1/AIDS susceptibility.
Several genetic factors influence HIV-1 susceptibility or AIDS disease progression. A recent study reported on what could be a particularly important genetic determinant for HIV-1 susceptibility and disease progression: copy number of a chemokine gene termed CCL3L1. Individuals with low copy numbers of the gene, relative to their ethnic background, were associated with markedly enhanced HIV-1/AIDS susceptibility. These findings define an important new genetic determinant of HIV-1 susceptibility and further emphasize the importance of the chemokine system, either as elements that inhibit HIV-1 infection or that modulate antiviral immune responses.
We investigated the association of polymorphisms in CCR5, the major human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 coreceptor, and copy number of its potent ligand CCL3L1 with tuberculosis in 298 individuals from Colombia. The CCR5-HHD haplotype, a known genetic determinant of increased susceptibility to HIV-AIDS, and a high copy number of CCL3L1, a known genetic determinant of enhanced CCL3/CCL3L1 chemokine expression, each associated with presence of tuberculosis. Furthermore, CCR5-HHD was associated with higher CCR5 gene and surface expression. These results substantiate the strong link between the pro-inflammatory effects of CCR5 and its ligands with active tuberculosis and suggest that chemokine-chemokine receptor genetic determinants may influence tuberculosis in addition to HIV/AIDS.
Variability in the susceptibility to infectious disease and its clinical manifestation can be determined by variation in the environment and by genetic variation in the pathogen and the host. Despite several successes based on candidate gene studies, defining the host variation affecting infectious disease has not been as successful as for other multifactorial diseases. Both single nucleotide variation and copy number variation (CNV) of the host contribute to the host's susceptibility to infectious disease. In this review we focus on CNV, particularly on complex multiallelic CNV that is often not well characterised either directly by hybridisation methods or indirectly by analysis of genotypes and flanking single nucleotide variants. We summarise the well-known examples, such as alpha-globin deletion and susceptibility to severe malaria, as well as more recent controversies, such as the extensive CNV of the chemokine gene CCL3L1 and HIV infection. We discuss the potential biological mechanisms that could underly any genetic association and reflect on the extensive complexity and functional variation generated by a combination of CNV and sequence variation, as illustrated by the Fc gamma receptor genes FCGR3A, FCGR3B and FCGR2C. We also highlight some understudied areas that might prove fruitful areas for further research.
Copy number variation, namely regions of the genome that can be either deleted or duplicated in a variable way, has emerged as an important source of genetic variance in the human genome. Genes with immunological functions are particularly prone to copy number variation, in part because this is a mechanism to expand the recognition repertoire; however, immunological genes not directly involved in immune recognition are also copy number variable but, despite the link between immunological function and copy number variation, very few copy number variants (CNVs) have been found to be associated with autoimmune diseases, even in recent large genome-wide CNV-association studies. Nonetheless, CNVs in FCGR3B, DEFB4, CCL3L1, C4A/B and NCF1 have been suggested to be associated with autoimmune diseases, although there is conflicting evidence in all cases. The reasons for the lack of definitive data on CNV-autoimmunity associations, as well as the technical challenges for the field are the focus of this review.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune disorder characterized by the presence of auto-antibodies to nuclear antigens, immune complex deposition, and subsequent tissue destruction. Early studies in twins suggested that SLE has, at least in part, a genetic basis, and a role for class II alleles in the major histocompatibility complex has been known for over 30 years. Through both linkage studies and candidate gene studies, numerous additional genetic risk factors have been identified. The recent publication of two SNP-based genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has resulted in the confirmation of a number of previously identified genetic risk loci and has identified new previously unappreciated loci conferring risk for development of SLE. A role for gene copy number variation (CNV) in SLE has also been appreciated through studies of the complement component 4 (C4) loci and more recent work in the IgG Fc receptor loci. The availability of large SNP-based GWAS datasets will undoubtedly lead to the genome-wide analysis and identification of copy number variants related to genetic susceptibility for development of SLE. We review current studies of CNV in SLE susceptibility that include reports of association between SLE and CNV in C4, IgG Fc receptors, TLR7, and CCL3L1.
Human CC ligand 3-like protein 1 (CCL3L1), a member of the CC chemokine family, that induces MCP1 and RANTES, exhibits a variety of proinflammatory activities including chemotaxis, and functional and proliferative activation of leukocytes, lymphocytes and macrophages. Its signal is transmitted through transmembrane receptors, CC chemokine receptors, CCR1, CCR3 and CCR5. To examine gene expression of chemokine, CCL3L1, and its receptors, CCR1, CCR3 and CCR5, we analyzed tumor tissues from 21 patients with several types of primary gliomas. CCL3L1, CCR3 and CCR5 gene exhibited over-expression in 70% (7/10), 60% (6/10), and 60% (6/10) of glioblastoma, in comparison with lower frequencies seen in lower-grade gliomas. Transfection of CCL3L1-expression vector to glioblastoma cell line enhanced proliferation of the tumor cells. These data suggest that increased expression of the CCL3L1, CCR3 and CCR5 chemokine-receptors system is involved in brain tumorigenesis, especially in the progression of glioblastoma.
The chemokine receptor CCR5 is the most important entry coreceptor for HIV-1 in vivo. Its chemokine ligands, including CCL3L1, efficiently inhibit infection by receptor blockade and downmodulation. However, in Nature Immunology, Dolan et al. (2007) present a large human-cohorts study that identifies entry-independent, CCR5-CCL3L1-dependent effects on cell-mediated immunity as a strong correlate of pathogenesis and point to additional influences of the CCR5-CCL3L1 axis on disease progression through undefined mechanisms.
BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease with a multifactorial etiology. Peripheral blood is the main channel of the immune system, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are the immune cells that initiate the autoimmune inflammatory process. However, there are few reports on the mechanisms of peripheral blood immunity in RA. METHODS: ScRNA-seq was performed on four RA samples and integrated with single-cell transcriptome data from four healthy control samples downloaded from publicly available databases for analysis. RESULTS: A total of 52,073 cells were used for descending clustering analysis to map RA peripheral blood immune cells at single-cell resolution. Redimensional clustering analysis of four major immune cells (T cells, monocytes, B cells, and natural killer cells) revealed that double-negative T (DNT) cells were significantly altered in abundance and function. And a number of genes (including SOCS3, cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), B2M, MTFP1, RSRP1, and YWHAB) were specifically downregulated in DNT cells. RA T cells, especially DNT cells, exhibit significant metabolic defects and dysfunction, mainly in the form of inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation, ATP synthesis, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-I-mediated antigen presentation. In addition, cellular communication networks were established, and it was evident that RA is significantly attenuated in the number and intensity of cellular communication. Monocytes and T cells play key roles in the process of the immune inflammatory response through CCL and MHC-related pathways. CONCLUSIONS: This study describes the landscape of the peripheral blood immune system and cell communication in RA, characterizes the abundance of PBMCs, gene expression profiles, and changes in signaling pathways in RA patients, and identifies several key cell subpopulations (DNT and classic monocytes) and specific genes (SOCS3, CREM, B2M, MTFP1, RSRP1, and YWHAB). Meanwhile, we propose that classic monocytes in peripheral blood may migrate to sites of inflammation in synovial tissue under the chemotaxis of the chemokines CCL3 and CCL3L1, differentiate into macrophages, secrete proinflammatory cytokines, and thus participate in the inflammatory response. These findings provide new insights for the future elucidation of the peripheral blood immune mechanisms of RA and the search for new clinical therapeutic targets.
Post-translational modification of chemokines is an essential regulatory mechanism to enhance or dampen the inflammatory response. CD26/dipeptidylpeptidase IV, ubiquitously expressed in tissues and blood, removes NH2-terminal dipeptides from proteins with a penultimate Pro or Ala. A large number of human chemokines, including CXCL2, CXCL6, CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, CXCL12, CCL3L1, CCL4, CCL5, CCL11, CCL14, and CCL22, are cleaved by CD26; however, the efficiency is clearly influenced by the amino acids surrounding the cleavage site and although not yet proven, potentially affected by the chemokine concentration and interactions with third molecules. NH2-terminal cleavage of chemokines by CD26 has prominent effects on their receptor binding, signaling, and hence, in vitro and in vivo biologic activities. However, rather than having a similar result, the outcome of NH2-terminal truncation is highly diverse. Either no difference in activity or drastic alterations in receptor recognition/specificity and hence, chemotactic activity are observed. Analogously, chemokine-dependent inhibition of HIV infection is enhanced (for CCL3L1 and CCL5) or decreased (for CXCL12) by CD26 cleavage. The occurrence of CD26-processed chemokine isoforms in plasma underscores the importance of the in vitro-observed CD26 cleavages. Through modulation of chemokine activity, CD26 regulates leukocyte/tumor cell migration and progenitor cell release from the bone marrow, as shown by use of mice treated with CD26 inhibitors or CD26 knockout mice. As chemokine processing by CD26 has a significant impact on physiologic and pathologic processes, application of CD26 inhibitors to affect chemokine function is currently explored, e.g., as add-on therapy in viral infection and cancer.
BACKGROUND: C-C motif Chemokine Ligand 3 Like 1 (CCL3L1) is a multiallelic copy number variable, which plays a crucial role in immunoregulatory and hosts defense through the production of macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha. Variable range of the CCL3L1 copies from 0 to 14 copies have been documented in several different populations. However, there is still lack of report on the range of CCL3L1 copy number exclusively among Malaysians who are a multi-ethnic population. Thus, this study aims to extensively examine the distribution of CCL3L1 copy number in the three major populations from Malaysia namely Malay, Chinese and Indian. A diploid copy number of CCL3L1 for 393 Malaysians (Malay = 178, Indian = 90, and Chinese = 125) was quantified using Paralogue Ratio Tests (PRTs) and then validated with microsatellites analysis. RESULTS: To our knowledge, this is the first report on the CCL3L1 copy number that has been attempted among Malaysians and the Chinese ethnic group exhibits a diverse pattern of CCL3L1 distribution copy number from the Malay and Indian (p < 0.0001). The CCL3L1 ranged from 0 to 8 copies for both the Malay and Indian ethnic groups while 0 to 10 copies for the Chinese ethnic. Consequently, the CCL3L1 copy number among major ethnic groups in the Malaysian population is found to be significantly varied when compared to the European population (p < 0.0001). The mean/median reported for the Malay, Chinese, Indian, and European are 2.759/2.869, 3.453/3.290, 2.437/1.970 and 2.001/1.940 respectively. CONCLUSION: This study reveals the existence of genetic variation of CCL3L1 in the Malaysian population, and suggests by examining genetic diversity on the ethnicity, and specific geographical region could help in reconstructing human evolutionary history and for the prediction of disease risk related to the CCL3L1 copy number.
Sexually transmitted infections such as Chlamydia trachomatis can enhance HIV-1 infection. However, the molecular mechanisms modulating the enhancement of HIV-1 infectivity and replication during HIV-1/sexually transmitted infections coinfection remain elusive. In this study, we performed an ex vivo infection of HIV-1 in PBMCs of C. trachomatis‒infected patients and observed a significant increase in HIV-1 p24 levels compared with those in cells from healthy donors. Similarly, C. trachomatis‒stimulated PBMCs from healthy donors showed enhanced susceptibility to HIV-1. C. trachomatis‒stimulated CD4 T cells also harbored more HIV-1 copy numbers. RNA sequencing data revealed the upregulation of CCL3L1/CCL3L3, a paralog of CCL3 in C. trachomatis‒stimulated CD4 T cells infected with HIV-1. Furthermore, an increase in CCL3L1/CCL3L3 expression levels correlated with HIV-1 replication in C. trachomatis‒stimulated cells. However, the addition of exogenous CCL3L1 reduces HIV-1 infection of healthy cells, indicating a dual role of CCL3L1 in HIV-1 infection. Further investigation revealed that a knockout of CCL3L1/CCL3L3 in Jurkat T cells rescued the increased susceptibility of C. trachomatis‒stimulated cells to HIV-1 infection. These results reveal a role for CCL3L1/CCL3L3 in enhancing HIV-1 replication and production and highlight a mechanism for the enhanced susceptibility to HIV-1 among C. trachomatis‒infected patients.
The human genome contains a significant amount of sequence variation, from single nucleotide polymorphisms to large stretches of DNA that may be present in a range of different copies between individuals. Several such regions are variable in >1% of the population (referred to as copy number polymorphisms or CNPs), and many studies have looked for associations between the copy number of genes within multiallelic CNPs and disease susceptibility. Associations have indeed been described for several genes, including the beta-defensins (DEFB4, DEFB103, DEFB104), chemokine ligand 3 like 1 (CCL3L1), Fc gamma receptor 3B (FCGR3B), and complement component C4 (C4). However, follow-up replication in independent cohorts has failed to reproduce a number of these associations. It is clear that replicated associations such as those between C4 and systemic lupus erythematosus, and beta-defensin and psoriasis, have used robust genotyping methodologies. Technical issues associated with genotyping sequences of high identity may therefore account for failure to replicate other associations. Here, we compare and contrast the most popular approaches that have been used to genotype CNPs, describe how they have been applied in different situations, and discuss potential reasons for the difficulty in reproducibly linking multiallelic CNPs to complex diseases.
Segmental duplications in the human genome are selectively enriched for genes involved in immunity, although the phenotypic consequences for host defense are unknown. We show that there are significant interindividual and interpopulation differences in the copy number of a segmental duplication encompassing the gene encoding CCL3L1 (MIP-1alphaP), a potent human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1)-suppressive chemokine and ligand for the HIV coreceptor CCR5. Possession of a CCL3L1 copy number lower than the population average is associated with markedly enhanced HIV/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) susceptibility. This susceptibility is even greater in individuals who also possess disease-accelerating CCR5 genotypes. This relationship between CCL3L1 dose and altered HIV/AIDS susceptibility points to a central role for CCL3L1 in HIV/AIDS pathogenesis and indicates that differences in the dose of immune response genes may constitute a genetic basis for variable responses to infectious diseases.
BACKGROUND: The role of copy number variation of the CCL3L1 gene, encoding MIP1alpha, in contributing to the host variation in susceptibility and response to HIV infection is controversial. Here we analyse a sub-Saharan African cohort from Tanzania and Ethiopia, two countries with a high prevalence of HIV-1 and a high co-morbidity of HIV with tuberculosis. METHODS: We use a form of quantitative PCR called the paralogue ratio test to determine CCL3L1 gene copy number in 1134 individuals and validate our copy number typing using array comparative genomic hybridisation and fiber-FISH. RESULTS: We find no significant association of CCL3L1 gene copy number with HIV load in antiretroviral-naive patients prior to initiation of combination highly active anti-retroviral therapy. However, we find a significant association of low CCL3L1 gene copy number with improved immune reconstitution following initiation of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (p = 0.012), replicating a previous study. CONCLUSIONS: Our work supports a role for CCL3L1 copy number in immune reconstitution following antiretroviral therapy in HIV, and suggests that the MIP1alpha -CCR5 axis might be targeted to aid immune reconstitution.
