G1/S-specific cyclin-D1; Regulatory component of the cyclin D1-CDK4 (DC) complex that phosphorylates and inhibits members of the retinoblastoma (RB) protein family including RB1 and regulates the cell-cycle during G(1)/S transition. Phosphorylation of RB1 allows dissociation of the transcription factor E2F from the RB/E2F complex and the subsequent transcription of E2F target genes which are responsible for the progression through the G(1) phase. Hypophosphorylates RB1 in early G(1) phase. Cyclin D-CDK4 complexes are major integrators of various mitogenenic and antimitogenic signals. A [...] 
The centromere proteins (CENPs), a critical mitosis-related protein complexes, are involved in the kinetochore assembly and chromosome segregation. In this study, we identified that CENPA was significantly up-regulated in HCC and highly expressed CENPA correlated with poor prognosis for HCC patients. Knockdown of CENPA inhibited HCC cell proliferation and tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, CENPA transcriptionally activated and cooperated with YY1 to drive the expression of cyclin D1 (CCND1) and neuropilin 2 (NRP2). Moreover, we identified that CENPA can be lactylated at lysine 124 (K124). The lactylation of CENPA at K124 promotes CENPA activation, leading to enhanced expression of its target genes. In summary, CENPA function as a transcriptional regulator to promote HCC via cooperating with YY1. Targeting the CENPA-YY1-CCND1/NRP2 axis may provide candidate therapeutic targets for HCC.
Large-scale human genetic data(1-3) have shown that cancer mutations display strong tissue-selectivity, but how this selectivity arises remains unclear. Here, using experimental models, functional genomics and analyses of patient samples, we demonstrate that the lineage transcription factor paired box 8 (PAX8) is required for oncogenic signalling by two common genetic alterations that cause clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) in humans: the germline variant rs7948643 at 11q13.3 and somatic inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor (VHL)(4-6). VHL loss, which is observed in about 90% of ccRCCs, can lead to hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha (HIF2A) stabilization(6,7). We show that HIF2A is preferentially recruited to PAX8-bound transcriptional enhancers, including a pro-tumorigenic cyclin D1 (CCND1) enhancer that is controlled by PAX8 and HIF2A. The ccRCC-protective allele C at rs7948643 inhibits PAX8 binding at this enhancer and downstream activation of CCND1 expression. Co-option of a PAX8-dependent physiological programme that supports the proliferation of normal renal epithelial cells is also required for MYC expression from the ccRCC metastasis-associated amplicons at 8q21.3-q24.3 (ref. (8)). These results demonstrate that transcriptional lineage factors are essential for oncogenic signalling and that they mediate tissue-specific cancer risk associated with somatic and inherited genetic variants.
BACKGROUND: Insulin like growth factor II mRNA binding protein 3 (IGF2BP3) is an RNA binding protein with multiple roles in regulation of gene expression at the post-transcriptional level and is implicated in tumorigenesis and progression of numerous cancers including gastric cancer (GC). Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a diverse endogenous noncoding RNA population that have important regulatory roles in cancer. However, circRNAs that regulate the expression of IGF2BP3 in GC is largely unknown. METHODS: CircRNAs that bound to IGF2BP3 were screened in GC cells using RNA immunoprecipitation and sequencing (RIP-seq). The identification and localization of circular nuclear factor of activated T cells 3 (circNFATC3) were identified using Sanger sequencing, RNase R assays, qRT-PCR, nuclear-cytoplasmic fractionation and RNA-FISH assays. CircNFATC3 expression in human GC tissues and adjacent normal tissues were measured by qRT-PCR and ISH. The biological role of circNFATC3 in GC was confirmed by in vivo and in vitro experiments. Furthermore, RIP, RNA-FISH/IF, IP and rescue experiments were performed to uncover interactions between circNFATC3, IGF2BP3 and cyclin D1 (CCND1). RESULTS: We identified a GC-associated circRNA, circNFATC3, that interacted with IGF2BP3. CircNFATC3 was significantly overexpressed in GC tissues and was positively associated with tumor volume. Functionally, the proliferation of GC cells decreased significantly after circNFATC3 knockdown in vivo and in vitro. Mechanistically, circNFATC3 bound to IGF2BP3 in the cytoplasm, which enhanced the stability of IGF2BP3 by preventing ubiquitin E3 ligase TRIM25-mediated ubiquitination, thereby enhancing the regulatory axis of IGF2BP3-CCND1 and promoting CCND1 mRNA stability. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that circNFATC3 promotes GC proliferation by stabilizing IGF2BP3 protein to enhance CCND1 mRNA stability. Therefore, circNFATC3 is a potential novel target for the treatment of GC.
G-quadruplexes (G4s) can recruit transcription factors to activate gene expression, but detailed mechanisms remain enigmatic. Here, we demonstrate that G4s in the CCND1 promoter propel the motility in MAZ phase-separated condensates and subsequently activate CCND1 transcription. Zinc finger (ZF) 2 of MAZ is a responsible for G4 binding, while ZF3-5, but not a highly disordered region, is critical for MAZ condensation. MAZ nuclear puncta overlaps with signals of G4s and various coactivators including BRD4, MED1, CDK9 and active RNA polymerase II, as well as gene activation histone markers. MAZ mutants lacking either G4 binding or phase separation ability did not form nuclear puncta, and showed deficiencies in promoting hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation and xenograft tumor formation. Overall, we unveiled that G4s recruit MAZ to the CCND1 promoter and facilitate the motility in MAZ condensates that compartmentalize coactivators to activate CCND1 expression and subsequently exacerbate hepatocarcinogenesis.
Cyclin D1 is a protein encoded by the CCND1 gene, located on 11q13 chromosome, which is a key component of the physiological regulation of the cell cycle. CCND1/cyclin D1 is upregulated in several types of human tumors including melanoma and is currently classified as an oncogene that promotes uncontrolled cell proliferation. Despite the demonstrated importance of CCND1/cyclin D1 as a central oncogene in several types of human tumors, its knowledge in melanoma is still limited. This review examines data published on upregulation of the CCND1 gene and cyclin D1 protein in the melanoma setting, focusing on the pathways and molecular mechanisms involved in the activation of the gene and on the clinical and therapeutic implications.
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains a cause for concern as the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Amidst ongoing debates on the role and mechanisms of methionine adenosyltransferase 1A (MAT1A) in cancer, our study sheds light on its significance in NSCLC. Leveraging TCGA database and immunohistochemical staining, we systematically analyzed MAT1A expression in NSCLC, uncovering its marked upregulation. To unravel the functional and mechanistic underpinnings, we implemented stable knockdown of MAT1A in NSCLC cell lines. Our findings converged to demonstrate that suppression of MAT1A expression effectively impeded the proliferation and migratory capabilities of NSCLC cells, while concurrently enhancing apoptosis. Mechanistically, we discovered that MAT1A depletion accelerated the degradation of CCND1, a key cell cycle regulator, through S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (SKP2)-mediated ubiquitination. Notably, CCND1 emerged as a crucial MAT1A partner, jointly orchestrating glycolytic metabolism in NSCLC cells. This intricate interplay suggests that MAT1A promotes NSCLC progression by safeguarding CCND1 protein stability and activating glycolytic pathways, thereby sustaining tumorigenesis. In summary, our study not only identifies MAT1A as a prognostic marker for poor survival in NSCLC patients but also elucidates its mechanistic contributions to cancer progression. These findings pave the way for the development of targeted therapies aimed at disrupting the deleterious MAT1A-CCND1-glycolysis axis in NSCLC.
Cyclin D1 (CCND1), a crucial mediator of cell cycle progression, possesses many mutation types with different mutation frequencies in human cancers. The G870A mutation is the most common mutation in CCND1, which produces two isoforms: full-length CCND1a and divergent C-terminal CCND1b. The dysregulation of the CCND1 isoforms is associated with multiple human cancers. Exploring the molecular mechanism of CCND1 isoforms has offer new insight for cancer treatment. On this basis, the alterations of CCND1 gene are described, including amplification, overexpression, and mutation, especially the G870A mutation. Subsequently, we review the characteristics of CCND1 isoforms caused by G870A mutation. Additionally, we summarize cis-regulatory elements, trans-acting factors, and the splice mutation involved in splicing regulation of CCND1. Furthermore, we highlight the function of CCND1 isoforms in cell cycle, invasion, and metastasis in cancers. Importantly, the clinical role of CCND1 isoforms is also discussed, particularly concerning prognosis, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. Last, emphasis is given to the corrective strategies that modulate the cancerous CCND1 isoforms. Thus, it is highlighting significance of aberrant isoforms of CCND1 as targets for cancer therapy.
Enhanced expression of methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3) promotes the m(6)A modification of specific mRNAs, contributing to breast tumorigenesis. While the mRNA substrates targeted by METTL3 are well characterized, the factors dictating the selection of these specific mRNA remain elusive. This study aimed to examine the regulatory role of the transcription factor STAT5B in METTL3-induced m(6)A modification. METTL3 specifically interacts with STAT5B in response to mitogenic stimulation by epidermal growth factor (EGF). Chromatin immunoprecipitation and CRISPR/Cas9 mutagenesis showed that STAT5B recruits METTL3 to gene promoters like CCND1, where METTL3 interacts with RPB1, dependent on CDK9-mediated RPB1 (Ser2) phosphorylation during transcription elongation. Inhibition and depletion of either STAT5B or CDK9 prevented the EGF-induced m(6)A modification of CCND1. The translation efficiency of CCND1 was increased following m(6)A modification, thereby increasing cell proliferation. STAT5B facilitated METTL3-induced tumor formation by increasing CCND1 expression in an orthotopic mouse model. In clinical context, a positive correlation was observed between p-STAT5B and METTL3 expression in high-grade breast tumors. This study elucidates a novel mechanism that underlies the specificity of m(6)A modification in breast cancer cells, thereby underscoring its potential therapeutic value.
Orthodontic tooth movement (OTM) is induced by biomechanical stimuli and facilitated by periodontal tissue remodeling, where multiple immune cells participate in this progression. It has been demonstrated that macrophage is essential for mechanical force-induced tissue remodeling. In this study, we first found that mechanical force significantly induced macrophage proliferation in human periodontal samples and murine OTM models. Yet, how macrophages perceive mechanical stimuli and thereby modulate their biological behaviors remain elusive. To illustrate the mechanisms of mechanical force-induced macrophage proliferation, we subsequently identified Piezo1, a novel mechanosensory ion channel, to modulate macrophage response subjected to mechanical stimuli. Mechanical force upregulates Piezo1 expression in periodontal tissues and cultured bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs). Remarkably, suppressing Piezo1 with GsMTx4 retarded OTM through reduced macrophage proliferation. Moreover, knockdown of Piezo1 effectively inhibited mechanical force-induced BMDMs proliferation. RNA sequencing was further performed to dissect the underlying mechanisms of Piezo1-mediated mechanotransduction utilizing mechanical stretch system. We revealed that Piezo1-activated AKT/GSK3beta signaling was closely associated with macrophage proliferation upon mechanical stimuli. Importantly, Cyclin D1 (Ccnd1) was authenticated as a critical downstream factor of Piezo1 that facilitated proliferation by enhancing Rb phosphorylation. We generated genetically modified mice in which Ccnd1 could be deleted in macrophages in an inducible manner. Conditional ablation of Ccnd1 inhibited periodontal macrophage proliferation and therefore delayed OTM. Overall, our findings highlight that proliferation driven by mechanical force is a key process by which macrophages infiltrate in periodontal tissue during OTM, where Piezo1-AKT-Ccnd1 axis plays a pivotal role.
Cyclin D1 promotes cell cycle progression during G1 phase, a key event in G1-S transition. The protein is encoded by gene CCND1, located in chromosomal band 11q13. Cyclin D1 plays key roles in cell biology, including cell proliferation and growth regulation, mitochondrial activity modulation, DNA repair, and cell migration control. CCND1 gene and its protein cyclin D1 are frequently altered by different molecular mechanisms, including amplification, chromosomal translocations, mutations, and activation of the pathways involved in cyclin D1 expression, alterations which appear to be essential in the development of human cancers, including oral carcinoma. This is the first published review of the specific features of cyclin D1 overexpression in oral oncogenesis. Starting with the physiological regulation of cyclin D1, there is an evaluation of its functions, overexpression mechanisms, and the implications of the oncogenic activation of CCND1/cyclin D1 in oral squamous cell carcinoma. The potential diagnostic and prognostic value of cyclin D1 is reviewed. The influence of CCND1/cyclin D1 on tumor size and clinical stage is reported, and an update is provided on the utilization of cyclin D1 as therapeutic target and on the combination of cyclin D1 inhibitors with cytotoxic agents. Future research lines in this field are also proposed.
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a rare, aggressive subtype of B cell NHL for which there is no standard of care. It is characterized by the t(11;14) translocation, implicating cyclin D1 (CCND1) in its pathogenesis. Cyclin D1 is one of a family of 3 unlinked D type cyclin genes, CCND1, 2, 3. CCND1 is not expressed in normal B cells. Deregulated expression occurs as a result of juxtaposition of cis IgH enhancer elements, Emu and 3' Calpha, to the cyclin D1 gene. These enhancer elements and regions upstream of the CCND1 gene are hypomethylated on the translocated allele. Histones surrounding the translocation have shown hyperacetylation as well, a hallmark of transcriptionally active chromatin. The t(11;14) translocation is an epigenetic event, leading to cyclin D1 deregulated transcription. These findings provide the rationale for the use of epigenetic and targeted cyclin D1 therapies to overcome resistance and induce durable remissions in MCL.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Although cancer immunotherapies are effective for advanced-stage cancers, there are no clinically approved immunotherapies for colon cancers (CRCs). Therefore, there is a high demand for the development of novel therapies. Extracellular adenosine-mediated signaling is considered a promising target for advanced-stage cancers that are nonresponsive to programmed death 1 (PD-1)-/programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1)-targeted immunotherapies. In this study, we aimed to elucidate novel tumorigenic mechanisms of extracellular adenosine. METHODS: To investigate the effects of extracellular adenosine on tumor-associated macrophages, peripheral blood-derived human macrophages were treated with adenosine and analyzed using flow cytometry and Western blot. Changes in adenosine-treated macrophages were further assessed using multi-omics analysis, including total RNA sequencing and proteomics. Colon cancer mouse models were used to measure the therapeutic efficacy of AB680 and palbociclib. We also used tissue microarrays of patients with CRC, to evaluate their clinical relevance. RESULTS: Extracellular adenosine-mediated reduction of cyclin D1 (CCND1) was found to be critical for the regulation of immune checkpoint molecules and PD-L1 levels in human macrophages, indicating that post-translational modification of PD-L1 is affected by adenosine. A potent CD73 selective inhibitor, AB680, reversed the effects of adenosine on CCND1 and PD-L1. This result strongly suggests that AB680 is a combinatory therapeutic option to overcome the undesired side effects of the cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor, palbociclib, which increases PD-L1 expression in tumors. Because palbociclib is undergoing clinical trials for metastatic CRC in combination with cetuximab (clinical trial number: NCT03446157), we validated that the combination of AB680 and palbociclib significantly improved anti-tumor efficacy in CRC animal models, thereby highlighting it as a novel immunotherapeutic strategy. We further assessed whether the level of CCND1 in tumor-associated macrophages was indeed reduced in tumor sections obtained from patients with CRC, for evaluating the clinical relevance of this strategy. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we demonstrated that a novel combination therapy of AB680 and palbociclib may be advantageous for the treatment of CRC.
BACKGROUND: Up to 80% of breast cancers (BCa) are estrogen receptor positive and current treatments target the estrogen receptor (endocrine therapies) and/or CDK4/6 (CDK4/6 inhibitors). CCND1 encodes the protein cyclin D1, responsible for regulation of G1 to S phase transition in the cell cycle. CCND1 amplification is common in BCa and contributes to increased cyclin D1 expression. As there are signalling interactions between cyclin D1 and the estrogen receptor, understanding the impact of CCND1 amplification on estrogen receptor positive patients' disease outcomes, is vital. This review aims to evaluate CCND1 amplification as a prognostic and predictive biomarker in BCa. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Publications were retrieved from the databases: PubMed, MEDLINE, Embase and Cochrane library. Exclusion criteria were duplication, publication type, non-English language, in vitro and animal studies, not BCa, male BCa, premenopausal BCa, cohort size <35, CCND1 amplification not reported. Publications with cohort duplication, and inadequate recurrence free survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS) data, were also excluded. Included publications were assessed for Risk of Bias (RoB) using the Quality In Prognosis Studies tool. Statistical analyses (Inverse Variance and Mantel-Haenszel) were performed in Review Manager. The PROSPERO registration number is [CRD42020208179]. RESULTS: CCND1 amplification was significantly associated with positive estrogen receptor status (OR:1.70, 95% CI:1.19-2.43, p = 0.004) and cyclin D1 overexpression (OR: 5.64, 95% CI: 2.32-13.74, p=0.0001). CCND1 amplification was significantly associated with shorter RFS (OR: 1.64, 95% CI: 1.13-2.38, p = 0.009), and OS (OR: 1.51, 95% CI: 1.19-1.92, p = 0.0008) after removal of studies with a high RoB. In endocrine therapy treated patients specifically, CCND1 amplification predicted shorter RFS (HR: 2.59, 95% CI: 1.96-3.41, p < 0.00001) and OS (HR: 1.59, 95% CI: 1.00-2.49, p = 0.05) also after removal of studies with a high RoB. CONCLUSION: While a lack of standardised approach for the detection of CCND1 amplification is to be considered as a limitation, CCND1 amplification was found to be prognostic of shorter RFS and OS in BCa. CCND1 amplification is also predictive of reduced RFS and OS in endocrine therapy treated patients specifically. With standardised methods and cut offs for the detection of CCND1 amplification, CCND1 amplification would have potential as a predictive biomarker in breast cancer patients. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/, identifier CRD42020208179.
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a group of tumors that arise along the human biliary duct tree, ranking second in primary hepatic malignancies. Intrahepatic CCA (iCCA) represents about 10%-20% of CCAs. There is an increasing body of evidence suggesting that iCCAs' incidence and mortality have been increasing globally over the past few decades. In this study, we found that the EIF3H expression level in iCCA tissues was significantly increased compared to the adjacent non-cancerous tissues by immunohistochemistry analysis (IHC). A similar tendency of EIF3H mRNA and protein level was confirmed in iCCA cell lines using RT-qPCR and Western blot. EIF3H has been identified as a critical molecule that plays a pro-neoplasmic role in iCCA both in vivo and in vitro, such as proliferation, migration, and anti-apoptosis. Mechanistically, we found that EIF3H knockdown can promote the degradation of CCND1 and the proteolysis of CCND1 is mediated by ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). Thus, we come to the conclusion that EIF3H promotes proliferation and migration of iCCAs, inhibiting apoptosis of iCCA cells at the same time by stabilizing the CCND1 protein structure. Our findings provide insights into the mechanism of tumorigenesis role of EIF3H in iCCAs and a potential therapeutic target for iCCA treatment.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent cancer in women, with increasing incidence and death rates in recent years. Disruptions of different signaling pathways partially cause breast cancer. Hence, different genes through particular pathways are involved in BC tumorigenesis. METHODS: In this study, we evaluated the expression level of GLIS2 and CCND1 genes in 50 patients. Also, in-silico analyses were used to enrich related signaling pathways involving the mentioned genes. RESULTS: The results showed an increased expression level of Cyclin D1 and decreased expression level of GLIS2 in BC patients. Moreover, a relationship between aberrant expression levels of GLIS2 and CCND1 and BC development was determined. CONCLUSION: These observations could help uncover new therapeutic targets for treating patients with BC in the progressive stage.
Gliomas are the most common brain malignancies characterized by high degree of aggressiveness and high mortality. However, the underlying mechanism of glioma progression remains unclear. Here, we probed the role of CDC42EP3 (CDC42 effector protein 3) played in glioma development and its potential downstream mechanism. The expression of CDC42EP3 in tumor and normal brain tissues were examined through immunohistochemistry and we found the likelihood of CDC42EP3 overexpression was positively correlated with pathological grading. Patients with higher expression of CDC42EP3 were more likely to suffer from recurrence as well. Through constructing CDC42EP3-knockdown cell models, we discovered that silencing CDC42EP3 significantly restricted cell proliferation and migration but facilitated cell apoptosis in vitro. Inhibition on tumor growth mediated by CDC42EP3 depletion was further verified in vivo. Regarding downstream target of CDC42EP3, we found that it may positively regulate the expression of CCND1 through c-Myc-mediated transcription. Furthermore, our findings affirmed that effects of CDC42EP3 overexpression on cell proliferation, migration and apoptosis could be confined by depleting CCND1. In a word, this study reported the tumor-promoting role of CDC42EP3 in glioma progression which probably functioned through targeting CCND1.
Pituitary tumors constitute 10% of intracranial neoplasms and are mostly benign, monoclonal adenomas derived from single mutant cells. Pituitary oncogenes have been intensively studied and three of them, gsp, ccnd1, and PTTG are abundant in significant numbers of cases. gsp is present in approximately 40% of Caucasian patients with GH-secreting tumors and results from a mutated, constitutively active alpha subunit of Gs protein. Persistent activation of the cAMP-PKA-CREB pathway may lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation and GH secretion. ccnd1 is overexpressed cyclin D1, and cyclin D1 gene is amplified in some pituitary tumors. PTTG is expressed in most pituitary tumors. PTTG is localized to both the nucleus and cytoplasm and interacts with several protein partners. At least three tumorigenesis mechanisms are proposed for human PTTG. 1) PTTG and FGF form a positive feedback loop and stimulate tumor vascularity. 2) PTTG transactivates c-myc or other pro-proliferation genes. 3) PTTG overexpression causes aneuploidy. PTTG expression activates p53 and causes p53-dependent and -independent apoptosis. Due to lack of functional human pituitary cell cultures and appropriate animal models for pituitary tumors, many of the results reviewed here are obtained from heterologous systems.
Cyclin D1 has been shown to participate in the pathogenesis of breast cancer. This cell cycle-related protein has direct or indirect interactions with long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). In the present two-step study, we first identified CCND1-related lncRNAs through an in silico approach. Then, we measured expression of CCND1 mRNA and five lncRNAs in paired breast cancer samples and their matched non-cancerous samples obtained from adjacent tissues. HOTTIP expression was significantly higher in breast cancer tissues compared with adjacent tissues (expression ratio (95% CI)= 4.63 (1.56-13.76), P value= 0.0070). Similarly, CBR3-AS1 was up-regulated in cancerous tissues compared with control tissues (expression ration (95% CI)= 3.26 (1.35-7.86), P value= 0.0122). Expression of HOTTIP was higher in estrogen receptor (ER) negative samples compared with ER positive ones (-4.35 +/- 1.33 versus -4.63 +/- 0.62, P value=0.002). CBR3-AS1 could differentiate between these two sets of samples with AUC+/-SD, sensitivity, specificity and P values of 0.7 +/- 0.05, 0.9, 0.49 and 0.003, respectively. These values were 0.68 +/- 0.04, 0.87, 0.34 and 0.04 for HOTTIP. Although we could not find difference in expression of CCND1 between these two sets of samples, we reported up-regulation of two CCND1-related lncRNAs in breast cancer samples. These lncRNAs are putative markers for breast cancer.
OBJECTIVE/BACKGROUND: Proliferation is a widely recognized trigger for pulmonary hypertension (PH), a life-threatening, progressive disorder of pulmonary blood vessels. This study was aimed to identify some proliferation associated genes/targets for better comprehension of PH pathogenesis. METHODS: Human pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells (hPASMCs) were cultured in the presence or absence of human recombinant platelet derived growth factor (rhPDGF)-BB. Cells were collected for metabolomics or transcriptomics study. Gene profiling of lungs of PH rats after hypoxia exposure or of PH patients were retrieved from GEO database. RESULTS: 90 metabolites (VIP score >1, fold change >2 or <0.5 and p < .05) and 2701 unique metabolism associated genes (MAGs) were identified in rhPDGF-BB treated hPASMCs compared to control cells. In addition, 1151 differentially expressed genes (313 upregulated and 838 downregulated) were identified in rhPDGF-BB treated hPASMCs compared to control cells (fold change >2 or <0.5 and p < .05). 152 differentially expressed MAGs were then determined, out of which 9 hub genes (IL6, CXCL8, CCL2, CXCR4, CCND1, PLAUR, PLAU, HBEGF and F3) were defined as core proliferation associated hub genes in protein proten interaction analysis. In addition, the hub gene-based LASSO model can predict the occurrence of PH (AUC = 0.88). The expression of CXCR4, as one of the hub genes, was positively correlated to immune cell infiltrates. CONCLUSION: Our findings revealed some key proliferation associated genes in PH, which provide the crucial information concerning complex metabolic reprogramming and inflammatory modulation in response to proliferation signals and might offer therapeutic gains for PH.
PURPOSE: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) is a chronic sinonasal inflammatory disease characterized histologically by hyperplastic nasal epithelium and epithelial cells proliferation. Cysteine-rich angiogenic inducer 61 (CYR61) acts as a positive regulator of cell cycle process. Cyclin D1 (CCND1) and c-Myc play key roles in the processes of cell cycle and cell growth. The purpose of our research was to explore the expression and roles of CYR61, CCND1 and c-Myc in CRSwNP. METHODS: FeaturePlot and vlnPlot functions embedded in the seurat package (version 4.1.1) of R software (version 4.2.0) were applied to explore the cellular distribution of CYR61, CCND1 and c-Myc in the single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) dataset of nasal tissue samples. CYR61, CCND1 and c-Myc immunolabeling and mRNA levels in nasal tissue samples were assessed by immunohistochemistry and real-time PCR. Co-localization of CYR61, CCND1 and c-Myc with basal epithelial cell marker P63 was assayed using double-label immunofluorescence staining. Furthermore, we collected and cultured human nasal epithelial cells (HNEC) to assess the regulation and role of CYR61 in vitro study. RESULTS: CYR61, CCND1 and c-Myc were primarily expressed by nasal epithelial cells. Significant upregulation of CYR61, CCND1 and c-Myc positive cells and increased levels of CYR61, CCND1 and c-Myc mRNA were found in nasal polyps in comparison to control samples. Of note, CYR61 mRNA and protein levels were altered by SEB, LPS, IFN-gamma, IL-13, IL-17A and TGF-beta1 in HNEC. In addition, CYR61 intervention could increase CCND1 and c-Myc mRNA and protein levels to promote HNEC proliferation, and siRNA against ITGA2 (si-ITGA2) could reverse CYR61 induced upregulation of CCND1 and c-Myc mRNA and protein levels in HNEC and cell proliferation of HNEC. CONCLUSIONS: CYR61, CCND1 and c-Myc were primarily expressed by epithelial cells in nasal mucosa. CYR61, CCND1 and c-Myc expression levels were increased in CRSwNP compared with controls. CYR61 could interact with ITGA2 to enhance HNEC proliferation via upregulating CCND1 and c-Myc levels in the HNEC, leading to hyperplastic nasal epithelium in CRSwNP.
