C-C chemokine receptor type 1; Receptor for a C-C type chemokine. Binds to MIP-1-alpha, MIP- 1-delta, RANTES, and MCP-3 and, less efficiently, to MIP-1-beta or MCP- 1 and subsequently transduces a signal by increasing the intracellular calcium ions level. Responsible for affecting stem cell proliferation.
Eosinophils are terminally differentiated cells derived from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bone marrow. Several studies have confirmed the effective roles of eosinophils in asthmatic airway pathogenesis. However, their regulatory functions have not been well elucidated. Here, increased C-C chemokine ligand 6 (CCL6) in asthmatic mice and the human orthologs CCL15 and CCL23 that are highly expressed in asthma patients are described, which are mainly derived from eosinophils. Using Ccl6 knockout mice, further studies revealed CCL6-dependent allergic airway inflammation and committed eosinophilia in the bone marrow following ovalbumin (OVA) challenge and identified a CCL6-CCR1 regulatory axis in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Eosinophil differentiation and airway inflammation were remarkably decreased by the specific CCR1 antagonist BX471. Thus, the study identifies that the CCL6-CCR1 axis is involved in the crosstalk between eosinophils and HSCs during the development of allergic airway inflammation, which also reveals a potential therapeutic strategy for targeting G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) for future clinical treatment of asthma.
Despite the diverse etiologies of drug-induced liver injury (DILI), innate immunity activation is a common feature involved in DILI progression. However, the involvement of innate immunity regulation in inflammation resolution and liver regeneration in DILI remains obscure. Herein, we identified the chemokine CCL5 as a central mediator of innate immunity regulation in the pathogenesis of DILI. First, we showed that serum and hepatic CCL5 levels are elevated in both DILI patients and an APAP-induced liver injury (AILI) mouse model. Interestingly, both nonparenchymal cells and stressed hepatocytes are cell sources of CCL5 induction in response to liver injury. Functional experiments showed that CCL5 deficiency has no effect on the early phase of AILI but promotes liver repair in the late phase mainly by promoting inflammation resolution and liver regeneration, which are associated with an increased number of hepatic M2 macrophages. Mechanistically, CCL5 can directly activate M1 polarization and impede M2 polarization through the CCR1- and CCR5-mediated activation of the MAPK and NF-kappaB pathways. We then showed that CCL5 inhibition mediated by either a CCL5-neutralizing antibody or the antagonist Met-CCL5 can greatly alleviate liver injury and improve survival in an AILI mouse model. Our data demonstrate CCL5 induction during DILI, identify CCL5 as a novel innate immunity regulator in macrophage polarization, and suggest that CCL5 blockage is a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of DILI.
Regulatory T cells (Treg) are abundant in human and mouse pancreatic cancer. To understand the contribution to the immunosuppressive microenvironment, we depleted Tregs in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer. Contrary to our expectations, Treg depletion failed to relieve immunosuppression and led to accelerated tumor progression. We show that Tregs are a key source of TGFbeta ligands and, accordingly, their depletion reprogramed the fibroblast population, with loss of tumor-restraining, smooth muscle actin-expressing fibroblasts. Conversely, we observed an increase in chemokines Ccl3, Ccl6, and Ccl8 leading to increased myeloid cell recruitment, restoration of immune suppression, and promotion of carcinogenesis, an effect that was inhibited by blockade of the common CCL3/6/8 receptor CCR1. Further, Treg depletion unleashed pathologic CD4(+) T-cell responses. Our data point to new mechanisms regulating fibroblast differentiation in pancreatic cancer and support the notion that fibroblasts are a heterogeneous population with different and opposing functions in pancreatic carcinogenesis. SIGNIFICANCE: Here, we describe an unexpected cross-talk between Tregs and fibroblasts in pancreatic cancer. Treg depletion resulted in differentiation of inflammatory fibroblast subsets, in turn driving infiltration of myeloid cells through CCR1, thus uncovering a potentially new therapeutic approach to relieve immunosuppression in pancreatic cancer.See related commentary by Aykut et al., p. 345.This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 327.
Berlex and its parent company, Schering AG, are developing BX-471 (also known as ZK-811752), the lead in a series of non-peptide chemokine receptor 1 (CCR1) antagonists, for the potential treatment of autoimmune diseases, in particular multiple sclerosis (MS) [291682], [376290], [411184]. In March 2000, BX-471 was undergoing phase I trials for the potential treatment of autoimmune diseases [362022]; phase I trials in MS were ongoing in March 2002 [441989], [443941]. Positive results from these trials have been reported and Berlex was planning phase II trials in MS patients as of mid-March 2002 [444906]. In July 2001, Schering estimated filing in the US and EU in 2008 [411184], [416493]. WO-09856771 claims piperazinyl derivatives, pharmaceutical compositions comprising them and their use in the treatment of inflammatory conditions.
Macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha) and MIP-1beta are highly related members of the CC chemokine subfamily. Despite their structural similarities, MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta show diverging signaling capacities. Depending on the MIP-1 subtype and its NH(2)-terminal processing, one or more of the CC chemokine receptors CCR1, CCR2, CCR3 and CCR5 are recognized. Since both human MIP-1alpha subtypes (LD78alpha and LD78beta) and MIP-1beta signal through CCR5, the major co-receptor for M-tropic HIV-1 strains, these chemokines are capable of inhibiting HIV-1 infection in susceptible cells. In this review, different aspects of human and mouse MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta are discussed, including their protein and gene structures, their regulated production, their receptor usage and biological activities and their role in several pathologies including HIV-1 infection.
Macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha was identified 15 years ago as the first of now four members of the MIP-1 CC chemokine subfamily. These proteins termed CCL3 (MIP-1alpha), CCL4 (MIP-1beta), CCL9/10 (MIP-1delta), and CCL15 (MIP-1gamma) according to the revised nomenclature for chemokines are produced by many cells, particularly macrophages, dendritic cells, and lymphocytes. MIP-1 proteins, which act via G-protein-coupled cell surface receptors (CCR1, 3, 5), e.g. expressed by lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages (MPhi), are best known for their chemotactic and proinflammatory effects but can also promote homoeostasis. The encouraging results of preclinical studies in murine models of inflammation, i.e. asthma, arthritis, or multiple sclerosis, have led to the development of potent CCR3 and 5 antagonists, some of which are currently being tested in first clinical trials.
Chemokines constitute a family of small heparin-binding proteins which orchestrate the infiltration of leukocytes during inflammation, but also directly influence other physiological and pathophysiological processes. In humans, more than 40 chemokines are known binding to around 18 G-protein-coupled receptors. A non-redundant role of certain chemokines and their receptors has been identified within the last years in inflammation and host defense. Among chemokine receptors, the CC chemokine receptors CCR1 and CCR2 have been shown to play a crucial role in these processes. Importantly, these receptors have already been targeted by specific antagonists in early human trials for autoimmune and infectious diseases. Although most of these antagonists failed to show any significant efficacy in the clinic, the knowledge of their biological effects could henceforth offer new avenues with optimal strategies for producing successful therapeutics.
Pediatric high-grade gliomas (pHGGs), including hemispheric pHGGs and diffuse midline gliomas (DMGs), harbor mutually exclusive tumor location-specific histone mutations. Using immunocompetent de novo mouse models of pHGGs, we demonstrated that myeloid cells were the predominant infiltrating non-neoplastic cell population. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), flow cytometry, and immunohistochemistry illustrated the presence of heterogeneous myeloid cell populations shaped by histone mutations and tumor location. Disease-associated myeloid (DAM) cell phenotypes demonstrating immune permissive characteristics were identified in murine and human pHGG samples. H3.3K27M DMGs, the most aggressive DMG, demonstrated enrichment of DAMs. Genetic ablation of chemokines Ccl8 and Ccl12 resulted in a reduction of DAMs and an increase in lymphocyte infiltration, leading to increased survival of tumor-bearing mice. Pharmacologic inhibition of chemokine receptors CCR1 and CCR5 resulted in extended survival and decreased myeloid cell infiltration. This work establishes the tumor-promoting role of myeloid cells in DMG and the potential therapeutic opportunities for targeting them.
BACKGROUND: Chemokine ligands and their corresponding receptors are essential for regulating inflammatory responses. Chemokine receptors can stimulate immune activation or inhibit/promote signaling pathways by binding to specific chemokine ligands. Among these receptors, CC chemokine receptor 1 (CCR1) is extensively studied as a G protein-linked receptor target, predominantly expressed in various leukocytes, and is considered a promising target for anti-inflammatory therapy. Furthermore, CCR1 is essential for monocyte extravasation and transportation in inflammatory conditions. Its involvement in inflammatory diseases of the central nervous system (CNS), including multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, and stroke, has been extensively studied along with its ligands. Animal models have demonstrated the beneficial effects resulting from inhibiting CCR1 or its ligands. SUMMARY: This review demonstrates the significance of CCR1 in CNS inflammatory diseases, the molecules implicated in the inflammatory pathway, and potential drugs or molecules for treating CNS diseases. This evidence may offer new targets or strategies for treating inflammatory CNS diseases.
Mononuclear cells are involved in the pathogenesis of retinal diseases, including age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Here, we examined the mechanisms that underlie macrophage-driven retinal cell death. Monocytes were extracted from patients with AMD and differentiated into macrophages (hMd標s), which were characterized based on proteomics, gene expression, and ex vivo and in vivo properties. Using bioinformatics, we identified the signaling pathway involved in macrophage-driven retinal cell death, and we assessed the therapeutic potential of targeting this pathway. We found that M2a hMd標s were associated with retinal cell death in retinal explants and following adoptive transfer in a photic injury model. Moreover, M2a hMd標s express several CCRI (C-C chemokine receptor type 1) ligands. Importantly, CCR1 was upregulated in Muller cells in models of retinal injury and aging, and CCR1 expression was correlated with retinal damage. Lastly, inhibiting CCR1 reduced photic-induced retinal damage, photoreceptor cell apoptosis, and retinal inflammation. These data suggest that hMd標s, CCR1, and Muller cells work together to drive retinal and macular degeneration, suggesting that CCR1 may serve as a target for treating these sight-threatening conditions.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Chemokine (CC motif) receptor 1 (CCR1) promotes liver fibrosis in mice. However, its effects on nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) remain unclear. Therefore, the present study aimed to investigate the role of CCR1 in the progression of NASH. METHODS: Human serum and liver tissues were obtained from patients with NASH and controls. Systemic (Ccr1(-/-)) and liver macrophage-knockout Ccr1 (Ccr1(LKD)) mice were fed a high-cholesterol and high-fat (CL) diet for 12 weeks or a methionine/choline-deficient (MCD) diet for 4 weeks. BX471 was used to pharmacologically inhibit CCR1 in CL-fed mice. RESULTS: CCR1 was significantly upregulated in liver samples from patients with NASH and in animal models of dietary-induced NASH. In the livers of mice fed a CL diet for 12 weeks, the CCR1 protein colocalized with F4/80(+) macrophages rather than with hepatic stellate cells. Compared to their wild-type littermates, Ccr1(-/-) mice fed with the CL or MCD diet showed inhibition of NASH-associated hepatic steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis. Mechanistically, Ccr1 deficiency suppressed macrophage infiltration and activation by attenuating the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling. Similar results were observed in Ccr1(LKD) mice administered the CL diet. Moreover, CCR1 inhibition by BX471 effectively suppressed NASH progression in CL-fed mice. CONCLUSIONS: Ccr1 deficiency mitigated macrophage activity by inhibiting mTORC1 signaling, thereby preventing the development of NASH. Notably, the CCR1 inhibitor BX471 protected against NASH. These findings would help in developing novel strategies for the treatment of NASH.
The selective accumulation and activation of leukocytes in inflamed tissues contributes to the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases such as infection, rheumatoid arthritis, allergic asthma, atopic dermatitis, and multiple sclerosis. A substantial body of reports suggests that chemokines and their receptors, which belong to a family of seven transmembrane G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR), may be involved in the selective accumulation and activation of leukocytes in inflamed tissues, and in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. One such receptor is CCR1 which is a receptor for CC chemokines, such as CCL5 (RANTES) and CCL3 (MIP-1alpha). The involvement of CCR1 in immunological diseases now is documented in several preclinical studies with CCR1 deficient mice, anti-CCR1 antibodies and CCR1 antagonists, suggesting that CCR1 may be an attractive therapeutic target for a variety of diseases. Publications and patents describing CCR1 antagonists and their pharmacological effects have recently been disclosed. This review highlights the biology and pathophysiology of CCR1, and some of its currently reported antagonists. Additionally, our approach to CCR1 drug discovery is summarized.
CCL13/MCP-4, is a CC family chemokine that is chemoattractant for eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, macrophages, immature dendritic cells, and T cells, and its capable of inducing crucial immuno-modulatory responses through its effects on epithelial, muscular and endothelial cells. Similar to other CC chemokines, CCL13 binds to several chemokine receptors (CCR1, CCR2 and CCR3), allowing it to elicit different effects on its target cells. A number of studies have shown that CCL13 is involved in many chronic inflammatory diseases, in which it functions as a pivotal molecule involved in the selective recruitment of cell lineages to the inflamed tissues and their subsequent activation. Based on these studies, we suggest that blocking the actions of CCL13 can serve as a novel strategy for the generation of agents with anti-inflammatory activity. The main goal of this review is to present the current information about CCL13, its gene and protein structure and the roles of this chemokine during innate/adaptive immune responses in inflammatory diseases.
Chemokines and their receptors are central to the inflammatory process and are attractive therapeutic targets. Drugs that inhibit chemokine receptors are approved for the treatment of HIV infection and for stem cell mobilization, but none have been approved yet for the treatment of inflammatory and/or autoimmune diseases. We analyse the challenges of developing chemokine receptor antagonists, and propose that inappropriate target selection and ineffective dosing, not the 'redundancy' of the chemokine system, are the main barriers to their use as anti-inflammatory therapies. We highlight evidence suggesting that chemokine receptor inhibition will prove to be an effective therapy in inflammatory diseases.
There is a growing interest in the role of chemokines and their receptors in the determination of mast cell tissue localization and how chemokines regulate mast cell function. At least nine chemokine receptors (CXCR1, CXCR2, CXCR3, CXCR4, CX3CR1, CCR1, CCR3, CCR4 and CCR5) have been described to be expressed by human mast cells of different origins. Seven chemokines (CXCL1, CXCL5, CXCL8, CXCL14, CX3CL1, CCL5 and CCL11) have been shown to act on some of these receptors and to induce mast cell migration. Mast cells have a unique expression pattern of CCR3, CXCR1 and CXCR2. These receptors are mainly expressed intracellularly on cytoplasmic membranes. Upon an allergic activation, CCR3 expression is increased on the cell surface and the cell becomes vulnerable for CCL11 treatment. Chemokines do not induce mast cell degranulation but CXCL14 causes secretion of de novo synthesized CXCL8. Because of the expression of CCR3, CCR5 and CXCR4 on mast cell progenitors, these cells are susceptible to HIV infection and mast cells might therefore be a persistent HIV reservoir in AIDS. In this review, we summarize the knowledge about chemokine receptor expression and function on mast cells.
The invasion of an extravillous trophoblast (EVT) into maternal decidual tissues, especially towards maternal spiral arteries, is an essential process in the human placental formation and subsequent normal fetal development. However, the precise regulatory mechanisms to induce EVT invasion towards arteries and/or to protect EVT from further invasion are not well understood. We found that a chemokine receptor, CCR1, was specifically expressed on EVT migrating towards maternal arteries. Using EVT isolated from a primary villous explant culture, RANTES, which is one of the ligands for CCR1, was shown to enhance EVT invasion. Furthermore, we observed that the platelets were deposited among intravascular EVT and platelet-derived soluble factors, which contained RANTES, enhanced EVT invasion. On the one hand, dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPPIV), which can metabolize RANTES on the cell surface, was expressed on non-invading EVT and was demonstrated to suppress EVT invasion. In contrast, laeverin/aminopeptidase Q, which is specifically expressed on EVT, was shown to induce EVT invasion. Also, CD9 which is a cell surface marker of platelets and a regulator of integrin function was expressed on EVT and gene knockdown of the CD9 molecule enhanced EVT invasion. These findings suggest that the chemokine-chemokine receptor, chemokine-peptidase, and CD9-integrin systems play important roles in the regulation of EVT invasion during early human placental formation.
While a number of agents directed at chemokine receptors have entered clinic trials, the vast majority of these have failed, and the enthusiasm for this class of drugs has been attenuated. To date, there are two drugs that inhibit chemokine receptors approved by the FDA. The first to be approved in 2007 was maraviroc (brand name Selzentry, or Celsentri outside the US) which targets CCR5 and is used for the treatment of HIV infection. The second is plerixafor (Mozobil) which was approved in 2008, targets CXCR4, and is used for the mobilization of hematopoietic stem cells. This review will focus on the CC chemokine receptors CCR1 and CCR5. These G protein coupled receptors are both activated by a relatively large number of chemokines, most of which overlap. While most of the drugs for CCR1 have been assessed in the context of autoimmune diseases like multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, and those for CCR5 were examined for HIV-infection, we review the role of these receptors in relation to cancer. Recently introduced pharmacophores that serve as agonists or antagonists for the receptors are presented. Efforts to exploit polypharmacology approaches using promiscuous compounds that target more than one receptor are also considered.
Inflammatory mediators such as cytokines and chemokines are crucially involved in the development of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). Here we report that CaCl(2) application into abdominal aorta induces AAA with intra-aortic infiltration of macrophages as well as enhanced expression of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 3 (CCL3) and MMP-9. Moreover, infiltrating macrophages express C-C chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5, a specific receptor for CCL3) and MMP-9. Both Ccl3(-/-) mice and Ccr5(-/-) but not Ccr1(-/-) mice exhibit exaggerated CaCl(2)-inducced AAA with augmented macrophage infiltration and MMP-9 expression. Similar observations are also obtained on an angiotensin II-induced AAA model. Immunoneutralization of CCL3 mimics the phenotypes observed in CaCl(2)-treated Ccl3(-/-) mice. On the contrary, CCL3 treatment attenuates CaCl(2)-induced AAA in both wild-type and Ccl3(-/-) mice. Consistently, we find that the CCL3-CCR5 axis suppresses PMA-induced enhancement of MMP-9 expression in macrophages. Thus, CCL3 can be effective to prevent the development of CaCl(2)-induced AAA by suppressing MMP-9 expression.
Chemokines are chemotactic proteins which play a central role in immune and inflammatory responses. Chemokine receptors are members of the seven transmembrane G-protein coupled family and have recently been shown to be involved in the entry of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) into target cells. To study chemokine endocytosis in detail we have used novel site-specific chemistry to make a fluorescently labeled CC-chemokine agonist (rhodamine-MIP-1alpha) and antagonist (NBD-RANTES). We have also generated a CHO cell line stably expressing a hemagglutinin-tagged version of the CC-chemokine receptor 1 (CCR1), and using these reagents we have examined the receptor-mediated endocytosis of CC-chemokines by confocal microscopy. Our studies reveal that the agonist was internalized and accumulated in transferrin receptor-positive endosomes whereas the antagonist failed to internalize. However, receptor-bound antagonist could be induced to internalize by co-administration of agonist. Analysis of receptor redistribution following chemokine addition confirmed that sequestration was induced by agonists but not by antagonists.
OBJECTIVE: The relationship between macrophages and the gut microbiota in patients with atherosclerosis remains poorly defined, and effective biological markers are lacking. This study aims to elucidate the interplay between gut microbial communities and macrophages, and to identify biomarkers associated with the destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques. The goal is to enhance our understanding of the underlying molecular pathways and to pave new avenues for diagnostic approaches and therapeutic strategies in the disease. METHODS: This study employed Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) and differential expression analysis on atherosclerosis datasets to identify macrophage-associated genes and quantify the correlation between these genes and gut microbiota gene sets. The Random Forest algorithm was utilized to pinpoint PLEK, IRF8, BTK, CCR1, and CD68 as gut microbiota-related macrophage genes, and a nomogram was constructed. Based on the top five genes, a Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) algorithm was applied to construct gut microbiota-related macrophage clusters and analyze their potential biological alterations. Subsequent single-cell analyses were conducted to observe the expression patterns of the top five genes and the interactions between immune cells. Finally, the expression profiles of key molecules were validated using clinical samples from atherosclerosis patients. RESULTS: Utilizing the Random Forest algorithm, we ultimately identified PLEK, IRF8, CD68, CCR1, and BTK as gut microbiota-associated macrophage genes that are upregulated in atherosclerotic plaques. A nomogram based on the expression of these five genes was constructed for use as an auxiliary tool in clinical diagnosis. Single-cell analysis confirmed the specific expression of gut microbiota-associated macrophage genes in macrophages. Clinical samples substantiated the high expression of PLEK in unstable atherosclerotic plaques. CONCLUSION: Gut microbiota-associated macrophage genes (PLEK, IRF8, CD68, CCR1, and BTK) may be implicated in the pathogenesis of atherosclerotic plaques and could serve as diagnostic markers to aid patients with atherosclerosis.
