C-C chemokine receptor type 2; Key functional receptor for CCL2 but can also bind CCL7 and CCL12. Its binding with CCL2 on monocytes and macrophages mediates chemotaxis and migration induction through the activation of the PI3K cascade, the small G protein Rac and lamellipodium protrusion (Probable). Also acts as a receptor for the beta-defensin DEFB106A/DEFB106B. Regulates the expression of T-cell inflammatory cytokines and T-cell differentiation, promoting the differentiation of T-cells into T-helper 17 cells (Th17) during inflammation (By similarity). Facilitates the export of matur [...] 
Cardiac macrophages represent a heterogeneous cell population with distinct origins, dynamics, and functions. Recent studies have revealed that C-C Chemokine Receptor 2 positive (CCR2(+)) macrophages derived from infiltrating monocytes regulate myocardial inflammation and heart failure pathogenesis. Comparatively little is known about the functions of tissue resident (CCR2(-)) macrophages. Herein, we identified an essential role for CCR2(-) macrophages in the chronically failing heart. Depletion of CCR2(-) macrophages in mice with dilated cardiomyopathy accelerated mortality and impaired ventricular remodeling and coronary angiogenesis, adaptive changes necessary to maintain cardiac output in the setting of reduced cardiac contractility. Mechanistically, CCR2(-) macrophages interacted with neighboring cardiomyocytes via focal adhesion complexes and were activated in response to mechanical stretch through a transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4)-dependent pathway that controlled growth factor expression. These findings establish a role for tissue-resident macrophages in adaptive cardiac remodeling and implicate mechanical sensing in cardiac macrophage activation.
Chemokines constitute a family of chemoattractant cytokines and are subdivided into four families on the basis of the number and spacing of the conserved cysteine residues in the N-terminus of the protein. Chemokines play a major role in selectively recruiting monocytes, neutrophils, and lymphocytes, as well as in inducing chemotaxis through the activation of G-protein-coupled receptors. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2) is one of the key chemokines that regulate migration and infiltration of monocytes/macrophages. Both CCL2 and its receptor CCR2 have been demonstrated to be induced and involved in various diseases. Migration of monocytes from the blood stream across the vascular endothelium is required for routine immunological surveillance of tissues, as well as in response to inflammation. This review will discuss these biological processes and the structure and function of CCL2.
Macrophages are major players in the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).To investigate whether lung macrophages and pulmonary-artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) collaborate to stimulate PASMC growth and whether the CCL2-CCR2 and CCL5-CCR5 pathways inhibited macrophage-PASMC interactions and PAH development, we used human CCR5-knock-in mice and PASMCs from patients with PAH and controls.Conditioned media from murine M1 or M2 macrophages stimulated PASMC growth. This effect was markedly amplified with conditioned media from M2 macrophage/PASMC co-cultures. CCR2, CCR5, CCL2 and CCL5 were upregulated in macrophage/PASMC co-cultures. Compared to inhibiting either receptor, dual CCR2 and CCR5 inhibition more strongly attenuated the growth-promoting effect of conditioned media from M2-macrophage/PASMC co-cultures. Deleting either CCR2 or CCR5 in macrophages or PASMCs attenuated the growth response. In mice with hypoxia- or SUGEN/hypoxia-induced PH, targeting both CCR2 and CCR5 prevented or reversed PH more efficiently than targeting either receptor alone. Patients with PAH exhibited CCR2 and CCR5 upregulation in PASMCs and perivascular macrophages compared to controls. The PASMC growth-promoting effect of conditioned media from M2-macrophage/PASMC co-cultures was greater when PASMCs from PAH patients were used in the co-cultures or as the target cells and was dependent on CCR2 and CCR5. PASMC migration toward M2-macrophages was greater with PASMCs from PAH patients and was attenuated by blocking CCR2 and CCR5.CCR2 and CCR5 are required for collaboration between macrophages and PASMCs to initiate and amplify PASMC migration and proliferation during PAH development. Dual targeting of CCR2 and CCR5 may hold promise for treating human PAH.
OBJECTIVE: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an aggressive malignancy with limited effective treatment options. An alternative strategy is to target cells, such as tumour-infiltrating macrophages, in the HCC tumour microenvironment. The CCL2/CCR2 axis is required for recruitment of monocytes/macrophages and is implicated in various aspects of liver pathology, including HCC. We investigated the feasibility of CCL2/CCR2 as a therapeutic target against HCC. DESIGN: CCL2 expression was analysed in two independent HCC cohorts. Growth of three murine HCC cells was evaluated in an orthotopic model, a postsurgical recurrence model and a subcutaneous model in mice after blocking CCL2/CCR2 axis by a novel CCR2 antagonist or knocking out of host CCR2. In vivo macrophage or T cell depletion and in vitro cell coculture were further conducted to investigate CCL2/CCR2-mediated crosstalk between tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) and tumour cells. RESULT: CCL2 is overexpressed in human liver cancers and is prognostic for patients with HCC. Blockade of CCL2/CCR2 signalling with knockout of CCR2 or with a CCR2 antagonist inhibits malignant growth and metastasis, reduces postsurgical recurrence, and enhances survival. Further, therapeutic blocking of the CCL2/CCR2 axis inhibits the recruitment of inflammatory monocytes, infiltration and M2-polarisation of TAMs, resulting in reversal of the immunosuppression status of the tumour microenvironment and activation of an antitumorous CD8(+) T cell response. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with liver cancer, CCL2 is highly expressed and is a prognostic factor. Blockade of CCL2/CCR2 signalling suppresses murine liver tumour growth via activating T cell antitumour immune response. The results demonstrate the translational potential of CCL2/CCR2 blockade for treatment of HCCs.
OBJECTIVES: While various monocyte chemokine systems are increased in expression in osteoarthritis (OA), the hierarchy of chemokines and chemokine receptors in mediating monocyte/macrophage recruitment to the OA joint remains poorly defined. Here, we investigated the relative contributions of the CCL2/CCR2 versus CCL5/CCR5 chemokine axes in OA pathogenesis. METHODS: Ccl2-, Ccr2-, Ccl5- and Ccr5-deficient and control mice were subjected to destabilisation of medial meniscus surgery to induce OA. The pharmacological utility of blocking CCL2/CCR2 signalling in mouse OA was investigated using bindarit, a CCL2 synthesis inhibitor, and RS-504393, a CCR2 antagonist. Levels of monocyte chemoattractants in synovial tissues and fluids from patients with joint injuries without OA and those with established OA were investigated using a combination of microarray analyses, multiplexed cytokine assays and immunostains. RESULTS: Mice lacking CCL2 or CCR2, but not CCL5 or CCR5, were protected against OA with a concomitant reduction in local monocyte/macrophage numbers in their joints. In synovial fluids from patients with OA, levels of CCR2 ligands (CCL2, CCL7 and CCL8) but not CCR5 ligands (CCL3, CCL4 and CCL5) were elevated. We found that CCR2+ cells are abundant in human OA synovium and that CCR2+ macrophages line, invade and are associated with the erosion of OA cartilage. Further, blockade of CCL2/CCR2 signalling markedly attenuated macrophage accumulation, synovitis and cartilage damage in mouse OA. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that monocytes recruited via CCL2/CCR2, rather than by CCL5/CCR5, propagate inflammation and tissue damage in OA. Selective targeting of the CCL2/CCR2 system represents a promising therapeutic approach for OA.
During mechanical force-induced alveolar bone remodeling, macrophage-mediated local inflammation plays a critical role. Yet, the detailed heterogeneity of macrophages is still unknown. Single-cell RNA sequencing was used to study the transcriptome heterogeneity of macrophages during alveolar bone remodeling. We identified macrophage subclusters with specific gene expression profiles and functions. CellChat and trajectory analysis revealed a central role of the Ccr2 cluster during development, with the CCL signaling pathway playing a crucial role. We further demonstrated that the Ccr2 cluster modulated bone remodeling associated inflammation through an NF-kappaB dependent pathway. Blocking CCR2 could significantly reduce the Orthodontic tooth movement (OTM) progression. In addition, we confirmed the variation of CCR2(+) macrophages in human periodontal tissues. Our findings reveal that mechanical force-induced functional shift of the Ccr2 macrophages cluster mediated by NF-kappaB pathway, leading to a pro-inflammatory response and bone remodeling. This macrophage cluster may represent a potential target for the manipulation of OTM.
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a major worldwide health concern that currently lacks effective medical treatments. PSMP is a damage-induced chemotactic cytokine that acts as a ligand of CCR2 and has an unknown role in AKI. We have observed a significant increase in PSMP levels in the renal tissue, urine, and plasma of patients with AKI. PSMP deficiency improved kidney function and decreased tubular damage and inflammation in AKI mouse models induced by kidney ischemia-reperfusion injury, glycerol, and cisplatin. Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis revealed that Ly6C(hi) or F4/80(lo) infiltrated macrophages (IMs) were a major group of proinflammatory macrophages with strong CCR2 expression in AKI. We observed that PSMP deficiency decreased CCR2(+)Ly6C(hi) or F4/80(lo) IMs and inhibited M1 polarization in the AKI mouse model. Moreover, overexpressed human PSMP in the mouse kidney could reverse the attenuation of kidney injury in a CCR2-dependent manner, and this effect could be achieved without CCL2 involvement. Extracellular PSMP played a crucial role, and treatment with a PSMP-neutralizing antibody significantly reduced kidney injury in vivo. Therefore, PSMP might be a therapeutic target for AKI, and its antibody is a promising therapeutic drug for the treatment of AKI.
Embryonic implantation, the process by which the human embryo orientates towards, attaches to and finally invades the underlying maternal endometrial tissue, requires a receptive endometrium, a functionally normal blastocyst and an adequate cross-communication between them. During apposition, human blastocysts find a location in which to implant, while they are guided to a specific area in the maternal endometrium. In the adhesion phase, which occurs 6 to 7 days after ovulation, within the so-called "implantation window", direct contact occurs between the endometrial epithelium (EE) and the trophectoderm (TE). Finally, in the invasion phase, the embryonic trophoblast traverses the basement membrane and passes the endometrial stroma and reaches the uterine vessels. Many molecules (hormones, cytokines, integrins, enzymes, etc.) take part in the dialogue between the human blastocyst and the maternal endometrium to achieve implantation. Here, we present our published data on the embryonic regulation of endometrial epithelial molecules such as chemokine receptors and the leptin system.
This review focuses on the construction and application of structural chemokine receptor models for the elucidation of molecular determinants of chemokine receptor modulation and the structure-based discovery and design of chemokine receptor ligands. A comparative analysis of ligand binding pockets in chemokine receptors is presented, including a detailed description of the CXCR4, CCR2, CCR5, CCR9, and US28 X-ray structures, and their implication for modeling molecular interactions of chemokine receptors with small-molecule ligands, peptide ligands, and large antibodies and chemokines. These studies demonstrate how the integration of new structural information on chemokine receptors with extensive structure-activity relationship and site-directed mutagenesis data facilitates the prediction of the structure of chemokine receptor-ligand complexes that have not been crystallized. Finally, a review of structure-based ligand discovery and design studies based on chemokine receptor crystal structures and homology models illustrates the possibilities and challenges to find novel ligands for chemokine receptors.
Chemokines constitute a family of small heparin-binding proteins which orchestrate the infiltration of leukocytes during inflammation, but also directly influence other physiological and pathophysiological processes. In humans, more than 40 chemokines are known binding to around 18 G-protein-coupled receptors. A non-redundant role of certain chemokines and their receptors has been identified within the last years in inflammation and host defense. Among chemokine receptors, the CC chemokine receptors CCR1 and CCR2 have been shown to play a crucial role in these processes. Importantly, these receptors have already been targeted by specific antagonists in early human trials for autoimmune and infectious diseases. Although most of these antagonists failed to show any significant efficacy in the clinic, the knowledge of their biological effects could henceforth offer new avenues with optimal strategies for producing successful therapeutics.
Chemokines are a family of small cytokines, which guide a variety of immune/inflammatory cells to the site of tumor in tumorigenesis. A dysregulated expression of chemokines is implicated in different types of cancer including prostate cancer. The progression and metastasis of prostate cancer involve a complex network of chemokines that regulate the recruitment and trafficking of immune cells. The chemokine CCL2 and its main receptor CCR2 have been receiving particular interest on their roles in cancer pathogenesis. The up-regulation of CCL2/CCR2 and varied immune conditions in prostate cancer, are associated with cancer advancement, metastasis, and relapse. Here we reviewed recent findings, which link CCL2/CCR2 to the inflammation and cancer pathogenesis, and discussed the therapeutic potential of CCL2/CCR2 axis in cancer treatment based on results from our group and other investigators, with a major focus on prostate cancer. Video Abstract.
Myeloid cells, which originate from hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs), play a crucial role in mitigating infections. This study aimed to explore the impact of mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) on the differentiation of HSPCs and progenitors through the C-C motif chemokine CCL2/CCR2 signaling pathway. Murine MSCs, identified as PDGFRalpha(+)Sca-1(+) cells (PalphaS cells), were found to secrete CCL2, particularly in response to lipopolysaccharide stimulation. MSC-secreted CCL2 promoted the differentiation of granulocyte/macrophage progenitors into the myeloid lineage. MSC-derived CCL2 plays an important role in the early phase of myeloid cell differentiation in vivo. Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis confirmed that CCL2-mediated cell fate determination was also observed in human bone marrow cells. These findings provide valuable insights for investigating the in vivo effects of MSC transplantation.
Rationale: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive inflammatory lung disease without effective molecular markers of disease activity or treatment responses. Monocyte and interstitial macrophages that express the C-C motif CCR2 (chemokine receptor 2) are active in IPF and central to fibrosis.Objectives: To phenotype patients with IPF for potential targeted therapy, we developed (64)Cu-DOTA-ECL1i, a radiotracer to noninvasively track CCR2(+) monocytes and macrophages using positron emission tomography (PET).Methods: CCR2(+) cells were investigated in mice with bleomycin- or radiation-induced fibrosis and in human subjects with IPF. The CCR2(+) cell populations were localized relative to fibrotic regions in lung tissue and characterized using immunolocalization, single-cell mass cytometry, and Ccr2 RNA in situ hybridization and then correlated with parallel quantitation of lung uptake by (64)Cu-DOTA-ECL1i PET.Measurements and Main Results: Mouse models established that increased (64)Cu-DOTA-ECL1i PET uptake in the lung correlates with CCR2(+) cell infiltration associated with fibrosis (n = 72). As therapeutic models, the inhibition of fibrosis by IL-1beta blockade (n = 19) or antifibrotic pirfenidone (n = 18) reduced CCR2(+) macrophage accumulation and uptake of the radiotracer in mouse lungs. In lung tissues from patients with IPF, CCR2(+) cells concentrated in perifibrotic regions and correlated with radiotracer localization (n = 21). Human imaging revealed little lung uptake in healthy volunteers (n = 7), whereas subjects with IPF (n = 4) exhibited intensive signals in fibrotic zones.Conclusions: These findings support a role for imaging CCR2(+) cells within the fibrogenic niche in IPF to provide a molecular target for personalized therapy and monitoring.Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03492762).
CCL13/MCP-4, is a CC family chemokine that is chemoattractant for eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, macrophages, immature dendritic cells, and T cells, and its capable of inducing crucial immuno-modulatory responses through its effects on epithelial, muscular and endothelial cells. Similar to other CC chemokines, CCL13 binds to several chemokine receptors (CCR1, CCR2 and CCR3), allowing it to elicit different effects on its target cells. A number of studies have shown that CCL13 is involved in many chronic inflammatory diseases, in which it functions as a pivotal molecule involved in the selective recruitment of cell lineages to the inflamed tissues and their subsequent activation. Based on these studies, we suggest that blocking the actions of CCL13 can serve as a novel strategy for the generation of agents with anti-inflammatory activity. The main goal of this review is to present the current information about CCL13, its gene and protein structure and the roles of this chemokine during innate/adaptive immune responses in inflammatory diseases.
CCR5 serves as R5-tropic HIV co-receptor. Knocking out CCR5 in HIV patients, which has occurred <10 times, is believed important for cure. JAK/STAT inhibitors tofacitinib and ruxolitinib inhibit CCR5 expression in HIV(+) viremic patients. We investigated the association of JAK/STAT signaling pathway with CCR5/CCR2 expression in human primary CD4(+) T cells and confirmed its importance. Six of nine JAK/STAT inhibitors that reduced CCR5/CCR2 expression were identified. Inhibitor-treated CD4(+) T cells were relatively resistant, specifically to R5-tropic HIV infection. Furthermore, single JAK2, STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B knockout and different combinations of JAK/STAT knockout significantly reduced CCR2/CCR5 expression of both RNA and protein levels, indicating that CCR5/CCR2 expression was positively regulated by JAK-STAT pathway in CD4(+) T cells. Serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) knockout affected CCR2/CCR5 gene expression, suggesting that SGK1 is involved in CCR2/CCR5 regulation. If cell surface CCR5 levels can be specifically and markedly down-regulated without adverse effects, that may have a major impact on the HIV cure agenda.
Astrocytes play vital roles in blood-brain barrier (BBB) maintenance, yet how they support BBB integrity under normal or pathological conditions remains poorly defined. Recent evidence suggests that ion homeostasis is a cellular mechanism important for BBB integrity. In the current study, we investigated the function of an astrocyte-specific pH regulator, Slc4a4, in BBB maintenance and repair. We show that astrocytic Slc4a4 is required for normal astrocyte morphological complexity and BBB function. Multi-omics analyses identified increased astrocytic secretion of CCL2 coupled with dysregulated arginine-NO metabolism after Slc4a4 deletion. Using a model of ischemic stroke, we found that loss of Slc4a4 exacerbates BBB disruption, which was rescued by pharmacological or genetic inhibition of the CCL2-CCR2 pathway in vivo. Together, our study identifies the astrocytic Slc4a4-CCL2 and endothelial CCR2 axis as a mechanism controlling BBB integrity and repair, while providing insights for a therapeutic approach against BBB-related CNS disorders.
A high postoperative tumour recurrence rate has significantly rendered a poorer prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. The aim of this study is to identify a natural compound genipin as a potential and effective candidate to suppress the postoperative recurrence of HCC. Clinical analysis revealed that infiltration of macrophage into the adjacent tissue but not HCC predicted patients' poor prognosis on recurrence-free survival. Genipin intervention suppressed the Ly6C+CD11b+F4/80+ pro-inflammatory macrophage infiltration in the postoperative liver of mice. Adoptive transfer of pro-inflammatory monocytic cells completely abolished the inhibitory effect of genipin on HCC recurrence. Transcriptomic analysis on FACs-sorted macrophages from the postoperative livers of mice revealed that PPARgamma signalling was involved in the regulatory effect of genipin. Genipin is directly bound to PPARgamma, causing PPARgamma-induced p65 degradation, which in turn suppressed the transcriptional activation of CCR2 signalling. PPARgamma antagonist GW9662 abrogated the effects of genipin on CCR2-medaited macrophage infiltration as well as HCC recurrence. Cytokine array analysis identified that genipin intervention potently suppressed the secretion of CCL2 further partially contributed to the pro-inflammatory macrophage infiltration into the postoperative liver. Multiplex immunostaining on tissue array of human HCC revealed that PPARgamma expression was inversely associated with CCL2 and the macrophage infiltration in the adjacent liver of HCC patients. Our works provide scientific evidence for the therapeutic potential of genipin as a PPARgamma agonist in preventing postoperative recurrence of HCC.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are, and will probably remain, the most tractable class of targets for the development of small-molecule therapeutic medicines. Currently, all approved GPCR-directed medicines are agonists or antagonists at orthosteric binding sites - except for the calcimimetic cinacalcet, which is a positive allosteric modulator of Ca(2+)-sensing receptors, and maraviroc, an allosteric inhibitor of CC-chemokine receptor (CCR) 5. It is now widely accepted that GPCRs exist and might function as dimers, and there is growing evidence for the physiological presence and relevance of GPCR heterodimers. Molecules that can regulate a GPCR within a heterodimer, through allosteric effects between the two protomers of the dimer or between a protomer or protomers and the associated G protein, offer the potential to function in a highly selective and tissue-specific way. Despite the conceptual attraction of such allosteric regulators of GPCR heterodimers as drugs, they cannot be identified by screening approaches that routinely use a 'one GPCR target at a time' strategy. In our opinion, this will require the development of new approaches for screening and a return to the use of physiologically relevant cell systems at an early stage in compound identification.
Acute lung injury (ALI) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) are severe inflammatory lung diseases associated with very high mortality, and are the most common and earliest organ dysfunctions in the development of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. The NIH estimates that more than 4.5 million people suffer from ALI/ARDS per year. Although the American-European Consensus Conference definition has been widely used for approximately 40 years, it still has some limitations that may impact on the conduct of clinical research and management of patients with ALI/ARDS. This article will focus on the role of CC chemokine receptor 2 and IL-8 in the pathogenesis and resolution in ALI/ARDS.
BACKGROUND: Macrophages expressing CC chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) possess characteristics and performance akin to M1 polarized macrophages, which promote inflammation. Advanced heart failure (HF) patients with higher abundance of CCR2+ macrophages are more likely to experience adverse remodeling. The precise mechanism of CCR2+ macrophages in how they affect the progression of dilated cardiomyopathy remains unknown. METHODS: Cardiac biopsy samples from dilated cardiomyopathy patients (DCM) were used for immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence staining. PCR is employed to identify the IL-1beta, IL-6, TNF-alpha, TGF-beta, MMP2, MMP9, PKM1, PKM1, GLUT1, GLUT2, GLUT3, GLUT4, PDK1, PFKFB3, PFK1 and HK2 mRNA expression of CCR2+ monocytes/macrophages from the peripheral blood of DCM patients. Seahorse was used to evaluate the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) of CCR2+ monocytes/macrophages. 2-DG was used to simulate a lack of glucose. Lentivirus containing GLUT1 inhibitory sequence was used to knockdown GLUT1 gene expression of CCR2+ monocytes/macrophages. Western Blot and immunofluorescence staining was used to evaluate the expression of NLRP3. RESULTS: Immunostaining results of cardiac biopsy tissue from dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) patients demonstrated that the progression to HF was associated with an increase in the number of CCR2+ macrophages. PCR results demonstrated that CCR2 monocytes and macrophages derived from the blood of DCM patients expressed elevated levels of inflammatory factors and up regulation of glycolysis related genes. In addition, OCR and glucose uptake experiments confirmed that increased glucose uptake of these cells was associated with greater inflammation and correlated with a worsening of cardiac function. limiting the glucose supply to CCR2+ monocytes and macrophages, or suppressing the activity of glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) could reduce inflammation levels. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that CCR2+ monocytes and macrophages rely on metabolic reprogramming to trigger inflammatory response and contribute to myocardial injury and the progression of DCM.
