C-C chemokine receptor type 3; Receptor for C-C type chemokine. Binds and responds to a variety of chemokines, including CCL11, CCL26, CCL7, CCL13, RANTES(CCL5) and CCL15. Subsequently transduces a signal by increasing the intracellular calcium ions level. In addition acts as a possible functional receptor for NARS1.
BACKGROUND: Eosinophils are elusive cells involved in allergic inflammation. Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) is an emerging approach to deeply characterize cellular properties, heterogeneity, and functionality. OBJECTIVES: We sought to comprehensively characterize the transcriptome and biological functions of human eosinophils at a site of severe allergic inflammation in the esophagus (ie, eosinophilic esophagitis [EoE]). METHODS: We employed a gravity-based scRNA-seq methodology to sequence blood eosinophils from patients with EoE and control individuals compared to a reanalyzed public scRNA-seq dataset of human esophageal eosinophils of EoE patients. We used flow cytometry, immunostaining, and a stimulation assay to verify mRNA findings. RESULTS: In total, scRNA-seq was obtained from 586 eosinophils (188 from blood [n = 6 individuals] and 398 from esophagus [n = 6 individuals]). The esophageal eosinophils were composed of a population of activated eosinophils (enriched in 659 genes compared with peripheral blood-associated eosinophils) and a small population of eosinophils resembling peripheral blood eosinophils (enriched in 62 genes compared with esophageal eosinophils). Esophageal eosinophils expressed genes involved in sensing and responding to diverse stimuli, most notably IFN-gamma, IL-10, histamine and leukotrienes, and succinate. Esophageal eosinophils were most distinguished from other esophageal populations by gene expression of the receptors CCR3, HRH4, SUCNR1, and VSTM1; transcription factors CEBPE, OLIG1, and OLIG2; protease PRSS33; and the hallmark eosinophil gene CLC. A web of bidirectional eosinophil interactions with other esophageal populations was derived. Comparing esophageal eosinophils and mast cells revealed that esophageal eosinophils expressed genes involved in DNAX-activation protein-12 (also known as TYROBP) interactions, IgG receptor-triggered events, immunoregulation, and IL-10 signaling. CONCLUSIONS: In EoE, esophageal eosinophils exist as 2 populations, a minority population resembling blood eosinophils and the other population characterized by high de novo transcription of diverse sensing receptors and inflammatory mediators readying them to potentially intersect with diverse cell types.
Macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha) and MIP-1beta are highly related members of the CC chemokine subfamily. Despite their structural similarities, MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta show diverging signaling capacities. Depending on the MIP-1 subtype and its NH(2)-terminal processing, one or more of the CC chemokine receptors CCR1, CCR2, CCR3 and CCR5 are recognized. Since both human MIP-1alpha subtypes (LD78alpha and LD78beta) and MIP-1beta signal through CCR5, the major co-receptor for M-tropic HIV-1 strains, these chemokines are capable of inhibiting HIV-1 infection in susceptible cells. In this review, different aspects of human and mouse MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta are discussed, including their protein and gene structures, their regulated production, their receptor usage and biological activities and their role in several pathologies including HIV-1 infection.
Eotaxin is a small protein that is produced in the lungs of asthmatic patients and is a potent chemoattractant for eosinophils. Eotaxin, a CC chemokine, stimulates the migration of eosinophils from the small blood vessels in the lungs by acting on the CC chemokine receptor CCR3, which is located on the leukocyte cell surface. In the past year, three low molecular weight compounds have been developed that can block this receptor. Such compounds may be developed into orally available drugs aimed at preventing eosinophil recruitment and, hence, the pathogenesis associated with the activation of these cells within the lung tissue.
Allergic diseases such as atopic dermatitis, asthma, and allergic rhinitis represent a significant healthcare problem. Understanding these diseases as dysregulated inflammatory responses has led to many new targets for therapeutic intervention. Recent data concerning soluble IL-4 receptor, monoclonal antibodies against IL-5 and an antibody toward IgE have lead to an appreciation of the crucial role played by Th2 subset of CD4(+) T cells and their corresponding cytokines. While these potential drugs are presently in clinical trials and may be valuable therapeutics, orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitors of Th2 cell responses would be desirable for treatment of these chronic diseases. One strategy is to prevent effector cell migration (Th2 cells, mast cells, and eosinophils) via chemokine receptor antagonism with a suitable small molecule. Chemokine receptors are a subset of the seven transmembrane-spanning family, which mediate their effects through interaction with heterotrimeric G-proteins. The ligands are a structurally related set of proteins that are selectively expressed in certain disease settings. Three chemokine receptors CCR3, CCR4, and CCR8 are preferentially expressed by Th2 cells, mast cells and eosinophils and therefore represent therapeutic targets for allergy. This mini-review will focus on new research involving CCR3, CCR4 and CCR8. The cellular distribution of each receptor, the corresponding chemokine ligands, and various validation studies are discussed. Recent drug discovery advances concerning pharmacological tools and small molecule receptor antagonists will also be presented.
OBJECTIVES: We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to estimate the polymorphism effects of IL18RAP and CCR3 on celiac disease susceptibility. METHODS: PubMed and Web of Science databases were searched (to June 2015) on IL18RAP rs917997 and CCR3 rs6441961 polymorphisms. RESULTS: The meta-analysis included 16 and 7 studies for rs917997 and rs6441961, respectively. The minor risk A allele at both rs917997 and rs6441961 carried risks (odds ratios) of 1.24 (95% CI 1.18-1.31) and 1.21 (95% CI 1.12-1.31), respectively. These alleles contributed to increase risks in all celiac disease patients by 5.04 and 6.35%. The estimated lambdas were 0.73 and 0.51, suggesting that an additive model would be the best choice for both gene effects. CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis provides robust estimates that IL18RAP rs917997 and CCR3 rs6441961 are potential risk factors for celiac disease in European populations. Studies are needed to confirm these findings in different ethnicities.
Cell migration is mediated by a group of chemotactic cytokines called chemokines: low molecular weight molecules that have been shown as important leukocyte chemical attractants to sites of inflammation and infection. Eotaxin-1, also called CCL11, was first described in 1994, as a highly specific eosinophils chemokine. Many cell types including lymphocytes, macrophages, bronchial smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells and eosinophils, are able to produce this chemokine, predominantly after cytokine stimulation, however little is known about its expression in human skin in vivo. Eotaxin-1 also regulates the chemiotaxis and, in some conditions, activation of basophils, mast cells and T lymphocytes. Chemokine receptors are named from their ligand families, thus the CC chemokine eotaxin-1 binds to the CCR3 receptor which is expressed on eosinophis, mast cells, Th2 type lymphocytes and even on keratinocytes. It seems that eotaxin-1 is one of the most important cytokines involved in tissue inflammation playing a central role in the pathogenesis of allergic airway diseases (asthma and rhinitis), in inflammatory bowel disease and gastrointestinal allergic hypersensitivity and recently it has been proposed as a therapeutical target for these conditions. Our group has studied the role of eotaxin-1 in the pathogenesis of two skin conditions: dermatitis herpetiformis and AIDS-associated eosinophilic folliculitis, demonstrating that this chemokine, together with Th2 type cytokines (IL-13 and IL-4) is important in cell recruitment, inflammation and tissue damage; moreover eotaxin has proven to paly an important role in other skin conditions such as, bullous pemphigoid, pemphigoid gestationis, atopic dermatitis and allergic drug reactions Recent advances in the understanding of eotaxin-1-mediated mechanisms of chemotaxis in allergic and inflammatory conditions may predict that therapeutic antagonism is achievable. This paper will focus on the role that eotaxin and its receptor play in the pathogenetical mechanism in a number of dermatologic diseases, some of which, like atopic dermatitis, may benefit from the introduction of novel and more selective therapeutic options.
CCL13/MCP-4, is a CC family chemokine that is chemoattractant for eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, macrophages, immature dendritic cells, and T cells, and its capable of inducing crucial immuno-modulatory responses through its effects on epithelial, muscular and endothelial cells. Similar to other CC chemokines, CCL13 binds to several chemokine receptors (CCR1, CCR2 and CCR3), allowing it to elicit different effects on its target cells. A number of studies have shown that CCL13 is involved in many chronic inflammatory diseases, in which it functions as a pivotal molecule involved in the selective recruitment of cell lineages to the inflamed tissues and their subsequent activation. Based on these studies, we suggest that blocking the actions of CCL13 can serve as a novel strategy for the generation of agents with anti-inflammatory activity. The main goal of this review is to present the current information about CCL13, its gene and protein structure and the roles of this chemokine during innate/adaptive immune responses in inflammatory diseases.
Atopic disorders include a range of conditions such as allergic asthma, -rhinitis, -conjunctivitis, -dermatitis, food and drug allergies and anaphylaxis. Induction of T helper (Th)-2 immune response with consequent IgE dependent eosinophil, basophil and mast cell mediated tissue damage is the characteristic feature of allergies. The mechanism underlying this unique and long appreciated feature of allergy is being elucidated at the molecular level with advances in our knowledge of the chemokine system. Thus, chemokines that target CCR3 in concert with Th2 cytokines appear to play a pathogenic role in allergy. In contrast, chemokines that target CXCR3 in concert with Th1 cytokine appear to play a beneficial role. Accordingly, inhibiting CCR3/Th2 pathway using CCR3 antagonists is viewed as a potentially useful strategy for anti-allergy drug development. In contrast, the idea of using CXCR3 agonists to inhibiting allergic response by promoting CXCR3/Th1 pathway faces serious concerns of their potential pro-inflammatory activities in vivo. In this article we have critically evaluated the literature examining the principle and potential of this anti-allergy drug development strategy including a summary of various compounds that are under investigation.
Expression of Ikaros family transcription factor IKZF3 (Aiolos) increases during murine eosinophil lineage commitment and maturation. Herein, we investigated Aiolos expression and function in mature human and murine eosinophils. Murine eosinophils deficient in Aiolos demonstrated gene expression changes in pathways associated with granulocyte-mediated immunity, chemotaxis, degranulation, ERK/MAPK signaling, and extracellular matrix organization; these genes had ATAC peaks within 1 kB of the TSS that were enriched for Aiolos-binding motifs. Global Aiolos deficiency reduced eosinophil frequency within peripheral tissues during homeostasis; a chimeric mouse model demonstrated dependence on intrinsic Aiolos expression by eosinophils. Aiolos deficiency reduced eosinophil CCR3 surface expression, intracellular ERK1/2 signaling, and CCL11-induced actin polymerization, emphasizing an impaired functional response. Aiolos-deficient eosinophils had reduced tissue accumulation in chemokine-, antigen-, and IL-13-driven inflammatory experimental models, all of which at least partially depend on CCR3 signaling. Human Aiolos expression was associated with active chromatin marks enriched for IKZF3, PU.1, and GATA-1-binding motifs within eosinophil-specific histone ChIP-seq peaks. Furthermore, treating the EOL-1 human eosinophilic cell line with lenalidomide yielded a dose-dependent decrease in Aiolos. These collective data indicate that eosinophil homing during homeostatic and inflammatory allergic states is Aiolos-dependent, identifying Aiolos as a potential therapeutic target for eosinophilic disease.
Chemokines are a family of small chemoattractant cytokines that have an important role in controlling leukocyte migration. The finding that some chemokines and their receptors are upregulated in both acute and chronic inflammatory diseases, and that they are key players in the development of AIDS, has provided the pharmaceutical industry with new targets for therapeutic intervention in these diseases. Although the chemokine system shows apparent redundancy in vitro, target validation is possible largely through expression studies in human disease tissues and the use of transgenic and knockout mice as disease models. Several approaches are being developed to block the effects of chemokines, including small-molecule antagonists of chemokine receptors, modified chemokines and antibodies directed against chemokine receptors. Here, we describe the rationale behind these different approaches, the pitfalls that have been encountered and future perspectives.
It is recognized that CC chemokine receptor 3 (CCR3) is associated with numerous inflammatory conditions and fibroblast-like synoviocyte (FLS) invasiveness correlates with articular damage in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, little is known of the expression and action of CCR3 on FLS in RA. In the present study, we investigated the expression of CCR3 on dispersed synovial tissue and peripheral blood cells in RA and influence of eotaxin-1 on FLS functions by using flow cytometry analysis, FLS challenge, and real-time PCR techniques. The results showed that approximately 7.0 % dispersed synovial cells are CCR3+ cells. Among those CCR3+ cells, 38.1, 23.8, and 20.6 % cells are CD90+CD14-CD3- (representing FLS), CD14+, and CD8+ cells, respectively, indicating that FLS is one of the major populations of CCR3+ cells in the synovial tissue of RA. In peripheral blood, CD14+ CCR3+ cells are elevated, but CD8+CCR3+ cells are reduced in RA. It was found that eotaxin-1 induced upregulated expression of CCR3 and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in FLS. Since an antagonist of CCR3 suppressed the action of eotaxin-1, the event appeared CCR3 dependent. Moreover, we observed that interleukin (IL)-1beta induced markedly enhanced eotaxin-1 release from FLS, but TNF-alpha reduced eotaxin-1 release at 12 and 24 h following incubation. In conclusion, enhanced expression of CCR3 on synovial cells and increased levels of eotaxin-1 in plasma and synovial fluid (SF) of RA indicate that CCR3-mediated mechanisms may play an important role in RA. Blockage of eotaxin-1 provoked CCR3 and MMP-9 expression in FLS by antagonist of CCR3, implicating that anti-CCR3 agents may have therapeutic use for RA.
OBJECTIVES: Upregulated expression of CC chemokine receptor (CCR)3 was observed in osteoarthritis (OA) cartilage and chondrocytes, but expression of CCR3 on synovial tissue of OA remains unknown. Fibroblast-like synoviocyte (FLS) invasion in synovium appears one of the features of OA, but expression and function of CCR3 on FLS remain uninvestigated. We therefore explored them in the present study. METHODS: Enzymatically dispersed synovial tissue cells were analyzed by flowcytometry. Primary cultured FLS isolated from OA synovium were challenged and the expression of CCR3, eotaxin-1 and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 was determined by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and ELISA. RESULTS: Approximately 4.5% dispersed OA synovial tissue cells are CCR3+ cells. Among them, 58.4% cells are CD90+CD14-CD3- cells (representing FLS) and 36.7% are CD8+ cells, indicating that FLS are major population of CCR3+ cells in the synovial tissue. Levels of eotaxin-1 and MMP-9 in OA synovial fluid (SF) were greater than that in OA plasma and in healthy control (HC) plasma. Eotaxin-1 induced up to 5.8 and 7.2-fold increases in the expression of MMP-9 mRNA and protein, respectively following 12h incubation with FLS, which was inhibited by antagonist of CCR3 SB328437 and an inhibitor of ERK U0126, indicating that action of eotaxin-1 on FLS seemed via CCR3 and ERK signaling pathway. IL-1beta and TNF-alpha was found to elicit release of eotaxin-1 from OA FLS. CONCLUSION: FLS via eotaxin-1 and its receptor CCR3 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of OA, which strengthen the concept that OA is likely an inflammation related disease.
Eosinophilic pneumonia (EP), including acute EP and chronic EP, is characterized by the massive pulmonary infiltration of eosinophils into the lung. However, the mechanisms underlying the selective accumulation of eosinophils in EP have not yet been fully elucidated. We reported that bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from EP patients induced the transmigration of eosinophils across endothelial cells in vitro. The concentrations of eotaxin-2 (CCL24) and monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-4 (CCL13), which are CC chemokine receptor (CCR) 3 ligands, were elevated in the BALF of EP patients, and anti-CCR3 monoclonal antibody inhibited the eosinophil transmigration induced by the BALF of EP patients. The concentration of macrophage inflammatory protein 1beta (CCL4), a CCR5 ligand that induces eosinophil migration, was increased in the BALF of EP patients. Furthermore, the concentration of interleukin (IL) 5 was increased in the BALF of EP patients, and it has been reported that anti-IL-5 antibody treatment resulted in remission and the reduction of glucocorticoid use in some cases of chronic EP. The concentrations of lipid mediators, such as leukotriene (LT) B(4), damage-associated molecular pattern molecules (DAMPs), such as uric acid, or extracellular matrix proteins, such as periostin, were also increased in the BALF of EP patients. These findings suggest that chemokines, such as CCR3/CCR5 ligands, cytokines, such as IL-5, lipid mediators, such as LTB(4), DAMPs, and extracellular matrix proteins may play roles in the accumulation or activation of eosinophils in EP.
Eosinophilic leukocytes accumulate in high numbers in the lungs of asthmatic patients, and are believed to be important in the pathogenesis of asthma. A potent eosinophil chemoattractant is produced in the asthmatic lung. This small protein, the chemokine eotaxin, is synthesized by a number of different cell types, and is stimulated by interleukin-4 and interleukin-13, which are produced by T-helper (Th)2 lymphocytes. Low molecular weight compounds have been developed that can block the eotaxin receptor C-C chemokine receptor (CCR)3, and prevent stimulation by eotaxin. This provides the potential for orally available drugs that can prevent eosinophil recruitment into the lung and the associated damage and dysfunction.
Migration of leukocytes from the bone marrow to the circulation, the primary lymphoid organs and inflammatory sites is directed by chemokines and specific receptor interactions. Besides the role of this group of low molecular weight cytokines in leukocyte attraction and activation, anti-HIV and hematopoietic activities were also attributed to chemokines. On the basis of the number and arrangement of the conserved cysteines, chemokines are subdivided in two multi-member families, namely the CXC and CC chemokines, whereas fractalkine (CX3C) and lymphotactin (C) are unique relatives. The CC chemokines possess four cysteines of which the first two are adjacent. Functionally, they form a rather heterogeneous family. Here, the focus is on the monocyte chemotactic proteins and eotaxin which, on a structural basis, can be considered as a CC chemokine subfamily. Not only the protein sequences, but also the gene structures, chromosomal location, biological activities and receptor usage exhibit considerable similarities. The review is complemented with a comparison of the biological functions of the MCP/eotaxin-subfamily in physiology and pathology.
We recently showed that adult male mice that lacked the C-C-chemokine receptor 3 (CCR3) exhibited disturbed bone remodeling, which resulted in a cortical bone phenotype of thin femoral cortical bone. However, it remains unknown whether this phenotype would be present during bone modeling, or it affects female mice. Here, we analyzed juvenile and adolescent CCR3-deficient mice to determine when bone modeling was affected in the absence of CCR3 signaling. To investigate whether the CCR3 bone phenotype was sex-related, we analyzed both young female and male mice, and adult females. Micro-computed tomography (muCT) and histomorphometric analyses in adolescent CCR3-deficient male mice revealed reduced cortical bone volume and thickness, and an increase in periosteal mineralization. Interestingly, no skeletal phenotype was observed in adolescent or adult female CCR3-deficient mice. Among juvenile CCR3-deficient mice, neither males nor females showed a skeletal phenotype, which indicated that bone modeling was not affected by the CCR3 deficiency. In summary, adolescent and adult male mice that lacked CCR3 receptors exhibited a cortical phenotype that was not present in female mice, probably due to an estrogen protective mechanism. Based on these and our previous results, we suggest that the importance of CCR3 in cortical bone turnover is related to sex hormones. Because only a few molecules are known to control cortical bone turnover, our novel finding that CCR3 regulated cortical bone thickness only in males suggested that CCR3 is a novel target for controlling cortical bone morphology in male individuals, and perhaps, in post-menopausal women.
Eotaxin-1 (CCL11) induces the migration of different leukocyte types by interacting with CCR3. In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) are pathogenic effectors and a major CCR3-expressing cell. The aim of this study was to investigate the expression and function of CCL11 in RA FLS. The expression of CCL11 and CCR3 was evaluated by ELISA, immunofluorescence and quantitative PCR analysis. The CCL11 levels in serum and synovial fluids (SFs) from RA patients were significantly higher than those in serum from healthy controls and SFs from osteoarthritis patients. CCL11 and CCR3 were expressed in the RA synovial tissue lining layers. The secretion of CCL11 in RA FLS-conditioned medium and the mRNA expression of CCL11 and CCR3 were induced by TNF-alpha. Furthermore, CCL11 induced the mRNA expression of CCL11 and CCR3. Application of a CCR3 antagonist reduced TNF-alpha-induced CCL11 secretion from RA FLS. CCL11 induced the migration of RA FLS and monocytes. RA FLS migration was decreased by treatment with CCL11 siRNA. The migration of monocytes to medium conditioned with CCL11 siRNA-transfected and TNF-alpha-stimulated RA FLS was reduced. These data indicate that the self-amplification of CCL11 via CCR3 may play an important role in cell migration in RA.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most lethal primary nervous system cancer, but due to its rarity and complexity, its pathogenesis is poorly understood. To identify potential tumorigenic factors in GBM, we screened antibody-based cytokine arrays and found that CCL11 was upregulated. We then demonstrated in vitro that both CCL11 and its receptor, CCR3, were overexpressed and promoted the proliferation, migration and invasion of cancer cells. To examine the clinical significance of CCL11/CCR3, 458 GBM samples were divided into a training cohort with 225 cases and a test cohort containing 233 cases. In the training set, immunohistochemical analysis showed overexpression of CCL11 and CCR3 were correlated with unfavorable overall survival (OS). We further developed a prognostic classifier combining CCL11 and CCR3 expression and Karnofsky performance status (KPS) for predicting one-year survival in GBM patients. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis demonstrated that this predictor achieved 90.7% sensitivity and 73.4% specificity. These results were validated with the test sample set. Our findings suggest that CCL11-CCR3 binding is involved in the progression of GBM and may prompt a novel therapeutic approach. In addition, CCL11 and CCR3 expression, combined with KPS, may be used as an accurate predictor of one-year survival in GBM patients.
Chemokines are small cytokines that control a wide variety of biological and pathological processes, from immunosurveillance to inflammation, and from viral infection to cancer. The numerous known chemokine receptors have given hope that selective receptor antagonism might be possible, which could allow us to control which cells are recruited and activated at any time and in any place. As chemokine receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors, which are classical targets for the pharmaceutical industry, it is hoped that chemokines could be the first cytokines for which small-molecule receptor antagonists could be developed. Recently, reports of chemokine-receptor antagonists, both in vitro and in animal models of disease, have been published. It is anticipated that this field could produce clinically useful therapies in the next few years.
The chemokine CCL5 prevents neuronal cell death mediated both by amyloid beta, as well as the human immunodeficiency virus viral proteins gp120 and Tat. Because CCL5 binds to CCR5, CCR3 and/or CCR1 receptors, it remains unclear which of these receptors plays a role in neuroprotection. Indeed, CCL5 also has neuroprotective activity in cells lacking these receptors. CCL5 may bind to a G-protein-coupled receptor 75 (GPR75), which encodes for a 540 amino-acid orphan receptor of the Gqalpha family. In this study, we have used SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells to characterize whether CCL5 could activate a Gq signaling through GPR75. Both qPCR and flow cytometry show that these cells express GPR75 but do not express CCR5, CCR3 or CCR1 receptors. SY-SY5Y cells were then used to examine CCL5-mediated signaling. We report that CCL5 promotes a time- and concentration-dependent phosphorylation of protein kinase B (AKT), glycogen synthase kinase 3beta, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2. Specific antagonists of CCR5, CCR3, and CCR1 did not prevent CCL5 from increasing phosphorylated AKT or ERK. Moreover, CCL5 promotes a time-dependent internalization of GPR75. Lastly, knocking down GPR75 expression by a CRISPR-Cas9 approach inhibited the ability of CCL5 to activate pERK in SH-SY5Y cells. Therefore, we propose that GPR75 is a novel receptor for CCL5 that could explain some of the pharmacological action of this chemokine. These findings may help in the development of small molecule GPR75 agonists that mimic CCL5. Open Science: This manuscript was awarded with the Open Materials Badge. For more information see: https://cos.io/our-services/open-science-badges/.
