C-C chemokine receptor type 4; High affinity receptor for the C-C type chemokines CCL17/TARC, CCL22/MDC and CKLF isoform 1/CKLF1. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G(i) proteins which activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system. Can function as a chemoattractant homing receptor on circulating memory lymphocytes and as a coreceptor for some primary HIV-2 isolates. In the CNS, could mediate hippocampal-neuron survival.
The first step of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) replication cycle-binding and entry into the host cell-plays a major role in determining viral tropism and the ability of HIV to degrade the human immune system. HIV uses a complex series of steps to deliver its genome into the host cell cytoplasm while simultaneously evading the host immune response. To infect cells, the HIV protein envelope (Env) binds to the primary cellular receptor CD4 and then to a cellular coreceptor. This sequential binding triggers fusion of the viral and host cell membranes, initiating infection. Revealing the mechanism of HIV entry has profound implications for viral tropism, transmission, pathogenesis, and therapeutic intervention. Here, we provide an overview into the mechanism of HIV entry, provide historical context to key discoveries, discuss recent advances, and speculate on future directions in the field.
Microtubules play crucial roles in cellular architecture, intracellular transport, and mitosis. The availability of free tubulin subunits affects polymerization dynamics and microtubule function. When cells sense excess free tubulin, they trigger degradation of the encoding mRNAs, which requires recognition of the nascent polypeptide by the tubulin-specific ribosome-binding factor TTC5. How TTC5 initiates the decay of tubulin mRNAs is unknown. Here, our biochemical and structural analysis reveals that TTC5 recruits the poorly studied protein SCAPER to the ribosome. SCAPER, in turn, engages the CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex through its CNOT11 subunit to trigger tubulin mRNA decay. SCAPER mutants that cause intellectual disability and retinitis pigmentosa in humans are impaired in CCR4-NOT recruitment, tubulin mRNA degradation, and microtubule-dependent chromosome segregation. Our findings demonstrate how recognition of a nascent polypeptide on the ribosome is physically linked to mRNA decay factors via a relay of protein-protein interactions, providing a paradigm for specificity in cytoplasmic gene regulation.
The CCR4-NOT complex is a major regulator of eukaryotic messenger RNA (mRNA) stability. Slow decoding during translation promotes association of CCR4-NOT with ribosomes, accelerating mRNA degradation. We applied selective ribosome profiling to further investigate the determinants of CCR4-NOT recruitment to ribosomes in mammalian cells. This revealed that specific arginine codons in the P-site are strong signals for ribosomal recruitment of human CNOT3, a CCR4-NOT subunit. Cryo-electron microscopy and transfer RNA (tRNA) mutagenesis demonstrated that the D-arms of select arginine tRNAs interact with CNOT3 and promote its recruitment whereas other tRNA D-arms sterically clash with CNOT3. These effects link codon content to mRNA stability. Thus, in addition to their canonical decoding function, tRNAs directly engage regulatory complexes during translation, a mechanism we term P-site tRNA-mediated mRNA decay.
Background: Lactate greatly contributes to the regulation of intracellular communication within the tumor microenvironment (TME). However, the role of lactate in pituitary adenoma (PA) invasion is unclear. In this study, we aimed to clarify the effects of lactate on the TME and the effects of TME on PA invasion. Methods: To explore the correlation between TME acidosis and tumor invasion, LDHA and LAMP2 expression levels were quantified in invasive (n = 32) and noninvasive (n = 32) PA samples. The correlation between immune cell infiltration and tumor invasion was evaluated in 64 PAs. Critical chemokine and key signaling pathway components were detected by qPCR, Western blotting, siRNA knockdown, and specific inhibitors. The functional consequences of CCR4 signaling inhibition were evaluated in vitro and in vivo. Results: Lactate was positively associated with PA invasion. Of the 64 PA tissues, invasive PAs were related to high infiltration of M2-like tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) (P < 0.05). Moreover, lactate secreted from PA cells facilitated M2 polarization via the mTORC2 and ERK signaling pathways, while activated TAMs secreted CCL17 to promote PA invasion via the CCL17/CCR4/mTORC1 axis. According to univariate analysis of clinical data, high CCL17 expression was associated with larger tumor size (P = 0.0438), greater invasion (P = 0.0334), and higher susceptibility to postoperative recurrence (P = 0.0195) in human PAs. Conclusion: This study illustrates the dynamics between PA cells and immune TME in promoting PA invasion via M2 polarization. CCL17 levels in the TME are related to the PA invasiveness and clinical prognosis, and the CCL17/CCR4/mTOCR1 axis may serve as potential therapeutic targets for Pas.
Solid cancers like pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), a type of pancreatic cancer, frequently exploit nerves for rapid dissemination. This neural invasion (NI) is an independent prognostic factor in PDAC, but insufficiently modeled in genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM) of PDAC. Here, we systematically screened for human-like NI in Europe's largest repository of GEMM of PDAC, comprising 295 different genotypes. This phenotype screen uncovered 2 GEMMs of PDAC with human-like NI, which are both characterized by pancreas-specific overexpression of transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-alpha) and conditional depletion of p53. Mechanistically, cancer-cell-derived TGF-alpha upregulated CCL2 secretion from sensory neurons, which induced hyperphosphorylation of the cytoskeletal protein paxillin via CCR4 on cancer cells. This activated the cancer migration machinery and filopodia formation toward neurons. Disrupting CCR4 or paxillin activity limited NI and dampened tumor size and tumor innervation. In human PDAC, phospho-paxillin and TGF-alpha-expression constituted strong prognostic factors. Therefore, we believe that the TGF-alpha-CCL2-CCR4-p-paxillin axis is a clinically actionable target for constraining NI and tumor progression in PDAC.
Poly(A) tails are important regulators of mRNA stability and translational efficiency. Cytoplasmic removal of poly(A) tails by 3'-->5' exonucleases (deadenylation) is the rate-limiting step in mRNA degradation. Two exonuclease complexes contribute the majority of the deadenylation activity in eukaryotes: Ccr4-Not and Pan2-Pan3. These can be specifically recruited to mRNA to regulate mRNA stability or translational efficiency, thereby fine-tuning gene expression. In the present review, we discuss the activities and roles of the Pan2-Pan3 deadenylation complex.
Poly(A) tails are present on almost all eukaryotic mRNAs, and play critical roles in mRNA stability, nuclear export, and translation efficiency. The biosynthesis and shortening of a poly(A) tail are regulated by large multiprotein complexes. However, the molecular mechanisms of these protein machineries still remain unclear. Recent studies regarding the structural and biochemical characteristics of those protein complexes have shed light on the potential mechanisms of polyadenylation and deadenylation. This review summarizes the recent structural studies on pre-mRNA 3'-end processing complexes that initiate the polyadenylation and discusses the similarities and differences between yeast and human machineries. Specifically, we highlight recent biochemical efforts in the reconstitution of the active human canonical pre-mRNA 3'-end processing systems, as well as the roles of RBBP6/Mpe1 in activating the entire machinery. We also describe how poly(A) tails are removed by the PAN2-PAN3 and CCR4-NOT deadenylation complexes and discuss the emerging role of the cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein (PABPC) in promoting deadenylation. Together, these recent discoveries show that the dynamic features of these machineries play important roles in regulating polyadenylation and deadenylation.
The mechanisms that enable immune evasion at metastatic sites are poorly understood. We show that the Polycomb Repressor Complex 1 (PRC1) drives colonization of the bones and visceral organs in double-negative prostate cancer (DNPC). In vivo genetic screening identifies CCL2 as the top prometastatic gene induced by PRC1. CCL2 governs self-renewal and induces the recruitment of M2-like tumor-associated macrophages and regulatory T cells, thus coordinating metastasis initiation with immune suppression and neoangiogenesis. A catalytic inhibitor of PRC1 cooperates with immune checkpoint therapy to reverse these processes and suppress metastasis in genetically engineered mouse transplantation models of DNPC. These results reveal that PRC1 coordinates stemness with immune evasion and neoangiogenesis and point to the potential clinical utility of targeting PRC1 in DNPC.
Antibody affinity maturation depends on positive selection in germinal centres (GCs) of rare B cell clones that acquire higher-affinity B cell receptors via somatic hypermutation, present more antigen to follicular helper T (T(FH)) cells and, consequently, receive more contact-dependent T cell help(1). As these GC B cells and T(FH) cells do not maintain long-lasting contacts in the chaotic GC environment(2-4), it is unclear how sufficient T cell help is cumulatively focused onto those rare clones. Here we show that, upon stimulation of CD40, GC B cells upregulate the chemokine CCL22 and to a lesser extent CCL17. By engaging the chemokine receptor CCR4 on T(FH) cells, CCL22 and CCL17 can attract multiple helper cells from a distance, thus increasing the chance of productive help. During a GC response, B cells that acquire higher antigen-binding affinities express higher levels of CCL22, which in turn 'highlight' these high-affinity GC B cells. Acute increase or blockade of T(FH) cells helps to rapidly increase or decrease CCL22 expression by GC B cells, respectively. Therefore, a chemokine-based intercellular reaction circuit links the amount of T cell help that individual B cells have received recently to their subsequent ability to attract more help. When CCL22 and CCL17 are ablated in B cells, GCs form but B cells are not affinity-matured efficiently. When competing with wild-type B cells in the same reaction, B cells lacking CCL22 and CCL17 receive less T cell help to maintain GC participation or develop into bone-marrow plasma cells. By uncovering a chemokine-mediated mechanism that highlights affinity-improved B cells for preferential help from T(FH) cells, our study reveals a principle of spatiotemporal orchestration of GC positive selection.
Protein synthesis is frequently deregulated during tumorigenesis. However, the precise contexts of selective translational control and the regulators of such mechanisms in cancer is poorly understood. Here, we uncovered CNOT3, a subunit of the CCR4-NOT complex, as an essential modulator of translation in myeloid leukemia. Elevated CNOT3 expression correlates with unfavorable outcomes in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). CNOT3 depletion induces differentiation and apoptosis and delayed leukemogenesis. Transcriptomic and proteomic profiling uncovers c-MYC as a critical downstream target which is translationally regulated by CNOT3. Global analysis of mRNA features demonstrates that CNOT3 selectively influences expression of target genes in a codon usage dependent manner. Furthermore, CNOT3 associates with the protein network largely consisting of ribosomal proteins and translation elongation factors in leukemia cells. Overall, our work elicits the direct requirement for translation efficiency in tumorigenesis and propose targeting the post-transcriptional circuitry via CNOT3 as a therapeutic vulnerability in AML.
Shortening of messenger RNA poly(A) tails, or deadenylation, is a rate-limiting step in mRNA decay and is highly regulated during gene expression. The incorporation of non-adenosines in poly(A) tails, or 'mixed tailing', has been observed in vertebrates and viruses. Here, to quantitate the effect of mixed tails, we mathematically modeled deadenylation reactions at single-nucleotide resolution using an in vitro deadenylation system reconstituted with the complete human CCR4-NOT complex. Applying this model, we assessed the disrupting impact of single guanosine, uridine or cytosine to be equivalent to approximately 6, 8 or 11 adenosines, respectively. CCR4-NOT stalls at the 0, -1 and -2 positions relative to the non-adenosine residue. CAF1 and CCR4 enzyme subunits commonly prefer adenosine but exhibit distinct sequence selectivities and stalling positions. Our study provides an analytical framework to monitor deadenylation and reveals the molecular basis of tail sequence-dependent regulation of mRNA stability.
The Ccr4-Not complex is a unique, essential and conserved multi-subunit complex that acts at the level of many different cellular functions to regulate gene expression. Two enzymatic activities, namely ubiquitination and deadenylation, are provided by different subunits of the complex. However, studies over the last decade have demonstrated a tantalizing multi-functionality of this complex that extends well beyond its identified enzymatic activities. Most of our initial knowledge about the Ccr4-Not complex stemmed from studies in yeast, but an increasing number of reports on this complex in other species are emerging. In this review we will discuss the structure and composition of the complex, and describe the different cellular functions with which the Ccr4-Not complex has been connected in different organisms. Finally, based upon our current state of knowledge, we will propose a model to explain how one complex can provide such multi-functionality. This model suggests that the Ccr4-Not complex might function as a "chaperone platform".
RNA deadenylation, the process of shortening of the 3' poly(A) tail of an RNA molecule, is one of the key steps of post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in eukaryotic cells. PAN2/3 and CCR4-NOT (CNOT) are the two dominant RNA deadenylation complexes, which play central roles in mediating mRNA decay and translation. While degradation is the final fate of virtually all RNAs in their life cycles, selection of RNA targets as well as control of the rate and timing of RNA decay, in coordination with other molecular pathways, including translation, can be modulated in certain contexts. Such regulation influences cell growth, proliferation, and differentiation at the cellular level; and contributes to establish polarity and regulate signaling at the tissue level. Dysregulation of deadenylation processes have also been implicated in human diseases ranging from cardiac diseases and neurodevelopmental disorders to cancers. In this review, we will discuss mechanisms of gene expression control mediated by the RNA deadenylation complexes and highlight relevant evidence supporting the emerging roles of RNA deadenylation and its regulatory proteins during development and in diseases. A systemic understanding of these mechanisms will be a critical foundation for development of effective strategies to therapeutically target them.
Unlike most RNA and DNA viruses that broadly stimulate mRNA decay and interfere with host gene expression, human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) extensively remodels the host translatome without producing an mRNA decay enzyme. By performing a targeted loss-of-function screen in primary human fibroblasts, we here identify the host CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex members CNOT1 and CNOT3 as unexpected pro-viral host factors that selectively regulate HCMV reproduction. We find that the scaffold subunit CNOT1 is specifically required for late viral gene expression and genome-wide host responses in CCR4-NOT-disrupted cells. By profiling poly(A)-tail lengths of individual HCMV and host mRNAs using nanopore direct RNA sequencing, we reveal poly(A)-tails of viral messages to be markedly longer than those of cellular mRNAs and significantly less sensitive to CCR4-NOT disruption. Our data establish that mRNA deadenylation by host CCR4-NOT is critical for productive HCMV replication and define a new mechanism whereby herpesvirus infection subverts cellular mRNA metabolism to remodel the gene expression landscape of the infected cell. Moreover, we expose an unanticipated host factor with potential to become a therapeutic anti-HCMV target.
The Ccr4-Not complex is an essential multi-subunit protein complex that plays a fundamental role in eukaryotic mRNA metabolism and has a multitude of different roles that impact eukaryotic gene expression . It has a conserved core of three Not proteins, the Ccr4 protein, and two Ccr4 associated factors, Caf1 and Caf40. A fourth Not protein, Not4, is conserved, but is only a stable subunit of the complex in yeast. Certain subunits have been duplicated during evolution, with functional divergence, such as Not3 in yeast, and Ccr4 or Caf1 in human. However the complex includes only one homolog for each protein. In addition, species-specific subunits are part of the complex, such as Caf130 in yeast or Not10 and Not11 in human. Two conserved catalytic functions are associated with the complex, deadenylation and ubiquitination . The complex adopts an L-shaped structure, in which different modules are bound to a large Not1 scaffold protein. In this chapter we will summarize our current knowledge of the architecture of the complex and of the structure of its constituents.
Recent findings indicate that the translation elongation rate influences mRNA stability. One of the factors that has been implicated in this link between mRNA decay and translation speed is the yeast DEAD-box helicase Dhh1p. Here, we demonstrated that the human ortholog of Dhh1p, DDX6, triggers the deadenylation-dependent decay of inefficiently translated mRNAs in human cells. DDX6 interacts with the ribosome through the Phe-Asp-Phe (FDF) motif in its RecA2 domain. Furthermore, RecA2-mediated interactions and ATPase activity are both required for DDX6 to destabilize inefficiently translated mRNAs. Using ribosome profiling and RNA sequencing, we identified two classes of endogenous mRNAs that are regulated in a DDX6-dependent manner. The identified targets are either translationally regulated or regulated at the steady-state-level and either exhibit signatures of poor overall translation or of locally reduced ribosome translocation rates. Transferring the identified sequence stretches into a reporter mRNA caused translation- and DDX6-dependent degradation of the reporter mRNA. In summary, these results identify DDX6 as a crucial regulator of mRNA translation and decay triggered by slow ribosome movement and provide insights into the mechanism by which DDX6 destabilizes inefficiently translated mRNAs.
Introduction: Chemokine receptors are important therapeutic targets for the treatment of many human diseases. This study will provide an overview of approved chemokine receptor antagonists and promising candidates in advanced clinical trials.Areas covered: We will describe clinical aspects of chemokine receptor antagonists regarding their clinical efficacy, mechanisms of action, and re-purposed applications.Expert opinion: Three chemokine antagonists have been approved: (i) plerixafor is a small-molecule CXCR4 antagonist that mobilizes hematopoietic stem cells; (ii) maraviroc is a small-molecule CCR5 antagonist for anti-HIV treatment; and (iii) mogamulizumab is a monoclonal-antibody CCR4 antagonist for the treatment of mycosis fungoides or Sezary syndrome. Moreover, phase 3 trials are ongoing to evaluate many potent candidates, including CCR5 antagonists (e.g. leronlimab), dual CCR2/CCR5 antagonists (e.g. cenicriviroc), and CXCR4 antagonists (e.g. balixafortide, mavorixafor, motixafortide). The success of chemokine receptor antagonists depends on the selective blockage of disease-relevant chemokine receptors which are indispensable for disease progression. Although clinical translation has been slow, antagonists targeting chemokine receptors with multifaced functions offer the potential to treat a broad spectrum of human diseases.
The mammalian Ccr4-Not complex, carbon catabolite repression 4 (Ccr4)-negative on TATA-less (Not), is a large, highly conserved, multifunctional assembly of proteins that acts at different cellular levels to regulate gene expression. In the nucleus, it is involved in the regulation of the cell cycle, chromatin modification, activation and inhibition of transcription initiation, control of transcription elongation, RNA export, nuclear RNA surveillance, and DNA damage repair. In the cytoplasm, the Ccr4-Not complex plays a central role in mRNA decay and affects protein quality control. Most of our original knowledge of the Ccr4-Not complex is derived, primarily, from studies in yeast. More recent studies have shown that the mammalian complex has a comparable structure and similar properties. In this review, we summarize the evidence for the multiple roles of both the yeast and mammalian Ccr4-Not complexes, highlighting their similarities.
Primary cutaneous lymphomas are heterogenous lymphoproliferative disorders. Some patients show rapid progression and the need for treatment of advanced disease is still unmet. The frequency of each subtype of cutaneous lymphoma varies among different ethnic groups, as do the medical systems found in different countries. It is important to know the differences in clinical guidelines in different areas of the world. Although current monochemotherapy with gemcitabine or pegylated liposomal doxorubicin is temporarily effective for mycosis funogides (MF) and Sezary syndrome (SS)-representative types of cutaneous lymphomas-the duration of response is usually limited. Therefore, treatment strategies targeting tumor-specific molecules have been developed. Molecular targets for MS/SS are currently CD30, CCR4, CD25, CD52, and histone deacetylases, most of which are surface molecules specifically expressed on tumor cells. As a result of advances in research techniques, different kinds of genomic alterations in MF/SS have been revealed. Molecular targets for MS/SS in the near future would be CD158k, JAK, PIK3, the mammalian target of rapamycin, and microRNAs, most of which mediate intracellular signaling pathways. Personalized therapy based on the detection of the genetic signatures of tumors and inhibition of the most suitable target molecules constitutes a future treatment strategy for MF/SS.
Translational control regulates the levels of protein synthesized from its transcript and is key for the rapid adjustment of gene expression in response to environmental stimuli. The regulation of translation is of special importance for malaria parasites, which pass through a complex life cycle that includes various replication phases in the different organs of the human and mosquito hosts and a sexual reproduction phase in the mosquito midgut. In particular, the quiescent transmission stages rely on translational control to rapidly adapt to the new environment, once they switch over from the human to the mosquito and vice versa. Three control mechanisms are currently proposed in Plasmodium, (1) global regulation that acts on the translation initiation complex; (2) mRNA-specific regulation, involving cis control elements, mRNA-binding proteins and translational repressors; and (3) induced mRNA decay by the Ccr4-Not and the RNA exosome complex. The main molecules controlling translation are highly conserved in malaria parasites and an increasing number of studies shed light on the interwoven pathways leading to the up or downregulation of protein synthesis in the diverse plasmodial stages. We here highlight recent findings on translational control during life cycle progression of Plasmodium and discuss the molecules involved in regulating protein synthesis.
