C-C chemokine receptor type 5; Receptor for a number of inflammatory CC-chemokines including CCL3/MIP-1-alpha, CCL4/MIP-1-beta and RANTES and subsequently transduces a signal by increasing the intracellular calcium ion level. May play a role in the control of granulocytic lineage proliferation or differentiation.
Macrophages are major players in the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).To investigate whether lung macrophages and pulmonary-artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) collaborate to stimulate PASMC growth and whether the CCL2-CCR2 and CCL5-CCR5 pathways inhibited macrophage-PASMC interactions and PAH development, we used human CCR5-knock-in mice and PASMCs from patients with PAH and controls.Conditioned media from murine M1 or M2 macrophages stimulated PASMC growth. This effect was markedly amplified with conditioned media from M2 macrophage/PASMC co-cultures. CCR2, CCR5, CCL2 and CCL5 were upregulated in macrophage/PASMC co-cultures. Compared to inhibiting either receptor, dual CCR2 and CCR5 inhibition more strongly attenuated the growth-promoting effect of conditioned media from M2-macrophage/PASMC co-cultures. Deleting either CCR2 or CCR5 in macrophages or PASMCs attenuated the growth response. In mice with hypoxia- or SUGEN/hypoxia-induced PH, targeting both CCR2 and CCR5 prevented or reversed PH more efficiently than targeting either receptor alone. Patients with PAH exhibited CCR2 and CCR5 upregulation in PASMCs and perivascular macrophages compared to controls. The PASMC growth-promoting effect of conditioned media from M2-macrophage/PASMC co-cultures was greater when PASMCs from PAH patients were used in the co-cultures or as the target cells and was dependent on CCR2 and CCR5. PASMC migration toward M2-macrophages was greater with PASMCs from PAH patients and was attenuated by blocking CCR2 and CCR5.CCR2 and CCR5 are required for collaboration between macrophages and PASMCs to initiate and amplify PASMC migration and proliferation during PAH development. Dual targeting of CCR2 and CCR5 may hold promise for treating human PAH.
OBJECTIVES: While various monocyte chemokine systems are increased in expression in osteoarthritis (OA), the hierarchy of chemokines and chemokine receptors in mediating monocyte/macrophage recruitment to the OA joint remains poorly defined. Here, we investigated the relative contributions of the CCL2/CCR2 versus CCL5/CCR5 chemokine axes in OA pathogenesis. METHODS: Ccl2-, Ccr2-, Ccl5- and Ccr5-deficient and control mice were subjected to destabilisation of medial meniscus surgery to induce OA. The pharmacological utility of blocking CCL2/CCR2 signalling in mouse OA was investigated using bindarit, a CCL2 synthesis inhibitor, and RS-504393, a CCR2 antagonist. Levels of monocyte chemoattractants in synovial tissues and fluids from patients with joint injuries without OA and those with established OA were investigated using a combination of microarray analyses, multiplexed cytokine assays and immunostains. RESULTS: Mice lacking CCL2 or CCR2, but not CCL5 or CCR5, were protected against OA with a concomitant reduction in local monocyte/macrophage numbers in their joints. In synovial fluids from patients with OA, levels of CCR2 ligands (CCL2, CCL7 and CCL8) but not CCR5 ligands (CCL3, CCL4 and CCL5) were elevated. We found that CCR2+ cells are abundant in human OA synovium and that CCR2+ macrophages line, invade and are associated with the erosion of OA cartilage. Further, blockade of CCL2/CCR2 signalling markedly attenuated macrophage accumulation, synovitis and cartilage damage in mouse OA. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that monocytes recruited via CCL2/CCR2, rather than by CCL5/CCR5, propagate inflammation and tissue damage in OA. Selective targeting of the CCL2/CCR2 system represents a promising therapeutic approach for OA.
Embryonic implantation, the process by which the human embryo orientates towards, attaches to and finally invades the underlying maternal endometrial tissue, requires a receptive endometrium, a functionally normal blastocyst and an adequate cross-communication between them. During apposition, human blastocysts find a location in which to implant, while they are guided to a specific area in the maternal endometrium. In the adhesion phase, which occurs 6 to 7 days after ovulation, within the so-called "implantation window", direct contact occurs between the endometrial epithelium (EE) and the trophectoderm (TE). Finally, in the invasion phase, the embryonic trophoblast traverses the basement membrane and passes the endometrial stroma and reaches the uterine vessels. Many molecules (hormones, cytokines, integrins, enzymes, etc.) take part in the dialogue between the human blastocyst and the maternal endometrium to achieve implantation. Here, we present our published data on the embryonic regulation of endometrial epithelial molecules such as chemokine receptors and the leptin system.
Macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha) and MIP-1beta are highly related members of the CC chemokine subfamily. Despite their structural similarities, MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta show diverging signaling capacities. Depending on the MIP-1 subtype and its NH(2)-terminal processing, one or more of the CC chemokine receptors CCR1, CCR2, CCR3 and CCR5 are recognized. Since both human MIP-1alpha subtypes (LD78alpha and LD78beta) and MIP-1beta signal through CCR5, the major co-receptor for M-tropic HIV-1 strains, these chemokines are capable of inhibiting HIV-1 infection in susceptible cells. In this review, different aspects of human and mouse MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta are discussed, including their protein and gene structures, their regulated production, their receptor usage and biological activities and their role in several pathologies including HIV-1 infection.
This review focuses on the construction and application of structural chemokine receptor models for the elucidation of molecular determinants of chemokine receptor modulation and the structure-based discovery and design of chemokine receptor ligands. A comparative analysis of ligand binding pockets in chemokine receptors is presented, including a detailed description of the CXCR4, CCR2, CCR5, CCR9, and US28 X-ray structures, and their implication for modeling molecular interactions of chemokine receptors with small-molecule ligands, peptide ligands, and large antibodies and chemokines. These studies demonstrate how the integration of new structural information on chemokine receptors with extensive structure-activity relationship and site-directed mutagenesis data facilitates the prediction of the structure of chemokine receptor-ligand complexes that have not been crystallized. Finally, a review of structure-based ligand discovery and design studies based on chemokine receptor crystal structures and homology models illustrates the possibilities and challenges to find novel ligands for chemokine receptors.
CCR5 serves as R5-tropic HIV co-receptor. Knocking out CCR5 in HIV patients, which has occurred <10 times, is believed important for cure. JAK/STAT inhibitors tofacitinib and ruxolitinib inhibit CCR5 expression in HIV(+) viremic patients. We investigated the association of JAK/STAT signaling pathway with CCR5/CCR2 expression in human primary CD4(+) T cells and confirmed its importance. Six of nine JAK/STAT inhibitors that reduced CCR5/CCR2 expression were identified. Inhibitor-treated CD4(+) T cells were relatively resistant, specifically to R5-tropic HIV infection. Furthermore, single JAK2, STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B knockout and different combinations of JAK/STAT knockout significantly reduced CCR2/CCR5 expression of both RNA and protein levels, indicating that CCR5/CCR2 expression was positively regulated by JAK-STAT pathway in CD4(+) T cells. Serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) knockout affected CCR2/CCR5 gene expression, suggesting that SGK1 is involved in CCR2/CCR5 regulation. If cell surface CCR5 levels can be specifically and markedly down-regulated without adverse effects, that may have a major impact on the HIV cure agenda.
Recognition of cell-surface receptors and co-receptors is a crucial molecular event towards the establishment of HIV infection. HIV exists as several variants that differentially recognize the principal co-receptors, CCR5 and CXCR4, in different cell types, known as HIV co-receptor-tropism. The relative levels of these variants dynamically adjust to the changing host selection pressures to infect a vast repertoire of cells in a stage-specific manner. HIV infection sets in through immune cells such as dendritic cells, macrophages, and T-lymphocytes in the acute stage, while a wide range of other cells, including astrocytes, glial cells, B-lymphocytes, and epithelial cells, are infected during chronic stages. A change in tropism occurs during the transition from acute to a chronic phase, termed as co-receptor switching marked by a change in disease severity. The cellular and molecular events leading to co-receptor switching are poorly understood. This review aims to collate our present understanding of the dynamics of HIV co-receptor-tropism vis-a-vis host and viral factors, highlighting the cellular and molecular events involved therein. We present the possible correlations between virus entry, cell tropism, and co-receptor switching, speculating its consequences on disease progression, and proposing new scientific pursuits to help in an in-depth understanding of HIV biology.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) entry is a complex and intricate process that facilitates delivery of the viral genome to the host cell. The only viral surface protein, Envelope (Env), is composed of a trimer of gp120 and gp41 heterodimers. It is essentially a fusion machine cloaked in a shroud of carbohydrate structures and variable loops of amino acids that enable it to evade the humoral immune response. For entry to occur gp120 sequentially engages the host protein CD4 and then one of two chemokine coreceptors, either CCR5 or CXCR4. CD4 binding facilitates exposure and formation of the coreceptor-binding site, and coreceptor binding then triggers the membrane fusion machinery in the gp41 subunit. Our understanding of HIV entry has led to the development of successful small molecule inhibitors for the clinical treatment of HIV infection as well as insights into viral tropism and pathogenesis.
Chemokine receptors are found on cell surfaces and promote cellular migration by chemotaxis. The CC chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) is used by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) to infect cells. Strategies that target human CCR5 are therefore being developed to prevent and treat HIV infection. Antiviral strategies that target a host element necessary for viral replication may be predicted to interfere with the function of that element and may therefore adversely affect the host. We conducted a review of the literature between November 2005 and April 2006 with a focus on articles addressing the genetics and function of CCR5, the effects of CCR5 deletion in human and murine systems, and treatment strategies for HIV infection that target this coreceptor. English-language articles in the human and murine literature published between March 1996 and April 2006 were identified through a search of MEDLINE using CCR5 as the search term. Relevant articles as judged by their titles and abstracts were reviewed in detail. In addition, based on our knowledge of the field and with permission, unpublished work was also reviewed. In this article, we explore the effects that targeting CCR5 may have on host defenses in individuals with immunity already compromised by HIV infection.
The discovery that chemokine receptors are the human cofactors required along with CD4 for fusion and infection by HIV has opened new directions in AIDS research on mechanisms of viral entry, tropism, and pathogenesis. A possible mechanism of co-receptor function has been demonstrated that involves the formation of a complex on the cell surface between the HIV-1 envelope, CD4, and the coreceptor. Functional studies indicate that this interaction is structurally complex, that it probably involves multiple domains of the coreceptor, and that different virus isolates interact with coreceptors in distinct ways. Other immunodeficiency viruses including simian immunodeficiency virus and feline immunodeficiency virus also utilize chemokine receptors for entry. The identification of genetic polymorphisms helps explain why some people, with alterations in the CCR5 gene that prevent expression, are protected from HIV-1 infection. The discovery of specific HIV-1 fusion coreceptor molecules has not only provided new insights into the mechanisms of viral entry and tropism, but also led to new avenues of investigation on strategies to block HIV infection.
During HIV type 1 (HIV-1) entry, trimers of gp120 bind to CD4 and either the CCR5 or CXCR4 coreceptor on the target cell. The stoichiometric parameters associated with HIV-1 entry remain unclear. Important unanswered questions include: how many trimers must attach to CD4 molecules, how many must bind coreceptors, and how many functional gp120 subunits per trimer are required for entry? We performed single round infectivity assays with chimeric viruses and compared the experimental relative infectivity curves with curves generated by mathematical models. Our results indicate that HIV-1 entry requires only a small number of functional spikes (one or two), that Env trimers may function with fewer than three active subunits, and that there is no major difference in the stoichiometric requirements for CCR5 vs. CXCR4 mediated HIV-1 entry into host cells.
BACKGROUND: Tyrosine sulfation is an important post-translational modification of secreted and membrane proteins in multi-cellular organisms. This modification is catalyzed by tyrosylprotein sulfotransferases that often modify tyrosine residues in their target substrates in a heterogeneous manner. Chemokine receptors such as CCR5, which play roles in inflammation, immunity and viral infection, are sulfated on tyrosine residues in their extracellular N-termini. The heterogeneity of the sulfation has made it difficult to obtain atomic-resolution information on this region of CCR5. Homogeneously sulfated peptide surrogates can be efficiently synthesized by chemical and biochemical approaches. This communication reviews current chemical and biochemical methods for peptide tyrosine sulfation and the use of N-terminal CCR5 peptide surrogates in biochemical and structural analyses. CONCLUSION: Using solid phase peptide synthesis and synthons containing sulfotyrosine or sulfotyrosine neopentyl esters peptides containing up to 30 residues with multiple sulfotyrosines can be synthesized and purified in high (>50-70%) yield. Such peptides can be isotopically labeled at selected positions and used in detailed NMR investigations to investigate the interactions of sulfotyrosine residues with receptors. The application of transferred NOE studies to investigate CCL5/CCR5 interactions has led to the determination of pairwise interactions between the chemokine and its receptor.
Globally, human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection is a major health burden for which successful therapeutic options are still being investigated. Challenges facing current drugs that are part of the established life-long antiretroviral therapy (ART) include toxicity, development of drug resistant HIV-1 strains, the cost of treatment, and the inability to eradicate the provirus from infected cells. For these reasons, novel anti-HIV-1 therapeutics that can prevent or eliminate disease progression including the onset of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) are needed. While development of HIV-1 vaccination has also been challenging, recent advancements demonstrate that infection of HIV-1-susceptible cells can be prevented in individuals living with HIV-1, by targeting C-C chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5). CCR5 serves many functions in the human immune response and is a co-receptor utilized by HIV-1 for entry into immune cells. Therapeutics targeting CCR5 generally involve gene editing techniques including CRISPR, CCR5 blockade using antibodies or antagonists, or combinations of both. Here we review the efficacy of these approaches and discuss the potential of their use in the clinic as novel ART-independent therapies for HIV-1 infection.
The chemokine receptor, CCR5, is a G protein coupled receptor responsible for some of the effects of the chemokines CCL3, CCL4 and CCL5. It is also one of the co-receptors for the entry of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) into cells. Regulation of CCR5 number on cells is, therefore, important for determining the infection rate by HIV-1.
The numerous chemokines and their cognate G protein-coupled chemokine receptors on the surface of leukocytes form a complex signaling network, which regulates the immune response and also other key physiological processes. Currently only a very limited number of structures of chemokine*chemokine receptor complexes have been solved. More structures are needed for the understanding of their mechanism of action and the rational design of drugs against these highly relevant therapeutic targets. Recently, we have determined the cryo-EM structure of the human wild-type CCR5 chemokine receptor, which is also the HIV-1 coreceptor, in its active conformation bound to the chemokine super-agonist [6P4]CCL5 and the heterotrimeric G(i) protein. The structure provides the rationale for the sequence-activity relation of agonist and antagonist CCR5 chemokine ligands. In this chapter, we present a detailed protocol for the preparation of the active agonist chemokine*CCR5*G(i) complex for cryo-EM studies including quality controls and caveats. As such the protocol may serve as starting point for structural and biophysical studies of other chemokine*chemokine receptor complexes.
The CCR5 chemokine receptor mediates the effects of proinflammatory beta-chemokines that stimulate chemotaxis, activation, and proliferation of macrophages and T cells. CCR5 is also the major coreceptor that mediates HIV infection in combination with CD4. Chemokine agonists of CCR5 stimulate the activation of cellular calcium and protein kinase signaling pathways that depend on the activation of Galphai and probably also Galphaq in some cells. Chemokines also stimulate the recruitment of beta-arrestin, which is required for clathrin-dependent receptor internalization and acts as a scaffold protein for the chemotaxis signaling complex that mobilizes the actin cytoskeleton. CCR5 is partially constitutively active for the activation of Galphai, but the physiological significance has not been studied. HIV binding to CCR5 also activates G protein and protein kinase signaling but, in addition, stimulates the production of proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF-alpha, and mobilizes the actin cytoskeleton to form the fusion pore that allows viral entry and subsequently supports viral replication in the cell. The CCR5 conformation that mediates the fusion of the viral and cell membranes is unknown, but it is probably distinct from the conformation that mediates G protein signaling. Nonpeptide CCR5 blockers are allosteric inverse agonists that increase dissociation of both chemokines and HIV envelope proteins, but this does not correlate with their ability to inhibit HIV infection. Nevertheless, the inverse agonist activity may ameliorate the immune activation that exacerbates AIDS pathogenesis. Inverse agonists of CCR5 have established efficacy for the treatment of AIDS, but may also be useful in preventing HIV infection.
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) enters host cells through the binding of its envelope glycoproteins (Env) to the host cell receptor CD4 and then subsequent binding to a chemokine coreceptor, either CCR5 or CXCR4. CCR5 antagonists are a relatively recent class addition to the armamentarium of anti-HIV-1 drugs. These compounds act by binding to a hydrophobic pocket formed by the transmembrane helices of CCR5 and altering the conformation of the extracellular domains, such that they are no longer recognized by Env. Maraviroc is the first drug within this class to be licenced for use in HIV-1 therapy regimens. HIV resistance to CCR5 antagonists occurs either through outgrowth of pre-existing CXCR4-using viruses, or through acquisition of the ability of CCR5-using HIV-1 to use the antagonist bound form of CCR5. In the latter scenario, the mechanism underlying resistance is through complex alterations in the way that resistant Envs engage CCR5. These significant changes are unlikely to occur without consequence to the viral entry phenotype and may also open up new avenues to target CCR5 antagonist resistant viruses. This review discusses the mechanism of action of CCR5 antagonists, how HIV resistance to CCR5 antagonists occurs, and the subsequent effects on Env function.
In spite of the relevance of the results obtained through the clinical application of chemotherapeutic agents (reverse transcriptase and proteinase inhibitors) that are able to prolong the life span of affected people, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) remains a serious and lethal disease. AIDS is caused by a type 1 human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) and formation of a complex among the gp120, CD4 and CCR5/CXCR4 surface proteins represents a key-step in the infection. The use of synthetic peptides reproducing reduced sequences of these proteins has contributed to increase the knowledge of the mechanism that determines the penetration of the HIV viruses into the target-cells. In addition, short peptides with minimum structural requirements for anti-HIV activity hold greater potential as lead compounds for rational drug design than macromolecular proteins. In this context, our studies concern: the role of gp120 V3 loop in CD4 binding, the importance of the N-terminal sequence of HIV CCR5 coreceptor, the potential inhibitory properties of sequences patterned on CXCR4 natural ligand (SDF-1) and the role of secondary structure in determining gp160 enzymatic processing into gp120.
The CC chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) is a member of CC-chemokine receptor family. CCR5 has the characteristic structure of a seven transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), which regulates trafficking and effector functions of memory/effector Th1 cells, macrophages, NK cells, and immature dendritic cells. CCR5 and its ligands are important molecules in viral pathogenesis. CCR5 represents the co-receptor for macrophage (M) and dual (T cell and M)-tropic immunodeficiency viruses. Recent evidence has also demonstrated the role of CCR5 in a variety of human diseases, ranging from infectious and inflammatory diseases to cancer. In this article, we describe the involvement of CCR5 in two age-related diseases, atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's disease, suggesting a possible role of chemokine system on these diseases' pathophysiology. Finally, we review the data on the probable association between CCR5Delta32 deletion and cardiovascular diseases and Alzheimer's disease.
Studying HIV-1 replication in the presence of functionally related proteins from different species has helped define host determinants of HIV-1 infection. Humans and owl monkeys, but not macaques, encode a CD4 receptor that permits entry of transmissible HIV-1 variants due to a single residue difference. However, little is known about whether divergent CCR5 receptor proteins act as determinants of host-range. Here we show that both owl monkey (Aotus vociferans) CD4 and CCR5 receptors are functional for the entry of transmitted HIV-1 when paired with human versions of the other receptor. By contrast, the owl monkey CD4/CCR5 pair is generally a suboptimal receptor combination, although there is virus-specific variation in infection with owl monkey receptors. Introduction of the human residues 15Y and 16T within a sulfation motif into owl monkey CCR5 resulted in a gain of function. These findings suggest there is cross-talk between CD4 and CCR5 involving the sulfation motif.
