C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4; Receptor for the C-X-C chemokine CXCL12/SDF-1 that transduces a signal by increasing intracellular calcium ion levels and enhancing MAPK1/MAPK3 activation. Involved in the AKT signaling cascade. Plays a role in regulation of cell migration, e.g. during wound healing. Acts as a receptor for extracellular ubiquitin; leading to enhanced intracellular calcium ions and reduced cellular cAMP levels. Binds bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) et mediates LPS-induced inflammatory response, including TNF secretion by monocytes. Involved in hematopoiesis and in car [...] 
Macrophages are versatile cells of the immune system which react to various external stimuli through different polarization patterns which adjust the cells to the required function whether it is removal of pathogens or necrotic cells, tissue repair or propagation of inflammation. As much of macrophage behavior is determined by their polarization, appropriate models to study macrophage polarization are required. Previously we have published a protocol for transfection of THP-1 macrophages, which in brief pre-differentiates THP-1 monocytes for 48h using 100ng/ml PMA, followed by detachment of the cells and eletroporation using Lonza nucleofector technology and finally includes further 48h of differentiation with 100ng/ml PMA. When we applied this protocol to study interleukin (IL) 10 dependent polarization, the cells were inert to the IL10 stimulus, as indicated by a failure to induce IL10 target genes such as SOCS3. Further investigation revealed that the cells were classically activated by the differentiation agent phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) as shown by induction of chemokine receptor CCR7. Subsequent reduction of PMA concentration during THP-1 macrophage differentiation significantly improved their response to IL10 as SOCS3 increased more than 40-fold. This increased responsiveness of the THP-1 macrophages was also confirmed for polarization with LPS and IFNgamma. Up-regulation of classical activation markers CCL3, CCR7 and TNFalpha was enhanced from 18-, 21- and 70-fold, respectively, to 48-, 222- and 951-fold, respectively. Reduction of PMA concentration did not negatively affect macrophage differentiation or transfection efficiency. Expression of macrophage differentiation markers CD11b and CD68 as well as cell morphology remained unchanged. In addition transfection efficiency and rates of apoptosis and necrosis remained unaffected. Thus our revised protocol combines high transfection efficiency and cell vitality with a strong response to polarizing stimuli and therefore constitutes a suitable model for studying macrophage polarization in vitro.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is frequently accompanied by excruciating pain, which has been associated with attraction of cancer cells and their invasion of intrapancreatic sensory nerves. Neutralization of the chemokine CCL2 reduced cancer-associated pain in a clinical trial, but there have been no systematic analyses of the highly diverse chemokine families and their receptors in PDAC. METHODS: We performed an open, unbiased RNA-interference screen of mammalian chemokines in co-cultures of mouse PDAC cells (K8484) and mouse peripheral sensory neurons, and confirmed findings in studies of DT8082 PDAC cells. We studied the effects of chemokines on migration of PDAC cell lines. Orthotopic tumors were grown from K8484 cells in mice, and mice were given injections of neutralizing antibodies against chemokines, antagonists, or control antibodies. We analyzed abdominal mechanical hypersensitivity and collected tumors and analyzed them by histology and immunohistochemistry to assess neural remodeling. We collected PDAC samples and information on pain levels from 74 patients undergoing resection and measured levels of CXCR3 and CCR7 by immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting. RESULTS: Knockdown of 9 chemokines in DRG neurons significantly reduced migration of PDAC cells towards sensory neurons. Sensory neuron-derived CCL21 and CXCL10 promoted migration of PDAC cells via their receptors CCR7 and CXCR3, respectively, which were expressed by cells in orthotopic tumors and PDAC specimens from patients. Neutralization of CCL21 or CXCL10, or their receptors, in mice with orthotopic tumors significantly reduced nociceptive hypersensitivity and nerve fiber hypertrophy and improved behavioral parameters without affecting tumor infiltration by T cells or neutrophils. Increased levels of CXCR3 and CCR7 in human PDAC specimens were associated with increased frequency of cancer-associated pain, determined from patient questionnaires. CONCLUSIONS: In an unbiased screen of chemokines, we identified CCL21 and CXCL10 as proteins that promote migration of pancreatic cancer cells toward sensory neurons. Inhibition of these chemokines or their receptors reduce hypersensitivity in mice with orthotopic tumors, and patients with PDACs with high levels of the chemokine receptors of CXCR3 and CCR7 had increased frequency of cancer-associated pain.
Naive T lymphocytes travel to T-cell areas of secondary lymphoid organs in search of antigen presented by dendritic cells. Once activated, they proliferate vigorously, generating effector cells that can migrate to B-cell areas or to inflamed tissues. A fraction of primed T lymphocytes persists as circulating memory cells that can confer protection and give, upon secondary challenge, a qualitatively different and quantitatively enhanced response. The nature of the cells that mediate the different facets of immunological memory remains unresolved. Here we show that expression of CCR7, a chemokine receptor that controls homing to secondary lymphoid organs, divides human memory T cells into two functionally distinct subsets. CCR7- memory cells express receptors for migration to inflamed tissues and display immediate effector function. In contrast, CCR7+ memory cells express lymph-node homing receptors and lack immediate effector function, but efficiently stimulate dendritic cells and differentiate into CCR7- effector cells upon secondary stimulation. The CCR7+ and CCR7- T cells, which we have named central memory (TCM) and effector memory (TEM), differentiate in a step-wise fashion from naive T cells, persist for years after immunization and allow a division of labour in the memory response.
Conventional dendritic cells (cDCs), cDC1 and cDC2, act both to initiate immunity and maintain self-tolerance. The tryptophan metabolic enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) is used by cDCs in maintaining tolerance, but its role in different subsets remains unclear. At homeostasis, only mature CCR7(+) cDC1 expressed IDO1 that was dependent on IRF8. Lipopolysaccharide treatment induced maturation and IDO1-dependent tolerogenic activity in isolated immature cDC1, but not isolated cDC2. However, both human and mouse cDC2 could induce IDO1 and acquire tolerogenic function when co-cultured with mature cDC1 through the action of cDC1-derived l-kynurenine. Accordingly, cDC1-specific inactivation of IDO1 in vivo exacerbated disease in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. This study identifies a previously unrecognized metabolic communication in which IDO1-expressing cDC1 cells extend their immunoregulatory capacity to the cDC2 subset through their production of tryptophan metabolite l-kynurenine. This metabolic axis represents a potential therapeutic target in treating autoimmune demyelinating diseases.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and fatal primary tumor of the central nervous system (CNS) and current treatments have limited success. Chemokine signaling regulates both malignant cells and stromal cells of the tumor microenvironment (TME), constituting a potential therapeutic target against brain cancers. Here, we investigated the C-C chemokine receptor type 7 (CCR7) and the chemokine (C-C-motif) ligand 21 (CCL21) for their expression and function in human GBM and then assessed their therapeutic potential in preclinical mouse GBM models. In GBM patients, CCR7 expression positively associated with a poor survival. CCL21-CCR7 signaling was shown to regulate tumor cell migration and proliferation while also controlling tumor associated microglia/macrophage recruitment and VEGF-A production, thereby controlling vascular dysmorphia. Inhibition of CCL21-CCR7 signaling led to an increased sensitivity to temozolomide-induced tumor cell death. Collectively, our data indicate that drug targeting of CCL21-CCR7 signaling in tumor and TME cells is a therapeutic option against GBM.
The recruitment of cells with effector functions into the tumor microenvironment holds potential for delaying cancer progression. We show that subsets of human CD28-effector CD8 T cells, CCR7(-) CD45RO(+) effector memory, and CCR7(-) CD45RO(-) effector memory RA phenotypes, express the chemerin receptor CMKLR1 and bind chemerin via the receptor. CMKLR1-expressing human CD8 effector memory T cells present gene, protein, and cytotoxic features of NK cells. Active chemerin promotes chemotaxis of CMKLR1-expressing CD8 effector memory cells and triggers activation of the alpha4beta1 integrin. In an experimental prostate tumor mouse model, chemerin expression is downregulated in the tumor microenvironment, which is associated with few tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells, while forced overexpression of chemerin by mouse prostate cancer cells leads to an accumulation of intra-tumor CD8(+) T cells. Furthermore, alpha4 integrin blockade abrogated the chemerin-dependent recruitment of CD8(+) T effector memory cells into implanted prostate tumors in vivo. The results identify a role for chemerin:CMKLR1 in defining a specialized NK-like CD8 T cell, and suggest the use of chemerin-dependent modalities to target effector CMKLR1-expressing T cells to the tumor microenvironment for immunotherapeutic purposes.
C-C chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) was one of the first two chemokine receptors that were found to be upregulated in breast cancers. Chemokine receptors promote chemotaxis of cells and tissue organization. Since under homeostatic conditions, CCR7 promotes migration of immune cells to lymph nodes, questions immediately arose regarding the ability of CCR7 to direct migration of cancer cells to lymph nodes. The literature since 2000 was examined to determine to what extent the expression of CCR7 in malignant tumors promoted migration to the lymph nodes. The data indicated that in different cancers, CCR7 plays distinct roles in directing cells to lymph nodes, the skin or to the central nervous system. In certain tumors, it may even serve a protective role. Future studies should focus on defining mechanisms that differentially regulate the unfavorable or beneficial role that CCR7 plays in cancer pathophysiology, to be able to improve outcomes in patients who harbor CCR7-positive cancers.
The CCR7 chemokine axis is comprised of chemokine ligand 21 (CCL21) and chemokine ligand 19 (CCL19) acting on chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7). This axis plays two important but apparently opposing roles in cancer. On the one hand, this axis is significantly engaged in the trafficking of a number of effecter cells involved in mounting an immune response to a growing tumour. This suggests therapeutic strategies which involve potentiation of this axis can be used to combat the spread of cancer. On the other hand, the CCR7 axis plays a significant role in controlling the migration of tumour cells towards the lymphatic system and metastasis and can thus contribute to the expansion of cancer. This implies that therapeutic strategies which involve decreasing signaling through the CCR7 axis would have a beneficial effect in preventing dissemination of cancer. This dichotomy has partly been the reason why this axis has not yet been exploited, as other chemokine axes have, as a therapeutic target in cancer. Recent report of a crystal structure for CCR7 provides opportunities to exploit this axis in developing new cancer therapies. However, it remains unclear which of these two strategies, potentiation or antagonism of the CCR7 axis, is more appropriate for cancer therapy. This review brings together the evidence supporting both roles of the CCR7 axis in cancer and examines the future potential of each of the two different therapeutic approaches involving the CCR7 axis in cancer.
AIMS: Breast cancer is the most severe malignant tumor in women. Chemokines and their receptors appear to be implicated in tumorigenesis and metastatic pattern. Also the scavenger atypical chemokine receptors are emerging as crucial regulators for the availability of chemokines. Therefore the aim of the present study is to evaluate the expression of CCR7, ACKR4 and their ligand; CCL21 in human breast cancer. MAIN METHODS: In this study, RT-PCR was done to detect the expression of CCR7 and ACKR4 in 50 non-metastatic and 30 metastatic breast cancer tissue. Also CCL21 level in the serum of study group was detected by ELISA. The expression of all markers is compared to 80 control healthy individual. KEY FINDINGS: Our results revealed the increase in expression of CCR7 and CCL21 level in metastatic group compared to non-metastatic and control groups while ACKR4 expression is significantly increased in breast tissues of non-metastatic patients compared to both control and metastatic groups. Also there was significant positive correlation between CCR7 expression and CCL21 level in cancer patients and significant negative correlation between ACKR4 and both CCR-7 and CCL21 in both non-metastatic and metastatic cancer groups. SIGNIFICANCE: Thus, it might be elucidating that ACKR4 and CCR7 could be a novel target for tumor therapy as targeting the chemokine-receptors axis might represent a powerful tool to prevent infiltration and metastasis and consequently improve cancer prognosis and treatment.
Cancer is one of the most common cause of death in the world with high negative emotional, economic, and social impacts. Conventional therapeutic methods, including chemotherapy and radiotherapy, have not proven satisfactory and relapse is common in most cases. Recent studies have focused on targeted therapy with more precise identification and targeted attacks to the cancer cells. For this purpose, chemokine receptors are proper targets and among them, CXCR4 and CCR7, with a crucial role in cancer metastasis, are being considered as desired candidates for investigation. In this review paper, the most important experimental results are highlighted on the potential targeted therapies based on CXCR4 and CCR7 chemokine receptors.
Early in embryonic development of mice, from day 12.5 after conception, myeloid-lymphoid bipotent progenitors, expressing receptors both for IL7 and CSF-1, migrate from embryonic blood into developing fetal liver. These progenitors also express multiple chemokine receptors, i.e., CCR7, CXCR3, CXCR4, and CXCR5, all on one cell. Their migration through LYVE-1+ vascular endothelium is guided by CCR7, recognizing the chemokine CCL19, and by CXCR3, recognizing CXCL10/11, chemokines which are both produced by the endothelium. Once inside fetal liver, the progenitors are attracted by the chemokine CXCL12 to ALCAM+ liver mesenchyme, which produces not only this chemokine, but also the myeloid differentiation-inducing cytokine CSF-1 and the lymphoid differentiation-inducing cytokine IL7. In this mesenchymal environment B-lymphocyte lineage progenitors are then induced by IL7 to enter differentiation and Ig gene rearrangements. Within 3-4 days surface IgM+ immature B-cells develop, which are destined to enter the B1-cell compartments in the peripheral lymphoid organs.
Oxysterols are involved in maintaining cellular cholesterol levels. Recently, oxysterols have been demonstrated to modulate the function of immune cells and tumor growth. These effects can be dependent on the activation of the oxysterol-binding liver X receptors (LXRs) or, as recently demonstrated for T and B cells, DCs and neutrophils, can be independent of LXR activation. LXR-dependent oxysterol effects can be ascribed to the activation of LXRalpha, LXRbeta or LXRalphabeta isoforms, which induces transcriptional activation or trans-repression of target genes. The prevalent activation of one isoform seems to be cell-, tissue-, or context-specific, as shown in some pathologic processes, i.e., infectious diseases, atherosclerosis, and autoimmunity. Oxysterol-LXR signaling has recently been shown to inhibit antitumor immune responses, as well as to modulate tumor cell growth. Here, we review the mechanisms that link oxysterols to tumor growth, and discuss possible networks at the basis of LXR-dependent and -independent oxysterol effects on immune cells and tumor development.
Chemokines are essential guidance cues orchestrating cell migration in health and disease. Cognate chemokine receptors sense chemokine gradients over short distances to coordinate directional cell locomotion. The chemokines CCL19 and CCL21 are essential for recruiting CCR7-expressing dendritic cells bearing pathogen-derived antigens and lymphocytes to lymph nodes, where the two cell types meet to launch an adaptive immune response against the invading pathogen. CCR7-expressing cancer cells are also recruited by CCL19 and CCL21 to metastasize in lymphoid organs. In contrast, atypical chemokine receptors (ACKRs) do not transmit signals required for cell locomotion but scavenge chemokines. ACKR4 is crucial for internalizing and degrading CCL19 and CCL21 to establish local gradients, which are sensed by CCR7-expressing cells. Here, we describe the production of fluorescently tagged chemokines by fusing CCL19 and CCL21 to monomeric red fluorescent protein (mRFP). We show that purified CCL19-mRFP and CCL21-mRFP are versatile and powerful tools to study CCR7 and ACKR4 functions, such as receptor trafficking and chemokine scavenging, in a spatiotemporal fashion. We demonstrate that fluorescently tagged CCL19 and CCL21 permit the visualization and quantification of chemokine gradients in real time, while CCR7-expressing leukocytes and cancer cells sense the guidance cues and migrate along the chemokine gradients.
The chemokine receptor CCR7, together with its ligands, is responsible for the migration and positioning of adaptive immune cells, and hence critical for launching adaptive immune responses. CCR7 is also induced on certain cancer cells and contributes to metastasis formation. Thus, CCR7 expression and signalling must be tightly regulated for proper function. CCR7, like many other members of the G-protein coupled receptor superfamily, can form homodimers and oligomers. Notably, danger signals associated with pathogen encounter promote oligomerisation of CCR7 and is considered as one layer of regulating its function. Here, we assessed the dimerisation of human CCR7 and several single point mutations using split-luciferase complementation assays. We demonstrate that dimerisation-defective CCR7 mutants can be transported to the cell surface and elicit normal chemokine-driven G-protein activation. By contrast, we discovered that CCR7 mutants whose expression are shifted towards monomers significantly augment their capacities to bind and internalise fluorescently labelled CCL19. Modeling of the receptor suggests that dimerisation-defective CCR7 mutants render the extracellular loops more flexible and less structured, such that the chemokine recognition site located in the binding pocket might become more accessible to its ligand. Overall, we provide new insights into how the dimerisation state of CCR7 affects CCL19 binding and receptor trafficking.
The study of leukocyte migration continues to provide new insights into the regulation of lymphocyte priming in secondary lymphoid organs and effector responses in inflamed tissues. Chemoattractant receptors have always been viewed as facilitators of cell movement into a tissue. This whole concept must now be revised with the discovery of sphingosine 1 phosphate receptors, which control cell exit from lymphoid tissues. The chemoattractants that regulate lymphoid tissue homing are usually different to those that regulate leukocyte recruitment to inflamed tissues. There is evidence, however, of inflammatory pathways of leukocyte recruitment in lymph nodes and, conversely of constitutive pathways in peripheral tissues. Finally, antagonists (or agonists) of chemoattractant receptors and their signalling pathways represent the most attractive strategy for the treatment of a wide range of inflammatory diseases, including allergy.
OBJECTIVE: C-C motif chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) significantly influences tumors onset and progression, yet its impact on the tumor microenvironment (TME) and specific mechanisms remain elusive. Inflammatory Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts (iCAF), a vital subtype of Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts (CAF), play a critical role in regulating the TME and tumor growth, though the underlying molecular mechanisms are not fully understood. This study aims to determine whether CCR7 participates in tumor regulation by iCAF and to elucidate the specific mechanisms involved. METHODS: Differential gene analysis of CAF subtypes in CCR7 knockout and wild-type groups was conducted using single-cell data. Animal models facilitated the extraction of primary iCAF cells via flow cytometry sorting. Changes in DUSP1 expression and the efficiency of lentivirus-mediated knockdown and overexpression were examined through qPCR and Western Blot. MOC1 and MOC2 cells were co-cultured with iCAF, with subsequent validation of changes in tumor cell proliferation, migration, and invasion using CCK8, EdU, and wound healing assays. ELISA was employed to detect changes in TGF-beta1 concentration in the iCAF supernatant. RESULTS: CAF was categorized into three subtypes-myCAF, iCAF, and apCAF-based on single-cell data. Analysis revealed a significant increase in DUSP1 expression in iCAF from the CCR7 knockout group, confirmed by in vitro experiments. Co-culturing MOC1 and MOC2 cells with iCAF exhibiting lentivirus-mediated DUSP1 knockdown resulted in inhibited tumor cell proliferation, invasion, and migration. In contrast, co-culture with iCAF overexpressing DUSP1 enhanced these capabilities. Additionally, the TGF-beta1 concentration in the supernatant increased in the DUSP1 knockdown iCAF group, whereas it decreased in the DUSP1 overexpression group. CONCLUSION: The CCR7/DUSP1 signaling axis regulates tumor growth by modulating TGF-beta1 secretion in iCAF.
The human chemokines CCL19 and CCL21 bind to the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) CCR7 and play an important role in the trafficking of immune cells as well as cancer metastasis. Conserved binding sites for sulfotyrosine residues on the receptor contribute significantly to the chemokine/GPCR interaction and have been shown to provide promising targets for new drug-discovery efforts to disrupt the chemokine/GPCR interaction and, consequently, tumor metastasis. Here, we report the first X-ray crystal structure of a truncated CCL19 (residues 7-70) at 2.50 A resolution, revealing molecular details crucial for protein-protein interactions. Although the overall structure is similar to the previously determined NMR model, there are important variations, particularly near the N terminus and the so-called 30's and 40's loops. Computational analysis using the FTMap server indicates the potential importance of these areas in ligand binding and the differences in binding hotspots compared to CCL21. NMR titration experiments using a CCR7-derived peptide (residues 5-11, TDDYIGD) further demonstrate potential receptor recognition sites, such as those near the C terminus and 40's loop, which consist of both positively charged and hydrophobic residues that may be important for receptor binding. Taken together, the X-ray, NMR, and computational analysis herein provide insights into the overall structure and molecular features of CCL19 and enables investigation into this chemokine's function and inhibitor development.
A number of human and animal herpes viruses encode G-protein coupled receptors with seven transmembrane (7TM) segments-most of which are clearly related to human chemokine receptors. It appears, that these receptors are used by the virus for immune evasion, cellular transformation, tissue targeting, and possibly for cell entry. In addition, many virally-encoded chemokine 7TM receptors have been suggested to be causally involved in pathogenic phenotypes like Kaposi sarcoma, atherosclerosis, HIV-infection and tumour development. The role of these receptors during the viral life cycle and in viral pathogenesis is still poorly understood. Here we focus on the current knowledge of structure, function and trafficking patterns of virally encoded chemokine receptors and further address the putative roles of these receptors in virus survival and host -cell and/or -immune system modulation. Finally, we highlight the emerging impact of these receptor on virus-mediated diseases.
OBJECTIVE: To explore whether Src activity is regulated by the binding of chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) and CCL19 in salivary gland tumor. We also aim to elucidate whether Src is capable of regulating invasion and migration of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells. MATERIALS AND METHODS: PCI-37B cells were first treated with 20 muM PP2 for 30 min or 10 mug/mL CCR7mAb for 4 h, respectively, followed by 200 ng/mL CCL19 induction for 5 min. Western blot was conducted to detect protein levels of p-Src, p-Pyk2 and p-Paxillin. Transwell assay was performed to access migratory and invasive abilities of PCI-37B cells. Immunofluorescence was finally conducted to observe changes in cell cytoskeleton. RESULTS: CCL19 induction in PCI-37B cells upregulated protein levels of p-Src, p-Pyk2 and p-Paxillin, which were downregulated by PP2 treatment. Src activation induced by CCL19 enhanced invasive and migratory abilities of PCI-37B cells. However, PP2 treatment reversed invasive and migratory abilities even after CCL19 induction. CCL19-induced PCI-37B cells were shaped as irregular polygon and closely connected. Large flak pseudopods were observed and invasive pseudopodia connections markedly increased after CCL19 induction. F-actin body was found in pseudopodia. PP2 treatment resulted in fewer pseudopodia and regularly arranged actin filaments. CONCLUSIONS: Src activation is regulated by binding of CCR7 and CCL19 in salivary gland tumor. Activated Src alters cell adhesion ability and cytoskeleton by regulating Pyk2 and Paxillin, thus elevating invasive and migratory abilities of HNSCC cells.
Primary central nervous system (CNS) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) represents less than 1% of non-Hodgkin lymphomas and 2%-3% of brain tumors. Primary CNS DLBCL occurs sporadically in healthy patients. Tumor development and progression have been associated with reduced/absent expression of human leukocyte antigen class I and II proteins; increased expression of CXCR4, CXCL12, CXCR5, and CCR7; mutations of VH4/34, BCL6, MYC, and PAX5 genes; and rearrangement of immunoglobulin heavy and light chain genes. Generally, DLBCL is a single supratentorial lesion (60%-70%), and stereotactic biopsy and intraoperative examination are the main diagnostic methods. Distinctive histologic features are a diffuse growth pattern and angioinvasiveness. Most neoplastic cells resemble centroblasts and exhibit positive CD20, CD22, PAX5, CD79a, and MUM1 expression. The prognosis of primary CNS DLBCL is less favorable than that of nodal DLBCL, and DLBCL subtype, strong FOXP1 immunoreactivity, MYC and BCL2 overexpression, and BCL6 translocations are associated with poor prognosis.
