C-C chemokine receptor type 9; Receptor for chemokine SCYA25/TECK. Subsequently transduces a signal by increasing the intracellular calcium ions level. Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) targeting the PD-1/PD-L1 axis induce sustained clinical responses in a sizable minority of cancer patients. We found that primary resistance to ICIs can be attributed to abnormal gut microbiome composition. Antibiotics inhibited the clinical benefit of ICIs in patients with advanced cancer. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) from cancer patients who responded to ICIs into germ-free or antibiotic-treated mice ameliorated the antitumor effects of PD-1 blockade, whereas FMT from nonresponding patients failed to do so. Metagenomics of patient stool samples at diagnosis revealed correlations between clinical responses to ICIs and the relative abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila Oral supplementation with A. muciniphila after FMT with nonresponder feces restored the efficacy of PD-1 blockade in an interleukin-12-dependent manner by increasing the recruitment of CCR9(+)CXCR3(+)CD4(+) T lymphocytes into mouse tumor beds.
Despite recent advances in our understanding of the biological behavior of prostate cancer (PCa), PCa is becoming the most common malignancy in men worldwide. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway has been implicated in prostate carcinogenesis. Inflammatory cytokines (CCR9, IL-6, and TLR3) regulate PI3K/AKT signaling during apoptosis of PCa cells, and PI3K/AKT signaling participates with androgen-, 1alpha,25(OH)2-vitamin D3-, and prostaglandin-associated mechanisms and is regulated by ErbB, EGFR, and the HER family during cell growth. During metastasis of PCa cells, the PI3K/AKT/NF-kappaB/BMP-2-Smad axis, PTEN/PI3K/AKT pathway, and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling regulates tumor cell metastasis and invasion. The present review focuses on the PI3K/AKT signal pathway and discusses the role of the PI3K/AKT signal pathway in PCa tumorigenesis.
CC chemokines (or beta-chemokines) are 28 chemotactic cytokines with an N-terminal CC domain that play an important role in immune system cells, such as CD4(+) and CD8(+) lymphocytes, dendritic cells, eosinophils, macrophages, monocytes, and NK cells, as well in neoplasia. In this review, we discuss human CC motif chemokine ligands: CCL1, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CCL18, CCL19, CCL20, CCL21, CCL25, CCL27, and CCL28 (CC motif chemokine receptor CCR5, CCR6, CCR7, CCR8, CCR9, and CCR10 ligands). We present their functioning in human physiology and in neoplasia, including their role in the proliferation, apoptosis resistance, drug resistance, migration, and invasion of cancer cells. We discuss the significance of chemokine receptors in organ-specific metastasis, as well as the influence of each chemokine on the recruitment of various cells to the tumor niche, such as cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF), Kupffer cells, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC), osteoclasts, tumor-associated macrophages (TAM), tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL), and regulatory T cells (T(reg)). Finally, we show how the effect of the chemokines on vascular endothelial cells and lymphatic endothelial cells leads to angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis.
Several chemokines have important functions in mucosal immunity. While there are many chemokines, 4 of them (CCL25, CCL28, CXCL14, and CXCL17) are especially important in mucosal immunity because they are homeostatically expressed in mucosal tissues. Of these, only CCL25 and CCL28 have been widely recognized as mucosal chemokines. In this study, we review the physiology of these chemokines with specific emphasis on their function in mucosal immunity. CCL25 recruits certain important subsets of T cells that express CCR9 to the small intestine. These CCR9(+) T cells also express the integrin alpha4beta7 and have been shown to play important roles in the control of intestinal inflammation. CCL28 recruits CCR10(+) IgA plasmablasts to the lactating mammary gland. The role of CXCL14 in mucosal immunity is less well defined, but a Cxcl14(-/-) mouse exhibits significant metabolic abnormalities. Finally, CXCL17 was the last chemokine to be described and signals through a new chemokine receptor (GPR35/CXCR8), which is expressed in a subset of macrophages that are recruited to mucosal tissues by this chemokine. We conclude that these 4 chemokines play very important roles in mucosal immunity and their continued functional characterization will likely identify novel therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND: There is considerable variation in disease behavior among patients infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19). Genomewide association analysis may allow for the identification of potential genetic factors involved in the development of Covid-19. METHODS: We conducted a genomewide association study involving 1980 patients with Covid-19 and severe disease (defined as respiratory failure) at seven hospitals in the Italian and Spanish epicenters of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in Europe. After quality control and the exclusion of population outliers, 835 patients and 1255 control participants from Italy and 775 patients and 950 control participants from Spain were included in the final analysis. In total, we analyzed 8,582,968 single-nucleotide polymorphisms and conducted a meta-analysis of the two case-control panels. RESULTS: We detected cross-replicating associations with rs11385942 at locus 3p21.31 and with rs657152 at locus 9q34.2, which were significant at the genomewide level (P<5x10(-8)) in the meta-analysis of the two case-control panels (odds ratio, 1.77; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.48 to 2.11; P = 1.15x10(-10); and odds ratio, 1.32; 95% CI, 1.20 to 1.47; P = 4.95x10(-8), respectively). At locus 3p21.31, the association signal spanned the genes SLC6A20, LZTFL1, CCR9, FYCO1, CXCR6 and XCR1. The association signal at locus 9q34.2 coincided with the ABO blood group locus; in this cohort, a blood-group-specific analysis showed a higher risk in blood group A than in other blood groups (odds ratio, 1.45; 95% CI, 1.20 to 1.75; P = 1.48x10(-4)) and a protective effect in blood group O as compared with other blood groups (odds ratio, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.53 to 0.79; P = 1.06x10(-5)). CONCLUSIONS: We identified a 3p21.31 gene cluster as a genetic susceptibility locus in patients with Covid-19 with respiratory failure and confirmed a potential involvement of the ABO blood-group system. (Funded by Stein Erik Hagen and others.).
Sjogren's syndrome (SS) is a chronic systemic autoimmune disease that typically presents with lymphocyte, dendritic cell, and macrophage infiltration of exocrine gland ducts and the formation of ectopic germinal centers. The interactions of lymphocyte homing receptors and addressins and chemokines and their receptors, such as alpha4beta7/MAdCAM-1, LFA-1/ICAM-1, CXCL13/CXCR5, CCL25/CCR9, CX3CL1/CX3CR1, play important roles in the migration of inflammatory cells to the focal glands and the promotion of ectopic germinal center formation in SS. A variety of molecules have been shown to be involved in lymphocyte homing, including tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interferon (IFN)-alpha, IFN-beta, and B cell activating factor. This process mainly involves the Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription signaling pathway, lymphotoxin-beta receptor pathway, and nuclear factor-kappaB signaling pathway. These findings have led to the development of antibodies to cell adhesion molecules, antagonists of chemokines and their receptors, compounds interfering with chemokine receptor signaling, and gene therapies targeting chemokines and their receptors, providing new targets for the treatment of SS in humans. The aim of this study was to explore the relationship between lymphocyte homing and the pathogenesis of SS, and to provide a review of recent studies addressing lymphocyte homing in targeted therapy for SS.
Chemokines constitute a superfamily of small chemotactic cytokines with functions that are based on interactions with their corresponding receptors. It has been found that, among other functions, chemokines regulate the migratory and invasive abilities of cancer cells. Multiple studies have confirmed that chemokine receptor 9 (CCR9) and its exclusive ligand, chemokine 25 (CCL25), are overexpressed in a variety of malignant tumors and are closely associated with tumor proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, migration and drug resistance. This review evaluates recent advances in understanding the role of CCR9/CCL25 in cancer development. First, we outline the general background of chemokines in cancer and the structure and function of CCR9 and CCL25. Next, we describe the basic function of CCR9/CCL25 in the cancer process. Then, we introduce the role of CCR9/CCL25 and related signaling pathways in various cancers. Finally, future research directions are proposed. In general, this paper is intended to serve as a comprehensive repository of information on this topic and is expected to contribute to the design of other research projects and future efforts to develop treatment strategies for ameliorating the effects of CCR9/CCL25 in cancer.
This review focuses on the construction and application of structural chemokine receptor models for the elucidation of molecular determinants of chemokine receptor modulation and the structure-based discovery and design of chemokine receptor ligands. A comparative analysis of ligand binding pockets in chemokine receptors is presented, including a detailed description of the CXCR4, CCR2, CCR5, CCR9, and US28 X-ray structures, and their implication for modeling molecular interactions of chemokine receptors with small-molecule ligands, peptide ligands, and large antibodies and chemokines. These studies demonstrate how the integration of new structural information on chemokine receptors with extensive structure-activity relationship and site-directed mutagenesis data facilitates the prediction of the structure of chemokine receptor-ligand complexes that have not been crystallized. Finally, a review of structure-based ligand discovery and design studies based on chemokine receptor crystal structures and homology models illustrates the possibilities and challenges to find novel ligands for chemokine receptors.
BACKGROUND: The pathological features of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are associated with leukocyte cell infiltrates, which contribute to disease progression and persistence by production of proinflammatory mediators. Recruiting leukocytes to the gut involves local expression of chemokines that interact with receptors on the leukocytes' surface. Specific antagonists may interfere with leukocyte recruitment to the intestine. The chemokine receptor CCR9 is one of the key molecules in leukocyte homing to gut mucosa. CCR9 antagonists have been shown to retard progression in patients with IBD. OBJECTIVE: To discuss CCR9 as a potential target for the treatment of IBD. METHODS: A literature review. RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: The therapeutic effects of CCR9 antagonists, in combination with established therapies, should be evaluated in an attempt to slow down leukocyte recruitment at early stages of IBD.
Cancer is currently one of the leading causes of death worldwide and is one of the most challenging major public health problems. The main challenges faced by clinicians in the management and treatment of cancer mainly arise from difficulties in early diagnosis and the emergence of tumor chemoresistance and metastasis. The structures of chemokine receptor 9 (CCR9) and its specific ligand chemokine ligand 25 (CCL25) have been elucidated, and, interestingly, a number of studies have demonstrated that CCR9 is a potential tumor biomarker in diagnosis and therapy, as it has been found to be highly expressed in a wide range of cancers. This expression pattern suggests that CCR9 may participate in many important biological activities involved in cancer progression. Researchers have shown that CCR9 that has been activated by its specific ligand CCL25 can interact with many signaling pathways, especially those involved in tumor chemoresistance and metastasis. This review, therefore, focuses on CCR9 induction activity and summarizes what is currently known regarding its role in cancers and its potential application in tumor-targeted therapy.
The pathogenesis of the murine model of autoimmune pancreatitis associated with IgG4-related disease (AIP/IgG4-RD) induced by administration of polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly[I:C]) is incompletely understood. While it is known that murine and human AIP/IgG4-RD is driven by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) producing IFN-alpha, the origin of these cells and their relation to effector T cells is not known. Here, we show that murine AIP was initiated by TLR3-bearing conventional DCs in the uninflamed pancreas whose activation by the TLR3 ligand poly(I:C) caused IFN-alpha, CXCL9, and CXCL10 secretion. This, in turn, induced pancreatic recruitment of CXCR3+ T cells and these T cells, via their secretion of CCL25, facilitated migration of pDCs bearing CCR9 into the pancreas. This established a feedback loop anchored by the now dominant pDC production of IFN-alpha and the continued CXCR3+ T cell facilitation of pDC migration. Remarkably, the interaction between CXCR3+ T cells and pDCs also existed at the functional level since this interaction enhanced the production of CCL25 and IFN-alpha by CXCR3+ T cells and pDCs, respectively. Evidence presented here that a similar disease mechanism was present in human AIP/IgG4-RD creates new avenues of disease treatment.
Chemokine receptor CCR9 is a G protein-coupled receptor and expressed on several types of immune cells, including dendritic cells (DCs), CD4(+) T cells, and B cells. CCR9 drives the migration of immune cells to gradients of its cognate ligand CCL25. The chemokine CCL25 is mostly produced by gut and thymic epithelial cells. Gut- and thymic-homing DCs are known to express CCR9, and these cells are predominantly localized in the gut lining and thymus. CCR9(+) DCs are implicated in regulating inflammation, food allergy, alloimmunity, and autoimmunity. Differential interaction of CCR9(+) DCs with lymphoid and myeloid cells in the thymus, secondary lymphoid tissues, and mucosal sites offer crucial insights to immune regulation. In this review, we examine the phenotypes, distributions, and interactions of CCR9(+) DCs with other immune cells, elucidating their functions and role in inflammation and autoimmunity.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a hematological malignancy characterized by the malignant clonal expansion of lymphoid hematopoietic precursors. It is regulated by various signaling molecules such as cytokines and adhesion molecules in its microenvironment. Chemokines are chemotactic cytokines that regulate migration, positioning and interactions of cells. Many chemokine axes such as CXCL12/CXCR4 and CCL25/CCR9 have been proved to play important roles in leukemia microenvironment and further affect ALL outcomes. In this review, we summarize the chemokines that are involved in ALL progression and elaborate on their roles and mechanisms in leukemia cell proliferation, infiltration, drug resistance and disease relapse. We also discuss the potential of targeting chemokine axes for ALL treatments, since many related inhibitors have shown promising efficacy in preclinical trials, and some of them have entered clinical trials.
The discovery of gut-specific leukocytes and the ability to modulate their function has been a groundbreaking development in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. Drugs target the interaction between lymphocytes and endothelial cells via integrins and their ligand cellular adhesion molecules. Safety, efficacy and sustainability of effect are key to this drug class, notwithstanding the association of natalizumab with fatal polyoma virus infection. Vedolizumab (2014) now licensed for the treatment of Crohn's disease around the world provides gut-specific immunosuppression. Targets for modulators of leukocyte trafficking include (examples in brackets) ICAM-1 (alicaforsen, efalizumab); MAdCAM-1 (PF-00547 659); alpha4 and related receptors (abrilumab, etrolizumab, natalizumab, vedolizumab); chemokine receptor CCR9 (vercirnon); and sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors (etrasimod, fingolimod, ozanimod). Oral and subcutaneous therapies are in development. The safety, efficacy and practice points of licensed drugs are discussed, in addition to initial results from therapeutic trials.
The NOTCH signaling pathway is a conserved signaling cascade that regulates many aspects of development and homeostasis in multiple organ systems. Aberrant activity of this signaling pathway is linked to the initiation and progression of several hematological malignancies, exemplified by T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Interestingly, frequent non-mutational activation of NOTCH1 signaling has recently been demonstrated in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL), significantly extending the pathogenic significance of this pathway in B-CLL. Leukemia patients often present with high-blood cell counts, diffuse disease with infiltration of the bone marrow, secondary lymphoid organs, and diffusion to the central nervous system (CNS). Chemokines are chemotactic cytokines that regulate migration of cells between tissues and the positioning and interactions of cells within tissue. Homeostatic chemokines and their receptors have been implicated in regulating organ-specific infiltration, but may also directly and indirectly modulate tumor growth. Recently, oncogenic NOTCH1 has been shown to regulate infiltration of leukemic cells into the CNS hijacking the CC-chemokine ligand 19/CC-chemokine receptor 7 chemokine axis. In addition, a crucial role for the homing receptor axis CXC-chemokine ligand 12/CXC-chemokine receptor 4 has been demonstrated in leukemia maintenance and progression. Moreover, the CCL25/CCR9 axis has been implicated in the homing of leukemic cells into the gut, particularly in the presence of phosphatase and tensin homolog tumor suppressor loss. In this review, we summarize the latest developments regarding the role of NOTCH signaling in regulating the chemotactic microenvironmental cues involved in the generation and progression of T-ALL and compare these findings to B-CLL.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) are a research approach used to identify genetic variants associated with common diseases, like COVID-19. The lead genetic variants (n = 41) reported by the eleven largest COVID-19 GWASs are mapped to 22 different chromosomal regions. The loci 3q21.31 (LZTFL1 and chemokine receptor genes) and 9q34.2 (ABO), associated with disease severity and susceptibility to infection, respectively, were the most replicated findings across studies. Genes involved with mucociliary clearance (CEP97, FOXP4), viral-entry (ACE2, SLC6A20) and mucosal immunity (MIR6891) are associated with the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection while genes of antiviral immune response (IFNAR2, OAS1), leukocyte trafficking (CCR9, CXCR6) and lung injury (DPP9, NOTCH4) are associated with severe disease. The biological processes underlying the risk of infection occur prominently, but not exclusively, in the upper airways whereas the severe COVID-19-associated processes in alveolar-capillary interface. The COVID-19 GWASs has unraveled key genetic mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis, although the genetic basis of other COVID-19 related phenotypes (long COVID and neurological impairment) remains to be elucidated.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease, which in the majority of patients progresses to liver transplantation or death. To date, no medical treatment has been proven to be of benefit, although ursodeoxycholic acid is widely used. The etiopathogenesis of PSC is unclear, although it is associated with inflammatory bowel disease. Various hypotheses have been suggested, which have led to different therapeutic strategies. Recent studies have suggested that the microbiome may play a role in PSC, raising the possibility of efficacy of antibiotics and fecal microbiota transplantation. Gut-homing T cells may be important in the pathogenesis of PSC, and several agents are in development, targeting various receptors, integrins, and ligands on this pathway, including VAP-1, MAdCAM-1, alpha4beta7, and CCR9. Nuclear receptor agonists such as obeticholic acid and fibrates hold promise, as do other therapies that alter bile acid composition such as norUDCA. Antifibrotic agents such as Loxl2 inhibitors are also being assessed. In conclusion, it is likely that an effective drug therapy for PSC will become available over the next decade.
After a relatively long time of failed developments and negative clinical trials in pharmacological inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) therapy we now phase a time of a great number of successful studies and new therapy principles that will most likely make it into clinical practice. This will change the landscape of IBD therapy in future markedly. Many new therapeutic principles have been developed and old ones that seemed to have failed such as anti-sense technology suddenly now provide promising results. Some initially promising therapies will need further development or have failed such as Trichuris suis ova therapy (but not helminth therapy in general), CCR9 targeted therapies or recombinant IL-10. In contrast anti-leukocate trafficking therapies appear to be quite promising. Vedolizumab is the first in class anti-integrin antibody that was approved for the therapy of CD and UC recently. Other anti-integrin antibodies and small molecule adhesion inhibitors will most likely be approved in the next years for IBD therapy. Tofacitinib, a small molecule JAK inhibitor, is a promising candidate for the treatment of UC. Phosphatidylcholine may be a future option for patients with 5-ASA refractory UC or 5-ASA intolerance. The preliminary data for Mongersen, a Smad7 antisense oligonucleotide, are promising despite some concerns about long term effect of TGFbeta induction. Anti IL6 strategies will hopefully be further evaluated keeping in mind the caveat of a lack of CRP induction in anti-IL6 treated patients. Stem cell transplantation will become an option for patients that have experienced failure of established medications. Fecal microbiota transplantation and also perhaps combined probiotic therapy is a field that will be evaluated in more detail in the near future especially for UC patients. Based on these new developments treatment algorithms need to be updated. This review will reflect these current developments and give a perspective for future IBD therapy.
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells hold promise as a therapy for B-cell-derived malignancies, and despite their impressive initial response rates, a significant proportion of patients ultimately experience relapse. Although recent studies have explored the mechanisms of in vivo CAR T-cell function, little is understood about the activation of surrounding CARneg bystander T cells and their potential to enhance tumor responses. We performed single-cell RNA sequencing on nonhuman primate (NHP) and patient-derived T cells to identify the phenotypic and transcriptomic hallmarks of bystander activation of CARneg T cells following B-cell-targeted CAR T-cell therapy. Using a highly translatable CD20 CAR NHP model, we observed a distinct population of activated CD8+ CARneg T cells emerging during CAR T-cell expansion. These bystander CD8+ CARneg T cells exhibited a unique transcriptional signature with upregulation of natural killer-cell markers (KIR3DL2, CD160, and KLRD1), chemokines, and chemokine receptors (CCL5, XCL1, and CCR9), and downregulation of naive T-cell-associated genes (SELL and CD28). A transcriptionally similar population was identified in patients after a tisagenlecleucel infusion. Mechanistic studies revealed that interleukin-2 (IL-2) and IL-15 exposure induced bystander-like CD8+ T cells in a dose-dependent manner. In vitro activated and patient-derived T cells with a bystander phenotype efficiently killed leukemic cells through a T-cell receptor-independent mechanism. Collectively, to our knowledge, these data provide the first comprehensive identification and profiling of CARneg bystander CD8+ T cells following B-cell-targeting CAR T-cell therapy and suggest a novel mechanism through which CAR T-cell infusion might trigger enhanced antileukemic responses. Patient samples were obtained from the trial #NCT03369353, registered at www.ClinicalTrials.gov.
Chemokine receptors are essential for the immune response in the oral and gut mucosa. The gastrointestinal mucosa is characterized by the presence of immune populations because it is susceptible to inflammatory and infectious diseases, necessitating immune surveillance. Chemokine receptors are expressed on immune cells and play a role in gastrointestinal tissue-homing, although other non-immune cells also express them for various biological functions. CCR9, CXCR3 and CXCR6 play an important role in the T cell response in inflammatory and neoplastic conditions of the gastrointestinal mucosa. However, CXCR6 could also be found in gastric cancer cells, highlighting the different roles of chemokine receptors in different pathologies. On the other hand, CCR4 and CCR8 are critical for Treg migration in gastrointestinal tissues, correlating with poor prognosis in mucosal cancers. Other chemokine receptors are also important in promoting myeloid infiltration with context-dependent roles. Further, CXCR4 and CXCR7 are also present in gastrointestinal tumor cells and are known to stimulate proliferation, migration, and invasion into other tissues, among other pro-tumorigenic functions. Determining the processes underlying mucosal immunity and creating tailored therapeutic approaches for gastrointestinal diseases requires an understanding of the complex interactions that occur between chemokine receptors and their ligands in these mucosal tissues.
