Thymidylate synthase; Contributes to the de novo mitochondrial thymidylate biosynthesis pathway.
During S phase, not only does DNA have to be replicated, but also newly synthesized DNA molecules have to be connected with each other. This sister chromatid cohesion is essential for the biorientation of chromosomes on the mitotic or meiotic spindle, and is thus an essential prerequisite for chromosome segregation. Cohesion is mediated by cohesin complexes that are thought to embrace sister chromatids as large rings. Cohesin binds to DNA dynamically before DNA replication and is converted into a stably DNA-bound form during replication. This conversion requires acetylation of cohesin, which in vertebrates leads to recruitment of sororin. Sororin antagonizes Wapl, a protein that is able to release cohesin from DNA, presumably by opening the cohesin ring. Inhibition of Wapl by sororin therefore "locks" cohesin rings on DNA and allows them to maintain cohesion for long periods of time in mammalian oocytes, possibly for months or even years.
The CRL4-DCAF15 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex is targeted by the aryl-sulfonamide molecular glues, leading to neo-substrate recruitment, ubiquitination, and proteasomal degradation. However, the physiological function of DCAF15 remains unknown. Using a domain-focused genetic screening approach, we reveal DCAF15 as an acute myeloid leukemia (AML)-biased dependency. Loss of DCAF15 results in suppression of AML through compromised replication fork integrity and consequent accumulation of DNA damage. Accordingly, DCAF15 loss sensitizes AML to replication stress-inducing therapeutics. Mechanistically, we discover that DCAF15 directly interacts with the SMC1A protein of the cohesin complex and destabilizes the cohesin regulatory factors PDS5A and CDCA5. Loss of PDS5A and CDCA5 removal precludes cohesin acetylation on chromatin, resulting in uncontrolled chromatin loop extrusion, defective DNA replication, and apoptosis. Collectively, our findings uncover an endogenous, cell autonomous function of DCAF15 in sustaining AML proliferation through post-translational control of cohesin dynamics.
Eukaryotic genomes are organized by loop extrusion and sister chromatid cohesion, both mediated by the multimeric cohesin protein complex. Understanding how cohesin holds sister DNAs together, and how loss of cohesion causes age-related infertility in females, requires knowledge as to cohesin's stoichiometry in vivo. Using quantitative super-resolution imaging, we identified two discrete populations of chromatin-bound cohesin in postreplicative human cells. Whereas most complexes appear dimeric, cohesin that localized to sites of sister chromatid cohesion and associated with sororin was exclusively monomeric. The monomeric stoichiometry of sororin:cohesin complexes demonstrates that sister chromatid cohesion is conferred by individual cohesin rings, a key prediction of the proposal that cohesion arises from the co-entrapment of sister DNAs.
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a rare cancer derived from neuroendocrine C-cells of the thyroid. In contrast to other neuroendocrine tumors, a histological grading system was lacking until recently. A novel two-tier grading system based on the presence of high proliferation or necrosis is associated with prognosis. Transcriptomic analysis was conducted on 21 MTCs, including 9 high-grade tumors, with known mutational status, using the NanoString Tumor Signaling 360 Panel. This analysis, covering 760 genes, revealed upregulation of the genes EGLN3, EXO1, UBE2T, UBE2C, FOXM1, CENPA, DLL3, CCNA2, SOX2, KIF23, and CDCA5 in high-grade MTCs. Major pathways differentially expressed between high-grade and low-grade MTCs were DNA damage repair, p53 signaling, cell cycle, apoptosis, and Myc signaling. Validation through qRT-PCR in 30 MTCs demonstrated upregulation of ASCL1, DLL3, and SOX2 in high-grade MTCs, a gene signature akin to small-cell lung carcinoma, molecular subgroup A. Subsequently, DLL3 expression was validated by immunohistochemistry. MTCs with DLL3 overexpression (defined as >/= 50% of positive tumor cells) were associated with significantly lower disease-free survival (p = 0.041) and overall survival (p = 0.01). Moreover, MTCs with desmoplasia had a significantly increased expression of DLL3. Our data supports the idea that DLL3 should be further explored as a predictor of aggressive disease and poor outcomes in MTC.
BACKGROUND: Triosephosphate isomerase 1 (TPI1), as a key glycolytic enzyme, is upregulated in multiple cancers. However, expression profile and regulatory mechanism of TPI1 in breast cancer (BRCA) remain mysterious. METHODS: Western blotting and immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays were used to investigate the expression of TPI1 in BRCA specimens and cell lines. TPI1 correlation with the clinicopathological characteristics and prognosis of 362 BRCA patients was analyzed using a tissue microarray. Overexpression and knockdown function experiments in cells and mice models were performed to elucidate the function and mechanisms of TPI1-induced BRCA progression. Related molecular mechanisms were clarified using co-IP, IF, mass spectrometric analysis, and ubiquitination assay. RESULTS: We have found TPI1 is highly expressed in BRCA tissue and cell lines, acting as an independent indicator for prognosis in BRCA patients. TPI1 promotes BRCA cell glycolysis, proliferation and metastasis in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, TPI1 activates phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway to regulate epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) and aerobic glycolysis, which is positively mediated by cell division cycle associated 5 (CDCA5). Moreover, TPI1 interacts with sequestosome-1 (SQSTM1)/P62, and P62 decreases the protein expression of TPI1 by promoting its ubiquitination in MDA-MB-231 cells. CONCLUSIONS: TPI1 promotes BRCA progression by stabilizing CDCA5, which then activates the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. P62 promotes ubiquitin-dependent proteasome degradation of TPI1. Collectively, TPI1 promotes tumor development and progression, which may serve as a therapeutic target for BRCA.
Cell division cycle associated 5 (CDCA5) is correlated with the development and progression of many malignant tumors. However, little is known about its role in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) progression. In this study, the clinical value, biological function and underlying mechanisms of CDCA5 in EOC were evaluated. CDCA5 mRNA and protein levels were substantially upregulated in EOC and had a significant positive correlation with adverse clinicopathological characteristics and a poor prognosis. CDCA5 facilitated proliferation, invasion, and metastasis and disrupted mitochondrial-mediated endogenous apoptosis by activating the cell cycle pathway and inhibiting the P53 pathway in EOC cells. Conversely, knockdown of CDCA5 expression blocked the malignant activities of EOC cells and suppressed the growth of xenograft tumors in vivo. Mechanistically, the transcription factor KLF5 bound to a specific site in the CDCA5 promoter and promoted CDCA5 expression. Moreover, KLF5 overexpression rescued the negative regulation of inhibited CDCA5 expression on EOC cell proliferation. In conclusion, our findings revealed that CDCA5 promoted tumor progression of EOC via the KLF5/CDCA5/cell cycle and P53 axes, which might provide new insights into the roles of CDCA5 in EOC.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is one of the most common malignant tumors in women. Cell division cycle associated 5 (CDCA5), a master regulator of sister chromatid cohesion, was reported to be upregulated in several types of cancer. Here, the function and regulation mechanism of CDCA5 in breast cancer were explored. METHODS: CDCA5 expression was identified through immunohistochemistry staining in breast cancer specimens. The correlation between CDCA5 expression with clinicopathological features and prognosis of breast cancer patients was analyzed using a tissue microarray. CDCA5 function in breast cancer was explored in CDCA5-overexpressed/knockdown cells and mice models. Co-IP, ChIP and dual-luciferase reporter assay assays were performed to clarify underlying molecular mechanisms. RESULTS: We found that CDCA5 was expressed at a higher level in breast cancer tissues and cell lines, and overexpression of CDCA5 was significantly associated with poor prognosis of patients with breast cancer. Moreover, CDCA5 knockdown significantly suppressed the proliferation and migration, while promoted apoptosis in vitro. Mechanistically, we revealed that CDCA5 played an important role in promoting the binding of E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F1) to the forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) promoter. Furthermore, the data of in vitro and in vivo revealed that depletion of FOXM1 alleviated the effect of CDCA5 overexpression on breast cancer. Additionally, we revealed that the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway was required for CDCA5 induced progression of breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: We suggested that CDCA5 promoted progression of breast cancer via CDCA5/FOXM1/Wnt axis, CDCA5 might serve as a novel therapeutic target for breast cancer treatment.
Cohesin is a highly-conserved protein complex that plays important roles in sister chromatid cohesion, chromatin structure, gene expression, and DNA repair. In humans, cohesin is a ubiquitously expressed, multi-subunit protein complex composed of core subunits SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21, STAG1/2 and regulatory subunits WAPL, PDS5A/B, CDCA5, NIPBL, and MAU2. Recent studies have demonstrated that genes encoding cohesin subunits are somatically mutated in a wide range of human cancers. STAG2 is the most commonly mutated subunit, and in a recent analysis was identified as one of only 12 genes that are significantly mutated in four or more cancer types. In this review we summarize the findings reported to date and comment on potential functional implications of cohesin mutation in the pathogenesis of human cancer.
This study aimed to identify key functional modules and genes in functional module involved in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development. The microarray data set GSE54236 was obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between HCC, and normal samples were identified by Limma. DAVID was used to identify the gene ontology terms these genes enriched. The co-expression network was constructed based on Pearson correlation coefficient between gene expression values, and the functional modules these DEGs obviously enriched in were recognized through GraphWeb. Then, based on the genes related to the development of HCC, the DEGs interacting with HCC-associated genes were spotted. Finally, survival analysis and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction were performed. Totally, 427 upregulated (e.g., cell division cycle associated 5 [CDCA5], kinesin family member 4A [KIF4A], TPX2 microtubule nucleation factor [TPX2]) and 313 downregulated (e.g., metallothionein 1E [MT1E]) DEGs were identified in HCC. Besides, CDCA5, KIF4A, and TPX2 had interacting relationship and played important roles in HCC development by interrelating with HCC-related gene, forkhead box M1 (FOXM1). Furthermore, CDCA5, KIF4A, TPX2, and FOXM1 obviously enriched in cell cycle-related functional module, whereas MT1E enriched in mineral absorption module in Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. CDCA5, KIF4A, and TPX2 expression were increased in HCC cells, and their high expressions were related to poor prognosis. Overexpression of CDCA5, KIF4A, TPX2, and FOXM1 coregulated cell cycle and thereby promoted the development of HCC. The finding provided potential targets for the study and treatment of HCC.
PURPOSE: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most frequent arrhythmia in clinical practice. The pathogenesis of AF is not yet clear. Therefore, exploring the molecular information of AF displays much importance for AF therapy. METHODS: The GSE2240 data were acquired from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The R limma software package was used to screen DEGs. Based on the Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) databases, we conducted the functions and pathway enrichment analyses. Then, the STRING and Cytoscape software were employed to build Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network and screen for hub genes. Finally, we used the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) experiment to explore the effect of hub gene knockdown on the proliferation of AF cells. RESULT: 906 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), including 542 significantly upregulated genes and 364 significantly downregulated genes, were screened in AF. The genes of AF were mainly enriched in vascular endothelial growth factor-activated receptor activity, alanine, regulation of histone deacetylase activity, and HCM. The PPI network constructed of significantly upregulated DEGs contained 404 nodes and 514 edges. Five hub genes, ASPM, DTL, STAT3, ANLN, and CDCA5, were identified through the PPI network. The PPI network constructed by significantly downregulated genes contained 327 nodes and 301 edges. Four hub genes, CDC42, CREB1, AR, and SP1, were identified through this PPI network. The results of CCK-8 experiments proved that knocking down the expression of CDCA5 gene could inhibit the proliferation of H9C2 cells. CONCLUSION: Bioinformatics analyses revealed the hub genes and key pathways of AF. These genes and pathways provide information for studying the pathogenesis, treatment, and prognosis of AF and have the potential to become biomarkers in AF treatment.
Breast cancer is one of the most common malignant tumors in women. Cell division cycle‑associated 5 (CDCA5) is closely associated with the behavior of various cancer types. The aim of the present study was to explore the effect of CDCA5 on breast cancer. Western blot analysis and reverse transcription‑quantitative PCR were used to detect the expression level of CDCA5 in human normal mammary cells and human breast cancer cell lines. To determine its function in MDA‑MB‑231 cells, CDCA5 was silenced in MDA‑MB‑231 cells by transient short hairpin RNA transfection. Cell Counting Kit‑8 and clonogenicity assays were used to evaluate cell proliferation. Wound healing and Transwell assays were used to detect cell invasion and migration. Western blot analysis was used to detect the protein expressions of Ki67 and PCNA associated with proliferation, MMP2 and MMP9 associated with migration. CDCA5 was found to be markedly increased in breast cancer cell lines. CDCA5 knockdown was able to suppress cell proliferation, invasion and migration. CDCA5 inhibition downregulated PDS5 cohesin‑associated factor A (PDS5A) expression in breast cancer cells. PDS5A overexpression was found to reverse the effect of CDCA5 inhibition on breast cancer cell proliferation and migration. CDCA5 knockdown was shown to suppress the malignant progression of breast cancer cells by regulating PDS5A. The present findings may provide new potential targets for breast cancer therapy.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to screen novel gene signatures for ovarian cancer (OC) and explore the role of biomarkers in OC via regulating pyroptosis using bioinformatics analysis. METHODS: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of OC were screened from GSE12470 and GSE16709 datasets. Hub genes were determined from protein-protein interaction networks after bioinformatics analysis. The role of Centromeric protein M (CENPM) in OC was assessed by subcutaneous tumor experiment using hematoxylin-eosin and immunohistochemical staining. Tumor metastasis was evaluated by detecting epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related proteins. The proliferation, migration, and invasion were determined using cell counting kit and transwell assay. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was applied to measure inflammatory factors. The mRNA and protein expression were detected using real-time quantitative PCR and western blot. RESULTS: We determined 9 hub genes (KIFC1, PCLAF, CDCA5, KNTC1, MCM3, OIP5, CENPM, KIF15, and ASF1B) with high prediction value for OC. In SKOV3 and A2780 cells, the expression levels of hub genes were significantly up-regulated, compared with normal ovarian cells. CENPM was selected as a key gene. Knockdown of CENPM suppressed proliferation, migration, and invasion of OC cells. Subcutaneous tumor experiment revealed that CENPM knockdown significantly suppressed tumor growth and metastasis. Additionally, pyroptosis was promoted in OC cells and xenograft tumors after CENPM knockdown. Furthermore, CENPM knockdown activated cGAS-STING pathway and the pathway inhibitor reversed the inhibitory effect of CENPM knockdown on viability, migration, and invasion of OC cells. CONCLUSION: CENPM was a novel biomarker of OC, and knockdown of CENPM inhibited OC progression by promoting pyroptosis and activating cGAS-STING pathway.
Osteosarcoma, one of the most common malignant bone tumors, is characterized by a high rate of metastasis, and the survival rate of patients with metastatic osteosarcoma is poor. Previous studies have reported that miRNAs often regulate the occurrence and development of various tumors. In this work, we identified miRNA-542-5p as a critical miRNA in osteosarcoma by overlapping three Gene Expression Omnibus datasets, and then evaluated miRNA-542-5p expression profiles using Gene Expression Omnibus and Sarcoma-microRNA Expression Database. We used MISIM to investigate miRNAs correlated with miR-542 and identified potential target genes of miRNA-542-5p using miRWalk. Functional and pathway enrichment analyses were performed using The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery. Protein-protein interaction was performed using Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes and Cytoscape. We report that the relative level of miRNA-542-5p was significantly higher in osteosarcoma than in healthy bone. Expressions of hsa-miR-330 and hsa-miR-1202 were found to be strongly correlated with that of miR-542-5p. Furthermore, we identified a total of 514 down-regulated genes as possible targets of miR-542-5p. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis demonstrated that the putative target genes of miR-542-5p were most enriched in the cell-cycle process. The differentially expressed genes CDCA5, PARP12 and HSPD1 were found to be hub genes in protein-protein interaction networks. Finally, transfection of the osteosarcoma cell line U2OS with miR-542-5p mimics or inhibitor revealed that miR-542-5p can promote cell proliferation. In conclusion, our results suggest that miR-542-5p may promote osteosarcoma proliferation; thus, this miRNA may have potential as a biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis.
Cell division cycle-associated 5 (CDCA5) can regulate cell cycle-related proteins to promote the proliferation of cancer cells. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the expression level of CDCA5 in prostate cancer (PCa) and its effect on PCa progression. The signalling pathway by which CDCA5 functions through was also attempted to elucidate. Clinical specimens of PCa patients were collected from the Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University. The expression level of CDCA5 in cancer tissues and paracancerous tissues from PCa patients was detected by RT-qPCR analysis and IHC. The relationship between the expression level of CDCA5 and the survival rate of PCa patients was analysed using TCGA database. Two stable cell lines (C4-2 and PC-3) with CDCA5 knockdown were established, and the effects of CDCA5 on PCa cell proliferation were detected by MTT and colony formation assays. Flow cytometry was performed to detect the effect of CDCA5 on the PCa cell division cycle, and western blot analysis was used to determine changes in ERK phosphorylation levels after CDCA5 knockdown. The effect of CDCA5 expression on prostate tumour growth was assessed using a mouse xenograft model. The results revealed that the mRNA and protein expression levels of CDCA5 were significantly higher in PCa tissues than in paracancerous tissues. High CDCA5 expression was associated with the prognosis of patients with PCa. CDCA5 expression knockdown significantly reduced the number of PCa cells in mitoses and inhibited their proliferation in vitro and in vivo. When CDCA5 was knocked down, the phosphorylation level of ERK was also reduced. Collectively, CDCA5 was upregulated and affected the prognosis of patients with PCa. Decreased CDCA5 expression inhibited PCa cell proliferation by inhibiting the ERK signalling pathway. Thus, CDCA5 may be a potential therapeutic target for PCa.
BACKGROUND: The gene cell division cycle associated 5 (CDCA5), also called sororin, has oncogenic characteristics and is upregulated in various carcinomas. Nevertheless, the involvement of CDCA5 in ovarian cancer (OC), a highly aggressive form of cancer, and the underlying mechanism of metastasis remain inadequately investigated. RESULTS: The bioinformatics data revealed a negative correlation between the patient's survival and CDCA5 expression, which was overexpressed in OC. Functional assays also confirmed high expression levels of CDCA5 in OC tissues and cells. This suggests that CDCA5 may potentially enhance the motility, migration, and proliferation of OC cells invitro. It impedes DNA damage and apoptosis in OC cells, inhibiting xenograft development in nude mice. The RNA sequencing results suggest CDCA5 is majorly associated with biological functions related to the extracellular matrix (ECM) and influences the transforming growth factor (TGF) signaling pathway. Moreover, subsequent functional investigations elucidated that CDCA5 facilitated the migration and invasion of OC cells viathe TGF-beta1/Smad2/3 signaling pathway activation. CONCLUSIONS: CDCA5 may be a strong potential therapeutic target for the treatment and management of OC.
Cell division cycle‑associated 5 (CDCA5) plays a critical role in the progression of various human cancers by regulating cell cycle‑related proteins; however, the function of CDCA5 in breast cancer (BC) is poorly understood. The aim of the present study was to investigate the expression level of CDCA5 in BC and its effect on BC progression. CDCA5 was found to be highly expressed in patients with BC, as well as in BC cell lines. It was also found that a high CDCA5 expression in BC was significantly associated with a shorter survival rate. In addition, the expression level of CDCA5 was significantly increased in stem cells derived from suspension‑cultured BC cells, as compared to adherent‑cultured cells. CDCA5 knockdown in MCF7 and SKBR3 cells significantly reduced cell proliferation, migration and clone formation. At the same time, the stemness capacity of BC cells, determined by analyzing cancer stem cell marker expression and mammosphere formation, was also markedly diminished following the knockdown of CDCA5. In addition, in vivo experiments demonstrated that CDCA5 knockdown in MCF7 cells markedly reduced tumor growth. On the whole, the present study demonstrates that CDCA5 may be used as a prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for BC.
The E3 ubiquitin ligase adaptor Speckle-type POZ protein (SPOP) plays an important tumour suppressor role in prostate cancers (PCa), with mutation rate up to 15%. However, how SPOP mutations regulate prostate tumorigenesis remains elusive. Here, we report the identification of cell division cycle associated 5 (CDCA5) as a SPOP substrate. We found that SPOP interacts with CDCA5 and promotes its polyubiquitin degradation in a degron-dependent manner. This effect was greatly impaired by introducing PCa associated SPOP mutations. Importantly, we found that CDCA5 was essential for PCa cells to survive and proliferate. CDCA5 depletion in PCa cells led to cessation of proliferation, G2M arrest, severe sister chromatid aggregation disturbance, and apoptosis. we also found that CDCA5 knockdown decreased the protein expression of p-GSK3beta, increased the activity of caspase-3, caspase-9, and the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio. Besides, we confirmed that CDCA5 interrupted cancer cell behavior via the AKT pathway. In contrast, silencing SPOP or overexpressing CDCA5 increased cell proliferation. Consistently, depleting SPOP along with CDCA5, or overexpressing CDCA5 along with SPOP also caused the growth of cells repressed. Consistent with the functional role of CDCA5, the mRNA and protein levels of CDCA5 were significantly increased in PCa, compared to normal tissues, and its high expression was associated with more severe lymph node metastasis, higher Gleason score, and poorer prognosis. Together, our data showed that SPOP plays a crucial role in inhibiting tumorigenesis and partly achieved this by promoting the degradation of oncoprotein CDCA5.
The cell division cycle associated 5(CDCA5) was reported to be associated with progression of several human cancers, however, its clinical significance and biological role still remain unknown in gastric cancer(GC). By analyzing The Cancer Genome Atlas(TCGA), we found CDCA5 was significantly upregulated in GC tissues compared to adjacent normal tissues. Tissue microarray(TMA) indicated upregulation of CDCA5 was significantly correlated with more advanced clinicopathological features, and acts as an independent risk factor for worse overall survival(OS) in GC patients. Moreover, silence of CDCA5 suppresses proliferation of GC cells by inducing G1-phase arrest via downregulating Cyclin E1(CCNE1). Our results demonstrate upregulation of CDCA5 promotes GC malignant progression, which may offer a potential prognostic and therapeutic strategy.
BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common form of cancer in males and accounts for many cancer-related deaths. Human cell division cycle associated 5 (CDCA5) may be a useful marker for predicting tumor metastasis and therapeutic target for the treatment of PC patients. In this study, we investigated the role of CDCA5 in prostate cancer progression. Immunohistochemistry was performed on 20 prostate cancer tissue samples. METHOD: We performed immunohistochemistry on 20 prostate cancer tissue samples. CDCA5, a gene that is differentially expressed in prostate cancer, was screened with The Cancer Genome Atlas database. In both DU145 and PC-3 cells, CDCA5 levels consistently affected cell proliferation, colony formation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion. RESULT: CDCA5 knockdown significantly inhibited PC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Furthermore, the apoptosis of DU145 and PC-3 cells was significantly increased after CDCA5 downregulation. Further investigations revealed that CDCA5 may participate in the development of PC through interaction with TWIST1, CDH1, and CDH2. CONCLUSION: The present results provide a novel insight into the important and multifaceted role of CDCA5 in PC, indicating that CDCA5 is a promising biomarker and therapeutic target for PC.
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is one of the major causes of liver cirrhosis (LC) and HCC. Therefore, the discovery of common markers for hepatitis B or LC and HCC is crucial for the prevention of HCC. METHODS: Expressed genes for to chronic active hepaititis B (CAH-B), LC and HCC were obtained from the GEO and TCGA databases, and co-expressed genes were screened using Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks, least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), random forest (RF) and support vector machine - recursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE). The prognostic value of genes was assessed using Kaplan-Meier (KM) survival curves. Columnar line plots, calibration curves and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves of individual genes were used for evaluation. Validation was performed using GEO datasets. The association of these key genes with HCC clinical features was explored using the UALCAN database ( https://ualcan.path.uab.edu/index.html ). RESULTS: Based on WGCNA analysis and TCGA database, the co-expressed genes (565) were screened. Moreover, the five algorithms of MCODE (ClusteringCoefficient, MCC, Degree, MNC, and DMNC) was used to select one of the most important and most closely linked clusters (the top 50 genes ranked). Using, LASSO regression model, RF model and SVM-RFE model, four key genes (UBE2T, KIF4A, CDCA3, and CDCA5) were identified for subsequent research analysis. These 4 genes were highly expressed and associated with poor prognosis and clinical features in HCC patients. CONCLUSION: These four key genes (UBE2T, KIF4A, CDCA3, and CDCA5) may be common biomarkers for CAH-B and HCC or LC and HCC, promising to advance our understanding of the molecular basis of CAH-B/LC/HCC progression.
