Cadherin-1; Cadherins are calcium-dependent cell adhesion proteins. They preferentially interact with themselves in a homophilic manner in connecting cells; cadherins may thus contribute to the sorting of heterogeneous cell types. CDH1 is involved in mechanisms regulating cell-cell adhesions, mobility and proliferation of epithelial cells. Has a potent invasive suppressor role. It is a ligand for integrin alpha-E/beta-7.  (Microbial infection) Serves as a receptor for Listeria monocytogenes; internalin A (InlA) binds to this protein and promotes uptake of the bacteria.
Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2C (UBE2C) mediates ubiquitylation chain formation via the K11 linkage. While previous in vitro studies showed that UBE2C plays a growth-promoting role in cancer cell lines, the underlying mechanism remains elusive. Still unknown is whether and how UBE2C plays a promoting role in vivo. Here we report that UBE2C was indeed essential for growth and survival of lung cancer cells harboring Kras mutations, and UBE2C was required for KrasG12D-induced lung tumorigenesis, since Ube2c deletion significantly inhibited tumor formation and extended the lifespan of mice. Mechanistically, KrasG12D induced expression of UBE2C, which coupled with APC/CCDH1 E3 ligase to promote ubiquitylation and degradation of DEPTOR, leading to activation of mTORC signaling. Importantly, DEPTOR levels fluctuated during cell cycle progression in a manner dependent on UBE2C and CDH1, indicating their physiological connection. Finally, Deptor deletion fully rescued the tumor inhibitory effect of Ube2c deletion in the KrasG12D lung tumor model, indicating a causal role of Deptor. Taken together, our study shows that the UBE2C/CDH1/DEPTOR axis forms an oncogene and tumor suppressor cascade that regulates cell cycle progression and autophagy and validates UBE2C an attractive target for lung cancer associated with Kras mutations.
More than 70% of human breast cancers (BCs) are estrogen receptor alpha-positive (ER(+)). A clinical challenge of ER(+) BC is that they can recur decades after initial treatments. Mechanisms governing latent disease remain elusive due to lack of adequate in vivo models. We compare intraductal xenografts of ER(+) and triple-negative (TN) BC cells and demonstrate that disseminated TNBC cells proliferate similarly as TNBC cells at the primary site whereas disseminated ER(+) BC cells proliferate slower, they decrease CDH1 and increase ZEB1,2 expressions, and exhibit characteristics of epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity (EMP) and dormancy. Forced E-cadherin expression overcomes ER(+) BC dormancy. Cytokine signalings are enriched in more active versus inactive disseminated tumour cells, suggesting microenvironmental triggers for awakening. We conclude that intraductal xenografts model ER + BC dormancy and reveal that EMP is essential for the generation of a dormant cell state and that targeting exit from EMP has therapeutic potential.
STAT3, an oncogene drives tumor growth and is associated with poor prognosis. However, small molecule-based STAT3 inhibitors were unsuccessful in clinics. Recently, STAT3 degraders that ubiquitinate STAT3 were found to elicit long-lasting anti-tumor responses. Thus, triggering STAT3 ubiquitination in cancers is a better strategy than STAT3 inhibition. However, not much is known about the identity of E3-ligases that ubiquitinate STAT3 in cancers. Therefore, to design better therapies to degrade STAT3, we sought to identify E3-ligases that ubiquitinate STAT3 in cancer cells. To answer this question, we determined the cell cycle-dependent ubiquitination of STAT3 in HEK293T cells and examined the link between STAT3 dephosphorylation and ubiquitination. We found that STAT3 is more strongly ubiquitinated in mitosis than in other phases of the cell cycle. We observed that APC/C CDH1 binds and ubiquitinates STAT3 in mitosis. Further, we also found that inhibiting phosphatases decreases STAT3 ubiquitination. We conclude that APC/C CDH1 ubiquitinates STAT3 in mitosis. We suggest that mitosis can be a potential therapeutic window for treating STAT3-activated cancers.
In recent years, diverse and unexpected neurobiological functions have been uncovered for the major cell cycle-regulated ubiquitin ligase, the anaphase-promoting complex (APC). Functions of the APC in the nervous system range from orchestrating neuronal morphogenesis and synapse development to the regulation of neuronal differentiation, survival, and metabolism. The APC acts together with the coactivating proteins Cdh1 and Cdc20 in neural cells to target specific substrates for ubiquitination and consequent degradation by the proteasome. As we continue to unravel APC functions and mechanisms in neurobiology, these studies should advance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of neuronal connectivity, with important implications for the study of brain development and disease.
Stem cell-derived pancreatic progenitors (SC-PPs), as an unlimited source of SC-derived beta (SC-beta) cells, offers a robust tool for diabetes treatment in stem cell-based transplantation, disease modeling, and drug screening. Whereas, PDX1(+)/NKX6.1(+) PPs enhances the subsequent endocrine lineage specification and gives rise to glucose-responsive SC-beta cells in vivo and in vitro. To identify the regulators that promote induction efficiency and cellular function maturation, single-cell RNA-sequencing is performed to decipher the transcriptional landscape during PPs differentiation. The comprehensive evaluation of functionality demonstrated that manipulating LINC MIR503HG using CRISPR in PP cell fate decision can improve insulin synthesis and secretion in mature SC-beta cells, without effects on liver lineage specification. Importantly, transplantation of MIR503HG(-/-) SC-beta cells in recipients significantly restored blood glucose homeostasis, accompanied by serum C-peptide release and an increase in body weight. Mechanistically, by releasing CtBP1 occupying the CDH1 and HES1 promoters, the decrease in MIR503HG expression levels provided an excellent extracellular niche and appropriate Notch signaling activation for PPs following differentiation. Furthermore, this exhibited higher crucial transcription factors and mature epithelial markers in CDH1(High) expressed clusters. Altogether, these findings highlighted MIR503HG as an essential and exclusive PP cell fate specification regulator with promising therapeutic potential for patients with diabetes.
The anaphase promoting complex/ cyclosome (APC/C), is an evolutionarily conserved protein complex essential for cellular division due to its role in regulating the mitotic transition from metaphase to anaphase. In this review, we highlight recent work that has shed light on our understanding of the role of APC/C coactivators, Cdh1 and Cdc20, in cancer initiation and development. We summarize the current state of knowledge regarding APC/C structure and function, as well as the distinct ways Cdh1 and Cdc20 are dysregulated in human cancer. We also discuss APC/C inhibitors, novel approaches for targeting the APC/C as a cancer therapy, and areas for future work.
Diabetes is a chronic disease caused by absolute or relative insufficiency of insulin secretion and impaired insulin utilization. CDH1 and DVL1 role in diabetes and its nursing care is unclear. The diabetes dataset GSE21321 and GSE19790 profiles were downloaded from the gene expression omnibus (GEO) database. Perform differentially expressed genes (DEGs) screening, weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), protein-protein interaction (PPI) network construction and analysis, functional enrichment analysis, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), immune infiltration analysis, and Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) analysis. Gene expression heat map was drawn. TargetScan was used to screen the miRNA that regulates central DEGs. 1983 DEGs were obtained. According to Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, they were mainly enriched in signal regulation, catenin complexes, and signal receptor binding. In Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genome (KEGG) analysis, they were mainly concentrated in the Rap1 signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway, and Hippo signaling pathway. The DEGs are mainly enriched in cell signaling, Wnt signaling vesicles, growth factor activity, and the interaction between neural active ligands and receptors. In the enrichment project of Metascape, BMP signaling pathways and cell population proliferation can be seen in the GO enrichment project. The soft threshold power in WGCNA is set to 5. A total of 15 modules were generated. Core gene expression heatmap showed that core genes (CTNNB1, CDH1, DVL1) were highly expressed in diabetes samples. CTD analysis showed thatCTNNB1, CDH1, DVL1were associated with weight gain, inflammation, and necrosis. CDH1 and DVL1 are highly expressed in diabetes and may become molecular targets for diabetes and its care.
Plants reputed to have cancer-inhibiting potential and putative active components derived from those plants have emerged as an exciting new field in cancer study. Some of these compounds have cancer-inhibiting potential in different clinical staging levels, especially metastasis. A few of them which stabilize cell-cell adhesions are controversial topics. This review article introduces some effective herbal compounds that target E-cadherin/beta-catenin protein complex. In this article, at first, we briefly review the structure and function of E-cadherin and beta-catenin proteins, Wnt signaling pathway, and its target genes. Then, effective compounds of the Teucrium persicum, Teucrium polium, Allium sativum (garlic), Glycine max (soy), and Brassica oleracea (broccoli) plants, which influence stability and cellular localization of E-cadherin/beta-catenin complex, were studied. Based on literature review, there are some compounds in these plants, including genistein of soy, sulforaphane of broccoli, organosulfur compounds of garlic, and the total extract of Teucrium genus that change the expression of variety of Wnt target genes such as MMPs, E-cadherin, p21, p53, c-myc, and cyclin D1. So they may induce cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis and/or inhibition of Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and metastasis.
The ability of eukaryotes to alter chromatin structure and function is modulated, in part, by histone-modifying enzymes and the post-translational modifications they create. One of these enzymes, PR-Set7/Set8/KMT5a, is the sole histone methyltransferase responsible for the monomethylation of histone H4 lysine 20 (H4K20me1) in higher eukaryotes. Both PR-Set7 and H4K20me1 were previously found to be tightly cell cycle regulated suggesting that they play an important, although unknown, role in cell cycle progression. Several recent reports reveal that PR-Set7 abundance is dynamically regulated during different cell cycle phases by distinct enzymes including cdk1/cyclinB, Cdc14, SCF(Skp2), CRL4(cdt2) and APC(cdh1). Importantly, these reports demonstrate that inappropriate levels of PR-Set7 result in profound cell cycle defects including the inability to initiate S phase, the re-replication of DNA and the improper timing of mitotic progression. Here, we summarize the significance of these new findings, raise some important questions that require further investigation and explore several possibilities of how PR-Set7 and methylated H4K20 may likely function as novel regulators of the cell cycle.
We review the role of cadherins and cadherin-related proteins in human cancer. Cellular and animal models for human cancer are also dealt with whenever appropriate. E-cadherin is the prototype of the large cadherin superfamily and is renowned for its potent malignancy suppressing activity. Different mechanisms for inactivating E-cadherin/CDH1 have been identified in human cancers: inherited and somatic mutations, aberrant protein processing, increased promoter methylation, and induction of transcriptional repressors such as Snail and ZEB family members. The latter induce epithelial mesenchymal transition, which is also associated with induction of "mesenchymal" cadherins, a hallmark of tumor progression. VE-cadherin/CDH5 plays a role in tumor-associated angiogenesis. The atypical T-cadherin/CDH13 is often silenced in cancer cells but up-regulated in tumor vasculature. The review also covers the status of protocadherins and several other cadherin-related molecules in human cancer. Perspectives for emerging cadherin-related anticancer therapies are given.
A common characteristic of cancer types associated with viruses is the dysregulated expression of the CDH1 gene, which encodes E‑cadherin, in general by activation of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts). In cervical cancer, E7 protein from high risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) has been demonstrated to interact with Dnmt1 and histone deacetylase type 1 (HDAC1). The present study proposed that E7 may regulate the expression of CDH1 through two pathways: i) Epigenetic, including DNA methylation; and ii) Epigenetic‑independent, including the induction of negative regulators of CDH1 expression, such as Snail family transcriptional repressor Snai1 and Snai2. To test this hypothesis, HPV16‑ and HPV18‑positive cell lines were used to determine the methylation pattern of the CDH1 promoter and its expression in association with its negative regulators. Different methylation frequencies were identified in the CDH1 promoter in HeLa (88.24%) compared with SiHa (17.65%) and Ca Ski (0%) cell lines. Significant differences in the expression of SNAI1 were observed between these cell lines, and an inverse association was identified between the expression levels of SNAI1 and CDH1. In addition, suppressing E7 not only increased the expression of CDH1, but notably decreased the expression of SNAI1 and modified the methylation pattern of the CDH1 promoter. These results suggested that the expression of CDH1 was dependent on the expression of SNAI1 and was inversely associated with the expression of E7. The present results indicated that E7 from HPV16/18 regulated the expression of CDH1 by the two following pathways in which Snai1 is involved: i) Hypermethylation of the CDH1 promoter region and increasing expression of SNAI1, as observed in HeLa; and ii) Hypomethylation of the CDH1 promoter region and expression of SNAI1, as observed in SiHa. Therefore, the suppression of CDH1 and expression of SNAI1 may be considered to be biomarkers of metastasis in uterine cervical cancer.
Centromere protein A (CENP-A), a centromere-specific histone H3 variant, is crucial for kinetochore positioning and chromosome segregation. However, its regulatory mechanism in human cells remains incompletely understood. A structure-activity relationship (SAR) study of the cell-cycle-arresting indole terpenoid mimic JP18 leads to the discovery of two more potent analogs, (+)-6-Br-JP18 and (+)-6-Cl-JP18. Tubulin is identified as a potential cellular target of these halogenated analogs by using the drug affinity responsive target stability (DARTS) based method. X-ray crystallography analysis reveals that both molecules bind to the colchicine-binding site of beta-tubulin. Treatment of human cells with microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs), including these two compounds, results in CENP-A accumulation by destabilizing Cdh1, a co-activator of the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) E3 ubiquitin ligase. This study establishes a link between microtubule dynamics and CENP-A accumulation using small-molecule tools and highlights the role of Cdh1 in CENP-A proteolysis.
BACKGROUND: CDH1 is a protein encoded by the CDH1 gene in humans. Mutations in this gene are linked with several types of cancer. Loss of CDH1 function contributes to the progression of cancer by increasing proliferation, invasion, and/or metastasis. However, the association between and clinicopathological significance of CDH1 promoter methylation and lung cancer remains unclear. In this study, we systematically reviewed the studies of CDH1 promoter methylation and lung cancer, and evaluated the association between CDH1 promoter methylation and lung cancer using meta-analysis methods. METHODS: A comprehensive search of the PubMed and Embase databases was performed up to July 2014. The methodological quality of the studies was also evaluated. The data were extracted and assessed by two reviewers independently. Analyses of pooled data were performed. Odds ratios (ORs) were calculated and summarized. RESULTS: Finally, an analysis of 866 patients with non-small cell lung cancer from 13 eligible studies was performed. The CDH1 methylation level in the cancer group was significantly higher than in the controls (OR 3.89, 95% confidence interval [CI] 2.87-5.27, P<0.00001). However, there were no correlations between CDH1 promoter methylation and clinicopathological characteristics (sex status, OR 0.78, 95% CI 0.41-1.50, P=0.46; smoking history, OR 0.97, 95% CI 0.53-1.79, P=0.93; pathological type, OR 0.97, 95% CI 0.59-1.60, P=0.91; clinical staging, OR 1.48, 95% CI 0.81-2.68, P=0.2; lymph node metastasis, OR 0.68, 95% CI 0.13-3.63, P=0.65; or differentiation degree, OR 1.01, 95% CI 0.34-3.02, P=0.99). CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis suggest that CDH1 methylation is associated with an increased risk of lung cancer. CDH1 hypermethylation, which induces inactivation of the CDH1 gene, plays an important role in carcinogenesis and may serve as a potential drug target in lung cancer. However, CDH1 methylation does not correlate with other factors, such as smoking history, clinical stage, pathological type, sex status, lymph node metastasis, or degree of differentiation.
Seminoma is the most common testicular cancer. Pituitary tumor-transforming gene 1 (PTTG1) is a securin showing oncogenic activity in several tumors. We previously demonstrated that nuclear PTTG1 promotes seminoma tumor invasion through its transcriptional activity on matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) and E-cadherin (CDH1). We wondered if specific interactors could affect its subcellular distribution. To this aim, we investigated the PTTG1 interactome in seminoma cell lines showing different PTTG1 nuclear levels correlated with invasive properties. A proteomic approach upon PTTG1 immunoprecipitation uncovered new specific securin interactors. Western blot, confocal microscopy, cytoplasmic/nuclear fractionation, sphere-forming assay, and Atlas database interrogation were performed to validate the proteomic results and to investigate the interplay between PTTG1 and newly uncovered partners. We observed that spectrin beta-chain (SPTBN1) and PTTG1 were cofactors, with SPTBN1 anchoring the securin in the cytoplasm. SPTBN1 downregulation determined PTTG1 nuclear translocation, promoting its invasive capability. Moreover, a PTTG1 deletion mutant lacking SPTBN1 binding was strongly localized in the nucleus. The Atlas database revealed that seminomas that contained higher nuclear PTTG1 levels showed significantly lower SPTBN1 levels in comparison to non-seminomas. In human seminoma specimens, we found a strong PTTG1/SPTBN1 colocalization that decreases in areas with nuclear PTTG1 distribution. Overall, these results suggest that SPTBN1, along with PTTG1, is a potential prognostic factor useful in the clinical management of seminoma.
The Anaphase-Promoting Complex or Cyclosome (APC/C) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase whose activation requires the binding of a cofactor, either Cdc20 or Cdh1. While APC/C-Cdc20 is a major player during mitotic exit, APC/C-Cdh1 plays a central role in maintaining quiescence and controlling the onset of DNA replication. In addition, APC/C-Cdh1 is essential for endoreduplication, a process in which several rounds of DNA synthesis occur without mitosis. Recent data suggest that the APC/C is also involved in differentiation and metabolism, and plays important roles in postmitotic cells such as neurons. Thus, the APC/C is not only critical for anaphase onset but also regulates many other cellular processes during G1/S or in quiescent cells.
CDH1, as a tumor suppressor gene, contributes sporadic breast cancer (BC) progression. However, the association between CDH1 hypermethylation and BC, and its clinicopathological significance remains unclear. We conducted a meta-analysis to investigate the relationship between the CDH1 methylation profile and the major clinicopathological features. A detailed literature was searched through the electronic databases PubMed, Web of Science, and EMBASE for related research publications. The data were extracted and assessed by two reviewers independently. Odds ratios (ORs) with corresponding confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated and summarized respectively. The frequency of CDH1 methylation was significantly higher in invasive ductal carcinoma than in normal breast tissues (OR =5.83, 95% CI 3.76-9.03, P<0.00001). CDH1 hypermethylation was significantly higher in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative BC than in ER-positive BC (OR =0.62, 95% CI 0.43-0.87, P=0.007). In addition, we found that the CDH1 was significantly methylated in HER2-negative BC than in HER2-positive BC (OR =0.26, 95% CI 0.15-0.44, P<0.00001). However, CDH1 methylation frequency was not associated with progesterone receptor (PR) status, or with grades, stages, or lymph node metastasis of BC patients. Our results indicate that CDH1 hypermethylation is a potential novel drug target for developing personalized therapy. CDH1 hypermethylation is strongly associated with ER-negative and HER2-negative BC, respectively, suggesting CDH1 methylation status could contribute to the development of novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of ER-negative or HER2-negative BC with aggressive tumor biology.
Stable intraepithelial adhesion complexes are essential for the maintenance of epithelial integrity. Alterations in these complexes are key events in the development and progression of many diseases. One of the major proteins involved in maintaining epithelial cell-cell adhesion is the cell-adhesion junction protein E-cadherin, a member of the cadherin family of transmembrane adhesion proteins. E-cadherin is involved in many cellular processes including morphogenesis, adhesion, recognition, communication and oncogenesis. Inactivation of its adhesive properties is often a key step in tumour progression and metastasis, leading to its recent description as a tumour suppressor gene. Mutations of the E-cadherin gene CDH1 in gastric and mammary cancers have been well documented and reports of transcriptional repression during tumour progression are increasing. This review examines the role of posttranslational truncation of E-cadherin in cancer cells focusing on implications for tumour progression. The various proteins involved in the directed cleavage of E-cadherin and consequences of these truncations are discussed.
Cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) in complex with D-type cyclins promote cell cycle entry. Most human cancers contain overactive CDK4/6-cyclin D, and CDK4/6-specific inhibitors are promising anti-cancer therapeutics. Here, we investigate the critical functions of CDK4/6-cyclin D kinases, starting from an unbiased screen in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. We found that simultaneous mutation of lin-35, a retinoblastoma (Rb)-related gene, and fzr-1, an orthologue to the APC/C co-activator Cdh1, completely eliminates the essential requirement of CDK4/6-cyclin D (CDK-4/CYD-1) in C. elegans. CDK-4/CYD-1 phosphorylates specific residues in the LIN-35 Rb spacer domain and FZR-1 amino terminus, resembling inactivating phosphorylations of the human proteins. In human breast cancer cells, simultaneous knockdown of Rb and FZR1 synergistically bypasses cell division arrest induced by the CDK4/6-specific inhibitor PD-0332991. Our data identify FZR1 as a candidate CDK4/6-cyclin D substrate and point to an APC/C(FZR1) activity as an important determinant in response to CDK4/6-inhibitors.
BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer (GC) ranks fifth among all common malignancies globally. Genetic research has revealed several genes that are frequently dis-regulated in GC, such as lysine-specific demethylase 6A (KDM6A) and cadherin-1 (CDH1). OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine the expression profile and role of KDM6A in GC, as well as the molecular pathway involved. METHODS: The expression profile and overall survival data of KDM6A were retrieved from the TCGA database. Expression levels of KDM6A were also measured in GC patient samples and compared with those of healthy controls. Furthermore, stable silencing of KDM6A was introduced into the GC cell line NCI-N87, followed by assessments of cell proliferation, migration and invasion, in the xenograft mouse model. The metastatic status of mice injected with NCI-N87 cells was also analyzed. RESULTS: In patients diagnosed with GC, KDM6A was upregulated. Silencing KDM6A reduced the proliferation, migration and invasion of cells, as well as the growth of xenograft tumors. KDM6A knockdown also inhibited metastatic behaviors of injected NCI-N87 cells, as well as elevated CDH1 expression, leading to reversed epithelial-mesenchymal transition. CONCLUSION: KDM6A serves as an oncogene in GC and exerts its pro-tumor functions by repressing the expression of CDH1.
The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) is a 1.2 MDa ubiquitin ligase complex with important functions in both proliferating and post-mitotic differentiated cells. In proliferating cells, APC/C controls cell cycle progression by targeting inhibitors of chromosome segregation and mitotic exit for degradation by the 26S proteasome. To understand how APC/C recruits and ubiquitylates its substrate proteins and how these processes are controlled, it is essential to analyze APC/C activity in vitro. In the past, such experiments have been limited by the fact that large quantities of purified APC/C were difficult to obtain and that mutated versions of the APC/C could not be easily generated. In this chapter we review recent advances in generating and purifying recombinant forms of the human APC/C and its co-activators, using methods that are scalable and compatible with mutagenesis. We also describe a method that allows the quantitative analysis of APC/C activity using fluorescently labeled substrate proteins.
