Histone H3-like centromeric protein A; Histone H3-like nucleosomal protein that is specifically found in centromeric nucleosomes. Replaces conventional H3 in the nucleosome core of centromeric chromatin at the inner plate of the kinetochore. The presence of CENPA subtly modifies the nucleosome structure and the way DNA is wrapped around the nucleosome and gives rise to protruding DNA ends that are less well-ordered and rigid compared to nucleosomes containing histone H3. May serve as an epigenetic mark that propagates centromere identity through replication and cell division. Required  [...] 
The centromere proteins (CENPs), a critical mitosis-related protein complexes, are involved in the kinetochore assembly and chromosome segregation. In this study, we identified that CENPA was significantly up-regulated in HCC and highly expressed CENPA correlated with poor prognosis for HCC patients. Knockdown of CENPA inhibited HCC cell proliferation and tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, CENPA transcriptionally activated and cooperated with YY1 to drive the expression of cyclin D1 (CCND1) and neuropilin 2 (NRP2). Moreover, we identified that CENPA can be lactylated at lysine 124 (K124). The lactylation of CENPA at K124 promotes CENPA activation, leading to enhanced expression of its target genes. In summary, CENPA function as a transcriptional regulator to promote HCC via cooperating with YY1. Targeting the CENPA-YY1-CCND1/NRP2 axis may provide candidate therapeutic targets for HCC.
m(6)A modification is best known for its critical role in controlling multiple post-transcriptional processes of the mRNAs. Here, we discovered elevated levels of m(6)A modification on centromeric RNA (cenRNA) in cancerous cells compared with non-cancerous cells. We then identified CENPA, an H3 variant, as an m(6)A reader of cenRNA. CENPA is localized at centromeres and is essential in preserving centromere integrity and function during mitosis. The m(6)A-modified cenRNA stabilizes centromeric localization of CENPA in cancer cells during the S phase of the cell cycle. Mutations of CENPA at the Leu61 and the Arg63 or removal of cenRNA m(6)A modification lead to loss of centromere-bound CENPA during S phase. This in turn results in compromised centromere integrity and abnormal chromosome separation and hinders cancer cell proliferation and tumor growth. Our findings unveil an m(6)A reading mechanism by CENPA that epigenetically governs centromere integrity in cancer cells, providing potential targets for cancer therapy.
Kinetochores assemble onto specialized centromeric CENP-A (centromere protein A) nucleosomes (CENP-A(Nuc)) to mediate attachments between chromosomes and the mitotic spindle. We describe cryo-electron microscopy structures of the human inner kinetochore constitutive centromere associated network (CCAN) complex bound to CENP-A(Nuc) reconstituted onto alpha-satellite DNA. CCAN forms edge-on contacts with CENP-A(Nuc), and a linker DNA segment of the alpha-satellite repeat emerges from the fully wrapped end of the nucleosome to thread through the central CENP-LN channel that tightly grips the DNA. The CENP-TWSX histone-fold module further augments DNA binding and partially wraps the linker DNA in a manner reminiscent of canonical nucleosomes. Our study suggests that the topological entrapment of the linker DNA by CCAN provides a robust mechanism by which kinetochores withstand both pushing and pulling forces exerted by the mitotic spindle.
The centromere is a specialized region on the chromosome that directs equal chromosome segregation. Centromeres are usually not defined by DNA sequences alone. How centromere formation and function are determined by epigenetics is still not fully understood. Active centromeres are often marked by the presence of centromeric-specific histone H3 variant, centromere protein A (CENP-A). How CENP-A is assembled into the centromeric chromatin during the cell cycle and propagated to the next cell cycle or the next generation to maintain the centromere function has been intensively investigated. In this review, we summarize current understanding of how post-translational modifications of CENP-A and other centromere proteins, centromeric and pericentric histone modifications, non-coding transcription and transcripts contribute to centromere function, and discuss their intricate relationships and potential feedback mechanisms.
The centromere is essential for ensuring high-fidelity transmission of chromosomes. CENP-A, the centromeric histone H3 variant, is thought to be the epigenetic mark of centromere identity. CENP-A deposition at the centromere is crucial for proper centromere function and inheritance. Despite its importance, the precise mechanism responsible for maintenance of centromere position remains obscure. Here, we report a mechanism to maintain centromere identity. We demonstrate that CENP-A interacts with EWSR1 (Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1) and EWSR1-FLI1 (the oncogenic fusion protein in Ewing sarcoma). EWSR1 is required for maintaining CENP-A at the centromere in interphase cells. EWSR1 and EWSR1-FLI1 bind CENP-A through the SYGQ2 region within the prion-like domain, important for phase separation. EWSR1 binds to R-loops through its RNA-recognition motif in vitro. Both the domain and motif are required for maintaining CENP-A at the centromere. Therefore, we conclude that EWSR1 guards CENP-A in centromeric chromatins by binding to centromeric RNA.
To faithfully segregate chromosomes during vertebrate mitosis, kinetochore-microtubule interactions must be restricted to a single site on each chromosome. Prior work on pair-wise kinetochore protein interactions has been unable to identify the mechanisms that prevent outer kinetochore formation in regions with a low density of CENP-A nucleosomes. To investigate the impact of higher-order assembly on kinetochore formation, we generated oligomers of the inner kinetochore protein CENP-T using two distinct, genetically engineered systems in human cells. Although individual CENP-T molecules interact poorly with outer kinetochore proteins, oligomers that mimic centromeric CENP-T density trigger the robust formation of functional, cytoplasmic kinetochore-like particles. Both in cells and in vitro, each molecule of oligomerized CENP-T recruits substantially higher levels of outer kinetochore components than monomeric CENP-T molecules. Our work suggests that the density dependence of CENP-T restricts outer kinetochore recruitment to centromeres, where densely packed CENP-A recruits a high local concentration of inner kinetochore proteins.
Centromeres are essential chromosomal structures that mediate the accurate distribution of genetic material during meiotic and mitotic cell divisions. In most organisms, centromeres are epigenetically specified and propagated by nucleosomes containing the centromere-specific H3 variant, centromere protein A (CENP-A). Although centromeres perform a critical and conserved function, CENP-A and the underlying centromeric DNA are rapidly evolving. This paradox has been explained by the centromere drive hypothesis, which proposes that CENP-A is undergoing an evolutionary tug-of-war with selfish centromeric DNA. Here, we review our current understanding of CENP-A evolution in relation to centromere drive and discuss classical and recent advances, including new evidence implicating CENP-A chaperones in this conflict.
Equal distribution of DNA in mitosis requires the assembly of a large proteinaceous ensemble onto the centromeric DNA, called the kinetochore. With few exceptions, kinetochore specification is independent of the DNA sequence and is determined epigenetically by deposition at the centromeric chromatin of special nucleosomes containing an H3-related histone, CENP-A. Onto centromeric CENP-A chromatin is assembled the so-called constitutive centromere-associated network (CCAN) of 16 proteins distributed in several functional groups as follows: CENP-C, CENP-H/CENP-I/CENP-K/, CENP-L/CENP-M/CENP-N, CENP-O/CENP-P/CENP-Q/CENP-R/CENP-U(50), CENP-T/CENP-W, and CENP-S/CENP-X. One role of the CCAN is to recruit outer kinetochore components further, such as KNL1, the Mis12 complex, and the Ndc80 complex (KMN network) to which attach the spindle microtubules with their structural and regulatory proteins. Among the CENPs in CCAN, CENP-C and CENP-T are required in parallel for operational kinetochore specification and spindle attachment. This review presents discussion of the latest structural and functional data on CENP-A and CENPs from the CCAN as well as their interaction with the KMN network.
Accurate chromosome segregation requires the attachment of microtubules to centromeres, epigenetically defined by the enrichment of CENP-A nucleosomes. During DNA replication, CENP-A nucleosomes undergo dilution. To preserve centromere identity, correct amounts of CENP-A must be restored in a cell cycle-controlled manner orchestrated by the Mis18 complex (Mis18alpha-Mis18beta-Mis18BP1). We demonstrate here that PLK1 interacts with the Mis18 complex by recognizing self-primed phosphorylations of Mis18alpha (Ser(54)) and Mis18BP1 (Thr(78) and Ser(93)) through its Polo-box domain. Disrupting these phosphorylations perturbed both centromere recruitment of the CENP-A chaperone HJURP and new CENP-A loading. Biochemical and functional analyses showed that phosphorylation of Mis18alpha and PLK1 binding were required to activate Mis18alpha-Mis18beta and promote Mis18 complex-HJURP interaction. Thus, our study reveals key molecular events underpinning the licensing role of PLK1 in ensuring accurate centromere inheritance.
Faithful chromosome segregation is essential for the maintenance of genomic integrity and requires functional centromeres. Centromeres are epigenetically defined by the histone H3 variant, centromere protein A (CENP-A). Here we highlight current knowledge regarding CENP-A-containing chromatin structure, specification of centromere identity, regulation of CENP-A deposition and possible contribution to cancer formation and/or progression. CENP-A overexpression is common among many cancers and predicts poor prognosis. Overexpression of CENP-A increases rates of CENP-A deposition ectopically at sites of high histone turnover, occluding CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding. Ectopic CENP-A deposition leads to mitotic defects, centromere dysfunction and chromosomal instability (CIN), a hallmark of cancer. CENP-A overexpression is often accompanied by overexpression of its chaperone Holliday Junction Recognition Protein (HJURP), leading to epigenetic addiction in which increased levels of HJURP and CENP-A become necessary to support rapidly dividing p53 deficient cancer cells. Alterations in CENP-A posttranslational modifications are also linked to chromosome segregation errors and CIN. Collectively, CENP-A is pivotal to genomic stability through centromere maintenance, perturbation of which can lead to tumorigenesis.
The centromere directs chromosome segregation and genetic inheritance but is not itself heritable in a canonical, DNA-based manner. In most species, centromeres are epigenetically defined by the presence of a histone H3 variant centromere protein A (CENP-A), independent of underlying DNA sequence. Therefore, centromere inheritance depends on maintaining the CENP-A nucleosome mark across generations. Experiments in cycling somatic cells have led to a model in which centromere identity is maintained by a cell cycle-coupled CENP-A chromatin assembly pathway. However, the processes of animal gametogenesis pose unique challenges to centromere inheritance because of the extended cell cycle arrest and the massive genome reorganization in the female and male germline, respectively. Here, we review our current understanding of germline centromere inheritance and highlight outstanding questions.
The centromeric histone H3 variant CENP-A is overexpressed in many cancers. The mislocalization of CENP-A to noncentromeric regions contributes to chromosomal instability (CIN), a hallmark of cancer. However, pathways that promote or prevent CENP-A mislocalization remain poorly defined. Here, we performed a genome-wide RNAi screen for regulators of CENP-A localization which identified DNAJC9, a J-domain protein implicated in histone H3-H4 protein folding, as a factor restricting CENP-A mislocalization. Cells lacking DNAJC9 exhibit mislocalization of CENP-A throughout the genome, and CIN phenotypes. Global interactome analysis showed that DNAJC9 depletion promotes the interaction of CENP-A with the DNA-replication-associated histone chaperone MCM2. CENP-A mislocalization upon DNAJC9 depletion was dependent on MCM2, defining MCM2 as a driver of CENP-A deposition at ectopic sites when H3-H4 supply chains are disrupted. Cells depleted for histone H3.3, also exhibit CENP-A mislocalization. In summary, we have defined novel factors that prevent mislocalization of CENP-A, and demonstrated that the integrity of H3-H4 supply chains regulated by histone chaperones such as DNAJC9 restrict CENP-A mislocalization and CIN.
Centromeres are chromatin structures specialized in sister chromatid cohesion, kinetochore assembly, and microtubule attachment during chromosome segregation. The regional centromere of vertebrates consists of long regions of highly repetitive sequences occupied by the Histone H3 variant CENP-A, and which are flanked by pericentromeres. The three-dimensional organization of centromeric chromatin is paramount for its functionality and its ability to withstand spindle forces. Alongside CENP-A, key contributors to the folding of this structure include components of the Constitutive Centromere-Associated Network (CCAN), the protein CENP-B, and condensin and cohesin complexes. Despite its importance, the intricate architecture of the regional centromere of vertebrates remains largely unknown. Recent advancements in long-read sequencing, super-resolution and cryo-electron microscopy, and chromosome conformation capture techniques have significantly improved our understanding of this structure at various levels, from the linear arrangement of centromeric sequences and their epigenetic landscape to their higher-order compaction. In this review, we discuss the latest insights on centromere organization and place them in the context of recent findings describing a bipartite higher-order organization of the centromere.
Centromere identity is specified epigenetically by specialized nucleosomes containing the evolutionarily conserved centromeric histone H3 variant (Cse4 in budding yeast, CENP-A in humans) which is essential for faithful chromosome segregation. However, the mechanisms of epigenetic regulation of Cse4 have not been clearly defined. We have identified two kinases, Cdc5 (Plk1 in humans) and Ipl1 (Aurora B kinase in humans) that phosphorylate Cse4 to prevent chromosomal instability (CIN). Cdc5 associates with Cse4 in mitosis and Cdc5-mediated phosphorylation of Cse4 is coincident with the centromeric enrichment of Cdc5 during metaphase. Defects in Cdc5-mediated Cse4 phosphorylation causes CIN, whereas constitutive association of Cdc5 with Cse4 results in lethality. Cse4 is also a substrate for Ipl1 and phospho-mimetic cse4 mutants suppress growth defects of ipl1 and Ipl1 kinetochore substrate mutants, namely dam1 spc34 and ndc80. Ipl1-mediated phosphorylation of Cse4 regulates kinetochore-microtubule interactions and chromosome biorientation. We propose that collaboration of Cdc5- and Ipl1-mediated phosphorylation of Cse4 modulates kinetochore structure and function, and chromosome biorientation. These findings demonstrate how phosphorylation of Cse4 regulates the integrity of the kinetochore, and acts as an epigenetic marker for mitotic control.
Glutamine addiction is a significant hallmark of metabolic reprogramming in tumors and is crucial to the progression of cancer. Nevertheless, the regulatory mechanisms of glutamine metabolism in endometrial cancer (EC) remains elusive. In this research, we found that elevated expression of CENPA and solute carrier family 38 member 1 (SLC38A1) were firmly associated with worse clinical stage and unfavorable outcomes in EC patients. In addition, ectopic overexpression or silencing of CENPA could either enhance or diminish glutamine metabolism and tumor progression in EC. Mechanistically, CENPA directly regulated the transcriptional activity of the target gene, SLC38A1, leading to enhanced glutamine uptake and metabolism, thereby promoting EC progression. Notably, a prognostic model utilizing the expression levels of CENPA and SLC38A1 genes independently emerged as a prognostic factor for EC. More importantly, CENPA and SLC38A1 were significantly elevated and positively correlated, as well as indicative of poor prognosis in multiple cancers. In brief, our study confirmed that CENPA is a critical transcription factor involved in glutamine metabolism and tumor progression through modulating SLC38A1. This revelation suggests that targeting CENPA could be an appealing therapeutic approach to address pan-cancer glutamine addiction.
Centromeres are chromosomal loci that are defined epigenetically in most eukaryotes by incorporation of a centromere-specific nucleosome in which the canonical histone H3 variant is replaced by Centromere Protein A (CENP-A). Therefore, the assembly and propagation of centromeric nucleosomes are critical for maintaining centromere identify and ensuring genomic stability. Centromeres direct chromosome segregation (during mitosis and meiosis) by recruiting the constitutive centromere-associated network of proteins throughout the cell cycle that in turn recruits the kinetochore during mitosis. Assembly of centromere-specific nucleosomes in humans requires the dedicated CENP-A chaperone HJURP, and the Mis18 complex to couple the deposition of new CENP-A to the site of the pre-existing centromere, which is essential for maintaining centromere identity. Human CENP-A deposition occurs specifically in early G1, into pre-existing chromatin, and several additional chromatin-associated complexes regulate CENP-A nucleosome deposition and stability. Here we review the current knowledge on how new CENP-A nucleosomes are assembled selectively at the existing centromere in different species and how this process is controlled to ensure stable epigenetic inheritance of the centromere.
Faithful chromosome segregation during cell division depends on the centromere, a complex DNA/protein structure that links chromosomes to spindle microtubules. This chromosomal domain has to be marked throughout cell division and its chromosomal localization preserved across cell generations. From fission yeast to human, centromeres are established on a series of repetitive DNA sequences and on specialized centromeric chromatin. This chromatin is enriched with the histone H3 variant, named CENP-A, that was demonstrated to be the epigenetic mark that maintains centromere identity and function indefinitely. Although centromere identity is thought to be exclusively epigenetic, the presence of specific DNA sequences in the majority of eukaryotes and of the centromeric protein CENP-B that binds to these sequences, suggests the existence of a genetic component as well. In this review, we will highlight the importance of centromeric sequences for centromere formation and function, and discuss the centromere DNA sequence/CENP-B paradox.
The centromere, a chromosome locus defined by the histone H3-like protein centromeric protein A (CENP-A), promotes assembly of the kinetochore to bind microtubules during cell division. Centromere maintenance requires CENP-A to be actively replenished by dedicated protein machinery in the early G(1) phase of the cell cycle to compensate for its dilution after DNA replication. Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) limit CENP-A deposition to once per cell cycle and function as negative regulators outside of early G(1). Antithetically, Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) promotes CENP-A deposition in early G(1), but the molecular details of this process are still unknown. We reveal here a phosphorylation network that recruits PLK1 to the deposition machinery to control a conformational switch required for licensing the CENP-A deposition reaction. Our findings clarify how PLK1 contributes to the epigenetic maintenance of centromeres.
Accurate chromosome segregation is critical to ensure the faithful inheritance of the genome during cell division. Human chromosomes distinguish the location of the centromere from general chromatin by the selective assembly of CENP-A containing nucleosomes at the active centromere. The location of centromeres in most higher eukaryotes is determined epigenetically, independent of DNA sequence. CENP-A containing centromeric chromatin provides the foundation for assembly of the kinetochore that mediates chromosome attachment to the microtubule spindle and controls cell cycle progression in mitosis. Here we review recent work demonstrating the role of posttranslational modifications on centromere function and CENP-A inheritance via the direct modification of the CENP-A nucleosome and pre-nucleosomal complexes, the modification of the CENP-A deposition machinery and the modification of histones within existing centromeres.
Lung adenocarcinoma is a malignant and fatal respiratory disease. However, due to its complex pathogenesis and poorly effective therapeutic options, accurate early diagnosis and prognosis remain elusive. Now, there is increasing evidence that tumor stem cells are involved in tumorigenesis, metastasis, relapse, resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy and are one of the reasons why tumors cannot be cured. The mRNA expression based-stemness index (mRNAsi) is a parameter obtained by Malta and his colleagues applying innovative one-class logistic regression machine learning algorithm (OCLR) on mRNA expression in normal stem cells and their progeny. It is a valid evaluation parameter and is currently employed to evaluate the degree of differentiation of a certain tumor. In this study, we first used WGCNA and the software Cytoscape to obtain key modules and hub genes. We then applied LASSO regression analysis to calculate the genes in the key module to obtain a six-gene risk model. Moreover, the accuracy of this model was validated. Finally, we took the intersection of hub genes and risk genes and validated CENPA as both a tumor stemness regulator and a tumor prognostic factor in lung cancer.
