Centromere protein K; Component of the CENPA-CAD (nucleosome distal) complex, a complex recruited to centromeres which is involved in assembly of kinetochore proteins, mitotic progression and chromosome segregation. May be involved in incorporation of newly synthesized CENPA into centromeres via its interaction with the CENPA-NAC complex. Acts in coordination with KNL1 to recruit the NDC80 complex to the outer kinetochore; Belongs to the CENP-K/MCM22 family.
BACKGROUND: Stemness and chemoresistance contribute to cervical cancer recurrence and metastasis. In the current study, we determined the relevant players and role of N(6)-methyladenine (m(6)A) RNA methylation in cervical cancer progression. METHODS: The roles of m(6)A RNA methylation and centromere protein K (CENPK) in cervical cancer were analyzed using bioinformatics analysis. Methylated RNA immunoprecipitation was adopted to detect m(6)A modification of CENPK mRNA. Human cervical cancer clinical samples, cell lines, and xenografts were used for analyzing gene expression and function. Immunofluorescence staining and the tumorsphere formation, clonogenic, MTT, and EdU assays were performed to determine cell stemness, chemoresistance, migration, invasion, and proliferation in HeLa and SiHa cells, respectively. Western blot analysis, co-immunoprecipitation, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and luciferase reporter, cycloheximide chase, and cell fractionation assays were performed to elucidate the underlying mechanism. RESULTS: Bioinformatics analysis of public cancer datasets revealed firm links between m(6)A modification patterns and cervical cancer prognosis, especially through ZC3H13-mediated m(6)A modification of CENPK mRNA. CENPK expression was elevated in cervical cancer, associated with cancer recurrence, and independently predicts poor patient prognosis [hazard ratio = 1.413, 95% confidence interval = 1.078 - 1.853, P = 0.012]. Silencing of CENPK prolonged the overall survival time of cervical cancer-bearing mice and improved the response of cervical cancer tumors to chemotherapy in vivo (P < 0.001). We also showed that CENPK was directly bound to SOX6 and disrupted the interactions of CENPK with beta-catenin, which promoted beta-catenin expression and nuclear translocation, facilitated p53 ubiquitination, and led to activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, but suppression of the p53 pathway. This dysregulation ultimately enhanced the tumorigenic pathways required for cell stemness, DNA damage repair pathways necessary for cisplatin/carboplatin resistance, epithelial-mesenchymal transition involved in metastasis, and DNA replication that drove tumor cell proliferation. CONCLUSIONS: CENPK was shown to have an oncogenic role in cervical cancer and can thus serve as a prognostic indicator and novel target for cervical cancer treatment.
The overexpression of centromere protein K (CENPK) is a major contributor to the malignant progression of numerous cancers. To date, the detailed functions and mechanisms of CENPK in breast carcinoma are not fully elucidated. The goals of this project were to comprehensively address the relevance of CENPK in breast carcinoma. The initial investigation by TCGA analysis revealed a high expression level of CENPK in breast carcinoma. Subsequently, an immunoblotting assay confirmed that CENPK is highly expressed in the clinical samples of breast carcinoma. In vitro experiments elucidated that the inhibition of CENPK produced substantial anticancer effects, including a reduction of proliferation, the inhibition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, the induction of cell cycle arrest and chemosensitivity. Mechanism research unveiled a role for CENPK in mediating the focal adhesion kinase (FAK1)/PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Inhibiting the FAK/PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway was able to reverse CENPK-elicited cancer-promoting effects. Additionally, CENPK-silenced breast carcinoma cells exhibited low tumorigenicity in vivo. In summary, our data demonstrated that CENPK inhibition provided an excellent anticancer effect for breast carcinoma by regulating FAK/PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. This work illustrates a novel molecular mechanism for CENPK in breast carcinoma and suggests CENPK inhibition as a promising targeted therapy for breast carcinoma.
Previous studies have indicated that centromere protein K (CENPK) is upregulated in several cancers and related to tumorigenesis. Nevertheless, the potential function of CENPK in gastric cancer (GC) remains unknown. Here, we investigated the function of CENPK on oncogenicity and explored its underlying mechanisms in GC. Our results showed that CENPK was dramatically overexpressed in GC and was associated with poor prognosis through bioinformatics analysis. We demonstrated that CENPK is upregulated in GC tissues and cell lines. Moreover, knockdown of CENPK significantly inhibited proliferation in vitro and attenuated the growth of implanted GCs in vivo. In addition, CENPK silencing induced G1 phase cell cycle arrest and facilitated apoptosis of GC cells. KEGG pathway analysis indicated that the PI3K-AKT signalling pathway was considerably enriched. Knockdown of CENPK decreased the expression of PI3K, p-Akt (Ser437) and p-GSK3beta (Ser9) in GC cells, and increased the expression of PTEN. In conclusion, this study indicated that CENPK was overexpressed in GC and may promote gastric carcinogenesis through the PTEN-PI3K-AKT signalling pathway. Thus, CENPK may be a potential target for cancer therapeutics in GC.
BACKGROUND: Identification of functional genes or biomarkers may be helpful for developing new treatment strategies in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). The centromere protein K (CENPK) gene has been discovered to be overexpressed and could influence tumor progression in several tumor types. However, its role in LUAD has never been revealed. OBJECTIVES: The purpose of the current study was to detect the effects of CENPK and its mechanisms in the progression of LUAD. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Oncomine databases was used to analyze the expression of CENPK. The relationship between CENPK expression and the prognosis of LUAD was investigated using Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression analyses. The cell viability was monitored with Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) and colony forming assays, while migration and invasion were analyzed with a transwell assay. The effect of CENPK on the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers were estimated using western blotting. RESULTS: CENPK was significantly overexpressed in LUAD tissues and cells (p < 0.01). The overall survival rate in the low CENPK expression group was significantly higher than in the high CENPK expression group (p = 0.003). Furthermore, the overexpression of CENPK facilitated cell viability, migration and invasion of tumor cells, while knockdown of CENPK prevented these behaviors (p < 0.01). Moreover, upregulation of CENPK decreased the expression of E-cadherin and enhanced the expression of N-cadherin, vimentin and Snail in LUAD cells (p < 0.01). Conversely, knockdown of CENPK resulted in the opposite trend (p < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: CENPK was upregulated in LUAD tissues and cells, and the enhancement of CENPK promoted the viability, migration, invasion, and EMT of LUAD cells.
BACKGROUND: CENPK is a novel oncogene which is aberrantly expression in some malignant tumors. However, the role and mechanisms of CENPK in gastric cancer have not been explored. METHODS: In this study, we use RT-PCR and IHC to study CENPK expression in gastric cancer cells and tissues. In addition, we constructed the two kinds of CENPK siRNA lentivirus to knock down CENPK. Then, we use High content living cell imaging System, Cell Counting Kit-8, colony formation, wound healing and Transwell assays to demonstrate the function of CENPK on gastric cancer cells AGS and MKN45. Meanwhile, we use flow cytometry assay to study CENPK function on gastric cancer cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. Subcutaneous tumorigenesis in nude mice was also performed to confirm CENPK function on gastric cancer. Finally, we use Co-IP, LC-MS and function rescue assay to study the downstream interaction molecular of CENPK. RESULTS: We demonstrated that CENPK expression were up-regulated in GC cell lines. Poor differentiation and III-IV stage had more percentages of high CENPK expression. Knocking down CENPK could significantly suppress GC cells proliferation, migration and invasion, and induce GC cells apoptosis and G1/S phase transition arrest. Subcutaneous tumorigenesis confirmed the tumor-promoting effects of CENPK in vivo. Remarkably, we found for the first time that XRCC5 might be interacted with CENPK through Co-IP, LC-MS and rescue study. CONCLUSION: CENPK promotes GC cell proliferation and migration via interacting with XRCC5 and may be a novel prognostic factor or therapeutic target for CENPK.
Sarcopenia is a medical condition that progressively develops with age and results in reduced skeletal muscle mass, alteration in muscle composition, and decreased muscle strength. Several clinical studies suggested that sarcopenia disproportionally affects males and females with age. Despite this knowledge, the molecular mechanism governing the pathophysiology is not well understood in a sex-specific manner. In this study, we utilized human gastrocnemius muscles from males and females to identify differentially regulated genes with age. We found 269 genes with at least a twofold expression difference in the aged muscle transcriptome. Among the female muscle samples, there were 239 differentially regulated genes, and the novel protein-coding genes include KIF20A, PIMREG, MTRNR2L6, TRPV6, EFNA2, RNF24, and SFN. In aged male skeletal muscle, there were 166 differentially regulated genes, and the novel-protein coding genes are CENPK, CDKN2A, BHLHA15, and EPHA. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment revealed glucose catabolism, NAD metabolic processes, and muscle fiber transition pathways that are involved in aged female skeletal muscle, whereas replicative senescence, cytochrome C release, and muscle composition pathways are disrupted in aged male skeletal muscle. Targeting these novels, differentially regulated genes, and signaling pathways could serve as sex-specific therapeutic targets to combat the age-related onset of sarcopenia and promote healthy aging.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignant tumors worldwide. The identification of novel diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for CRC is a key research imperative. Immunohistochemical analysis has revealed high expression of centromere protein K (CENPK) in CRC. However, the role of CENPK in the progression of CRC is not well characterized. AIM: To evaluate the effects of knockdown of CENPK and overexpression of Cullin 4A (CUL4A) in RKO and HCT116 cells. METHODS: Human colon cancer samples were collected and tested using a human gene expression chip. We identified CENPK as a potential oncogene for CRC based on bioinformatics analysis. In vitro experiments verified the function of this gene. We investigated the expression of CENPK in RKO and HCT116 cells using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), western blot, and flow cytometry. The effect of short hairpin RNA (shRNA) virus-infected RKO cells on tumor growth was evaluated in vivo using quantitative analysis of fluorescence imaging. To evaluate the effects of knockdown of CENPK and overexpression of CUL4A in RKO and HCT116 cells, we performed a series of in vitro experiments, using qPCR, western blot, MTT assay, and flow cytometry. RESULTS: We demonstrated overexpression of CENPK in human colon cancer samples. CENPK was an independent risk factor in patients with CRC. The downstream genes FBX32, CUL4A, and Yes-associated protein isoform 1 were examined to evaluate the regulatory action of CENPK in RKO cells. Significantly delayed xenograft tumor emergence, slower growth rate, and lower final tumor weight and volume were observed in the CENPK short hairpin RNA virus infected group compared with the CENPK negative control group. The CENPK gene interference inhibited the proliferation of RKO cells in vitro and in vivo. The lentivirus-mediated shRNA interference of CENPK inhibited the proliferation of RKO and HCT116 colon cancer cells, with overexpression of the CUL4A. CONCLUSION: We indicated a potential role of CENPK in promoting tumor proliferation, and it may be a novel diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for CRC.
Differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC) is one of the most common malignant tumors. Increasing evidence indicates that centromere protein K(CENPK) may play a key role in promoting carcinogenesis. The expression, biological functions, and clinical significance of CENPK in DTC are still unclear. The CENPK expression in the DTC specimen was confirmed using quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot. The expression of CENPK was silenced and promoted by lentivirus-mediated transfection with shRNA sequences or CENPK plasmid targeting CENPK in TPC1 and FTC-133 cells, respectively. Colony formation, Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8), Transwell invasion, and scratch assays were performed to assess the malignant biological properties of FTC-133 and TPC1 cells. Tumorigenicity assay was performed using C57BL/6 mice to explore the influence of CENPK on the growth of TPC1. The present work suggested that the expression of CENPK remarkably increased in follicular thyroid cancer and papillary thyroid cancer  tissue samples at the mRNA level. Immunohistochemical staining also showed consistent results at the protein level. In addition, CENPK mRNA expression level showed great value in diagnosis of DTC. Knockdown of CENPK significantly inhibited the invasion and migration of TPC1 and FTC-133 cells. In contrast, CENPK overexpression promoted invasion and migration of TPC1 and FTC-133 cells. Knockdown and overexpression of CENPK showed consistent effect on DTC tumor growth and expression of Ki-67 invivo. Our results indicated that CENPK was evidently upregulated in DTC. Knocking down CENPK suppressed TPC1 cell proliferation, invasion and migration. Targeting the CENPK may be anovel therapeutic method for DTC.
Ovarian cancer stands as a formidable clinical challenge, with limited therapeutic options. This investigation delves into the intricate molecular mechanisms governing ovarian cancer progression and uncovers Centromere Protein K (CENPK) as a central figure in disease pathogenesis. Elevated CENPK levels within ovarian cancer tissues conspicuously align with adverse clinical outcomes, positioning CENPK as a promising prognostic biomarker. Deeper exploration reveals a direct transcriptional connection between CENPK and the E2F1 transcription factor and clearly establishes E2F1's role as the master regulator of CENPK expression in ovarian cancer. Our inquiry revealing a suppression of tumor-promoting signaling pathways, most notably the mTOR pathway, upon CENPK silencing. Intriguingly, CENPK renders ovarian cancer cells more responsive to the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin, introducing a promising avenue for therapeutic intervention. In summation, our study unravels the multifaceted role of CENPK in ovarian cancer progression. It emerges as a prognostic indicator, a pivotal mediator of cell proliferation and tumorigenicity, and a regulator of the mTOR pathway, shedding light on potential therapeutic avenues for this formidable disease.
Most patients with metastatic prostate cancer eventually develop resistance to primary androgen deprivation therapy. To identify predictive biomarker for Abiraterone acetate/prednisone resistance, we screened alternative splice variants between responders and non-responders from the PROMOTE clinical study and pinned down the most significant variant, CENPK-delta8. Through preclinical patient-derived mouse xenograft (PDX) and 3D organoids obtained from responders and non-responders, as well as in vitro models, aberrant CENPK-delta8 expression was determined to link to drug resistance via enhanced migration and proliferation. The FLNA and FLOT1 were observed to specifically bind to CENK-delta8 rather than wild-type CENPK, underscoring the role of CENPK-delta8 in cytoskeleton organization and cell migration. Our study, leveraging data from the PROMOTE study, TCGA, and TCGA SpliceReq databases, highlights the important function of alternative splice variants in drug response and their potential to be prognostic biomarkers for improving individual therapeutic outcomes in precision medicine.
The human genome encodes more than 350 kinds of Kruppel-associated box (KRAB) domain-containing zinc-finger proteins (KZFPs), KRAB-type ZNF transcription factor family (KZNF) plays a vital role in gene regulatory networks. The KZNF family members include a large number of highly homologous genes, gene subtypes and pseudogenes, and their expression has a high degree of tissue specificity and precision. Due to the high complexity of its regulatory network, the KZNF gene family has not been researched in sufficient, and the role of its members in the occurrence of cancer is mostly unexplored. In this study, ZNF880 was significantly associated with overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) patients. Low ZNF880 expression resulted in shorter OS and DFS. Combined with Colon adenocarcinoma (COAD) and Rectum adenocarcinoma (READ) data collection in the TCGA database, we found that ZNF880 was significantly down-regulated in CRC. Further analysis of the sequence variation of ZNF880 in CRC showed that ZNF880 accumulated a large number of SNV in the C2H2 domain and KRAB domain, while promoter region of ZNF880 also showed high methylation in COAD and READ. Combined with the Cbioportal and TIMER databases, the expression of mutant ZNF880 was significantly lower in COAD compared to the wild type. Simultaneously, the lncRNA-miRNA-ZNF880 ceRNA regulatory network was constructed through co-expression and miRNAs target gene prediction, demonstrating the precision of the ZNF880 regulatory network. In addition, the decreased expression of ZNF880 caused the significant immune infiltration decreases of CD8 + cells in COAD. In contrast, the immune infiltration of CD4 + cells and macrophages in COAD is positively correlated with ZNF880. Finally, through protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis and transcription factor target gene prediction, we screened out the genes most likely to be related to the function of ZNF880. CENPK, IFNGR2, REC8 and ZBTB17 were identified as the most closely functioning genes with ZNF880, which may indicate that ZNF880 has important links with the formation of cell centromere, tumor immunity, cell cycle and other pathways closely related to the occurrence of CRC. These studies show that the down-regulation of ZNF880 gene is closely related to CRC, and the targeted change of the expression of its regulatory molecules (miRNA and lncRNA) may be a new perspective for CRC treatment.
Centromere protein K (CENPK) is a newly identified malignancy-related gene that exhibits differential expression in various cancers and plays a crucial role in carcinogenesis. However, it remains uncertain whether CENPK is involved in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). This work aimed to unveil the expression, clinical significance, biological functions, and regulatory mechanisms of CENPK in ccRCC. Through analysis of RNA-seq data obtained from TCGA, a high expression pattern of CENPK was identified in ccRCC, which was found to be associated with pathologic stage, histologic grade, and clinical outcome. The enrichment of CENPK in ccRCC was further verified through the analysis of clinical samples. By conducting cellular functional experiments, we showed an inhibitory effect of CENPK knockdown on the malignant behavior of ccRCC cells. GSEA revealed a close relationship between CENPK and the Hippo-YAP1/TAZ signal cascade. The following experiments demonstrated that the activation of YAP1/TAZ was strongly inhibited by CENPK knockdown, and this change was accompanied by a decrease in the levels of CTGF and CYR61. Blockade of the MST1/2-LATS1/2 axis reversed the suppressive impact of CENPK knockdown on YAP1/TAZ. The tumor-promoting impact observed upon CENPK overexpression was diminished in YAP1 knockout cells. Notably, ccRCC cells with reduced CENPK expression exhibited a diminished capability to form tumors in nude mice. This report highlights the importance of CENPK in ccRCC and sheds new light on the underlying mechanism of this cancer type. Therefore, CENPK has the potential to serve as a viable candidate target for treating ccRCC.
Centromere protein family member genes (CENPx genes) have been reported to be exceptionally expressed in various cancers. However, the systematic analysis of their roles in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is still lacking. The aim of this study is to comprehensively analyze the expression and survival value of CENPx genes in LUAD and to perform immune analysis and related mechanistic investigations. We confirmed that CENPA, CENPF, CENPI, CENPK, CENPM, CENPN, CENPU and CENPW were highly expressed in LUAD, and their high expression were associated with poor prognosis (P < 0.05). Methylation results showed that methylation of one CpG site on promotor of CENPF, one of CENPU and two CENPMs were relevant to overall survival in LUAD. The gene alteration analysis demonstrated that the altered group of CENPF were correlated with poor overall survival. Microsatellite instability analysis concluded that the expression of CENPF and microsatellite instability scores were correlated positively with statistical significance. In addition, the expression changes of these eight genes were significantly associated with immune cell infiltration and the expression of immunoinhibitors, immunostimulators, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. Functional enrichment analysis indicated that directly related genes were mainly involved in MRNA splicing, via spliceosome, Poly(A) RNA binding and Spliceosome. Moreover, we established a risk model based on LASSO regression. The expression changes of these eight genes in the Gene Expression Omnibus were also highly expressed in LUAD-compared with normal tissues, which confirmed the analysis in the Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis (GEPIA) database. To sum up, we aimed to provide new biomarkers.
We report RNA-Seq results from skin of X. maculatus Jp 163 B after exposure to various doses of "cool white" fluorescent light (FL). We show that FL exposure incites a genetic transcriptional response in skin nearly as great as observed for UVB exposure; however, the gene sets modulated due to exposure to the two light sources are quite different. Known light responsive genes involved in maintaining circadian cycling (e.g., clock, cry2a, cry1b, per1b, per2, per3, and arntl1a) exhibited expected shifts in transcriptional expression upon FL exposure. Exposure to FL also resulted in down-regulated transcription of many genes involved with cell cycle progression (e.g., cdc20, cdc45, cdca7b, plk1, cdk1, ccnb-3, and cdca7a) and chromosome segregation (e.g., cenpe, cenpf, cenpi, cenpk, cenpo, cenpp, and cenpu; cep70; knstrm, kntc, mcm2, mcm5; smc2). In addition, several DNA replication and recombination repair genes (e.g., pola1, pole, rec52, rad54l, rpa1, and parpbp) exhibit reduced expression in FL exposed X. maculatus skin. Some genes down modulated by FL are known to be associated with DNA repair and human diseases (e.g., atm2, brip1, fanc1, fancl, and xrcc4). The overall suppression of genes involved with mitotic progression in the skin of adult fish is consistent with entry into the light phase of the circadian cycle. Current efforts are aimed at determining specific wavelengths that may lead to differential expression among the many genes affected by fluorescent light exposure.
Mammals are able to rapidly produce red blood cells in response to stress. The molecular pathways used in this process are important in understanding responses to anaemia in multiple biological settings. Here we characterise the novel gene Claudin 13 (Cldn13), a member of the Claudin family of tight junction proteins using RNA expression, microarray and phylogenetic analysis. We present evidence that Cldn13 appears to be co-ordinately regulated as part of a stress induced erythropoiesis pathway and is a mouse-specific gene mainly expressed in tissues associated with haematopoietic function. CLDN13 phylogenetically groups with its genomic neighbour CLDN4, a conserved tight junction protein with a putative role in epithelial to mesenchymal transition, suggesting a recent duplication event. Mechanisms of mammalian stress erythropoiesis are of importance in anaemic responses and expression microarray analyses demonstrate that Cldn13 is the most abundant Claudin in spleen from mice infected with Trypanosoma congolense. In mice prone to anaemia (C57BL/6), its expression is reduced compared to strains which display a less severe anaemic response (A/J and BALB/c) and is differentially regulated in spleen during disease progression. Genes clustering with Cldn13 on microarrays are key regulators of erythropoiesis (Tal1, Trim10, E2f2), erythrocyte membrane proteins (Rhd and Gypa), associated with red cell volume (Tmcc2) and indirectly associated with erythropoietic pathways (Cdca8, Cdkn2d, Cenpk). Relationships between genes appearing co-ordinately regulated with Cldn13 post-infection suggest new insights into the molecular regulation and pathways involved in stress induced erythropoiesis and suggest a novel, previously unreported role for claudins in correct cell polarisation and protein partitioning prior to erythroblast enucleation.
BACKGROUND: Fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS), a chronic musculoskeletal condition characterized by diffuse pain, fatigue, sleep impairment, and cognitive dysfunction, is associated with significant functional disability. Its underlying biological mechanisms are unknown. This study investigated differentially expressed genes between women with FMS and healthy volunteers. METHODS: Women who met the 1990 or 2010 American College of Rheumatology fibromyalgia criteria were compared to age- and race-matched pain-free healthy women. Peripheral blood samples were collected, and a full genome microarray gene expression analysis was performed. One-way analysis of variance was used to identify differentially expressed genes using the filtering criterion of 1% false discovery rate. Analysis of canonical pathways associated with these genes was performed. Confirmatory quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay verified microarray results. Independent t-tests compared gene and protein expression between groups. RESULT: Participants were 54 women with FMS and 25 controls. Expression arrays from a subset of women with FMS (n = 29) and controls (n = 20) showed upregulation of 12 genes (>1.8-fold change, p < .05) in the FMS sample. Differentially expressed genes were related to B-cell development, primary immunodeficiency signaling, and mitotic roles of polo-like kinase. CENPK and HSP90AA1 were the most differentially expressed genes (p < .01). CONCLUSION: Activity of interrelated pathways related to immune response, and homeostasis appears to be relevant to the experience of FMS. Replication and exploration of the relationship between gene expression and symptom severity will help determine clinical relevance of these findings.
Kinetochores, multi-subunit complexes that assemble at the interface with centromeres, bind spindle microtubules to ensure faithful delivery of chromosomes during cell division. The configuration and function of the kinetochore-centromere interface is poorly understood. We report that a protein at this interface, CENP-M, is structurally and evolutionarily related to small GTPases but is incapable of GTP-binding and conformational switching. We show that CENP-M is crucially required for the assembly and stability of a tetramer also comprising CENP-I, CENP-H, and CENP-K, the HIKM complex, which we extensively characterize through a combination of structural, biochemical, and cell biological approaches. A point mutant affecting the CENP-M/CENP-I interaction hampers kinetochore assembly and chromosome alignment and prevents kinetochore recruitment of the CENP-T/W complex, questioning a role of CENP-T/W as founder of an independent axis of kinetochore assembly. Our studies identify a single pathway having CENP-C as founder, and CENP-H/I/K/M and CENP-T/W as CENP-C-dependent followers.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02978.001.
The clinical prognosis of patients with glioma is determined by tumor grades, but tumors of different subtypes with equal malignancy grade usually have different prognosis that is largely determined by genetic abnormalities. Oligodendrogliomas (ODs) are the second most common type of gliomas. In this study, integrative analyses found that distribution of TCGA transcriptomic subtypes was associated with grade progression in ODs. To identify critical gene(s) associated with tumor grades and TCGA subtypes, we analyzed 34 normal brain tissue (NBT), 146 WHO grade II and 130 grade III ODs by microarray and RNA sequencing, and identified a co-expression network of six genes (AURKA, NDC80, CENPK, KIAA0101, TIMELESS and MELK) that was associated with tumor grades and TCGA subtypes as well as Ki-67 expression. Validation of the six genes was performed by qPCR in additional 28 ODs. Importantly, these genes also were validated in four high-grade recurrent gliomas and the initial lower-grade gliomas resected from the same patients. Finally, the RNA data on two genes with the highest discrimination potential (AURKA and NDC80) and Ki-67 were validated on an independent cohort (5 NBTs and 86 ODs) by immunohistochemistry. Knockdown of AURKA and NDC80 by siRNAs suppressed Ki-67 expression and proliferation of gliomas cells. Survival analysis showed that high expression of the six genes corporately indicated a poor survival outcome. Correlation and protein interaction analysis provided further evidence for this co-expression network. These data suggest that the co-expression of the six mitosis-regulating genes was associated with malignant progression and prognosis in ODs.
BACKGROUND Immune-checkpoint inhibitors have propelled the field of therapeutics for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) treatment, but are only beneficial to some patients. The objective of this study was to identify valid biomarkers for good potential response to immunotherapy. MATERIAL AND METHODS We performed an integrated analysis of the available datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) projects, Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE), TISIDB database, and Lung Cancer Explorer (LCE) database. Six prognosis-related genes (MCM2, EZH2, CENPK, CHEK1, CDKN2A, and EXOSC2) were identified utilizing the meta workflow of data analysis methods. We performed subclass mapping to compare their expression profiles to other datasets of patients who responded to immunotherapy. A drug sensitivity predictive model was used to predict the chemotherapeutic response to cisplatin and etoposide. RESULTS Our results showed that the expression of the 6 key genes was significantly associated with the overall survival of patients with SCLC. Lower expression of these 6 genes was correlated to the response to anti-PD-1 treatment. Additionally, low expression of MCM2, EZH2, CENPK, and CHEK1 was correlated with increased sensitivity to cisplatin, but not etoposide. CONCLUSIONS Overall, our data showed that MCM2, EZH2, CENPK, CHEK1, CDKN2A, and EXOSC2 are potential prognostic and predictive biomarkers for response to immune-checkpoint inhibitor treatment in patients with SCLC. Further studies with large sample sizes are required to validate our findings and to explore the detailed mechanisms underlying the role of these genes in SCLC.
Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that chromatin regulators (CRs) regulate immune cell infiltration and are correlated with prognoses of patients in some cancers. However, the immunological and prognostic roles of CRs in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) are still unclear. Here, we systematically revealed the correlations of CRs with immunological features and the survival in LUAD patients based on a cohort of gene expression datasets from the public TCGA and GEO databases and real RNA-seq data by an integrative analysis using a comprehensive bioinformatics method. Totals of 160 differentially expressed CRs (DECRs) were identified between LUAD and normal lung tissues, and two molecular prognostic subtypes (MPSs) were constructed and evaluated based on 27 prognostic DECRs using five independent datasets (p =0.016, <0.0001, =0.008, =0.00038 and =0.00055, respectively). Six differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (CENPK, ANGPTL4, CCL20, CPS1, GJB3, TPSB2) between two MPSs had the most important prognostic feature and a six-gene prognostic model was established. LUAD patients in the low-risk subgroup showed a higher overall survival (OS) rate than those in the high-risk subgroup in nine independent datasets (p <0.0001, =0.021, =0.016, =0.0099, <0.0001, =0.0045, <0.0001, =0.0038 and =0.00013, respectively). Six-gene prognostic signature had the highest concordance index of 0.673 compared with 19 reported prognostic signatures. The risk score was significantly correlated with immunological features and activities of oncogenic signaling pathways. LUAD patients in the low-risk subgroup benefited more from immunotherapy and were less sensitive to conventional chemotherapy agents. This study provides novel insights into the prognostic and immunological roles of CRs in LUAD.
