Adenosine receptor A2b; Receptor for adenosine. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase.
Phenolic acids have recently gained substantial attention due to their various practical, biological and pharmacological effects. Chlorogenic Acid (CGA, 3-CQA) is a most abundant isomer among caffeoylquinic acid isomers (3-, 4-, and 5-CQA), that currently known as 5-CQA as per guidelines of IUPAC. It is one of the most available acids among phenolic acid compounds which can be naturally found in green coffee extracts and tea. CGA is an important and biologically active dietary polyphenol, playing several important and therapeutic roles such as antioxidant activity, antibacterial, hepatoprotective, cardioprotective, anti-inflammatory, antipyretic, neuroprotective, anti-obesity, antiviral, anti-microbial, anti-hypertension, free radicals scavenger and a central nervous system (CNS) stimulator. In addition, it has been found that CGA could modulate lipid metabolism and glucose in both genetically and healthy metabolic related disorders. It is speculated that CGA can perform crucial roles in lipid and glucose metabolism regulation and thus help to treat many disorders such as hepatic steatosis, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and obesity as well. Furthermore, this phenolic acid (CGA) causes hepatoprotective effects by protecting animals from chemical or lipopolysaccharide-induced injuries. The hypocholesterolemic influence of CGA can result from the altered metabolism of nutrients, including amino acids, glucose and fatty acids (FA). The purpose of this review was to broaden the scope of knowledge of researchers to conduct more studies on this subject to both unveil and optimize its biological and pharmacological effects. As a result, CGA may be practically used as a natural safeguard food additive to replace the synthetic antibiotics and thereby reduce the medicinal cost.
The granin family comprises altogether 7 different proteins originating from the diffuse neuroendocrine system and elements of the central and peripheral nervous systems. The family is dominated by three uniquely acidic members, namely chromogranin A (CgA), chromogranin B (CgB) and secretogranin II (SgII). Since the late 1980s it has become evident that these proteins are proteolytically processed, intragranularly and/or extracellularly into a range of biologically active peptides; a number of them with regulatory properties of physiological and/or pathophysiological significance. The aim of this comprehensive overview is to provide an up-to-date insight into the distribution and properties of the well established granin-derived peptides and their putative roles in homeostatic regulations. Hence, focus is directed to peptides derived from the three main granins, e.g. to the chromogranin A derived vasostatins, betagranins, pancreastatin and catestatins, the chromogranin B-derived secretolytin and the secretogranin II-derived secretoneurin (SN). In addition, the distribution and properties of the chromogranin A-derived peptides prochromacin, chromofungin, WE14, parastatin, GE-25 and serpinins, the CgB-peptide PE-11 and the SgII-peptides EM66 and manserin will also be commented on. Finally, the opposing effects of the CgA-derived vasostatin-I and catestatin and the SgII-derived peptide SN on the integrity of the vasculature, myocardial contractility, angiogenesis in wound healing, inflammatory conditions and tumors will be discussed.
De novo and acquired resistance are major impediments to the efficacy of conventional and targeted cancer therapy. In unselected gastric cancer (GC) patients with advanced disease, trials combining chemotherapy and an anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody have been largely unsuccessful. In an effort to identify biomarkers of resistance so as to better select patients for such trials, we screened the secretome of chemotherapy-treated human GC cell lines. We found that levels of CGA, the alpha-subunit of glycoprotein hormones, were markedly increased in the conditioned media of chemoresistant GC cells, and CGA immunoreactivity was enhanced in GC tissues that progressed on chemotherapy. CGA levels in plasma increased in GC patients who received chemotherapy, and this increase was correlated with reduced responsiveness to chemotherapy and poor survival. Mechanistically, secreted CGA was found to bind to EGFR and activate EGFR signaling, thereby conferring a survival advantage to GC cells. N-glycosylation of CGA at Asn52 and Asn78 is required for its stability, secretion, and interaction with EGFR. GATA2 was found to activate CGA transcription, whose increase, in turn, induced the expression and phosphorylation of GATA2 in an EGFR-dependent manner, forming a positive feedback circuit that was initiated by GATA2 autoregulation upon sublethal exposure to chemotherapy. Based on this circuit, combination strategies involving anti-EGFR therapies or targeting CGA with microRNAs (miR-708-3p and miR-761) restored chemotherapy sensitivity. These findings identify a clinically actionable CGA/EGFR/GATA2 circuit and highlight CGA as a predictive biomarker and therapeutic target in chemoresistant GC.
Deep sequencing of the gut microbiomes of 1135 participants from a Dutch population-based cohort shows relations between the microbiome and 126 exogenous and intrinsic host factors, including 31 intrinsic factors, 12 diseases, 19 drug groups, 4 smoking categories, and 60 dietary factors. These factors collectively explain 18.7% of the variation seen in the interindividual distance of microbial composition. We could associate 110 factors to 125 species and observed that fecal chromogranin A (CgA), a protein secreted by enteroendocrine cells, was exclusively associated with 61 microbial species whose abundance collectively accounted for 53% of microbial composition. Low CgA concentrations were seen in individuals with a more diverse microbiome. These results are an important step toward a better understanding of environment-diet-microbe-host interactions.
Chlorogenic acid (CGA), an important biologically active dietary polyphenol, is produced by certain plant species and is a major component of coffee. Reduction in the risk of a variety of diseases following CGA consumption has been mentioned in recent basic and clinical research studies. This systematic review discusses in vivo animal and human studies of the physiological and biochemical effects of chlorogenic acids (CGAs) on biomarkers of chronic disease. We searched PubMed, Embase, Amed and Scopus using the following search terms: ("chlorogenic acid" OR "green coffee bean extract") AND (human OR animal) (last performed on April 1st, 2015) for relevant literature on the in vivo effects of CGAs in animal and human models, including clinical trials on cardiovascular, metabolic, cancerogenic, neurological and other functions. After exclusion of editorials and letters, uncontrolled observations, duplicate and not relevant publications the remaining 94 studies have been reviewed. The biological properties of CGA in addition to its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects have recently been reported. It is postulated that CGA is able to exert pivotal roles on glucose and lipid metabolism regulation and on the related disorders, e.g. diabetes, cardiovascular disease (CVD), obesity, cancer, and hepatic steatosis. The wide range of potential health benefits of CGA, including its anti-diabetic, anti-carcinogenic, anti-inflammatory and anti-obesity impacts, may provide a non-pharmacological and non-invasive approach for treatment or prevention of some chronic diseases. In this study, the effects of CGAs on different aspects of health by reviewing the related literatures have been discussed.
Chromogranin A (CgA) is the major member of the granin family of acidic secretory glycoproteins that are expressed in all endocrine and neuroendocrine cells. Granins have been proposed to play multiple roles in the secretory process. Intracellularly, granins play a role in targeting peptide hormones and neurotransmitters to granules of the regulated pathway by virtue of their ability to aggregate in the low-pH, high-calcium environment of the trans-Golgi network. Extra-cellularly, peptides formed as a result of proteolytic processing of granins regulate hormone secretion. Some conserved features of the mature CgA protein are polyglutamic acids, calcium-binding sites, and several pairs of basic amino acids. The first 2 features are important for its intracellular functions, and the latter characteristic suggested that peptides could be released from the molecule by precursor processing enzymes. Several biologically active peptides encoded within the CgA molecule, such as vasostatin, beta-granin, chromostatin, pancreastatin, and parastatin act predominantly to inhibit hormone and neurotransmitter release in an autocrine or paracrine fashion. The biosynthesis of CgA is regulated by many different factors, including steroid hormones and agents that act through a variety of signalling pathways. CgA biosynthesis and that of the resident hormone or neurotransmitter can be regulated differentially. The widespread distribution of CgA has made the measurement of circulating immunoreactive CgA a valuable tool in the diagnosis of neuroendocrine neoplasia, and CgA immunohistochemistry can help to identify the neuroendocrine nature of tumours. Recent molecular biology studies are identifying those elements in the CgA gene promoter responsible for its specific neuroendocrine cell expression.
SignificanceWhile increasing evidence associates the disruption of circadian rhythms with pathologic conditions, including obesity, type 2 diabetes, and nonalcoholic fatty liver diseases (NAFLD), the involved mechanisms are still poorly described. Here, we show that, in both humans and mice, the pathogenesis of NAFLD is associated with the disruption of the circadian clock combined with perturbations of the growth hormone and sex hormone pathways. However, while this condition protects mice from the development of fibrosis and insulin resistance, it correlates with increased fibrosis in humans. This suggests that the perturbation of the circadian clock and its associated disruption of the growth hormone and sex hormone pathways are critical for the pathogenesis of metabolic and liver diseases.
Of the major diagnostic specimen types, saliva is one of the most easily collected. Many studies have focused on the evaluation of salivary proteins secreted by healthy people and patients with various diseases during responses to acute mental stress. In particular, such studies have focused on cortisol, alpha-amylase, chromogranin A (CgA), and immunoglobulin A (IgA) as salivary stress markers. Each of these salivary stress markers has its own strengths and weaknesses as well as data gaps related to many factors including collection technique. In this review, we summarize the critical knowledge of the positive and negative attributes and data gaps pertaining to each salivary stress marker.
Chromogranin A (CgA)-the index member of the chromogranin/secretogranin secretory protein family-is ubiquitously distributed in endocrine, neuroendocrine, and immune cells. Elevated levels of CgA-related polypeptides, consisting of full-length molecules and fragments, are detected in the blood of patients suffering from neuroendocrine tumors, heart failure, renal failure, hypertension, rheumatoid arthritis, and inflammatory bowel disease. Full-length CgA and various CgA-derived peptides, including vasostatin-1, pancreastatin, catestatin, and serpinin, are expressed at different relative levels in normal and pathological conditions and exert diverse, and sometime opposite, biological functions. For example, CgA is overexpressed in genetic hypertension, whereas catestatin is diminished. In rodents, the administration of catestatin decreases hypertension, cardiac contractility, obesity, atherosclerosis, and inflammation, and it improves insulin sensitivity. By contrast, pancreastatin is elevated in diabetic patients, and the administration of this peptide to obese mice decreases insulin sensitivity and increases inflammation. CgA and the N-terminal fragment of vasostatin-1 can enhance the endothelial barrier function, exert antiangiogenic effects, and inhibit tumor growth in animal models, whereas CgA fragments lacking the CgA C-terminal region promote angiogenesis and tumor growth. Overall, the CgA system, consisting of full-length CgA and its fragments, is emerging as an important and complex player in cardiovascular, immunometabolic, and cancer regulation.
Chromogranin A (CgA) is a soluble glycoprotein stored with hormones and neuropeptides in secretory granules (SG) of most (neuro)endocrine cells and neurons. Since its discovery in 1967, many studies have reported its structural characteristics, biological roles, and mechanisms of action. Indeed, CgA is both a precursor of various biologically active peptides and a granulogenic protein regulating the storage and secretion of hormones and neuropeptides. This review emphasizes the findings and theoretical concepts around the CgA-linked molecular machinery controlling hormone/neuropeptide aggregation and the interaction of CgA-hormone/neuropeptide aggregates with the trans-Golgi membrane to allow hormone/neuropeptide targeting and SG biogenesis. We will also discuss the intriguing alteration of CgA expression and secretion in various neurological disorders, which could provide insights to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying these pathophysiological conditions.
BACKGROUND: Research on Chromogranin A (CGA) and its derived fragments convincingly demonstrated the multifunctional activity of the 21 amino acid peptide named Catestatin (CST: human CGA352-372, bovine CGA344-364, rat CGA367-387). This review aims to provide a synopsis of the current information concerning the biological role of CST in health and disease. METHODS: Structured search of bibliographic databases for peer-reviewed research literature. RESULTS: CST is mainly known as an inhibitor of the nicotinic-dependent Catecholamine (CA) release, and an anti-hypertensive peptide, but its role includes a modulation of antioxidant and immune defense, epidermal function, and adipose tissue homeostasis. CST influences the cardiocirculatory system acting both indirectly, via the autonomic nervous system, and directly by influencing the basal cardiac function, and the stretch-dependent myocardial performance. It also counteracts the effects of adrenergic stimulation on the heart and protects the myocardium from ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury, acting in pre- and postconditioning protection. CONCLUSIONS: The knowledge on CST is constantly expanding, thanks to a growing number of human studies that document its involvement in physiological modulation and in many severe diseases, also revealing its applicative potential as a clinical biomarker.
N(4)-acetylcytidine (ac(4)C), a conserved but recently rediscovered RNA modification on tRNAs, rRNAs and mRNAs, is catalyzed by N-acetyltransferase 10 (NAT10). Lysine acylation is a ubiquitous protein modification that controls protein functions. Our latest study demonstrates a NAT10-dependent ac(4)C modification, which occurs on the polyadenylated nuclear RNA (PAN) encoded by oncogenic DNA virus Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), can induce KSHV reactivation from latency and activate inflammasome. However, it remains unclear whether a novel lysine acylation occurs in NAT10 during KSHV reactivation and how this acylation of NAT10 regulates tRNAs ac(4)C modification. Here, we showed that NAT10 was lactylated by alpha-tubulin acetyltransferase 1 (ATAT1), as a writer at the critical domain, to exert RNA acetyltransferase function and thus increase the ac(4)C level of tRNA(Ser-CGA-1-1). Mutagenesis at the ac(4)C site in tRNA(Ser-CGA-1-1) inhibited its ac(4)C modifications, translation efficiency of viral lytic genes, and virion production. Mechanistically, KSHV PAN orchestrated NAT10 and ATAT1 to enhance NAT10 lactylation, resulting in tRNA(Ser-CGA-1-1) ac(4)C modification, eventually boosting KSHV reactivation. Our findings reveal a novel post-translational modification in NAT10, as well as expand the understanding about tRNA-related ac(4)C modification during KSHV replication, which may be exploited to design therapeutic strategies for KSHV-related diseases.
Chromogranin A (CgA), a secretory protein released in the blood by neuroendocrine cells and neurons, is the precursor of various bioactive fragments involved in the regulation of the cardiovascular system, metabolism, innate immunity, angiogenesis, and tissue repair. After the original demonstration that circulating CgA can serve as a biomarker for a wide range of neuroendocrine tumors, several studies have shown that increased levels of CgA can be present also in the blood of patients with cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and inflammatory diseases with, in certain cases, important diagnostic and prognostic implications. Considering the high structural and functional heterogeneity of the CgA system, comprising precursor and fragments, it is not surprising that the different immunoassays used in these studies led, in some cases, to discrepant results. Here, we review these notions and we discuss the importance of measuring total-CgA, full-length CgA, specific fragments, and their relative levels for a more thorough assessment of the pathophysiological function and diagnostic/prognostic value of the CgA system.
Nucleosomes at the promoters of genes regulate the accessibility of the transcription machinery to DNA, and function as a basic layer in the complex regulation of gene expression. Our understanding of the role of the nucleosome's spontaneous, thermally driven position changes in modulating expression is lacking. This is the result of the paucity of experimental data on these dynamics, at high-resolution, and for DNA sequences that belong to real, transcribed genes. We have developed an assay that uses partial, reversible unzipping of nucleosomes with optical tweezers to repeatedly probe a nucleosome's position over time. Using the nucleosomes at the promoters of two model genes, Cga and Lhb, we show that the mobility of nucleosomes is modulated by the sequence of DNA and by the use of alternative histone variants, and describe how the mobility can affect transcription, at the initiation and elongation phases.
Chromogranin A (CgA) is an acidic glycoprotein belonging to a family of regulated secretory proteins stored in the dense core granules of the adrenal medulla and of many other neuroendocrine cells and neurons. This protein is frequently used as a diagnostic and prognostic serum marker for a range of neuroendocrine tumors. Circulating CgA is also increased in patients with other diseases, including subpopulations of patients with non-neuroendocrine tumors, with important prognostic implications. A growing body of evidence suggests that CgA is more than a diagnostic/prognostic marker for cancer patients. Indeed, results of in vitro experiments and in vivo studies in animal models suggest that this protein and its fragments can affect several elements of the tumor microenvironment, including fibroblasts and endothelial cells. In this article, recent findings implicating CgA as a modulator of the tumor microenvironment and suggesting that abnormal secretion of CgA could play important roles in tumor progression and response to therapy in cancer patients are reviewed and discussed.
Coffee is a drink prepared from roasted coffee beans and is lauded for its aroma and flavour. It is the third most popular beverage in the world. This beverage is known by its stimulant effect associated with the presence of methylxanthines. Caffeine, a purine-like molecule (1,3,7 trymetylxantine), is the most important bioactive compound in coffee, among others such as chlorogenic acid (CGA), diterpenes, and trigonelline. CGA is a phenolic acid with biological properties as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, neuroprotector, hypolipidemic, and hypoglicemic. Purinergic system plays a key role inneuromodulation and homeostasis. Extracellular ATP, other nucleotides and adenosine are signalling molecules that act through their specific receptors, namely purinoceptors, P1 for nucleosides and P2 for nucleotides. They regulate many pathological processes, since adenosine, for instance, can limit the damage caused by ATP in the excitotoxicity from the neuronal cells. The primary purpose of this review is to discuss the effects of coffee, caffeine, and CGA on the purinergic system. This review focuses on the relationship/interplay between coffee, caffeine, CGA, and adenosine, and their effects on ectonucleotidases activities as well as on the modulation of P1 and P2 receptors from central nervous system and also in peripheral tissue.
Human chromogranin A (CgA), a 439-residue long neurosecretory protein, can serve as a circulating biomarker for a wide range of neuroendocrine tumors. Increased levels of immunoreactive CgA are also present in the blood of patients with cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, or inflammatory diseases with, in certain cases, important diagnostic and prognostic implications. A growing body of evidence suggest that CgA and various CgA-derived fragments have complex roles in the regulation of cardiovascular system, metabolism, innate immunity, angiogenesis, and tissue repair, sometime with opposite biological effects. For example, while full-length CgA (CgA(1-439)) inhibits angiogenesis, the CgA(1-373) fragment, at certain doses, is proangiogenic. Thus, the selective quantification of CgA and its fragments in the blood of patients (and in other biological fluids) is of great experimental and clinical interest. Here, we describe methods to produce CgA(1-439) and CgA(1-373) and to develop ELISAs capable of detecting these polypeptides in a very selective manner. The same approach can be used, in principle, also for developing assays for other fragments.
The chromogranin-secretogranin secretory proteins-granins-are acidic proteins localized in granules of endocrine cells and neurons. The chromogranin family includes chromogranins A (CgA) and B, as well as secretogranin II (once called chromogranin C). Members of this family undergo catalytic proteolysis to produce active peptides. The CgA-derived peptides vasostatin-1 and vasostatin-2, in particular, appear to protect against atherosclerosis, suppressing the expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and intercellular adhesion molecule-1, as well as exerting vasodilatory effects by enhancing nitric oxide bioavailability. Vasostatin-1 also suppresses vasoconstriction and abnormal angiogenesis. Vasostatin-1 and vasostatin-2 may be novel therapeutic targets for atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease, also protecting the myocardium against ischaemic damage.
Chromogranin A (CgA) is the most abundant granin in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs). As a tumor marker is moderately sensitive and nonspecific. Despite the limitations of testing methods, which require careful interpretation, especially in the case of gastrinomas, patients treated with somatostatin analogues, and poorly differentiated tumors, it is the best tumor marker in GEP-NETs and may be of value in other tumors with neuroendocrine differentiation. CgA may be used as a marker in blood or tissue samples through immunohistochemical techniques. CgA levels correlate with tumor burden and extension and may be used for diagnosis and monitoring of GEP-NETs, especially midgut carcinoids and endocrine pancreatic tumors. It is also useful as a prognostic marker for detection of recurrence and monitoring of response to different treatments.
Chromogranin A (CgA) is a member of the granins, a family of acidic proteins found in abundance in (neuro)endocrine cells (e.g., in chromaffin cells) and in some tumors. Like other granins, CgA has a granulogenic role in secretory granule biogenesis and is stored in these organelles. CgA is partially processed differentially in various cell types to yield biologically active peptides, such as vasostatin, pancreastatin, catestatin, and serpinins. In this review, we describe the roles of CgA and several of its derived peptides. CgA, which is elevated in the blood of cancer patients, inhibits angiogenesis and exerts protective effects on the endothelial barrier function in tumors, thus affecting response to chemotherapy. Recent studies indicate that the serpinins promote cell survival and myocardial contractility and relaxation. Other peptides such as pancreastatin were found to have significant effects on inhibition of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and glucose up-take, induction of glycogenolysis in hepatocytes, and inhibition of lipogenesis. In contrast, catestatin has opposite effects to that of pancreastatin in glucose metabolism and lipogenesis. Catestatin appears to also play a significant role in cardiac function, blood pressure regulation, and mutations in the catestatin domain of the CgA gene are associated with hypertension in humans.
