Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M4; The muscarinic acetylcholine receptor mediates various cellular responses, including inhibition of adenylate cyclase, breakdown of phosphoinositides and modulation of potassium channels through the action of G proteins. Primary transducing effect is inhibition of adenylate cyclase; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subfamily. CHRM4 sub-subfamily.
Current treatment options for prostate cancer focus on targeting androgen receptor (AR) signaling. Inhibiting effects of AR may activate neuroendocrine differentiation and lineage plasticity pathways, thereby promoting the development of neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC). Understanding the regulatory mechanisms of AR has important clinical implications for this most aggressive type of prostate cancer. Here, we demonstrated the tumor-suppressive role of the AR and found that activated AR could directly bind to the regulatory sequence of muscarinic acetylcholine receptor 4 (CHRM4) and downregulate its expression. CHRM4 was highly expressed in prostate cancer cells after androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT). CHRM4 overexpression may drive neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer cells and is associated with immunosuppressive cytokine responses in the tumor microenvironment (TME) of prostate cancer. Mechanistically, CHRM4-driven AKT/MYCN signaling upregulated the interferon alpha 17 (IFNA17) cytokine in the prostate cancer TME after ADT. IFNA17 mediates a feedback mechanism in the TME by activating the CHRM4/AKT/MYCN signaling-driven immune checkpoint pathway and neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer cells. We explored the therapeutic efficacy of targeting CHRM4 as a potential treatment for NEPC and evaluated IFNA17 secretion in the TME as a possible predictive prognostic biomarker for NEPC.
Disordered eating contributes to weight gain, obesity, and type 2 diabetes (T2D), but the precise mechanisms underlying the development of different eating patterns and connecting them to specific metabolic phenotypes remain unclear. We aimed to identify genetic variants linked to eating behaviour and investigate its causal relationships with metabolic traits using Mendelian randomization (MR). We tested associations between 30 genetic variants and eating patterns in individuals with T2D from the Volga-Ural region and investigated causal relationships between variants associated with eating patterns and various metabolic and anthropometric traits using data from the Volga-Ural population and large international consortia. We detected associations between HTR1D and CDKAL1 and external eating; between HTR2A and emotional eating; between HTR2A, NPY2R, HTR1F, HTR3A, HTR2C, CXCR2, and T2D. Further analyses in a separate group revealed significant associations between metabolic syndrome (MetS) and the loci in CRP, ADCY3, GHRL, CDKAL1, BDNF, CHRM4, CHRM1, HTR3A, and AKT1 genes. MR results demonstrated an inverse causal relationship between external eating and glycated haemoglobin levels in the Volga-Ural sample. External eating influenced anthropometric traits such as body mass index, height, hip circumference, waist circumference, and weight in GWAS cohorts. Our findings suggest that eating patterns impact both anthropometric and metabolic traits.
BACKGROUND: Central nervous system disruption of cholinergic (ACh) signaling, which plays a major role in cognitive processes, is well documented in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). The expression of muscarinic ACh receptors type 1 and 4 (CHRM1 and CHRM4) has been reported to be altered in the brain of DLB patients. OBJECTIVE: We aim to assess the peripheral gene expression of CHRM1 and 4 in DLB as a possible marker as compared to AD and healthy control (HC) subjects. METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were collected from 21 DLB, 13 AD, and 8 HC matched subjects. RT-PCR was performed to estimate gene expression of CHRM1 and CHRM4. RESULTS: Peripheral CHRM1 expression was higher and CHRM4 was lower in DLB and AD compared to HC, whereas both CHRM1 and CHRM4 levels were higher in AD compared to DLB patients. Receiver operating characteristics curves, with logistic regression analysis, showed that combining peripheral CHRM1 and CHRM4 levels, DLB and AD subjects were classified with an accuracy of 76.0%. CONCLUSION: Alterations of peripheral CHRM1 and CHRM4 was found in both AD and DLB patients as compared to HC. CHRM1 and CHRM4 gene expression resulted to be lower in DLB patients compared to AD. In the future, peripheral CHRM expression could be studied as a possible marker of neurodegenerative conditions associated with cholinergic deficit and a possible marker of response to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) contributes to the progression of malignancy. However, the functional role and regulatory mechanisms of NGF in the development of neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) are unclear. Here, we show that an androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT)-stimulated transcription factor, ZBTB46, upregulated NGF via ZBTB46 mediated-transcriptional activation of NGF. NGF regulates NEPC differentiation by physically interacting with a G-protein-coupled receptor, cholinergic receptor muscarinic 4 (CHRM4), after ADT. Pharmacologic NGF blockade and NGF knockdown markedly inhibited CHRM4-mediated NEPC differentiation and AKT-MYCN signaling activation. CHRM4 stimulation was associated with ADT resistance and was significantly correlated with increased NGF in high-grade and small-cell neuroendocrine prostate cancer (SCNC) patient samples. Our results reveal a role of the NGF in the development of NEPC that is linked to ZBTB46 upregulation and CHRM4 accumulation. Our study provides evidence that the NGF-CHRM4 axis has potential to be considered as a therapeutic target to impair NEPC progression.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease characterised clinically by a progressive decline in executive functions, memory and cognition. Classic neuropathological hallmarks of AD include intracellular hyper-phosphorylated tau protein which forms neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), and extracellular deposits of amyloid beta (Abeta) protein, the primary constituent of senile plaques (SP). The gradual process of pathogenic amyloid accumulation is thought to occur 10-20 years prior to symptomatic manifestation. Advance detection of these deposits therefore offers a highly promising avenue for prodromal AD diagnosis. Currently, the most sophisticated method of 'probable AD' diagnosis is via neuroimaging or cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) biomarker analysis. Whilst these methods have reported a high degree of diagnostic specificity and accuracy, they fall significantly short in terms of practicality; they are often highly invasive, expensive or unsuitable for large-scale population screening. In recent years, ocular screening has received substantial attention from the scientific community due to its potential for non-invasive and inexpensive central nervous system (CNS) imaging. In this appraisal we build upon our previous reviews detailing ocular structural and functional changes in AD (Retinal manifestations of Alzheimer's disease, Alzheimer's disease and Retinal Neurodegeneration) and consider their use as biomarkers. In addition, we present an overview of current advances in the use of fluorescent reporters to detect AD pathology through non-invasive retinal imaging.
Adult stem and progenitor cells are uniquely capable of self-renewal, and targeting this process represents a potential therapeutic opportunity. The early erythroid progenitor, burst-forming unit erythroid (BFU-E), has substantial self-renewal potential and serves as a key cell type for the treatment of anemias. However, our understanding of mechanisms underlying BFU-E self-renewal is extremely limited. Here, we found that the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, cholinergic receptor, muscarinic 4 (CHRM4), pathway regulates BFU-E self-renewal and that pharmacological inhibition of CHRM4 corrects anemias of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), aging, and hemolysis. Genetic down-regulation of CHRM4 or pharmacologic inhibition of CHRM4 using the selective antagonist PD102807 promoted BFU-E self-renewal, whereas deletion of Chrm4 increased erythroid cell production under stress conditions in vivo. Moreover, muscarinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists corrected anemias in mouse models of MDS, aging, and hemolysis in vivo, extending the survival of mice with MDS relative to that of controls. The effects of muscarinic receptor antagonism on promoting expansion of BFU-Es were mediated by cyclic AMP induction of the transcription factor CREB, whose targets up-regulated key regulators of BFU-E self-renewal. On the basis of these data, we propose a model of hematopoietic progenitor self-renewal through a cholinergic-mediated "hematopoietic reflex" and identify muscarinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists as potential therapies for anemias associated with MDS, aging, and hemolysis.
AIM: This study was designed to determine whether polymorphisms in acetylcholine receptors contribute to opioid dependence and/or cocaine dependence. PATIENTS & METHODS: The sample (n = 1860) was divided by drug and ancestry, and 55 polymorphisms (nine genes) were analyzed. RESULTS: Of the 20 SNPs that showed nominally significant associations, the association of the African-specific CHRM4 SNP rs2229163 (Asn417=) with cocaine dependence survived correction for multiple testing (Pcorrected = 0.047). CHRM4 is located in a region of strong linkage disequilibrium on chromosome 11 that includes genes associated with schizophrenia. CHRM4 SNP rs2229163 is in strong linkage disequilibrium with several African-specific SNPs in DGKZ and AMBRA1. CONCLUSION: Cholinergic receptors' variants may contribute to drug addiction and have a potential role as pharmacogenetic markers.
BACKGROUND: Cognitive deficits are amongst the most socially debilitating and least effectively treated symptoms of schizophrenia. The cholinergic system is a promising target for the design of novel drugs that can more effectively treat these symptoms. METHODS: We review the literature supporting the dysfunction of the cholinergic system in schizophrenia, discuss the preclinical and clinical data showing that modulating the cholinergic system could improve the symptoms of schizophrenia and review the main pharmacological strategies being investigated to treat cholinergic dysfunction in schizophrenia. RESULTS: Post-mortem and neuroimaging studies suggest there are widespread reductions in cholinergic receptor signalling in the cortex as well as subcortical regions, such as the hippocampus and striatum, in individuals with schizophrenia. Potential cholinergic drug targets are being pursued to increase receptor function. These include inhibiting the activity of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase to increase synaptic acetylcholine levels, and increasing the nicotinic receptor and muscarinic receptor activity with agonists or positive allosteric modulators. CONCLUSION: Amongst the most promising drug targets for treating schizophrenia are the alpha7 nicotinic receptor and the CHRM1 and CHRM4 muscarinic receptors. The recent development of allosteric modulators that selectively target these receptors offers the potential to more effectively treat the symptoms of schizophrenia.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the levels of IgG against neurotransmitter receptors are increased in patients with schizophrenia. Genome-wide association (GWA) studies of schizophrenia confirmed that 108 loci harbouring over 300 genes were associated with schizophrenia. Although the functional implications of genetic variants are unclear, theoretical functional alterations of these genes could be replicated by the presence of autoantibodies. This study examined the levels of plasma IgG antibodies against four neurotransmitter receptors, CHRM4, GRM3, CHRNA4 and CHRNA5, using an in-house ELISA in 247 patients with schizophrenia and 344 non-psychiatric controls. Four peptides were designed based on in silico analysis with computational prediction of HLA-DRB1 restricted and B-cell epitopes. The relationship between plasma IgG levels and psychiatric symptoms, as defined by the Operational Criteria Checklist for Psychotic Illness and Affective Illness (OPCRIT), were examined. The results showed that the levels of plasma IgG against peptides derived from CHRM4 and CHRNA4 were significantly increased in patients with schizophrenia compared with control subjects, but there was no significant association of plasma IgG levels with any symptom domain or any specific symptoms. These preliminary results suggest that CHRM4 and CHRNA4 may be novel targets for autoantibody responses in schizophrenia, although the pathogenic relationship between increased serum autoantibody levels and schizophrenia symptoms remains unclear.
The tumor microenvironment (TME) of prostate cancer (PCa) is characterized by high levels of immunosuppressive molecules, including cytokines and chemokines. This creates a hostile immune landscape that impedes effective immune responses. The interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor antagonist (IL1RN), a key anti-inflammatory molecule, plays a significant role in suppressing IL-1-related immune and inflammatory responses. Our research investigates the oncogenic role of IL1RN in PCa, particularly its interactions with muscarinic acetylcholine receptor 4 (CHRM4), and its involvement in driving immunosuppressive pathways and M2-like macrophage polarization within the PCa TME. We demonstrate that following androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), the IL1RN-CHRM4 interaction in PCa activates the MAPK/AKT signaling pathway. This activation upregulates the transcription factors E2F1 and MYCN, stimulating IL1RN production and creating a positive feedback loop that increases CHRM4 abundance in both PCa cells and M2-like macrophages. This ADT-driven IL1RN/CHRM4 axis significantly enhances immune checkpoint markers associated with neuroendocrine differentiation and treatment-resistant outcomes. Higher serum IL1RN levels are associated with increased disease aggressiveness and M2-like macrophage markers in advanced PCa patients. Additionally, elevated IL1RN levels correlate with better clinical outcomes following immunotherapy. Clinical correlations between IL1RN and CHRM4 expression in advanced PCa patients and neuroendocrine PCa organoid models highlight their potential as therapeutic targets. Our data suggest that targeting the IL1RN/CHRM4 signaling could be a promising strategy for managing PCa progression and enhancing treatment responses.
Background: It is difficult to distinguish cognitive decline due to AD from that sustained by cerebrovascular disease in view of the great overlap. It is uncertain in the molecular biological pathway behind AD and VaD.Objective: Our study aimed to explore the hub molecules and their associations with each other to identify potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for the AD and VaD.Methods: We screened the differentially expressed genes of AD and VaD, used weighted gene co-expression network analysis and then constructed a VaD-AD-specific protein-protein interaction network with functional annotation to their related metabolic pathways. Finally, we performed a ROC curve analysis of hub proteins to get an idea about their diagnostic value.Results: In the frontal lobe and temporal cortex, hub genes were identified. With regard to VaD, there were only three hub genes which encoded the neuropeptides, SST, NMU and TAC1. The AUC of these genes were 0.804, 0.768 and 0.779, respectively. One signature was established for these three hub genes with AUC of 0.990. For the identification of AD and VaD, all hub genes were receptors. These genes included SH3GL2, PROK2, TAC3, HTR2A, MET, TF, PTH2R CNR1, CHRM4, PTPN3 and CRH. The AUC of these genes were 0.853, 0.859, 0.796, 0.775, 0.706, 0.677, 0.696, 0.668 and 0.652, respectively. The other signature was built for eleven hub genes with AUC of 0.990.Conclusion: In the frontal lobe and temporal cortex regions, hub genes are used as diagnostic markers, which may provide insight into personalized potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for patients with VaD and AD.
A considerable body of data supports a role for the central cholinergic system in the aetiologies of schizophrenia and mood disorders. There have been breakthroughs in gaining structural data on muscarinic receptors (CHRMs), understanding their role in CNS functioning and in synthesising drugs that can specifically target each of the 5 CHRMs. This means it is opportune to consider the role of specific CHRMs in the pathophysiologies of schizophrenia and mood disorders. This review will focus on data suggesting changes in levels of CHRM1 and CHRM4 implicate these receptors in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia whereas data suggest a role for CHRM2 in mood disorders. There will be a selected reference to recent developments in understanding the roles of CHRM1, 2 and 4 in CNS function and how these predict mechanisms by which these receptors could induce the symptoms prevalent in schizophrenia and mood disorders. Finally, there will be comments on the potential advantages and problems in targeting CHRM1 and CHRM4 to treat the symptoms of schizophrenia and CHRM2 to treat the symptom of depression.
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in mammals consist of five subtypes (M1-M5) encoded by distinct genes. They are widely expressed throughout the body and play a variety of roles in the peripheral and central nervous systems. Although their pharmacological properties have been studied extensively in vitro, colocalization of the multiple subtypes in each tissue and lack of subtype-specific ligands have hampered characterization of the respective subtypes in vivo. We have mapped mouse genomic loci for all five genes (Chrm1-5) by restriction fragment length variant (RFLV) analyses in interspecific backcross mice. Chrm1, Chrm2, and Chrm3 were mapped to chromosome (Chr) 19, 6, and 13, respectively. Both Chrm4 and Chrm5 were mapped to Chr 2. Although a comparison of their map positions with other mutations in their vicinities suggested a possibility that the El2 (epilepsy 2) allele might be a mutation in Chrm5, sequencing analyses of the Chrm5 gene in the El2 mutant mice did not support such a hypothesis.
M(4) muscarinic receptors are highly expressed in the striatum and cortex, brain regions that are involved in diseases such as Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia, and dystonia. Despite potential therapeutic advantages of specifically targeting the M(4) receptor, it has been historically challenging to develop highly selective ligands, resulting in undesired off-target activity at other members of the muscarinic receptor family. Recently, we have reported first-in-class, potent, and selective M(4) receptor antagonists. As an extension of that work, we now report the development and characterization of a radiolabeled M(4) receptor antagonist, [(3)H]VU6013720, with high affinity (pK(d) of 9.5 +/- 0.2 at rat M(4), 9.7 at mouse M(4), and 10 +/- 0.1 at human M(4) with atropine to define nonspecific binding) and no significant binding at the other muscarinic subtypes. Binding assays using this radioligand in rodent brain tissues demonstrate loss of specific binding in Chrm4 knockout animals. Dissociation kinetics experiments with various muscarinic ligands show differential effects on the dissociation of [(3)H]VU6013720 from M(4) receptors, suggesting a binding site that is overlapping but may be distinct from the orthosteric site. Overall, these results demonstrate that [(3)H]VU6013720 is the first highly selective antagonist radioligand for the M(4) receptor, representing a useful tool for studying the basic biology of M(4) as well for the support of M(4) receptor-based drug discovery. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This manuscript describes the development and characterization of a novel muscarinic (M) acetylcholine subtype 4 receptor antagonist radioligand, [(3)H]VU6013720. This ligand binds to or overlaps with the acetylcholine binding site, providing a highly selective radioligand for the M(4) receptor that can be used to quantify M(4) protein expression in vivo and probe the selective interactions of acetylcholine with M(4) versus the other members of the muscarinic receptor family.
BACKGROUND: Postoperative delirium (POD) and postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD) are frequent and serious complications after surgery. We aim to investigate the association between genetic variants in cholinergic candidate genes according to the Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes - pathway: cholinergic neurotransmission with the development of POD or POCD in elderly patients. METHODS: This analysis is part of the European BioCog project ( www.biocog.eu ), a prospective multicenter observational study with elderly surgical patients. Patients with a Mini-Mental-State-Examination score </= 23 points were excluded. POD was assessed up to seven days after surgery using the Nursing Delirium Screening Scale, Confusion Assessment Method and a patient chart review. POCD was assessed three months after surgery with a neuropsychological test battery. Genotyping was performed on the Illumina Infinium Global Screening Array. Associations with POD and POCD were analyzed using logistic regression analysis, adjusted for age, comorbidities and duration of anesthesia (for POCD analysis additionally for education). Odds ratios (OR) refer to minor allele counts (0, 1, 2). RESULTS: 745 patients could be included in the POD analysis, and 452 in the POCD analysis. The rate of POD within this group was 20.8% (155 patients), and the rate of POCD was 10.2% (46 patients). In a candidate gene approach three genetic variants of the cholinergic genes CHRM2 and CHRM4 were associated with POD (OR [95% confidence interval], rs8191992: 0.61[0.46; 0.80]; rs8191992: 1.60[1.22; 2.09]; rs2067482: 1.64[1.10; 2.44]). No associations were found for POCD. CONCLUSIONS: We found an association between genetic variants of CHRM2 and CHRM4 and POD. Further studies are needed to investigate whether disturbances in acetylcholine release and synaptic plasticity are involved in the development of POD. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02265263.
PURPOSE: Numerous studies have proven that the nonselective muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) antagonist atropine prevents the axial elongation that leads to myopia. Five distinct receptor genes (CHRM1-CHRM5), each encoding a muscarinic receptor protein (M[1]-M[5]), have been cloned. Copy number variations (CNVs), which constitute a substantial portion of genetic variability and structural genetic variants, are increasingly being recognized as modulators of human diseases. In this study, CNVs of CHRMs were detected to determine the genes associated with myopia. METHODS: Participants were divided into three groups: high myopia group (myopia of 6-10 diopters [D]), severe high myopia group (myopia >/= 10 D), and control group (myopia </= 0.5 D). The CNVs were detected, and the relative copy number was estimated using the comparative 2(-DeltaDeltaCt) METHOD: Syrian hamsters with form-deprivation myopia (FDM) were used as animal models of myopia. RESULTS: The CNVs of CHRM2, CHRM3, and CHRM4 were significantly different among the groups, and the variations were most dominant in the CHRM3. The CNVs of CHRM3 showed significant differences among all 3 groups (P = 0.005). A replication cohort was collected to further confirm the association of CHRM3 CNV with myopia (P = 0.011). The expression of M(3) on the sclera of the FDM Syrian hamsters was upregulated and then downregulated after atropine administration. CONCLUSIONS: CHRM3 and M(3) were suggested to play important roles in the pathogenesis of myopia and in the arrested progression of myopia by atropine.
Preeclampsia is a hypertensive disorder that occurs during pregnancy. It is a complex disease with unknown pathogenesis and the leading cause of fetal and maternal mortality during pregnancy. Using all drugs currently under clinical trial for preeclampsia, we extracted all their possible targets from the DrugBank and ChEMBL databases and labeled them as "targets". The proteins labeled as "off-targets" were extracted in the same way but while taking all antihypertensive drugs which are inhibitors of ACE and/or angiotensin receptor antagonist as query molecules. Classification models were obtained for each of the 55 total proteins (45 targets and 10 off-targets) using the TPOT pipeline optimization tool. The average accuracy of the models in predicting the external dataset for targets and off-targets was 0.830 and 0.850, respectively. The combinations of models maximizing their virtual screening performance were explored by combining the desirability function and genetic algorithms. The virtual screening performance metrics for the best model were: the Boltzmann-Enhanced Discrimination of ROC (BEDROC)(alpha=160.9) = 0.258, the Enrichment Factor (EF)(1%) = 31.55 and the Area Under the Accumulation Curve (AUAC) = 0.831. The most relevant targets for preeclampsia were: AR, VDR, SLC6A2, NOS3 and CHRM4, while ABCG2, ERBB2, CES1 and REN led to the most relevant off-targets. A virtual screening of the DrugBank database identified estradiol, estriol, vitamins E and D, lynestrenol, mifrepristone, simvastatin, ambroxol, and some antibiotics and antiparasitics as drugs with potential application in the treatment of preeclampsia.
Cobenfy, a co-formulation of xanomeline and trospium, is the first drug not acting on the dopaminergic system of the CNS approved for the treatment of schizophrenia by the FDA. Xanomeline is a muscarinic M1 and M4 receptor (CHRM1 and CHRM4) agonist whilst trospium is a peripherally active CHRM antagonist that reduces the unwanted peripheral side-effects of xanomeline. Relevant to this exciting development, this review details the human CNS cholinergic systems and how those systems are affected by the molecular pathology of schizophrenia in a way suggesting activating the CHRM1 and 4 would be beneficial in treating the disorder. The CNS distribution of CHRMs is presented along with findings using CHRM knockout mice and mice treated with drugs that activate the CHRM1 and / or M4, these data explain why these CHRMs could be involved in the genesis of the symptoms of schizophrenia. Next, the process leading to the formulation of Cobenfy and the preclinical data on xanomeline are reviewed showing why Cobenfy was expected to be useful in treating schizophrenia. The pipeline of drugs targeting CHRM1 and /or M4 receptors to treat schizophrenia are discussed. Finally, the molecular pathology of two sub-groups within schizophrenia, separated based on the presence or absence of a deficit of cortical CHRM1, are reviewed to show how such approaches could identify new drug targets. In conclusion, the history of the development of Cobenfy highlights how a growing understanding the pathophysiology of schizophrenia will suggest new treatment targets for the disorder and that pharmacologists can synthesise drugs to target these sites.
Autonomic nervous system plays an important role in the development of multiple cancers via regulating cancer cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, migration and invasion. However, no detailed studies have been performed to study the role of autonomic nerve fibers in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as well as its correlation with the progression of HCC. Here, we examined the distribution of the autonomic nerve fibers and analyzed the correlation between autonomic nerve fibers and the pathological characteristics of HCC patients. The transcriptional expression of adrenergic and cholinergic receptors was evaluated in both hepatoma cell lines and primary hepatoma cells. In addition, we summarized the function of receptors for neurotransmitters in different cancers recently reported. Our findings indicate that tissue of liver cancer is innervated by both sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves and the density of the nerve fibers is associated with patients' poor prognosis. Additionally, we report that adrenergic receptors beta2 and cholinergic receptors alpha7, M1 and M3 are high expressed in both hepatoma cell lines and primary hepatoma cells, indicating these receptors may play essential roles in the regulation of autonomic nervous system triggered HCC.
BACKGROUND: Song performed in flocks by European starlings (Sturnus vulgaris), referred to here as gregarious song, is a non-sexual, social behavior performed by adult birds. Gregarious song is thought to be an intrinsically reinforced behavior facilitated by a low-stress, positive affective state that increases social cohesion within a flock. The medial preoptic area (mPOA) is a region known to have a role in the production of gregarious song. However, the neurochemical systems that potentially act within this region to regulate song remain largely unexplored. In this study, we used RNA sequencing to characterize patterns of gene expression in the mPOA of male and female starlings singing gregarious song to identify possibly novel neurotransmitter, neuromodulator, and hormonal pathways that may be involved in the production of gregarious song. RESULTS: Differential gene expression analysis and rank rank hypergeometric analysis indicated that dopaminergic, cholinergic, and GABAergic systems were associated with the production of gregarious song, with multiple receptor genes (e.g., DRD2, DRD5, CHRM4, GABRD) upregulated in the mPOA of starlings who sang at high rates. Additionally, co-expression network analyses identified co-expressing gene clusters of glutamate signaling-related genes associated with song. One of these clusters contained five glutamate receptor genes and two glutamate scaffolding genes and was significantly enriched for genetic pathways involved in neurodevelopmental disorders associated with social deficits in humans. Two of these genes, GRIN1 and SHANK2, were positively correlated with performance of gregarious song. CONCLUSIONS: This work provides new insights into the role of the mPOA in non-sexual, gregarious song in starlings and highlights candidate genes that may play a role in gregarious social interactions across vertebrates. The provided data will also allow other researchers to compare across species to identify conserved systems that regulate social behavior.
