Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M5; The muscarinic acetylcholine receptor mediates various cellular responses, including inhibition of adenylate cyclase, breakdown of phosphoinositides and modulation of potassium channels through the action of G proteins. Primary transducing effect is Pi turnover.
Most antipsychotic drugs act on the forebrain by blocking dopamine receptors. In rodents, the M5 muscarinic receptor (CHRM5) is important for prolonged dopamine release. We typed polymorphisms in CHRM5 and alpha7-nicotinic receptor (CHRNA7) genes on 15q13 in 82 Canadian families having at least 1 schizophrenic patient. Using the Family-Based Association Test, we performed haplotype analysis of the 2 loci and found biased transmission in schizophrenia (z = -2.651, p = 0.008). In the families tested, the 2 cholinergic genes interacted to affect schizophrenia in combination, while neither was sufficiently alone to confer susceptibility. Our present study provided the first line of direct evidence suggesting that the CHRM5 gene combined with the CHRNA7 gene may be linked to schizophrenia.
Neurogenic bladder is caused by disruption of neuronal pathways regulating bladder relaxation and contraction. In severe cases, neurogenic bladder can lead to vesicoureteral reflux, hydroureter, and chronic kidney disease. These complications overlap with manifestations of congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). To identify novel monogenic causes of neurogenic bladder, we applied exome sequencing (ES) to our cohort of families with CAKUT. By ES, we have identified a homozygous missense variant (p.Gln184Arg) in CHRM5 (cholinergic receptor, muscarinic, 5) in a patient with neurogenic bladder and secondary complications of CAKUT. CHRM5 codes for a seven transmembrane-spanning G-protein-coupled muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. CHRM5 is shown to be expressed in murine and human bladder walls and is reported to cause bladder overactivity in Chrm5 knockout mice. We investigated CHRM5 as a potential novel candidate gene for neurogenic bladder with secondary complications of CAKUT. CHRM5 is similar to the cholinergic bladder neuron receptor CHRNA3, which Mann et al. published as the first monogenic cause of neurogenic bladder. However, functional in vitro studies did not reveal evidence to strengthen the status as a candidate gene. Discovering additional families with CHRM5 variants could help to further assess the genes' candidate status.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) promotes maturation of cholinergic neurons. However, how activity-dependent BDNF expression affects specific cholinergic gene expression remains unclear. This study addressed this question by determining mRNA levels of 22 acetylcholine receptor subunits, the choline transporter (CHT), and the choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) in mice deficient in activity-dependent BDNF via promoter IV (KIV) and control wild-type mice. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed significant reductions in nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha 5 (CHRNA5) in the frontal cortex and hippocampus and M5 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRM5) in the hippocampus, but significant increases in M2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRM2) in the frontal cortex of KIV mice compared to wild-type mice. Three-week treatments with fluoxetine, phenelzine, duloxetine, imipramine, or an enriched environment treatment (EET) did not affect the altered expression of these genes except that EET increased CHRNA5 levels only in KIV frontal cortex. EET also increased levels of CHRNA7, CHT, and ChAT, again only in the KIV frontal cortex. The imipramine treatment was most prominent among the four antidepressants; it up-regulated hippocampal CHRM2 and frontal cortex CHRM5 in both genotypes, and frontal cortex CHRNA7 only in KIV mice. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first evidence that BDNF deficiency disturbs expression of CHRNA5, CHRM2, and CHRM5. Our results suggest that promoter IV-BDNF deficiency - which occurs under chronic stress - causes cholinergic dysfunctions via these receptors. EET is effective on CHRNA5, while its compensatory induction of other cholinergic genes or drugs targeting CHRNA5, CHRM2, and CHRM5 may become an alternative strategy to reverse these BDNF-linked cholinergic dysfunctions.
The family of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (mAChRs) consists of five members in mammals, encoded by the CHRM1-5 genes. The mAChRs are G-protein-coupled receptors, which can be divided into the following two subfamilies: M2 and M4 receptors coupling to G(i/o); and M1, M3, and M5 receptors coupling to G(q/11). However, despite the fundamental roles played by these receptors, their evolution in vertebrates has not yet been fully described. We have combined sequence-based phylogenetic analyses with comparisons of exon-intron organization and conserved synteny in order to deduce the evolution of the mAChR receptors. Our analyses verify the existence of two ancestral genes prior to the two vertebrate tetraploidizations (1R and 2R). After these events, one gene had duplicated, resulting in CHRM2 and CHRM4; and the other had triplicated, forming the CHRM1, CHRM3, and CHRM5 subfamily. All five genes are still present in all vertebrate groups investigated except the CHRM1 gene, which has not been identified in some of the teleosts or in chicken or any other birds. Interestingly, the third tetraploidization (3R) that took place in the teleost predecessor resulted in duplicates of all five mAChR genes of which all 10 are present in zebrafish. One of the copies of the CHRM2 and CHRM3 genes and both CHRM4 copies have gained introns in teleosts. Not a single separate (nontetraploidization) duplicate has been identified in any vertebrate species. These results clarify the evolution of the vertebrate mAChR family and reveal a doubled repertoire in zebrafish, inviting studies of gene neofunctionalization and subfunctionalization.
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in mammals consist of five subtypes (M1-M5) encoded by distinct genes. They are widely expressed throughout the body and play a variety of roles in the peripheral and central nervous systems. Although their pharmacological properties have been studied extensively in vitro, colocalization of the multiple subtypes in each tissue and lack of subtype-specific ligands have hampered characterization of the respective subtypes in vivo. We have mapped mouse genomic loci for all five genes (Chrm1-5) by restriction fragment length variant (RFLV) analyses in interspecific backcross mice. Chrm1, Chrm2, and Chrm3 were mapped to chromosome (Chr) 19, 6, and 13, respectively. Both Chrm4 and Chrm5 were mapped to Chr 2. Although a comparison of their map positions with other mutations in their vicinities suggested a possibility that the El2 (epilepsy 2) allele might be a mutation in Chrm5, sequencing analyses of the Chrm5 gene in the El2 mutant mice did not support such a hypothesis.
BACKGROUND: This study investigates whether demographical, disease-related and genetic factors contribute to inter-individual differences in nausea and vomiting among patients receiving opioids for cancer pain. METHODS: Cancer patients receiving opioids were included from 17 centres in 11 European countries. Intensities of nausea and vomiting were reported by 1579 patients on four-point categorical scales. In stratified regression models including demographical and disease-related factors as covariates, 96 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 16 candidate genes related to opioid- or nausea/vomiting signalling pathways (ABCB1, OPRM1, OPRK1, ARRB2, STAT6, COMT, CHRM3, CHRM5, HRH1, DRD2, DRD3, TACR1, HTR3A, HTR3B, HTR3C, CNR1) were analysed for association with nausea and vomiting. FINDINGS: Age, body mass index, Karnofsky Performance Status, gender, use of antiemetics, type of opioid, type of cancer and eight SNPs were associated with the inter-individual differences in nausea and vomiting among cancer patients treated with opioids (p<0.01). The SNPs were rs1176744, rs3782025 and rs1672717 in HTR3B; rs165722, rs4680 and rs4633 in COMT; rs10802789 and rs685550 in CHRM3. Only the SNP rs1672717 in HTR3B passed the Benjamini-Hochberg criterion for a 10% false discovery rate. INTERPRETATION: Clinical characteristics and SNPs within the HTR3B, COMT and CHRM3 genes may be associated with the variability in nausea and vomiting among cancer patients receiving opioids. This knowledge may help to identify patients at particular risk for nausea and vomiting during treatment with opioids for cancer pain.
OBJECTIVE: NUT midline carcinoma (NMC), a rare type of squamous cell carcinoma, is genetically characterised by NUT midline carcinoma family member 1 (NUTM1) gene rearrangement. NMC can arise from the lungs; however, there is no standard for the management of primary pulmonary NMC. This study aimed to confirm the clinical features and report the treatments, especially with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), and outcomes of patients with primary pulmonary NMC. METHODS: A retrospective review of patients with primary pulmonary NMC was performed in the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University between January 2015 and December 2018. Clinical manifestations as well as radiographic and pathological findings were recorded. Whole-exome sequencing (WES), a predictor for ICI response, was used to determine the tumour mutational burden (TMB). Treatments, especially by immune checkpoint blockade, and patient survival were analysed. RESULTS: Seven patients with primary pulmonary mass (four men and three women) with a mean age of 42 years (range, 23-74) who were diagnosed with NMC according to NUT immunohistochemistry staining were included for analysis. One patient had a rare fusion of CHRM5-NUTM1 by tumour sequencing. A wide range of TMB (1.75-73.81 mutations/Mbp) was observed. The initial treatments included chemotherapy (5/7, 71.4%), surgery (1/7, 14.3%), and radiotherapy (1/7, 14.3%). Five patients (5/7, 71.4%) received ICIs (programmed cell death protein 1 [PD1]/programmed cell death ligand 1 [PDL1] monoclonal antibody) as second- or higher-line treatments. The median overall survival (OS) was 4.1 months (range, 1.5-26.7 months). CONCLUSIONS: Patients with primary pulmonary NMC have a poor prognosis and chemotherapy is often preferred. Checkpoint immunotherapy is a good option as the second- or higher-line treatment. TMB seems to be not associated with OS.
We present an infant girl with a de novo interstitial deletion of the chromosome 15q11-q14 region, larger than the typical deletion seen in Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). She presented with features seen in PWS including hypotonia, a poor suck, feeding problems, and mild micrognathia. She also presented with features not typically seen in PWS such as preauricular ear tags, a high-arched palate, edematous feet, coarctation of the aorta, a PDA, and a bicuspid aortic valve. G-banded chromosome analysis showed a large de novo deletion of the proximal long arm of chromosome 15 confirmed using FISH probes (D15511 and GABRB3). Methylation testing was abnormal and consistent with the diagnosis of PWS. Because of the large appearing deletion by karyotype analysis, an array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was performed. A 12.3 Mb deletion was found which involved the 15q11-q14 region containing approximately 60 protein coding genes. This rare deletion was approximately twice the size of the typical deletion seen in PWS and involved the proximal breakpoint BP1 and the distal breakpoint was located in the 15q14 band between previously recognized breakpoints BP5 and BP6. The deletion extended slightly distal to the AVEN gene including the neighboring CHRM5 gene. There is no evidence that the genes in the 15q14 band are imprinted; therefore, their potential contribution in this patient's expanded PWS phenotype must be a consequence of dosage sensitivity of the genes or due to altered expression of intact neighboring genes from a position effect.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) have similar clinical characteristics in the brain and islet, as well as an increased incidence with ageing and familial susceptibility. Therefore, in recent years there has been a great desire for research that elucidates how anti-diabetic drugs affect AD. This work attempts to first elucidate the possible mechanism of action of DPP-IV inhibitors in the treatment of AD by employing techniques from network pharmacology, molecular docking, molecular dynamic simulation, principal component analysis, and MM/PBSA. A total of 463 targets were identified from the SwissTargetPrediction and 784 targets were identified from the SuperPred databases. 79 common targets were screened using the PPI network. The GO and KEGG analyses indicated that the activity of DPP-IV against AD potentially involves the hsa04080 neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction signalling pathway, which contains 17 proteins, including CHRM2, CHRM3, CHRNB1, CHRNB4, CHRM1, PTGER2, CHRM4, CHRM5, TACR2, HTR2C, TACR1, F2, GABRG2, MC4R, HTR7, CHRNG, and DRD3. Molecular docking demonstrated that sitagliptin had the greatest binding affinity of -10.7 kcal/mol and established hydrogen bonds with the Asp103, Ser107, and Asn404 residues in the active site of the CHRM2 protein. Molecular dynamic simulation, PCA, and MM/PBSA were performed for the complex of sitagliptin with the above-mentioned proteins, which revealed a stable complex throughout the simulation. The work identifies the active component and possible molecular mechanism of sitagliptin in the treatment of AD and provides a theoretical foundation for future fundamental research and practical implementation.
PURPOSE: Numerous studies have proven that the nonselective muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) antagonist atropine prevents the axial elongation that leads to myopia. Five distinct receptor genes (CHRM1-CHRM5), each encoding a muscarinic receptor protein (M[1]-M[5]), have been cloned. Copy number variations (CNVs), which constitute a substantial portion of genetic variability and structural genetic variants, are increasingly being recognized as modulators of human diseases. In this study, CNVs of CHRMs were detected to determine the genes associated with myopia. METHODS: Participants were divided into three groups: high myopia group (myopia of 6-10 diopters [D]), severe high myopia group (myopia >/= 10 D), and control group (myopia </= 0.5 D). The CNVs were detected, and the relative copy number was estimated using the comparative 2(-DeltaDeltaCt) METHOD: Syrian hamsters with form-deprivation myopia (FDM) were used as animal models of myopia. RESULTS: The CNVs of CHRM2, CHRM3, and CHRM4 were significantly different among the groups, and the variations were most dominant in the CHRM3. The CNVs of CHRM3 showed significant differences among all 3 groups (P = 0.005). A replication cohort was collected to further confirm the association of CHRM3 CNV with myopia (P = 0.011). The expression of M(3) on the sclera of the FDM Syrian hamsters was upregulated and then downregulated after atropine administration. CONCLUSIONS: CHRM3 and M(3) were suggested to play important roles in the pathogenesis of myopia and in the arrested progression of myopia by atropine.
BACKGROUND: The mesolimbic structures of the brain are important in the anticipation and perception of reward. Moreover, many drugs of addiction elicit their response in these structures. The M5 muscarinic receptor (M5R) is expressed in dopamine-containing neurones of the substantia nigra pars compacta and ventral tegmental area, and regulates the release of mesolimbic dopamine. Mice lacking M5R show a substantial reduction in both reward and withdrawal responses to morphine and cocaine. The CHRM5, the gene that codes for the M5R, is a strong biological candidate for a role in human addiction. We screened the coding and core promoter sequences of CHRM5 using denaturing high performance liquid chromatography to identify common polymorphisms. Additional polymorphisms within the coding and core promoter regions that were identified through dbSNP were validated in the test population. We investigated whether these polymorphisms influence substance dependence and dose in a cohort of 1947 young Australians. RESULTS: Analysis was performed on 815 participants of European ancestry who were interviewed at wave 8 of the cohort study and provided DNA. We observed a 26.8% increase in cigarette consumption in carriers of the rs7162140 T-allele, equating to 20.1 cigarettes per week (p=0.01). Carriers of the rs7162140 T-allele were also found to have nearly a 3-fold increased risk of developing cannabis dependence (OR=2.9 (95%CI 1.1-7.4); p=0.03). CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that variation within the CHRM5 locus may play an important role in tobacco and cannabis but not alcohol addiction in European ancestry populations. This is the first study to show an association between CHRM5 and substance use in humans. These data support the further investigation of this gene as a risk factor in substance use and dependence.
BACKGROUND/AIM: The five members of the mammalian muscarinic acetylcholine receptor family are encoded by the cholinergic receptor, muscarinic, 1-5 (CHRM1-5) genes. CHRM genes are incriminated in formation of various cancer types, but their roles in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) are improperly understood. Aberrant epigenetic modifications of specific tumor-suppressor genes and oncogenes are known to promote cancer development. We aimed to analyze the connection between methylation of CHRM genes and HNSCC recurrence, with specific reference to human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive oropharyngeal carcinoma. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the methylation state of CHRM1-CHRM5 genes expressed in 305 samples of primary HNSCCs by quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. We explored associations between methylation of these genes and the clinicopathological characteristics of HNSCC (location of the tumor as well as recurrence) Results: We found 1.08+/-0.94 methylated genes per sample (range=0-5), with promoters of CHRM1-5 genes methylated in 85.9%, 47.5%, 10.2%, 17.7%, and 19.3%, respectively, of the evaluated samples. Methylation levels of CHRM2 were significantly raised in HNSCC samples compared to corresponding normal tissues (p<0.001). Although there was no significance of tumor location, analysis by Kaplan-Meier estimate and multivariate Cox proportional hazard methods showed that methylated CHRM2 was significantly associated with increased recurrence of HNSCC with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer. CONCLUSION: CHRM methylation status is associated with HNSCC pathogenesis.
High-resolution array CGH utilizing sets of overlapping BAC and PAC clones ("tiling path") covering the whole genome is a powerful novel tool for fast detection of submicroscopic chromosome deletions or duplications. We describe the successful application of a submegabase resolution whole genome "tiling path" BAC array to confirm and characterize a de novo interstitial deletion of chromosome 15. The deletion has a size of 5.3 Mb and is located within chromosome band 15q14, distal to the Prader-Willi/Angelman region. The affected girl had a heart defect, cleft palate, recurrent infections, and developmental delay. In contrast to GTG banding, array CGH determined the exact number of deleted genes and thus allowed the identification of candidate genes for cleft palate (GREM1, CX36, MEIS2), congenital heart defect (ACTC, GREM1, CX36, MEIS2), and mental retardation (ARHGAP11A, CHRNA7, CHRM5).
