Rod outer segment membrane protein 1; Plays a role in rod outer segment (ROS) morphogenesis (By similarity). May play a role with PRPH2 in the maintenance of the structure of ROS curved disks (By similarity). Plays a role in the organization of the ROS and maintenance of ROS disk diameter (By similarity). Involved in the maintenance of the retina outer nuclear layer (By similarity).
In many solid tumors, parasympathetic input is provided by the vagus nerve, which has been shown to modulate tumor growth. However, whether cholinergic signaling directly regulates progression of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has not been defined. Here, we found that subdiaphragmatic vagotomy in LSL-Kras (+/G12D);Pdx1-Cre (KC) mice accelerated PDAC development, whereas treatment with the systemic muscarinic agonist bethanechol restored the normal KC phenotype, thereby suppressing the accelerated tumorigenesis caused by vagotomy. In LSL-Kras (+/G12D);LSL-Trp53 (+/R172H);Pdx1-Cre mice with established PDAC, bethanechol significantly extended survival. These effects were mediated in part through CHRM1, which inhibited downstream MAPK/EGFR and PI3K/AKT pathways in PDAC cells. Enhanced cholinergic signaling led to a suppression of the cancer stem cell (CSC) compartment, CD11b(+) myeloid cells, TNFalpha levels, and metastatic growth in the liver. Therefore, these data suggest that cholinergic signaling directly and indirectly suppresses growth of PDAC cells, and therapies that stimulate muscarinic receptors may be useful in the treatment of PDAC.Significance: Subdiaphragmatic vagotomy or Chrm1 knockout accelerates pancreatic tumorigenesis, in part via expansion of the CSC compartment. Systemic administration of a muscarinic agonist suppresses tumorigenesis through MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling, in early stages of tumor growth and in more advanced, metastatic disease. Therefore, CHRM1 may represent a potentially attractive therapeutic target. Cancer Discov; 8(11); 1458-73. (c)2018 AACR. This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 1333.
INTRODUCTION: Successful phase 3 trials of KarXT in people with schizophrenia herald a new era of treating the disorder with drugs that do not target the dopamine D2 receptor. The active component of KarXT is xanomeline, a muscarinic (CHRM) M1 and M4 agonist, making muscarinic receptors a viable target for treating schizophrenia. AREAS COVERED: This review covers the process of taking drugs that activate the muscarinic M1 and M4 receptors from conceptualization to the clinic and details the mechanisms by which activating the CHRM1 and 4 can affect the broad spectrum of symptoms experienced by people with schizophrenia. EXPERT OPINION: Schizophrenia is a syndrome which means drugs that activate muscarinic M1 and M4 receptors, as was the case for antipsychotic drugs acting on the dopamine D2 receptor, will not give optimal outcomes in everyone within the syndrome. Thus, it would be ideal to identify people who are responsive to drugs activating the CHRM1 and 4. Given knowledge of the actions of these receptors, it is possible treatment non-response could be restricted to sub-groups within the syndrome who have deficits in cortical CHRM1 or those with one of the cognitive endophenotypes that may be identifiable by changes in the blood transcriptome.
Docetaxel is the most commonly used chemotherapy for advanced prostate cancer (PC), including castration-resistant disease (CRPC), but the eventual development of docetaxel resistance constitutes a major clinical challenge. Here, we demonstrate activation of the cholinergic muscarinic M1 receptor (CHRM1) in CRPC cells upon acquiring resistance to docetaxel, which is manifested in tumor tissues from PC patients post- vs. pre-docetaxel. Genetic and pharmacological inactivation of CHRM1 restores the efficacy of docetaxel in resistant cells. Mechanistically, CHRM1, via its first and third extracellular loops, interacts with the SEMA domain of cMET and forms a heteroreceptor complex with cMET, stimulating a downstream mitogen-activated protein polykinase program to confer docetaxel resistance. Dicyclomine, a clinically available CHRM1-selective antagonist, reverts resistance and restricts the growth of multiple docetaxel-resistant CRPC cell lines and patient-derived xenografts. Our study reveals a CHRM1-dictated mechanism for docetaxel resistance and identifies a CHRM1-targeted combinatorial strategy for overcoming docetaxel resistance in PC.
Disordered eating contributes to weight gain, obesity, and type 2 diabetes (T2D), but the precise mechanisms underlying the development of different eating patterns and connecting them to specific metabolic phenotypes remain unclear. We aimed to identify genetic variants linked to eating behaviour and investigate its causal relationships with metabolic traits using Mendelian randomization (MR). We tested associations between 30 genetic variants and eating patterns in individuals with T2D from the Volga-Ural region and investigated causal relationships between variants associated with eating patterns and various metabolic and anthropometric traits using data from the Volga-Ural population and large international consortia. We detected associations between HTR1D and CDKAL1 and external eating; between HTR2A and emotional eating; between HTR2A, NPY2R, HTR1F, HTR3A, HTR2C, CXCR2, and T2D. Further analyses in a separate group revealed significant associations between metabolic syndrome (MetS) and the loci in CRP, ADCY3, GHRL, CDKAL1, BDNF, CHRM4, CHRM1, HTR3A, and AKT1 genes. MR results demonstrated an inverse causal relationship between external eating and glycated haemoglobin levels in the Volga-Ural sample. External eating influenced anthropometric traits such as body mass index, height, hip circumference, waist circumference, and weight in GWAS cohorts. Our findings suggest that eating patterns impact both anthropometric and metabolic traits.
The family of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (mAChRs) consists of five members in mammals, encoded by the CHRM1-5 genes. The mAChRs are G-protein-coupled receptors, which can be divided into the following two subfamilies: M2 and M4 receptors coupling to G(i/o); and M1, M3, and M5 receptors coupling to G(q/11). However, despite the fundamental roles played by these receptors, their evolution in vertebrates has not yet been fully described. We have combined sequence-based phylogenetic analyses with comparisons of exon-intron organization and conserved synteny in order to deduce the evolution of the mAChR receptors. Our analyses verify the existence of two ancestral genes prior to the two vertebrate tetraploidizations (1R and 2R). After these events, one gene had duplicated, resulting in CHRM2 and CHRM4; and the other had triplicated, forming the CHRM1, CHRM3, and CHRM5 subfamily. All five genes are still present in all vertebrate groups investigated except the CHRM1 gene, which has not been identified in some of the teleosts or in chicken or any other birds. Interestingly, the third tetraploidization (3R) that took place in the teleost predecessor resulted in duplicates of all five mAChR genes of which all 10 are present in zebrafish. One of the copies of the CHRM2 and CHRM3 genes and both CHRM4 copies have gained introns in teleosts. Not a single separate (nontetraploidization) duplicate has been identified in any vertebrate species. These results clarify the evolution of the vertebrate mAChR family and reveal a doubled repertoire in zebrafish, inviting studies of gene neofunctionalization and subfunctionalization.
BACKGROUND: Cholinergic hypofunction and sleep disturbance are hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), a progressive disorder leading to neuronal deterioration. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (M1-5 or mAChRs), expressed in hippocampus and cerebral cortex, play a pivotal role in the aberrant alterations of cognitive processing, memory, and learning, observed in AD. Recent evidence shows that two mAChRs, M1 and M3, encoded by CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes, respectively, are involved in sleep functions and, peculiarly, in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. METHODS: We used twenty microarray datasets extrapolated from post-mortem brain tissue of nondemented healthy controls (NDHC) and AD patients to examine the expression profile of CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes. Samples were from eight brain regions and stratified according to age and sex. RESULTS: CHRM1 and CHRM3 expression levels were significantly reduced in AD compared with ageand sex-matched NDHC brains. A negative correlation with age emerged for both CHRM1 and CHRM3 in NDHC but not in AD brains. Notably, a marked positive correlation was also revealed between the neurogranin (NRGN) and both CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes. These associations were modulated by sex. Accordingly, in the temporal and occipital regions of NDHC subjects, males expressed higher levels of CHRM1 and CHRM3, respectively, than females. In AD patients, males expressed higher levels of CHRM1 and CHRM3 in the temporal and frontal regions, respectively, than females. CONCLUSION: Thus, substantial differences, all strictly linked to the brain region analyzed, age, and sex, exist in CHRM1 and CHRM3 brain levels both in NDHC subjects and in AD patients.
Sleep regulation involves interdependent signaling among specialized neurons in distributed brain regions. Although acetylcholine promotes wakefulness and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, it is unclear whether the cholinergic pathway is essential (i.e., absolutely required) for REM sleep because of redundancy from neural circuits to molecules. First, we demonstrate that synaptic inhibition of TrkA+ cholinergic neurons causes a severe short-sleep phenotype and that sleep reduction is mostly attributable to a shortened sleep duration in the dark phase. Subsequent comprehensive knockout of acetylcholine receptor genes by the triple-target CRISPR method reveals that a similar short-sleep phenotype appears in the knockout of two Gq-type acetylcholine receptors Chrm1 and Chrm3. Strikingly, Chrm1 and Chrm3 double knockout chronically diminishes REM sleep to an almost undetectable level. These results suggest that muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, Chrm1 and Chrm3, are essential for REM sleep.
We previously identified a group of subjects with schizophrenia who, on average, have a 75% decrease in cholinergic receptor, muscarinic 1 (CHRM1) in Brodmann's area (BA) 9. To extend this finding, we determined i) if the decrease in CHRM1 was present in another functionally related CNS region (BA6), ii) whether the marked decrease in CHRM1 was accompanied by changes in levels of other CHRMs and iii) potential factors responsible for the decreased CHRM1 expression. We measured CHRM1 and CHRM3 using in situ radioligand binding with [(3)H]pirenzepine and [(3)H]4-DAMP respectively in BA6 from 20 subjects with schizophrenia who had low levels of CHRM1 in BA9 (SzLow[(3)H]PZP), 18 subjects with schizophrenia whose levels of CHRM1 were similar to controls (SzNormal[(3)H]PZP) and 20 control subjects. Levels of CHRM1, 3 and 4 mRNA were measured using qPCR and levels of the transcription factors, SP1 and SP3, were determined using Western blots. In BA6, the density of [(3)H]pirenzepine binding was decreased in subjects with SzLow[(3)H]PZP (p<0.001) compared to controls. The density of [(3)H]4-DAMP binding, levels of CHRM1, 3 and 4 mRNA and levels of SP1 and SP3 was not significantly different between the three groups. This study shows that the previously identified decrease in CHRM1 expression is not confined to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex but is present in other cortical areas. The effect shows some specificity to CHRM1, with no change in levels of binding to CHRM3. Furthermore, this decrease in CHRM1 does not appear to be associated with low levels of CHRM1 mRNA or to simply be regulated by the transcription factors, SP1 and SP3, suggesting that other mechanisms are responsible for the decreased CHRM1 in these subjects.
Cognitive dysfunction is a core feature of schizophrenia. Growing evidence indicates that a wide variety of genetic mutations and polymorphisms impact cognition and may thus be implicated in various aspects of this mental disorder. Despite differences between human and rodent brain structure and function, genetic mouse models have contributed critical information about brain mechanisms involved in cognitive processes. Here, we summarize discoveries of genetic modifications in mice that impact cognition. Based on functional hypotheses, gene modifications within five model systems are described: 1) dopamine (D1, D2, D3, D4, D5, DAT, COMT, MAO); 2) glutamate (GluR-A, NR1, NR2A, NR2B, GRM2, GRM3, GLAST); 3) GABA (alpha(5), gamma(2), alpha(4), deltaGABA(A), GABA(B(1)), GAT1); 4) acetylcholine (nAChRbeta2, alpha7, CHRM1); and 5) calcium (CaMKII-alpha, neurogranin, CaMKKbeta, CaMKIV). We also consider other risk-associated genes for schizophrenia such as dysbindin (DTNBP1), neuregulin (NRG1), disrupted-in-schizophrenia1 (DISC1), reelin and proline dehydrogenase (PRODH). Because of the presumed importance of environmental factors, we further consider genetic modifications within the stress-sensitive systems of corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and the endocannabinoid systems. We highlight the missing information and limitations of cognitive assays in genetically modified mice models relevant to schizophrenia pathology.
BACKGROUND: Preclinical and some human data suggest allosteric modulation of the muscarinic M1 receptor (CHRM1) is a promising approach for the treatment of schizophrenia. However, it is suggested there is a subgroup of participants with schizophrenia who have profound loss of cortical CHRM1 (MRDS). This raises the possibility that some participants with schizophrenia may not respond optimally to CHRM1 allosteric modulation. Here we describe a novel methodology to measure positive allosteric modulation of CHRM1 in human CNS and the measurement of that response in the cortex, hippocampus, and striatum from participants with MRDS, non-MRDS and controls. METHODS: The cortex (Brodmann's area 6), hippocampus, and striatum from 40 participants with schizophrenia (20 MRDS and 20 non-MRDS) and 20 controls were used to measure benzyl quinolone carboxylic acid-mediated shift in acetylcholine displacement of [3H]N-methylscopolamine using a novel in situ radioligand binding with autoradiography methodology. RESULTS: Compared with controls, participants with schizophrenia had lower levels of specific [3H]N-methylscopolamine binding in all CNS regions, whilst benzyl quinolone carboxylic acid-modulated binding was less in the striatum, Brodmann's area 6, dentate gyrus, and subiculum. When divided by subgroup, only in MRDS was there lower specific [3H]N-methylscopolamine binding and less benzyl quinolone carboxylic acid-modulated binding in all cortical and subcortical regions studied. CONCLUSIONS: In a subgroup of participants with schizophrenia, there is a widespread decreased responsiveness to a positive allosteric modulator at the CHRM1. This finding may have ramifications it positive allosteric modulators of the CHRM1 are used in clinical trials to treat schizophrenia as some participants may not have an optimal response.
BACKGROUND: Dysfunction of cholinergic neurotransmission is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD); forming the basis for using acetylcholine (ACh) esterase (AChE) inhibitors to mitigate symptoms of ACh deficiency in AD. The Cholinergic Receptor Muscarinic 1 (CHRM1) is highly expressed in brain regions impaired by AD. Previous analyses of postmortem AD brains revealed unaltered CHRM1 mRNA expression compared to normal brains. However, the CHRM1 protein level in AD and other forms of dementia has not been extensively studied. Reduced expression of CHRM1 in AD patients may explain the limited clinical efficacy of AChE inhibitors. OBJECTIVE: To quantify CHRM1 protein in the postmortem hippocampus and temporal cortex of AD, Parkinson's disease (PD), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) patients. METHODS: Western blotting was performed on postmortem hippocampus (N = 19/73/7/9: unaffected/AD/FTD/PD) and temporal cortex (N = 9/74/27: unaffected/AD/PD) using a validated anti-CHRM1 antibody. RESULTS: Quantification based on immunoblotting using a validated anti-CHRM1 antibody revealed a significant loss of CHRM1 protein level (<50%) in the hippocampi (78% AD, 66% PD, and 85% FTD) and temporal cortices (56% AD and 42% PD) of dementia patients. Loss of CHRM1 in the temporal cortex was significantly associated with early death (<65-75 years) for both AD and PD patients. CONCLUSION: Severe reduction of CHRM1 in a subset of AD and PD patients can explain the reported low efficacy of AChE inhibitors as a mitigating treatment for dementia patients. Based on this study, it can be suggested that future research should prioritize therapeutic restoration of CHRM1 protein levels in cholinergic neurons.
BACKGROUND: Central nervous system disruption of cholinergic (ACh) signaling, which plays a major role in cognitive processes, is well documented in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). The expression of muscarinic ACh receptors type 1 and 4 (CHRM1 and CHRM4) has been reported to be altered in the brain of DLB patients. OBJECTIVE: We aim to assess the peripheral gene expression of CHRM1 and 4 in DLB as a possible marker as compared to AD and healthy control (HC) subjects. METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were collected from 21 DLB, 13 AD, and 8 HC matched subjects. RT-PCR was performed to estimate gene expression of CHRM1 and CHRM4. RESULTS: Peripheral CHRM1 expression was higher and CHRM4 was lower in DLB and AD compared to HC, whereas both CHRM1 and CHRM4 levels were higher in AD compared to DLB patients. Receiver operating characteristics curves, with logistic regression analysis, showed that combining peripheral CHRM1 and CHRM4 levels, DLB and AD subjects were classified with an accuracy of 76.0%. CONCLUSION: Alterations of peripheral CHRM1 and CHRM4 was found in both AD and DLB patients as compared to HC. CHRM1 and CHRM4 gene expression resulted to be lower in DLB patients compared to AD. In the future, peripheral CHRM expression could be studied as a possible marker of neurodegenerative conditions associated with cholinergic deficit and a possible marker of response to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.
Asthma is a complex disease for which genetic predisposition has been widely documented. Considerable evidence supports the hypothesis that polymorphisms in the muscarinic-cholinergic (CHRM) genes could be involved in asthma pathogenesis, bronchial hyperresponsiveness, and mucus secretion. To determine whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or haplotypes in CHRM1, CHRM2, or CHRM3 are associated with asthma in Mexican pediatric population. We performed a case-control study including 398 pediatric cases with asthma and 450 healthy controls. We analyzed 19 SNPs distributed among these three genes. Two of the seven SNPs located in CHRM2, the 3' untranslated region rs8191992 and rs6962027, differed significantly in allele frequencies between patients with asthma and healthy controls [odds ratio (OR) 1.42, 95 % confidence interval (95 % CI) 1.14-1.77, P = 0.001, and OR 1.50, 95 % CI 1.21-1.87, P = 0.0002, respectively]. Statistical significance remained after multiple comparison corrections (P = 0.003 and P = 0.005, respectively). The haplotypes AA and TT, containing both major and minor alleles from rs8191992 and rs6962027, also differed between cases and controls. The haplotype AA occurred at a lower frequency in cases (OR 0.67, 95 % CI 0.53-0.85, P = 0.001) whereas the haplotype TT was overrepresented in cases compared to controls (28 vs 21 %, respectively; OR 1.46, 95 % CI 1.15-1.85, P = 0.002). No association was observed between CHRM1 or CHRM3 SNPs or haplotypes and asthma. CHRM2 polymorphisms are implicated in the genetic etiology of asthma.
BACKGROUND: Cognitive deficits are amongst the most socially debilitating and least effectively treated symptoms of schizophrenia. The cholinergic system is a promising target for the design of novel drugs that can more effectively treat these symptoms. METHODS: We review the literature supporting the dysfunction of the cholinergic system in schizophrenia, discuss the preclinical and clinical data showing that modulating the cholinergic system could improve the symptoms of schizophrenia and review the main pharmacological strategies being investigated to treat cholinergic dysfunction in schizophrenia. RESULTS: Post-mortem and neuroimaging studies suggest there are widespread reductions in cholinergic receptor signalling in the cortex as well as subcortical regions, such as the hippocampus and striatum, in individuals with schizophrenia. Potential cholinergic drug targets are being pursued to increase receptor function. These include inhibiting the activity of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase to increase synaptic acetylcholine levels, and increasing the nicotinic receptor and muscarinic receptor activity with agonists or positive allosteric modulators. CONCLUSION: Amongst the most promising drug targets for treating schizophrenia are the alpha7 nicotinic receptor and the CHRM1 and CHRM4 muscarinic receptors. The recent development of allosteric modulators that selectively target these receptors offers the potential to more effectively treat the symptoms of schizophrenia.
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) is a leading cause of chronic liver disease with few therapeutic options. To narrow the translational gap in the development of pharmacological MASH treatments, a 3D liver model from primary human hepatocytes and non-parenchymal cells derived from patients with histologically confirmed MASH was established. The model closely mirrors disease-relevant endpoints, such as steatosis, inflammation and fibrosis, and multi-omics analyses show excellent alignment with biopsy data from 306 MASH patients and 77 controls. By combining high-content imaging with scalable biochemical assays and chemogenomic screening, multiple novel targets with anti-steatotic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-fibrotic effects are identified. Among these, activation of the muscarinic M(1) receptor (CHRM1) and inhibition of the TRPM8 cation channel result in strong anti-fibrotic effects, which are confirmed using orthogonal genetic assays. Strikingly, using biosensors based on bioluminescence resonance energy transfer, a functional interaction along a novel MASH signaling axis in which CHRM1 inhibits TRPM8 via G(q/11) and phospholipase C-mediated depletion of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate can be demonstrated. Combined, this study presents the first patient-derived 3D MASH model, identifies a novel signaling module with anti-fibrotic effects, and highlights the potential of organotypic culture systems for phenotype-based chemogenomic drug target identification at scale.
BACKGROUND: Postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD) is a prevalent complication following anesthesia and surgery, particularly in the elderly, leading to increased mortality and reduced quality of life. Despite its prevalence, there are no effective clinical treatments. Exercise has shown cognitive benefits in aging and various diseases, which can be transferred to sedentary animals through plasma. However, it is unclear if exercise-conditioned plasma can replicate these benefits in the context of POCD. METHODS: Sixteen-month-old male C57BL/6J mice underwent 30 days of voluntary running wheel training or received systemic administration of exercise-conditioned plasma, followed by tibial fracture surgery under general anesthesia at 17 months of age. Cognitive performance, hippocampal synaptic deficits, neuroinflammation, BDNF/TrkB signaling, and medial septum (MS)-hippocampal cholinergic activity were evaluated through immunohistochemical staining, transmission electron microscopy, Western blotting, and biochemical assays. To investigate the role of hippocampal BDNF signaling and cholinergic activity in the therapeutic effects, the TrkB antagonist ANA-12 and the cholinergic receptor muscarinic 1 (CHRM1) antagonist trihexyphenidyl (THP) were administered via intraperitoneal injection, and adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors expressing Chrm1 shRNA were delivered via intrahippocampal stereotaxic microinjection. RESULTS: Exercise-conditioned plasma mimicked the benefits of exercise, alleviating cognitive decline induced by anesthesia/surgery, restoring hippocampal synapse formation and levels of regulators for synaptic plasticity, inhibiting neuroinflammatory responses to surgery by microglia and astrocytes, augmenting BDNF production and TrkB phosphorylation in hippocampal neurons, astrocytes, and microglia, upregulating MS expression of choline acetyltransferase (CHAT) and hippocampal expression of CHRM1 in neurons and astrocytes, and enhancing hippocampal cholinergic innervation and acetylcholine release. Conversely, ANA-12 administration blocked TrkB activation and reduced the protective effects on cognition, synaptic deficits, and neuroinflammatory reactivity of glial cells post-surgery. Similarly, THP administration or intrahippocampal delivery of AAV-Chrm1 shRNA inhibited the activation of the hippocampal cholinergic circuit by exercise plasma, negating the cognitive and neuropathological benefits and reducing BDNF/TrkB signaling enhancements. CONCLUSION: Exercise-conditioned plasma can replicate the protective effects of exercise against anesthesia/surgery-induced neuroinflammation, synaptic, and cognitive impairments, at least partly, through CHRM1-dependent regulation of hippocampal cholinergic activity and BDNF/TrkB signaling.
PURPOSE: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the most common endocrine and metabolic disorders, posing a serious threat to the health of women. Herein, we aimed to explore new biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets for PCOS by employing integrated bioinformatics tools. METHODS: Three gene expression profile datasets (GSE138518, GSE155489, GSE106724) were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database and the differentially expressed genes in PCOS and normal groups with an adjusted p-value &lt; 0.05 and a |log fold change (FC) | &gt; 1.2 were first identified using the DESeq package. The weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) R package was used to identify clusters of highly correlated genes or modules associated with PCOS. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis and visualization of genes in the key module were performed using the STRINGdb database and the NetworkX package (edge &gt; 5), respectively. The genes overlapping among the key module genes and PCOS-associated genes were further analyzed. Ligand molecules with strong binding energy &lt; -10 kJ/mol to GNB3 were screened in the drug library using MTiOpenScreen. AutoDock, ChimeraX, and BIOVIA Discovery Studio Visualizer were further used to elucidate the mechanism of ligand interaction with GNB3. Finally, the relationship between GNB3 and PCOS was verified using experimental models in vivo and in vitro. RESULTS: Of the 11 modules identified by WGCNA, the black module had the highest correlation with PCOS (correlation = 0.96, P = 0.00016). The PPI network of 351 related genes revealed that VCL, GNB3, MYH11, LMNA, MLLT4, EZH2, PAK3, and CHRM1 have important roles in PCOS. The hub gene GNB3 was identified by taking the intersection of PCOS-related gene sets. MTiOpenScreen revealed that five compounds interacted with GNB3. Of these five, compound 1 had the strongest binding ability and can bind amino acids in the WD40 motif of GNB3, which in turn affects the function of the G protein-coupled receptor beta subunit. GNB3 was also significantly downregulated in PCOS models. CONCLUSION: We identified the hub gene GNB3 as the most important regulatory gene in PCOS. We suggest that compound 1 can target the WD40 motif of GNB3 to affect related functions and must be considered as a lead compound for drug development. This study will provide new insights into the development of PCOS-related drugs.
[(3)H]4-DAMP is a radioligand that has been used to quantify levels of the muscarinic receptor CHRM3 protein in situ. However, in addition to high affinity binding to CHRM3, [(3)H]4-DAMP binds with low affinity to CHRM1 confounding the potential to discriminate between changes in these two muscarinic receptors. We have developed a [(3)H]4-DAMP binding assay, optimised for measuring CHRM3 protein levels in the cortex, with minimal selectivity towards CHRM1. The selectivity of our assay towards CHRM3 was confirmed using recombinant receptor-expressing, cell lysate preparations. [(3)H]4-DAMP binding levels were similar between wildtype and CHRM1 knockout mice, confirming that the amount of [(3)H]4-DAMP binding to CHRM1 was negligible. We used this assay to measure CHRM3 protein levels in the frontal pole, obtained post-mortem from subjects with bipolar disorder (n = 15), major depressive disorder (n = 15) and matched controls (n = 20) and showed that [(3)H]4-DAMP binding was not altered in either bipolar disorder or major depressive disorder. Western blotting confirmed that CHRM3 protein levels were unchanged in these subjects.
Objectives: Acetylcholine M (muscarinic) receptors are possibly involved in tardive dyskinesia (TD). The authors tried to verify this hypothesis by testing for possible associations between two muscarinic receptor genes (CHRM1 and CHRM2) polymorphisms and TD in patients with schizophrenia.Methods: A total of 472 patients with schizophrenia were recruited. TD was assessed cross-sectionally using the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale. Fourteen allelic variants of CHRM1 and CHRM2 were genotyped using Applied Biosystems amplifiers (USA) and the MassARRAY System by Agena Bioscience.Results: The prevalence of the rs1824024*GG genotype of the CHRM2 gene was lower in TD patients compared to the group without it (chi2 = 6.035, p = 0.049). This suggested that this genotype has a protective effect for the development of TD (OR = 0.4, 95% CI: 0.19-0.88). When age, gender, duration of schizophrenia and dosage of antipsychotic treatment were added as covariates in regression analysis, the results did not reach statistical significance.Conclusions: This study did identify associations between CHRM2 variations and TD; the results of logistic regression analysis with covariates suggest that the association is, however, likely to be secondary to other concomitant factors.
