Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M3; The muscarinic acetylcholine receptor mediates various cellular responses, including inhibition of adenylate cyclase, breakdown of phosphoinositides and modulation of potassium channels through the action of G proteins. Primary transducing effect is Pi turnover.
Bile acids are soluble derivatives of cholesterol produced in the liver that subsequently undergo bacterial transformation yielding a diverse array of metabolites. The bulk of bile acid synthesis takes place in the liver yielding primary bile acids; however, other tissues have also the capacity to generate bile acids (e.g. ovaries). Hepatic bile acids are then transported to bile and are subsequently released into the intestines. In the large intestine, a fraction of primary bile acids is converted to secondary bile acids by gut bacteria. The majority of the intestinal bile acids undergo reuptake and return to the liver. A small fraction of secondary and primary bile acids remains in the circulation and exert receptor-mediated and pure chemical effects (e.g. acidic bile in oesophageal cancer) on cancer cells. In this review, we assess how changes to bile acid biosynthesis, bile acid flux and local bile acid concentration modulate the behavior of different cancers. Here, we present in-depth the involvement of bile acids in oesophageal, gastric, hepatocellular, pancreatic, colorectal, breast, prostate, ovarian cancer. Previous studies often used bile acids in supraphysiological concentration, sometimes in concentrations 1000 times higher than the highest reported tissue or serum concentrations likely eliciting unspecific effects, a practice that we advocate against in this review. Furthermore, we show that, although bile acids were classically considered as pro-carcinogenic agents (e.g. oesophageal cancer), the dogma that switch, as lower concentrations of bile acids that correspond to their serum or tissue reference concentration possess anticancer activity in a subset of cancers. Differences in the response of cancers to bile acids lie in the differential expression of bile acid receptors between cancers (e.g. FXR vs. TGR5). UDCA, a bile acid that is sold as a generic medication against cholestasis or biliary surge, and its conjugates were identified with almost purely anticancer features suggesting a possibility for drug repurposing. Taken together, bile acids were considered as tumor inducers or tumor promoter molecules; nevertheless, in certain cancers, like breast cancer, bile acids in their reference concentrations may act as tumor suppressors suggesting a Janus-faced nature of bile acids in carcinogenesis.
BACKGROUND: Cholinergic hypofunction and sleep disturbance are hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), a progressive disorder leading to neuronal deterioration. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (M1-5 or mAChRs), expressed in hippocampus and cerebral cortex, play a pivotal role in the aberrant alterations of cognitive processing, memory, and learning, observed in AD. Recent evidence shows that two mAChRs, M1 and M3, encoded by CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes, respectively, are involved in sleep functions and, peculiarly, in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. METHODS: We used twenty microarray datasets extrapolated from post-mortem brain tissue of nondemented healthy controls (NDHC) and AD patients to examine the expression profile of CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes. Samples were from eight brain regions and stratified according to age and sex. RESULTS: CHRM1 and CHRM3 expression levels were significantly reduced in AD compared with ageand sex-matched NDHC brains. A negative correlation with age emerged for both CHRM1 and CHRM3 in NDHC but not in AD brains. Notably, a marked positive correlation was also revealed between the neurogranin (NRGN) and both CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes. These associations were modulated by sex. Accordingly, in the temporal and occipital regions of NDHC subjects, males expressed higher levels of CHRM1 and CHRM3, respectively, than females. In AD patients, males expressed higher levels of CHRM1 and CHRM3 in the temporal and frontal regions, respectively, than females. CONCLUSION: Thus, substantial differences, all strictly linked to the brain region analyzed, age, and sex, exist in CHRM1 and CHRM3 brain levels both in NDHC subjects and in AD patients.
Hyperstimulation of the cholecystokinin 1 receptor (CCK1R), a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), in pancreatic acinar cells is commonly used to induce pancreatitis in rodents. Human pancreatic acinar cells lack CCK1R but express cholinergic receptor muscarinic 3 (M3R), another GPCR. To test whether M3R activation is involved in pancreatitis, a mutant M3R was conditionally expressed in pancreatic acinar cells in mice. This mutant receptor loses responsiveness to its native ligand, acetylcholine, but can be activated by an inert small molecule, clozapine-N-oxide (CNO). Intracellular calcium and amylase were elicited by CNO in pancreatic acinar cells isolated from mutant M3R mice but not WT mice. Similarly, acute pancreatitis (AP) could be induced by a single injection of CNO in the transgenic mice but not WT mice. Compared with the cerulein-induced AP, CNO caused more widespread acinar cell death and inflammation. Furthermore, chronic pancreatitis developed at 4 weeks after 3 episodes of CNO-induced AP. In contrast, in mice with 3 recurrent episodes of cerulein-included AP, pancreas histology was restored in 4 weeks. Furthermore, the M3R antagonist ameliorated the severity of cerulein-induced AP in WT mice. We conclude that M3R activation can cause the pathogenesis of pancreatitis. This model may provide an alternative approach for pancreatitis research.
Diabetic bladder dysfunction (DBD) is the most common complication in diabetes. Myogenic abnormalities are common in DBD; however, the underlying mechanisms leading to these remain unclear. To understand the importance of smooth muscle insulin receptor (IR)-mediated signaling in the pathogenesis of DBD, we conditionally deleted it to achieve either heterozygous (SMIR+/-) or homozygous (SMIR-/-) deletion in smooth muscle cells. Despite impaired glucose and insulin tolerance seen with SMIR-/- mice, both SMIR+/- and SMIR-/- mice exhibited normal blood glucose and plasma insulin levels. Interestingly, these mice had abnormal voiding phenotypes, that included urinary frequency and small voids, and bladder smooth muscle (BSM) had significantly diminished contraction force. Morphology revealed a dilated bladder with thinner BSM layer, and BSM bundles were disorganized with penetrating interstitial tissue. Deletion of IR elevated FoxO and decreased mTOR protein expression, which further decreased the expression of Chrm3, P2x1, Sm22, and Cav1.2, crucial functional proteins for BSM contraction. Furthermore, we determined the expression of adiponectin in BSM, and deletion of IR in BSM inhibited adiponectin-mediated signaling. In summary, disruption of IR-mediated signaling in BSM caused abnormalities in proliferation and differentiation, leading to diminished BSM contractility and a voiding dysfunction phenotype that recapitulates human DBD.
PURPOSE: Through network pharmacology combined with molecular docking and in vivo validation, the study examines the unexplored molecular mechanisms of Tongxieyaofang (TXYF) in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). In particular, the potential pharmacological mechanism of TXYF alleviating IBS by regulating CHRM3 and intestinal barrier has not been studied. PATIENTS AND METHODS: LC-MS technique and TCMSP database were used in combination to identify the potential effective components and target sites of TXYF. Potential targets for IBS were obtained from Genecards and OMIM databases. PPI and cytoHub analysis for targets. Molecular docking was used to validate the binding energy of effective components with related targets and for visualization. GO and KEGG analysis were employed to identify target functions and signaling pathways. In the in vivo validation, wrap restraint stress-induced IBS model was employed to verify the change for cytoHub genes and CHRM3 expression. Furthermore, inflammatory changes of colon were observed by HE staining. The changes of Ach were verified by ELISA. IHC and WB validated CHRM3 and GNAQ/PLC/MLCK channel variations. AB-PAS test and WB test confirmed the protection of TXYF on gut barrier. The NF-kappaB/MLCK pathway was also verified. RESULTS: In TXYF decoction, LC-MS identified 559 chemical components, with 23 remaining effective components after screening in TCMSP. KEGG analysis indicated that calcium plays a crucial role in TXYF treated for IBS. Molecular docking validated the binding capacity of the effective components Naringenin and Nobiletin with cytoHub-gene and CHRM3. In vivo validation demonstrated that TXYF inhibits the activation of Ach and CHRM3 in IBS, and inhibits for the GNAQ/PLC/MLCK axis. Additionally, TXYF downregulates TNF-alpha, MMP9, and NF-kappaB/MLCK, while modulating goblet cell secretion to protect gut barrier. CONCLUSION: TXYF inhibits Ach and CHRM3 expression, regulating the relaxation of intestinal smooth muscle via GNAQ/PLC/MLCK. Additionally, TXYF inhibits NF-kappaB/MLCK activated and goblet cell secretion to protect gut barrier.
BACKGROUND: Radix Paeoniae Alba is a traditional Chinese herbal medicine. It can accelerate salivary secretion and alleviate the dry mouth of patients with Sjogren's syndrome (SS). Although it is widely used in clinical treatment, its target and mechanism remain unclear. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to analyze the main components of Radix Paeoniae Alba, explore the target genes, and propose the possible mechanism for Radix Paeoniae Alba's acceleration of salivary secretion. METHODS: The main active components and potential targets of Radix Paeoniae Alba were searched through the TCMSP database. Efforts were made to search for the related genes of Sjogren's syndrome in OMIM and GeneCards databases. Cytoscape v3.8.0 software was used to link target genes of active components and key genes of the disease. The software Autodock vina1.1.2. was adopted to simulate the interaction between active components and target genes. Human submandibular gland (HSG) cells were used in vitro experiments to verify the results of our analysis. RESULTS: beta-Sitosterol, the main component of Radix Paeoniae Alba, may intervene in the disease through CHRM3. Molecular docking shows beta-Sitosterol has a high affinity with CHRM3, and the interaction between CHRM3 and beta-Sitosterol is the basis of biological activity. The in vitro experiments showed that beta-Sitosterol could significantly up-regulate the mRNA and protein expression levels of both CHRM3 and secretion-related genes in HSG cells. CONCLUSION: Our study shows that the chemical components of Radix Paeoniae Alba have a positive effect on the related mechanism of salivary secretion. We found that beta-Sitosterol can promote the expression of CHRM3, stimulate salivary secretion, treat Sjogren's syndrome and potentially improve its prognosis.
Assisted reproductive technology (ART) has been used globally among infertile couples. However, many epidemiological investigations have indicated that ART is associated with a range of long-term adverse health outcomes in offspring, including cardiovascular disease, obesity, and increased plasma lipid levels. Until now, direct evidence has been limited regarding the pathological changes in vascular function in fetuses with ART. In this study, human umbilical cords were collected from healthy normal pregnancies and in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVF-ET) pregnancies. Vascular functional studies involving acetylcholine (ACh), antagonists of its specific receptors, and L-type calcium channel/PKC-MLC20 phosphorylation pathway specific inhibitors were conducted. Quantitative real-time PCR, Western blotting, and methylation analyses were performed on umbilical vein samples. We found that the umbilical vein constriction induced by ACh in the IVF-ET group was significantly attenuated compared with that in the healthy normal pregnancy group, which was not only associated with the hypermethylation of ACh muscarinic receptor subtype 3 (CHRM3) and decreased expression of CHRM3, PKCbeta, and CaV1.2, but was also related to the reduced phosphorylation of MLC20. This study revealed that the hypermethylation of CHRM3, leading to a reduction in CHRM3 expression and downregulation of the CaV1.2/PKC-MLC20 phosphorylation pathway, was responsible for the decreased sensitivity to ACh observed in the umbilical vein under IVF-ET conditions. The hypermethylation of CHRM3 caused by IVF-ET might play an important role in altered vasoconstriction and impact cardiovascular systems in the long run.
Cannabis, the most widely used illicit drug, can induce hallucinations. Our understanding of the biology of cannabis-induced hallucinations (Ca-HL) is limited. We used the Semi-Structured Assessment for Drug Dependence and Alcoholism (SSADDA) to identify cannabis-induced hallucinations (Ca-HL) among long-term cannabis users (used cannabis >/=1 year and >/=100 times). A genome-wide association study (GWAS) was conducted by analyzing European Americans (EAs) and African Americans (AAs) in Yale-Penn 1 and 2 cohorts individually, then meta-analyzing the two cohorts within population. In the meta-analysis of Yale-Penn EAs (n = 1917), one genome-wide significant (GWS) signal emerged at the CHRM3 locus, represented by rs115455482 (P = 1.66 x 10(-10)), rs74722579 (P = 2.81 x 10(-9)), and rs1938228 (P = 1.57 x 10(-8)); signals were GWS in Yale-Penn 1 EAs (n = 1092) and nominally significant in Yale-Penn 2 EAs (n = 825). Two SNPs, rs115455482 and rs74722579, were available from the Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism data (COGA; 3630 long-term cannabis users). The signals did not replicate, but when meta-analyzing Yale-Penn and COGA EAs, the two SNPs' association signals were increased (meta-P-values 1.32 x 10(-10) and 2.60 x 10(-9), respectively; n = 4291). There were no significant findings in AAs, but in the AA meta-analysis (n = 3624), nominal significance was seen for rs74722579. The rs115455482*T risk allele was associated with lower CHRM3 expression in the thalamus. CHRM3 was co-expressed with three psychosis risk genes (GABAG2, CHRNA4, and HRH3) in the thalamus and other human brain tissues and mouse GABAergic neurons. This work provides strong evidence for the association of CHRM3 with Ca-HL and provides insight into the potential involvement of thalamus for this trait.
CHRM3 codes for the M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor that is located on the surface of smooth muscle cells of the detrusor, the muscle that effects urinary voiding. Previously, we reported brothers in a family affected by a congenital prune belly-like syndrome with mydriasis due to homozygous CHRM3 frameshift variants. In this study, we describe two sisters with bladders that failed to empty completely and pupils that failed to constrict fully in response to light, who are homozygous for the missense CHRM3 variant c.352G > A; p.(Gly118Arg). Samples were not available for genotyping from their brother, who had a history of multiple urinary tract infections and underwent surgical bladder draining in the first year of life. He died at the age of 6 years. This is the first independent report of biallelic variants in CHRM3 in a family with a rare serious bladder disorder associated with mydriasis and provides important evidence of this association.
Cholinergic receptor muscarinic 3 (CHRM3)-mediated focal adhesion kinase/YES-associated protein (YAP) signalling is essential for the growth of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) cells. Here, we evaluated the molecular mechanisms through which CHRM3 overexpression facilitates castration-resistant growth. Small RNA sequencing combined with in silico analyses revealed that CHRM3 was a putative target of miR-15b-5p. Notably, androgen deprivation suppressed miR-15b-5p expression and increased CHRM3 expression. Moreover, miR-15b-5p bound directly to CHRM3 and inhibited YAP activation induced by CHRM3 stimulation. Furthermore, miR-15b-5p abolished the growth of CRPC cells induced by CHRM3 stimulation. We conclude that the miR-15b-5p/CHRM3/YAP signalling axis promotes the castration-resistant growth of prostate cancer.
Acinar cells in acute pancreatitis (AP) die through apoptosis and necrosis, the impacts of which are quite different. Early clinical interference strategies on preventing the progress of AP to severe acute pancreatitis (SAP) are the elimination of inflammation response and inhibition of necrosis. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M3 was encoded by Chrm3 gene. It is one of the best-characterized receptors of pancreatic beta cells and regulates insulin secretion, but its function in AP remains unclear. In this study, we explored the function of Chrm3 gene in the regulation of cell death in l-arginine-induced SAP animal models. We found that Chrm3 was upregulated in pancreatitis, and we further confirmed the localization of Chrm3 resided in both pancreatic islets and acinar cell membranes. The reduction of Chrm3 decreased the pathological lesion of SAP and reduced amylase activities in serum. Consistently, Chrm3 can suppress acinar cells necrosis markedly, but has no effect on regulating apoptosis after l-arginine treatment. It was shown that Chrm3 attenuated acinar cells necrosis at least in part by stabilizing caspase-8. Thus, this study indicates that Chrm3 is critical participants in SAP, and regulation of Chrm3 expression might be a useful therapeutic strategy for preventing pathologic necrosis.
Hypoxia can lead to adult middle cerebral artery (MCA) dysfunction and increase the risk of cerebrovascular diseases. It is largely unknown whether intrauterine hypoxia affects fetal MCA vasodilatation. This study investigated the effects and mechanisms of intrauterine hypoxia on fetal MCA vasodilatation. Near-term fetal sheep were exposed to intrauterine hypoxia. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were exposed to hypoxia in cellular experiments. Vascular tone measurement, molecular analysis, and transmission electron microscope (TEM) were utilized to determine vascular functions, tissue anatomy, and molecular pathways in fetal MCA. In fetal MCA, acetylcholine (ACh) induced reliable relaxation, which was markedly attenuated by intrauterine hypoxia. Atropine, P-F-HHSiD, L-NAME, and u0126 blocked most ACh-mediated dilation, while AF-DX 116 and tropicamide partially inhibited the dilation. Indomethacin and SB203580 did not significantly change ACh-mediated dilation. Tempol and PS-341 could restore the attenuated ACh-mediated vasodilatation following intrauterine hypoxia. The mRNA expression levels of CHRM2 and CHRM3 and the protein levels of CHRM3, p-NOS3, SOD2, ERK1/2, p-ERK1/2, MAPK14, and p-MAPK14 were significantly reduced by intrauterine hypoxia. The dihydroethidium assay showed that the production of ROS was increased under intrauterine hypoxia. TEM analysis revealed endothelial cells damaged by intrauterine hypoxia. In HUVECs, hypoxia increased ROS formation and decreased the expression of CHRM3, p-NOS3, SOD1, SOD2, SOD3, ERK1/2, p-ERK1/2, and p-MAPK14, while tempol and PS-341 potentiated p-NOS3 protein expression. In conclusion, in utero hypoxia reduced ACh-mediated vasodilatation in ovine MCA predominantly via decreased CHRM3 and p-NOS3, and the decreased NOS3 bioactivities might be attributed to ROS and ERK1/2.
BACKGROUND: Expression and activation of subtype-3 muscarinic receptors (M3R) plays an important role in the progression of colorectal neoplasia. METHOD: Herein, we describe the role of muscarinic receptors in colon cancer, focusing specifically on M3R, illustrate how M3R over-expression and activation of post-receptor signaling pathways potentiates tumor progression, and explore the efficacy and safety of a variety of therapeutic approaches that can target the molecules involved. RESULTS: Colon cancers overexpress M3R mRNA (CHRM3) and protein, and post-M3R signaling stimulates cell proliferation. Post-M3R signal transduction is complex, involving interplay between epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR)/ERK and protein kinase C (PKC)/p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling pathways. In particular, the development of an invasive and metastatic phenotype requires that these signaling interactions augment cellular release of a key collagenase, matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP1). Blocking either M3R activation or post-M3R signaling attenuates MMP1 release and colon cancer invasiveness. CONCLUSION: Parsing the complexities of these signaling interactions is important, not only to understand these mechanisms of cancer initiation and progression, but also to develop novel treatment modalities. Since the vast majority of persons with colon cancer die from disseminated disease, preventing or reversing metastatic spread of cancer cells by targeting M3R, post-M3R signaling, or MMP1 has therapeutic potential.
BACKGROUND: Clinical risk factors for postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) are usually stratified using the Apfel Score. While a genetic predisposition has recently been demonstrated with the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRM3) rs2165870 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), we investigated whether (1) other SNPs contribute to PONV risk and (2) a genetic risk score might summarise genetic PONV risk. METHODS: We retrospectively analysed data from a study with 472 patients undergoing elective surgery. We investigated the SNPs rs3218315 (IL2RB), rs349358 (KCNB2), rs703363 (intergenic variant), rs1800497 (DRD2), rs1799971 (OPRM1), and rs1176713 (HTR3A). A genetic risk score was established and association with PONV investigated. RESULTS: Early PONV occurred in 37%. There was a significant association of the KCNB2 rs349358 SNP with nausea (P = 0.021), retching (P = 0.001), and PONV (P = 0.006). The rs349358 genotype distribution was TT in 310 and TC/CC in 155 patients. The KCNB2 SNP was associated with an Odds Ratio (OR) of 1.6 for CT/CC vs. TT (95% CI 1-2.5; P = 0.031) to develop PONV and this was independent from the Apfel Score, and the CHRM3 rs2165870 SNP. A genetic risk score based on the CHRM3 rs2165870 and the KCNB2 rs349358 SNP was created and this genetic score (OR per genetic risk score point: 1.6 (1.3-2.1), P < 0.0001) was independent from the Apfel Score (OR per Apfel score point: 1.6 (1.3-1.9), P < 0.0001) associated with PONV. CONCLUSION: The KCNB2 rs349358 SNP is also an independent PONV predictor and a genetic risk score has a similar impact on PONV susceptibility compared to the Apfel Score.
The M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (M(3)R) is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that regulates important physiologic processes, including vascular tone, bronchoconstriction, and insulin secretion. It is expressed on a wide variety of cell types, including pancreatic beta, smooth muscle, neuronal, and immune cells. Agonist binding to the M(3)R is thought to initiate intracellular signaling events primarily through the heterotrimeric G protein Gq. However, reports differ on the ability of M(3)R to couple to other G proteins beyond Gq. Using members from the four primary G protein families (Gq, Gi, Gs, and G13) in radioligand binding, GTP turnover experiments, and cellular signaling assays, including live cell G protein dissociation and second messenger assessment of cAMP and inositol trisphosphate, we show that other G protein families, particularly Gi and Gs, can also interact with the human M(3)R. We further show that these interactions are productive as assessed by amplification of classic second messenger signaling events. Our findings demonstrate that the M(3)R is more promiscuous with respect to G protein interactions than previously appreciated. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The study reveals that the human M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (M(3)R), known for its pivotal roles in diverse physiological processes, not only activates intracellular signaling via Gq as previously known but also functionally interacts with other G protein families such as Gi and Gs, expanding our understanding of its versatility in mediating cellular responses. These findings signify a broader and more complex regulatory network governed by M(3)R and have implications for therapeutic targeting.
BACKGROUND: Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is the most frequent side effect following anaesthesia. Predisposition to developing PONV is multifactorial with patient risk factors and anaesthetic techniques both being contributory. However, there is also a genetic susceptibility to PONV, and several studies have aimed to identify polymorphisms contributing to a genetic PONV risk. OBJECTIVE: We summarised previous published studies investigating genetic contribution to PONV risk. DESIGN: Systematic review without meta-analysis. DATA SOURCE: We searched MEDLINE until June 2019. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Articles were chosen for review when PONV and polymorphisms were included. Exclusion criteria were reviews/meta-analysis/comments, articles not in the English language, nonappropriate content (e.g. PONV not as primary aim of the study, study investigated opioid-induced nausea) or if articles were pharmacogenetic studies addressing treatment of PONV. RESULTS: A total of 59 studies were screened and 14 articles were reviewed including one genome-wide association study (GWAS). Seven studies were performed in East Asians, and seven in Caucasians. Seventeen polymorphisms have been positively associated with PONV in at least one study. Allele frequency of the investigated polymorphisms differs widely between the ethnicities. Furthermore, the anaesthesia regimen and the postoperative time point at which the association with PONV was reported were quite different. Only two polymorphisms, the CHRM3 rs2165870 and the KCNB2 rs349358 (both first associated with PONV in a GWAS), have been significantly associated with PONV incidence in Caucasians in independent studies. CONCLUSION: There is a genetic susceptibility to the development of PONV. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), the CHRM3 rs2165870 and the KCNB2 rs349358 SNP, seem to have a major influence on PONV incidence, at least in Caucasians. Both SNPs were primarily identified in a GWAS and this association may lead to a better understanding of the disease aetiology. Further high-quality studies are needed to reveal more insights in genetic PONV susceptibility, particularly so in non-Caucasian ethnicities.
PURPOSE: Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) is characterized by retinal new vessel formation, pointing to the importance of the antiangiogenic treatment in PDR. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (HNF4A) has been highlighted to inhibit vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-stimulated in vitro angiogenesis. Therefore, this study aims to elucidate the potential antiangiogenic mechanisms of HNF4A in PDR. METHODS: PDR-related high-throughput sequencing datasets (GSE94019, GSE102485, and GSE191210) were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, followed by the screening of differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the candidate DEGs was constructed based on gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) data and Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING) data. In addition, the key genes and pathways related to angiogenesis were screened by functional enrichment analysis. Furthermore, human retinal microvascular cells were used for further in vitro validation. RESULTS: Four key genes (CACNA1A, CACNA1E, PDE1B, and CHRM3) related to PDR were identified in the grey module. CACNA1A affected angiogenesis in PDR by regulating vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) expression. Furthermore, HNF4A participated in angiogenesis in PDR by activating CACNA1A. In vitro experiments further identified that inhibition of HNF4A reduced CACNA1A expression and increased VEGFA expression, thus promoting angiogenesis in PDR. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the obtained findings suggest that antiangiogenic HNF4A activates the CACNA1A/VEGFA axis in PDR. Our work provides new insights into the angiogenic mechanism of PDR and offers potential targets for translational applications.
BACKGROUND: Genomic instability and aberrant tumor mutation burden are widely accepted hallmarks of cancer. Glioblastoma (GBM) is a common brain tumor in adults, and survival of patients with GBM is poor. This study aimed to investigate the prognostic value of genomic instability-derived genes in GBM. METHODS: GBM data were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas and Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas databases. Differential expression analysis of all samples with different tumor mutation burden was performed. Univariate Cox and LASSO Cox regression analyses were integrated to determine the optimal genes for constructing a risk score model. Multivariate Cox regression analysis and survival analysis determined independent prognostic indicators. Immune cell infiltration was analyzed by CIBERSORT algorithm. RESULTS: In GMB patients with high and low tumor mutation burden, we identified 154 differentially expressed genes, which were significantly enriched in 47 Gene Ontology terms and 6 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways. To establish a risk score, 9 genes were further screened, including SDC1, CXCL1, CXCL6, RGS4, PCDHGB2, CA9, ZAR1, CHRM3, and SLN. High-risk patients had worse prognosis in two databases. The performance of a nomogram including prognostic factors (risk score and age) was good. Moreover, mast cells resting was significantly differentially infiltrated between high- and low-risk GBM samples. CONCLUSIONS: The risk score constructed by 9 genomic instability-derived genes could reliably predict prognosis of GBM patients. The nomogram based on age and risk score also had a good prognostic predictive value.
Endothelial cells derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC-ECs) provide a new opportunity for mechanistic research on vascular regeneration and drug screening. However, functions of hiPSC-ECs still need to be characterized. The objective of this study was to investigate electrophysiological and functional properties of hiPSC-ECs compared with primary human cardiac microvascular endothelial cells (HCMECs), mainly focusing on ion channels and membrane receptor signaling, as well as specific cell functions. HiPSC-ECs were derived from hiPS cells that were generated from human skin fibroblasts of three independent healthy donors. Phenotypic and functional comparison to HCMECs was performed by flow cytometry, immunofluorescence staining, quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), tube formation, LDL uptake, exosome release assays and, importantly, patch clamp techniques. HiPSC-ECs were successfully generated from hiPS cells and were identified by endothelial markers. The mRNA levels of KCNN2, KCNN4, KCNMA1, TRPV2, and SLC8A1 in hiPSC-ECs were significantly higher than HCMECs. AT1 receptor mRNA level in hiPSC-ECs was higher than in HCMECs. AT2 receptor mRNA level was the highest among all receptors. Adrenoceptor ADRA2 expression in hiPSC-ECs was lower than in HCMECs, while ADRA1, ADRB1, ADRB2, and G-protein GNA11 and Gai expression were similar in both cell types. The expression level of muscarinic and dopamine receptors CHRM3, DRD2, DRD3, and DRD4 in hiPSC-ECs were significantly lower than in HCMECs. The functional characteristics of endothelial cells, such as tube formation and LDL uptake assay, were not statistically different between hiPSC-ECs and HCMECs. Phenylephrine similarly increased the release of the vasoconstrictor endothelin-1 (ET-1) in hiPSC-ECs and HCMECs. Acetylcholine also similarly increased nitric oxide generation in hiPSC-ECs and HCMECs. The resting potentials (RPs), I(SK1-3), I(SK4) and I(K1) were similar in hiPSC-ECs and HCMECs. I(BK) was larger and I(KATP) was smaller in hiPSC-ECs. In addition, we also noted a higher expression level of exosomes marker CD81 in hiPSC-ECs and a higher expression of CD9 and CD63 in HCMECs. However, the numbers of exosomes extracted from both types of cells did not differ significantly. The study demonstrates that hiPSC-ECs are similar to native endothelial cells in ion channel function and membrane receptor-coupled signaling and physiological cell functions, although some differences exist. This information may be helpful for research using hiPSC-ECs.
