Acetylcholine receptor subunit delta; After binding acetylcholine, the AChR responds by an extensive change in conformation that affects all subunits and leads to opening of an ion-conducting channel across the plasma membrane. Belongs to the ligand-gated ion channel (TC 1.A.9) family. Acetylcholine receptor (TC 1.A.9.1) subfamily. Delta/CHRND sub- subfamily.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by impaired neuromuscular signal transmission due to germline pathogenic variants in genes expressed at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). A total of 35 genes have been reported in CMS (AGRN, ALG14, ALG2, CHAT, CHD8, CHRNA1, CHRNB1, CHRND, CHRNE, CHRNG, COL13A1, COLQ, DOK7, DPAGT1, GFPT1, GMPPB, LAMA5, LAMB2, LRP4, MUSK, MYO9A, PLEC, PREPL, PURA, RAPSN, RPH3A, SCN4A, SLC18A3, SLC25A1, SLC5A7, SNAP25, SYT2, TOR1AIP1, UNC13A, VAMP1). The 35 genes can be classified into 14 groups according to the pathomechanical, clinical, and therapeutic features of CMS patients. Measurement of compound muscle action potentials elicited by repetitive nerve stimulation is required to diagnose CMS. Clinical and electrophysiological features are not sufficient to identify a defective molecule, and genetic studies are always required for accurate diagnosis. From a pharmacological point of view, cholinesterase inhibitors are effective in most groups of CMS, but are contraindicated in some groups of CMS. Similarly, ephedrine, salbutamol (albuterol), amifampridine are effective in most but not all groups of CMS. This review extensively covers pathomechanical and clinical features of CMS by citing 442 relevant articles.
BACKGROUND: Clinical and molecular data on the occurrence and frequency of inherited neuromuscular disorders (NMD) in the Lebanese population is scarce. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to provide a retrospective overview of hereditary NMDs based on our clinical consultations in Lebanon. METHODS: Clinical and molecular data of patients referred to a multi-disciplinary consultation for neuromuscular disorders over a 20-year period (1999-2019) was reviewed. RESULTS: A total of 506 patients were diagnosed with 62 different disorders encompassing 10 classes of NMDs. 103 variants in 49 genes were identified. In this cohort, 81.4% of patients were diagnosed with motor neuron diseases and muscular dystrophies, with almost half of these described with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) (40.3% of patients). We estimate a high SMA incidence of 1 in 7,500 births in Lebanon. Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy were the second most frequently diagnosed NMDs (17% of patients). These disorders were associated with the highest number of variants (39) identified in this study. A highly heterogeneous presentation of Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease was notably identified. The least common disorders (5.5% of patients) involved congenital, metabolic, and mitochondrial myopathies, congenital myasthenic syndromes, and myotonic dystrophies. A review of the literature for selected NMDs in Lebanon is provided. CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates a high prevalence and underreporting of heterogeneous forms of NMDs in Lebanon- a major challenge with many novel NMD treatments in the pipeline. This report calls for a regional NMD patient registry.
BACKGROUND: N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is one of the most extensive RNA methylation modifications in eukaryotes and participates in the pathogenesis of numerous diseases including ischemic stroke. Peripheral blood neutrophils are forerunners after ischemic brain injury and exert crucial functions. This study aims to explore the transcriptional profiles of m6A modification in neutrophils of patients with ischemic stroke. RESULTS: We found that the expression levels of m6A regulators FTO and YTHDC1 were notably decreased in the neutrophils following ischemic stroke, and FTO expression was negatively correlated with neutrophil counts and neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR). The m6A mRNA&lncRNA epigenetic transcriptome microarray identified 416 significantly upregulated and 500 significantly downregulated mRNA peaks in neutrophils of ischemic stroke patients. Moreover, 48 mRNAs and 18 lncRNAs were hypermethylated, and 115 mRNAs and 29 lncRNAs were hypomethylated after cerebral ischemia. Gene ontology (GO) analysis identified that these m6A-modified mRNAs were primarily enriched in calcium ion transport, long-term synaptic potentiation, and base-excision repair. The signaling pathways involved were EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance, ErbB, and base excision repair signaling pathway. MeRIP-qPCR validation results showed that NRG1 and GDPD1 were significantly hypermethylated, and LIG1, CHRND, lncRNA RP11-442J17.2, and lncRNA RP11-600P1.2 were significantly hypomethylated after cerebral ischemia. Moreover, the expression levels of major m6A regulators Mettl3, Fto, Ythdf1, and Ythdf3 were obviously declined in the brain and leukocytes of post-stroke mouse models. CONCLUSION: This study explored the RNA m6A methylation pattern in the neutrophils of ischemic stroke patients, indicating that it is an intervention target of epigenetic regulation in ischemic stroke.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the genetic basis for a female patient featuring unstable head upright and hypotonia of limbs. METHODS: The child was examined clinically. Peripheral blood samples of the child, her parents and siblings were collected. Genomic DNA was extracted and subjected to next generation sequencing (NGS). Suspected variant was verified by Sanger sequencing and bioinformatic analysis. RESULTS: DNA sequencing found that the patient has carried a de novo heterozygous c.354C>A (p.N118K) variant of the CHRND gene, which was not found in her parents and sibling. Bioinformatics analysis predicted that the variant was likely to be pathogenic. Literature review suggested that the phenotype of the patient was very similar to previously reported ones. CONCLUSION: The child was diagnosed with slow-channel congenital myasthenic syndrome (SCCMS) type 3A caused by heterozygous variant of the CHRND gene. NGS has provided a powerful tool for the diagnosis of such disorders.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes comprise heterogeneous genetic diseases characterized by compromised neuromuscular transmission. Congenital myasthenic syndromes are classified as presynaptic, synaptic, or postsynaptic, depending on the primary defect's location within the neuromuscular junction. Presynaptic forms are the rarest, affecting an estimated 7-8% of patients; synaptic forms account for approximately 14-15% of patients; and the remaining 75-80% are attributable to postsynaptic defects. Clinical manifestations vary by congenital myasthenic syndrome subtype. Electrophysiologic, morphologic, and molecular descriptions of various forms of congenital myasthenic syndromes have led to an enhanced understanding of clinical manifestations and disease pathophysiology. Although congenital myasthenic syndromes are indicated by clinical manifestations, family history, electrophysiologic studies, and responses to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, overlap in some presentations occurs. Therefore, genetic testing may be necessary to identify specific mutations in CHAT, COLQ, LAMB2, CHRNA, CHRNB, CHRND, CHRNE, CHRNG, RAPSN, DOK7, MUSK, AGRN, SCN4A, GFPT1, or PLEC1 genes. The identification of congenital myasthenic syndromes subtypes will prove important in the treatment of these patients. Different drugs may be beneficial, or should be avoided because they are ineffective or worsen some forms of congenital myasthenic syndromes. We explore the classification, clinical manifestations, electrophysiologic features, genetics, and treatment responses of each congenital myasthenic syndrome subtype.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are clinically and genetically heterogeneous diseases caused by mutations affecting neuromuscular transmission. Even if the first symptoms mainly occur during childhood, adult neurologists must confront this challenging diagnosis and manage these patients throughout their adulthood. However, long-term follow-up data from large cohorts of CMS patients are lacking, and the long-term prognosis of these patients is largely unknown. We report the clinical features, diagnostic difficulties, and long-term prognosis of a French nationwide cohort of 235 adult patients with genetically confirmed CMS followed in 23 specialized neuromuscular centres. Data were retrospectively analysed. Of the 235 patients, 123 were female (52.3%). The diagnosis was made in adulthood in 139 patients, 110 of whom presented their first symptoms before the age of 18. Mean follow-up time between first symptoms and last visit was 34 years [standard deviation (SD) = 15.1]. Pathogenic variants were found in 19 disease-related genes. CHRNE-low expressor variants were the most common (23.8%), followed by variants in DOK7 (18.7%) and RAPSN (14%). Genotypes were clustered into four groups according to the initial presentation: ocular group (CHRNE-LE, CHRND, FCCMS), distal group (SCCMS), limb-girdle group (RAPSN, COLQ, DOK7, GMPPB, GFPT1), and a variable-phenotype group (MUSK, AGRN). The phenotypical features of CMS did not change throughout life. Only four genotypes had a proportion of patients requiring intensive care unit admission that exceeded 20%: RAPSN (54.8%), MUSK (50%), DOK7 (38.6%) and AGRN (25.0%). In RAPSN and MUSK patients most ICU admissions occurred before age 18 years and in DOK7 and AGRN patients at or after 18 years of age. Different patterns of disease course (stability, improvement and progressive worsening) may succeed one another in the same patient throughout life, particularly in AGRN, DOK7 and COLQ. At the last visit, 55% of SCCMS and 36.3% of DOK7 patients required ventilation; 36.3% of DOK7 patients, 25% of GMPPB patients and 20% of GFPT1 patients were wheelchair-bound; most of the patients who were both wheelchair-bound and ventilated were DOK7 patients. Six patients died in this cohort. The positive impact of therapy was striking, even in severely affected patients. In conclusion, even if motor and/or respiratory deterioration could occur in patients with initially moderate disease, particularly in DOK7, SCCMS and GFPT1 patients, the long-term prognosis for most CMS patients was favourable, with neither ventilation nor wheelchair needed at last visit. CHRNE-LE patients did not worsen during adulthood and RAPSN patients, often severely affected in early childhood, subsequently improved.
AIM: Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are rare, genetically and phenotypically diverse disorders of neuromuscular transmission. Data on prevalence among children are scarce. Whole exome sequencing facilitated discovery of novel CMS mutations and enabled targeted treatment. Our aim was to identify the prevalence, genetic subtypes and clinical characteristics of CMS in pediatric population of Slovenia. METHODS: In this observational, national, cross-sectional study, medical records were retrospectively reviewed. Children with genetically confirmed CMS, referred over a 19 - year period (2000-2018) to the University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, were included in the study. Genetic and phenotypic characteristics were collected and prevalence of CMS in children was calculated. RESULTS: Eight children with a confirmed genetic mutation in 5 different genes (CHRNE, CHRND, RAPSN, CHAT, MUSK) causative of the CMS were identified. Calculated prevalence of genetically confirmed CMS was 22.2 cases per 1.000.000 children at the end of 2018. INTERPRETATION: The prevalence of genetically confirmed CMS in Slovenian children at the end of 2018 exceeds previously reported prevalence by more than two-fold, which suggests that prevalence in the literature is likely to be underestimated. Two extremely rarely detected mutations in MUSK and CHRND gene were detected and patient's clinical descriptions add important information on genotype-phenotype correlation.
Multiple pterygium syndromes (MPS) comprise a group of multiple congenital anomaly disorders characterized by webbing (pterygia) of the neck, elbows, and/or knees and joint contractures (arthrogryposis). MPS are phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous but are traditionally divided into prenatally lethal and nonlethal (Escobar) types. Previously, we and others reported that recessive mutations in the embryonal acetylcholine receptor g subunit (CHRNG) can cause both lethal and nonlethal MPS, thus demonstrating that pterygia resulted from fetal akinesia. We hypothesized that mutations in acetylcholine receptor-related genes might also result in a MPS/fetal akinesia phenotype and so we analyzed 15 cases of lethal MPS/fetal akinesia without CHRNG mutations for mutations in the CHRNA1, CHRNB1, CHRND, and rapsyn (RAPSN) genes. No CHRNA1, CHRNB1, or CHRND mutations were detected, but a homozygous RAPSN frameshift mutation, c.1177-1178delAA, was identified in a family with three children affected with lethal fetal akinesia sequence. Previously, RAPSN mutations have been reported in congenital myasthenia. Functional studies were consistent with the hypothesis that whereas incomplete loss of rapsyn function may cause congenital myasthenia, more severe loss of function can result in a lethal fetal akinesia phenotype.
BACKGROUND: Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of genetic disorders characterized by impaired neuromuscular transmission. CMS typically present at a young age with fatigable muscle weakness, often with an abnormal response after repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS). Pharmacologic treatment can improve symptoms, depending on the underlying defect. Prevalence is likely underestimated. This study reports on patients with CMS followed in Belgium in 2022. METHODS: Data were gathered retrospectively from the medical charts. Only likely pathogenic and pathogenic variants were included in the analysis. RESULTS: We identified 37 patients, resulting in an estimated prevalence of 3.19 per 1,000,000. The patients harbored pathogenic variants in CHRNE, RAPSN, DOK7, PREPL, CHRNB1, CHRNG, COLQ, MUSK, CHRND, GFPT1, and GMPPB. CHRNE was the most commonly affected gene. Most patients showed disease onset at birth, during infancy, or during childhood. Symptom onset was at adult age in seven patients, caused by variants in CHRNE, DOK7, MUSK, CHRND, and GMPPB. Severity and distribution of weakness varied, as did the presence of respiratory involvement, feeding problems, and extraneuromuscular manifestations. RNS was performed in 23 patients of whom 18 demonstrated a pathologic decrement. Most treatment responses were predictable based on the genotype. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first pooled characterization of patients with CMS in Belgium. We broaden the phenotypical spectrum of pathogenic variants in CHRNE with adult-onset CMS. Systematically documenting larger cohorts of patients with CMS can aid in better clinical characterization and earlier recognition of this rare disease. We emphasize the importance of establishing a molecular genetic diagnosis to tailor treatment choices.
Insight into the bidirectional signaling between primary human myogenic cells and neurons is lacking. For this purpose, human myogenic cells were derived from the semitendinosus and gracilis muscles of five healthy individuals and co-cultured with cerebellar granule neurons from two litters of 7-day-old Wistar rat pups, in muscle medium or neural medium, alongside monocultures of myogenic cells or neurons. RT-PCR was performed to determine human mRNA levels of GAPDH, Ki67, myogenin, and MUSK, and the acetylcholine receptor subtypes CHRNA1, CHRNB1, CHRNG, CHRND, and CHRNE, and rat mRNA levels of GAPDH, Fth1, Rack1, vimentin, Cdh13, and Ppp1r1a. Immunocytochemistry was used to evaluate neurite outgrowth (GAP43) in the presence and absence of myogenic cells. Co-culture with primary neurons lead to higher myogenic cell gene expression levels of GAPDH, myogenin, MUSK, CHRNA1, CHRNG, and CHRND, compared to myogenic cells cultured alone. It appeared that neurons preferentially attached to myotubes and that neurite outgrowth was enhanced when neurons were cultured with myogenic cells compared to monoculture. In neural medium, rat mRNA levels of GAPDH, vimentin, Cdh13, and Ppp1r1a were greater in co-culture, versus monoculture, whereas in muscle medium co-culture lead to lower levels of Fth1, Rack1, vimentin, and Cdh13 than monoculture. These findings demonstrate mutually beneficial stimulatory signaling between rat cerebellar granule neurons and human myogenic cells, providing support for an active role for both the neuron and the muscle cell in stimulating neurite growth and myogenesis. Bidirectional muscle nerve signaling.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of inherited disorders caused by mutations in genes encoding proteins essential for neuromuscular transmission. CMS is characterized by fatigable muscle weakness with onset at birth or in early childhood; rarely, symptoms may present later. The most frequently involved proteins are choline acetyltransferase, the endplate species of acetylcholinesterase and the acetylcholine receptor subunits. Defects in the cholinergic receptor nicotinic delta subunit (CHRND) are a rare cause for CMS but they should be considered in patients with a severe, early onset disease, with respiratory distress. We describe two sisters, clinically and genetically diagnosed with CMS, carrying two heteroallelic variants in the CHRND gene: c.730C>T; p.(Arg244Cys) and c.1304T>C; p.(Leu435Pro). The first variant has already been described yet no clinical relevance has been proved; the second one, is a novel variant documented here for the first time. These two cases expand the clinical spectrum of CMS linked to CHRND mutations.
PURPOSE: Wavelength signals play a vital role in refractive development. This study aimed to explore the retinal transcriptome signature in these processes. METHODS: Guinea pigs were randomly divided into three groups exposed to white, blue, or green environmental light for eight weeks. Refraction and axial length were evaluated every 4 weeks, and the retinal transcriptome was profiled at 8 weeks. RESULTS: Compared with the white group, ocular refraction significantly decreased and ocular axial length significantly extended in the green group whereas these parameters showed opposite trends in the blue group. RNA-sequencing showed that, compared with the white group, 184 and 171 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were found in the blue and green groups, respectively. Among these DEGs, only 31 overlapped. These two sets of DEGs were enriched in distinct biological processes and pathways. There were 268 DEGs between the blue and green groups, which were primarily enriched in the extracellular matrix, and metabolism, receptor activity, and ion binding processes. In addition, nine human genes, including ECEL1, CHRND, SHBG, PRSS56, OVOL1, RDH5, WNT7B, PEBP4, CA12, were identified to be related to myopia development and wavelength response, indicating the potential role of these genes in human wavelength-induced myopia. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified retinal targets and pathways involved in the response to wavelength signals in emmetropization.
With aging skeletal muscle fibers undergo repeating cycles of denervation and reinnervation. In approximately the 8th decade of life reinnervation no longer keeps pace, resulting in the accumulation of persistently denervated muscle fibers that in turn cause an acceleration of muscle dysfunction. The significance of denervation in important clinical outcomes with aging is poorly studied. The Study of Muscle, Mobility, and Aging (SOMMA) is a large cohort study with the primary objective to assess how aging muscle biology impacts clinically important traits. Using transcriptomics data from vastus lateralis muscle biopsies in 575 participants we have selected 49 denervation-responsive genes to provide insights to the burden of denervation in SOMMA, to test the hypothesis that greater expression of denervation-responsive genes negatively associates with SOMMA participant traits that included time to walk 400 meters, fitness (VO(2peak)), maximal mitochondrial respiration, muscle mass and volume, and leg muscle strength and power. Consistent with our hypothesis, increased transcript levels of: a calciumdependent intercellular adhesion glycoprotein (CDH15), acetylcholine receptor subunits (CHRNA1, CHRND, CHRNE), a glycoprotein promoting reinnervation (NCAM1), a transcription factor regulating aspects of muscle organization (RUNX1), and a sodium channel (SCN5A) were each negatively associated with at least 3 of these traits. VO(2peak) and maximal respiration had the strongest negative associations with 15 and 19 denervation-responsive genes, respectively. In conclusion, the abundance of denervationresponsive gene transcripts is a significant determinant of muscle and mobility outcomes in aging humans, supporting the imperative to identify new treatment strategies to restore innervation in advanced age.
The muscle acetylcholine receptor (AChR) is the main target self-antigen in acquired autoimmune myasthenia gravis (MG). Here, we investigated an association of MG with the CHRND gene encoding the delta-subunit of the AChR. Using a microsatellite repeat located in the second intron of the gene, we observed a preferential transmission of the allele 268 in 114 one-generation families with one myasthenic child (Pc=0.0154). This allele was also over-represented in a group of 350 unrelated nonthymoma MG patients (OR=1.78, P=0.038), but not in 84 thymoma patients, compared to 168 healthy controls. Moreover, among nonthymoma patients, those lacking serum anti-titin antibodies appeared to be best associated (OR=2.07, P=0.017). In contrast, there was no distortion in the transmission of a single-nucleotide substitution polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 3' untranslated region of CHRND nor in that of two SNPs located in the closely linked CHRNG gene, 4.5 kb telomeric to CHRND. The data warrant a detailed investigation of CHRND polymorphism in MG patients.
Paroxysmal dystonic choreoathetosis (PDC) is characterized by attacks of involuntary dystonic and choreoathetoid movements, typically several hours in duration with no sign of abnormality between attacks. Inheritance is autosomal dominant and the PDC locus has recently been assigned to the distal long arm of chromosome 2 in two families. We describe a six-generation British family with PDC and describe the results of fine genetic mapping and candidate gene linkage analysis. As part of a genome-wide search, linkage to chromosome 2q was confirmed in this family. Positive LOD scores were obtained for six markers on 2q. A LOD score of 5.08 at a recombination fraction of 0.0 was obtained for the marker D2S163. Construction of haplotypes allowed definition of a disease interval of 4 cM between the flanking markers D2S295 and D2S377. Polymorphic tandem repeats within the candidate genes CHRND (delta polypeptide of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor) and SLC4A3 were examined yielding LOD scores of -7.68 and 6.08, respectively, at a recombination fraction of 0.0. This excludes CHRND as a candidate. Our data confirm the assignment of the locus for PDC to chromosome 2q and provide evidence for locus homogeneity in PDC. We have narrowed the disease interval to 4 cM and our findings provide support for the involvement of the gene for the chloride/bicarbonate exchanger as a candidate gene for PDC.
Fetal akinesia deformation sequence is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by a variable combination of arthrogryposis, fetal akinesia, intrauterine growth restriction, developmental abnormalities such as cystic hygroma, pulmonary hypoplasia, cleft palate, cryptorchidism, cardiac defects and intestinal malrotation, and occasional pterygia of the limbs. Multiple pterygium syndrome is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by pterygia of the neck, elbows and/or knees, arthrogryposis, and other phenotypic features such as short stature, genital abnormalities, craniofacial abnormalities, clubfoot, kyphoscoliosis, and cardiac abnormalities. Fetal akinesia deformation sequence may phenotypically overlap with the lethal type of multiple pterygium syndrome. This article provides a comprehensive review of prenatal diagnosis and genetic analysis of fetal akinesia deformation sequence and multiple pterygium syndrome associated with neuromuscular junction disorders. Prenatal diagnosis of fetal akinesia along with cystic hygroma, increased nuchal translucency, nuchal edema, hydrops fetalis, arthrogryposis, pterygia, and other structural abnormalities should include a differential diagnosis of neuromuscular junction disorders. Genetic analysis of mutations in the neuromuscular junction genes such as CHRNA1, CHRND, CHRNG, CNTN1, DOK7, RAPSN, and SYNE1 may unveil the pathogenetic cause of fetal akinesia deformation sequence and multiple pterygium syndrome, and the information acquired is helpful for genetic counseling and clinical management.
The objective of this study was to report the clinical phenotype and genetic analysis of two Indian families with Escobar syndrome (ES). The diagnosis of ES in both families was made on the basis of published clinical features. Blood samples were collected from members of both families and used in genomic DNA isolation. The entire coding regions and intron-exon junctions of the ES gene CHRNG (cholinergic receptor, nicotinic, gamma), and two other related genes, CHRND and CHRNA1, were amplified and sequenced to search for mutations in both families. Both families show a typical form of ES. Sequencing of the entire coding regions including the intron-exon junctions of the three genes did not yield any mutations in these families. In conclusion, it is possible that the mutations in these genes are located in the promoter or deep intronic regions that we failed to identify or the ES in these families is caused by mutations in a different gene. The lack of mutations in CHRNG has also been reported in several families, suggesting the possibility of at least one more gene for this syndrome.
INTRODUCTION: Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of genetic disorders that stem mostly from molecular defects in nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (AChRs). Defects in the cholinergic receptor nicotinic delta subunit (CHRND) gene can cause a series of myasthenic syndromes. Here, we report 2 new compound heterozygous variants of the CHRND gene in a Chinese male with CMS. CASE PRESENTATION: A 43-year-old Chinese male presented with progressive muscle weakness, difficulty chewing, and an inability to lift his head from the time he was 8 years old. He was treated with pyridostigmine, which was partially effective. Two weeks prior, he was hospitalized for dyspnea. Upon examination, he was unable to drum his cheeks and exhibited fatigable muscle weakness and facial muscle atrophy. Sequencing of his exome revealed 2 previously unreported mutations in CHRND, c.59G>A (exon2) and c.423G>C (exon5). CONCLUSIONS: We identified a new mutational site that contributes to the onset of CMS.
Some case reports have suggested possible worsening of the clinical condition of patients with congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) during pregnancy. However, this risk has not yet been quantified in a significant number of patients. Using a standardized report form, we reviewed the gynecological and obstetrical medical history of all patients with CMS listed in the French Registry. The data were reviewed with the assistance of the patients to insure accuracy. We report on 17 pregnancies in eight patients with CMS with mutations in CHRNA1, CHRNE, CHRND, GFPT1, COLQ, or DOK7. Symptoms worsened for six patients during at least one of their pregnancies, and one patient required hospitalization in an intensive care unit during the post-partum period. One patient never recovered to the level of her pre-pregnancy clinical condition. Only one caesarean section was performed. The outcome for children was excellent, with the exceptions of a pulmonary artery atresia in the offspring of a mother on pyridostigmin and a newborn with a severe neonatal congenital myasthenic syndrome (an autosomic dominant slow channel transmission). Our study argues in favor of frequent clinical worsening of symptoms during pregnancy in patients with CMS. These patients should be closely followed by neurologists during the course of pregnancy. However, the overall clinical prognosis is good since the vast majority of patients recovered their pre-pregnancy clinical status six months after the delivery.
Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) refers to a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders with congenital malformations related to impaired fetal movement. FADS can result from mutations in CHRNG, CHRNA1, CHRND, DOK7 and RAPSN; however, these genes only account for a minority of cases. Here we identify MUSK as a novel cause of lethal FADS. Fourteen affected fetuses from a Dutch genetic isolate were traced back to common ancestors 11 generations ago. Homozygosity mapping in two fetuses revealed MUSK as a candidate gene. All tested cases carried an identical homozygous variant c.1724T>C; p.(Ile575Thr) in the intracellular domain of MUSK. The carrier frequency in the genetic isolate was 8%, exclusively found in heterozygous carriers. Consistent with the established role of MUSK as a tyrosine kinase that orchestrates neuromuscular synaptogenesis, the fetal myopathy was accompanied by impaired acetylcholine receptor clustering and reduced tyrosine kinase activity at motor nerve endings. A functional assay in myocytes derived from human fetuses confirmed that the variant blocks MUSK-dependent motor endplate formation. Taken together, the results strongly support a causal role of this founder mutation in MUSK, further expanding the gene set associated with FADS and offering new opportunities for prenatal genetic testing.
