Neuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit alpha-10; Ionotropic receptor with a probable role in the modulation of auditory stimuli. Agonist binding may induce an extensive change in conformation that affects all subunits and leads to opening of an ion- conducting channel across the plasma membrane. The channel is permeable to a range of divalent cations including calcium, the influx of which may activate a potassium current which hyperpolarizes the cell membrane. In the ear, this may lead to a reduction in basilar membrane motion, altering the activity of auditory nerve fibers and reduci [...] 
AIM: To identify genetic variants associated with greater tobacco consumption in a Mexican population. PATIENTS & METHODS: Daily smokers were classified as light smokers (LS; n = 742), heavy smokers (HS; n = 601) and nonsmokers (NS; n = 606). In the first stage, a genotyping microarray that included 347 SNPs in CHRNA2-CHRNA7/CHRNA10, CHRNB2-CHRNB4 and NRXN1 genes and 37 ancestry-informative markers was used to analyze 707 samples (187 HS, 328 LS and 192 NS). In the second stage, 14 SNPs from stage 1 were validated in the remaining samples (HS, LS and NS; n = 414 in each group) using real-time PCR. To predict the role of the associated SNPs, an in silico analysis was performed. RESULTS: Two SNPs in NRXN1 and two in CHRNA5 were associated with cigarette consumption, while rs10865246/C (NRXN1) was associated with high nicotine addiction. The in silico analysis revealed that rs1882296/T had a high level of homology with Hsa-miR-6740-5p, which encodes a putative miRNA that targets glutamate receptor subunits (GRIA2, GRID2) and GABA receptor subunits (GABRG1, GABRA4, GABRB2), while rs1882296/C had a high level of homology with Hsa-miR-6866-5p, which encodes a different miRNA that targets GRID2 and GABRB2. CONCLUSION: In a Mexican Mestizo population, greater consumption of cigarettes was influenced by polymorphisms in the NRXN1 and CHRNA5 genes. We proposed new hypotheses regarding the putative roles of miRNAs that influence the GABAergic and glutamatergic pathways in smoking addiction.
Heroin addiction is a chronic and complex brain disease. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) have been shown as major control points in many of the neurological and physiological disorders involved in heroin addiction. In the present study, thirty-three SNPs across nine nAChR genes were selected and probed for their associations with heroin addiction phenotypes in 801 unrelated northwestern Chinese Han patients. We found that rs2565055 in CHRNA2 gene was associated with daily dose of methadone treatment, and rs2672215, rs2672216 and rs2741865 in CHRNA10 gene were associated with the duration of the transition from first use to dependence (DTFUD). Cox multivariable regression analysis revealed that rs3743075, rs6495309 in CHRNA3, rs2304297 in CHRNA6, and rs1948 in CHRNB4 were associated with sexual desire in patients with heroin addiction. These findings were further supported by the identification of a haplotype block spanning CHRNA5, CHRNA3, and CHRNB4 that is correlated with changes in sexual desire after long-term heroin use. Our findings highlight associations between polymorphisms in nAChRs genes and the phenotypes of heroin addiction in the Chinese Han population. We suggest several nAChRs subunits as potential novel targets for the treatment of heroin addiction.
Cholinergic circuits in the central nervous system are vulnerable to age-related functional decline, but it is not known if aging impacts cholinergic signaling in the vestibular sensory organs, which are critically important to balance maintenance and visual gaze stability. We have previously shown cholinergic neurotransmission between vestibular efferent terminals and type II mechanosensory hair cells requires the alpha9 (Chrna9) nicotinic receptor subunit. Homozygous knockout of the alpha9 subunit causes vestibulo-ocular reflex adaptation deficits that mirror those observed in aged mice. This prompted examination of cholinergic signaling in the vestibular sensory organs of aged mice. We confirmed older (>24 months) mice had impaired performance in a balance beam task compared to young (3-4 months) adult mice. While there was no qualitative loss of cholinergic axon varicosities in the crista ampullaris of old mice, qPCR analysis revealed reduced expression of nicotinic receptor subunit genes Chrna1, Chrna9, and Chrna10 in the cristae of old relative to young mice. Functionally, single-cell patch clamp recordings taken from type II vestibular hair cells exposed to acetylcholine show reduced conductance through alpha9/10 subunit-containing nicotinic receptors in older mice, despite preserved passive membrane properties and voltage-activated conductances. These findings suggest that cholinergic signaling in the peripheral vestibular sensory organs is vulnerable to aging processes, manifesting in dynamic molecular and functional age-related changes. Given the importance of these organs to our everyday activities, and the dramatic increase in fall incidence in the older, further investigation into the mechanisms of altered peripheral vestibular function in older humans is warranted.
Chronic pain is a widespread healthcare problem affecting not only the patient but in many ways all the society. Chronic pain is a disease itself that endures for a long period of time and it is resistant to the majority of medical treatments that provide modest improvements in pain and minimum improvements in physical and emotional functioning. More co-existing chronic pain conditions may be present in the same individual (patient). The alpha9alpha10 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) may be a potential target in the pathophysiology of chronic pain, as well in the development of breast and lung cancers. alpha-conotoxins (alpha-CNT) are small peptides used offensively by carnivorous marine snails known as Conus that target nAChR. Among alpha-CNT there are potent and selective antagonists of alpha9alpha10 nAChR such as RgIA and Vc1.1 that produces both acute and long lasting analgesia. Moreover, these peptides accelerate the recovery of nerve function after injury, likely through immune/inflammatory-mediated mechanisms. We review the background, findings, implications and problems in using compounds that act on alpha9alpha10 nAChR.
The alpha9alpha10-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) has been implicated in pain and has been proposed to be a novel target for analgesics. However, the evidence to support the involvement of the alpha9alpha10-nAChR in pain is conflicted. This receptor was first implicated in pain with the characterisation of conotoxin Vc1.1, which is highly selective for alpha9alpha10-nAChRs and is an efficacious analgesic in chronic pain models with restorative capacities and no reported side effects. Numerous other analgesic conotoxin and non-conotoxin molecules have been subsequently characterised that also inhibit alpha9alpha10-nAChRs. However, there is evidence that alpha9alpha10-nAChR inhibition is neither necessary nor sufficient for analgesia. alpha9alpha10-nAChR-inhibiting analogues of Vc1.1 have no analgesic effects. Genetically-modified alpha9-nAChR knockout mice have a phenotype that is markedly different from the analgesic profile of Vc1.1 and similar conotoxins, suggesting that the conotoxin effects are largely independent of alpha9alpha10-nAChRs. Furthermore, an alternative mechanism of analgesia by Vc1.1 and other similar conotoxins involving non-canonical coupling of GABAB receptors to voltage-gated calcium channels is known. Additional incongruities regarding alpha9alpha10-nAChRs in analgesia are discussed. A more comprehensive characterisation of the role of alpha9alpha10-nAChRs in pain is crucial for understanding the analgesic action of conotoxins and for improved drug design.
We report the isolation and initial characterization of a new member of the human nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunit family, alpha10 (CHRNA10), from both inner-ear neuroepithelium and lymphoid tissue. The cDNA is 1959 nucleotides in length, with a coding region predicting a protein of 451 amino acids that is 90% identical to rat alpha10. The alpha10 gene was localized to chromosome 11p15.5. Human alpha10 was detected in human inner-ear tissue, tonsil, immortalized B-cells, cultured T-cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, Northern blot hybridization, and immunohistochemistry. We also detected the expression of the human nAChR alpha9 (CHRNA9) mRNA in these same tissues using RT-PCR and Northern blot hybridization.
Though the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunits alpha9 and alpha 10 have been thoroughly characterized within hair cells of the organ of Corti in the inner ear, prior studies have shown that they are also expressed in lymphocytes. In this report, we sought to more definitively characterize the nAChR subunits alpha9 and alpha10 within various populations of human lymphocytes. Using a combination of techniques, including RT-PCR, single-cell RT-PCR, Northern and western blot analysis, and immunofluorescence, expression of both alpha9 and alpha 10 was demonstrated in purified populations of T-cells (CD3+, CD4+, CD8+ and the Jurkat, MT2 and CEM T-cell lines) and B-cells (CD19+, CD80+ and EBV-immortalized B-cells). Single-lymphocyte recording techniques failed to identify an ionic current in response to applied acetylcholine in either T-cells or B-cells. These results clearly demonstrate the presence of these nicotinic receptor subunits within several populations of human lymphocytes, implicating their role in the immune response. However, a lack of demonstrated response to applied acetylcholine using standard single-cell recording techniques suggests a physiology different than that seen in hair cells of the inner ear.
AIM: To compare expression of nicotinic cholinergic receptors (CHRNs) in healthy and squamous cell carcinoma-affected esophagus and determine the prognostic value. METHODS: We performed RT-qPCR to measure the expression of CHRNs in 44 esophageal samples from healthy individuals and in matched normal surrounding mucosa, and in tumors from 28 patients diagnosed with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Next, we performed correlation analysis for the detected expression of these receptors with the habits and clinico-pathological characteristics of all study participants. In order to investigate the possible correlations between the expression of the different CHRN subunits in both healthy esophagus and tissues from ESCC patients, correlation matrices were generated. Subsequently, we evaluated whether the detected alterations in expression of the various CHRNs could precede histopathological modifications during the esophageal carcinogenic processes by using receiver operating characteristic curve analysis. Finally, we evaluated the impact of CHRNA5 and CHRNA7 expression on overall survival by using multivariate analysis. RESULTS: CHRNA3, CHRNA5, CHRNA7 and CHRNB4, but not CHRNA1, CHRNA4, CHRNA9 or CHRNA10, were found to be expressed in normal (healthy) esophageal mucosa. In ESCC, CHRNA5 and CHRNA7 were overexpressed as compared with patient-matched surrounding non-tumor mucosa (ESCC-adjacent mucosa; P < 0.0001 and P = 0.0091, respectively). Positive correlations were observed between CHRNA3 and CHRNB4 expression in all samples analyzed. Additionally, CHRNB4 was found to be differentially expressed in the healthy esophagus and the normal-appearing ESCC-adjacent mucosa, allowing for distinguishment between these tissues with a sensitivity of 75.86% and a specificity of 78.95% (P = 0.0002). Finally, CHRNA5 expression was identified as an independent prognostic factor in ESCC; patients with high CHRNA5 expression showed an increased overall survival, in comparison with those with low expression. The corresponding age- and tumor stage-adjusted hazard ratio was 0.2684 (95%CI: 0.075-0.97, P = 0.0448). CONCLUSION: Expression of CHRNs is homogeneous along healthy esophagus and deregulated in ESCC, suggesting a pathogenic role for these receptors in ESCC development and progression.
alphaO-conotoxin GeXIVA from Conus generalis is a potent antagonist of the alpha9alpha10 nAChR and analgesic in animal models of pain. This peptide has two disulfide bond cross-links, and the bead and ribbon isomers have similar inhibitory activity against alpha9alpha10 nAChRs. We synthesized 12 disulfide-deficient analogues of bead GeXIVA, and all remained potent inhibitors of alpha9alpha10 nAChR. The most potent disulfide-deficient analogue displayed IC(50) values of 6 and 33 nM at rat and human alpha9alpha10 nAChRs, respectively, representing less than a 2-fold increase compared with bead GeXIVA. The disulfide-deficient analogs and parent peptides also do not have a well-defined structure according to NMR spectroscopy. Molecular simulations suggest that the disulfide bonds and termini of GeXIVA do not establish stable interactions with the receptor. Overall, this study proposes that the structure of the analgesic peptide GeXIVA could be simplified through disulfide bond deletions and potentially termini truncations.
IL-1beta is a potent proinflammatory cytokine of the innate immune system that is involved in host defense against infection. However, increased production of IL-1beta plays a pathogenic role in various inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, gout, sepsis, stroke, and transplant rejection. To prevent detrimental collateral damage, IL-1beta release is tightly controlled and typically requires two consecutive danger signals. LPS from Gram-negative bacteria is a prototypical first signal inducing pro-IL-1beta synthesis, whereas extracellular ATP is a typical second signal sensed by the ATP receptor P2X7 that triggers activation of the NLRP3-containing inflammasome, proteolytic cleavage of pro-IL-1beta by caspase-1, and release of mature IL-1beta. Mechanisms controlling IL-1beta release, even in the presence of both danger signals, are needed to protect from collateral damage and are of therapeutic interest. In this article, we show that acetylcholine, choline, phosphocholine, phosphocholine-modified LPS from Haemophilus influenzae, and phosphocholine-modified protein efficiently inhibit ATP-mediated IL-1beta release in human and rat monocytes via nicotinic acetylcholine receptors containing subunits alpha7, alpha9, and/or alpha10. Of note, we identify receptors for phosphocholine-modified macromolecules that are synthesized by microbes and eukaryotic parasites and are well-known modulators of the immune system. Our data suggest that an endogenous anti-inflammatory cholinergic control mechanism effectively controls ATP-mediated release of IL-1beta and that the same mechanism is used by symbionts and misused by parasites to evade innate immune responses of the host.
Pain due to inflammation can be reduced by targeting the noncanonical nicotinic receptors (NCNR) in cells of the immune system that regulate the synthesis and release of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Although NCNR do not generate ion channel currents, the pharmacology of ion-channel forms of the receptors can predict drugs which may be effective regulators of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory system (CAS). Agonists of alpha7 type receptors have been definitively associated with CAS. Receptors containing alpha9 and alpha10 subunits have also been implicated. We have recently characterized two small molecules, pCN-diEPP and mCN-diEPP, as selective alpha9alpha10 agonists and antagonists, respectively. We used these drugs, along with nicotine, an alpha7 agonist and alpha9alpha10 antagonist, to probe the mixed populations of receptors that are formed when alpha7, alpha9, and alpha10 are all expressed together in Xenopus oocytes. We also evaluated the effects of the CN-diEPP compounds on regulating the ATP-induced release of interleukin-1beta from monocytic THP-1 cells, which express NCNR. The compounds successfully identified separate populations of receptors when all three subunits were co-expressed, including a potential population of homomeric alpha10 receptors. The alpha9alpha10 agonist pCN-diEPP was the more effective regulator of interleukin-1beta release in THP-1 cells. pCN-diEPP was also fully effective in a mouse model of inflammatory pain, while mCN-diEPP had only partial effects, requiring a higher dosage. The analgetic effects of pCN-diEPP and mCN-diEPP were retained in alpha7 knockout mice. Taken together, our results suggest that drugs that selectively activate alpha9alpha10 receptors may useful to reduce inflammatory pain through the CAS.
Phosphocholine-modified bacterial cell wall components are virulence factors enabling immune evasion and permanent colonization of the mammalian host, by mechanisms that are poorly understood. Recently, we demonstrated that free phosphocholine (PC) and PC-modified lipooligosaccharides (PC-LOS) from Haemophilus influenzae, an opportunistic pathogen of the upper and lower airways, function as unconventional nicotinic agonists and efficiently inhibit the ATP-induced release of monocytic IL-1beta. We hypothesize that H. influenzae PC-LOS exert similar effects on pulmonary epithelial cells and on the complex lung tissue. The human lung carcinoma-derived epithelial cell lines A549 and Calu-3 were primed with lipopolysaccharide from Escherichia coli followed by stimulation with ATP in the presence or absence of PC or PC-LOS or LOS devoid of PC. The involvement of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors was tested using specific antagonists. We demonstrate that PC and PC-LOS efficiently inhibit ATP-mediated IL-1beta release by A549 and Calu-3 cells via nicotinic acetylcholine receptors containing subunits alpha7, alpha9, and/or alpha10. Primed precision-cut lung slices behaved similarly. We conclude that H. influenzae hijacked an endogenous anti-inflammatory cholinergic control mechanism of the lung to evade innate immune responses of the host. These findings may pave the way towards a host-centered antibiotic treatment of chronic airway infections with H. influenzae.
The goal of the present work was to identify the candidate genetic markers predictive of alloimmunization in sickle cell disease (SCD). Red blood cell (RBC) transfusion is indicated for acute treatment, prevention, and abrogation of some complications of SCD. A well-known consequence of multiple RBC transfusions is alloimmunization. Given that a subset of SCD patients develop multiple RBC allo-/autoantibodies, while others do not in a similar multiple transfusional setting, we investigated a possible genetic basis for alloimmunization. Biomarker(s) which predicts (predict) susceptibility to alloimmunization could identify patients at risk before the onset of a transfusion program and thus may have important implications for clinical management. In addition, such markers could shed light on the mechanism(s) underlying alloimmunization. We genotyped 27 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CD81, CHRNA10, and ARHG genes in two groups of SCD patients. One group (35) of patients developed alloantibodies, and another (40) had no alloantibodies despite having received multiple transfusions. Two SNPs in the CD81 gene, that encodes molecule involved in the signal modulation of B lymphocytes, show a strong association with alloimmunization. If confirmed in prospective studies with larger cohorts, the two SNPs identified in this retrospective study could serve as predictive biomarkers for alloimmunization.
Several independent studies show that the chromosome 15q25.1 region, which contains the CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster, harbors variants strongly associated with nicotine dependence, other smoking behaviors, lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We investigated whether variants in other cholinergic nicotinic receptor subunit (CHRN) genes affect the risk of nicotine dependence in a new sample of African Americans (AAs) (N = 710). We also analyzed this AA sample together with a European American (EA) sample (N = 2062, 1608 of which have been previously studied), allowing for differing effects in the two populations. Cases are current nicotine-dependent smokers and controls are non-dependent smokers. Variants in or near CHRND-CHRNG, CHRNA7 and CHRNA10 show modest association with nicotine dependence risk in the AA sample. In addition, CHRNA4, CHRNB3-CHRNA6 and CHRNB1 show association in at least one population. CHRNG and CHRNA4 harbor single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that have opposite directions of effect in the two populations. In each of the population samples, these loci substantially increase the trait variation explained, although no loci meet Bonferroni-corrected significance in the AA sample alone. The trait variation explained by three key associated SNPs in CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 is 1.9% in EAs and also 1.9% in AAs; this increases to 4.5% in EAs and 7.3% in AAs when we add six variants representing associations at other CHRN genes. Multiple nicotinic receptor subunit genes outside chromosome 15q25 are likely to be important in the biological processes and development of nicotine dependence, and some of these risks may be shared across diverse populations.
Interleukin (IL)-1beta is a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine of innate immunity involved in host defense. High systemic IL-1beta levels, however, cause life-threatening inflammatory diseases, including systemic inflammatory response syndrome. In response to various danger signals, the pro-form of IL-1beta is synthesized and stays in the cytoplasm unless a second signal, such as extracellular ATP, activates the inflammasome, which enables processing and release of mature IL-1beta. As pulmonary surfactant is known for its anti-inflammatory properties, we hypothesize that surfactant inhibits ATP-induced release of IL-1beta. Lipopolysaccharide-primed monocytic U937 cells were stimulated with an ATP analog in the presence of natural or synthetic surfactant composed of recombinant surfactant protein (rSP)-C, palmitoylphosphatidylglycerol, and dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC). Both surfactant preparations dose-dependently inhibited IL-1beta release from U937 cells. DPPC was the active constituent of surfactant, whereas rSP-C and palmitoylphosphatidylglycerol were inactive. DPPC was also effective in primary mononuclear leukocytes isolated from human blood. Experiments with nicotinic antagonists, siRNA technology, and patch-clamp experiments suggested that stimulation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) containing subunit alpha9 results in a complete inhibition of the ion channel function of ATP receptor, P2X7. In conclusion, the surfactant constituent, DPPC, efficiently inhibits ATP-induced inflammasome activation and maturation of IL-1beta in human monocytes by a mechanism involving nAChRs.
Opioids are first-line drugs for moderate to severe acute pain and cancer pain. However, these medications are associated with severe side effects, and whether they are efficacious in treatment of chronic nonmalignant pain remains controversial. Medications that act through alternative molecular mechanisms are critically needed. Antagonists of alpha9alpha10 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) have been proposed as an important nonopioid mechanism based on studies demonstrating prevention of neuropathology after trauma-induced nerve injury. However, the key alpha9alpha10 ligands characterized to date are at least two orders of magnitude less potent on human vs. rodent nAChRs, limiting their translational application. Furthermore, an alternative proposal that these ligands achieve their beneficial effects by acting as agonists of GABA(B) receptors has caused confusion over whether blockade of alpha9alpha10 nAChRs is the fundamental underlying mechanism. To address these issues definitively, we developed RgIA4, a peptide that exhibits high potency for both human and rodent alpha9alpha10 nAChRs, and was at least 1,000-fold more selective for alpha9alpha10 nAChRs vs. all other molecular targets tested, including opioid and GABA(B) receptors. A daily s.c. dose of RgIA4 prevented chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain in rats. In wild-type mice, oxaliplatin treatment produced cold allodynia that could be prevented by RgIA4. Additionally, in alpha9 KO mice, chemotherapy-induced development of cold allodynia was attenuated and the milder, temporary cold allodynia was not relieved by RgIA4. These findings establish blockade of alpha9-containing nAChRs as the basis for the efficacy of RgIA4, and that alpha9-containing nAChRs are a critical target for prevention of chronic cancer chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain.
The present study examined the association between genetic variation in the nicotinic receptor gene family (CHRNA2, CHRNA3, CHRNA4, CHRNA5, CHRNA6, CHRNA7, CHRNA9, CHRNA10, CHRNB2, CHRNB3, CHRNB4) and the occurrence of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Clinical interviews were used to diagnose PTSD in 925 non-Hispanic Black (NHB) and 743 non-Hispanic White (NHW) participants. Trauma history and smoking status were assessed with self-report. No significant main effects or single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) * smoking interactions were observed among NHB participants; however, among NHW participants, a novel association between rs12898919 in the cholinergic receptor nicotinic alpha-5 (CHRNA5) gene and PTSD was observed. No other significant main effects or SNP * smoking interactions were identified among NHW participants. While preliminary, these findings provide continued support for the hypothesis that the CHRNA5 gene is associated with increased risk for PTSD. Limitations of the present study include cross-sectional design, relatively small sample sizes for genetic research, use of self-report to assess smoking status, and use of different methods to diagnose PTSD. Additional research in other samples of trauma-exposed participants is needed to identify the specific functional variant(s) responsible for the association observed between CHRNA5 and PTSD risk in the present study.
While interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) is a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine essential for host defense, high systemic levels cause life-threatening inflammatory syndromes. ATP, a stimulus of IL-1beta maturation, is released from damaged cells along with beta-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (beta-NAD). Here, we tested the hypothesis that beta-NAD controls ATP-signaling and, hence, IL-1beta release. Lipopolysaccharide-primed monocytic U937 cells and primary human mononuclear leukocytes were stimulated with 2'(3')-O-(4-benzoyl-benzoyl)ATP trieethylammonium salt (BzATP), a P2X7 receptor agonist, in the presence or absence of beta-NAD. IL-1beta was measured in cell culture supernatants. The roles of P2Y receptors, nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), and Ca(2+)-independent phospholipase A2 (iPLA2beta, PLA2G6) were investigated using specific inhibitors and gene-silencing. Exogenous beta-NAD signaled via P2Y receptors and dose-dependently (IC(50) = 15 microM) suppressed the BzATP-induced IL-1beta release. Signaling involved iPLA2beta, release of a soluble mediator, and nAChR subunit alpha9. Patch-clamp experiments revealed that beta-NAD inhibited BzATP-induced ion currents. In conclusion, we describe a novel triple membrane-passing signaling cascade triggered by extracellular beta-NAD that suppresses ATP-induced release of IL-1beta by monocytic cells. This cascade links activation of P2Y receptors to non-canonical metabotropic functions of nAChRs that inhibit P2X7 receptor function. The biomedical relevance of this mechanism might be the control of trauma-associated systemic inflammation.
