Tyrosine-protein kinase SYK; Non-receptor tyrosine kinase which mediates signal transduction downstream of a variety of transmembrane receptors including classical immunoreceptors like the B-cell receptor (BCR). Regulates several biological processes including innate and adaptive immunity, cell adhesion, osteoclast maturation, platelet activation and vascular development. Assembles into signaling complexes with activated receptors at the plasma membrane via interaction between its SH2 domains and the receptor tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAM domains. The association with the receptor can a [...] 
For acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), differentiation therapy with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is well established. However, the narrow application and tolerance development of ATRA remain to be improved. In this study, we investigated the effects of combinations of glycosylation inhibitors with ATRA to achieve better efficiency than ATRA alone. We found that the combination of fucosylation inhibitor 6-alkynylfucose (6AF) and ATRA had an additional effect on cell differentiation, as revealed by expression changes in two differentiation markers, CD11b and CD11c, and significant morphological changes in NB4 APL and HL-60 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. In AAL lectin blot analyses, ATRA or 6AF alone could decrease fucosylation, while their combination decreased fucosylation more efficiently. To clarify the molecular mechanism for the 6AF effect on ATRA-induced differentiation, we performed microarray analyses using NB4 cells. In a pathway analysis using DAVID software, we found that the C-type lectin receptor (CLR) signaling pathway was enriched with high significance. In real-time PCR analyses using NB4 and HL-60 cells, FcepsilonRIgamma, CLEC6A, CLEC7A, CASP1, IL-1beta, and EGR3, as components of the CLR pathway, as well as CD45 and AKT3 were upregulated by 6AF in ATRA-induced differentiation. Taken together, the present findings suggest that the CLR signaling pathway is involved in the 6AF effect on ATRA-induced differentiation.
CLEC6A, (C-type lectin domain family 6, member A), plays a prominent role in regulating innate immunity and adaptive immunity. CLEC6A has shown great potential as a target for cancer immunotherapy. This study aims to explore the prognostic value of CLEC6A, and analyze the relationship associated with the common hematological parameters in breast cancer patients. We performed a retrospective analysis on 183 breast cancer patients data in hospital information system from January 2013 to December 2015. The expression of CLEC6A was recorded via semiquantitative immunohistochemistry in breast cancer. The association between expression of CLEC6A and relative parameters were performed by Chi-square test and Fisher's exact test. Kaplan-Meier assay and Log-rank test were performed to evaluate the survival time. The Cox proportional hazards regression analysis was applied to identify prognostic factors. Nomograms were conducted to predict 1-, 3-, and 5-year disease free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) for breast cancer, which could be a good reference in clinical practice. The nomogram model was estimated by calibration curve analysis for its function of discrimination. The accuracy and benefit of the nomogram model were appraised by comparing it to only CLEC6A via decision curve analysis (DCA). The prediction accuracy of CLEC6A was also determined by time-dependent receiver operating characteristics (TDROC) curves, and the area under the curve (AUC) for different survival time. There were 94 cases in the CLEC6A low-expression group and 89 cases in CLEC6A high-expression group. Compared to CLEC6A low-expression group, the CLEC6A high-expression group had better survival (DFS: 56.95 vs. 70.81 months, P = 0.0078 and OS: 67.98 vs. 79.05 months, P = 0.0089). The CLEC6A was a potential prognostic factor in multivariate analysis (DFS: P = 0.023, hazard ratio (HR): 0.454, 95 % confidence interval (CI): 0.229-0.898; OS: P = 0.020, HR: 0.504, 95 %CI: 0.284-0.897). The nomogram in accordance with these potential prognostic factors was constructed to predict survival and the calibration curve analysis had indicated that the predicted line was well-matched with reference line in 1-, 3-, and 5-year DFS and OS category. The 1-, 3-, and 5-year DCA curves have revealed that nomogram model yielded larger net benefits than CLEC6A alone. Finally, the TDROC curve indicated that CLEC6A could better predict 1-year DFS and OS than others. Furthermore, we combined these potential independent prognostic factors to analyze the relationship among these hematologic index and oxidative stress indicators, and indicated that higher CLEC6A level, higher CO2 level or low CHOL level or high HDL-CHO level would have survived longer and better prognosis. In breast cancer, high expression of CLEC6A can independently predict better survival. Our nomogram consisted of CLEC6A and other indicators has good predictive performance and can facilitate clinical decision-making.
The role of NETosis and its related molecules remains unclear in gastric cancer. The data used in this study was directly downloaded from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. All analysis and plots are completed in R software using diverse R packages. In our study, we collected the list of NETosis-related genes from previous publications. Based on the list and expression profile of gastric cancer patients from the TCGA database, we identified the NETosis-related genes significantly correlated with patients survival. Then, CLEC6A, BST1 and TLR7 were identified through LASSO regression and multivariate Cox regression analysis for prognosis model construction. This prognosis model showed great predictive efficiency in both training and validation cohorts. We noticed that the high-risk patients might have a worse survival performance. Next, we explored the biological enrichment difference between high- and low-risk patients and found that many carcinogenic pathways were upregulated in the high-risk patients. Meanwhile, we investigated the genomic instability, mutation burden and immune microenvironment difference between high- and low-risk patients. Moreover, we noticed that low-risk patients were more sensitive to immunotherapy (85.95% vs. 56.22%). High-risk patients were more sensitive to some small molecules compounds like camptothecin_1003, cisplatin_1005, cytarabine_1006, nutlin-3a (-)_1047, gemcitabine_1190, WZ4003_1614, selumetinib_1736 and mitoxantrone_1810. In summary, our study comprehensively explored the role of NETosis-related genes in gastric cancer, which can provide direction for relevant studies.
Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) is a key soluble effector of the innate immune system that recognizes pathogen-specific surface glycans. Surprisingly, low-producing MBL genetic variants that may predispose children and immunocompromised individuals to infectious diseases are more common than would be expected in human populations. Since certain immune defense molecules, such as immunoglobulins, can be exploited by invasive pathogens, we hypothesized that MBL might also enhance infections in some circumstances. Consequently, the low and intermediate MBL levels commonly found in human populations might be the result of balancing selection. Using model infection systems with pseudotyped and authentic glycosylated viruses, we demonstrated that MBL indeed enhances infection of Ebola, Hendra, Nipah and West Nile viruses in low complement conditions. Mechanistic studies with Ebola virus (EBOV) glycoprotein pseudotyped lentiviruses confirmed that MBL binds to N-linked glycan epitopes on viral surfaces in a specific manner via the MBL carbohydrate recognition domain, which is necessary for enhanced infection. MBL mediates lipid-raft-dependent macropinocytosis of EBOV via a pathway that appears to require less actin or early endosomal processing compared with the filovirus canonical endocytic pathway. Using a validated RNA interference screen, we identified C1QBP (gC1qR) as a candidate surface receptor that mediates MBL-dependent enhancement of EBOV infection. We also identified dectin-2 (CLEC6A) as a potentially novel candidate attachment factor for EBOV. Our findings support the concept of an innate immune haplotype that represents critical interactions between MBL and complement component C4 genes and that may modify susceptibility or resistance to certain glycosylated pathogens. Therefore, higher levels of native or exogenous MBL could be deleterious in the setting of relative hypocomplementemia which can occur genetically or because of immunodepletion during active infections. Our findings confirm our hypothesis that the pressure of infectious diseases may have contributed in part to evolutionary selection of MBL mutant haplotypes.
BACKGROUND: Fc receptor gamma subunit (FcRgamma)-related receptors expressed on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) enhance allergen sensitization and allergic inflammation. DNA demethylation of the high-affinity IgE receptor gamma subunit gene (FCER1G) leads to FcRgamma and FcepsilonRI overexpression on monocytes from patients with atopic dermatitis. OBJECTIVE: We investigated epigenetic mechanisms underlying FCER1G demethylation and upregulation of FcRgamma-related receptors on APCs and the consequent effect on allergic responses. METHODS: Effects of thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) on expression of FcRgamma and its related receptors and methylation or hydroxymethylation of FCER1G in human monocytes were assessed. Recruitment of ten-eleven translocation protein (TET) 2 to FCER1G by TSLP-activated phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (pSTAT5) was evaluated. Effects of TSLP on expression of FcRgamma-related receptors and costimulatory receptors on monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs) and the ability of DCs to take up ovalbumin were analyzed. TSLP-induced T(H) polarization and related cytokine production were also analyzed. RESULTS: pSTAT5 activation by TSLP resulted in TET2 recruitment to FCER1G, leading to FCER1G demethylation and subsequent upregulation of FcRgamma-related receptors on monocytes. TSLP not only stimulated monocyte-derived DC maturation but also maintained their allergen uptake ability, likely through maintenance and upregulation of FcRgamma-related receptors. Allergen sensitization and upregulation of T(H)2/T(H)17-related cytokines contributed to TSLP-DC-induced T(H)2/T(H)17 polarization. The latter was attenuated on neutralization with a dectin-2 antibody. CONCLUSIONS: TSLP mediated upregulation of FcRgamma-related receptors on APCs through activation of pSTAT5, which recruited TET2 to induce FCER1G demethylation. TSLP-induced allergic T(H)2/T(H)17 polarization likely depends on dectin-2-mediated allergen sensitization and upregulation of T(H)2/T(H)17-related cytokines.
BACKGROUND: Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are related to the prognosis of cancer patients. Nevertheless, the potential prognostic values of NETs in skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM) remains largely unknown. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The NET-related gene signature was constructed by LASSO Cox regression analysis using the TCGA-SKCM cohort. The overall survival (OS) and immune status in SKCM patients between the high- and low-NET score (high-score, low-score) groups were explored. The scRNA-seq dataset GSE115978 was used to understand the role of NET score in SKCM at single cell resolution. RESULTS: A five NET genes-based signature (TLR2, CLEC6A, PDE4B, SLC22A4 and CYP4F3) was constructed as the NET-related prognostic model for SKCM. The OS of SKCM patients with low-score was better than that in patients with high-score. Additionally, NET score was negatively associated with infiltration of some immune cells (e.g. type I Macrophages, CD8-T cells, CD4-T cells). Moreover, patients with high-score had low stromal, immune and ESTIMATE scores. Furthermore, drug sensitivity analysis results showed that Lapatinib, Trametinib and Erlotinib may have better therapeutic advantages in patients with high-score. CONCLUSION: We established a NET-related five gene signature in SKCM and found that the NET-related signature may exhibit a good predictive ability for SKCM prognosis. The NET score may not only predict the survival outcome and drug sensitivity in SKCM, but also reflect the immune conditions of SKCM patients.
Dectin-2, a C-type lectin on macrophages and other cells of the innate immune system, functions in response to pathogens, particularly fungi. The carbohydrate-recognition domain (CRD) in dectin-2 is linked to a transmembrane sequence that interacts with the common Fc receptor gamma subunit to initiate immune signaling. The molecular mechanism by which dectin-2 selectively binds to pathogens has been investigated by characterizing the CRD expressed in a bacterial system. Competition binding studies indicated that the CRD binds to monosaccharides with modest affinity and that affinity was greatly enhanced for mannose-linked alpha1-2 or alpha1-4 to a second mannose residue. Glycan array analysis confirmed selective binding of the CRD to glycans that contain Manalpha1-2Man epitopes. Crystals of the CRD in complex with a mammalian-type high-mannose Man(9)GlcNAc(2) oligosaccharide exhibited interaction with Manalpha1-2Man on two different termini of the glycan, with the reducing-end mannose residue ligated to Ca(2+) in a primary binding site and the nonreducing terminal mannose residue occupying an adjacent secondary site. Comparison of the binding sites in DC-SIGN and langerin, two other pathogen-binding receptors of the innate immune system, revealed why these two binding sites accommodate only terminal Manalpha1-2Man structures, whereas dectin-2 can bind Manalpha1-2Man in internal positions in mannans and other polysaccharides. The specificity and geometry of the dectin-2-binding site provide the molecular mechanism for binding of dectin-2 to fungal mannans and also to bacterial lipopolysaccharides, capsular polysaccharides, and lipoarabinomannans that contain the Manalpha1-2Man disaccharide unit.
INTRODUCTION: Local delivery of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to the acutely injured or osteoarthritic joint retards cartilage destruction. However, in the absence of assistive materials the efficiency of engraftment of MSCs to either intact or fibrillated cartilage is low and localization is further reduced by natural movement of the joint surfaces. It is hypothesised that enhanced engraftment of the delivered MSCs at the cartilage surface will increase their reparative effect and that the application of a bioadhesive to the degraded cartilage surface will provide improved cell retention. Pullulan is a structurally flexible, non-immunogenic exopolysaccharide with wet-stick adhesive properties and has previously been used for drug delivery via the wet surfaces of the buccal cavity. In this study, the adhesive character of pullulan was exploited to enhance MSC retention on the damaged cartilage surface. METHODS: MSCs labeled with PKH26 were applied to pullulan-coated osteoarthritic cartilage explants to measure cell retention. Cytocompatability was assessed by measuring the effects of prolonged exposure to the bioadhesive on MSC viability and proliferation. The surface phenotype of the cells was assessed by flow cytometry and their multipotent nature by measuring osteogenic, adipogenic and chrondrogenic differentiation. Experiments were also carried out to determine expression of the C-type lectin Dectin-2 receptor. RESULTS: MSCs maintained a stable phenotype following exposure to pullulan in terms of metabolic activity, proliferation, differentiation and surface antigen expression. An increase in osteogenic activity and Dectin-2 receptor expression was seen in MSCs treated with pullulan. Markedly enhanced retention of MSCs was observed in explant culture of osteoarthritic cartilage. CONCLUSIONS: Pullulan is a biocompatible and effective cytoadhesive material for tissue engraftment of MSCs. Prolonged exposure to pullulan has no negative impact on the phenotype, viability and differentiation potential of the cells. Pullulan dramatically improves the retention of MSCs at the fibrillated surface of osteoarthritic articular cartilage. Pullulan causes an upregulation in expression of the Dectin-2 C-type lectin transmembrane complex.
Immunocompromised patients are highly susceptible to invasive aspergillosis. Herein, we identified a homozygous deletion mutation (507 del C) resulting in a frameshift (N170I) and early stop codon in the fungal binding Dectin-2 receptor, in an immunocompromised patient. The mutated form of Dectin-2 was weakly expressed, did not form clusters at/near the cell surface and was functionally defective. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from this patient were unable to mount a cytokine (tumor necrosis factor, interleukin 6) response to Aspergillus fumigatus, and this first identified Dectin-2-deficient patient died of complications of invasive aspergillosis.
This study aimed to find novel genetic variants of susceptibility to aspaergillosis in paediatric patients with haematological malignancies. Complete sequences of fifteen genes of human innate immunity (CCL2, CCR2, CD209, CLEC6A, CLEC7A and ten TLR genes) were studied in 40 patients diagnosed with haematological disorders (20 unaffected and 20 affected by aspergillosis). All samples were sequenced with MiSeq (Illumina) and 454 (Roche Diagnostics) technologies. Statistical significance of the differences between studied groups was determined using the two-tailed Fisher's exact test. Sixty variants of potential importance were identified, the vast majority of which are located in non-coding parts of the targeted genes. At the threshold of p < 0.000005, one intergenic (TLR2 rs4585282) and one intronic variant (CLEC6A rs12099687) were found significant between the case and control groups for genotype and allele frequencies, respectively. Rs12099687 in CLEC6A was predicted to constitute an alternative isoform or cryptic splice site, which potentially changes activity of the Dectin-2 protein. Overall, we assume that the two strongest associations reported in this study are expected to be reproducible even in the absence of other evidence, while another twelve associations may be strong enough to justify additional research in larger cohorts.
Autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a primary immunodeficiency caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE). Patients with AIRE mutations are susceptible to Candida albicans infection and present with autoimmune disorders. We previously demonstrated that cytoplasmic AIRE regulates the Syk-dependent Dectin-1 pathway. In this study, we further evaluated direct contact with fungal elements, synapse formation, and the response of macrophage-like THP-1 cells to C. albicans hyphae to determine the role of AIRE upon Dectin receptors function and signaling. We examined the fungal synapse (FS) formation in wild-type and AIRE-knockdown THP-1 cells differentiated to macrophages, as well as monocyte-derived macrophages from APECED patients. We evaluated Dectin-2 receptor signaling, phagocytosis, and cytokine secretion upon hyphal stimulation. AIRE co-localized with Dectin-2 and Syk at the FS upon hyphal stimulation of macrophage-like THP-1 cells. AIRE-knockdown macrophage-like THP-1 cells exhibited less Dectin-1 and Dectin-2 receptors accumulation, decreased signaling pathway activity at the FS, lower C. albicans phagocytosis, and less lysosome formation. Furthermore, IL-1beta, IL-6, or TNF-alpha secretion by AIRE-knockdown macrophage-like THP-1 cells and AIRE-deficient patient macrophages was decreased compared to control cells. Our results suggest that AIRE modulates the FS formation and hyphal recognition and help to orchestrate an effective immune response against C. albicans.
Allergen-specific immunotherapy (AIT) induces tolerance and shifts the Th2 response towards a regulatory T-cell profile. The underlying mechanisms are not fully understood, but dendritic cells (DC) play a vital role as key regulators of T-cell responses. DCs interact with allergens via Fc receptors (FcRs) and via certain C-type lectin receptors (CLRs), including CD209/DC-SIGN, CD206/MR and Dectin-2/CLEC6A. In this study, the effect of AIT on the frequencies as well as the FcR and CLR expression profiles of human DC subsets was assessed. PBMC was isolated from peripheral blood from seven allergic donors before and after 8 weeks and 1 year of subcutaneous AIT, as well as from six non-allergic individuals. Cells were stained with antibodies against DC subset-specific markers and a panel of FcRs and CLRs and analyzed by flow cytometry. After 1 year of AIT, the frequency of CD123+ DCs was increased and a larger proportion expressed FcepsilonRI. Furthermore, the expression of CD206 and Dectin-2 was reduced on CD141+ DCs after 1 year of treatment and CD206 as well as Dectin-1 was additionally down regulated in CD1c+ DCs. Interestingly, levels of DNGR1/CLEC9A on CD141+ DCs were increased by AIT, reaching levels similar to cells isolated from non-allergic controls. The modifications in phenotype and occurrence of specific DC subsets observed during AIT suggest an altered capacity of DC subsets to interact with allergens, which can be part of the mechanisms by which AIT induces allergen tolerance.
Dectin-2 is a C-type lectin involved in the recognition of several pathogens such as Aspergillus fumigatus, Candida albicans, Schistosoma mansonii, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis that triggers Th17 immune responses. Identifying pathogen ligands and understanding the molecular basis of their recognition is one of the current challenges. Purified M. tuberculosis mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan (ManLAM) was shown to induce signaling via Dectin-2, an activity that requires the (alpha1 --> 2)-linked mannosides forming the caps. Here, using isogenic M. tuberculosis mutant strains, we demonstrate that ManLAM is a bona fide and actually the sole ligand mediating bacilli recognition by Dectin-2, although M. tuberculosis produces a variety of cell envelope mannoconjugates, such as phosphatidyl-myo-inositol hexamannosides, lipomannan or manno(lipo)proteins, that bear (alpha1 --> 2)-linked mannosides. In addition, we found that Dectin-2 can recognize lipoglycans from other bacterial species, such as Saccharotrix aerocolonigenes or the human opportunistic pathogen Tsukamurella paurometabola, suggesting that lipoglycans are prototypical Dectin-2 ligands. Finally, from a structure/function relationship perspective, we show, using lipoglycan variants and synthetic mannodendrimers, that dimannoside caps and multivalent interaction are required for ligand binding to and signaling via Dectin-2. Better understanding of the molecular basis of ligand recognition by Dectin-2 will pave the way for the rational design of potent adjuvants targeting this receptor.
Basophils are emerging as immunoregulatory cells capable of interacting with their environment not only via their characteristic IgE-mediated activation, but also in an IgE-independent manner. Basophils are known to express and respond to stimulation via TLR2, TLR4, DC-SIGN and DCIR, but whether basophils also express other C-type lectin receptors (CLRs) is largely unknown. In this study, we investigate the CLR expression profile of human basophils using multicolour flow cytometry. As FcRs as well as some CLRs are associated with allergen recognition and shown to be involved in subsequent immune responses, the expression of CLRs and FcRs on peripheral blood basophils, as well as their frequency, was monitored for 1 year in subjects undergoing subcutaneous allergen-specific immunotherapy (AIT). Here, we show that human basophils express CLECSF14, DEC205, Dectin-1, Dectin-2 and MRC2. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the frequencies of basophils expressing the allergy-associated CLRs Dectin-1 and Dectin-2 were significantly reduced after 1 year and 8 weeks of AIT, respectively. In contrast, the frequency of basophils positive for FcgammaRII, as well as the fraction of total basophils, significantly increased after 1 year of AIT. The herein demonstrated expression of various CLRs on basophils, and their altered CLR and FcR expression profile upon AIT, suggest yet unexplored ways by which basophils can interact with antigens and may point to novel immunoregulatory functions targeted through AIT.
How the immune system senses aeroallergens and triggers an aberrant inflammation is poorly understood. Dectin-2 is a house dust mite (HDM)-sensing pattern recognition receptor. In a 3-week mouse model of repeated intranasal HDM challenge, anti-Dectin-2 potently attenuated the characteristic allergic inflammation and airway hyper-responsiveness. Anti-Dectin-2 also prevented neutrophil influx following a single HDM challenge. Interestingly, cysteinyl leukotrienes, but not chemokine and cytokine levels were inhibited by anti-Dectin-2 in this acute model, and in ex vivo challenge of cultured alveolar macrophages with HDM. Furthermore in the single-challenge model, zileuton, an inhibitor of leukotriene production, produced a similar effect as Dectin-2 blockade. Together these data suggest alveolar macrophage sensing of HDM by Dectin-2 elicits the production of cysteinyl leukotrienes, and this axis is key for the initiation of airway inflammation to this aeroallergen. Finally, we found Dectin-2-positive infiltrating cells present in bronchial biopsies from asthmatic subjects.
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), which have been extensively studied in the context of the immune response to viruses, have recently been implicated in host defense mechanisms against fungal infections. Nevertheless, the involvement of human pDCs during paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM), a fungal infection endemic to Latin America, has been scarcely studied. However, pDCs were found in the cutaneous lesions of PCM patients, and in pulmonary model of murine PCM these cells were shown to control disease severity. These findings led us to investigate the role of human pDCs in the innate phase of PCM. Moreover, considering our previous data on the engagement of diverse Toll-like receptors and C-type lectin receptors receptors in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis recognition, we decided to characterize the innate immune receptors involved in the interaction between human pDCs and yeast cells. Purified pDCs were obtained from peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy donors and they were stimulated with P. brasiliensis with or without blocking antibodies to innate immune receptors. Here we demonstrated that P. brasiliensis stimulation activates human pDCs that inhibit fungal growth and secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines and type I IFNs. Surprisingly, P. brasiliensis-stimulated pDCs produce mature IL-1beta and activate caspase 1, possibly via inflammasome activation, which is a phenomenon not yet described during pDC engagement by microorganisms. Importantly, we also demonstrate that dectin-2 and dectin-3 are expressed on pDCs and appear to be involved (via Syk signaling) in the pDC-P. brasiliensis interaction. Moreover, P. brasiliensis-stimulated pDCs exhibited an efficient antigen presentation and were able to effectively activate CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. In conclusion, our study demonstrated for the first time that human pDCs are involved in P. brasiliensis recognition and may play an important role in the innate and adaptive immunity against this fungal pathogen.
LPS consists of a relatively conserved region of lipid A and core oligosaccharide and a highly variable region of O-antigen polysaccharide. Whereas lipid A is known to bind to the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-myeloid differentiation factor 2 (MD2) complex, the role of the O-antigen remains unclear. Here we report a novel molecular interaction between dendritic cell-associated C-type lectin-2 (Dectin-2) and mannosylated O-antigen found in a human opportunistic pathogen, Hafnia alvei PCM 1223, which has a repeating unit of [-Man-alpha1,3-Man-alpha1,2-Man-alpha1,2-Man-alpha1,2-Man-alpha1,3-]. H. alvei LPS induced higher levels of TNFalpha and IL-10 from mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs), when compared with Salmonella enterica O66 LPS, which has a repeat of [-Gal-alpha1,6-Gal-alpha1,4-[Glc-beta1,3]GalNAc-alpha1,3-GalNAc-beta1,3-]. In a cell-based reporter assay, Dectin-2 was shown to recognize H. alvei LPS. This binding was inhibited by mannosidase treatment of H. alvei LPS and by mutations in the carbohydrate-binding domain of Dectin-2, demonstrating that H. alvei LPS is a novel glycan ligand of Dectin-2. The enhanced cytokine production by H. alvei LPS was Dectin-2-dependent, because Dectin-2 knock-out BM-DCs failed to do so. This receptor cross-talk between Dectin-2 and TLR4 involved events including spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) activation and receptor juxtaposition. Furthermore, another mannosylated LPS from Escherichia coli O9a also bound to Dectin-2 and augmented TLR4 activation of BM-DCs. Taken together, these data indicate that mannosylated O-antigens from several Gram-negative bacteria augment TLR4 responses through interaction with Dectin-2.
BACKGROUND: Dectin-2, which is a C-type lectin, interacts with the house dust mite (HDM) Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus allergen. This study aimed to investigate whether Dectin-2 blockade by antagonistic monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) attenuates HDM-induced allergic responses. METHODS: Two anti-Dectin-2 MoAbs were generated and validated for specific binding to Dectin-2 Fc fusion protein (Dectin-2.Fc) and inhibition of Dectin-2.Fc/HDM interaction. Patients with asthma exhibiting high titers of anti-D. pteronyssinus IgE were enrolled. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells with depleted CD14(+) monocytes were obtained from these patients and co-cultured with autologous monocyte-derived conventional dendritic cells in the presence of D. pteronyssinus or its group 2 allergens (Der p 2). Interleukin (IL)-5 and IL-13 levels in the culture supernatants were determined using ELISA in the presence or absence of anti-Dectin-2 MoAbs. RESULTS: Two MoAbs, 6A4G7 and 17A1D10, showed specific binding to recombinant Dectin-2.Fc and inhibited HDM binding to Dectin-2.Fc. Both anti-Dectin-2 MoAbs inhibited IL-5 and IL-13 production in co-cultures with Der p 2 stimulation in a dose-dependent manner. 6A4G7 and 17A1D10 (3 mug/mL) significantly inhibited Der p 2-induced (3 mug/mL) IL-5 production by 69.7 and 86.4% and IL-13 production by 84.0 and 81.4%, respectively. Moreover, this inhibitory effect of the two MoAbs remained significant in the presence of D. pteronyssinus. CONCLUSIONS: Anti-Dectin-2 MoAbs significantly inhibited HDM-induced allergic responses in vitro and therefore have the potential to become therapeutic agents in mite-induced allergic diseases.
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) were initially considered as critical for innate immunity to viruses. However, our group has shown that pDCs bind to and inhibit the growth of Aspergillus fumigatus hyphae and that depletion of pDCs renders mice hypersusceptible to experimental aspergillosis. In this study, we examined pDC receptors contributing to hyphal recognition and downstream events in pDCs stimulated by A. fumigatus hyphae. Our data show that Dectin-2, but not Dectin-1, participates in A. fumigatus hyphal recognition, TNF-alpha and IFN-alpha release, and antifungal activity. Moreover, Dectin-2 acts in cooperation with the FcRgamma chain to trigger signaling responses. In addition, using confocal and electron microscopy we demonstrated that the interaction between pDCs and A. fumigatus induced the formation of pDC extracellular traps (pETs) containing DNA and citrullinated histone H3. These structures closely resembled those of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). The microarray analysis of the pDC transcriptome upon A. fumigatus infection also demonstrated up-regulated expression of genes associated with apoptosis as well as type I interferon-induced genes. Thus, human pDCs directly recognize A. fumigatus hyphae via Dectin-2; this interaction results in cytokine release and antifungal activity. Moreover, hyphal stimulation of pDCs triggers a distinct pattern of pDC gene expression and leads to pET formation.
