Caseinolytic peptidase B protein homolog; May function as a regulatory ATPase and be related to secretion/protein trafficking process.
The BCL2 family plays important roles in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Venetoclax, a selective BCL2 inhibitor, has received FDA approval for the treatment of AML. However, drug resistance ensues after prolonged treatment, highlighting the need for a greater understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Using a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen in human AML, we identified genes whose inactivation sensitizes AML blasts to venetoclax. Genes involved in mitochondrial organization and function were significantly depleted throughout our screen, including the mitochondrial chaperonin CLPB. We demonstrated that CLPB is upregulated in human AML, it is further induced upon acquisition of venetoclax resistance, and its ablation sensitizes AML to venetoclax. Mechanistically, CLPB maintains the mitochondrial cristae structure via its interaction with the cristae-shaping protein OPA1, whereas its loss promotes apoptosis by inducing cristae remodeling and mitochondrial stress responses. Overall, our data suggest that targeting mitochondrial architecture may provide a promising approach to circumvent venetoclax resistance. SIGNIFICANCE: A genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen reveals genes involved in mitochondrial biological processes participate in the acquisition of venetoclax resistance. Loss of the mitochondrial protein CLPB leads to structural and functional defects of mitochondria, hence sensitizing AML cells to apoptosis. Targeting CLPB synergizes with venetoclax and the venetoclax/azacitidine combination in AML in a p53-independent manner.See related commentary by Savona and Rathmell, p. 831.This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 813.
The equilibrium and reciprocal actions among appetite-stimulating (orexigenic) and appetite-suppressing (anorexigenic) signals synthesized in the gut, brain, microbiome and adipose tissue (AT), seems to play a pivotal role in the regulation of food intake and feeding behavior, anxiety, and depression. A dysregulation of mechanisms controlling the energy balance may result in eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN). AN is a psychiatric disease defined by chronic self-induced extreme dietary restriction leading to an extremely low body weight and adiposity. BN is defined as out-of-control binge eating, which is compensated by self-induced vomiting, fasting, or excessive exercise. Certain gut microbiota-related compounds, like bacterial chaperone protein Escherichia coli caseinolytic protease B (ClpB) and food-derived antigens were recently described to trigger the production of autoantibodies cross-reacting with appetite-regulating hormones and neurotransmitters. Gut microbiome may be a potential manipulator for AT and energy homeostasis. Thus, the regulation of appetite, emotion, mood, and nutritional status is also under the control of neuroimmunoendocrine mechanisms by secretion of autoantibodies directed against neuropeptides, neuroactive metabolites, and peptides. In AN and BN, altered cholinergic, dopaminergic, adrenergic, and serotonergic relays may lead to abnormal AT, gut, and brain hormone secretion. The present review summarizes updated knowledge regarding the gut dysbiosis, gut-barrier permeability, short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), fecal microbial transplantation (FMT), blood-brain barrier permeability, and autoantibodies within the ghrelin and melanocortin systems in eating disorders. We expect that the new knowledge may be used for the development of a novel preventive and therapeutic approach for treatment of AN and BN.
CLPB is a mitochondrial intermembrane space AAA+ domain-containing disaggregase. CLPB mutations are associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria and neutropenia; however, the molecular mechanism underscoring disease and the contribution of CLPB substrates to disease pathology remains unknown. Interactions between CLPB and mitochondrial quality control (QC) factors, including PARL and OPA1, have been reported, hinting at dysregulation of organelle QC in disease. Utilizing proteomic and biochemical approaches, we show a stress-specific aggregation phenotype in a CLPB-null environment and define the CLPB substrate profile. We illustrate an interplay between intermembrane space proteins including CLPB, HAX1, HTRA2, and the inner membrane quality control proteins (STOML2, PARL, YME1L1; SPY complex), with CLPB deficiency impeding SPY complex function by virtue of protein aggregation in the intermembrane space. We conclude that there is an interdependency of mitochondrial QC components at the intermembrane space/inner membrane interface, and perturbations to this network may underscore CLPB disease pathology.
Protein aggregation is a common problem in protein biochemistry and is linked to many cellular pathologies and human diseases. The molecular chaperone ClpB can resolubilize and reactivate aggregated proteins. This unit describes the procedure for following reactivation of an aggregated enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase mediated by ClpB from Escherichia coli in cooperation with another molecular chaperone, DnaK. The procedures for purification of these chaperones are also described.
The congenital neutropenia syndromes are rare haematological conditions defined by impaired myeloid precursor differentiation or function. Patients are prone to severe infections with high mortality rates in early life. While some patients benefit from granulocyte colony-stimulating factor treatment, they may still face an increased risk of bone marrow failure, myelodysplastic syndrome and acute leukaemia. Accurate diagnosis is crucial for improved outcomes; however, diagnosis depends on familiarity with a heterogeneous group of rare disorders that remain incompletely characterised. The clinical and pathological overlap between reactive conditions, primary and congenital neutropenias, bone marrow failure, and myelodysplastic syndromes further clouds diagnostic clarity.We review the diagnostically useful clinicopathological and morphological features of reactive causes of neutropenia and the most common primary neutropenia disorders: constitutional/benign ethnic neutropenia, chronic idiopathic neutropenia, cyclic neutropenia, severe congenital neutropenia (due to mutations in ELANE, GFI1, HAX1, G6PC3, VPS45, JAGN1, CSF3R, SRP54, CLPB and WAS), GATA2 deficiency, Warts, hypogammaglobulinaemia, infections and myelokathexis syndrome, Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome, the lysosomal storage disorders with neutropenia: Chediak-Higashi, Hermansky-Pudlak, and Griscelli syndromes, Cohen, and Barth syndromes. We also detail characteristic cytogenetic and molecular factors at diagnosis and in progression to myelodysplastic syndrome/leukaemia.
In the matrix of bacteria/mitochondria/chloroplasts, Lon acts as the degradation machine for soluble proteins. In stress periods, however, proteostasis and survival depend on the strongly conserved Clp/Hsp100 family. Currently, the targets of ATP-powered unfoldases/disaggregases ClpB and ClpX and of peptidase ClpP heptameric rings are still unclear. Trapping experiments and proteome profiling in multiple organisms triggered confusion, so we analyzed the consistency of ClpP-trap targets in bacteria. We also provide meta-analyses of protein interactions in humans, to elucidate where Clp family members are enriched. Furthermore, meta-analyses of mouse complexomics are provided. Genotype-phenotype correlations confirmed our concept. Trapping, proteome, and complexome data retrieved consistent coaccumulation of CLPXP with GFM1 and TUFM orthologs. CLPX shows broad interaction selectivity encompassing mitochondrial translation elongation, RNA granules, and nucleoids. CLPB preferentially attaches to mitochondrial RNA granules and translation initiation components; CLPP is enriched with them all and associates with release/recycling factors. Mutations in CLPP cause Perrault syndrome, with phenotypes similar to defects in mtDNA/mtRNA. Thus, we propose that CLPB and CLPXP are crucial to counteract misfolded insoluble protein assemblies that contain nucleotides. This insight is relevant to improve ClpP-modulating drugs that block bacterial growth and for the treatment of human infertility, deafness, and neurodegeneration.
BACKGROUND: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) has led to an exponential increase in identification of causative variants in mitochondrial disorders (MD). METHODS: We performed WES in 113 MD suspected patients from Polish paediatric reference centre, in whom routine testing failed to identify a molecular defect. WES was performed using TruSeqExome enrichment, followed by variant prioritization, validation by Sanger sequencing, and segregation with the disease phenotype in the family. RESULTS: Likely causative mutations were identified in 67 (59.3 %) patients; these included variants in mtDNA (6 patients) and nDNA: X-linked (9 patients), autosomal dominant (5 patients), and autosomal recessive (47 patients, 11 homozygotes). Novel variants accounted for 50.5 % (50/99) of all detected changes. In 47 patients, changes in 31 MD-related genes (ACAD9, ADCK3, AIFM1, CLPB, COX10, DLD, EARS2, FBXL4, MTATP6, MTFMT, MTND1, MTND3, MTND5, NAXE, NDUFS6, NDUFS7, NDUFV1, OPA1, PARS2, PC, PDHA1, POLG, RARS2, RRM2B, SCO2, SERAC1, SLC19A3, SLC25A12, TAZ, TMEM126B, VARS2) were identified. The ACAD9, CLPB, FBXL4, PDHA1 genes recurred more than twice suggesting higher general/ethnic prevalence. In 19 cases, variants in 18 non-MD related genes (ADAR, CACNA1A, CDKL5, CLN3, CPS1, DMD, DYSF, GBE1, GFAP, HSD17B4, MECP2, MYBPC3, PEX5, PGAP2, PIGN, PRF1, SBDS, SCN2A) were found. The percentage of positive WES results rose gradually with increasing probability of MD according to the Mitochondrial Disease Criteria (MDC) scale (from 36 to 90 % for low and high probability, respectively). The percentage of detected MD-related genes compared with non MD-related genes also grew with the increasing MD likelihood (from 20 to 97 %). Molecular diagnosis was established in 30/47 (63.8 %) neonates and in 17/28 (60.7 %) patients with basal ganglia involvement. Mutations in CLPB, SERAC1, TAZ genes were identified in neonates with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria (3-MGA) as a discriminative feature. New MD-related candidate gene (NDUFB8) is under verification. CONCLUSIONS: We suggest WES rather than targeted NGS as the method of choice in diagnostics of MD in children, including neonates with 3-MGA aciduria, who died without determination of disease cause and with limited availability of laboratory data. There is a strong correlation between the degree of MD diagnosis by WES and MD likelihood expressed by the MDC scale.
Human mitochondrial disorders impact tissues with high energetic demands and can be associated with cardiac muscle disease (cardiomyopathy) and early mortality. However, the mechanistic link between mitochondrial disease and the development of cardiomyopathy is frequently unclear. In addition, there is often marked phenotypic heterogeneity between patients, even between those with the same genetic variant, which is also not well understood. Several of the mitochondrial cardiomyopathies are related to defects in the maintenance of mitochondrial protein homeostasis, or proteostasis. This essential process involves the importing, sorting, folding and degradation of preproteins into fully functional mature structures inside mitochondria. Disrupted mitochondrial proteostasis interferes with mitochondrial energetics and ATP production, which can directly impact cardiac function. An inability to maintain proteostasis can result in mitochondrial dysfunction and subsequent mitophagy or even apoptosis. We review the known mitochondrial diseases that have been associated with cardiomyopathy and which arise from mutations in genes that are important for mitochondrial proteostasis. Genes discussed include DnaJ heat shock protein family member C19 (DNAJC19), mitochondrial import inner membrane translocase subunit TIM16 (MAGMAS), translocase of the inner mitochondrial membrane 50 (TIMM50), mitochondrial intermediate peptidase (MIPEP), X-prolyl-aminopeptidase 3 (XPNPEP3), HtraA serine peptidase 2 (HTRA2), caseinolytic mitochondrial peptidase chaperone subunit B (CLPB) and heat shock 60-kD protein 1 (HSPD1). The identification and description of disorders with a shared mechanism of disease may provide further insights into the disease process and assist with the identification of potential therapeutics.
The gut microbiome is considered an organ contributing to the regulation of host metabolism. Since the relationship between the gut microbiome and specific diseases was elucidated, numerous studies have deciphered molecular mechanisms explaining how gut bacteria interact with host cells and eventually shape metabolism. Both metagenomic and metabolomic analyses have contributed to the discovery of bacterial-derived metabolites acting on host cells. In this review, we examine the molecular mechanisms by which bacterial metabolites act as paracrine or endocrine factors, thereby regulating host metabolism. We highlight the impact of specific short-chain fatty acids on the secretion of gut peptides (i.e., glucagon-like peptide-1, peptide YY) and other metabolites produced from different amino acids and regulating inflammation, glucose metabolism, or energy homeostasis. We also discuss the role of gut microbes on the regulation of bioactive lipids that belong to the endocannabinoid system and specific neurotransmitters (e.g., gamma-aminobutyric acid, serotonin, nitric oxide). Finally, we review the role of specific bacterial components (i.e., ClpB, Amuc_1100) also acting as endocrine factors and eventually controlling host metabolism. In conclusion, this review summarizes the recent state of the art, aiming at providing evidence that the gut microbiome influences host endocrine functions via several bacteria-derived metabolites.
The oligomeric AAA+ chaperones Hsp104 in yeast and ClpB in bacteria are responsible for the reactivation of aggregated proteins, an activity essential for cell survival during severe stress. The protein disaggregase activity of these members of the Hsp100 family is linked to the activity of chaperones from the Hsp70 and Hsp40 families. The precise mechanism by which these proteins untangle protein aggregates remains unclear. Strikingly, Hsp100 proteins are not present in metazoans. This does not mean that animal cells do not have a disaggregase activity, but that this activity is performed by the Hsp70 system and a representative of the Hsp110 family instead of a Hsp100 protein. This review describes the actual view of Hsp100-mediated aggregate reactivation, including the ATP-induced conformational changes associated with their disaggregase activity, the dynamics of the oligomeric assembly that is regulated by its ATPase cycle and the DnaK system, and the tight allosteric coupling between the ATPase domains within the hexameric ring complexes. The lack of homologs of these disaggregases in metazoans has suggested that they might be used as potential targets to develop antimicrobials. The current knowledge of the human disaggregase machinery and the role of Hsp110 are also discussed.
The process of folding is a seminal event in the life of a protein, as it is essential for proper protein function and therefore cell physiology. Inappropriate folding, or misfolding, can not only lead to loss of function, but also to the formation of protein aggregates, an insoluble association of polypeptides that harm cell physiology, either by themselves or in the process of formation. Several biological processes have evolved to prevent and eliminate the existence of non-functional and amyloidogenic aggregates, as they are associated with several human pathologies. Molecular chaperones and heat shock proteins are specialized in controlling the quality of the proteins in the cell, specifically by aiding proper folding, and dissolution and clearance of already formed protein aggregates. The latter is a function of disaggregases, mainly represented by the ClpB/Hsp104 subfamily of molecular chaperones, that are ubiquitous in all organisms but, surprisingly, have no orthologs in the cytosol of metazoan cells. This review aims to describe the characteristics of disaggregases and to discuss the function of yeast Hsp104, a disaggregase that is also involved in prion propagation and inheritance.
The relevance of molecular mechanisms governing mitochondrial proteostasis to the differentiation and function of hematopoietic and immune cells is largely elusive. Through dissection of the network of proteins related to HCLS1-associated protein X-1, we defined a potentially novel functional CLPB/HAX1/(PRKD2)/HSP27 axis with critical importance for the differentiation of neutrophil granulocytes and, thus, elucidated molecular and metabolic mechanisms underlying congenital neutropenia in patients with HAX1 deficiency as well as bi- and monoallelic mutations in CLPB. As shown by stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) proteomics, CLPB and HAX1 control the balance of mitochondrial protein synthesis and persistence crucial for proper mitochondrial function. Impaired mitochondrial protein dynamics are associated with decreased abundance of the serine-threonine kinase PRKD2 and HSP27 phosphorylated on serines 78 and 82. Cellular defects in HAX1-/- cells can be functionally reconstituted by HSP27. Thus, mitochondrial proteostasis emerges as a critical molecular and metabolic mechanism governing the differentiation and function of neutrophil granulocytes.
This review focuses on the molecular chaperone ClpB that belongs to the Hsp100/Clp subfamily of the AAA+ ATPases and its biological function in selected bacterial pathogens, causing a variety of human infectious diseases, including zoonoses. It has been established that ClpB disaggregates and reactivates aggregated cellular proteins. It has been postulated that ClpB's protein disaggregation activity supports the survival of pathogenic bacteria under host-induced stresses (e.g., high temperature and oxidative stress), which allows them to rapidly adapt to the human host and establish infection. Interestingly, ClpB may also perform other functions in pathogenic bacteria, which are required for their virulence. Since ClpB is not found in human cells, this chaperone emerges as an attractive target for novel antimicrobial therapies in combating bacterial infections.
BACKGROUND: The incidence of skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM), one of the most aggressive and lethal skin tumors, is increasing worldwide. However, for advanced SKCM, we still lack an accurate and valid way to predict its prognosis, as well as novel theories to guide the planning of treatment options for SKCM patients. Lactylation (LAC), a novel post-translational modification of histones, has been shown to promote tumor growth and inhibit the antitumor response of the tumor microenvironment (TME) in a variety of ways. We hope that this study will provide new ideas for treatment options for SKCM patients, as well as research on the molecular mechanisms of SKCM pathogenesis and development. METHODS: At the level of the RNA sequencing set (TCGA, GTEx), we used differential expression analysis, LASSO regression analysis, and multifactor Cox regression analysis to screen for prognosis-related genes and calculate the corresponding LAC scores. The content of TME cells in the tumor tissue was calculated using the CIBERSORT algorithm, and the TME score was calculated based on its results. Finally, the LAC-TME classifier was established and further analyzed based on the two scores, including the construction of a prognostic model, analysis of clinicopathological characteristics, and correlation analysis of tumor mutation burden (TMB) and immunotherapy. Based on single-cell RNA sequencing data, this study analyzed the cellular composition in SKCM tissues and explored the role of LAC scores in intercellular communication. To validate the functionality of the pivotal gene CLPB in the model, cellular experiments were ultimately executed. RESULTS: We screened a total of six prognosis-related genes (NDUFA10, NDUFA13, CLPB, RRM2B, HPDL, NARS2) and 7 TME cells with good prognosis. According to Kaplan-Meier survival analysis, we found that the LAC(low)/TME(high) group had the highest overall survival (OS) and the LAC(high)/TME(low) group had the lowest OS (p value < 0.05). In further analysis of immune infiltration, tumor microenvironment (TME), functional enrichment, tumor mutational load and immunotherapy, we found that immunotherapy was more appropriate in the LAC(low)/TME(high) group. Moreover, the cellular assays exhibited substantial reductions in proliferation, migration, and invasive potentials of melanoma cells in both A375 and A2058 cell lines upon CLPB knockdown. CONCLUSIONS: The prognostic model using the combined LAC score and TME score was able to predict the prognosis of SKCM patients more consistently, and the LAC-TME classifier was able to significantly differentiate the prognosis of SKCM patients across multiple clinicopathological features. The LAC-TME classifier has an important role in the development of immunotherapy regimens for SKCM patients.
Bacterial ClpB is an ATP-dependent disaggregase that belongs to the Hsp100/Clp subfamily of the AAA+ ATPases and cooperates with the DnaK chaperone system in the reactivation of aggregated proteins, as well as promotes bacterial survival under adverse environmental conditions, including thermal and oxidative stresses. In addition, extensive evidence indicates that ClpB supports the virulence of numerous bacteria, including pathogenic spirochaete Leptospira interrogans responsible for leptospirosis in animals and humans. However, the specific function of ClpB in leptospiral virulence still remains to be fully elucidated. Interestingly, ClpB was predicted as one of the L. interrogans hub proteins interacting with human proteins, and pathogen-host protein interactions are fundamental for successful invasion of the host immune system by bacteria. The aim of this review is to discuss the most important aspects of ClpB's function in L. interrogans, including contribution of ClpB to leptospiral virulence and pathogenesis of leptospirosis, a zoonotic disease with a significant impact on public health worldwide.
Mitochondria are critical to cellular and organismal health. To prevent damage, mitochondria have evolved protein quality control machines to survey and maintain the mitochondrial proteome. SKD3, also known as CLPB, is a ring-forming, ATP-fueled protein disaggregase essential for preserving mitochondrial integrity and structure. SKD3 deficiency causes 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type VII (MGCA7) and early death in infants, while mutations in the ATPase domain impair protein disaggregation with the observed loss-of-function correlating with disease severity. How mutations in the non-catalytic N-domain cause disease is unknown. Here, we show that the disease-associated N-domain mutation, Y272C, forms an intramolecular disulfide bond with Cys267 and severely impairs SKD3(Y272C) function under oxidizing conditions and in living cells. While Cys267 and Tyr272 are found in all SKD3 isoforms, isoform-1 features an additional alpha-helix that may compete with substrate-binding as suggested by crystal structure analyses and in silico modeling, underscoring the importance of the N-domain to SKD3 function.
PURPOSE: To investigate monoallelic CLPB variants. Pathogenic variants in many genes cause congenital neutropenia. While most patients exhibit isolated hematological involvement, biallelic CLPB variants underlie a neurological phenotype ranging from nonprogressive intellectual disability to prenatal encephalopathy with progressive brain atrophy, movement disorder, cataracts, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, and neutropenia. CLPB was recently shown to be a mitochondrial refoldase; however, the exact function remains elusive. METHODS: We investigated six unrelated probands from four countries in three continents, with neutropenia and a phenotype dominated by epilepsy, developmental issues, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria with next-generation sequencing. RESULTS: In each individual, we identified one of four different de novo monoallelic missense variants in CLPB. We show that these variants disturb refoldase and to a lesser extent ATPase activity of CLPB in a dominant-negative manner. Complexome profiling in fibroblasts showed CLPB at very high molecular mass comigrating with the prohibitins. In control fibroblasts, HAX1 migrated predominantly as monomer while in patient samples multiple HAX1 peaks were observed at higher molecular masses comigrating with CLPB thus suggesting a longer-lasting interaction between CLPB and HAX1. CONCLUSION: Both biallelic as well as specific monoallelic CLPB variants result in a phenotypic spectrum centered around neurodevelopmental delay, seizures, and neutropenia presumably mediated via HAX1.
CONTEXT: Premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) is a common form of female infertility that usually presents as an isolated condition but can be part of various genetic syndromes. Early diagnosis and treatment of POI can minimize comorbidity and improve health outcomes. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the genetic cause of syndromic POI, intellectual disability, neutropenia, and cataracts. METHODS: We performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) followed by functional validation via RT-PCR, RNAseq, and quantitative proteomics, as well as clinical update of previously reported patients with variants in the caseinolytic peptidase B (CLPB) gene. RESULTS: We identified causative variants in CLPB, encoding a mitochondrial disaggregase. Variants in this gene are known to cause an autosomal recessive syndrome involving 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, neurological dysfunction, cataracts, and neutropenia that is often fatal in childhood; however, there is likely a reporting bias toward severe cases. Using RNAseq and quantitative proteomics we validated causation and gained insight into genotype:phenotype correlation. Clinical follow-up of patients with CLPB deficiency who survived to adulthood identified POI and infertility as a common postpubertal ailment. CONCLUSION: A novel splicing variant is associated with CLPB deficiency in an individual who survived to adulthood. POI is a common feature of postpubertal female individuals with CLPB deficiency. Patients with CLPB deficiency should be referred to pediatric gynecologists/endocrinologists for prompt POI diagnosis and hormone replacement therapy to minimize associated comorbidities.
Staphylococcus aureus poses a significant threat to human health due to its virulence and multidrug resistance. In addition, recalcitrant biofilm formation of S. aureus often results in chronic infection and the treatment tolerance toward the traditional antibiotics. Thus, the development of novel antimicrobial agents capable to inhibit or eradicate S. aureus biofilm formation does matter. Here, we demonstrated that clemastine showed slight bacteriostatic activity and enhanced the antibacterial activity of oxacillin against S. aureus. Moreover, the dramatic inhibition of biofilm formation was found in clinical S. aureus strains by clemastine. Clemastine inhibited the release of eDNA during the biofilm formation and decreased the S. aureus hemolytic activity. Moreover, the S. aureus SA113 treated with clemastine displayed the decreased transcriptional level of the biofilm formation relevant genes (fnbB, icaA, and icaB), virulence genes (hlg, hld, lukde, lukpvl, beta-PSM, delta-PSM, and cap5A), and the regulatory genes agrA. The proteomics analysis of SA113 treated with clemastine demonstrated the significant changes in levels of biofilm-related proteins (stress response regulators ClpB and GroS, ATP-binding proteins, and urease metabolism), virulence-related proteins (SspA, superantigen, and VWbp), and methicillin resistance-related proteins (glutamine metabolism). The genetic mutations on gdpP (cyclic di-AMP phosphodiesterase) were found in the clemastine-induced tolerant derivative isolate by whole-genome sequencing. Furthermore, the interaction between clemastine and GdpP protein was demonstrated by the molecular docking, gdpP overexpression experiment, and thermal stability assay. Conclusively, clemastine might exert its inhibitory effects against the biofilm formation and hemolysis in S. aureus through targeting GdpP protein. IMPORTANCE The biofilm formation, which protects bacteria from stresses, including antibiotics and host immune responses, can be commonly found in clinical S. aureus isolates worldwide. Treatment failure of traditional antibiotics in biofilm-associated S. aureus infections remains a serious challenge. The novel anti-biofilm drug is urgently needed to address the looming crisis. In this study, clemastine, which is a histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) antagonist, was found to have a novel role of the significant inhibition against the biofilm formation and hemolytic activity of S. aureus and enhanced antibacterial activity against S. aureus when used in combination with oxacillin by targeting the GdpP protein. The discovery of this study identified novel use and mechanism of action of clemastine as a potential anti-biofilm drug for clinical application for S. aureus infectious.
