Cannabinoid receptor 2; Heterotrimeric G protein-coupled receptor for endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol mediating inhibition of adenylate cyclase. May function in inflammatory response, nociceptive transmission and bone homeostasis.
Although the application of medical marijuana and cannabinoid drugs is controversial, it is a part of modern-day medicine. The list of diseases in which cannabinoids are promoted as a treatment is constantly expanding. Cases of significant improvement in patients with a very poor prognosis of glioma or epilepsy have already been described. However, the occurrence of side effects is still difficult to estimate, and the current knowledge of the therapeutic effects of cannabinoids is still insufficient. In our opinion, the answers to many questions and concerns regarding the medical use of cannabis can be provided by pharmacogenetics. Knowledge based on proteins and molecules involved in the transport, action, and metabolism of cannabinoids in the human organism leads us to predict candidate genes which variations are responsible for the presence of the therapeutic and side effects of medical marijuana and cannabinoid-based drugs. We can divide them into: receptor genes-CNR1, CNR2, TRPV1, and GPR55, transporters-ABCB1, ABCG2, SLC6A, biotransformation, biosynthesis, and bioactivation proteins encoded by CYP3A4, CYP2C19, CYP2C9, CYP2A6, CYP1A1, COMT, FAAH, COX2, ABHD6, ABHD12 genes, and also MAPK14. This review organizes the current knowledge in the context of cannabinoids pharmacogenetics according to individualized medicine and cannabinoid drugs therapy.
The combination of immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) with chemotherapy significantly improves clinical benefit of cancer treatment. Since chemotherapy is often associated with adverse events, concomitant treatment with drugs managing side effects of chemotherapy is frequently used in the combination therapy. However, whether these ancillary drugs could impede immunotherapy remains unknown. Here, we showed that (∆)9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the key ingredient of drugs approved for the treatment of chemotherapy-caused nausea, reduced the therapeutic effect of PD-1 blockade. The endogenous cannabinoid anandamide (AEA) also impeded antitumor immunity, indicating an immunosuppressive role of the endogenous cannabinoid system (ECS). Consistently, high levels of AEA in the sera were associated with poor overall survival in cancer patients. We further found that cannabinoids impaired the function of tumor-specific T cells through CNR2. Using a knock-in mouse model expressing a FLAG-tagged Cnr2 gene, we discovered that CNR2 binds to JAK1 and inhibits the downstream STAT signaling in T cells. Taken together, our results unveiled a novel mechanism of the ECS-mediated suppression on T-cell immunity against cancer, and suggest that cannabis and cannabinoid drugs should be avoided during immunotherapy.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The use of recreational drugs has increased globally, with the most commonly used recreational drug being cannabis. As of 2019, 10 states and the District of Columbia have legalized cannabis for recreational use, with more states potentially joining this movement. With the increased legalization of cannabis, leading to even greater recreational and medicinal use, it is important to recognize its effect on cardiovascular health. We propose to review the current literature regarding the pathophysiology of endocannabinoids, their hemodynamic effects, and their association with acute and chronic cardiovascular outcomes. RECENT FINDINGS: The demonstrated effects of the endocannabinoid system on the cardiovascular system at the cellular level have led to great interest regarding its potential clinical impact. A number of studies have attempted to characterize the hemodynamic effects of cannabis use as well as its potential negative impact on the cardiovascular system, but the data are inconclusive at this time. The largest prospective study to date, the CARDIA study, failed to show an association between lifetime or recent cannabis use and cardiovascular events. There is suggestion on a molecular level and based on retrospective analyses that cannabis may have a negative impact on the cardiovascular system. However, prospective clinical data has not confirmed these suggested findings. Further research is needed to better elucidate the association, if any, between cannabis and cardiovascular disease.
Systemic sclerosis (SSc) poses a significant challenge in autoimmunology, characterized by the development of debilitating fibrosis of skin and internal organs. The pivotal role of dysregulated T cells, notably the skewed polarization toward Th2 cells, has been implicated in the vascular damage and progressive fibrosis observed in SSc. In this study, we explored the underlying mechanisms by which cannabinoid receptor 2 (CB2) highly selective agonist HU-308 restores the imbalance of T cells to alleviate SSc. Using a bleomycin-induced SSc (BLM-SSc) mouse model, we demonstrated that HU-308 effectively attenuates skin and lung fibrosis by specifically activating CB2 on CD4(+) T cells to inhibit the polarization of Th2 cells in BLM-SSc mice, which was validated by Cnr2-specific-deficient mice. Different from classical signaling downstream of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), HU-308 facilitates the expression of SOCS3 protein and subsequently impedes the IL2/STAT5 signaling pathway during Th2 differentiation. The deficiency of SOCS3 partially mitigated the impact of HU-308. Analysis of a cohort comprising 80 SSc patients and 82 healthy controls revealed an abnormal elevation in the Th2/Th1 ratio in SSc patients. The proportion of Th2 cells showed a significant positive correlation with mRSS score and positivity of anti-Scl-70. Administration of HU-308 to PBMCs and peripheral CD4(+) T cells from SSc patients led to the upregulation of SOCS3, which effectively suppressed the aberrantly activated STAT5 signaling pathway and the proportion of CD4(+)IL4(+) T cells. In conclusion, our findings unveil a novel mechanism by which the CB2 agonist HU-308 ameliorates fibrosis in SSc by targeting and reducing Th2 responses. These insights provide a foundation for future therapeutic approaches in SSc by modulating Th2 responses.
Apoptosis is the physiological mechanism of cell death and can be modulated by endogenous and exogenous factors, including stress and metabolic alterations. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), as well as ROS-dependent lipid peroxidation products (including isoprostanes and reactive aldehydes including 4-hydroxynonenal) are proapoptotic factors. These mediators can activate apoptosis via mitochondrial-, receptor-, or ER stress-dependent pathways. Phospholipid metabolism is also an essential regulator of apoptosis, producing the proapoptotic prostaglandins of the PGD and PGJ series, as well as the antiapoptotic prostaglandins of the PGE series, but also 12-HETE and 20-HETE. The effect of endocannabinoids and phytocannabinoids on apoptosis depends on cell type-specific differences. Cells where cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1) is the dominant cannabinoid receptor, as well as cells with high cyclooxygenase (COX) activity, undergo apoptosis after the administration of cannabinoids. In contrast, in cells where CB2 receptors dominate, and cells with low COX activity, cannabinoids act in a cytoprotective manner. Therefore, cell type-specific differences in the pro- and antiapoptotic effects of lipids and their (oxidative) products might reveal new options for differential bioanalysis between normal, functional, and degenerating or malignant cells, and better integrative biomedical treatments of major stress-associated diseases.
BACKGROUND: Dendritic cells (DCs) play a key role in a variety of inflammatory lung diseases, but their role in sepsis-associated acute lung injury (SA-ALI) is currently not been illuminated. Cannabinoid receptor 2 (CNR2) has been reported to regulate the DCs maturation. However, whether the CNR2 in DCs contributes to therapeutic therapy for SA-ALI remain unclear. In current study, the role of CNR2 on DCs maturation and inflammatory during SA-ALI is to explored. METHODS: First, the CNR2 level was analyzed in isolated Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) and Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid (BALF) from patient with SA-ALI by qRT-PCR and flow cytometry. Subsequently, HU308, a specific agonist of CNR2, and SR144528, a specific antagonist of CNR2, were introduced to explore the function of CNR2 on DCs maturation and inflammatory during SA-ALI. Finally, CNR2 conditional knockout mice were generated to further confirm the function of DCs maturation and Inflammation during SA-ALI. RESULTS: First, we found that the expression of CNR2 on DCs was decreased in patient with SA-ALI. Besides, the result showed HU308 could decrease the maturation of DCs and the level of inflammatory cytokines, simultaneously reduce pulmonary pathological injury after LPS-induced sepsis in mice. In contrast of HU308, SR144528 exhibits opposite function of DCs maturate, inflammatory cytokines and lung pathological injury. Furthermore, comparing with SR144528 treatment, similar results were obtained in DCs specific CNR2 knockout mice after LPS treatment. CONCLUSION: CNR2 could alleviate SA-ALI by modulating maturation of DCs and inflammatory factors levels. Targeting CNR2 signaling specifically in DCs has therapeutic potential for the treatment of SA-ALI.
BACKGROUND: High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the biggest cause of gynecological cancer-related mortality because of its extremely metastatic nature. This study aimed to explore and evaluate the characteristics of candidate factors associated with the metastasis and progression of HGSOC. METHODS: Transcriptomic data of HGSOC patients' samples collected from primary tumors and matched omental metastatic tumors were obtained from three independent studies in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were selected to evaluate the effects on the prognosis and progression of ovarian cancer using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Hub genes' immune landscapes were estimated by the Tumor Immune Estimation Resource (TIMER) database. Finally, using 25 HGSOC patients' cancer tissues and 10 normal fallopian tube tissues, immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to quantify the expression levels of hub genes associated with International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stages. RESULTS: Fourteen DEGs, ADIPOQ , ALPK2 , BARX1 , CD37 , CNR2 , COL5A3 , FABP4 , FAP , GPR68 , ITGBL1 , MOXD1 , PODNL1 , SFRP2 , and TRAF3IP3 , were upregulated in metastatic tumors in every database while CADPS , GATA4 , STAR , and TSPAN8 were downregulated. ALPK2 , FAP , SFRP2 , GATA4 , STAR , and TSPAN8 were selected as hub genes significantly associated with survival and recurrence. All hub genes were correlated with tumor microenvironment infiltration, especially cancer-associated fibroblasts and natural killer (NK) cells. Furthermore, the expression of FAP and SFRP2 was positively correlated with the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage, and their increased protein expression levels in metastatic samples compared with primary tumor samples and normal tissues were confirmed by IHC ( P = 0.0002 and P = 0.0001, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: This study describes screening for DEGs in HGSOC primary tumors and matched metastasis tumors using integrated bioinformatics analyses. We identified six hub genes that were correlated with the progression of HGSOC, particularly FAP and SFRP2 , which might provide effective targets to predict prognosis and provide novel insights into individual therapeutic strategies for HGSOC.
The therapeutic potential of Cannabis sativa has been recognized since ancient times. Phytocannabinoids, endocannabinoids and synthetic cannabinoids activate two major G protein-coupled receptors, subtype 1 and 2 (CB1 and CB2). Cannabinoids (CBs) modulate several aspects of cancer cells, such as apoptosis, autophagy, proliferation, migration, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and stemness. Moreover, agonists of CB1 and CB2 receptors inhibit angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis in vitro and in vivo. Low-grade inflammation is a hallmark of cancer in the tumor microenvironment (TME), which contains a plethora of innate and adaptive immune cells. These cells play a central role in tumor initiation and growth and the formation of metastasis. CB2 and, to a lesser extent, CB1 receptors are expressed on a variety of immune cells present in TME (e.g., T cells, macrophages, mast cells, neutrophils, NK cells, dendritic cells, monocytes, eosinophils). The activation of CB receptors modulates a variety of biological effects on cells of the adaptive and innate immune system. The expression of CB2 and CB1 on different subsets of immune cells in TME and hence in tumor development is incompletely characterized. The recent characterization of the human cannabinoid receptor CB2-G(i) signaling complex will likely aid to design potent and specific CB2/CB1 ligands with therapeutic potential in cancer.
Mammalian tissues contain at least two types of cannabinoid receptor, CB(1) and CB(2), both coupled to G proteins. CB(1) receptors are expressed mainly by neurones of the central and peripheral nervous system whereas CB(2) receptors occur centrally and peripherally in certain non-neuronal tissues, particularly in immune cells. The existence of endogenous ligands for cannabinoid receptors has also been demonstrated. The discovery of this 'endocannabinoid system' has prompted the development of a range of novel cannabinoid receptor agonists and antagonists, including several that show marked selectivity for CB(1) or CB(2) receptors. It has also been paralleled by a renewed interest in cannabinoid-induced antinociception. This review summarizes current knowledge about the ability of cannabinoids to produce antinociception in animal models of acute pain as well as about the ability of these drugs to suppress signs of tonic pain induced in animals by nerve damage or by the injection of an inflammatory agent. Particular attention is paid to the types of pain against which cannabinoids may be effective, the distribution pattern of cannabinoid receptors in central and peripheral pain pathways and the part that these receptors play in cannabinoid-induced antinociception. The possibility that antinociception can be mediated by cannabinoid receptors other than CB(1) and CB(2) receptors, for example CB(2)-like receptors, is also discussed as is the evidence firstly that one endogenous cannabinoid, anandamide, produces antinociception through mechanisms that differ from those of other types of cannabinoid, for example by acting on vanilloid receptors, and secondly that the endocannabinoid system has physiological and/or pathophysiological roles in the modulation of pain.
Endocannabinoids are a group of arachidonic acid-derived lipid mediators binding to cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2. An overactivity of the endocannabinoid system plays a pathophysiological role in the development of visceral obesity and insulin resistance. Moreover, elevated circulating endocannabinoid levels are also prevalent in atherosclerosis. The pathophysiological increase of endocannabinoid levels is due to an altered expression of endocannabinoid synthesizing and degrading enzymes induced by inflammatory mediators such as cytokines or lipids. Emerging experimental evidence suggests that enhanced endocannabinoid signalling affects atherosclerosis via multiple effects, including a modulation of vascular inflammation, leukocyte recruitment, macrophage cholesterol metabolism and consequently atherosclerotic plaque stability. In addition, recent findings in various metabolic disease models highlight the relevance of peripheral CB1 cannabinoid receptors in adipose tissue, liver and pancreas, which crucially regulate lipid and glucose metabolism as well as macrophage properties in these organs. This suggests that targeting the endocannabinoid system in the vasculature and peripheral organs might have a therapeutic potential for atherosclerosis by inhibiting vascular inflammation and improving metabolic risk factors. This review will provide a brief update on the effects of endocannabinoid signalling in atherosclerosis and related metabolic complications.
Introduction: Clinicians involved in pain management can finally include cannabis or cannabis-related products in their therapeutic armamentarium as a growing number of countries have approved them for pain relief. Despite the several benefits attributed to analgesic, anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties of cannabinoids, there are still significant areas of uncertainty concerning their use in many fields of medicine. The biosynthesis and inactivation of cannabinoids are regulated by a complex signaling system of cannabinoid receptors, endocannabinoids (the endogenous ligands of cannabinoid receptors) and enzymes, with a variety of interactions with neuroendocrinological and immunological systems. Areas covered: A review of studies carried out during clinical development of cannabis and cannabis medical products in systemic rheumatic diseases was performed, highlighting the aspects that we believe to be relevant to clinical practice. Expert opinion: The growing public opinion, pushing toward the legalization of the use of cannabis in chronic pain and various rheumatological conditions, makes it necessary to have educational programs that modify the concerns and widespread preconceptions related to this topic in the medical community by increasing confidence. More extensive basic and clinical research on the mechanisms and clinical utility of cannabis and derivatives in various diseases and their long-term side effects is necessary.
The actions of cannabis are mediated by receptors that are part of an endogenous cannabinoid system. The endocannabinoid system (ECS) consists of the naturally occurring ligands N-arachidonoylethanolamine (anandamide) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), their biosynthetic and degradative enzymes, and the cannabinoid (CB) receptors CB1 and CB2. The ECS is a widely distributed transmitter system that controls gut functions peripherally and centrally. It is an important physiologic regulator of gastrointestinal motility. Polymorphisms in the gene encoding CB1 (CNR1) have been associated with some forms of irritable bowel syndrome. The ECS is involved in the control of nausea and vomiting and visceral sensation. The homeostatic role of the ECS also extends to the control of intestinal inflammation. We review the mechanisms by which the ECS links stress and visceral pain. CB1 in sensory ganglia controls visceral sensation, and transcription of CNR1 is modified through epigenetic processes under conditions of chronic stress. These processes might link stress with abdominal pain. The ECS is also involved centrally in the manifestation of stress, and endocannabinoid signaling reduces the activity of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal pathways via actions in specific brain regions, notably the prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and hypothalamus. Agents that modulate the ECS are in early stages of development for treatment of gastrointestinal diseases. Increasing our understanding of the ECS will greatly advance our knowledge of interactions between the brain and gut and could lead to new treatments for gastrointestinal disorders.
ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The Roucongrong Pill (RCRP), originating from the historical General Medical Collection of Royal Benevolence, is frequently used to treat postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOP). Despite its prevalent application, the specific anti-osteoporotic mechanisms of RCRP remain to be elucidated. AIM OF THE STUDY: This study aims to elucidate the therapeutic mechanism of RCRP in the context of ovariectomy (OVX)-induced PMOP in rats. By employing an integrative approach, the research combines medicinal chemistry, gut microbiota (GM) profiling, metabolomics, MetOrigin traceability, network pharmacology, molecular docking, and molecular dynamics simulations to deliver a comprehensive analysis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats underwent bilateral OVX to establish a PMOP model. The therapeutic efficacy of RCRP was evaluated through bone metrics (BMD, bone strength, BV/TV, Tb.Sp), hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) histological assessment, and bone metabolism markers (OPG, BALP, TRACP-5b, beta-CTX, RANKL). Fecal metabolomics and 16S rDNA sequencing were employed to assess the influence of RCRP on GM and metabolite profiles. Furthermore, MetOrigin facilitated the traceability analysis of relevant metabolites. Molecular docking identified potential RCRP compounds with anti-PMOP activity, while their stability and protein interactions were assessed through molecular dynamics simulations. Network pharmacology further confirms the targets of action. RESULTS: RCRP alleviated PMOP in rats, enhancing bone strength, cortical and trabecular BMD, BV/TV, and serum OPG levels, while reducing Tb.Sp, serum BALP, TRACP-5b, beta-CTX, and RANKL concentrations. A total of twenty-six distinct metabolites were identified, of which ten-tribufos, sulfoacetic acid, betamethasone dipropionate, 9-oxooctadeca-10,12,15-trienoic acid, menatetrenone, piperlongumine, maltopentaose, enol-phenylpyruvate, catechol, pentaacetate, and (+)-2-methylpropanoic acid-exhibited correlations with six GM species: Turicibacter, Roseburia, Colidextribacter, Helicobacter, Odoribacter, and Lachnoclostridium, as determined by Spearman's correlation analysis. Notably, MetOrigin revealed the microbial metabolism of taurine and hypotaurine, along with host-specific steroid hormone synthesis. Computational docking studies demonstrated robust interactions between five RCRP-derived steroids (hydroxyecdysone, corticosterone, trilostane, 5alpha-androstan-3,6,17-trione, and cortisol) and key enzymes (estradiol 17alpha-dehydrogenase and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase), suggesting a potential enhancement of therapeutic efficacy against PMOP. Furthermore, molecular dynamics simulations indicated stable interactions between hydroxyecdysone and two proteins, with binding free energies of -67.427 kJ/mol and -156.948 kJ/mol, respectively. Through network pharmacology and molecular docking approaches, potential targets of these metabolites were identified, including estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2, dual specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6), sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), prostaglandin E receptor 4 (PTGER4), cannabinoid receptor 2 (CNR2), cathepsin K (CTSK), and androgen receptor (AR). CONCLUSIONS: RCRP effectively mitigates OVX-induced bone loss in PMOP rats by modulating GM and associated metabolites, along with their potential targets and key metabolic pathways, including taurine and hypotaurine metabolism, as well as steroid hormone biosynthesis. These findings offer new insights into the therapeutic mechanisms by which RCRP may alleviate PMOP.
Bone is a dynamic tissue, whose homeostasis is maintained by a fine balance between osteoclast (OC) and osteoblast (OB) activity. The endocannabinoid/endovanilloid (EC/EV) system's receptors are the cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1), the cannabinoid receptor type 2 (CB2), and the transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1 (TRPV1). Their stimulation modulates bone formation and bone resorption. Bone diseases are very common worldwide. Osteoporosis is the principal cause of bone loss and it can be caused by several factors such as postmenopausal estrogen decrease, glucocorticoid (GC) treatments, iron overload, and chemotherapies. Studies have demonstrated that CB1 and TRPV1 stimulation exerts osteoclastogenic effects, whereas CB2 stimulation has an anti-osteoclastogenic role. Moreover, the EC/EV system has been demonstrated to have a role in cancer, favoring apoptosis and inhibiting cell proliferation. In particular, in bone cancer, the modulation of the EC/EV system not only reduces cell growth and enhances apoptosis but it also reduces cell invasion and bone pain in mouse models. Therefore, EC/EV receptors may be a useful pharmacological target in the prevention and treatment of bone diseases. More studies to better investigate the biochemical mechanisms underlining the EC/EV system effects in bone are needed, but the synthesis of hybrid molecules, targeting these receptors and capable of oppositely regulating bone homeostasis, seems to be a promising and encouraging prospective in bone disease management.
There are two well characterized cannabinoid receptors (CBRs), CB1-Rs and CB2-Rs, with other candidates, such as GPR55, PPARs and vanilloid TRPV1 (VR1) receptors, which are either activated by cannabinoids and/or endocannabinoids (eCBs). The neuronal and functional expression of CB2-Rs in the brain has been much less well characterized in comparison with the expression of the ubiquitous CB1-Rs. CB2-Rs were previously thought to be predominantly expressed in immune cells in the periphery and were traditionally referred to as peripheral CB2-Rs. We and others have now demonstrated the expression of CB2-Rs in neuronal, glial and endothelial cells in the brain, and this warrants a re-evaluation of the CNS effects of CB2-Rs. In the present review we summarize our current understanding of CNR2 genomic structure, its polymorphic nature, subtype specificity, from mice to human subjects, and its variants that confer vulnerabilities to neuropsychiatric disorders beyond neuro-immuno-cannabinoid activity.
Patient phenotypes in pharmacological pain treatment varies between individuals, which could be partly assigned to their genotypes regarding the targets of classical analgesics (OPRM1, PTGS2) or associated signalling pathways (KCNJ6). Translational and genetic research have identified new targets, for which new analgesics are being developed. This addresses voltage-gated sodium, calcium and potassium channels, for which SCN9A, CACNA1B, KCNQ2 and KCNQ3, respectively, are primary gene candidates because they code for the subunits of the respective channels targeted by analgesics currently in clinical development. Mutations in voltage gated transient receptor potential (TRPV) channels are known from genetic pain research and may modulate the effects of analgesics under development targeting TRPV1 or TRPV3. To this add ligand-gated ion channels including nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, ionotropic glutamate-gated receptors and ATP-gated purinergic P2X receptors with most important subunits coded by CHRNA4, GRIN2B and P2RX7. Among G protein coupled receptors, delta-opioid receptors (coded by OPRD1), cannabinoid receptors (CNR1 and CNR2), metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR5 coded by GRM5), bradykinin B(1) (BDKRB1) and 5-HT(1A) (HTR1A) receptors are targeted by new analgesic substances. Finally, nerve growth factor (NGFB), its tyrosine kinase receptor (NTRK1) and the fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) have become targets of interest. For most of these genes, functional variants have been associated with neuro-psychiatric disorders and not yet with analgesia. However, research on the genetic modulation of pain has already identified variants in these genes, relative to pain, which may facilitate the pharmacogenetic assessments of new analgesics. The increased number of candidate pharmacogenetic modulators of analgesic actions may open opportunities for the broader clinical implementation of genotyping information.
The endogenous cannabinoid system was first uncovered following studies of the recreational drug Cannabis sativa. It is now recognized as a vital network of signaling pathways that regulate several physiological processes. Following the initial discovery of the cannabinoid receptors 1 (CB1) and 2 (CB2), activated by Cannabis-derived analogs, many endogenous fatty acids termed "endocannabinoids" are now known to be partial agonists of the CB receptors. At present, the most thoroughly studied endocannabinoid signaling molecules are anandamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG), which are both derived from arachidonic acid. Both AEA and 2-AG are also substrates for the eicosanoid-synthesizing pathways, namely, certain cyclooxygenase (COX), lipoxygenase (LOX), and cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. In the past, research in the endocannabinoid field focused on the interaction of AEA and 2-AG with the COX and LOX enzymes, but accumulating evidence also points to the involvement of CYPs in modulating endocannabinoid signaling. The focus of this review is to explore the current understanding of CYP-mediated metabolism of endocannabinoids.
Cannabis has been used for its medicinal purposes since ancient times. Its consumption leads to the activation of Cannabis receptors CB1 and CB2 that, through specific mechanisms can lead to modulation and progression of inflammation or repair. The novel findings are linked to the medical use of Cannabis in gastrointestinal (GI) system. PURPOSE: The objective of the present paper is to elucidate the role of Cannabis consumption in GI system. An additional aim is to review the information on the function of Cannabis in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). METHODS AND RESULTS: This review summarizes the recent findings on the role of cannabinoid receptors, their synthetic or natural ligands, as well as their metabolizing enzymes in normal GI function and its disorders, including irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and possible adverse events. The synergism or antagonism between Cannabis' active ingredients and the "entourage" plays a role in the efficacy of various strains. Some elements of Cannabis may alter disease severity as over-activation of Cannabis receptors CB1 and CB2 can lead to changes of the commensal gut flora. The endocannabinoid system (ECS) contributes to gut homeostasis. The ability of ECS to modulate inflammatory responses demonstrates the capacity of ECS to preserve gastrointestinal (GI) function. Alterations of the ECS may predispose patients to pathologic disorders, including IBD. Clinical studies in IBD demonstrate that subjects benefit from Cannabis consumption as seen through a reduction of the IBD-inflammation, as well as through a decreased need for other medication. NAFLD is characterized by fat accumulation in the liver. The occurrence of inflammation in NAFLD leads to non-alcoholic-steatohepatitis (NASH). The use of Cannabis might reduce liver inflammation. CONCLUSIONS: With limited evidence of efficacy and safety of Cannabis in IBD, IBS, and NAFLD, randomized controlled studies are required to examine its therapeutic efficacy. Moreover, since long term use of the plant leads to drug use disorders the patients should be followed continuously.
Despite advances in the molecular exploration of paediatric cancers, approximately 50% of children with high-risk neuroblastoma lack effective treatment. To identify therapeutic options for this group of high-risk patients, we combine predictive data mining with experimental evaluation in patient-derived xenograft cells. Our proposed algorithm, TargetTranslator, integrates data from tumour biobanks, pharmacological databases, and cellular networks to predict how targeted interventions affect mRNA signatures associated with high patient risk or disease processes. We find more than 80 targets to be associated with neuroblastoma risk and differentiation signatures. Selected targets are evaluated in cell lines derived from high-risk patients to demonstrate reversal of risk signatures and malignant phenotypes. Using neuroblastoma xenograft models, we establish CNR2 and MAPK8 as promising candidates for the treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma. We expect that our method, available as a public tool (targettranslator.org), will enhance and expedite the discovery of risk-associated targets for paediatric and adult cancers.
The endocannabinoid system plays a role in regulating bone mass and bone cell activity and inactivation of the type 1 (Cnr1) or type 2 (Cnr2) cannabinoid receptors influences peak bone mass and age-related bone loss. As the Cnr1 and Cnr2 receptors have limited homology and are activated by different ligands, we have evaluated the effects of combined deficiency of Cnr1 and 2 receptors (Cnr1/2(-/-) ) on bone development from birth to old age and studied ovariectomy induced bone loss in female mice. The Cnr1/2(-/-) mice had accelerated bone accrual at birth when compared with wild type littermates, and by 3 months of age, they had higher trabecular bone mass. They were also significantly protected against ovariectomy-induced bone loss due to a reduction in osteoclast number. The Cnr1/2(-/-) mice had reduced age-related bone loss when compared with wild-type due to a reduction in osteoclast number. Although bone formation was reduced and bone marrow adiposity increased in Cnr1/2(-/-) mice, the osteoclast defect outweighed the reduction in bone formation causing preservation of bone mass with aging. This contrasts with the situation previously reported in mice with inactivation of the Cnr1 or Cnr2 receptors individually where aged-related bone loss was greater than in wild-type. We conclude that the Cnr1 and Cnr2 receptors have overlapping but nonredundant roles in regulating osteoclast and osteoblast activities. These observations indicate that combined inhibition of Cnr1 and Cnr2 receptors may be beneficial in preventing age-related bone loss, whereas blockade of individual receptors may be detrimental.
