Catechol O-methyltransferase; Catalyzes the O-methylation, and thereby the inactivation, of catecholamine neurotransmitters and catechol hormones. Also shortens the biological half-lives of certain neuroactive drugs, like L-DOPA, alpha-methyl DOPA and isoproterenol; Belongs to the class I-like SAM-binding methyltransferase superfamily. Cation-dependent O-methyltransferase family.
In animals, different types of COMT inhibitors, irrespective of their brain penetration, are pro-nociceptive in several models of acute and inflammatory pain. Similarly, COMT knock-out mice are more sensitive to nociceptive stimuli, whereas in mice over-expressing a high activity COMT variant nociceptive sensitivity is decreased. COMT knock-out mice also show altered response to opioids and stress-induced analgesia. In different rat models of neuropathic pain, the action of nitecapone is opposite: it is antinociceptive and antiallodynic. Complex actions of low COMT activity may be caused by enhanced adrenergic and dopaminergic activities that play different and even contrasting roles at different parts of the nociceptive system. Also compensatory changes in other neurotransmitters may occur. Pro-nociceptive effects seem to be caused by increased activation of peripheral adrenergic beta(2)- and beta(3) -receptors. Other properties of COMT inhibitors, like scavenging of oxygen and nitrogen radicals, may be important in antiallodynic effects found in neuropathic pain models. Increased number of micro-opioid receptors in certain brain areas may be responsible of enhanced opioid effects associated with a low COMT activity. In human pain studies, a low COMT activity is often associated with increased pain sensitivity in experimental pain models and with increased pre- and postoperative pain in acute clinical situations. As a rule, a simultaneous occurrence of several SNPs within the haplotype, causing low COMT activity, is more often associated with pain than any single SNP alone. In experimental pain studies, all negative findings resulted from concentrating solely on SNP rs4680 (Val158Met). Virtually all studies assessing haplotypes were able to confirm an association of a low COMT and increased pain. In chronic clinical pain, the effect of COMT polymorphisms depends on the pain conditions. Hence, in neuropathic and cancer pains, COMT activity is meaningless but in some chronic musculoskeletal pain conditions and migraine or headache low COMT activity appears to increase incidence and symptoms. A low COMT activity also increases availability of opioid receptors and may enhance opioid analgesia and adverse effects at least in cancer pains.
Genetic variants of DCX, COMT and FMR1 have been linked to neurodevelopmental disorders related to intellectual disability and social behavior. In this systematic review we examine the roles of the DCX, COMT and FMR1 genes in the context of hippocampal neurogenesis with respect to these disorders with the aim of identifying important hubs and signaling pathways that may bridge these conditions. Taken together our findings indicate that factors connecting DCX, COMT, and FMR1 in intellectual disability and social behavior may converge at Wnt signaling, neuron migration, and axon and dendrite morphogenesis. Data derived from genomic research has identified a multitude of genes that are linked to brain disorders and developmental differences. Information about where and how these genes function and cooperate is lagging behind. The approach used here may help to shed light on the biological underpinnings in which key genes interface and may prove useful for the testing of specific hypotheses.
Imaging genetics is an integrated research method that uses neuroimaging and genetics to assess the impact of genetic variation on brain function and structure. Imaging genetics is both a tool for the discovery of risk genes for psychiatric disorders and a strategy for characterizing the neural systems affected by risk gene variants to elucidate quantitative and mechanistic aspects of brain function implicated in psychiatric disease. Early studies of imaging genetics included association analyses between brain morphology and single nucleotide polymorphisms whose function is well known, such as catechol-Omethyltransferase (COMT) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). GWAS of psychiatric disorders have identified genes with unknown functions, such as ZNF804A, and imaging genetics has been used to investigate clues of the biological function of these genes. The difficulty in replicating the findings of studies with small sample sizes has motivated the creation of largescale collaborative consortiums, such as ENIGMA, CHARGE and IMAGEN, to collect thousands of images. In a genome-wide association study, the ENIGMA consortium successfully identified common variants in the genome associated with hippocampal volume at 12q24, and the CHARGE consortium replicated this finding. The new era of imaging genetics has just begun, and the next challenge we face is the discovery of small effect size signals from large data sets obtained from genetics and neuroimaging. New methods and technologies for data reduction with appropriate statistical thresholds, such as polygenic analysis and parallel independent component analysis (ICA), are warranted. Future advances in imaging genetics will aid in the discovery of genes and provide mechanistic insight into psychiatric disorders.
OBJECTIVE: Cognition is a complex trait representing a set of all mental abilities and processes related to knowledge. Although diverse brain regions are involved, most cognitive processes appear to engage cortical regions. The activity of dopaminergic neurons in prefrontal cortex represents a biological substrate underlying cognitive functions. Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is the most frequent dementia associated with cognitive impairments. Cognitive impairment in AD starts slowly with discrete deterioration in memory, language, thinking and reasoning, but it progresses into more severe and debilitating cognitive dysfunction. Cognitive function is affected by the complex interactions between various genetic, epigenetic, developmental and environmental factors. One of the most studied genes, associated with cognitive disturbances, is the gene coding for Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), the enzyme with major role in dopamine metabolism and modulation of different brain functions. Therefore, COMT is studied as a target for many neuropsychiatric disorders, including dementias and AD. The COMT Val158/108Met functional polymorphism affects significantly the enzyme activity and consequently cognitive performance associated with altered dopamine function. The association of COMT Val158/108Met polymorphism with some cognitive domains and psychosis in AD was reported in some but not in all studies. Besides COMT Val158/108Met polymorphism, other risk genotypes or haplotypes should be evaluated to determine the association of COMT with cognitive decline in AD. CONCLUSION: Better understanding of the role of COMT in cognitive processes in AD, as well as integration of neurobiological, genetic, genomic and epigenetic data, might help in developing new potential therapies of cognitive impairments and psychotic symptoms, characteristic features of AD.
The ADAMTS proteinases are a group of multidomain and secreted metalloproteinases containing the thrombospondin motifs. ADAMTS-7 is a member of ADAMTS family and plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of arthritis. Overexpression of ADAMTS-7 gene promotes the breakdown of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) matrix and accelerates the progression of both surgically induced osteoarthritis and collagen-induced arthritis. Moreover, ADAMTS-7 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) form a positive feedback loop in osteoarthritis. More significantly, granulin-epithelin precursor, a growth factor has important roles in bone development and bone-associated diseases, disturbs the interaction between ADAMTS-7 and COMP, and prevents COMP degradation. This review is based on our results and provides an overview of current knowledge of ADAMTS-7, including its structure, function, gene regulation, and inflammatory diseases involvement.
The chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 4 ( CSPG4) gene encodes a transmembrane proteoglycan (PG) constituting the largest and most structurally complex macromolecule of the human surfaceome. Its transcript shows an extensive evolutionary conservation and, due to the elaborated intracellular processing of the translated protein, it generates an array of glycoforms with the potential to exert variant-specific functions. CSPG4-mediated molecular events are articulated through the interaction with more than 40 putative ligands and the concurrent involvement of the ectodomain and cytoplasmic tail. Alternating inside-out and outside-in signal transductions may thereby be elicited through a tight functional connection of the PG with the cytoskeleton and its regulators. The potential of CSPG4 to influence both types of signaling mechanisms is also asserted by its lateral mobility along the plasma membrane and its intersection with microdomain-restricted internalization and endocytic trafficking. Owing to the multitude of molecular interplays that CSPG4 may engage, and thanks to a differential phosphorylation of its intracellular domain accounted by crosstalking signaling pathways, the PG stands out for its unique capability to affect numerous cellular phenomena, including those purporting pathologic conditions. We discuss here the progresses made in advancing our understanding about the structural-functional bases for the ability of CSPG4 to widely impact on cell behavior, such as to highlight how its multivalency may be exploited to interfere with disease progression.-Tamburini, E., Dallatomasina, A., Quartararo, J., Cortelazzi, B., Mangieri, D., Lazzaretti, M., Perris, R. Structural deciphering of the NG2/CSPG4 proteoglycan multifunctionality.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Cognitive and motor functions are modulated by dopaminergic signalling, which is shaped by several genetic factors. The biological effects of single genetic variants might differ depending on epistatic interactions that can be functionally multi-directional and non-linear. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We performed behavioural and neurochemical assessments in genetically modified mice and behavioural assessments and genetic screening in human patients with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS). KEY RESULTS: Here, we confirm a genetic interaction between the Comt (catechol-O-methyltransferase, human orthologue: COMT) and Dtnbp1 (dystrobrevin binding protein 1, alias dysbindin, human orthologue: DTNBP1) genes that modulate cortical and striatal dopaminergic signalling in a manner not predictable by the effects of each single gene. In mice, Comt-by-Dtnbp1 concomitant reduction leads to a hypoactive mesocortical and a hyperactive mesostriatal dopamine pathway, associated with specific cognitive abnormalities. Like mice, in subjects with the 22q11.2DS (characterized by COMT hemideletion and dopamine alterations), COMT-by-DTNBP1 concomitant reduction was associated with analogous cognitive disturbances. We then developed an easy and inexpensive colourimetric kit for the genetic screening of common COMT and DTNBP1 functional genetic variants for clinical application. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These findings illustrate an epistatic interaction of two dopamine-related genes and their functional effects, supporting the need to address genetic interaction mechanisms at the base of complex behavioural traits.
Cognitive dysfunctions are core-enduring symptoms of schizophrenia, with important sex-related differences. Genetic variants of the DTBPN1 gene associated with reduced dysbindin-1 protein (Dys) expression negatively impact cognitive functions in schizophrenia through a functional epistatic interaction with Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). Dys is involved in the trafficking of dopaminergic receptors, crucial for prefrontal cortex (PFC) signaling regulation. Moreover, dopamine signaling is modulated by estrogens via inhibition of COMT expression. We hypothesized a sex dimorphism in Dys-related cognitive functions dependent on COMT and estrogen levels. Our multidisciplinary approach combined behavioral-molecular findings on genetically modified mice, human postmortem Dys expression data, and in vivo fMRI during a working memory task performance. We found cognitive impairments in male mice related to genetic variants characterized by reduced Dys protein expression (p(Bonferroni) = 0.0001), as well as in male humans through a COMT/Dys functional epistatic interaction involving PFC brain activity during working memory (t(23) = -3.21; p(FDR) = 0.004). Dorsolateral PFC activity was associated with lower working memory performance in males only (p = 0.04). Also, male humans showed decreased Dys expression in dorsolateral PFC during adulthood (p(FDR) = 0.05). Female Dys mice showed preserved cognitive performances with deficits only with a lack of estrogen tested in an ovariectomy model (p(Bonferroni) = 0.0001), suggesting that genetic variants reducing Dys protein expression could probably become functional in females when the protective effect of estrogens is attenuated, i.e., during menopause. Overall, our results show the differential impact of functional variants of the DTBPN1 gene interacting with COMT on cognitive functions across sexes in mice and humans, underlying the importance of considering sex as a target for patient stratification and precision medicine in schizophrenia.
Sleep and sleep disorders are complex and highly variable phenotypes regulated by many genes and environment. The catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene is an interesting candidate, being one of the major mammalian enzymes involved in the catabolism of catecholamines. The activity of COMT enzyme is genetically polymorphic due to a guanine-to-adenine transition at codon 158, resulting in a valine (Val) to methionine (Met) substitution. Individuals homozygous for the Val allele show higher COMT activity, and lower dopaminergic signaling in prefrontal cortex (PFC) than subjects homozygous for the Met allele. Since COMT has a crucial role in metabolising dopamine, it was suggested that the common functional polymorphism in the COMT gene impacts on cognitive function related to PFC, sleep-wake regulation, and potentially on sleep pathologies. The COMT Val158Met polymorphism may predict inter-individual differences in brain electroencephalography (EEG) alpha oscillations and recovery processes resulting from partial sleep loss in healthy individuals. The Val158Met polymorphism also exerts a sexual dimorphism and has a strong effect on objective daytime sleepiness in patients with narcolepsy-cataplexy. Since the COMT enzyme inactivates catecholamines, it was hypothesized that the response to stimulant drugs differs between COMT genotypes. Modafinil maintained executive functioning performance and vigilant attention throughout sleep deprivation in subjects with Val/Val genotype, but less in those with Met/Met genotype. Also, homozygous Met/Met patients with narcolepsy responded to lower doses of modafinil compared to Val/Val carriers. We review here the critical role of the common functional COMT gene polymorphism, COMT enzyme activity, and the prefrontal dopamine levels in the regulation of sleep and wakefulness in normal subjects, in narcolepsy and other sleep-related disorders, and its impact on the response to psychostimulants.
Many of the individual differences in cognition, motivation, and learning-and the disruption of these processes in neurological conditions-are influenced by genetic factors. We provide an integrative synthesis across human and animal studies, focusing on a recent spate of evidence implicating a role for genes controlling dopaminergic function in frontostriatal circuitry, including COMT, DARPP-32, DAT1, DRD2, and DRD4. These genetic effects are interpreted within theoretical frameworks developed in the context of the broader cognitive and computational neuroscience literature, constrained by data from pharmacological, neuroimaging, electrophysiological, and patient studies. In this framework, genes modulate the efficacy of particular neural computations, and effects of genetic variation are revealed by assays designed to be maximally sensitive to these computations. We discuss the merits and caveats of this approach and outline a number of novel candidate genes of interest for future study.
Enzymatic methylation catalyzed by methyltransferases has a significant impact on many human biochemical reactions. As the second most ubiquitous cofactor in humans, S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM or AdoMet) serves as a methyl donor for SAM-dependent methyltransferases (MTases), which transfer a methyl group to a nucleophilic acceptor such as O, As, N, S, or C as the byproduct. SAM-dependent methyltransferases can be grouped into different types based on the substrates. Here we systematically reviewed eight types of methyltransferases associated with human diseases. Catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT), As(III) S-adenosylmethionine methyltransferase (AS3MT), indolethylamine N-methyltransferase (INMT), phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT), histamine N-methyltransferase (HNMT), nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT), thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) and DNA methyltansferase (DNMT) are classic SAM-dependent MTases. Correlations between genotypes and disease susceptibility can be partially explained by genetic polymorphisms. The physiological function, substrate specificity, genetic variants and disease susceptibility associated with these eight SAM-dependent methyltransferases are discussed in this review.
There is much evidence that schizophrenia patients have an increased risk for aggression and violent behavior, including homicide. The neurobiological basis and correlates of this risk have not been much studied. While genome-wide association studies are lacking, a number of candidate genes have been investigated. By far, the most intensively studied is the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene on chromosome 22. COMT is involved in the metabolism of dopamine, a key neurotransmitter in schizophrenia pathophysiology. Several studies suggest that the Val158Met polymorphism of this gene affects COMT activity. Methionine (Met)/Met homozygote schizophrenia patients show 4- to 5-fold lower COMT activity than valine (Val)/Val homozygotes, and some but not all studies have found an association with aggression and violence. Recently, a new functional single-nucleotide polymorphism in the COMT gene, Ala72Ser, was found to be associated with homicidal behavior in schizophrenia, but this finding warrants further replication. Studies published so far indicate that an association with the monoamine oxidase A, B, or tryptophan hydroxylase 1 genes is unlikely. Data for the brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene are conflicting and limited. Data from the limited number of neuroimaging studies performed to date are interesting. Frontal and temporal lobe abnormalities are found consistently in aggressive schizophrenia patients. Positron emission tomography and single photon-emission computed tomography (SPECT) data indicate deficits also in the orbitofrontal and temporal cortex. Some functional magnetic resonance imaging studies found a negative association of violent behavior with frontal and right-sided inferior parietal activity. Neuroimaging studies may well help further elucidate the interrelationship between neurocognitive functioning, personality traits, and antisocial and violent behavior.
The catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene has attracted strong neuroscientific interest due to its implication in dopaminergic neurotransmission. One of its most widely studied variations comprises a common single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), a valine-to-methionine substitution at codon 158 (COMT Val158Met), which has been associated with various cognitive phenotypes, psychiatric disorders and changes in brain activation and structure. This review first gives an overview of recent findings on the effect of COMT Val158Met carrier status on behavioral and imaging correlates of brain function. Here, we highlight not only commonalities but also disparate findings and open questions, and identify possible causal factors including gender effects, study population characteristics, and definition of the respective phenotypes. Next, an introduction to what is known about interactions of COMT allele carrier status with age and environment is provided. The review closes with a discussion of the impact of additional COMT polymorphisms on brain structure and function, as well as gene-gene interactions between COMT and other learning-relevant genes. Future studies should try to disentangle the complex effects of COMT Val158Met on brain functions by taking gender, age, ethnicity, endophenotypes, as well as gene-environment and gene-gene interactions into account.
This paper reviews the published evidence on genetically driven variation in neurotransmitter function and brain circuits involved in emotion. Several studies point to a role of the serotonin transporter promoter polymorphism in amygdala activation during emotion perception. We also discuss other polymorphisms (e.g. the COMT val158met polymorphism, tryptophan hydroxylase-2 -703 G/T) and putative effects on affective processing in cortical and limbic regions. A different line of research concerns studies with genetic disorders. Although at a less fine-grained level, studies with individuals with aneuploidies of the X chromosome (Turner syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome), who display impairments in emotion processing, have resulted in new insights and hypotheses with regard to X chromosomal influences on brain systems supporting cognition and emotion. These have also implicated a key role for the amygdala. Integration of the emerging evidence, suggests that the study of polymorphisms using brain imaging can potentially elucidate biological pathways and mechanisms contributing to individual differences in brain circuits that may bias behavior and affect risk for psychiatric illness.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: The etiology of abdominal pain in postinfectious, diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome (PI-IBS-D) is unknown, and few treatment options exist. Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), an enzyme that inactivates and degrades biologically active catecholamines, plays an important role in numerous physiologic processes, including modulation of pain perception. Our objective was to determine the mechanism(s) of how decreased colonic COMT in PI-IBS-D patients contributes to the chronic abdominal pain phenotype after enteric infections. METHODS: Colon neurons, epithelial cells, and macrophages were procured with laser capture microdissection from PI-IBS-D patients to evaluate cell-specific colonic COMT, microRNA-155 (miR-155), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha expression levels compared to recovered patients (infection cleared: did not develop PI-IBS-D) and control individuals. COMT(-/-), colon-specific COMT(-/-), and miR-155(-/-) mice and human colonoids were used to model phenotypic expression of COMT in PI-IBS-D patients and to investigate signaling pathways linking abdominal pain. Citrobacter rodentium and trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid animal models were used to model postinflammatory changes seen in PI-IBS-D patients. RESULTS: Colonic COMT levels were significantly decreased and correlated with increased visual analog scale abdominal pain ratings in PI-IBS-D patients compared to recovered patients and control individuals. Colonic miR-155 and TNF-alpha were increased in PI-IBS-D patients with diminished colonic COMT. COMT(-/-) mice had significantly increased expression of miR-155 and TNF-alpha in both colon tissues and dorsal root ganglia. Introduction of cV1q antibody (anti-TNF-alpha) into mice reversed visceral hypersensitivity after C rodentium and trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid. CONCLUSIONS: Decreased colonic COMT in PI-IBS-D patients drives abdominal pain phenotypes via the COMT/miR-155/TNF-alpha axis. These important findings will allow new treatment paradigms and more targeted and personalized medicine approaches for gastrointestinal disorders after enteric infections.
Individual differences in long-term stability of fear memories are of potential relevance for stable dispositions related to threat processing, such as neuroticism/anxiety and fearfulness. As previous research suggests a prominent role of dopamine for the retention of conditioned and extinguished fear, dopaminergic gene polymorphisms may also relate to individual differences in fear stability. While the COMT Val158Met polymorphism causes individual differences in prefrontal dopamine, its associations with human long-term fear extinction are currently unknown. Here, n = 30/29/28 healthy male Val/Val, Val/Met and Met/Met carriers, respectively, underwent a two-day differential conditioning paradigm with fear acquisition and extinction on Day 1 and a recall test on Day 2 with recordings of EEG and ECG. Fearfulness but not neuroticism/anxiety predicted fear bradycardia (i.e., heart period slowing) during Day 1 fear acquisition while it did not affect extinction or Day 2 fear recall. In contrast, COMT Val158Met significantly modulated Day 2 fear recall as evident in fear bradycardia and Late Positive Potential (LPP) amplitudes while it did not affect Day 1 fear or extinction learning. Furthermore, exploratory analyses revealed that individual differences in fear bradycardia during Day 2 extinction recall depended on Day 1 extinction success. Importantly, this contingency was (a) modulated by COMT Val158Met and (b) significantly reduced in high vs. low neuroticism/anxiety. The present study indicates that (a) individual differences in dopaminergic genotypes may affect the long-term stability of fear memories and (b) fearfulness vs. neuroticism/anxiety might play distinct roles in initial fear reactions vs. long-term stability of fear memories, respectively.
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) genotype has been implicated as a vulnerability factor for several psychiatric diseases as well as aggressive behavior, either directly, or in interaction with an adverse environment. The present study aimed at investigating the susceptibility properties of COMT genotype to adverse and favorable environment in relation to physical and verbal aggressive behavior. The COMT Val158Met polymorphism was genotyped in a Swedish population-based cohort including 1,783 individuals, ages 20-24 years (47% males). A significant three-way interaction was found, after correction for multiple testing, between COMT genotype, exposure to violence, and parent-child relationship in association with physical but not verbal aggressive behavior. Homozygous for the Val allele reported lower levels of physical aggressive behavior when they were exposed to violence and at the same time experienced a positive parent-child relationship compared to Met carriers. Thus, susceptibility properties of COMT genotype were observed in relation to physical aggressive behavior supporting the hypothesis that COMT genotypes are modifying the sensitivity to environment that confers either risk or protection for aggressive behavior. As these are novel findings, they warrant further investigation and replication in independent samples. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Transcriptional and proteomics analyses in human fragile X syndrome (FXS) neurons identified markedly reduced expression of COMT, a key enzyme involved in the metabolism of catecholamines, including dopamine, epinephrine and norepinephrine. FXS is the most common genetic cause of intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorders. COMT encodes for catechol-o-methyltransferase and its association with neuropsychiatric disorders and cognitive function has been extensively studied. We observed a significantly reduced level of COMT in in FXS human neural progenitors and neurons, as well as hippocampal neurons from Fmr1 null mice. We show that deficits in COMT were associated with an altered response in an assay of dopaminergic activity in Fmr1 null mice. These findings demonstrate that loss of FMRP downregulates COMT expression and affects dopamine signaling in FXS, and supports the notion that targeting catecholamine metabolism may be useful in regulating certain neuropsychiatric aspects of FXS.
Catechol-estrogens can cause genetic mutations and to counteract their oncogenicity, the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene is capable of neutralizing these reactive compounds. In this study, we determined the functional effects and regulation of COMT in prostate cancer. Both the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and immunohistochemical analysis of clinical specimens demonstrated a reduction of COMT expression in prostate cancer. Also, western analyses of prostate cancer cell lines show COMT levels to be minimal in DuPro and DU145 and thus, these cells were used for further analyses. Re-expression of COMT led to suppressed migration ability (wound healing assay) and enhanced apoptosis (flow cytometric analyses), and when challenged with 4-hydroxyestradiol, a marked reduction of cell proliferation (MTT assay) was observed. Xenograft growth in athymic mice also resulted in inhibition due to COMT. As a mechanism, western analyses show cleaved CASP3 and BID were increased whereas XIAP and cIAP2 were reduced due to COMT. As COMT expression is low in prostate cancer, its regulation was determined. Databases identified several miRNAs capable of binding COMT and of these, miR-195 was observed to be increased in prostate cancer according to TCGA. Real-time PCR validated upregulation of miR-195 in clinical prostate cancer specimens as well as DuPro and DU145 and interestingly, luciferase reporter showed miR-195 capable of binding COMT and overexpressing miR-195 could reduce COMT in cells. These results demonstrate COMT to play a protective role by activating the apoptosis pathway and for miR-195 to regulate its expression. COMT may thus be a potential biomarker and gene of interest for therapeutic development for prostate cancer.
The protein purification strategies used for obtaining homogeneous rat and human soluble catechol-O-methyltransferase (S-COMT) polypeptides are reviewed. Expression and purification of recombinant rat and human S-COMT in Escherichia coli and for human S-COMT in baculevirus-infected insect cells made it possible to elucidate the S-COMT polypeptides in more detail. The application of these purification methods has allowed the crystallization of the rat S-COMT protein and the analysis of the kinetic properties of the enzyme in great detail. The availability of the pure S-COMT protein together with the structural data has also greatly enhanced the development of more potent COMT inhibitors.
