Cellular retinoic acid-binding protein 1; Cytosolic CRABPs may regulate the access of retinoic acid to the nuclear retinoic acid receptors; Belongs to the calycin superfamily. Fatty-acid binding protein (FABP) family.
Fibroblasts produce matrix, regulate inflammation, mediate reparative processes, and serve as pluripotent mesenchymal cells. Analyzing digested normal human skin by single-cell RNA sequencing, we explored different fibroblast populations. T-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding and clustering of single-cell RNA sequencing data from six biopsy samples showed two major fibroblast populations, defined by distinct genes, including SFRP2 and FMO1, expressed exclusively by these two major fibroblast populations. Further subpopulations were defined within each of the SFRP2 and FMO1 populations and five minor fibroblast populations, each expressing discrete genes: CRABP1, COL11A1, FMO2, PRG4, or C2ORF40. Immunofluorescent staining confirmed that SFRP2 and FMO1 define cell types of dramatically different morphology. SFRP2(+) fibroblasts were small, elongated, and distributed between collagen bundles. FMO1(+) fibroblasts were larger and distributed in both interstitial and perivascular locations. Differential gene expression by SFRP2(+), FMO1(+), and COL11A1(+) fibroblasts suggests roles in matrix deposition, inflammatory cell retention, and connective tissue cell differentiation, respectively.
In this review, we discuss the emerging role of Cellular Retinoic Acid Binding Protein 1 (CRABP1) as a mediator of non-canonical activities of retinoic acid (RA) and relevance to human diseases. We first discuss the role of CRABP1 in regulating MAPK activities and its implication in stem cell proliferation, cancers, adipocyte health, and neuro-immune regulation. We then discuss an additional role of CRABP1 in regulating CaMKII activities, and its implication in heart and motor neuron diseases. Through molecular and genetic studies of Crabp1 knockout (CKO) mouse and culture models, it is established that CRABP1 forms complexes with specific signaling molecules to function as RA-regulated signalsomes in a cell context-dependent manner. Gene expression data and CRABP1 gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of human cancer, neurodegeneration, and immune disease patients implicate the potential association of abnormality in CRABP1 with human diseases. Finally, therapeutic strategies for managing certain human diseases by targeting CRABP1 are discussed.
BACKGROUND: Cellular retinoic acid binding protein 1 (CRABP1) mediates rapid, non-canonical activity of retinoic acid (RA) by forming signalosomes via protein-protein interactions. Two signalosomes have been identified previously: CRABP1-MAPK and CRABP1-CaMKII. Crabp1 knockout (CKO) mice exhibited altered exosome profiles, but the mechanism of CRABP1 action was unclear. This study aimed to screen for and identify novel CRABP1 signalosomes that could modulate exosome secretion by using a combinatorial approach involving biochemical, bioinformatic and molecular studies. METHODS: Immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry (IP-MS) identified candidate CRABP1-interacting proteins which were subsequently analyzed using GO Term Enrichment, Functional Annotation Clustering; and Pathway Analysis. Gene expression analysis of CKO samples revealed altered expression of genes related to exosome biogenesis and secretion. The effect of CRABP1 on exosome secretion was then experimentally validated using CKO mice and a Crabp1 knockdown P19 cell line. RESULTS: IP-MS identified CRABP1-interacting targets. Bioinformatic analyses revealed significant association with actin cytoskeletal dynamics, kinases, and exosome secretion. The effect of CRABP1 on exosome secretion was experimentally validated by comparing circulating exosome numbers of CKO and wild type (WT) mice, and secreted exosomes from WT and siCRABP1-P19 cells. Pathway analysis identified kinase signaling and Arp2/3 complex as the major pathways where CRABP1-signalosomes modulate exosome secretion, which was validated in the P19 system. CONCLUSION: The combinatorial approach allowed efficient screening for and identification of novel CRABP1-signalosomes. The results uncovered a novel function of CRABP1 in modulating exosome secretion, and suggested that CRABP1 could play roles in modulating intercellular communication and signal propagation.
All-trans retinoic acid (AtRA), an active metabolite of vitamin A, is recognized for its classical action as an endocrine hormone that triggers genomic effects mediated through nuclear receptors RA receptors (RARs). New evidence shows that atRA-mediated cellular responses are biphasic with rapid and delayed responses. Most of these rapid atRA responses are the outcome of its binding to cellular retinoic acid binding protein 1 (CRABP1) that is predominantly localized in cytoplasm and binds to atRA with a high affinity. This review summarizes the most recent studies of such non-genomic outcomes of atRA and the role of CRABP1 in mediating such rapid effects in different cell types. In embryonic stem cells (ESCs), atRA-CRABP1 dampens growth factor sensitivity and stemness. In a hippocampal neural stem cell (NSC) population, atRA-CRABP1 negatively modulates NSC proliferation and affects learning and memory. In cardiomyocytes, atRA-CRABP1 prevents over-activation of calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), protecting heart function. These are supported by the fact that CRABP1 gene knockout (KO) mice exhibit multiple phenotypes including hippocampal NSC expansion and spontaneous cardiac hypertrophy. This indicates that more potential processes/signaling pathways involving atRA-CRABP1 may exist, which remain to be identified.
BACKGROUND: The prognostic variability of thyroid carcinomas has led to the search for accurate biomarkers at the molecular level. Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is a typical example of differentiated thyroid carcinomas (DTC) in which challenges are faced in the differential diagnosis. METHODS: We used high-throughput paired-end RNA sequencing technology to study four cases of FTC with different degree of capsular invasion: two minimally invasive (mFTC) and two widely invasive FTC (wFTC). We searched by genes differentially expressed between mFTC and wFTC, in an attempt to find biomarkers of thyroid cancer diagnosis and/or progression. Selected biomarkers were validated by real-time quantitative PCR in 137 frozen thyroid samples and in an independent dataset (TCGA), evaluating the diagnostic and the prognostic performance of the candidate biomarkers. RESULTS: We identified 17 genes significantly differentially expressed between mFTC and wFTC. C1QL1, LCN2, CRABP1 and CILP were differentially expressed in DTC in comparison with normal thyroid tissues. LCN2 and CRABP1 were also differentially expressed in DTC when compared with follicular thyroid adenoma. Additionally, overexpression of LCN2 and C1QL1 were found to be independent predictors of extrathyroidal extension in DTC. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the underexpression of CRABP1 and the overexpression of LCN2 may be useful diagnostic biomarkers in thyroid tumours with questionable malignity, and the overexpression of LCN2 and C1QL1 may be useful for prognostic purposes.
Capicua (CIC) has been implicated in pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia type-1 (SCA1) neurodegenerative disease and some types of cancer; however, the role of CIC in prostate cancer remains unknown. Here we show that CIC suppresses prostate cancer progression. CIC expression was markedly decreased in human prostatic carcinoma. CIC overexpression suppressed prostate cancer cell proliferation, invasion, and migration, whereas CIC RNAi exerted opposite effects. We found that knock-down of CIC derepresses expression of ETV5 and CRABP1 in LNCaP and PC-3 cells, respectively, thereby promoting cell proliferation and invasion. We also discovered that miR-93, miR-106b, and miR-375, which are known to be frequently overexpressed in prostate cancer patients, cooperatively down-regulate CIC levels to promote cancer progression. Altogether, we suggest miR-93/miR-106b/miR-375-CIC-CRABP1 as a novel key regulatory axis in prostate cancer progression.
BACKGROUND: Naturally occurring colorectal cancers (CRC) in rhesus macaques share many features with their human counterparts and are useful models for cancer immunotherapy; but mechanistic data are lacking regarding the comparative molecular pathogenesis of these cancers. METHODS: We conducted state-of-the-art imaging including CT and PET, clinical assessments, and pathological review of 24 rhesus macaques with naturally occurring CRC. Additionally, we molecularly characterized these tumors utilizing immunohistochemistry (IHC), microsatellite instability assays, DNAseq, transcriptomics, and developed a DNA methylation-specific qPCR assay for MLH1, CACNA1G, CDKN2A, CRABP1, and NEUROG1, human markers for CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). We furthermore employed Monte-Carlo simulations to in-silico model alterations in DNA topology in transcription-factor binding site-rich promoter regions upon experimentally demonstrated DNA methylation. RESULTS: Similar cancer histology, progression patterns, and co-morbidities could be observed in rhesus as reported for human CRC patients. IHC identified loss of MLH1 and PMS2 in all cases, with functional microsatellite instability. DNA sequencing revealed the close genetic relatedness to human CRCs, including a similar mutational signature, chromosomal instability, and functionally-relevant mutations affecting KRAS (G12D), TP53 (R175H, R273*), APC, AMER1, ALK, and ARID1A. Interestingly, MLH1 mutations were rarely identified on a somatic or germline level. Transcriptomics not only corroborated the similarities of rhesus and human CRCs, but also demonstrated the significant downregulation of MLH1 but not MSH2, MSH6, or PMS2 in rhesus CRCs. Methylation-specific qPCR suggested CIMP-positivity in 9/16 rhesus CRCs, but all 16/16 exhibited significant MLH1 promoter hypermethylation. DNA hypermethylation was modelled to affect DNA topology, particularly propeller twist and roll profiles. Modelling the DNA topology of a transcription factor binding motif (TFAP2A) in the MLH1 promoter that overlapped with a methylation-specific probe, we observed significant differences in DNA topology upon experimentally shown DNA methylation. This suggests a role of transcription factor binding interference in epigenetic silencing of MLH1 in rhesus CRCs. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that epigenetic silencing suppresses MLH1 transcription, induces the loss of MLH1 protein, abrogates mismatch repair, and drives genomic instability in naturally occurring CRC in rhesus macaques. We consider this spontaneous, uninduced CRC in immunocompetent, treatment-naive rhesus macaques to be a uniquely informative model for human CRC.
Retinoic acid (RA) binding proteins, CRABP1 and CRABP2, are molecular chaperones that mediate intracellular activity of RA, the key promoter of cell differentiation with tumor suppressor activity. One of the main functions of CRABP2 is delivery and transfer of RA to the nuclear receptors RAR/RXR, which leads to activation of the transcription of a wide range of retinoid-responsive genes. The functions of CRABP1 are less studied but are apparently associated with sequestration of RA in cytoplasm and limitation of its transcriptional activity, suggesting involvement of this protein in the development of RA resistance. The mechanisms regulating activity of CRABP1 are also poorly understood. Comparison of the CRABP1 level in tumor cell lines of various origins, performed for the first time here, showed absence of the CRABP1 protein in the cell lines of tumors considered to be RA-resistant, and pronounced production of this protein in the RA-sensitive cells. However, analysis carried out with a panel of breast cancer cell lines with different levels of RA-sensitivity showed that there was no correlation between the production of CRABP1 protein and the sensitivity of the cells to RA. At the same time, we found strong correlation between the expression of CRABP1 and CRABP2 proteins in all studied cell types, regardless of their origin and RA-sensitivity/resistance. Moreover, suppression of the CRABP1 level in both RA-sensitive and RA-resistant cells was shown in the cells with cells with knockdown of CRABP2 gene. The revealed CRABP2-dependent regulation of CRABP1 production is a new mechanism of the intracellular retinoic signaling system.
Multiple binding and transport proteins facilitate many aspects of retinoid biology through effects on retinoid transport, cellular uptake, metabolism, and nuclear delivery. These include the serum retinol binding protein sRBP (aka Rbp4), the plasma membrane sRBP receptor Stra6, and the intracellular retinoid binding-proteins such as cellular retinol-binding proteins (CRBP) and cellular retinoic acid binding-proteins (CRABP). sRBP transports the highly lipophilic retinol through an aqueous medium. The major intracellular retinol-binding protein, CRBP1, likely enhances efficient retinoid use by providing a sink to facilitate retinol uptake from sRBP through the plasma membrane or via Stra6, delivering retinol or retinal to select enzymes that generate retinyl esters or retinoic acid, and protecting retinol/retinal from excess catabolism or opportunistic metabolism. Intracellular retinoic acid binding-proteins (CRABP1 and 2, and FABP5) seem to have more diverse functions distinctive to each, such as directing retinoic acid to catabolism, delivering retinoic acid to specific nuclear receptors, and generating non-canonical actions. Gene ablation of intracellular retinoid binding-proteins does not cause embryonic lethality or gross morphological defects. Metabolic and functional defects manifested in knockouts of CRBP1, CRBP2 and CRBP3, however, illustrate their essentiality to health, and in the case of CRBP2, to survival during limited dietary vitamin A. Future studies should continue to address the specific molecular interactions that occur between retinoid binding-proteins and their targets and their precise physiologic contributions to retinoid homeostasis and function.
Resistance of tumor cells to retinoic acid (RA), a promising therapeutic agent, is the major factor limiting the use of RA in clinical practice. The mechanisms of resistance to RA are still poorly understood. Cellular Retinoic Acid Binding Proteins, CRABP1 and CRABP2, are essential mediators of RA signaling, but role of the two CRABP homologs in regulating cellular sensitivity to RA has not been well studied. In addition, the effects of CRABP1 and CRABP2 on cell proliferation have not been compared. Here, using a broad panel of breast cancer cell lines with different levels of RA sensitivity/resistance, we show for the first time that in the RA-sensitive cells, CRABP1 expression is restricted by methylation, and protein levels are highly variable. In the moderately-RA-resistant cell lines, high level of CRABP1 is observed both at the mRNA and protein levels, unchanged by inhibition of DNA methylation. The cell lines with maximum resistance to RA are characterized by complete repression of CRABP1 expression realized at transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels, and exogenous expression of each of the CRABP homologs has no effect on the studied characteristics. CRABP1 and CRABP2 proteins have opposing effects on proliferation and sensitivity to RA. In particular, CRABP1 stimulates and CRABP2 reduces proliferation and resistance to RA in the initially RA-sensitive cells, while in the more resistant cells the role of each homolog in both of these parameters is reversed. Overall, we have shown for the first time that CRABP proteins exert different effects on the growth and sensitivity to RA of breast cancer cells (stimulation, suppression, or no effect) depending on the baseline level of RA-sensitivity, with the effects of CRABP1 and CRABP2 homologs on the studied properties always being opposite.
Cellular retinoic acid binding protein 1 (CRABP1) participates in the regulation of retinoid signaling. Previous studies showed conflicting results regarding the role of CRABP1 in tumor biology, including protumorigenic and tumor-suppressive effects in different types of cancer. Our bioinformatics analyses suggested that CRABP1 expression was downregulated in thyroid cancer. Ectopic expression of CRABP1 in thyroid cancer cells suppressed migratory and invasive activity without affecting cell growth or cell cycle distribution. In transformed normal thyroid follicular epithelial cells, silencing of CRABP1 expression increased invasiveness. Additionally, CRABP1 overexpression was associated with downregulation of the mesenchymal phenotype. Kinase phosphorylation profiling indicated that CRABP1 overexpression was accompanied by a decrease in phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and downstream phosphorylation of Akt, STAT3, and FAK, which were reversed by exogenous EGF treatment. Immunohistochemical analysis of our tissue microarrays revealed an inverse association between CRABP1 expression and disease stage of differentiated thyroid cancer. Taken together, our results suggest that CRABP1 expression is aberrantly lost in thyroid cancer, and this downregulation promotes the epithelial-mesenchymal transition at least partly through modulating EGF receptor signaling.
BACKGROUND: Pituitary tumors account for approximately 10-15% of intracranial neoplasms. AIM: Using the cDNA microarray method, we have previously compared expression under two distinct conditions: a pool of 4 clinically non-functioning pituitary adenomas (NFPA) and a spinal cord metastasis of a non-functioning pituitary carcinoma, in order to gain biological insights into genomic changes of pituitary neoplasias. In the present study, we further investigated the mRNA expression of 3 selected genes previously described as being involved in other neoplasias based on a series of 60 pituitary adenomas: CRABP1 (cellular retinoic acid binding protein 1), GRP (gastrin-releasing peptide), and RERG (Ras-related, estrogen- regulated, growth inhibitor). MATERIAL AND METHODS: The expression of CRABP1, GRP, and RERG was determined by quantitative RT-PCR. RESULTS: A significantly higher content of CRABP1 mRNA was observed in NFPA compared to functioning adenomas, and PRL-secreting adenomas showed a lower expression of this gene compared to normal pituitary. A lower expression of GRP mRNA was detected in NFPA compared to normal pituitary and also to functioning adenomas. RERG mRNA was overexpressed in NFPA in comparison to functioning adenomas and to normal pituitary. Among the functioning adenomas, only the ACTH-secreting adenomas presented a higher expression of RERG mRNA compared to normal pituitary. CONCLUSIONS: The findings of differential expression of CRABP1 in prolactinomas and of RERG in NFPA compared to normal pituitary suggests that retinoic acid and estrogen receptor, respectively, could be involved in the tumorigenesis of these adenomas subtypes. Additional studies are required to further confirm this hypothesis.
Here we report the genomic organization of duplicated cellular retinoic acid-binding protein genes, crabp1 and crabp2, in medaka (Japanese ricefish; Oryzias latipes), the phylogenetic relationship of medaka Crabp1a, Crabp1b, Crabp2a and Crabp2b with other Crabp/CRABP sequences from teleosts/tetrapods, and the tissue-specific distribution of crabp1a, crabp1b, crabp2a, and crabp2b transcripts in adult medaka. The duplicated medaka crabp1 and crabp2 genes contain four exons separated by three introns, which encode polypeptides of 137 and 142 amino acids, respectively. Sequence alignment revealed that medaka Crabp sequences share highest sequence identity and similarity with their orthologs from vertebrates. Phylogenetic analysis confirmed the orthology of the medaka Crabps as they form a distinct clade with their orthologous polypeptides from vertebrates. Conserved gene synteny was evident between the duplicated crabp1 and crabp2 genes from medaka, and CRABP1 and CRABP2 genes from human, which provides compelling evidence that the identified duplicated crabp1 and crabp2 genes from medaka most likely arose owing to teleost-specific whole-genome duplication. The tissue-specific distribution of zebrafish (Danio rerio) and medaka crabp1a, crabp1b, crabp2a, and crabp2b gene transcripts suggests acquisition of new function by these genes in medaka, which may explain potential evolutionary processes that led to the retention of sister duplicates of crabp1 and crabp2 genes in the medaka genome.
To improve the outcome of gastric cancer, novel markers that predict postoperative prognosis are required. For this purpose, the function of cellular retinoic acid binding protein 1 (CRABP1) in gastric cancer cells was investigated and it was determined whether it serves as a novel biomarker for gastric cancer. Reverse transcription‑quantitative (RT‑q)PCR and a PCR‑array method were used to determine whether the expression of CRABP1 mRNA in gastric cancer cell lines correlated with the expression of cancer‑related genes. The correlations of CRABP1 mRNA expression in tissues with clinicopathological factors of 230 patients who underwent radical gastrectomy were further evaluated. CRABP1 mRNA levels varied among gastric cancer cell lines and showed significant positive correlations with numerous epithelial‑mesenchymal transition factors. Additionally, CRABP1 knockdown significantly suppressed the proliferation, migration and invasion of gastric cancer cell lines. In a mouse xenograft model of peritoneal metastasis of gastric cancer, it was found that the total weight of disseminated nodules was lower in the group, in which CRABP1 mRNA levels were knocked down compared with those of the untransfected group. Disease‑free survival (DFS) was significantly shorter in patients with high expression of CRABP1, and multivariate analysis of DFS revealed that high expression of CRABP1 in the tumor area and lymph node metastasis served as an independent factor associated with poor prognosis. High expression of CRABP1 in cancer tissues was associated with a greater incidence of peritoneal recurrences after curative gastrectomy. These findings indicated that CRABP1 contributes to the malignant phenotype of gastric cancer cells and may serve as a biomarker for prognosing recurrence after curative resection, particularly peritoneal dissemination.
Cellular binding-proteins (BP), including CRBP1, CRBP2, CRABP1, CRABP2, and FABP5, shepherd the poorly aqueous soluble retinoids during uptake, metabolism and function. Holo-BP promote efficient use of retinol, a scarce but essential nutrient throughout evolution, by sheltering it and its major metabolite all-trans-retinoic acid from adventitious interactions with the cellular milieu, and by imposing specificity of delivery to enzymes, nuclear receptors and other partners. Apo-BP reflect cellular retinoid status and modify activities of retinoid metabolon enzymes, or exert non-canonical actions. High ligand binding affinities and the nature of ligand sequestration necessitate external factors to prompt retinoid release from holo-BP. One or more of cross-linking, kinetics, and colocalization have identified these factors as RDH, RALDH, CYP26, LRAT, RAR and PPARbeta/delta. Michaelis-Menten and other kinetic approaches verify that BP channel retinoids to select enzymes and receptors by protein-protein interactions. Function of the BP and enzymes that constitute the retinoid metabolon depends in part on retinoid exchanges unique to specific pairings. The complexity of these exchanges configure retinol metabolism to meet the diverse functions of all-trans-retinoic acid and its ability to foster contrary outcomes in different cell types, such as inducing apoptosis, differentiation or proliferation. Altered BP expression affects retinoid function, for example, by impairing pancreas development resulting in abnormal glucose and energy metabolism, promoting predisposition to breast cancer, and fostering more severe outcomes in prostate cancer, ovarian adenocarcinoma, and glioblastoma. Yet, the extent of BP interactions with retinoid metabolon enzymes and their impact on retinoid physiology remains incompletely understood.
Neuroblastoma is a childhood neural crest tumor. Fenretinide, a retinoic acid analogue, induces accumulation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species and consequent apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells. The p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) enhances the antineuroblastoma cell efficacy of fenretinide in vitro. We examined the role of the retinoid binding protein, CRABP1, in p75NTR-mediated potentiation of the efficacy of fenretinide. Knockdown and overexpression, respectively, of either p75NTR or CRABP1 were effected in neuroblastoma cell lines using standard techniques. Expression was determined by qRT-PCR and confirmed at the protein level by Western blot. Metabolic viability was determined by Alamar blue assay. While protein content of CRABP1 correlated roughly with that of p75NTR in the three neuroblastoid or epithelioid human neuroblastoma cell lines studied, manipulation of p75NTR expression resulted in cell line-dependent, variable change in CRABP1 expression. Furthermore, in some cell lines, induced expression of CRABP1 in the absence of p75NTR did not alter cell sensitivity to fenretinide treatment. The effects of manipulation of p75NTR expression on CRABP1 expression and the effects of CRABP1 expression on fenretinide efficacy are therefore neuroblastoma cell line-dependent. Potentiation of the antineuroblastoma cell effects of fenretinide by p75NTR is not mediated solely through CRABP1.
CRABP1 (cellular retinoic acid binding protein 1) belongs to the family of fatty acid binding proteins. Retinoic acid binding is the only known functional activity of this protein. The role of CRABP1 in human carcinogenesis remains poorly understood. Here, for the first time we demonstrated pro-metastatic and pro-tumorigenic activity of CRABP1 in mesenchymal tumors. Further functional analysis revealed that the pro-tumorigenic effect of CRABP1 does not depend on retinoic acid binding activity. These results suggest that CRABP1 could have an alternative intracellular functional activity that contributes to the high malignancy of transformed mesenchymal cells. Microarray analysis detected CRABP1-mediated alterations in the expression of about 100 genes, including those encoding key regulatory proteins. CRABP1 is ubiquitously expressed in monophasic synovial sarcomas, while in biphasic synovial sarcomas it is expressed uniquely by the spindle cells of the aggressive mesenchymal component. High level of CRABP1 expression is associated with lymph node metastasis and poor differentiation/high grade of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs). Presented data suggest CRABP1 as a promising biomarker of pNETs' clinical behavior. Our results give the first evidence of pro-tumorigenic and pro-metastatic activity of CRABP1 in mesenchymal and neuroendocrine tumors.
PURPOSE: CRABP1 is a modulator of retinoic acid function. The aim of the present study was to investigate CRABP1 expression and its clinical significance in ovarian carcinoma. METHODS: Expression of CRABP1 protein was investigated by immunohistochemical analysis in 100 ovarian carcinomas of various histological sub-types, including serous and clear cell adenocarcinomas. Relationship of CRABP1 expression to clinical features, including prognosis, was analyzed. RESULTS: Reduced expression of CRABP1 protein was detected especially frequently in the serous and clear cell adenocarcinomas sub-types, 50% (20 of 40) and 38% (10 of 26) of cases, respectively. We found that in both serous and clear cell adenocarcinomas overall survival was significantly poorer in the cases with reduced CRABP1 expression compared to similar cases where expression was maintained, irrespective of the disease stage (P = 0.0073 and 0.049, respectively). Disease-free survival of the serous and clear cell adenocarcinoma cases with reduced CRABP1 expression was significantly poorer, compared to the cases whose CRABP1 expression was maintained (P = 0.024). Multivariate analysis showed that reduced expression of CRABP1 was a significantly important prognostic factor (adjusted hazard ratio: 8.189 (95% CI, 2.186-30.672, P = 0.0019)). CONCLUSIONS: The present study is the first to demonstrate that the reduced expression of CRABP1 has a potential as a prognostic marker for serous adenocarcinoma which is the most frequent histological ovarian tumor type and also for clear cell carcinoma that often exhibits chemo-resistance. Further study is necessary to clarify how CRABP1 protein expression was altered and how CRABP1 affects ovarian carcinoma cells.
Lynch syndrome is a hereditary cancer-predisposing syndrome caused by germline defects in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes such as MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. Carriers of pathogenic mutations in these genes have an increased lifetime risk of developing colorectal cancer (CRC) and other malignancies. Despite intensive surveillance, Lynch patients typically develop CRC after 10 years of follow-up, regardless of the screening interval. Recently, three different molecular models of colorectal carcinogenesis were identified in Lynch patients based on when MMR deficiency is acquired. In the first pathway, adenoma formation occurs in an MMR-proficient background, and carcinogenesis is characterized by APC and/or KRAS mutation and IGF2, NEUROG1, CDK2A, and/or CRABP1 hypermethylation. In the second pathway, deficiency in the MMR pathway is an early event arising in macroscopically normal gut surface before adenoma formation. In the third pathway, which is associated with mutations in CTNNB1 and/or TP53, the adenoma step is skipped, with fast and invasive tumor growth occurring in an MMR-deficient context. Here, we describe the association between molecular and histological features in these three routes of colorectal carcinogenesis in Lynch patients. The findings summarized in this review may guide the use of individualized surveillance guidelines based on a patient's carcinogenesis subtype.
BACKGROUND: Gene silencing through CpG island hypermethylation is a major mechanism in cancer development. In the present study, we aimed to identify and validate novel target genes inactivated through promoter hypermethylation in colorectal tumor development. METHODS: With the use of microarrays, the gene expression profiles of colon cancer cell lines before and after treatment with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine were identified and compared. The expression of the responding genes was compared with microarray expression data of primary colorectal carcinomas. Four of these down-regulated genes were subjected to methylation-specific PCR, bisulphite sequencing, and quantitative gene expression analysis using tumors (n=198), normal tissues (n=44), and cell lines (n=30). RESULTS: Twenty-one genes with a CpG island in their promoter responded to treatment in cell lines, and were simultaneously down-regulated in primary colorectal carcinomas. Among 20 colon cancer cell lines, hypermethylation was subsequently identified for three of four analyzed genes, ADAMTS1 (85%), CRABP1 (90%), and NR3C1 (35%). For the latter two genes, hypermethylation was significantly associated with absence or reduced gene expression. The methylation status of ADAMTS1, CRABP1, and NR3C1 was further investigated in 116 colorectal carcinomas and adenomas. Twenty-three of 63 (37%), 7/60 (12%), and 2/63 (3%) adenomas, as well as 37/52 (71%), 25/51 (49%), and 13/51 (25%) carcinomas were hypermethylated for the respective genes. These genes were unmethylated in tumors (n=82) from three other organs, prostate, testis, and kidney. Finally, analysis of normal colorectal mucosa demonstrated that the observed promoter hypermethylation was cancer-specific. CONCLUSION: By using a refined microarray screening approach we present three genes with cancer-specific hypermethylation in colorectal tumors, ADAMTS1, CRABP1, and NR3C1.
