Macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for CSF1 and IL34 and plays an essential role in the regulation of survival, proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic precursor cells, especially mononuclear phagocytes, such as macrophages and monocytes. Promotes the release of proinflammatory chemokines in response to IL34 and CSF1, and thereby plays an important role in innate immunity and in inflammatory processes. Plays an important role in the regulation of osteoclast proliferation and differentiation, the regulat [...] 
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a powerful tool for defining cellular diversity in tumors, but its application toward dissecting mechanisms underlying immune-modulating therapies is scarce. We performed scRNA-seq analyses on immune and stromal populations from colorectal cancer patients, identifying specific macrophage and conventional dendritic cell (cDC) subsets as key mediators of cellular cross-talk in the tumor microenvironment. Defining comparable myeloid populations in mouse tumors enabled characterization of their response to myeloid-targeted immunotherapy. Treatment with anti-CSF1R preferentially depleted macrophages with an inflammatory signature but spared macrophage populations that in mouse and human expresses pro-angiogenic/tumorigenic genes. Treatment with a CD40 agonist antibody preferentially activated a cDC population and increased Bhlhe40(+) Th1-like cells and CD8(+) memory T cells. Our comprehensive analysis of key myeloid subsets in human and mouse identifies critical cellular interactions regulating tumor immunity and defines mechanisms underlying myeloid-targeted immunotherapies currently undergoing clinical testing.
Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), also referred to as BCR-ABL1-like ALL, is a high-risk subset with a gene expression profile that shares significant overlap with that of Ph-positive (Ph(+)) ALL and is suggestive of activated kinase signaling. Although Ph(+) ALL is defined by BCR-ABL1 fusion, Ph-like ALL cases contain a variety of genomic alterations that activate kinase and cytokine receptor signaling. These alterations can be grouped into major subclasses that include ABL-class fusions involving ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, and PDGFRB that phenocopy BCR-ABL1 and alterations of CRLF2, JAK2, and EPOR that activate JAK/STAT signaling. Additional genomic alterations in Ph-like ALL activate other kinases, including BLNK, DGKH, FGFR1, IL2RB, LYN, NTRK3, PDGFRA, PTK2B, TYK2, and the RAS signaling pathway. Recent studies have helped to define the genomic landscape of Ph-like ALL and how it varies across the age spectrum, associated clinical features and outcomes, and genetic risk factors. Preclinical studies and anecdotal reports show that targeted inhibitors of relevant signaling pathways are active in specific Ph-like ALL subsets, and precision medicine trials have been initiated for this high-risk ALL subset.
Colony-Stimulating Factor-1 Receptor (CSF1R) is a receptor tyrosine kinase that controls the differentiation and maintenance of most tissue-resident macrophages and bone-resorbing osteoclasts. Mutations of CSF1R have been implicated in neurodegeneration, skeletal anomalies, and cancers. Activation of CSF1R by endogenous cytokine ligation to the ectodomain triggers the autophosphorylation of the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain, and thereafter, activation of several downstream pro-survival kinase cascades, including PI3K, ERK1/2, and JNK. The immunological role of CSF1R in regulating tumor-associate macrophages (TAMs) have been well-documented. TAMs harboring activated CSF1R release tumorigenic cytokines, which further deconditioning tumor microenvironment to a protumoral phenotype. Pharmacological inhibition of CSF1R has emerged as a promising antitumor strategy, with PLX3397 (pexidartinib) been approved by the FDA for the treatment of tenosynovial giant cell tumor in 2019. Research around developing novel small-molecule CSF1R inhibitors, as well as expanding their potential indications, have drawn numerous attentions thenceforward. Herein, we've comprehensively reviewed the latest progression of CSF1R inhibitors under clinical and preclinical studies. Key findings of CSF1R targeted therapies either as monotherapy or combinatorial therapy have also been discussed.
BACKGROUND: Philadelphia chromosome-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph-like ALL) is characterized by a gene-expression profile similar to that of BCR-ABL1-positive ALL, alterations of lymphoid transcription factor genes, and a poor outcome. The frequency and spectrum of genetic alterations in Ph-like ALL and its responsiveness to tyrosine kinase inhibition are undefined, especially in adolescents and adults. METHODS: We performed genomic profiling of 1725 patients with precursor B-cell ALL and detailed genomic analysis of 154 patients with Ph-like ALL. We examined the functional effects of fusion proteins and the efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in mouse pre-B cells and xenografts of human Ph-like ALL. RESULTS: Ph-like ALL increased in frequency from 10% among children with standard-risk ALL to 27% among young adults with ALL and was associated with a poor outcome. Kinase-activating alterations were identified in 91% of patients with Ph-like ALL; rearrangements involving ABL1, ABL2, CRLF2, CSF1R, EPOR, JAK2, NTRK3, PDGFRB, PTK2B, TSLP, or TYK2 and sequence mutations involving FLT3, IL7R, or SH2B3 were most common. Expression of ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, JAK2, and PDGFRB fusions resulted in cytokine-independent proliferation and activation of phosphorylated STAT5. Cell lines and human leukemic cells expressing ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, and PDGFRB fusions were sensitive in vitro to dasatinib, EPOR and JAK2 rearrangements were sensitive to ruxolitinib, and the ETV6-NTRK3 fusion was sensitive to crizotinib. CONCLUSIONS: Ph-like ALL was found to be characterized by a range of genomic alterations that activate a limited number of signaling pathways, all of which may be amenable to inhibition with approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Trials identifying Ph-like ALL are needed to assess whether adding tyrosine kinase inhibitors to current therapy will improve the survival of patients with this type of leukemia. (Funded by the American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities and others.).
The CSF-1 receptor (CSF-1R) is activated by the homodimeric growth factors colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) and interleukin-34 (IL-34). It plays important roles in development and in innate immunity by regulating the development of most tissue macrophages and osteoclasts, of Langerhans cells of the skin, of Paneth cells of the small intestine, and of brain microglia. It also regulates the differentiation of neural progenitor cells and controls functions of oocytes and trophoblastic cells in the female reproductive tract. Owing to this broad tissue expression pattern, it plays a central role in neoplastic, inflammatory, and neurological diseases. In this review we summarize the evolution, structure, and regulation of expression of the CSF-1R gene. We discuss the structures of CSF-1, IL-34, and the CSF-1R and the mechanism of ligand binding to and activation of the receptor. We further describe the pathways regulating macrophage survival, proliferation, differentiation, and chemotaxis downstream from the CSF-1R.
Microglia are brain-resident macrophages that contribute to central nervous system (CNS) development, maturation, and preservation. Here, we examine the consequences of permanent microglial deficiencies on brain aging using the Csf1r(DeltaFIRE/DeltaFIRE) mouse model. In juvenile Csf1r(DeltaFIRE/DeltaFIRE) mice, we show that microglia are dispensable for the transcriptomic maturation of other brain cell types. By contrast, with advancing age, pathologies accumulate in Csf1r(DeltaFIRE/DeltaFIRE) brains, macroglia become increasingly dysregulated, and white matter integrity declines, mimicking many pathological features of human CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy. The thalamus is particularly vulnerable to neuropathological changes in the absence of microglia, with atrophy, neuron loss, vascular alterations, macroglial dysregulation, and severe tissue calcification. We show that populating Csf1r(DeltaFIRE/DeltaFIRE) brains with wild-type microglia protects against many of these pathological changes. Together with the accompanying study by Chadarevian and colleagues(1), our results indicate that the lifelong absence of microglia results in an age-related neurodegenerative condition that can be counteracted via transplantation of healthy microglia.
Emerging evidence indicates that the detection and clearance of cancer cells via phagocytosis induced by innate immune checkpoints play significant roles in tumor-mediated immune escape. The most well-described innate immune checkpoints are the "don't eat me" signals, including the CD47/signal regulatory protein alpha axis (SIRPalpha), PD-1/PD-L1 axis, CD24/SIGLEC-10 axis, and MHC-I/LILRB1 axis. Molecules have been developed to block these pathways and enhance the phagocytic activity against tumors. Several clinical studies have investigated the safety and efficacy of CD47 blockades, either alone or in combination with existing therapy in hematological malignancies, including myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and lymphoma. However, only a minority of patients have significant responses to these treatments alone. Combining CD47 blockades with other treatment modalities are in clinical studies, with early results suggesting a synergistic therapeutic effect. Targeting macrophages with bispecific antibodies are being explored in blood cancer therapy. Furthermore, reprogramming of pro-tumor macrophages to anti-tumor macrophages, and CAR macrophages (CAR-M) demonstrate anti-tumor activities. In this review, we elucidated distinct types of macrophage-targeted strategies in hematological malignancies, from preclinical experiments to clinical trials, and outlined potential therapeutic approaches being developed.
Since the discovery of CSF1R gene mutations in families with hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids in 2012, more than 70 different mutations have been identified around the world. Through the analyses of mutation carriers, CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy has been distinctly characterized clinically, radiologically, and pathologically. Typically, patients present with frontotemporal dementia-like phenotype in their 40s-50s, accompanied by motor symptoms, including pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs. Women tend to develop the clinical symptoms at a younger age than men. On brain imaging, in addition to white matter abnormalities, thinning of the corpus callosum, diffusion-restricted lesions in the white matter, and brain calcifications are hallmarks. Primary axonopathy followed by demyelination was suggested by pathology. Haploinsufficiency of colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF1R) is evident in a patient with a frameshift mutation, facilitating the establishment of Csf1r haploinsufficient mouse model. These mice develop clinical, radiologic, and pathologic phenotypes consistent with those of human patients with CSF1R mutations. In vitro, perturbation of CSF1R signaling is shown in cultured cells expressing mutant CSF1R. However, the underlying mechanisms by which CSF1R mutations selectively lead to white matter degeneration remains to be elucidated. Given that CSF1R mainly expresses in microglia, CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy is representative of primary microgliopathies, of which microglia have a pivotal and primary role in pathogenesis. In this review, we address the current knowledge of CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy and discuss the putative pathophysiology, with a focus on microglia, as well as future research directions.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) can replace endogenous microglia with circulation-derived macrophages but has high mortality. To mitigate the risks of HSCT and expand the potential for microglia replacement, we engineered an inhibitor-resistant CSF1R that enables robust microglia replacement. A glycine to alanine substitution at position 795 of human CSF1R (G795A) confers resistance to multiple CSF1R inhibitors, including PLX3397 and PLX5622. Biochemical and cell-based assays show no discernable gain or loss of function. G795A- but not wildtype-CSF1R expressing macrophages efficiently engraft the brain of PLX3397-treated mice and persist after cessation of inhibitor treatment. To gauge translational potential, we CRISPR engineered human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived microglia (iMG) to express G795A. Xenotransplantation studies demonstrate that G795A-iMG exhibit nearly identical gene expression to wildtype iMG, respond to inflammatory stimuli, and progressively expand in the presence of PLX3397, replacing endogenous microglia to fully occupy the brain. In sum, we engineered a human CSF1R variant that enables nontoxic, cell type, and tissue-specific replacement of microglia.
BACKGROUND: Signalling through platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) and mast/stem cell growth factor receptor kit (c-KIT) plays a critical role in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). We examined the preclinical efficacy of inhaled seralutinib, a unique small-molecule PDGFR/CSF1R/c-KIT kinase inhibitor in clinical development for PAH, in comparison to a proof-of-concept kinase inhibitor, imatinib. METHODS: Seralutinib and imatinib potency and selectivity were compared. Inhaled seralutinib pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics were studied in healthy rats. Efficacy was evaluated in two rat models of PAH: SU5416/Hypoxia (SU5416/H) and monocrotaline pneumonectomy (MCTPN). Effects on inflammatory/cytokine signalling were examined. PDGFR, CSF1R and c-KIT immunohistochemistry in rat and human PAH lung samples and microRNA (miRNA) analysis in the SU5416/H model were performed. RESULTS: Seralutinib potently inhibited PDGFRalpha/beta, CSF1R and c-KIT. Inhaled seralutinib demonstrated dose-dependent inhibition of lung PDGFR and c-KIT signalling and increased bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 2 (BMPR2). Seralutinib improved cardiopulmonary haemodynamic parameters and reduced small pulmonary artery muscularisation and right ventricle hypertrophy in both models. In the SU5416/H model, seralutinib improved cardiopulmonary haemodynamic parameters, restored lung BMPR2 protein levels and decreased N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), more than imatinib. Quantitative immunohistochemistry in human lung PAH samples demonstrated increased PDGFR, CSF1R and c-KIT. miRNA analysis revealed candidates that could mediate seralutinib effects on BMPR2. CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled seralutinib was an effective treatment of severe PAH in two animal models, with improved cardiopulmonary haemodynamic parameters, a reduction in NT-proBNP, reverse remodelling of pulmonary vascular pathology and improvement in inflammatory biomarkers. Seralutinib showed greater efficacy compared to imatinib in a preclinical study.
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)2, FGF4, FGF7 and FGF20 are representative paracrine FGFs binding to heparan-sulfate proteoglycan and fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs), whereas FGF19, FGF21 and FGF23 are endocrine FGFs binding to Klotho and FGFRs. FGFR1 is relatively frequently amplified and overexpressed in breast and lung cancer, and FGFR2 in gastric cancer. BCR-FGFR1, CNTRL-FGFR1, CUX1-FGFR1, FGFR1OP-FGFR1, MYO18A-FGFR1 and ZMYM2-FGFR1 fusions in myeloproliferative neoplasms are non-receptor-type FGFR kinases, whereas FGFR1-TACC1, FGFR2-AFF3, FGFR2-BICC1, FGFR2-PPHLN1, FGFR3-BAIAP2L1 and FGFR3-TACC3 fusions in solid tumors are transmembrane-type FGFRs with C-terminal alterations. AZD4547, BGJ398 (infigratinib), Debio-1347 and dovitinib are FGFR1/2/3 inhibitors; BLU9931 is a selective FGFR4 inhibitor; FIIN-2, JNJ-42756493, LY2874455 and ponatinib are pan-FGFR inhibitors. AZD4547, dovitinib and ponatinib are multi-kinase inhibitors targeting FGFRs, colony stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)R2, and others. The tumor microenvironment consists of cancer cells and stromal/immune cells, such as cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), endothelial cells, M2-type tumor-associating macrophages (M2-TAMs), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and regulatory T cells. FGFR inhibitors elicit antitumor effects directly on cancer cells, as well as indirectly through the blockade of paracrine signaling. The dual inhibition of FGF and CSF1 or VEGF signaling is expected to enhance the antitumor effects through the targeting of immune evasion and angiogenesis in the tumor microenvironment. Combination therapy using tyrosine kinase inhibitors (FGFR or CSF1R inhibitors) and immune checkpoint blockers (anti-PD-1 or anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibodies) may be a promising choice for cancer patients. The inhibition of FGF19-FGFR4 signaling is associated with a risk of liver toxicity, whereas the activation of FGF23-FGFR4 signaling is associated with a risk of heart toxicity. Endocrine FGF signaling affects the pathophysiology of cancer patients who are prescribed FGFR inhibitors. Whole-genome sequencing is necessary for the detection of promoter/enhancer alterations of FGFR genes and rare alterations of other genes causing FGFR overexpression. To sustain the health care system in an aging society, a benefit-cost analysis should be performed with a focus on disease-free survival and the total medical cost before implementing genome-based precision medicine for cancer patients.
OBJECTIVE: In the tumour microenvironment, critical drivers of immune escape include the oncogenic activity of the tumour cell-intrinsic osteopontin (OPN), the expression of programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and the expansion of tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs). We investigated the feasibility of targeting these pathways as a therapeutic option in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) mouse models. DESIGN: We analysed the number of tumour-infiltrating immune cells and the inflammatory immune profiles in chemically induced liver tumour isolated from wild-type and OPNknockout (KO) mice. In vitro cell cocultures were further conducted to investigate the crosstalk between TAMs and HCC cells mediated by OPN, colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF1) and CSF1 receptor (CSF1R). The in vivo efficacy of anti-PD-L1 and CSF1/CSF1R inhibition was evaluated in OPN overexpressing subcutaneous or orthotopic mouse model of HCC. RESULTS: The numbers of TAMs, as well as the expression levels of M2 macrophage markers and PD-L1 were significantly decreased, but the levels of cytokines produced by T-helper 1 (Th1) cells were upregulated in tumour tissues from OPN KO mice compared with that from the controls. In addition, we observed a positive association between the OPN and PD-L1 expression, and OPN expression and TAM infiltration in tumour tissues from patients with HCC. We further demonstrated that OPN facilitates chemotactic migration, and alternative activation of macrophages, and promotes the PD-L1 expression in HCC via activation of the CSF1-CSF1R pathway in macrophages. Combining anti-PD-L1 and CSF1R inhibition elicited potent antitumour activity and prolonged survival of OPN(high) tumour-bearing mice. Histological, flow cytometric and ELISA revealed increased CD8(+) T cell infiltration, reduced TAMs and enhanced Th1/Th2 cytokine balance in multiple mouse models of HCC. CONCLUSIONS: OPN/CSF1/CSF1R axis plays a critical role in the immunosuppressive nature of the HCC microenvironment. Blocking CSF1/CSF1R prevents TAM trafficking and thereby enhances the efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors for the treatment of HCC.
Many risk genes for the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are exclusively or highly expressed in myeloid cells. Microglia are dependent on colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) signaling for their survival. We designed and synthesized a highly selective brain-penetrant CSF1R inhibitor (PLX5622) allowing for extended and specific microglial elimination, preceding and during pathology development. We find that in the 5xFAD mouse model of AD, plaques fail to form in the parenchymal space following microglial depletion, except in areas containing surviving microglia. Instead, Abeta deposits in cortical blood vessels reminiscent of cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Altered gene expression in the 5xFAD hippocampus is also reversed by the absence of microglia. Transcriptional analyses of the residual plaque-forming microglia show they exhibit a disease-associated microglia profile. Collectively, we describe the structure, formulation, and efficacy of PLX5622, which allows for sustained microglial depletion and identify roles of microglia in initiating plaque pathogenesis.
BACKGROUND: Synaptogyrin-2 (SYNGR2) plays an important role in regulating membrane traffic in non-neuronal cells. However, the role of SYNGR2 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear. METHODS: All original data were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases and integrated via R 3.5.3. SYNGR2 expression was explored in the TCGA and GEO databases. The correlations between SYNGR2 and cancer immune characteristics were analyzed via the TIMER and TISIDB databases. RESULTS: In general, SYNGR2 was predominantly overexpressed and had reference values in the diagnosis and prognostic estimation of ESCC. Upregulated SYNGR2 was associated with poorer overall survival, disease-specific survival and T stage in ESCC. Mechanistically, we identified hub genes that included a total of 38 SYNGR2-related genes, which were tightly associated with the protein polyubiquitination pathway in ESCC patients. SYNGR2 expression was negatively related to the infiltrating levels of T helper cells. SYNGR2 methylation was positively correlated with the expression of chemokines (CCL2 and CXCL12), chemokine receptors (CCR1 and CCR2), immunoinhibitors (CXCL12 and TNFRSF4) and immunostimulators (CSF1R and PDCD1LG2) in ESCC. CONCLUSION: SYNGR2 may be used as a biomarker for determining prognosis and immune infiltration in ESCC.
Macrophages are specialized cells that control tissue homeostasis. They include non-resident and tissue-resident macrophage populations which are characterized by the expression of particular cell surface markers and the secretion of molecules with a wide range of biological functions. The differentiation and polarization of macrophages relies on specific growth factors and their receptors. Macrophage-colony stimulating factor (CSF-1) and interleukine-34 (IL-34), also known as "twin" cytokines, are part of this regluatory landscape. CSF-1 and IL-34 share a common receptor, the macrophage-colony stimulating factor receptor (CSF-1R), which is activated in a similar way by both factors and turns on identical signaling pathways. However, there is some discrete differential activation leading to specific activities. In this review, we disscuss recent progress in understanding of the role of the twin cytokines in macrophage differentiation, from their interaction with CSF-1R and the activation of signaling pathways, to their implication in macrophage polarization of non-resident and tissue-resident macrophages. A special focus on IL-34, its involvement in pathophsyiological contexts, and its potential as a theranostic target for macrophage therapy will be proposed.
PURPOSE: Targeting immunosuppressive and pro-tumorigenic glioblastoma (GBM)-associated macrophages and microglial cells (GAM) has great potential to improve patient outcomes. Colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF1R) has emerged as a promising target for reprograming anti-inflammatory M2-like GAMs. However, treatment data on patient-derived, tumor-educated GAMs and their influence on the adaptive immunity are lacking. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: CD11b+-GAMs freshly isolated from patient tumors were treated with CSF1R-targeting drugs PLX3397, BLZ945, and GW2580. Phenotypical changes upon treatment were assessed using RNA sequencing, flow cytometry, and cytokine quantification. Functional analyses included inducible nitric oxide synthase activity, phagocytosis, transmigration, and autologous tumor cell killing assays. Antitumor effects and changes in GAM activation were confirmed in a complex patient-derived 3D tumor organoid model serving as a tumor avatar. RESULTS: The most effective reprogramming of GAMs was observed upon GW2580 treatment, which led to the downregulation of M2-related markers, IL6, IL10, ERK1/2, and MAPK signaling pathways, while M1-like markers, gene set enrichment indicating activated MHC-II presentation, phagocytosis, and T-cell killing were substantially increased. Moreover, treatment of patient-derived GBM organoids with GW2580 confirmed successful reprogramming, resulting in impaired tumor cell proliferation. In line with its failure in clinical trials, PLX3397 was ineffective in our analysis. CONCLUSIONS: This comparative analysis of CSF1R-targeting drugs on patient-derived GAMs and human GBM avatars identified GW2580 as the most powerful inhibitor with the ability to polarize immunosuppressive GAMs to a proinflammatory phenotype, supporting antitumor T-cell responses while also exerting a direct antitumor effect. These data indicate that GW2580 could be an important pillar in future therapies for GBM.
BACKGROUND: Microglia, the brain's principal immune cell, are increasingly implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD), but the molecular interfaces through which these cells contribute to amyloid beta (Abeta)-related neurodegeneration are unclear. We recently identified microglial contributions to the homeostatic and disease-associated modulation of perineuronal nets (PNNs), extracellular matrix structures that enwrap and stabilize neuronal synapses, but whether PNNs are altered in AD remains controversial. METHODS: Extensive histological analysis was performed on male and female 5xFAD mice at 4, 8, 12, and 18 months of age to assess plaque burden, microgliosis, and PNNs. Findings were validated in postmortem AD tissue. The role of neuroinflammation in PNN loss was investigated via LPS treatment, and the ability to prevent or rescue disease-related reductions in PNNs was assessed by treating 5xFAD and 3xTg-AD model mice with colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) inhibitor PLX5622 to deplete microglia. FINDINGS: Utilizing the 5xFAD mouse model and human cortical tissue, we report that PNNs are extensively lost in AD in proportion to plaque burden. Activated microglia closely associate with and engulf damaged nets in the 5xFAD brain, and inclusions of PNN material are evident in mouse and human microglia, while aggrecan, a critical PNN component, deposits within human dense-core plaques. Disease-associated reductions in parvalbumin (PV)+ interneurons, frequently coated by PNNs, are preceded by PNN coverage and integrity impairments, and similar phenotypes are elicited in wild-type mice following microglial activation with LPS. Chronic pharmacological depletion of microglia prevents 5xFAD PNN loss, with similar results observed following depletion in aged 3xTg-AD mice, and this occurs despite plaque persistence. INTERPRETATION: We conclude that phenotypically altered microglia facilitate plaque-dependent PNN loss in the AD brain. FUNDING: The NIH (NIA, NINDS) and the Alzheimer's Association.
Glioblastoma recurrence is currently inevitable despite extensive standard-of-care treatment. In preclinical studies, an alternative strategy of targeting tumor-associated macrophages and microglia through CSF-1R inhibition was previously found to regress established tumors and significantly increase overall survival. However, recurrences developed in  approximately 50% of mice in long-term studies, which were consistently associated with fibrotic scars. This fibrotic response is observed following multiple anti-glioma therapies in different preclinical models herein and in patient recurrence samples. Multi-omics analyses of the post-treatment tumor microenvironment identified fibrotic areas as pro-tumor survival niches that encapsulated surviving glioma cells, promoted dormancy, and inhibited immune surveillance. The fibrotic treatment response was mediated by perivascular-derived fibroblast-like cells via activation by transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling and neuroinflammation. Concordantly, combinatorial inhibition of these pathways inhibited treatment-associated fibrosis, and significantly improved survival in preclinical trials of anti-colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R) therapy.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggest that microglia contribute to tau pathology progression in Alzheimer's disease. Amyloid plaque accumulation transforms microglia, the primary innate immune cells in the brain, into neurodegenerative microglia (MGnD), which exhibit enhanced phagocytosis of plaques, apoptotic neurons and dystrophic neurites containing aggregated and phosphorylated tau (p-tau). It remains unclear how microglia promote disease progression while actively phagocytosing pathological proteins, therefore ameliorating pathology. METHODS: Adeno-associated virus expressing P301L tau mutant (AAV-P301L-tau) was stereotaxically injected into the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) in C57BL/6 (WT) and humanized APP mutant knock-in homozygote (App(NL-G-F)) mice at 5 months of age. Mice were fed either chow containing a colony stimulating factor-1 receptor inhibitor (PLX5622) or control chow from 4 to 6 months of age to test the effect of microglia depletion. Animals were tested at 6 months of age for immunofluorescence, biochemistry, and FACS of microglia. In order to monitor microglial extracellular vesicle secretion in vivo, a novel lentiviral EV reporter system was engineered to express mEmerald-CD9 (mE-CD9) specifically in microglia, which was injected into the same region of MEC. RESULTS: Expressing P301L tau mutant in the MEC induced tau propagation to the granule cell layer of the hippocampal dentate gyrus, which was significantly exacerbated in App(NL-G-F) mice compared to WT control mice. Administration of PLX5622 depleted nearly all microglia in mouse brains and dramatically reduced propagation of p-tau in WT and to a greater extent in App(NL-G-F) mice, although it increased plaque burden and plaque-associated p-tau(+) dystrophic neurites. Plaque-associated MGnD microglia strongly expressed an EV marker, tumor susceptibility gene 101, indicative of heightened synthesis of EVs. Intracortical injection of mE-CD9 lentivirus successfully induced microglia-specific expression of mE-CD9(+) EV particles, which were significantly enhanced in Mac2(+) MGnD microglia compared to Mac2(-) homeostatic microglia. Finally, consecutive intracortical injection of mE-CD9 lentivirus and AAV-P301L-tau into App(NL-G-F) mice revealed encapsulation of p-tau in microglia-specific mE-CD9(+) EVs as determined by super-resolution microscopy and immuno-electron microscopy. DISCUSSION: Our findings suggest that MGnD microglia hyper-secrete p-tau(+) EVs while compacting Abeta plaques and clearing NP tau, which we propose as a novel mechanistic link between amyloid plaque deposition and exacerbation of tau propagation in App(NL-G-F) mice.
