Tyrosine-protein kinase SYK; Non-receptor tyrosine kinase which mediates signal transduction downstream of a variety of transmembrane receptors including classical immunoreceptors like the B-cell receptor (BCR). Regulates several biological processes including innate and adaptive immunity, cell adhesion, osteoclast maturation, platelet activation and vascular development. Assembles into signaling complexes with activated receptors at the plasma membrane via interaction between its SH2 domains and the receptor tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAM domains. The association with the receptor can a [...] 
The secretory properties of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) play predominant roles in shaping a pro-metastatic tumor microenvironment. The present study demonstrated that SLIT2, an axon guidance protein, produced by CAFs and promoted gastric cancer (GC) metastasis in two gastric cancer cell lines (AGS and MKN45) by binding to roundabout guidance receptor 1 (ROBO1). Mass-spectrometry analysis revealed that ROBO1 could interact with NEK9, a serine/threonine kinase. And their mutual binding activities were further enhanced by SLIT2. Domain analysis revealed the kinase domain of NEK9 was critical in its interaction with the intracellular domain (ICD) of ROBO1, and it also directly phosphorylated tripartite motif containing 28 (TRIM28) and cortactin (CTTN) in AGS and MKN45 cells. TRIM28 function as a transcriptional elongation factor, which directly facilitate CTTN activation. In addition, Bioinformatics analysis and experimental validation identified transcriptional regulation of STAT3 and NF-kappaB p100 by TRIM28, and a synergetic transcription of CTTN by STAT3 and NF-kappaB p100 was also observed in AGS and MKN45. Therefore, CAF-derived SLIT2 increased the expression and phosphorylation levels of CTTN, which induced cytoskeletal reorganization and GC cells metastasis. A simultaneous increase in the expression levels of NEK9, TRIM28 and CTTN was found in metastatic GC lesions compared with paired non-cancerous tissues and primary cancer lesions via IHC and Multiplex IHC. The analysis of the data from a cohort of patients with GC revealed that increased levels of NEK9, TRIM28 and CTTN were associated with a decreased overall survival rate. On the whole, these findings revealed the connections of CAFs and cancer cells through SLIT2/ROBO1 and inflammatory signaling, and the key molecules involved in this process may serve as potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for GC.
BACKGROUND: Ring finger proteins (RNFs) were involved in carcinogenesis. Here, we aimed to explore the detailed mechanism of RNF128 in the progression of melanoma. METHODS: We reanalyzed several gene expression profiles from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and obtained the overlapped differential expressed RNF genes. Among them, RNF128 was selected to further explore its expression, the biological significance, and the underlying molecular mechanism, as well as the clinical relevance in melanoma patients. RESULTS: RNF128 was found to be significantly downregulated in the selected datasets, which was further verified in our melanoma tissues. Moreover, RNF128 downregulation was shown to correlate with the malignant phenotype of melanoma, and further functional assays demonstrated that low levels of RNF128 promoted melanoma progression via inducing cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the acquisition of stemness. Mechanistically, RNF128 interference activated the Wnt pathway via simultaneously ubiquitinating CD44/cortactin (CTTN), resulting in CD44 and c-Myc transcription, thus revealed that RNF128 participated in a positive feedback of the Wnt pathway-CD44 loop. Clinically, we found that patients expressing low RNF128 and high CD44/CTTN levels had a poor prognosis. CONCLUSION: Downregulated RNF128 activates Wnt signaling to induce cellular EMT and stemness by ubiquitinating and degrading CD44/CTTN, and RNF128 is a reliable diagnostic and prognostic biomarker, and a deeper understanding of RNF128 may contribute to the treatment of melanoma.
Recent study established the role of integrins in keratinocyte growth factor (KGF)-induced oral epithelial adhesion and rete peg elongation. However, how extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling cooperates with the increased epithelial adhesion during rete peg elongation has yet to be determined. Podosomes are cell-matrix contact structures that combine several abilities, including adhesion and matrix degradation. In the present study, we identified podosome formation at the ventral side of human immortalized oral epithelial cells (HIOECs) upon KGF treatment. Moreover, podosomal components including integrin alpha6，beta4，alpha3，beta1 and MMP14 colocalized with the F-actin-cortactin complex and matrix degradation assays demonstrated the ability of the F-actin-cortactin complex to degrade matrix. Inhibition both of integrin subunits beta4 and beta1 with specific blocking antibodies and inhibition of Erk1/2 abrogated the KGF-induced podosome formation. Notably, knockdown of integrin subunits beta4 and beta1 with specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) downregulated the phosphorylation levels of Erk1/2. In contrast, inhibition of both Erk1/2 could upregulate the expression of integrin subunits beta4 and beta1. These results demonstrate that KGF induces podosome formation via integrin-Erk1/2 signaling in HIOECs, suggesting a novel mechanism by which integrins enhance oral epithelial adhesion and rete peg elongation.
BACKGROUND: To evaluate the prognostic significance of CTTN/cortactin alterations in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). MATERIAL AND METHODS: We searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and Scopus for studies published before May 2018. We conducted a meta-analysis to quantify the impact of CTTN/cortactin alterations on clinicopathological and survival variables. RESULTS: Eighteen studies (1633 patients) met inclusion criteria. Quantitative evaluation revealed a strong association of CTTN/cortactin alterations with N+ status (P < .001), higher T status (P < .001), advanced clinical stage (P < .001), high histological grade (P = .001), and lower overall survival (OS) (P < .001). We found heterogeneity in T status, histological grade, and OS and observed small-study effects on N status and OS. In subgroup analyses, a significant association of CTTN amplification and cortactin overexpression with the above variables was preserved. The strongest association between CTTN/cortactin alterations and a worse outcome was observed in the subgroups of Asian patients and pharyngolaryngeal squamous cell carcinomas. CONCLUSIONS: CTTN/cortactin alterations should be evaluated to predict the HNSCC prognosis.
Matrix stiffness potently promotes the malignant phenotype in various biological contexts. Therefore, identification of gene expression to participate in mechanical force signals transduced into downstream biochemical signaling will contribute substantially to the advances in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) treatment. In the present study, we detected that cortactin (CTTN) played an indispensable role in matrix stiffness-induced cell migration, invasion, and invadopodia formation. Advances in cancer research have highlighted that dysregulated alternative splicing contributes to cancer progression as an oncogenic driver. However, whether WT-CTTN or splice variants (SV1-CTTN or SV2-CTTN) regulate matrix stiffness-induced malignant phenotype is largely unknown. We proved that alteration of WT-CTTN expression modulated matrix stiffness-induced cell migration, invasion, and invadopodia formation. Considering that splicing factors might drive cancer progression through positive feedback loops, we analyzed and showed how the splicing factor PTBP2 and TIA1 modulated the production of WT-CTTN. Moreover, we determined that high stiffness activated PTBP2 expression. Taken together, our findings showed that the PTBP2-WT-CTTN level increases upon stiffening and then promotes cell migration, invasion, and invadopodia formation in NPC.
By the mid 1980's, it was clear that the transforming activity of oncogenic Src was linked to the activity of its tyrosine kinase domain and attention turned to identifying substrates, the putative next level of control in the pathway to transformation. Among the first to recognize the potential of phosphotyrosine-specific antibodies, Parsons and colleagues launched a risky shotgun-based approach that led ultimately to the cDNA cloning and functional characterization of many of today's best-known Src substrates (for example, p85-Cortactin, p110-AFAP1, p130Cas, p125FAK and p120-catenin). Two decades and over 6000 citations later, the original goals of the project may be seen as secondary to the enormous impact of these protein substrates in many areas of biology. At the request of the editors, this review is not restricted to the current status of the substrates, but reflects also on the anatomy of the project itself and some of the challenges and decisions encountered along the way.
Metastasis is the primary stumbling block to the treatment of bladder cancer (BC). In order to spread, tumor cells must acquire increased migratory and invasive capacity, which is tightly linked with pseudopodia formation. Here, we unravel the effects of sulforaphane (SFN), an isothiocyanate in cruciferous vegetables, on the assembly of pseudopodia and BC metastasis, and its molecular mechanism in the process. Our database analysis revealed that in bladder tumor, pseudopodia-associated genes, CTTN, WASL and ACTR2/ARP2 are upregulated. SFN caused lamellipodia to collapse in BC cells by blocking the CTTN-ARP2 axis. SFN inhibited invadopodia formation and cell invasion by reducing WASL in different invasive BC cell lines. The production of ATP, essential for the assembly of pseudopodia, was significantly increased in bladder tumors and strongly inhibited by SFN. Overexpressing AKT1 reversed the downregulation of ATP in SFN-treated bladder cancer cells and restored filopodia and lamellipodia morphology and function. Bioluminescent imaging showed that SFN suppressed BC metastases to the lung of nude mice while downregulating Cttn and Arp2 expression. Our study thus reveals mechanisms of SFN action in inhibiting pseudopodia formation and highlights potential targeting options for the therapy of metastatic bladder cancer.
BACKGROUND: Alternative splicing (AS) and intron retention (IR) implicated in multiple pathophysiological processes, have rarely been reported in systemic sclerosis (SSc). METHODS: We integrated bulk RNA-seq and 4D label-free mass spectrometry to perform a multi-omics analysis of AS and IR in SSc skin tissue and fibroblasts. RMATS and iREAD were used to identify AS and IR, which were validated by real-time PCR. Spearman correlation and the LASSO method were employed to assess correlations among clinical features, introns, splicing factors (regulators of AS) and proteins. FINDINGS: AS profiles showed distinct alterations in SSc skin tissue, with the most pronounced changes occurring in IR. AS and IR were associated with total modified Rodnan skin score (mRSS) and local skin score. Upon TGF-beta stimulation, fibroblasts exhibited significant alterations in IR profiles, affecting genes related to fibroblast proliferation and collagen fibril organization. A comprehensive integrated analysis of introns, exons, and proteome profiles revealed that IR exerted a negative impact on protein expression, with certain changes being under intronic control. RT-PCR confirmed the presence of intron and exon-derived sequences of CTTN, OGA, MED16 and PHYKPL. Additionally, notable changes were observed in the regulatory network of splicing factors in SSc skin tissues. These factors are also involved in fibrosis pathways and correlated with clinical features. CONCLUSION: Totally, abnormal AS, IR profiles and splicing factors were identified in SSc, altered IRs and splicing factors participated in fibrosis-related pathways. IR exerted a negative impact on protein expression in TGF-beta-stimulated fibroblasts. Clarification of the IR mechanisms will provide new insights into the pathophysiology of SSc.
RATIONALE: Cortactin, an actin-binding cytoskeletal protein, plays a crucial role in maintaining endothelial cell (EC) barrier integrity and regulating vascular permeability. The gene encoding cortactin, CTTN, is implicated in various lung inflammatory disorders. Despite this, the transcriptional regulation of CTTN by inflammatory stimuli and promoter SNPs remains unexplored. METHODS: We transfected human lung ECs with a full-length CTTN promoters linked to a luciferase reporter to measure promoter activity. SNP-containing CTTN promoter was created via site-directed mutagenesis. Transfected ECs were exposed to LPS (PAMP), TNF-alpha (cytokine), cyclic stretch (CS), FG-4592 (HIF-inducer), NRF2 (anti-oxidant modulator), FTY-(S)-phosphate (endothelial barrier enhancer), and 5'-Aza (demethylation inducer). Immunohistochemistry was used to assess cortactin expression in mouse lungs exposed to LPS. RESULTS: LPS, TNF-alpha, and 18%CS significantly increased CTTN promoter activities in a time-dependent manner (P<0.05). The variant rs34612166 (-212T/C) markedly enhanced LPS- and 18%CS- induced CTTN promoter activities (P<0.05). FG-4592 significantly boosted CTTN promoter activities (P<0.01), which were partially inhibited by HIF1alpha (KC7F2) and HIF2alpha (PT2385) inhibitors (P<0.05). NRF2 activator Bixin increased CTTN promoter activities, whereas NRF2 inhibitor Brusatol reduced them (P<0.05). 5'-Aza increased CTTN promoter activities by 2.9-fold (P<0.05). NF-kappaB response element mutations significantly reduced CTTN promoter activities response to LPS and TNFalpha. FTY-(S)-phosphate significantly increased CTTN promoter activities in 24 h. In vivo, cortactin levels were significantly elevated in inflammatory mouse lungs exposed to LPS for 18 h. CONCLUSION: CTTN transcriptional is significantly influenced by inflammatory factors and promoter variants. Cortactin, essential in mitigating inflammatory edema, presents a promising therapeutic target to alleviate severe inflammatory disorders.
Patients with myasthenia gravis (MG) without antibodies to the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) or muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK) have been classified as having double-seronegative myasthenia gravis (dSNMG). We used the sera from six dSNMG patients with positive immunohistochemistry assays in a protein array to screen reactivity with 9000 human proteins. We identified cortactin, an intracellular protein that interacts with agrin/MuSK favoring AChR aggregation, as a new antigen in dSNMG. We then designed an in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay as a screening assay and confirmed these results by western blot. We found that 19.7% of dSNMG patients had anti-cortactin antibodies. In contrast, patients with AChR(+) MG or other autoimmune disorders and healthy controls were positive at significantly lower rates. Five percent of healthy controls were positive. In a recent study, we screened sera from 250 patients (AChR(+) MG, MuSK(+) MG, dSNMG) and 29 healthy controls. Cortactin antibodies were identified in 23.7% of dSNMG and 9.5% AChR(+) MG patients (P = 0.02). None of the MuSK(+) MG patients, patients with other autoimmune disorders, or healthy controls had antibodies against cortactin. Patients with dSNMG cortactin(+) MG were negative for anti-striated muscle and anti-LRP4 antibodies. Patients with dSNMG cortactin(+) MG presented ocular or mild generalized MG without bulbar symptoms. We conclude that cortactin autoantibodies are biomarkers of MG that, when present, suggest that the disease will be mild.
OBJECTIVE: Long QT syndrome type 7 (Andersen-Tawil syndrome, ATS), which is caused by KCNJ2 gene mutation, often leads to ventricular arrhythmia, periodic paralysis and skeletal malformations. The development, differentiation and electrophysiological maturation of cardiomyocytes (CMs) changes promote the pathophysiology of Long QT syndrome type 7(LQT7). We aimed to specifically reproduce the ATS disease phenotype and study the pathogenic mechanism. METHODS AND RESULTS: We established a cardiac cell model derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) to the phenotypes and electrophysiological function, and the establishment of a human myocardial cell model that specifically reproduces the symptoms of ATS provides a reliable platform for exploring the mechanism of this disease or potential drugs. The spontaneous pulsation rate of myocardial cells in the mutation group was significantly lower than that in the repair CRISPR group, the action potential duration was prolonged, and the Kir2.1 current of the inward rectifier potassium ion channel was decreased, which is consistent with the clinical symptoms of ATS patients. Only ZNF528, a chromatin-accessible TF related to pathogenicity, was continuously regulated beginning from the cardiac mesodermal precursor cell stage (day 4), and continued to be expressed at low levels, which was identified by WGCNA method and verified with ATAC-seq data in the mutation group. Subsequently, it indicated that seven pathways were downregulated (all p < 0.05) by used single sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis to evaluate the overall regulation of potassium-related pathways enriched in the transcriptome and proteome of late mature CMs. Among them, the three pathways (GO: 0008076, GO: 1990573 and GO: 0030007) containing the mutated gene KCNJ2 is involved that are related to the whole process by which a potassium ion enters the cell via the inward rectifier potassium channel to exert its effect were inhibited. The other four pathways are related to regulation of the potassium transmembrane pathway and sodium:potassium exchange ATPase (p < 0.05). ZNF528 small interfering (si)-RNA was applied to hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes for CRISPR group to explore changes in potassium ion currents and growth and development related target protein levels that affect disease phenotype. Three consistently downregulated proteins (KCNJ2, CTTN and ATP1B1) associated with pathogenicity were verificated through correlation and intersection analysis. CONCLUSION: This study uncovers TFs and target proteins related to electrophysiology and developmental pathogenicity in ATS myocardial cells, obtaining novel targets for potential therapeutic candidate development that does not rely on gene editing.
BACKGROUND/AIM: Cortactin (CTTN) has been considered a promising molecular prognostic factor in various types of cancers. In this study, we aimed to investigate the role of CTTN in the pathogenesis of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: CTTN and phospho-CTTN (p-CTTN) expression was determined in 10 healthy controls and 38 CSCC tissue samples by immunohistochemistry. The influence of CTTN on the biological behavior of CSCC cells was also investigated. RESULTS: p-CTTN expression was significantly increased in CSCC than control samples. In contrast, no significant difference in CTTN expression was found between control and CSCC tissues. Moreover, a significant association was found between recurrence-free survival with p-CTTN expression, but not with CTTN expression. Furthermore, the proliferative, migratory, and invasive abilities of CSCC cells were significantly decreased by CTTN-siRNA transfection. CONCLUSION: CTTN phosphorylation is strongly associated with CSCC pathogenesis and may serve as a molecular biomarker of CSCC.
Hepatitis B virus-encoded X protein (HBx) acts as a tumor promoter during hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development, probably by regulating the expression of host proteins through protein-protein interaction. A proteomics approach was used to identify HBx-interacting proteins involved in HBx-induced hepatocarcinogenesis. We validated the proteomics findings by co-immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy. We performed cell proliferation, migration assays and cell cycle analyses in HCC cells. Finally, we confirmed the clinical significance of our findings in samples from patients. We found that cortactin (CTTN) is a novel HBx-interacting protein, and HBx regulates the expression of CTTN in the HCC cell lines MHCC-LM3 and HepG2. Mechanistically, by upregulating the expression of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB1) and its downstream targets, such as cyclin D1 and MMP-9, the effects of the HBx-CTTN interaction on the enhancement of cellular proliferation and migration were maintained by inhibiting cell cycle arrest. In addition, we demonstrated that the levels of CTTN and CREB1 were closely correlated in clinical samples from HBV-infected patients with HCC. Overall, our data suggests that HBx contributes to cell migration and proliferation of HCC cells by interacting with CTTN and regulating the expression of CTTN and CREB1. Therefore, the HBx/CTTN/CREB1 axis is a potential novel therapeutic target in HCC.
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is a genetically complex tumor type and is a major cause of cancer-related mortality. The combination of genetics, diet, behavior, and environment plays an important role in the carcinogenesis of ESCC. To characterize the genomic aberrations of this disease, we investigated the genomic imbalances in 19 primary ESCC cases using high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). All cases showed either loss or gain of whole chromosomes or segments of chromosome(s) with variable genomic sizes. The copy number alterations per case affected the median 34% (~ 1,034Mb/3,000Mb) of the whole genome. Recurrent gains were 1q21.3-qter, 3q13.11-qter, 5pter-p11, 7pter-p15.3, 7p12.1-p11.2, 7q11-q11.2, 8p12-qter, 11q13.2-q13.3, 12pter-p13.31, 17q24.2, 20q11.21-qter, and 22q11.21-q11.22 whereas the recurrent losses were 3pter-p11.1, 4pter-p12, 4q28.3-q31.22, 4q31.3-q32.1, 9pter-p12, 11q22.3-qter and 13q12.11-q22.1. Amplification of 11q13 resulting in overexpression of CTTN/CCND1 was the most prominent finding, which was observed in 13 of 19 ESCC cases. These unique profiles of copy number alteration should be validated by further studies and need to be taken into consideration when developing biomarkers for early detection of ESCC.
Cortactin is a cytoskeletal protein and src kinase substrate that is frequently overexpressed in cancer. Animal studies suggest that cortactin overexpression increases tumor aggressiveness, possibly through promotion of tumor invasion and metastasis. Recently, many studies have documented a role for cortactin in promoting cell motility and invasion, including a critical role in invadopodia, actin rich-subcellular protrusions associated with degradation of the extracellular matrix by cancer cells. Here, I review the evidence and potential mechanisms for cortactin as a critical mediator of tumor cell invasion.
Proliferative verrucous leukoplakia (PVL) is a rare oral potentially malignant disorder characterised by multifocal origin and unpredictable long-term evolution to oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) or oral verrucous carcinoma (OVC). Currently no predictive biomarkers are in clinical use. We aimed to explore the genomic profile of PVL. A total of 685 cases in 26 studies were included in this review. Genomic data were presented in 15% of studies and biomarker analysis was reported in 85% of studies. At first clinical presentation, PVL is characterised by a high loss of heterozygosity (LOH), similar to OSCC, and low copy number alterations (CNA). As these progress, more CNAs and mutations in CDKN2A and alterations to ELAVL1 expression are noted, but no TP53 mutations are identified. There is significantly lower LOH at 17p in early PVL compared with OSCC (p = 0.037). Deletions in chromosomal loci 17q12, 5q31.1 and amplifications in 7q11.2, 7q22 are shared between early lesions and OVC. PVL shows CNAs at 11q31. WNT signalling pathway genes (SUZ12, CTTN and FOLR3) are enriched in CN-altered regions. PVL stroma shows significantly lower alpha-SMA and higher CD34 expression than OVC and OSCC. The exact genomic landscape is currently unclear, and further studies are necessary to unravel this mystery.
The endothelium is the first barrier that leukocytes have to overcome during recruitment to sites of inflamed tissues. The leukocyte extravasation cascade is a complex multistep process that requires the activation of various adhesion molecules and signaling pathways, as well as actin remodeling, in both leukocytes and endothelial cells. Endothelial adhesion molecules, such as E-selectin or ICAM-1, are connected to the actin cytoskeleton via actin-binding proteins (ABPs). Although the contribution of receptor-ligand interactions to leukocyte extravasation has been studied extensively, the contribution of endothelial ABPs to the regulation of leukocyte adhesion and transendothelial migration remains poorly understood. This review focuses on recently published evidence that endothelial ABPs, such as cortactin, myosin, or alpha-actinin, regulate leukocyte extravasation by controlling actin dynamics, biomechanical properties of endothelia, and signaling pathways, such as GTPase activation, during inflammation. Thus, ABPs may serve as targets for novel treatment strategies for disorders characterized by excessive leukocyte recruitment.
Cigarette smoke (CS) is the primary cause of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), and an important pathophysiologic event in COPD is CS-induced apoptosis in lung endothelial cells (EC). Cortactin (CTTN) is a cytoskeletal actin-binding regulatory protein with modulation by Src-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation. Based upon data demonstrating reduced CTTN mRNA levels in the lungs of smokers compared to non-smokers, we hypothesized a functional role for CTTN in CS-induced mitochondrial ROS generation and apoptosis in lung EC. Exposure of cultured human lung EC to CS condensate (CSC) led to the rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton and increased CTTN tyrosine phosphorylation (within hours). Exposure to CS significantly increased EC mitochondrial ROS generation and EC apoptosis. The functional role of CTTN in these CSC-induced EC responses was explored using cortactin siRNA to reduce its expression, and by using a blocking peptide for the CTTN SH3 domain, which is critical to cytoskeletal interactions. CTTN siRNA or blockade of its SH3 domain resulted in significantly increased EC mitochondrial ROS and apoptosis and augmented CSC-induced effects. Exposure of lung EC to e-cigarette condensate demonstrated similar results, with CTTN siRNA or SH3 domain blocking peptide increasing lung EC apoptosis. These data demonstrate a novel role for CTTN in modulating lung EC apoptosis induced by CS or e-cigarettes potentially providing new insights into COPD pathogenesis.
In patients with sickle cell disease (SCD), acute chest syndrome (ACS) is a common form of acute lung injury and a major cause of morbidity and mortality. The pathophysiology of ACS is complex, and hemin, the prosthetic moiety of hemoglobin, has been implicated in endothelial cell (EC) activation and subsequent acute lung injury (ALI) and ACS in vitro and in animal studies. Here, we examined the role of cortactin (CTTN), a cytoskeletal protein that regulates EC function, in response to hemin-induced ALI and ACS. Cortactin heterozygous (Cttn(+/-)) mice (n = 8) and their wild-type siblings (n = 8) were irradiated and subsequently received bone marrow cells (BMCs) extruded from the femurs of SCD mice (SS) to generate SS (Cttn+/)(-) and SS (CttnWT) chimeras. Following hemoglobin electrophoretic proof of BMC transplantation, the mice received 35 micromol/kg of hemin. Within 24 h, surviving mice were euthanized, and bronchoalveolar fluid (BAL) and lung samples were analyzed. For in vitro studies, human lung microvascular endothelial cells (HLMVECs) were used to determine hemin-induced changes in gene expression and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in cortactin deficiency and control conditions. When compared with wild-type littermates, the mortality for SS (Cttn+/-) mice trended to be lower after hemin infusion and these mice exhibited less severe lung injury and less necroptotic cell death. In vitro studies confirmed that cortactin deficiency is protective against hemin-induced injury in HMLVECs, by decreasing protein expression of p38/HSP27, improving cell barrier function, and decreasing the production of ROS. Further studies examining the role of CTTN in ACS are warranted and may open a new avenue of potential treatment for this devastating disease.
This study was aimed to evaluate the regulation mechanism of cortactin (CTTN) on matrix metalloproteinases 9 (MMP-9) and its relations with Exo70 in invasion of hepatoma carcinoma (HCC) cells. The expression levels of CTTN, Exo70 and MMP-9 were detected in normal hepatocytes and various HCC cells by real-time PCR. Then the migration and invasion ability of these cells was revealed by scratch and invasion assay. The effects of CTTN on MMP-9 and the ability of migration and invasion were evaluated by silence and overexpress CTTN. During this process, the expression of CTTN was detected by Western blot, the activity and concentration of MMP-9 in supernatant of culture medium was detected by zymography and ELISA assay. Besides, Exo70 was also inhibited to reveal its effects on MMP-9 and the migration and invasion ability of LM3. Increased expression of CTTN, MMP-9, Exo70, reduced scratch area and increased puncture cell numbers were found in HCC cells (p < 0.05). The expression of CTTN was significantly correlated with Exo70 and the migration and invasion ability of HCC (p < 0.05). In addition, the activity and concentration of MMP-9 were significantly affected by the expression level of CTTN, while the expression of MMP-9 was not influenced. Besides, Exo70-si also exhibited significantly inhibition effects on the activity and concentration of MMP-9 and puncture cell numbers (p < 0.05). A synergistic reaction may exhibited on CTTN and Exo70, which could mediate the secretion of MMPs thereby regulate tumor invasion.
