Cullin-5; Core component of multiple SCF-like ECS (Elongin-Cullin 2/5- SOCS-box protein) E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase complexes, which mediate the ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation of target proteins. As a scaffold protein may contribute to catalysis through positioning of the substrate and the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. The functional specificity of the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase complex depends on the variable substrate recognition component. ECS(SOCS1) seems to direct ubiquitination of JAK2. Seems to be involved in proteosomal degradation of p53/TP53 stimulate [...] 
Purinosomes serve as metabolons to enhance de novo purine synthesis (DNPS) efficiency through compartmentalizing DNPS enzymes during stressed conditions. However, the mechanism underpinning purinosome assembly and its pathophysiological functions remains elusive. Here, we show that K6-polyubiquitination of the DNPS enzyme phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase and phosphoribosylaminoimidazolesuccinocarboxamide synthetase (PAICS) by cullin-5/ankyrin repeat and SOCS box containing 11 (Cul5/ASB11)-based ubiquitin ligase plays a driving role in purinosome assembly. Upon several purinosome-inducing cues, ASB11 is upregulated by relieving the H3K9me3/HP1alpha-mediated transcriptional silencing, thus stimulating PAICS polyubiquitination. The polyubiquitinated PAICS recruits ubiquitin-associated protein 2 (UBAP2), a ubiquitin-binding protein with multiple stretches of intrinsically disordered regions, thereby inducing phase separation to trigger purinosome assembly for enhancing DNPS pathway flux. In human melanoma, ASB11 is highly expressed to facilitate a constitutive purinosome formation to which melanoma cells are addicted for supporting their proliferation, viability, and tumorigenesis in a xenograft model. Our study identifies a driving mechanism for purinosome assembly in response to cellular stresses and uncovers the impact of purinosome formation on human malignancies.
BACKGROUND: Hypoxia is a hallmark of solid tumors and leads to the metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells. The role of epigenetic regulation between hypoxia and aberrant cholesterol metabolism in colorectal cancer (CRC) remains elusive. METHODS: Hypoxia-responsive circular RNAs (circRNAs) were identified by high throughput RNA sequencing between CRC cells cultured under normoxia or hypoxia. The protein-coding potential of circINSIG1 was identified by polysome profiling and LC-MS. The function of circINSIG1 was validated in vitro and in vivo by gain or loss of function assays. Mechanistic results were concluded by immunoprecipitation analyses. RESULTS: A novel hypoxia-responsive circRNA named circINSIG1 was identified, which was upregulated in CRC tissues and correlated with advanced clinical stages and poor survival. Mechanistically, circINSIG1 encoded a 121 amino acid protein circINSIG1-121 to promote K48-linked ubiquitination of the critical cholesterol metabolism regulator INSIG1 at lysine 156 and 158 by recruiting CUL5-ASB6 complex, a ubiquitin E3 ligase complex, thereby inducing cholesterol biosynthesis to promote CRC proliferation and metastasis. The orthotopic xenograft tumor models and patient-derived xenograft models further identified the role of circINSIG1 in CRC progression and potential therapeutic target of CRC. CONCLUSIONS: circINSIG1 presents an epigenetic mechanism which provides insights into the crosstalk between hypoxia and cholesterol metabolism, and provides a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of CRC.
An emerging mechanism of ubiquitylation involves partnering of two distinct E3 ligases. In the best-characterized E3-E3 pathways, ARIH-family RING-between-RING (RBR) E3s ligate ubiquitin to substrates of neddylated cullin-RING E3s. The E3 ARIH2 has been implicated in ubiquitylation of substrates of neddylated CUL5-RBX2-based E3s, including APOBEC3-family substrates of the host E3 hijacked by HIV-1 virion infectivity factor (Vif). However, the structural mechanisms remained elusive. Here structural and biochemical analyses reveal distinctive ARIH2 autoinhibition, and activation on assembly with neddylated CUL5-RBX2. Comparison to structures of E3-E3 assemblies comprising ARIH1 and neddylated CUL1-RBX1-based E3s shows cullin-specific regulation by NEDD8. Whereas CUL1-linked NEDD8 directly recruits ARIH1, CUL5-linked NEDD8 does not bind ARIH2. Instead, the data reveal an allosteric mechanism. NEDD8 uniquely contacts covalently linked CUL5, and elicits structural rearrangements that unveil cryptic ARIH2-binding sites. The data reveal how a ubiquitin-like protein induces protein-protein interactions indirectly, through allostery. Allosteric specificity of ubiquitin-like protein modifications may offer opportunities for therapeutic targeting.
UBE2F, a neddylation E2, neddylates CUL5 to activate cullin-RING ligase-5, upon coupling with neddylation E3 RBX2/SAG. Whether and how UBE2F controls pancreatic tumorigenesis is previously unknown. Here, we showed that UBE2F is essential for the growth of human pancreatic cancer cells with KRAS mutation. In the mouse Kras(G12D) pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) model, Ube2f deletion suppresses cerulein-induced pancreatitis, and progression of acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM) and pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Mechanistically, Ube2f deletion inactivates the Mapk-c-Myc signals via blocking ubiquitylation of Diras2, a substrate of CRL5(Asb11) E3 ligase. Biologically, DIRAS2 suppresses growth and survival of human pancreatic cancer cells harboring mutant KRAS, and Diras2 deletion largely rescues the phenotypes induced by Ube2f deletion. Collectively, Ube2f or Diras2 plays a tumor-promoting or tumor-suppressive role in the mouse Kras(G12D) PDAC model, respectively. The UBE2F-CRL5(ASB11) axis could serve as a valid target for pancreatic cancer, whereas the levels of UBE2F or DIRAS2 may serve as prognostic biomarkers for PDAC patients.
Three classes of E3 ubiquitin ligases, members of the Cbl, Hakai, and SOCS-Cul5-RING ligase families, stimulate the ubiquitination of phosphotyrosine-containing proteins, including receptor and nonreceptor tyrosine kinases and their phosphorylated substrates. Because ubiquitination frequently routes proteins for degradation by the lysosome or proteasome, these E3 ligases are able to potently inhibit tyrosine kinase signaling. Their loss or mutational inactivation can contribute to cancer, autoimmunity, or endocrine disorders, such as diabetes. However, these ligases also have biological functions that are independent of their ubiquitination activity. Here we review relevant literature and then focus on more-recent developments in understanding the structures, substrates, and pathways through which the phosphotyrosine-specific ubiquitin ligases regulate diverse aspects of cell biology.
Vasopressin-activated calcium-mobilizing (VACM-1)/cul5 is the least conserved member of a cullin protein family involved in the formation of E3-specific ligase complexes that are responsible for delivering the ubiquitin protein to their target substrate proteins selected for ubiquitin-dependent degradation. This chapter summarizes work to date that has focused on VACM-1/cul5's tissue-specific expression in vivo and on its potential role in the control of specific cellular signaling pathways in those structures. As mammalian cells may contain hundreds of E3 ligases, identification VACM-1/cul5 as a specific subunit of the system that is expressed in the endothelium and in collecting tubules, structures known for their control of cellular permeability, may have significant implications when designing studies to elucidate the mechanism of water conservation. For example, VACM-1/cul5 expression is affected by water deprivation in some tissues and there is a potential relationship between neddylated VACM-1/cul5 and aquaporins.
The cullin proteins are a family of scaffolding proteins that associate with RING proteins and ubiquitin E3 ligases and mediate substrate-receptor bindings. Thus, cullin proteins regulate the specificity of ubiquitin targeting in the regulation of proteins involved in various cellular processes, including proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. There are seven cullin proteins that have been identified in eukaryotes: CUL1, CUL2, CUL3, CUL4A, CUL4B, CUL5, and CUL7/p53-associated parkin-like cytoplasmic protein. All of these proteins contain a conserved cullin homology domain that binds to RING box proteins. Cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase complexes are activated upon post-translational modification by neural precursor cell-expressed, developmentally downregulated protein 8. The aberrant expression of several cullin proteins has been implicated in many cancers though the significance in gastric cancer has been less well investigated. This review provides the first systematic discussion of the associations between all members of the cullin protein family and gastric cancer. Functional and regulatory mechanisms of cullin proteins in gastric carcinoma progression are also summarized along with a discussion concerning future research areas. Accumulating evidence suggests a critical role of cullin proteins in tumorigenesis, and a better understanding of the function of these individual cullin proteins and their targets will help identify potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets.
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell is a promising therapy for cancer, but factors that enhance the efficacy of CAR T cell remain elusive. Here we perform a genome-wide CRISPR screening to probe genes that regulate the proliferation and survival of CAR T cells following repetitive antigen stimulations. We find that genetic ablation of CUL5, encoding a core element of the multi-protein E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase complex, cullin-RING ligase 5, enhances human CD19 CAR T cell expansion potential and effector functions, potentially via the Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway. In this regard, CUL5 knockout CD19 CAR T cells show sustained STAT3 and STAT5 phosphorylation, as well as delayed phosphorylation and degradation of JAK1 and JAK3. In vivo, shRNA-mediated knockdown of CUL5 enhances CD19 CAR T treatment outcomes in tumor-bearing mice. Our findings thus imply that targeting CUL5 in the ubiquitin system may enhance CAR T cell effector functions to enhance immunotherapy efficacy.
The basic helix-loop-helix factors play a central role in neuronal differentiation and nervous system development, which involve the Notch and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)/small mother against decapentaplegic signaling pathways. Neural stem cells differentiate into three nervous system lineages, and the suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) and von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) proteins are involved in this neuronal differentiation. The SOCS and VHL proteins both contain homologous structures comprising the BC-box motif. SOCSs recruit Elongin C, Elongin B, Cullin5(Cul5), and Rbx2, whereas VHL recruits Elongin C, Elongin B, Cul2, and Rbx1. SOCSs form SBC-Cul5/E3 complexes, and VHL forms a VBC-Cul2/E3 complex. These complexes degrade the target protein and suppress its downstream transduction pathway by acting as E3 ligases via the ubiquitin-proteasome system. The Janus kinase (JAK) is the main target protein of the E3 ligase SBC-Cul5, whereas hypoxia-inducible factor is the primary target protein of the E3 ligase VBC-Cul2; nonetheless, VBC-Cul2 also targets the JAK. SOCSs not only act on the ubiquitin-proteasome system but also act directly on JAKs to suppress the Janus kinase-signal transduction and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway. Both SOCS and VHL are expressed in the nervous system, predominantly in brain neurons in the embryonic stage. Both SOCS and VHL induce neuronal differentiation. SOCS is involved in differentiation into neurons, whereas VHL is involved in differentiation into neurons and oligodendrocytes; both proteins promote neurite outgrowth. It has also been suggested that the inactivation of these proteins may lead to the development of nervous system malignancies and that these proteins may function as tumor suppressors. The mechanism of action of SOCS and VHL involved in neuronal differentiation and nervous system development is thought to be mediated through the inhibition of downstream signaling pathways, JAK-STAT, and hypoxia-inducible factor-vascular endothelial growth factor pathways. In addition, because SOCS and VHL promote nerve regeneration, they are expected to be applied in neuronal regenerative medicine for traumatic brain injury and stroke.
There is some evidence supporting an association between Cullin-5 (CUL5) and cancer, but no research using pan-cancer analysis has been conducted previously. We therefore investigated the oncogenic role of CUL5 in 33 tumors from the Gene Expression Omnibus and The Cancer Genome Atlas databases. Many cancers reduce CUL5 levels, and the prognosis of certain cancers is vitally linked with CUL5 expression. CUL5 expression is associated with CD8 + T-cell infiltration levels in uveal melanomas and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, and we observed a positive relationship between CUL5 and Tcm (T central memory) cells, and a negative relationship between T helper (Th) cells and pDC (plasmacytoid DC). CUL5 had negative associations with NK cells, NK CD56(bright) cells, NK CD56(dim) cells, Tregs, cytotoxic cells, and Th17 cells. Functions relating to protein processing and ubiquitin were included in the CUL5 functional mechanisms. The top 100 genes that are most strongly related to CUL5 were identified, and enrichment analysis indicated that the biological process with the closest relationship was neddylation, related pathways included the TGF-beta signaling pathway and intracellular receptor signaling pathway. CUL5 is related to biological cell behaviors such as chromosome segregation and positive regulation of chromosome organization. As the first study to perform a pan-cancer analysis of CUL5, the present findings will improve the understanding of the oncogenic role of CUL5 in different tumors.
Metastasis is the dominant cause of patient death in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), and a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying SCLC metastasis may potentially improve clinical treatment. Through genome-scale screening for key regulators of mouse Rb1-/- Trp53-/- SCLC metastasis using the pooled CRISPR/Cas9 library, we identified Cullin5 (CUL5) and suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3), two components of the Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, as top candidates. Mechanistically, the deficiency of CUL5 or SOCS3 disrupted the functional formation of the E3 ligase complex and prevented the degradation of integrin beta1, which stabilized integrin beta1 and activated downstream focal adhesion kinase/SRC (FAK/SRC) signaling and eventually drove SCLC metastasis. Low expression levels of CUL5 and SOCS3 were significantly associated with high integrin beta1 levels and poor prognosis in a large cohort of 128 clinical patients with SCLC. Moreover, the CUL5-deficient SCLCs were vulnerable to the treatment of the FDA-approved SRC inhibitor dasatinib. Collectively, this work identifies the essential role of CUL5- and SOCS3-mediated integrin beta1 turnover in controlling SCLC metastasis, which might have therapeutic implications.
Angiogenesis is essential for cancer metastasis, thus the discovery and characterization of molecules that inhibit this process is important. Thalidomide is a teratogenic drug which is known to inhibit angiogenesis and effectively inhibit cancer metastasis, yet the specific cellular targets for its effect are not well known. We discovered that CUL5 (previously identified as VACM-1), a scaffold protein in E3 ligase complexes, is involved in thalidomide-dependent inhibition of endothelial cell growth. Our results show that in human endothelial cells (HUVEC), thalidomide-dependent decrease in cell growth was associated with decreased nuclear localization of CUL5. In HUVEC transfected with anti-VACM-1 siRNA, thalidomide failed to decrease cell growth. Previously it was established that the antiproliferative effect of CUL5 is inhibited in rat endothelial cells (RAMEC) transfected with mutated CUL5 which is constitutively modified by NEDD8, a ubiquitin-like protein. In this study, the antiproliferative response to thalidomide was compromised in RAMEC expressing mutated CUL5. These results suggest that CUL5 protein is involved in the thalidomide-dependent regulation of cellular proliferation in vitro. Consequently, CUL5 may be an important part of the mechanism for thalidomide-dependent inhibition of cellular proliferation, as well as a novel biomarker for predicting a response to thalidomide for the treatment of disorders such as multiple myeloma and HIV infection.
The ORF9b protein, derived from the nucleocapsid's open-reading frame in both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, serves as an accessory protein crucial for viral immune evasion by inhibiting the innate immune response. Despite its significance, the precise regulatory mechanisms underlying its function remain elusive. In the present study, we unveil that the ORF9b protein of SARS-CoV-2, including emerging mutant strains like Delta and Omicron, can undergo ubiquitination at the K67 site and subsequent degradation via the proteasome pathway, despite certain mutations present among these strains. Moreover, our investigation further uncovers the pivotal role of the translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane 70 (TOM70) as a substrate receptor, bridging ORF9b with heat shock protein 90 alpha (HSP90alpha) and Cullin 5 (CUL5) to form a complex. Within this complex, CUL5 triggers the ubiquitination and degradation of ORF9b, acting as a host antiviral factor, while HSP90alpha functions to stabilize it. Notably, treatment with HSP90 inhibitors such as GA or 17-AAG accelerates the degradation of ORF9b, leading to a pronounced inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 replication. Single-cell sequencing data revealed an up-regulation of HSP90alpha in lung epithelial cells from COVID-19 patients, suggesting a potential mechanism by which SARS-CoV-2 may exploit HSP90alpha to evade the host immunity. Our study identifies the CUL5-TOM70-HSP90alpha complex as a critical regulator of ORF9b protein stability, shedding light on the intricate host-virus immune response dynamics and offering promising avenues for drug development against SARS-CoV-2 in clinical settings.
The liver is one of the most common sites of metastatic spread of lung cancer, and the process of metastasis is regulated by many factors. A number of genes, including multiple tumor suppressor 1 (mts1), p120 catenin, and CT45A1, increase the possibility of hepatic metastasis in lung cancer, whereas Tip30/CC3, CUL5, and SOCS3 expression in lung tumors inhibit tumor metastasis. microRNAs (miRNAs), such as miRNA-126, miRNA-338, and miRNA-218, can affect the metastasis of lung cancer cells to the liver. The D114-Notch signaling pathway can inhibit liver metastasis in small cell lung cancer. Serum tumor markers cytokeratin 19 fragment antigen 21-1 and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) are closely related to the risk of hepatic metastasis in lung cancer. Based on previously published literature, we found that the metastasis and invasion of lung cancer to the liver are determined by molecular factors. Therefore, the selective identification and intervention of these erroneous signals can predict early lung cancer metastasis to the liver. In this review article, we describe the mechanisms and influencing factors (genes, signal pathways, chemicals, proteins, miRNAs) of hepatic metastasis in lung cancer. We hope to provide a summary of the evidence for the mechanisms by which related genes or proteins affect the malignancy of liver metastasis from lung cancer so that doctors and researchers can improve treatment options.
Cell migration is a complex process that involves coordinated changes in membrane transport and actin cytoskeleton dynamics. Ras-like small monomeric GTPases, such as Rap2, play a key role in regulating actin cytoskeleton dynamics and cell adhesions. However, how Rap2 function, localization, and activation are regulated during cell migration is not fully understood. We previously identified the small GTPase Rab40b as a regulator of breast cancer cell migration. Rab40b contains a suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) box, which facilitates binding to Cullin5, a known E3 ubiquitin ligase component responsible for protein ubiquitylation. In this study, we show that the Rab40b/Cullin5 complex ubiquitylates Rap2. Importantly, we demonstrate that ubiquitylation regulates Rap2 activation as well as recycling of Rap2 from the endolysosomal compartment to the lamellipodia of migrating breast cancer cells. Based on these data, we propose that Rab40b/Cullin5 ubiquitylates and regulates Rap2-dependent actin dynamics at the leading edge, a process that is required for breast cancer cell migration and invasion.
Cullin-5 (Cul-5) was originally identified as an arginine vasopressin (AVP) receptor due to its homology to a vasopressin-activated calcium-mobilizing protein 1 (VACM-1). Cul-5 has subsequently gained much attention after being identified as the key component of CRL-5 (Cullin-RING ligase-5) that mediates ubiquitylation and degradation of several key cellular proteins associated with human cancers and viral infections. Structurally, Cul-5 interacts with the Elongin B/C complex, a RING finger protein (RBX2/SAG), and a SOCS protein to form a CRL-5 E3 ubiquitin ligase protein complex. CRL-5, by controlling turnover of a variety of substrates, is implicated in several biological processes and human diseases. Activation of CRL-5 requires Cul-5 neddylation, catalyzed by a neddylation enzyme cascade, consisting of the E1 NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE), the E2 neddylation conjugating enzyme (UBE2F), and E3 neddylation ligase (RBX2/SAG). RBX2/SAG, therefore, serves as both Cul-5 neddylation E3 and CRL-5 ubiquitylation E3. Here, we review the current knowledge on CRL-5, its activation by the UBE2F-SAG, its regulation of various signaling pathways via substrate degradation, and its implications in human cancers.
APOBEC3G is a cellular antiviral protein that restricts retroviral infection. In non-permissive cells infected by Vif-deficient HIV-1, the protein mediates the hypermutation of viral DNA through the enzymatic activity of cytidine deaminase. To counteract the antiviral activity of APOBEC3G, an accessory protein of HIV-1, Vif, forms ubiquitin E3 ligase through assembly with CUL5-RBX2, ELOB-ELOC and CBFbeta. Subsequently, Vif recruits APOBEC3G to the complex as a substrate adaptor of ubiquitin E3 ligase and induces poly-ubiquitination of APOBEC3G for its proteasomal degradation (Fig. 1). This review briefly summarizes current understanding of protein-protein interaction between Vif and host factors required for APOBEC3 degradation, based on high resolution structures of APOBEC3 proteins and Vif-CUL5NTD-ELOBC-CBFbeta complex.
Ubiquitylation is a reversible post-translational modification of proteins that controls a myriad of functions and cellular processes. It occurs through the sequential action of three distinct enzymes. E3 ubiquitin ligases (E3s) play the role of conductors of the ubiquitylation pathway making them attractive therapeutic targets. This review is dedicated to the largest family of multimeric E3s, the Cullin-RING E3 (CRL) family and more specifically to cullin 5 based CRLs that remains poorly characterized.
