High mobility group protein B1; Multifunctional redox sensitive protein with various roles in different cellular compartments. In the nucleus is one of the major chromatin-associated non-histone proteins and acts as a DNA chaperone involved in replication, transcription, chromatin remodeling, V(D)J recombination, DNA repair and genome stability. Proposed to be an universal biosensor for nucleic acids. Promotes host inflammatory response to sterile and infectious signals and is involved in the coordination and integration of innate and adaptive immune responses. In the cytoplasm functio [...] 
This review focuses on the construction and application of structural chemokine receptor models for the elucidation of molecular determinants of chemokine receptor modulation and the structure-based discovery and design of chemokine receptor ligands. A comparative analysis of ligand binding pockets in chemokine receptors is presented, including a detailed description of the CXCR4, CCR2, CCR5, CCR9, and US28 X-ray structures, and their implication for modeling molecular interactions of chemokine receptors with small-molecule ligands, peptide ligands, and large antibodies and chemokines. These studies demonstrate how the integration of new structural information on chemokine receptors with extensive structure-activity relationship and site-directed mutagenesis data facilitates the prediction of the structure of chemokine receptor-ligand complexes that have not been crystallized. Finally, a review of structure-based ligand discovery and design studies based on chemokine receptor crystal structures and homology models illustrates the possibilities and challenges to find novel ligands for chemokine receptors.
The chemokine ligand C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 12 (CXCL12) is a kind of small molecules of cytokines that widely expressed in diversified tissues. Recent evidence suggests that CXCL12 plays an important role in the communication of tumor cells with their surrounding microenvironment. The interaction of CXCL12 and its receptors subsequently excite the downstream signaling pathways to affect tumor angiogenesis, tumor cell proliferation and chemoresistance, and thus represents a potential target for cancer therapy. Outpouring molecules targeting CXCL12/CXCR4 axis in tumor microenvironment combined with traditional chemotherapy have drawn more and more attentions, which will be a promising method in anti-cancer therapies. Our review focuses on these roles of CXCL12 and summarizes strategies for treating cancer by disrupting this interaction with special emphasis on the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis.
Biological therapy, with its multifaceted applications, has revolutionized the treatment of tumors, mainly due to its ability to exclusively target cancer cells and reduce the adverse effects on normal tissues. This review focuses on the therapies targeting the CXCR4 and CD47 receptors. We surveyed the results of early clinical trials testing compounds classified as nonpeptides, small peptides, CXCR4 antagonists or specific antibodies whose activity reduces or completely blocks the intracellular signaling pathways and cell proliferation. We then examined antibodies and fusion proteins against CD47, the receptor that acts as a "do not eat me" signal to phagocytes escaping immune surveillance. Despite these molecules being tested in early clinical trials, some drawbacks are emerging that impair their use in practice. Finally, we examined the ImmunoGenic Surrender mechanism that involves crosstalk and co-internalization of CXCR4 and CD47 upon engagement of CXCR4 by ligands or other molecules. The favorable effect of such compounds is dual as CD47 surface reduction impact on the immune response adds to the block of CXCR4 proliferative potential. These results suggest that a combination of different therapeutic approaches has more beneficial effects on patients' survival and may pave the way for new accomplishments in personalized anticancer therapy.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) entry is a complex and intricate process that facilitates delivery of the viral genome to the host cell. The only viral surface protein, Envelope (Env), is composed of a trimer of gp120 and gp41 heterodimers. It is essentially a fusion machine cloaked in a shroud of carbohydrate structures and variable loops of amino acids that enable it to evade the humoral immune response. For entry to occur gp120 sequentially engages the host protein CD4 and then one of two chemokine coreceptors, either CCR5 or CXCR4. CD4 binding facilitates exposure and formation of the coreceptor-binding site, and coreceptor binding then triggers the membrane fusion machinery in the gp41 subunit. Our understanding of HIV entry has led to the development of successful small molecule inhibitors for the clinical treatment of HIV infection as well as insights into viral tropism and pathogenesis.
The C-X-C motif chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) and the atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3/CXCR7) are class A G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Accumulating evidence indicates that GPCR subcellular localization, trafficking, transduction properties, and ultimately their pathophysiological functions are regulated by both interacting proteins and post-translational modifications. This has encouraged the development of novel techniques to characterize the GPCR interactome and to identify residues subjected to post-translational modifications, with a special focus on phosphorylation. This review first describes state-of-the-art methods for the identification of GPCR-interacting proteins and GPCR phosphorylated sites. In addition, we provide an overview of the current knowledge of CXCR4 and ACKR3 post-translational modifications and an exhaustive list of previously identified CXCR4- or ACKR3-interacting proteins. We then describe studies highlighting the importance of the reciprocal influence of CXCR4/ACKR3 interactomes and phosphorylation states. We also discuss their impact on the functional status of each receptor. These studies suggest that deeper knowledge of the CXCR4/ACKR3 interactomes along with their phosphorylation and ubiquitination status would shed new light on their regulation and pathophysiological functions.
Malignant tumors are a major cause of death. The lack of methods that provide an early diagnosis and adequate treatment of cancers is the main obstacle to precision medicine. The C-X-C chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) is overexpressed in various tumors and plays a key role in tumor pathogenesis. Therefore, CXCR4-targeted molecular imaging can quickly and accurately detect and quantify CXCR4 abnormalities in real time. The expression level and activation status of CXCR4 are very important for screening susceptible populations and providing an accurate diagnosis and optimal treatment. In view of the fact that radionuclide-labeled peptides have become widely used for the diagnosis and treatment of tumors, this manuscript reviews the potential of different radionuclide-labeled peptide inhibitors for the targeted imaging of CXCR4- positive tumors and targeted treatment. The article also discusses the specificity and in vivo distribution of radionuclide-labeled peptide inhibitors, and translation of these inhibitors to the clinic.
Chemokines are chemoattractants that can regulate cell movement and adhesion. SDF-1 [stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1)] is a homeostatic CXC chemokine. SDF-1 and its receptors [CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4)] form a signaling pathway that plays critical roles in different pathological and physiological mechanisms, including embryogenesis, wound healing, angiogenesis, tumor growth, and proliferation. Therefore, the current review aimed to summarize the related studies that addressed the molecular signature of the SDF-1/CXCR4 pathway and to explain how this axis is involved in normal events.
It is known that the chemokine receptor CXCR7 (RDC1) can be engaged by both chemokines CXCL12 (SDF-1) and CXCL11 (I-TAC), but the exact expression pattern and function of CXCR7 is controversial. CXCR7 expression seems to be enhanced during pathological inflammation and tumor development, and emerging data suggest this receptor is an attractive therapeutic target for autoimmune diseases and cancer. CXCR7/CXCR4 heterodimerization, beta-arrestin-mediated signaling, and modulation of CXCL12 responsiveness by CXCR7 suggest that the monogamous CXCR4/CXCL12 signaling axis is an oversimplified model that needs to be revisited. Consequently, research into CXCR7 biology is of great interest and further studies are warranted. This review summarizes recent findings about the CXCR7 receptor and analyses its impact on understanding the roles of CXCL12 biology in health and disease.
Chemokines and chemokine receptors are indispensable to play a key role in the development of malignant tumors. As one of the most widely expressed chemokine receptors, chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 4 (CXCR4) has been a popular research focus. In most tumors, CXCR4 expression is significantly upregulated. Moreover, integrated nuclide diagnosis and therapy targeting CXCR4 show great potential. [(68)Ga]Ga-pentixafor, a radioligand targeting CXCR4, exhibits a strong affinity for CXCR4 both in vivo and in vitro. However, [(177)Lu]Lu-pentixather, the therapeutic companion of [(68)Ga]Ga-pentixafor, requires significant refinement to mitigate its pronounced hepatic biodistribution. The objective of this study was to synthesize theranostic molecular tracers with superior CXCR4 targeting functions. The Daudi cell line, which highly expressed CXCR4, and the MM.1S cell line, which weakly expressed CXCR4, were used in this study. Based on the pharmacophore cyclo (-d-Tyr-n-me-d-Orn-l-Arg-L-2-NAL-Gly-) (CPCR4) of pentixafor, six tracers were synthesized: [(124)I]I-1 ([(124)I]I-CPCR4), [(99m)Tc]Tc-2 ([(99m)Tc]Tc-HYNIC-CPCR4), [(124)I]I-3 ([(124)I]I-pentixafor), [(18)F]AlF-4 ([(18)F]AlF-NETA-CPCR4), [(99m)Tc]Tc-5 ([(99m)Tc]Tc-MAG(3)-CPCR4) and [(124)I]I-6 ([(124)I]I-pentixafor-Ga) and their radiochemical purities were all higher than 95%. After positron emission tomography (PET)/single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging, the [(124)I]I-6 group exhibited the best target-nontarget ratio. At the same time, comparing the [(68)Ga]Ga-pentixafor group with the [(124)I]I-6 group, we found that the [(124)I]I-6 group had a better target-nontarget ratio and lower uptake in nontarget organs. Therefore, compound 6 was selected for therapeutic radionuclide ((131)I) labeling, and the tumor-bearing animal models were treated with [(131)I]I-6. The volume of the tumor site was significantly reduced in the treatment group compared with the control group, and no significant side effects were found. [(124)I]I-6 and [(131)I]I-6 showed excellent affinity for targeting CXCR4, and they showed great potential for the integrated diagnosis and treatment of tumors with high CXCR4 expression.
During HIV type 1 (HIV-1) entry, trimers of gp120 bind to CD4 and either the CCR5 or CXCR4 coreceptor on the target cell. The stoichiometric parameters associated with HIV-1 entry remain unclear. Important unanswered questions include: how many trimers must attach to CD4 molecules, how many must bind coreceptors, and how many functional gp120 subunits per trimer are required for entry? We performed single round infectivity assays with chimeric viruses and compared the experimental relative infectivity curves with curves generated by mathematical models. Our results indicate that HIV-1 entry requires only a small number of functional spikes (one or two), that Env trimers may function with fewer than three active subunits, and that there is no major difference in the stoichiometric requirements for CCR5 vs. CXCR4 mediated HIV-1 entry into host cells.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are regulated by complex molecular mechanisms, both in physiologic and pathologic conditions, and their signaling can be intricate. Many factors influence their signaling behavior, including the type of ligand that activates the GPCR, the presence of interacting partners, the kinetics involved, or their location. The two CXC-type chemokine receptors, CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) and atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3), both members of the GPCR superfamily, are important and established therapeutic targets in relation to cancer, human immunodeficiency virus infection, and inflammatory diseases. Therefore, it is crucial to understand how the signaling of these receptors works to be able to specifically target them. In this review, we discuss how the signaling pathways activated by CXCR4 and ACKR3 can vary in different situations. G protein signaling of CXCR4 depends on the cellular context, and discrepancies exist depending on the cell lines used. ACKR3, as an atypical chemokine receptor, is generally reported to not activate G proteins but can broaden its signaling spectrum upon heteromerization with other receptors, such as CXCR4, endothelial growth factor receptor, or the alpha (1)-adrenergic receptor (alpha (1)-AR). Also, CXCR4 forms heteromers with CC chemokine receptor (CCR) 2, CCR5, the Na(+)/H(+) exchanger regulatory factor 1, CXCR3, alpha (1)-AR, and the opioid receptors, which results in differential signaling from that of the monomeric subunits. In addition, CXCR4 is present on membrane rafts but can go into the nucleus during cancer progression, probably acquiring different signaling properties. In this review, we also provide an overview of the currently known critical amino acids involved in CXCR4 and ACKR3 signaling.
High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein is a highly abundant protein that can promote the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases once it is in an extracellular location. This translocation can occur with immune cell activation as well as cell death, with the conditions for release associated with the expression of different isoforms. These isoforms result from post-translational modifications, with the redox states of three cysteines at positions 23, 45 and 106 critical for activity. Depending on the redox states of these residues, HMGB1 can induce cytokine production via toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) or promote chemotaxis by binding the chemokine CXCL12 for stimulation via CXCR4. Fully oxidized HMGB1 is inactive. During the course of inflammatory disease, HMGB1 can therefore play a dynamic role depending on its redox state. As a mechanism to generate alarmins, cell death is an important source of HMGB1, although each major cell death form (necrosis, apoptosis, pyroptosis and NETosis) can lead to different isoforms of HMGB1 and variable levels of association of HMGB1 with nucleosomes. The association of HMGB1 with nucleosomes may contribute to the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus by producing nuclear material whose immunological properties are enhanced by the presence of an alarmin. Since HMGB1 levels in blood or tissue are elevated in many inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, this molecule can serve as a unique biomarker as well as represent a target of novel therapies to block its various activities.
Structural optimization of aminopyrimidine-based CXCR4 antagonists is reported. The optimization is guided by molecular docking studies based on available CXCR4-small molecule crystal complex. The optimization identifies a number of compounds with improved receptor binding affinity and functional activity exemplified by compound 23 (inhibition of APC-conjugate clone 12G5 for CXCR4 binding in a cell based assay: IC(50) = 8.8 nM; inhibition of CXCL12 induced cytosolic calcium increase: IC(50) = 0.02 nM). In addition, compound 23 potently inhibits CXCR4/CXLC12 mediated chemotaxis in a matrigel invasion assay. Furthermore, compound 23 exhibits good physicochemical properties (MW 367, clogP 2.1, PSA 48, pKa 7.2) and in vitro safety profiles (marginal/moderate inhibition of CYP isozymes and hERG). These results represent significant improvement over the initial hit from scaffold hybridization and suggest that compound 23 can be used as a starting point to support lead optimization.
Gastric cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Despite the extensive body of research on gastric cancer, the prognosis of patients with advanced gastric cancer remains poor, and therapy for advanced gastric cancer relies largely on cytotoxic chemotherapy. Therefore, identifying the distinct molecular pathways underlying disease progression and treatment resistance may lead to novel therapeutic approaches, as well as improve the quality of life and survival of patients. The chemokine CXCL12 and its receptor CXCR4 are now known to play an important role in cancer development and progression. Here, we review the expression and function of CXCR4 and CXCL12, as well as their clinical relevance in gastric cancer. We also cover the current molecular mechanism, specifically the cell-signaling pathway, by which gastric cancer progresses through the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis, and discuss the potential of that axis as a therapeutic target in the treatment of gastric cancer.
Chemokines and their receptors are key molecules in the development and function of immune cell populations and the organization of lymphoid organs. Despite their central role in immunologic function, genetic studies exploring the intersection of chemokines or their receptors and human health have revealed few associations of unambiguous significance. The best-characterized examples have revealed striking selective advantage conferred by loss of receptors used as portals of entry by pathogens. Recently, mutations in the CXCR4 chemokine receptor gene were identified in a dominantly inherited immunodeficiency disease, WHIM syndrome. Genetic and biochemical evidences suggest that the loss of the receptor cytoplasmic tail domain results in aberrant signaling. Analyses of mutant cell responses to the receptor ligand CXCL12 have revealed enhanced chemotaxis, confirming the gain-of-function effect of the truncation mutations. The clinical features and potential mechanism of immunodeficiency in WHIM syndrome patients are discussed in this review.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) maintain quiescence under steady state; however, they are compelled to proliferate and expand to replenish the blood system under stress. The molecular basis underlying stress hematopoiesis remains to be fully understood. In this study, we reported that IRF7 represents an important regulator of stress hematopoiesis. Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) was dispensable for normal hematopoiesis, whereas its deficiency significantly enhanced hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) regeneration and improved long-term repopulation of HSCs under stress. Mechanistic studies showed that CXCR4 was identified as a downstream target of IRF7. Overexpression of CXCR4 abrogated the enhanced proliferation and regeneration of IRF7-deficient HSPCs under stress. Similar results were obtained in HSCs from human umbilical cord blood. These observations demonstrated that IRF7 plays an important role in hematopoietic regeneration under stress.
Chemokine 12 (CXCL12), also known as stromal cell derived factor-1 (SDF-1) and a member of the CXC chemokine subfamily, is ubiquitously expressed in many tissues and cell types. It interacts specifically with the ligand for the transmembrane G protein-coupled receptors CXCR4 and CXCR7. The CXCL12/CXCR4 axis takes part in a series of physiological, biochemical, and pathological process, such as inflammation and leukocyte trafficking, cancer-induced bone pain, and postsurgical pain, and also is a key factor in the cross-talking between tumor cells and their microenvironment. Aberrant overexpression of CXCR4 is critical for tumor survival, proliferation, angiogenesis, homing and metastasis. In this review, we summarized the role of CXCL12/CXCR4 in cancer, CXCR4 inhibitors under clinical study, and natural product CXCR4 antagonists. In conclusion, the CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling is important for tumor development and targeting the pathway might represent an effective approach to developing novel therapy in cancer treatment.
Arginine-rich protein motifs have been described as potent cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) but also as rather specific ligands of the cell surface chemokine receptor CXCR4, involved in the infection by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Polyarginines are commonly used to functionalize nanoscale vehicles for gene therapy and drug delivery, aimed to enhance cell penetrability of the therapeutic cargo. However, under which conditions these peptides do act as either unspecific or specific ligands is unknown. We have here explored the cell penetrability of differently charged polyarginines in two alternative presentations, namely as unassembled fusion proteins or assembled in multimeric protein nanoparticles. By this, we have observed that arginine-rich peptides switch between receptor-mediated and receptor-independent mechanisms of cell penetration. The relative weight of these activities is determined by the electrostatic charge of the construct and the oligomerization status of the nanoscale material, both regulatable by conventional protein engineering approaches.
Maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) takes place in a highly specialized microenvironment within the bone marrow. Technological improvements, especially in the field of in vivo imaging, have helped unravel the complexity of the niche microenvironment and have completely changed the classical concept from what was previously believed to be a static supportive platform, to a dynamic microenvironment tightly regulating HSC homeostasis through the complex interplay between diverse cell types, secreted factors, extracellular matrix molecules, and the expression of different transmembrane receptors. To add to the complexity, non-protein based metabolites have also been recognized as a component of the bone marrow niche. The objective of this review is to discuss the current understanding on how the different extracellular matrix components of the niche regulate HSC fate, both during embryonic development and in adulthood. Special attention will be provided to the description of non-protein metabolites, such as lipids and metal ions, which contribute to the regulation of HSC behavior. J. Cell. Biochem. 118: 1984-1993, 2017. (c) 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
The interaction between the chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) and stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1, also known as CXCL12) is a natural regulatory process in the human body. However, CXCR4 over-expression is also found in diseases such as cancer, where it plays a role in, among others, the metastatic spread. For this reason it is an interesting biomarker for the field of diagnostic oncology, and therefore, it is gaining increasing interest for applications in molecular imaging. Especially "small-molecule" imaging agents based on T140, FC131 and AMD3100 have been extensively studied. SDF-1, antibodies, pepducins and bioluminescence have also been used to visualize CXCR4. In this critical review reported CXCR4 targeting imaging agents are described based on their affinity, specificity and biodistribution. The level wherein CXCR4 is up-regulated in cancer patients and its relation to the different cell lines and animal models used to evaluate the efficacy of the imaging agents is also discussed (221 references).
