Cytochrome P450 1A2; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of various endogenous substrates, including fatty acids, steroid hormones and vitamins. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Exhibits high catalytic activity for the formation of hydroxyestrogens from estrone (E1) and 17beta- estradiol (E2), namely 2-hydroxy E1 and  [...] 
Human cytochrome P450 enzyme 1A2 (CYP1A2) is one of the most important cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes in the liver, accounting for 13% to 15% of hepatic CYP enzymes. CYP1A2 metabolises many clinical drugs, such as phenacetin, caffeine, clozapine, tacrine, propranolol, and mexiletine. CYP1A2 also metabolises certain precarcinogens such as aflatoxins, mycotoxins, nitrosamines, and endogenous substances such as steroids. The regulation of CYP1A2 is influenced by many factors. The transcription of CYP1A2 involves not only the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor pathway but also many additional transcription factors, and CYP1A2 expression may be affected by transcription coactivators and compression factors. Degradation of CYP1A2 mRNA and protein, alternative splicing, RNA stability, regulatory microRNAs, and DNA methylation are also known to affect the regulation of CYP1A2. Many factors can lead to changes in the activity of CYP1A2. Smoking, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ingestion, and certain drugs (e.g., omeprazole) increase its activity, while many clinical drugs such as theophylline, fluvoxamine, quinolone antibiotics, verapamil, cimetidine, and oral contraceptives can inhibit CYP1A2 activity. Here, we review the drugs metabolised by CYP1A2, the metabolic mechanism of CYP1A2, and various factors that influence CYP1A2 metabolism. The metabolic mechanism of CYP1A2 is of great significance in the development of personalised medicine and CYP1A2 target-based drugs.
Molecular genetic testing for congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD) is offered worldwide and is of importance for differential diagnosis, carrier detection and adequate genetic counseling, particularly for family planning. In 2008 the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) for the first time offered a European-wide external quality assessment scheme for CAH (due to 21-OH deficiency). The interest was great and over the last years at about 60 laboratories from Europe, USA and Australia regularly participated in that scheme. These best practice guidelines were drafted on the basis of the extensive knowledge and experience got from those annually organized CAH-schemes. In order to obtain the widest possible consultation with practicing laboratories the draft was therefore circulated twice by EMQN to all laboratories participating in the EQA-scheme for CAH genotyping and was updated by that input. The present guidelines address quality requirements for diagnostic molecular genetic laboratories, as well as criteria for CYP21A2 genotyping (including carrier-testing and prenatal diagnosis). A key aspect of that article is the use of appropriate methodologies (e.g., sequencing methods, MLPA (multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification), mutation specific assays) and respective limitations and analytical accuracy. Moreover, these guidelines focus on classification of variants, and the interpretation and standardization of the reporting of CYP21A2 genotyping results. In addition, the article provides a comprehensive list of common as well as so far unreported CYP21A2-variants.
CYP1A2, a member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily (CYPs), is involved in the metabolic activation of several carcinogens, among them aromatic and heterocyclic amines, nitroaromatic compounds, mycotoxins and estrogens. Several drugs are also metabolized by CYP1A2. Individual differences in CYP1A2 activity may thus influence individual susceptibility to cancer risk and the therapeutic efficacy of some drugs. In humans, CYP1A2 has been detected only in the liver, where it seems to be regulated by at least two mechanisms, one controlling constitutive levels of expression and another regulating inducibility. Wide interindividual differences in CYP1A2 activity have been described. They may be due to factors such as gender, race, genetic polymorphisms, and exposure to inducers. Higher activity has been shown in men than in women. Wide variation across racial/ethnic groups has been reported. Overall, slow and intermediate CYP1A2 metabolizers represent about 50% of Caucasians, while their frequency in Japanese subjects seems to be much lower. No nucleotide differences that could explain the phenotypic variability of the CYP1A2 gene have been found in any exons, exon-intron junctions, or 5'-flanking regions of the gene. However, two genetic variants have been identified which seem to be associated with CYP1A2 inducibility only. Induction of CYP1A2 activity has been reported as a consequence of cigarette smoking, dietary factors, several drugs, chronic hepatitis, and exposure to polybrominated biphenyls and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Several epidemiological studies have been conducted into the relationship between CYP1A2 activity, alone or in combination with other CYPs, and cancer risk. In the absence of a genotypic assay, only the CYP1A2 phenotype can be assessed at present. Many compounds have been tested as in vitro probes to assess CYP1A2 activity in humans. Currently, caffeine has the best potential for use in epidemiological studies: metabolites of caffeine after coffee consumption are measured as an index of CYP1A2 activity. Variable results have been obtained with caffeine-based methods, the use of some caffeine metabolite ratios having given bimodal or trimodal distributions while others have suggested normal or unimodal distributions. Although the epidemiological studies are limited because only phenotyping data are available, there is a suggestion of increased risk of colon cancer and bladder cancer in subjects with rapid CYP1A2 activity. A higher level of 4-aminobiphenyl-haemoglobin adducts has also been found in moderate smokers with rapid CYP1A2 phenotype than in subjects with slow activity.
A large interindividual variation in the activity of cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) raises concern about therapeutic failure or toxicity when medical professionals prescribe drugs extensively metabolized by CYP1A2. To date, a number of studies have assessed the association between genetic polymorphisms and CYP1A2 activity; however, there are controversies as to the functional importance of CYP1A2 polymorphisms on the metabolism of CYP1A2 substrates. This systematic review and meta-analysis assessed the effects of genetic polymorphisms on CYP1A2 activity, as measured by caffeine metabolism, in a total of 3570 individual subjects. Higher enzyme activity was observed among those who were homozygous or heterozygous for the -163C>A polymorphism (rs762551), when compared to the wild-type individuals (SMD = 0.40, 95%CI = 0.12-0.68, p = 0.005; SMD = 0.32, 95%CI = 0.11-0.54, p = 0.003, respectively) and this was more pronounced among smokers (SMD = 0.92, 95%CI = 0.27-1.57, p = 0.005; SMD = 0.56, 95%CI = 0.22-0.90, p = 0.001, respectively). For other CYP1A2 polymorphisms, altered caffeine metabolic ratios were not seen. Our results indicate the functional importance of -163C>A polymorphism on CYP1A2 inducibility in humans.
Human cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs) play a critical role in various biological processes and human diseases. CYP1 family members, including CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1, are induced by aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AhRs). The binding of ligands such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons activates the AhRs, which are involved in the metabolism (including oxidation) of various endogenous or exogenous substrates. The ligands that induce CYP1 expression are reported to be carcinogenic xenobiotics. Hence, CYP1 enzymes are correlated with the pathogenesis of cancers. Various endogenous substrates are involved in the metabolism of steroid hormones, eicosanoids, and other biological molecules that mediate the pathogenesis of several human diseases. Additionally, CYP1s metabolize and activate/inactivate therapeutic drugs, especially, anti-cancer agents. As the metabolism of drugs determines their therapeutic efficacy, CYP1s can determine the susceptibility of patients to some drugs. Thus, understanding the role of CYP1s in diseases and establishing novel and efficient therapeutic strategies based on CYP1s have piqued the interest of the scientific community.
BACKGROUND: ChatGPT3 is a new artificial intelligence program released on February 13, 2023. METHOD: The authors tested ChatGPT3 on February 18, 2023, and repeated the test a week later. They used their expertise on the effects of ethnic ancestry in the stratification of clozapine dosing and the new idea that they published in March 2022 that African-Americans need higher clozapine doses because they have higher clozapine clearance. RESULTS: In the first interaction on February 18, ChatGPT3 provided reasonable and very up-to-date information, which included a comment that patients of African ancestry have higher clozapine metabolism. The other 4 interactions became progressively more concerning as we asked ChatGPT3 to provide references to justify the latter statement. ChatGPT3 provided non-existent "references" using articles from real journals, with real authors, false PubMed identifiers, and false titles. Moreover, ChatGPT3 said that the first author wrote in 2003 that African-Americans had higher CYP1A2 activity when that did not happen until 2022. One week later, the second author repeated the same set of questions. This time ChatGPT3 described the opposite, that African-Americans have "lower" CYP1A2 activity and "slower" metabolism. ChatGPT3 provided another set of articles to justify the information; some were real but did not comment on clozapine metabolism in African-Americans while others did not exist. CONCLUSIONS: ChatGPT3 provided a mixture of truth, twisted reality, and non-existent "facts." Within one week it defended opposite positions regarding a clinically relevant issue such as using higher or lower clozapine doses in African-Americans.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the impact of inflammation on cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug metabolism in human subjects. DATA SOURCES: A PubMed search was done from 1980 to July 2021 limited to human subjects and English language using a search strategy of (((phase I metabolism) OR (CYP) OR (cytochrome P450)) AND (inflammatory OR inflammation)). STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Narrative review of human studies assessing the impact of inflammation or inflammatory suppression with biologic drugs on CYP drug metabolism were used. DATA SYNTHESIS: Patients with inflammatory conditions ranging from fungal, viral, or bacterial infections to noninfectious causes (critical illness, surgical procedure, cancer, or transplantation of stem cells or organs) have suppressed drug metabolism. Markers of inflammation such as C-reactive protein or alpha-1-acid glycoprotein are correlated with reduced clearance through CYP3A4, CYP1A2, and CYP2C19. Elevated interleukin-6 concentrations are also associated or correlated with reduced clearance for CYP3A4 and CYP2C-19 isoenzymes. There was insufficient information to properly assess CYP2D6. RELEVANCE TO PATIENT CARE AND CLINICAL PRACTICE: Health professionals should appreciate that patients with acute or chronic inflammation from infectious or noninfectious causes could have suppressed drug metabolism through CYP3A4, CYP1A2, and CYP2C19. For narrow therapeutic index drugs, such as many of the drugs assessed in this review, that means more judicious drug monitoring to prevent adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: Like other types of drug-drug or drug-disease interactions, inflammation can alter the steady-state concentration of CYP metabolized drugs.
Tobacco smoke can cause drug interactions by induction of CYP1A2, which metabolizes drugs like clozapine, olanzapine and theophylline. This means that smokers need higher doses to achieve the same plasma concentrations as non-smokers. Furthermore, smoking cessation can cause an increase in plasma concentrations of drugs metabolised by CYP1A2, which in turn may lead to adverse effects. Of the drugs used for smoking cessation only bupropione has clinically relevant interactions. All of these situations may be handled by dose adjustment.
Smoking causes certain clinically significant drug interactions. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons induce CYP1A2 enzyme, which is important in metabolism of several drugs. This enzyme induction can lead todecreased efficacy of certain psychoactive drugs, teophylline, warfarin, certain antiarythmicsand anticancer drugs. In addition, nicotine may interfere with the action of beta-blockers and benzodiatsepines through pharmacodynamic mechanisms. After smoking cessation the induced metabolism begins to normalize increasing the risks related to elevated drug concentrations. The risk is highestwhen using drugs with narrow therapeutic ratio, such as clozapine and theophylline. Compared to enzyme inhibition, enzyme-induction takes significantly longer to develop and longer to normalize after abolition of the enzyme inductor. When planning smoking cessation or when a smoker is acutely hospitalized, the medication has to be screened and need for changes in dosages and measurements of drug concentrations to be evaluated.
The humancytochrome P450 1A (CYP1A) subfamily genes, CYP1A1 and CYP1A2, encoding monooxygenases are critically involved in biotransformation of key endogenous substrates (estradiol, arachidonic acid, cholesterol) and exogenous compounds (smoke constituents, carcinogens, caffeine, therapeutic drugs). This suggests their significant involvement in multiple biological pathways with a primary role of maintaining endogenous homeostasis and xenobiotic detoxification. Large interindividual variability exist in CYP1A gene expression and/or catalytic activity of the enzyme, which is primarily due to the existence of polymorphic alleles which encode them. These polymorphisms (mainly single nucleotide polymorphisms, SNPs) have been extensively studied as susceptibility factors in a spectrum of clinical phenotypes. An in-depth understanding of the effects of polymorphic CYP1A genes on the differential metabolic activity and the resulting biological pathways is needed to explain the clinical implications of CYP1A polymorphisms. The present review is intended to provide an integrated understanding of CYP1A metabolic activity with unique substrate specificity and their involvement in physiological and pathophysiological roles. The article further emphasizes on the impact of widely studied CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 SNPs and their complex interaction with non-genetic factors like smoking and caffeine intake on multiple clinical phenotypes. Finally, we attempted to discuss the alterations in metabolism/physiology concerning the polymorphic CYP1A genes, which may underlie the reported clinical associations. This knowledge may provide insights into the disease pathogenesis, risk stratification, response to therapy and potential drug targets for individuals with certain CYP1A genotypes.
Endogenous estradiol (E2) exerts diverse physiological and pharmacological activities, commonly used for hormone replacement therapy. However, prolonged and excessive exposure to E2 potentially increases estrogenic cancer risk. Reportedly, CYP1 enzyme-mediated biotransformation of E2 is largely concerned with its balance between detoxification and carcinogenic pathways. Among the three key CYP1 enzymes (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1), CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 mainly catalyze the formation of nontoxic 2-hydroxyestradiol (2-OH-E2), while CYP1B1 specifically catalyzes the formation of genotoxic 4-hydroxyestradiol (4-OH-E2). 4-OH-E2 can be further metabolized to electrophilic quinone intermediates accompanied by the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), triggering DNA damage. Since abnormal alterations in CYP1 activities can greatly affect the bioactivation process of E2, regulatory effects of xenobiotics on CYP1s are essential for E2-associated cancer development. To date, thousands of natural and synthetic compounds have been found to show potential inhibition and/or induction actions on the three CYP1 members. Generally, these chemicals share similar planar polycyclic skeletons, the structural motifs and substituent groups of which are important for their inhibitory/inductive efficiency and selectivity toward CYP1 enzymes. This review comprehensively summarizes these known inhibitors and/or inductors of E2-metabolizing CYP1s based on chemical categories and discusses their structure-activity relationships, which would contribute to better understanding of the correlation between xenobiotic-regulated CYP1 activities and estrogenic cancer susceptibility.
BACKGROUND: Coffee intake may lower prostate cancer risk and progression, but postdiagnosis outcomes by caffeine metabolism genotype are not well characterized. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate associations between coffee intake, caffeine metabolism genotype, and survival in a large, multicenter study of men with prostate cancer. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Data from The PRACTICAL Consortium database for 5727 men with prostate cancer from seven US, Australian, and European studies were included. The cases included had data available for the CYP1A2 -163C>A rs762551 single-nucleotide variant associated with caffeine metabolism, coffee intake, and >6 mo of follow-up. OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Multivariable-adjusted Cox proportional hazards models across pooled patient-level data were used to compare the effect of coffee intake (categorized as low [reference], high, or none/very low) in relation to overall survival (OS) and prostate cancer-specific survival (PCSS), with stratified analyses conducted by clinical disease risk and genotype. RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: High coffee intake appeared to be associated with longer PCSS (hazard ratio [HR] 0.85, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.68-1.08; p = 0.18) and OS (HR 0.90, 95% CI 0.77-1.07; p = 0.24), although results were not statistically significant. In the group with clinically localized disease, high coffee intake was associated with longer PCSS (HR 0.66, 95% CI 0.44-0.98; p = 0.040), with comparable results for the group with advanced disease (HR 0.92, 95% CI 0.69-1.23; p = 0.6). High coffee intake was associated with longer PCSS among men with the CYP1A2 AA (HR 0.67, 95% CI 0.49-0.93; p = 0.017) but not the AC/CC genotype (p = 0.8); an interaction was detected (p = 0.042). No associations with OS were observed in subgroup analyses (p > 0.05). Limitations include the nominal statistical significance and residual confounding. CONCLUSIONS: Coffee intake was associated with longer PCSS among men with a CYP1A2 -163AA (*1F/*1F) genotype, a finding that will require further replication. PATIENT SUMMARY: It is likely that coffee intake is associated with longer prostate cancer-specific survival in certain groups, but more research is needed to fully understand which men may benefit and why.
Olanzapine is a commonly prescribed atypical antipsychotic agent for treatment of patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorders. Previous in vitro studies using human liver microsomes identified CYP1A2 and CYP2D6 enzymes being responsible for CYP-mediated metabolism of olanzapine. The present work focused on the impact of CYP1A2 and CYP2D6 genetic polymorphisms as well as of CYP1A2 metabolizing capacity influenced by non-genetic factors (sex, age, smoking) on olanzapine blood concentration in patients with psychiatric disorders (N = 139). CYP2D6 genotype-based phenotype appeared to have negligible contribution to olanzapine metabolism, whereas a dominant role of CYP1A2 in olanzapine exposure was confirmed. However, CYP1A2 expression rather than CYP1A2 genetic variability was demonstrated to be associated with olanzapine concentration in patients. Significant contribution of - 163C > A (rs762551), the most common SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) in CYP1A2 gene, to enhanced inducibility was confirmed by an increase in CYP1A2 mRNA expression in smokers carrying - 163A, and smoking was found to have appreciable impact on olanzapine concentration normalized by the dose/bodyweight. Furthermore, patients' olanzapine exposure was in strong association with CYP1A2 expression; therefore, assaying CYP1A2 mRNA level in leukocytes can be an appropriate tool for the estimation of patients' olanzapine metabolizing capacity and may be relevant in optimizing olanzapine dosage.
CONTEXT: Although the stimulant and anxiogenic properties of caffeine are widely accepted, research on its specific effects on the brain remains controversial. Growing evidence shows that interindividual differences in caffeine response may be partly due to variations in genes such as CYP1A2 and ADORA2A, which have been used to identify individuals as "fast" or "slow" caffeine metabolizers and as having a "high" or "low" caffeine sensitivity, respectively. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this review was to identify, evaluate, and discuss current evidence on the associations between common genetic variants, caffeine consumption, and brain-related outcomes in humans. DATA SOURCES: PubMed and Embase databases were searched for relevant reports based on a predetermined search strategy. DATA EXTRACTION: Reports of observational and experimental studies on healthy adults who underwent (a) genetic analysis for polymorphisms in genes associated with caffeine metabolism and effects and (b) measurements of brain-related effects such as anxiety, insomnia, and cognitive performance associated with the consumption of caffeine (habitual intake or supplementation) were included. DATA ANALYSIS: Of the 22 records included, 15 were randomized controlled trials, 6 were cross-sectional studies, and 1 was a genome-wide association study. The main outcomes identified were cognitive performance (n = 9), anxiety (n = 7), and sleep disturbance/insomnia (n = 6). Polymorphisms in the CYP1A2 gene were associated with cognitive function, while variations in the ADORA2A gene were associated with anxiety and sleep disturbance. CONCLUSION: The present review has provided evidence that variability in the CYP1A2 and the ADORA2A genes may modulate the association between caffeine and brain-related outcomes. Future studies are warranted to investigate the specific polymorphisms implicated in each brain outcome, which cognitive functions are particularly related to caffeine (simple vs complex), whether there are gender differences in anxiety effects, and how habitual caffeine intake may influence the acute effects of caffeine. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO registration no. CRD42021257556.
Tricyclic antidepressants are all hydroxylated by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6, but the tertiary amines, amitriptyline, clomipramine and imipramine, are also N-demethylated to the active metabolites, nortriptyline, N-desmethylclomipramine and desipramine, by several CYPs, including the polymorphic CYP2C19, CYP1A2 and CYP3A4. The five selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, citalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertraline are also oxidised by the CYP enzyme system. Thus, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine and paroxetine are partially metabolised by CYP2D6, citalopram by CYP2C19 and sertraline by at least five different CYPs. Paroxetine and fluoxetine are very potent inhibitors of CYP2D6 while citalopram, fluvoxamine and sertraline are moderate inhibitors of this enzyme. Fluvoxamine is a potent inhibitor of CYP1A2 and CYP2C19 and a moderate inhibitor of CYP2C9. Since the termination of the human genome project, there is no longer a technical hindrance to the identification of all of the genes involved in the clinical response to antidepressants. Research in the future will involve modern technologies and new scientific disciplines, including DNA-micro-array technology and bioinformatics. The research ultimately aims at developing better and safer antidepressants and/or better and safer use of currently available antidepressants.
Caffeine is a popular ergogenic aid due to its primary physiological effects that occur through antagonism of adenosine receptors in the central nervous system. This leads to a cascade of physiological reactions which increases focus and volition, and reduces perception of effort and pain, contributing to improved exercise performance. Substantial variability in the physiological and performance response to acute caffeine consumption is apparent, and a growing number of studies are implicating a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the CYP1A2 gene, responsible for caffeine metabolism, as a key factor that influences the acute responses to caffeine ingestion. However, existing literature regarding the influence of this polymorphism on the ergogenic effects of caffeine is controversial. Fast caffeine metabolisers (AA homozygotes) appear most likely to benefit from caffeine supplementation, although over half of studies showed no differences in the responses to caffeine between CYP1A2 genotypes, while others even showed either a possible advantage or disadvantage for C-allele carriers. Contrasting data are limited by weak study designs and small samples sizes, which did not allow separation of C-allele carriers into their sub-groups (AC and CC), and insufficient mechanistic evidence to elucidate findings. Mixed results prevent practical recommendations based upon genotype while genetic testing for CYP1A2 is also currently unwarranted. More mechanistic and applied research is required to elucidate how the CYP1A2 polymorphism might alter caffeine's ergogenic effect and the magnitude thereof, and whether CYP1A2 genotyping prior to caffeine supplementation is necessary.
Trace metals and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are ubiquitous environmental co-contaminants and the trace metals could influence the carcinogenicity of the PAHs by altering their extent of induction of cytochromes P4501A1, 1A2, and 1B1 (CYP). Studies in cell lines from humans, rodents, chickens, and fish, and in cell culture generally indicate that trace metals diminish the inductive potency of PAHs for these CYPs. The extent of the effect is species-, metal-, PAH-, and metal dose-dependent. Both transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms are involved in the trace metal-mediated down regulation of the CYP1 forms. The latter mechanism incorporates induction of heme oxygenase-1 by the metals, with resultant heme catabolism. Thus, trace metals could diminish the carcinogenicity of PAHs.
Caffeine use is widespread among athletes following its removal from the World Anti-Doping Agency banned list, with approximately 75% of competitive athletes using caffeine. While literature supports that caffeine has a small positive ergogenic effect for most forms of sports and exercise, there exists a significant amount of inter-individual difference in the response to caffeine ingestion and the subsequent effect on exercise performance. In this narrative review, we discuss some of the potential mechanisms and focus on the role that genetics has in these differences. CYP1A2 and ADORA2A are two of the genes which are thought to have the largest impact on the ergogenicity of caffeine. CYP1A2 is responsible for the majority of the metabolism of caffeine, and ADORA2A has been linked to caffeine-induced anxiety. The effects of CYP1A2 and ADORA2A genes on responses to caffeine will be discussed in detail and an overview of the current literature will be presented. The role of these two genes may explain a large portion of the inter-individual variance reported by studies following caffeine ingestion. Elucidating the extent to which these genes moderate responses to caffeine during exercise will ensure caffeine supplementation programs can be tailored to individual athletes in order to maximize the potential ergogenic effect.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Drug disposition undergoes significant alteration in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), yet circadian time-dependency of these changes remains largely unexplored. In this study, we aimed to determine the temporal effects of experimental colitis on drug disposition and toxicity. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: RNA-sequencing was used to screen genes relevant to colitis induced by dextran sodium sulfate in mice. Liver microsomes and pharmacokinetic analysis were used to analyze the activity of key enzymes. Dual luciferase assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) were employed to elucidate regulatory mechanisms. KEY RESULTS: RNA sequencing analysis revealed that colitis markedly influenced expression of cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. Specifically, a substantial down-regulation of CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 was observed in livers of mice with colitis at Zeitgeber Time 8 (ZT8), with no significant changes detected at ZT20. At ZT8, the altered expression corresponded to diminished metabolism and enhanced incidence of hepato-cardiac toxicity of theophylline, a substrate specifically metabolized by these enzymes. A combination of assays, integrating liver-specific Bmal1 knockout and targeted activation of BMAL1 showed that dysregulation in CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 during colitis was attributable to perturbed BMAL1 functionality. Luciferase reporter and ChIP assays collectively substantiated the role of BMAL1 in regulating Cyp1a2 and Cyp2e1 transcription through its binding affinity to E-box-like sites. CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATION: Our findings establish a strong link between colitis and chronopharmacology, shedding light on how IBD affects drug disposition and toxicity over time. This research provides a theoretical foundation for optimizing drug dosage in patients with IBD.
BACKGROUND: Circular RNA (circRNAs) have been found to play major roles in the progression of colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the functions of circ_0008345 (transcribed by PTK2) in regulating CRC development remain undefined. In this study, we aimed to explore the roles and underlying mechanisms of circ_0008345 in CRC. METHODS: RNase R-treated total cellular RNA was used to verify the circular structure of circ_0008345, and a subcellular fractionation assay was performed to detect the subcellular localization of circ_0008345. RNA pull-down and dual-luciferase assays were used to verify the binding relation between microRNA (miR)-182-5p and circ_0008345 and/or CYP1A2. Colony formation assay, EdU, and Transwell assays were performed to detect the biological behavior of CRC cells in vitro, and CRC cells were injected into mice to observe the tumor formation. m6A immunoprecipitation was used to detect the m6A modification of circ_0008345 in CRC cells. RESULTS: Circ_0008345, upregulated in CRC tissues and cells, was mainly present in the cytoplasm. Circ_0008345 bound to miR-182-5p, and miR-182-5p targeted CYP1A2, an oncogene in CRC. The colony formation, mobility, EdU-positive cell rate in vitro, and tumor growth in mice were inhibited after the knockdown of circ_0008345. However, the suppressing effects of sh-circ_0008345 on CRC and CYP1A2 expression were significantly reversed after further knockdown of miR-182-5p. METTL3 was the m6A modifier mediating circ_0008345 expression, and the suppression of METTL3 reduced the expression of circ_0008345. CONCLUSIONS: METTL3-dependent m6A methylation upregulated circ_0008345, which blocked the inhibitory effect of miR-182-5p on CYP1A2, thereby exacerbating the malignant phenotype of CRC cells.
