Steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in corticoid and androgen biosynthesis. Catalyzes 17-alpha hydroxylation of C21 steroids, which is common for both pathways. A second oxidative step, required only for androgen synthesis, involves an acyl-carbon cleavage. The 17-alpha hydroxy intermediates, as part of adrenal glucocorticoids biosynthesis pathway, are precursors of cortisol  (Probable). Hydroxylates steroid hormones, pregnenolone and progesterone to form 17-alpha hydroxy metabolites, followed by the cleavage of the C17-C20 bond to form C1 [...] 
The search for mineralocorticoids to explain some cases of low renin hypertension with suppressed aldosterone levels led to the isolation of the abundant steroid 18-hydroxycortisol in human urine. 18-Hydroxycortisol proved to be inactive, but because of its similarity to precursors for the synthesis of aldosterone, bullfrog adrenals were incubated with cortisol, resulting in the discovery of 18-oxocortisol which is structurally similar to aldosterone, but with a 17alpha-hydroxy group like cortisol. 18-Oxocortisol is a weak mineralocorticoid. Its synthesis occurs primarily in the zona glomerulosa where co-expression of the CYP11B2 (aldosterone synthase) and the CYP17A1 (17alpha-hydroxylase) occurs in a variable number of cells. The clinical value of the measurement of 18-oxocortisol is that it serves to distinguish subtypes of primary aldosteronism. It is significantly elevated in patients with aldosterone-producing adenomas in comparison to those with idiopathic bilateral hyperaldosteronism and helps predict the type of somatic mutation in the aldosterone-producing adenomas, as it is higher in those with KCNJ5 mutations compared to other gene mutations.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine disorder characterized by hyperandrogenemia of ovarian thecal cell origin, resulting in anovulation/oligo-ovulation and infertility. Our previous studies established that ovarian theca cells isolated and propagated from ovaries of normal ovulatory women and women with PCOS have distinctive molecular and cellular signatures that underlie the increased androgen biosynthesis in PCOS. To evaluate differences between gene expression in single-cells from passaged cultures of theca cells from ovaries of normal ovulatory women and women with PCOS, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). Results from these studies revealed differentially expressed pathways and genes involved in the acquisition of cholesterol, the precursor of steroid hormones, and steroidogenesis. Bulk RNA-seq and microarray studies confirmed the theca cell differential gene expression profiles. The expression profiles appear to be directed largely by increased levels or activity of the transcription factors SREBF1, which regulates genes involved in cholesterol acquisition (LDLR, LIPA, NPC1, CYP11A1, FDX1, and FDXR), and GATA6, which regulates expression of genes encoding steroidogenic enzymes (CYP17A1) in concert with other differentially expressed transcription factors (SP1, NR5A2). This study provides insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the hyperandrogenemia associated with PCOS and highlights potential targets for molecular diagnosis and therapeutic intervention.
CYP17A1 is an enzyme that plays a major role in steroidogenesis and is critically involved in the biosynthesis of steroid hormones. Therefore, it remains an attractive target in several serious hormone-dependent cancer diseases, such as prostate cancer and breast cancer. The medicinal chemistry community has been committed to the discovery and development of CYP17A1 inhibitors for many years, particularly for the treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer. The current Perspective reflects upon the discovery and evaluation of non-steroidal CYP17A1 inhibitors from a medicinal chemistry angle. Emphasis is placed on the structural aspects of the target, key learnings from the presented chemotypes, and design guidelines for future inhibitors.
INTRODUCTION: Granulosa cells (GCs) and theca cells (TCs) play a pivotal role in human ovarian steroidogenesis, facilitating the conversion of cholesterol into sex steroids that regulate normal reproductive function. This study aims to explore the expression patterns of key enzymes that govern human ovarian steroidogenesis throughout follicle development, employing both genomic and immunological methodologies. METHODS: Follicles and GCs obtained from women undergoing ovarian tissue cryopreservation (OTC) and in vitro fertilisation treatment were utilized. Gene expression data were obtained from a Chinese study using RNA sequencing and from microarray data generated in our laboratory to comprehensively analyse gene expression profiles across distinct stages of follicular development. To corroborate the localisation of key enzymes within GCs and TCs, immunohistochemistry analyses utilizing colourimetric and fluorescent techniques were conducted. RESULTS: Steroidogenesis-related enzymes displayed low gene expression levels during early follicle development. However, a notable upregulation of HSD3B2 was observed in GCs as follicles progressed to the antral/preovulatory stage, confirmed consistently using both microarray and RNA sequencing methodologies. Furthermore, immunohistochemical analyses effectively demonstrated that HSD3B2 were not only expressed in GCs, but co-localised with CYP17A1 within a specific subset of TCs surrounding human small antral follicles. Contributing to an enhanced progesterone production during the second half of the follicular phase was a significant upregulation of CYB5A in both microarray and RNA-seq datasets as follicles transition from the antral stage to the pre-ovulatory stage. Moreover, an augmented expression of DHCR24 and LDLR in both types of data, along with HMGCR expression expression in the microarray data, indicates increased substrate availability for ovarian steroidogenesis. DISCUSSION: This study confirms and extends that GCs gradually augment expression of HSD3B2 thereby enhancing their capacity for progesterone synthesis as follicles reach the size of selection at around 10 mm in diameter. This is supported by the expression CYB5A and possibly augmented availability of steroid precursors. A subset of TCs exhibit concurrent expression of CYP17A1 and HSD3B2, collectively contributing to the synthesis of 17-hydroxyprogesterone. These data significantly enhance our understanding of the dynamic regulation of progesterone throughout the process of follicular development.
The steroid hydroxylation and carbon-carbon bond cleavage activities of cytochrome P450 17A1 (CYP17A1) are responsible for the production of glucocorticoids and androgens, respectively. The inhibition of androgen synthesis is an important strategy to treat androgen-dependent prostate cancer. We discuss the different enzymatic activities towards the various substrates of CYP17A1, demonstrating its promiscuity. Additionally, a novel interhelical interaction is proposed between the F-G loop and the B'-helix to explain the 16alpha-hydroxylase activity of human CYP17A1 with progesterone as the substrate. The techniques used by biochemists to study this important enzyme are also summarized. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Steroid/Sterol signaling'.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: To investigate the association between CYP17A1 (rs74357) polymorphism and the risk of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS). METHODS: Literature on the association of CYP17rs74357 gene polymorphism and susceptibility to PCOS was retrieved by searching databases such as PubMed, Science Direct, Google Scholar and Embase from. The association measure was analyzed using an Odds Ratio (OR) and 95% Confidence Interval (CI). All the statistical analyses were executed using CMA 3.0 Software. RESULTS: In the present meta-analysis,24 studies including 3462 PCOS and 2898 controls were analyzed. The overall results validated that the 17 CYP17 T/C (rs74357) gene polymorphism was significantly associated with PCOS risk in 5 genetic models: recessive model (fixed and random effect), dominant model (random effect), CC vs. TT (fixed effect), CT vs. TT (fixed effect), and allele contrast (random effect). Stratified analyses by ethnicity/country also detected significant association between Asian and Caucasian under the recessive, dominant, CC vs. TT, CC vs. CT, and the allele contrast models. CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, CYP17 T/C (rs74357) gene polymorphism increase the susceptibility of PCOS, and the recessive C allele, can be proposed as a predictive factor for the risk of PCOS or an important pathway in PCOS associated metabolic and hormonal dysregulation especially insulin resistance.However, larger sample size andmultiracial studies are needed in the future to confirm the findings.
Cytochrome P450 (P450) 17A1 plays a key role in steroidogenesis, in that this enzyme catalyzes the 17alpha-hydroxylation of both pregnenolone and progesterone, followed by a lyase reaction to cleave the C-20 land C-21 carbons from each steroid. The reactions are important in the production of both glucocorticoids and androgens. The enzyme is critical in humans but is also a drug target in treatment of prostate cancer. Detailed methods are described for the heterologous expression of human P450 17A1 in bacteria, purification of the recombinant enzyme, reconstitution of the enzyme system in the presence of cytochrome b(5), and chromatographic procedures for sensitive analyses of reaction products. Historic assay approaches are reviewed. Some information is also provided about outstanding questions in the research field, including catalytic mechanisms and searches for selective inhibitors.
Polycystic ovary syndrome is a multifactorial condition associated with reproductive and endocrine organs and might cause infertility and metabolic abnormalities in childbearing age. PCOS seems to be a multifactorial disorder resulting from the combination of several genetic and environmental factors. Little research has been conducted to date on the impact of polymorphisms in infertility. We aim to review the appearance of polymorphisms in females of diverse ethnicities and their effect on infertility in the population with polycystic ovary syndrome. There have been numerous reports of the importance of the steroidogenesis pathway and genetic variants in PCOS pathogenesis. The most important genes that play a role in the aetiology of PCOS are CYP11A1, CYP17A1, and CYP19A1. We evaluated the occurrence of polymorphisms in various ethnicities in the CYP11A1, CYP17A1, and CYP19A1 genes and their efficacy on increasing PCOS risk with infertility. Our findings revealed that polymorphisms in various ethnicities are associated with the risk of PCOS with infertility. Although conflicting results regarding CYP11A1, CYP17A1, and CYP19A1 polymorphisms and their influence on PCOS with infertility have been reported in a small number of papers, the authors feel this may be attributable to the sample size and ethnic composition of the examined populations. In conclusion, our study strongly suggests that the CYP11A1, CYP17A1, and CYP19A1 genes might significantly enhance the probability of developing PCOS with infertility.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is one of the most common inherited metabolic disorders. It comprises a group of autosomal recessive disorders caused by the deficiency of one of four steroidogenic enzymes involved in cortisol biosynthesis or in the electron donor enzyme P450 oxidoreductase (POR) that serves as electron donor to steroidogenic cytochrome P450 (CYP) type II enzymes. The biochemical and clinical phenotype depends on the specific enzymatic defect and the impairment of specific enzyme activity. Defects of steroid 21-hydroxylase (CYP21A2) and 11beta-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) only affect adrenal steroidogenesis, whereas 17alpha-hydroxylase (CYP17A1) and 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD3B2) deficiency also impact on gonadal steroid biosynthesis. Inactivating POR gene mutations are the cause of CAH manifesting with apparent combined CYP17A1-CYP21A2 deficiency. P450 oxidoreductase deficiency (ORD) has a complex phenotype including two unique features not observed in any other CAH variant: skeletal malformations and severe genital ambiguity in both sexes.
Cytochrome P450 17A1 (CYP17A1) is a critical steroidogenic enzyme, essential for producing glucocorticoids and sex hormones. This review discusses the complex activity of CYP17A1, looking at its role in both the classical and backdoor steroidogenic pathways and the complex chemistry it carries out to perform both a hydroxylation reaction and a carbon-carbon cleavage, or lyase reaction. Functional and structural investigations have informed our knowledge of these two reactions. This review focuses on a few specific aspects of this discussion: the identities of reaction intermediates, the coordination of hydroxylation and lyase reactions, the effects of cytochrome b(5), and conformational selection. These discussions improve understanding of CYP17A1 in a physiological setting, where CYP17A1 is implicated in a variety of steroidogenic diseases. This information can be used to improve ways in which CYP17A1 can be effectively modulated to treat diseases such as prostate and breast cancer, Cushing's syndrome, and glioblastoma.
Nesfatin-1 is a polypeptide hormone known to regulate appetite and energy metabolism and is derived from the precursor protein nucleobindin 2 (NUCB2). Recent studies have shown that nesfatin-1 is expressed in many peripheral tissues in mice, including the reproductive organs. However, its function and regulation in the testis remain unknown. In this study, we investigated the expression of Nucb2 mRNA and nesfatin-1 protein in mouse Leydig cells and the Leydig cell line, TM3 cells. We also examined whether Nucb2 mRNA expression is regulated by gonadotropins and whether exogenous nesfatin-1 affects steroidogenesis in primary Leydig cells isolated from the testis and TM3 cells. We found that Nucb2 mRNA and nesfatin-1 protein were present in primary Leydig cells and TM3 cells, and nesfatin-1 binding sites were also found in both cell types. Nucb2 mRNA expression in testis, primary Leydig cells, and TM3 cells was increased after treatment with pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin and human chorionic gonadotropin. After nesfatin-1 treatment, the expression of steroidogenesis-related enzyme genes Cyp17a1 and Hsd3b was upregulated in primary Leydig cells and TM3 cells. Our results suggest that NUCB2/nesfatin-1 expression in mouse Leydig cells may be regulated through the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis and that nesfatin-1 produced by Leydig cells may locally regulate steroidogenesis in an autocrine manner. This study provides insight into the regulation of NUCB2/nesfatin-1 expression in Leydig cells and the effect of nesfatin-1 on steroidogenesis, which may have implications for male reproductive health.
This symposium summary, sponsored by the ASPET, was held at Experimental Biology 2015 on March 29, 2015, in Boston, Massachusetts. The symposium focused on: 1) the interactions of cytochrome P450s (P450s) with their redox partners; and 2) the role of the lipid membrane in their orientation and stabilization. Two presentations discussed the interactions of P450s with NADPH-P450 reductase (CPR) and cytochrome b5. First, solution nuclear magnetic resonance was used to compare the protein interactions that facilitated either the hydroxylase or lyase activities of CYP17A1. The lyase interaction was stimulated by the presence of b5 and 17alpha-hydroxypregnenolone, whereas the hydroxylase reaction was predominant in the absence of b5. The role of b5 was also shown in vivo by selective hepatic knockout of b5 from mice expressing CYP3A4 and CYP2D6; the lack of b5 caused a decrease in the clearance of several substrates. The role of the membrane on P450 orientation was examined using computational methods, showing that the proximal region of the P450 molecule faced the aqueous phase. The distal region, containing the substrate-access channel, was associated with the membrane. The interaction of NADPH-P450 reductase (CPR) with the membrane was also described, showing the ability of CPR to "helicopter" above the membrane. Finally, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) was shown to be heterogeneous, having ordered membrane regions containing cholesterol and more disordered regions. Interestingly, two closely related P450s, CYP1A1 and CYP1A2, resided in different regions of the ER. The structural characteristics of their localization were examined. These studies emphasize the importance of P450 protein organization to their function.
Cytochrome P450 17A1 (CYP17A1) operates at the core of human steroidogenesis, directing precursors into mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids, or sex steroids. Although the 17alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase activities of this dual function enzyme have been investigated extensively, until recently no CYP17A1 structures were available to inform our understanding. Structures of CYP17A1 with a range of steroidal inhibitors and substrates are now available. This review relates functional knowledge of this enzyme to structural features defining the selective differentiation between its various substrates. While both hydroxylase and lyase substrates have similar orientations with respect to the heme, subtle differences in hydrogen bonding between CYP17A1 and the C3 substituent at the opposite end of ligands appear to correlate with differential substrate utilization and product formation. Complementary structural information from solution NMR supports cytochrome b(5) allosteric modulation of the lyase reaction, implicating regions involved in ligand access to the otherwise buried active site.
Owing to the high degree of similarity between aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2) and cortisol synthase (CYP11B1), the design of selective inhibitors of one or the other of these two enzymes was, at one time, thought to be impossible. Through development of novel enzyme screening assays and significant medicinal chemistry efforts, highly potent inhibitors of CYP11B2 have been identified with selectivities approaching 1000-fold between the two enzymes. Many of these molecules also possess selectivity against other steroidogenic cytochromes P450 (e.g. CYP17A1 and CYP19A1) as well as hepatic drug metabolizing P450s. Though not as well developed or explored, inhibitors of CYP11B1, with selectivities approaching 50-fold, have also been identified. The therapeutic benefits of affecting the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system have been well established with the therapeutically useful angiotensin-converting enzymes inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. Data regarding the additional benefits of an aldosterone synthase inhibitor (ASi) are beginning to emerge from animal models and human clinical trials. Despite great promise and much progress, additional challenges still exist in the path towards development of a therapeutically useful ASi.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a highly heterogeneous reproductive system disorder of which the aetiology is not fully understood. Previous association studies have been conducted on >100 candidate genes, which principally related to reproductive hormones, cellular metabolism and chronic inflammation. Heritable tendencies have long been recognized for pathogeneses of PCOS, and recently a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in PCOS provides new clues to understand the genetic components and pathways in PCOS physiology. However, the current knowledge of the pathogenesis of PCOS is still in its infancy. Further studies using new technologies such as next-generation sequencing (NGS) shall be useful to understand more causal variants for PCOS.
BACKGROUND: 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency (17-OHD) is a rare subtype of congenital adrenal hyperplasia caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the CYP17A1 gene. PURPOSE: This study aimed to identify and characterize pathogenic variants in individuals with 17-OHD and to classify and validate the pathogenicity of novel variants. METHODS: Variants were identified via targeted long-read sequencing (TLRS) of the entire CYP17A1 gene in enrolled 17-OHD patients. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines were employed to assess the pathogenicity of novel variants. Minigene splicing assays were utilized to determine the impact of variants on RNA splicing. RESULTS: This study encompassed 26 patients with 17-OHD, detecting 2 trans pathogenic variants per patient using the TLRS method. A total of 20 pathogenic variants in the CYP17A1 were identified, with variant c.985_987delinsAA being the most frequent (28/52 alleles), followed by variant c.1459_1467del (4/52 alleles). Five novel variants including c.280T > C, c.470T > A, c.636_637del, c.866A > G, and c.1095del, were classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic ones according to ACMG criteria. The minigene splicing assays revealed c.866A > G in exon 5 causes a frameshift due to a 104 base pair deletion, while c.470T > A generates 2 transcripts, with the vast majority spliced like the wild-type and a small fraction lacking 35 base pairs in the 5' flank of exon 3. CONCLUSION: The TLRS can determine the cis/trans orientation of 2 distant variants. Five novel pathogenic variants were reported, broadening the spectrum of the CYP17A1 pathogenic variants. The variant c.866A > G, located deep in the exon, affects gene function through mechanisms of aberrant splicing.
OBJECTIVE: A recent genome wide association study identified eight hypertension susceptibility loci in Europeans. Subsequently, several studies have investigated these associations in East Asian populations. The results of these studies, however, have been inconsistent. A meta-analysis was performed to assess the associations of the most published polymorphisms, including CSK rs1378942, CYP17A1 rs11191548, MTHFR rs17367504, and FGF5 rs16998073 polymorphisms with hypertension. METHODS: Published literature from PubMed and Embase databases was retrieved. Pooled odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using fixed- or random-effects model. RESULTS: Seven studies (16,368 cases /19,707 controls) for CSK rs1378942 polymorphism, seven studies (15,688 cases /18,784 controls) for CYP17A1 rs11191548 polymorphism, four studies (7994 cases / 12,844 controls) for MTHFR rs17367504 polymorphism, and three studies (6026 cases / 8393 controls) for FGF5 rs16998073 polymorphism were included in the meta-analysis. The results suggested that both CYP17A1 rs11191548 and FGF5 rs16998073 polymorphisms were significantly associated with hypertension risk in East Asians (CYP17A1 rs11191548 (random effect model): OR=1.16, 95% CI 1.07-1.25, p=3.59x10(-4), I(2)=78.2%, p (heterogeneity)=1.14x10(-4); FGF5 rs16998073 (random effect model): OR=1.30, 95% CI 1.23-1.37, p=6.29x10(-21), I(2)=65.0%, p (heterogeneity)=0.009); whereas no significant association was observed for CSK rs1378942 (fix effect model: OR=1.09, 95% CI 0.98-1.22, p=0.128, I(2)=0.0%, p (heterogeneity)=0.820), or MTHFR rs17367504 (fix effect model: OR=1.06, 95% CI 0.98-1.14, p=0.126, I(2)=0.0%, p (heterogeneity)=0.822). CONCLUSION: The present meta-analysis indicated significant associations of both CYP17A1 rs11191548 and FGF5 rs16998073 polymorphisms with hypertension susceptibility in East Asians.
BACKGROUND: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a multi-factor complex trait and is heritable, especially in early-onset families. However, the genetic factors affecting the susceptibility of early-onset CAD are not fully characterized. METHODS: In the present study, we identified a rare nonsense variant in the CYP17A1 gene from a Chinese Han family with CAD. To validate the effect of this variation on atherosclerosis and early-onset coronary artery disease, we conducted studies on population, cells, and mice. RESULTS: The mutation precisely congregated with the clinical syndrome in all the affected family members and was absent in unaffected family members and unrelated controls. Similar to the human phenotype, the CYP17A1-deficient mice present the phenotype of metabolic syndrome with hypertension, increased serum glucose concentration, and presentation of central obesity and fatty liver. Furthermore, CYP17A1 knockout mice or CYP17A1 + ApoE double knockout mice developed more atherosclerotic lesions than wild type (WT) with high fat diary. In cell models, CYP17A1 was found to be involved in glucose metabolism by increasing glucose intake and utilization, through activating IGF1/mTOR/HIF1-alpha signaling way, which was consistent in CYP17A1 knockout mice with impaired glucose tolerance and insulin resistance. CONCLUSIONS: Through our study of cells, mice and humans, we identified CYP17A1 as a key protein participating in the pathophysiology of the atherosclerotic process and the possible mechanism of CYP17A1 C987X mutation induced atherosclerosis and early-onset CAD involving glucose homeostasis regulation was revealed. Video Abstract.
Steroid 17-hydroxylase 17,20-lyase (cytochrome P450c17, P450 17A1, CYP17A1) catalyzes two major reactions: steroid 17-hydroxylation followed by the 17,20-lyase reactions. The most severe mutations in the cognate CYP17A1 gene abrogate all activities and cause combined 17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency (17OHD), a biochemical phenotype that is replicated by treatment with the potent CYP17A1 inhibitor abiraterone acetate. The adrenals of patients with 17OHD synthesize 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC) and corticosterone but no 19-carbon steroids, similar to the rodent adrenal, and DOC causes hypertension and hypokalemia. Loss of 17,20-lyase activity precludes sex steroid synthesis and leads to sexual infantilism. Rare missense CYP17A1 mutations minimally disrupt 17-hydroxylase activity but cause isolated 17,20-lyase deficiency (ILD), Mutations in the POR gene encoding the required cofactor protein cytochrome P450-oxidoreductase causes a spectrum of disease from ILD to 17OHD combined with 21-hydroxylase and aromatase deficiencies, sometimes including skeletal malformations. Mutations in the CYB5A gene encoding a second cofactor protein cytochrome b(5) also selectively disrupt 17,20-lyase activity and cause the purest form of ILD. The clinical manifestations of these conditions are best understood in the context of the biochemistry of CYP17A1.
There is some confusion in the literature about steroidogenesis in endocrine glands and steroidogenesis in peripheral intracrine tissues. The objective of the present review is to bring some clarifications and better understanding about steroidogenesis in these two types of tissues. Concerns about substrate specificity, kinetic constants and place of enzymes in the pathway have been discussed. The role of 17alpha-hydroxylase/17-20 lyase (CYP17A1) in the production of dehydroepiandrosterone and back-door pathways of dihydrotestosterone biosynthesis is also analyzed. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled "Synthesis and biological testing of steroid derivatives as inhibitors".
