Prostaglandin G/H synthase 2; Converts arachidonate to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), a committed step in prostanoid synthesis. Constitutively expressed in some tissues in physiological conditions, such as the endothelium, kidney and brain, and in pathological conditions, such as in cancer. PTGS2 is responsible for production of inflammatory prostaglandins. Up-regulation of PTGS2 is also associated with increased cell adhesion, phenotypic changes, resistance to apoptosis and tumor angiogenesis. In cancer cells, PTGS2 is a key step in the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which plays imp [...] 
CYP1A1 plays an important role in the metabolism of polycyclic hydrocarbons that occur in the environment and several studies suggest that the genetic polymorphism of the gene may play a role in the predisposition to cancer. In order to evaluate the function of CYP1A1 in vivo as a host factor determinant of environmentally-caused cancers in humans, additional investigations are needed involving not only molecular epidemiological approaches in different ethnic populations but also more direct approaches such as the use of gene-targeted mice as a model system.
CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 are extrahepatic P450 family members involved in the metabolism of procarcinogens, such as PAHs, heterocyclic amines and halogen-containing organic compounds. CYP1A1/1B1 also participate in the metabolism of endogenous 17-beta-estradiol, producing estradiol hydroquinones, which are the intermediates of carcinogenic semiquinones and quinones. CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 proteins share approximately half amino acid sequence identity but differ in crystal structures. As a result, CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 have different substrate specificity to chemical procarcinogens. This review will introduce the general molecular biology knowledge of CYP1A1/1B1 and the metabolic processes of procarcinogens regulated by these two enzymes. Over the last four decades, a variety of natural products and synthetic compounds which interact with CYP1A1/1B1 have been identified as effective chemo-preventive agents against chemical carcinogenesis. These compounds are mainly classified as indirect or direct CYP1A1/1B1 inhibitors based on their distinct mechanisms. Indirect CYP1A1/1B1 inhibitors generally impede the transcription and translation of CYP1A1/1B1 genes or interfere with the translocation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) from the cytosolic domain to the nucleus. On the other hand, direct inhibitors inhibit the catalytic activities of CYP1A1/1B1. Based on the structural features, the indirect inhibitors can be categorized into the following groups: flavonoids, alkaloids and synthetic aromatics, whereas the direct inhibitors can be categorized into flavonoids, coumarins, stilbenes, sulfur containing isothiocyanates and synthetic aromatics. This review will summarize the in vitro and in vivo activities of these chemo-preventive agents, their working mechanisms, and related SARs. This will provide a better understanding of the molecular mechanism of CYP1 mediated carcinogenesis and will also give great implications for the discovery of novel chemo-preventive agents in the near future.
As one of the main extra-hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, CYP1A1 has been comprehensively investigated for its ability to metabolize both exogenous and endogenous compounds into their carcinogenic derivatives. These derivatives are linked to cancer initiation and progression. The compound benzo-a-pyrene (BaP), a copious and noxious compound present in coal tar, automobile exhaust fumes, cigarette smoke and charbroiled food, is metabolised by CYP1A1 and has been studied in great detail. Other compounds reliant on the same enzyme for their activation include 7,12 dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) and heterocyclic amine, 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP). This review takes an in-depth look at a number of phytochemicals, plant extracts and a few synthetic compounds that have been researched and deemed potential chemopreventives via their interaction with the activity and expression of CYP1A1. It will also review a useful active site model of CYP1A1. Based on inhibitors of CYP1A1 that have demonstrated in vivo use as chemopreventors, CYP1A1 is a useful initial target for screening compounds with such potential, with the use of rapid in vitro and/or in silico assessments. Chemoprevention is a means by which healthy tissues are protected via the prevention, inhibition or reversal of carcinogenesis. This review focuses on one important pathway of carcinogenesis and identifies the important role that CYP1A1 plays in that pathway. It is hoped that highlighting the importance of such a key target, will help revive further research into and application of inhibitors of CYP1A1 towards generating improved chemopreventors.
Human cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs) play a critical role in various biological processes and human diseases. CYP1 family members, including CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1, are induced by aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AhRs). The binding of ligands such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons activates the AhRs, which are involved in the metabolism (including oxidation) of various endogenous or exogenous substrates. The ligands that induce CYP1 expression are reported to be carcinogenic xenobiotics. Hence, CYP1 enzymes are correlated with the pathogenesis of cancers. Various endogenous substrates are involved in the metabolism of steroid hormones, eicosanoids, and other biological molecules that mediate the pathogenesis of several human diseases. Additionally, CYP1s metabolize and activate/inactivate therapeutic drugs, especially, anti-cancer agents. As the metabolism of drugs determines their therapeutic efficacy, CYP1s can determine the susceptibility of patients to some drugs. Thus, understanding the role of CYP1s in diseases and establishing novel and efficient therapeutic strategies based on CYP1s have piqued the interest of the scientific community.
Compelling evidence has demonstrated that tumor bulk comprises distinctive subset of cells generally referred as cancer stem cells (CSCs) that have been proposed as a strong sustainer and promoter of tumorigenesis and therapeutic resistance. These distinguished properties of CSCs have raised interest in understanding the molecular mechanisms that govern the maintenance of these cells. Numerous experimental and epidemiological studies have demonstrated that exposure to environmental toxins such as the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) is strongly involved in cancer initiation and progression. The PAH-induced carcinogenesis is shown to be mediated through the activation of a cytosolic receptor, aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)/Cytochrome P4501A pathway, suggesting a possible direct link between AhR and CSCs. Several recent studies have investigated the role of AhR in CSCs self-renewal and maintenance, however the molecular mechanisms and particularly the epigenetic regulations of CSCs by the AhR/CYP1A pathway have not been reviewed before. In this review, we first summarize the crosstalk between AhR and cancer genetics, with a particular emphasis on the mechanisms relevant to CSCs such as Wnt/beta-catenin, Notch, NF-kappaB, and PTEN-PI3K/Akt signaling pathways. The second part of this review discusses the recent advances and studies highlighting the epigenetic mechanisms mediated by the AhR/CYP1A pathway that control CSC gene expression, self-renewal, and chemoresistance in various human cancers. Furthermore, the review also sheds light on the importance of targeting the epigenetic pathways as a novel therapeutic approach against CSCs.
Manuka honey (MH) is a complex nutritional material with antimicrobial, antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity. We have previously shown that MH down regulates IL-4-induced CCL26 expression in immortalized keratinocytes. As MH contains potential ligands of the Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AHR), a key regulator of skin homeostasis, we hypothesize that this effect is mediated via AHR activation. Here, we treated HaCaT cell lines, either stable transfected with an empty vector (EV-HaCaT) or in which AHR had been stable silenced (AHR-silenced HaCaT); or primary normal human epithelial keratinocytes (NHEK) with 2% MH for 24 h. This induced a 15.4-fold upregulation of CYP1A1 in EV-HaCaTs, which was significantly reduced in AHR-silenced cells. Pre-treatment with the AHR antagonist CH223191 completely abrogated this effect. Similar findings were observed in NHEK. In vivo treatment of the Cyp1a1(Cre) x R26R(eYFP) reporter mice strain's skin with pure MH significantly induced CYP1A1 expression compared with Vaseline. Treatment of HaCaT with 2% MH significantly decreased baseline CYP1 enzymatic activity at 3 and 6 h but increased it after 12 h, suggesting that MH may activate the AHR both through direct and indirect means. Importantly, MH downregulation of IL-4-induced CCL26 mRNA and protein was abrogated in AHR-silenced HaCaTs and by pre-treatment with CH223191. Finally, MH significantly upregulated FLG expression in NHEK in an AHR-dependent manner. In conclusion, MH activates AHR, both in vitro and in vivo, thereby providing a mechanism of its IL4-induced CCL26 downregulation and upregulation of FLG expression. These results have potential clinical implications for atopic diseases and beyond.
Aim: CYP1A1 is a metabolizing enzyme and key polymorphisms in its gene may contribute to the risk of ischemic stroke. This study aimed to investigate the association of the rs4646903 and rs1048943 polymorphisms of CYP1A1 with stroke risk in a meta-analysis and a bioinformatic approach. Materials & methods: An electronic search was conducted and, after the screening procedure, six eligible studies were included in the meta-analysis. Some bioinformatic tools were employed to analyze the effects of rs4646903 and rs1048943 on CYP1A1 gene function. Results: There was a significant association between rs4646903 and the reduced risk of ischemic stroke, whereas there was no significant association for rs1048943. In silico analysis showed that rs4646903 and rs1048943 polymorphisms could affect the gene expression and cofactor affinity, respectively. Conclusion: Based on these results, rs4646903 may be a protective genetic factor against ischemic stroke.
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is primarily involved in the transcriptional regulation of CYP1A enzymes, which are the main catalysts of the metabolic activation or inactivation of numerous procarcinogens, carcinogens, environmental toxicants, or therapeutic agents. Several endogenous factors, including hormones, can modify CYP1A induction, directly influencing CYP1A gene expression or AhR function or indirectly via crosstalks with other transcription factors. In this article, we summarize the current knowledge about the role of hormones (i.e., glucocorticoids, estrogens, progesterone, androgens, insulin, and glucagon) and hormone receptors as well as other essential factors (e.g., vitamin D, retinoids) in the modulation of CYP1A expression.
Trace metals and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are ubiquitous environmental co-contaminants and the trace metals could influence the carcinogenicity of the PAHs by altering their extent of induction of cytochromes P4501A1, 1A2, and 1B1 (CYP). Studies in cell lines from humans, rodents, chickens, and fish, and in cell culture generally indicate that trace metals diminish the inductive potency of PAHs for these CYPs. The extent of the effect is species-, metal-, PAH-, and metal dose-dependent. Both transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms are involved in the trace metal-mediated down regulation of the CYP1 forms. The latter mechanism incorporates induction of heme oxygenase-1 by the metals, with resultant heme catabolism. Thus, trace metals could diminish the carcinogenicity of PAHs.
Epidemiological studies have demonstrated that fine particulate matter (PM2.5) is associated with adverse obstetric and postnatal metabolic health outcomes, but the mechanism remains unclear. This study aimed to investigate the toxicological pathways by which PM2.5 damaged placental trophoblasts in vivo and in vitro. We confirmed that PM2.5 induced adverse gestational outcomes such as increased fetal mortality rates, decreased fetal numbers and weight, damaged placental structure, and increased apoptosis of trophoblasts. Additionally, PM2.5 induced dysfunction of the trophoblast cell line HTR8/SVneo, including in its proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, migration and angiogenesis. Moreover, we comprehensively analyzed the transcriptional landscape of HTR8/SVneo cells exposed to PM2.5 through RNA-Seq and observed that PM2.5 triggered overexpression of pathways involved in oxidative stress and mitochondrial apoptosis to damage HTR8/SVneo cell biological functions through CYP1A1. Mechanistically, PM2.5 stimulated KLF9, a transcription factor identified as binding to CYP1A1 promoter region, which further modulated the CYP1A1-driven downstream phenotypes. Together, this study demonstrated that the KLF9/CYP1A1 axis played a crucial role in the toxic progression of PM2.5 induced adverse pregnancy outcomes, suggesting adverse effects of environmental pollution on pregnant females and putative targeted therapeutic strategies.
Human cytochrome P450 1A1 (hCYP1A1) has been an object of study due to its role in precarcinogen metabolism; for this reason it is relevant to know more in depth the mechanisms that rule out its expression and activity, which make this enzyme a target for the development of novel chemiopreventive agents. The aim of this work is to review the origin, regulation, and structural and functional characteristics of CYP1A1 letting us understand its role in the bioactivation of precarcinogen and the consequences of its modulation in other physiological processes, as well as guide us in the study of this important protein.
Background: It has been demonstrated that the lead compound 2-phenylimidazo[1,2-a]quinoline 1a selectively inhibits CYP1 enzymes. Additionally, CYP1 inhibition has been linked to inducing antiproliferative effects in various breast cancer cell lines as well as relieving drug resistance caused by CYP1 upregulation. Materials & methods: Herein, 54 novel analogs of 2-phenylimidazo[1,2-a]quinoline 1a have been synthesized with varied substitution on the phenyl and imidazole rings. Antiproliferative testing was conducted using (3)H thymidine uptake assays. Results: 2-Phenylimidazo[1,2-a]quinoline 1a and phenyl-substituted analogs 1c (3-OMe), 1n (2,3-napthalene) displayed excellent anti-proliferative activities, demonstrating their potency against cancer cell lines for the first time. Molecular modeling suggested that 1c and 1n bind similarly to 1a in the CYP1 binding site.
Cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) is one of the xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes (XMEs), which is induced by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). The most potent inducer of CYP1A1 is 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). In addition, TCDD induces a broad spectrum of biochemical and toxic effects, such as teratogenesis, immunosuppression and tumor promotion. Most, if not all, of the effects caused by TCDD and other PAHs are known to be mediated by AhR (aryl hydrocarbon receptor or dioxin receptor) which has a high binding affinity to TCDD. The liganded AhR translocates from cytoplasm to nuclei where it switches its partner molecule from Hsp90 to Arnt. Thus formed AhR/Arnt heterodimer binds a specific DNA sequence designated XRE in the promoter region of the target genes including CYP1A1, UDP-glucuronosyl transferase and others to enhance their expression. Although it remains to be studied how AhR is involved in the other TCDD-induced biological effects such as teratogenesis and immunosuppression than induction of XMEs, it is believed that these adverse TCDD effects are caused by untimely activation of gene expression by ligand-activated AhR in the biological process. We summarize the present knowledge about functional role of AhR in TCDD-induced biological effects.
The cytochromes P450 (CYPs) oxidatively transform a huge number of substrates in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, but the mechanisms by which they accommodate these diverse molecules remain unclear. A new study by Bart and Scott reports two co-crystal structures of CYP1A1 that reveal structural rearrangements and flexible interaction networks that explain how the active site cavity shapes itself around new ligands. These data open the door to an increased understanding of fundamental enzyme behavior and improved searches for anti-cancer compounds.
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH-PAS) family. Its ligands include many natural and synthetic compounds, some of which, such as polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, are important environmental contaminants. NF-kappaB is a pleiotropic factor that regulates many physiological and pathophysiological processes including the immune and inflammatory responses. In the past decade, accumulating evidence suggests close interactions between AhR and NF-kappaB pathways, and these interactions are potentially important mechanisms for many pathological processes such as the chemical-induced immune dysfunctions, carcinogenesis and alteration of xenobiotic metabolism and disposition. AhR-NF-kappaB interaction has become a mechanistic linchpin linking certain pathological responses induced by environmental insults. Furthermore, the AhR-NF-kappaB interaction provides basis for therapeutic applications of certain AhR ligands to treat human diseases. The effects of AhR-NF-kappaB on the epigenome are an important area that is not well understood. In this review, I highlight current research regarding the AhR-NF-kappaB(RelA) interactions with emphasis on the epigenetic impacts of these interactions on chromatin modifications and transcription elongation control.
With the widespread use of O-alkoxyresorufin dealkylation assays since the 1990s, thousands of inhibitors of cytochrome P450 family 1 enzymes (P450s 1A1, 1A2, and 1B1) have been identified and studied. Generally, planar polycyclic molecules such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, stilbenoids, and flavonoids are considered to potentially be effective inhibitors of these enzymes, however, the details of the structure-activity relationships and selectivity of these inhibitors are still ambiguous. In this review, we thoroughly discuss the selectivity of many representative P450 family 1 inhibitors reported in the past 20 years through a meta-analysis.
CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 are two extrahepatic enzymes that have been implicated in carcinogenesis and cancer progression. Selective inhibition of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 by dietary constituents, notably the class of flavonoids, is a widely accepted paradigm that supports the concept of dietary chemoprevention. In parallel, recent studies have documented the ability of CYP1 enzymes to selectively metabolize dietary flavonoids to conversion products that inhibit cancer cell proliferation. In the present study we have examined the inhibition of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1-catalyzed EROD activity by 14 different flavonoids containing methoxy- and hydroxyl-group substitutions as well as the metabolism of the monomethoxylated CYP1-flavonoid inhibitor acacetin and the poly-methoxylated flavone eupatorin-5-methyl ether by recombinant CYP1A1 and CYP1B1. The most potent inhibitors of CYP1-EROD activity were the methoxylated flavones acacetin, diosmetin, eupatorin and the di-hydroxylated flavone chrysin, indicating that the 4'-OCH(3) group at the B ring and the 5,7-dihydroxy motif at the A ring play a prominent role in EROD inhibition. Potent inhibition of CYP1B1 EROD activity was also obtained for the poly-hydroxylated flavonols quercetin and myricetin. HPLC metabolism of acacetin by CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 revealed the formation of the structurally similar flavone apigenin by demethylation at the 4'-position of the B ring, whereas the flavone eupatorin-5-methyl ether was metabolized to an as yet unidentified metabolite assigned E(5)M1. Eupatorin-5-methyl ether demonstrated a submicromolar IC(50) in the CYP1-expressing cancer cell line MDA-MB 468, while it was considerably inactive in the normal cell line MCF-10A. Homology modeling in conjunction with molecular docking calculations were employed in an effort to rationalize the activity of these flavonoids based on their CYP1-binding mode. Taken together the data suggest that dietary flavonoids exhibit three distinct modes of action with regard to cancer prevention, based on their hydroxyl and methoxy decoration: (1) inhibitors of CYP1 enzymatic activity, (2) CYP1 substrates and (3) substrates and inhibitors of CYP1 enzymes.
Phase I metabolic enzyme CYP1A1 plays an important role in xenobiotics metabolism and has been extensively studied as a cancer risk biomarker. CYP1A1 is polymorphic and its four variants, e.g., CYP1A1* 2 A, CYP1A1* 2C, CYP1A1* 3 and CYP1A1* 4 with trivial names m1, m2, m3, and m4 respectively, are most commonly studied for cancer link. Gene- gene interaction studies combining polymorphisms of this enzyme with those of phase II detoxifying enzymes, especially glutathione S- transferases (GSTs) revealed greater risk for cancer susceptibility. Variants of CYP1A1 have also been found to be associated with chemotherapeutic adverse- effects. Results of these studies, however, remained largely contradictory mainly because of lack of statistical power due to involvement of small sample size. Strongly powered experimental designs involving gene- gene, gene- environment interactions are required in order to validate CYP1A1 as reliable cancer- biomarker.
The abundance of dioxins and dioxin-like pollutants has massively increased in the environment due to human activity. These chemicals are particularly persistent and accumulate in the food chain, which raises major concerns regarding long-term exposure to human health. Most dioxin-like pollutants activate the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) transcription factor, which regulates xenobiotic metabolism enzymes that belong to the cytochrome P450 1A family (that includes CYP1A1 and CYP1B1). Importantly, a crosstalk exists between estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and AhR. More specifically, ERalpha represses the expression of the CYP1A1 gene, which encodes an enzyme that converts 17beta-estradiol into 2-hydroxyestradiol. However, (ERalpha) does not repress the CYP1B1 gene, which encodes an enzyme that converts 17beta-estradiol into 4-hydroxyestradiol, one of the most genotoxic estrogen metabolites. In this review, we discuss how chronic exposure to xenobiotic chemicals, such as pesticides, might affect the expression of genes regulated by the AhR-ERalpha crosstalk. Here, we focus on recent advances in the understanding of molecular mechanisms that mediate this crosstalk repression, and particularly on how ERalpha represses the AhR target gene CYP1A1, and could subsequently promote breast cancer. Finally, we propose that genes implicated in this crosstalk could constitute important biomarkers to assess long-term effects of pesticides on human health.
Hops (Humulus lupulus) is used as an alternative to hormone replacement therapy due to the phytoestrogen, 8-prenylnaringenin (8-PN). To examine the potential risks/benefits of hops extract and its compounds (8-PN and 6-prenylnaringenin, 6-PN), we aimed to evaluate the estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling pathways in human endometrial cancer cells. Hops extract, 8-PN and 6-PN showed estrogenic activity. Hops extract and 6-PN activated both ERalpha and AHR pathways. 6-PN increased the expression of the tumor suppressor gene (AHRR), and that of genes involved in the estrogen metabolism (CYP1A1, CYP1B1). Although 6-PN might activate the detoxification and genotoxic pathways of estrogen metabolism, hops extract as a whole only modulated the genotoxic pathway by an up-regulation of CYP1B1 mRNA expression. These data demonstrate the relevant role of 6-PN contained in the hops extract as potential modulator of estrogen metabolism due to its ERalpha and AHR agonist activity.
