Cytochrome P450 2J2; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in the cardiovascular system. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of PUFA. Converts arachidonic acid to four regioisomeric epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EpETrE), likely playing a major role in the epoxidation of endogenous cardiac arachidonic [...] 
Emerging research has revealed regulation of colorectal cancer metabolism by bacteria. Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fn) plays a crucial role in the development of colorectal cancer, however, whether Fn infection modifies metabolism in patients with colorectal cancer remains unknown. Here, LC-MS/MS-based lipidomics identified the upregulation of cytochrome P450 monooxygenases, primarily CYP2J2, and their mediated product 12,13-EpOME in patients with colorectal cancer tumors and mouse models, which increased the invasive and migratory ability of colorectal cancer cells in vivo and in vitro by regulating the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Metagenomic sequencing indicated a positive correlation between increased levels of fecal Fn and serum 12,13-EpOME in patients with colorectal cancer. High levels of CYP2J2 in tumor tissues also correlated with high Fn levels and worse overall survival in patients with stage III/IV colorectal cancer. Moreover, Fn was found to activate TLR4/AKT signaling, downregulating Keap1 and increasing NRF2 to promote transcription of CYP2J2. Collectively, these data identify that Fn promotes EMT and metastasis in colorectal cancer by activating a TLR4/Keap1/NRF2 axis to increase CYP2J2 and 12,13-EpOME, which could serve as clinical biomarkers and therapeutic targets for Fn-infected patients with colorectal cancer. SIGNIFICANCE: This study uncovers a mechanism by which Fusobacterium nucleatum regulates colorectal cancer metabolism to drive metastasis, suggesting the potential biomarker and therapeutic utility of the CYP2J2/12,13-EpOME axis in Fn-infected patients.
INTRODUCTION: Cytochrome P450s (CYPs) are a superfamily of monooxygenases with diverse biological roles. CYP2J2 is an isozyme highly expressed in the heart where it metabolizes endogenous substrates such as N-3/N-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) to produce lipid mediators involved in homeostasis and cardioprotective responses. Expanding our knowledge of the role CYP2J2 has within the heart is important for understanding its impact on cardiac health and disease. AREAS COVERED: The objective of this review was to assess the state of knowledge regarding cardiac CYP2J2. A literature search was conducted using PubMed-MEDLINE (from 2022 and earlier) to evaluate relevant studies regarding CYP2J2-mediated cardioprotection, small molecule modulators, effects of CYP2J2 substrates toward biologically relevant effects and implications of CYP2J2 polymorphisms and sexual dimorphism in the heart. EXPERT OPINION: Cardiac CYP2J2-mediated metabolism of endogenous and exogenous substrates have been shown to impact cardiac function. Identifying individual factors, like sex and age, that affect CYP2J2 require further elucidation to better understand CYP2J2's clinical relevance. Resolving the biological targets and activities of CYP2J2-derived PUFA metabolites will be necessary to safely target CYP2J2 and design novel analogues. Targeting CYP2J2 for therapeutic aims offers a potential novel approach to regulating cardiac homeostasis, drug metabolism and cardioprotection.
Cytochrome P450 2J2 (CYP2J2) is a known arachidonic acid (AA) epoxygenase that mediates the formation of four bioactive regioisomers of cis-epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs). Although its expression in the liver is low, CYP2J2 is mainly observed in extrahepatic tissues, including the small intestine, pancreas, lung, and heart. Changes in CYP2J2 levels or activity by xenobiotics, disease states, or polymorphisms are proposed to lead to various organ dysfunctions. Several studies have investigated the regulation of CYP2J2 and EET formation in various cell lines and have demonstrated that such regulation is tissue-dependent. In addition, studies linking CYP2J2 polymorphisms to the risk of developing cardiovascular disease (CVD) yielded contradictory results. This review will focus on the mechanisms of regulation of CYP2J2 by inducers, inhibitors, and oxidative stress modeling certain disease states in various cell lines and tissues. The implication of CYP2J2 expression, polymorphisms, activity and, as a result, EET levels in the pathophysiology of diabetes and CVD will also be discussed.
Extrahepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP450) are pivotal in the metabolism of endogenous substrates and xenobiotics. CYP2J2 is a major cardiac CYP450 and primarily metabolizes polyunsaturated fatty acids such as arachidonic acid to cardioactive epoxyeicosatrienoic acids. Due to its role in endobiotic metabolism, CYP2J2 has been actively studied in recent years with the focus on its biological functions in cardiac pathophysiology. Additionally, CYP2J2 metabolizes a number of xenobiotics such as astemizole and terfenadine and is potently inhibited by danazol and telmisartan. Notably, CYP2J2 is found to be upregulated in multiple cancers. Hence a number of specific CYP2J2 inhibitors have been developed and their efficacy in inhibiting tumor progression has been actively studied. CYP2J2 inhibitor such as C26 (1-[4-(vinyl)phenyl]-4-[4-(diphenyl-hydroxymethyl)-piperidinyl]-butanone hydrochloride) caused marked reduction in tumor proliferation and migration as well as promoted apoptosis in cancer cells. In this review, we discuss the role of CYP2J2 in cardiac pathophysiology and cancer therapeutics. Additionally, we provide an update on the substrates, reversible inhibitors and irreversible inhibitors of CYP2J2. Finally, we discuss the current gaps and future directions in CYP2J2 research.
In contrast to other drug-metabolizing cytochrome P(450) (CYP) oxygenases, CYP2J2 shows considerable extrahepatic activity and is responsible for the olefin epoxidation of several polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) precursors. The resulting epoxylipids act as signaling mediators and show a remarkable variety of biological functions. Recent studies suggest a role of selected CYP2J2-derived epoxylipids and their metabolites in chronic pain, as well as angiogenesis, hematopoiesis, metabolic disorders, and tumor growth. These pleiotropic effects of CYP products imply that targeting CYP2J2 could represent a novel therapeutic strategy in these fields. Here, we explore the biological functions of CYP2J2-derived epoxylipids and discuss therapeutic implications of the CYP2J2 inhibitors that are known so far.
Cytochrome p450 (CYP)2J2 is an epoxygenase enzyme that metabolises arachidonic acid to epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs). EETs are inactivated by soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH), which converts them in to their corresponding dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids (DHETs). CYP2J2 is highly expressed in cardiovascular tissue including the heart and vascular endothelial cells. CYP2J2 and the EETs it produces have been shown to have a diverse range of effects on the vasculature, including the regulation of inflammation, vascular tone, cellular proliferation, angiogenesis, and metabolism. This review will examine these established and emerging roles of CYP2J2 in the biology of vascular endothelial cells.
Anthracycline chemotherapeutics are highly effective, but their clinical usefulness is hampered by adverse side effects such as cardiotoxicity. Cytochrome P450 2J2 (CYP2J2) is a cytochrome P450 epoxygenase in human cardiomyocytes that converts arachidonic acid (AA) to cardioprotective epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (EET) regioisomers. Herein, we performed biochemical studies to understand the interaction of anthracycline derivatives (daunorubicin, doxorubicin, epirubicin, idarubicin, 5-iminodaunorubicin, zorubicin, valrubicin, and aclarubicin) with CYP2J2. We utilized fluorescence polarization (FP) to assess whether anthracyclines bind to CYP2J2. We found that aclarubicin bound the strongest to CYP2J2 despite it having large bulky groups. We determined that ebastine competitively inhibits anthracycline binding, suggesting that ebastine and anthracyclines may share the same binding site. Molecular dynamics and ensemble docking revealed electrostatic interactions between the anthracyclines and CYP2J2, contributing to binding stability. In particular, the glycosamine groups in anthracyclines are stabilized by binding to glutamate and aspartate residues in CYP2J2 forming salt bridge interactions. Furthermore, we used iterative ensemble docking schemes to gauge anthracycline influence on EET regioisomer production and anthracycline inhibition on AA metabolism. This was followed by experimental validation of CYP2J2-mediated metabolism of anthracycline derivatives using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry fragmentation analysis and inhibition of CYP2J2-mediated AA metabolism by these derivatives. Taken together, we use both experimental and theoretical methodologies to unveil the interactions of anthracycline derivatives with CYP2J2. These studies will help identify alternative mechanisms of how anthracycline cardiotoxicity may be mediated through the inhibition of cardiac P450, which will aid in the design of new anthracycline derivatives with lower toxicity.
Clinical studies suggest that diets rich in omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) provide beneficial anti-inflammatory effects, in part through their conversion to bioactive metabolites. Here we report on the endogenous production of a previously unknown class of omega-3 PUFA-derived lipid metabolites that originate from the crosstalk between endocannabinoid and cytochrome P450 (CYP) epoxygenase metabolic pathways. The omega-3 endocannabinoid epoxides are derived from docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) to form epoxyeicosatetraenoic acid-ethanolamide (EEQ-EA) and epoxydocosapentaenoic acid-ethanolamide (EDP-EA), respectively. Both EEQ-EAs and EDP-EAs are endogenously present in rat brain and peripheral organs as determined via targeted lipidomics methods. These metabolites were directly produced by direct epoxygenation of the omega-3 endocannabinoids, docosahexanoyl ethanolamide (DHEA) and eicosapentaenoyl ethanolamide (EPEA) by activated BV-2 microglial cells, and by human CYP2J2. Neuroinflammation studies revealed that the terminal epoxides 17,18-EEQ-EA and 19,20-EDP-EA dose-dependently abated proinflammatory IL-6 cytokines while increasing anti-inflammatory IL-10 cytokines, in part through cannabinoid receptor-2 activation. Furthermore the omega-3 endocannabinoid epoxides 17,18-EEQ-EA and 19,20-EDP-EA exerted antiangiogenic effects in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC) and vasodilatory actions on bovine coronary arteries and reciprocally regulated platelet aggregation in washed human platelets. Taken together, the omega-3 endocannabinoid epoxides' physiological effects are mediated through both endocannabinoid and epoxyeicosanoid signaling pathways. In summary, the omega-3 endocannabinoid epoxides are found at concentrations comparable to those of other endocannabinoids and are expected to play critical roles during inflammation in vivo; thus their identification may aid in the development of therapeutics for neuroinflammatory and cerebrovascular diseases.
Modern humans carry both Neanderthal and Denisovan (archaic) genome elements that are part of the human gene pool and affect the life and health of living individuals. The impact of archaic DNA may be particularly evident in pharmacogenes-genes responsible for the processing of exogenous substances such as food, pollutants, and medications-as these can relate to changing environmental effects, and beneficial variants may have been retained as modern humans encountered new environments. However, the health implications and contribution of archaic ancestry in pharmacogenes of modern humans remain understudied. Here, we explore 11 key cytochrome P450 genes (CYP450) involved in 75% of all drug metabolizing reactions in three Neanderthal and one Denisovan individuals and examine archaic introgression in modern human populations. We infer the metabolizing efficiency of these 11 CYP450 genes in archaic individuals and find important predicted phenotypic differences relative to modern human variants. We identify several single nucleotide variants shared between archaic and modern humans in each gene, including some potentially function-altering mutations in archaic CYP450 genes, which may result in altered metabolism in living people carrying these variants. We also identified several variants in the archaic CYP450 genes that are novel and unique to archaic humans as well as one gene, CYP2B6, that shows evidence for a gene duplication found only in Neanderthals and modern Africans. Finally, we highlight CYP2A6, CYP2C9, and CYP2J2, genes which show evidence for archaic introgression into modern humans and posit evolutionary hypotheses that explain their allele frequencies in modern populations.
Epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) are important endogenous substances that affect heart function in human body. Animal models of cytochrome P450 (CYP) and soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) related cardiovascular diseases (CVD) have revealed the physiological effects of EETs, mainly including vascular function regulation, angiogenesis, myocardial fibrosis, myocardial hypertrophy, and cardiovascular inflammation. At the same time, clinical studies have found that most of the substrates and inhibitors of CYP2J2 affect the content of EETs, resulting in cardiotoxicity of drugs. Therefore, the regulation of CYP and sEH enzymes on EETs points out the direction for exploring EET-mediated cardiac protection. The metabolic pathway of EETs is not only an important target for the development of new drugs for CVD but also an important factor in preventing drug cardiotoxicity. The development and clinical application of sEH inhibitors and EETs analogues provide broad prospects for the treatment of CVD.
Blood-retinal barrier (BRB) breakdown is responsible for multiple ocular diseases, such as diabetic retinopathy, age-related macular degeneration, and retinal vascular occlusive diseases. Increased vascular permeability contributes to vasogenic edema and tissue damage, with consequent adverse effects on vision. Herein, we found that endothelial CYP2J2 overexpression maintained BRB integrity after ischemia-reperfusion injury and consequently protected against retinal ganglion cell loss. Oxidative stress repressed endothelial ANXA1 expression in vivo and in vitro. CYP2J2 upregulated methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3) expression and hence promoted ANXA1 translation via ANXA1 m(6) A modification in endothelium under oxidative stress. CYP2J2 maintained the distribution of endothelial tight junctions and adherens junctions in an ANXA1-dependent manner. Endothelial ANXA1 plays an indispensable role in vascular homeostasis and stabilization during development. Endothelial ANXA1 deletion disrupted retinal vascular perfusion as well as BRB integrity. CYP2J2 metabolites restored BRB integrity in the presence of ANXA1. Our findings identified the CYP2J2-METTL3-ANXA1 pathway as a potential therapeutic target for relieving BRB impairments.
12,13-dihydroxy-9z-octadecenoic acid (12,13-DiHOME) is a linoleic acid diol derived from cytochrome P-450 (CYP) epoxygenase and epoxide hydrolase (EH) metabolism. 12,13-DiHOME is associated with inflammation and mitochondrial damage in the innate immune response, but how 12,13-DiHOME contributes to these effects is unclear. We hypothesized that 12,13-DiHOME enhances macrophage inflammation through effects on NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation. To test this hypothesis, we utilized human monocytic THP1 cells differentiated into macrophage-like cells with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA). 12,13-DiHOME present during lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-priming of THP1 macrophages exacerbated nigericin-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Using high-resolution respirometry, we observed that priming with LPS+12,13-DiHOME altered mitochondrial respiratory function. Mitophagy, measured using mito-Keima, was also modulated by 12,13-DiHOME present during priming. These mitochondrial effects were associated with increased sensitivity to nigericin-induced mitochondrial depolarization and reactive oxygen species production in LPS+12,13-DiHOME-primed macrophages. Nigericin-induced mitochondrial damage and NLRP3 inflammasome activation in LPS+12,13-DiHOME-primed macrophages were ablated by the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) inhibitor, Ru265. 12,13-DiHOME present during LPS-priming also enhanced nigericin-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation in primary murine bone marrow-derived macrophages. In summary, these data demonstrate a pro-inflammatory role for 12,13-DiHOME by enhancing NLRP3 inflammasome activation in macrophages.
Arachidonic acids are converted to eicosanoid mediators by different enzyme systems: cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase, and cytochrome P450 (CYP) monooxygenase pathways (omega/omega-1-hydroxylases and epoxygenases). Of 57 putatively functional human CYPs, only about a dozen enzymes are responsible for xenobiotic metabolism. CYP2 family is the predominant epoxygenase isoform abundantly expressed in the endothelium, myocardium, and kidney in humans. Numerous studies have demonstrated the cardiovascular protective effects of CYP epoxygenases and eicosatrienoic acids ranging from vasodilation, antihypertensive, proangiogenesis, antiatherosclerosis, and cardiac protection. The roles of CYP2 family and their metabolites in inflammation and cancer biology have recently attracted great attention. Here, we review the recent progress on polymorphisms, distribution and function of CYP2 family, and their roles in inflammation and cancer.
The endogenous cannabinoid system was first uncovered following studies of the recreational drug Cannabis sativa. It is now recognized as a vital network of signaling pathways that regulate several physiological processes. Following the initial discovery of the cannabinoid receptors 1 (CB1) and 2 (CB2), activated by Cannabis-derived analogs, many endogenous fatty acids termed "endocannabinoids" are now known to be partial agonists of the CB receptors. At present, the most thoroughly studied endocannabinoid signaling molecules are anandamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG), which are both derived from arachidonic acid. Both AEA and 2-AG are also substrates for the eicosanoid-synthesizing pathways, namely, certain cyclooxygenase (COX), lipoxygenase (LOX), and cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. In the past, research in the endocannabinoid field focused on the interaction of AEA and 2-AG with the COX and LOX enzymes, but accumulating evidence also points to the involvement of CYPs in modulating endocannabinoid signaling. The focus of this review is to explore the current understanding of CYP-mediated metabolism of endocannabinoids.
Therapeutics for arachidonic acid pathways began with the development of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs that inhibit cyclooxygenase (COX). The enzymatic pathways and arachidonic acid metabolites and respective receptors have been successfully targeted and therapeutics developed for pain, inflammation, pulmonary and cardiovascular diseases. These drugs target the COX and lipoxygenase pathways but not the third branch for arachidonic acid metabolism, the cytochrome P450 (CYP) pathway. Small molecule compounds targeting enzymes and CYP epoxy-fatty acid metabolites have evolved rapidly over the last two decades. These therapeutics have primarily focused on inhibiting soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) or agonist mimetics for epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EET). Based on preclinical animal model studies and human studies, major therapeutic indications for these sEH inhibitors and EET mimics/analogs are renal and cardiovascular diseases. Novel small molecules that inhibit sEH have advanced to human clinical trials and demonstrate promise for cardiovascular diseases. Challenges remain for sEH inhibitor and EET analog drug development; however, there is a high likelihood that a drug that acts on this third branch of arachidonic acid metabolism will be utilized to treat a cardiovascular or kidney disease in the next decade.
Drug withdrawal post-marketing due to cardiotoxicity is a major concern for drug developers, regulatory agencies, and patients. One common mechanism of cardiotoxicity is through inhibition of cardiac ion channels, leading to prolongation of the QT interval and sometimes fatal arrythmias. Recently, oxylipin signaling compounds have been shown to bind to and alter ion channel function, and disruption in their cardiac levels may contribute to QT prolongation. Cytochrome P450 2J2 (CYP2J2) is the predominant CYP isoform expressed in cardiomyocytes, where it oxidizes arachidonic acid to cardioprotective epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs). In addition to roles in vasodilation and angiogenesis, EETs bind to and activate various ion channels. CYP2J2 inhibition can lower EET levels and decrease their ability to preserve cardiac rhythm. In this review, we investigated the ability of known CYP inhibitors to cause QT prolongation using Certara's Drug Interaction Database. We discovered that among the multiple CYP isozymes, CYP2J2 inhibitors were more likely to also be QT-prolonging drugs (by approximately 2-fold). We explored potential binding interactions between these inhibitors and CYP2J2 using molecular docking and identified four amino acid residues (Phe61, Ala223, Asn231, and Leu402) predicted to interact with QT-prolonging drugs. The four residues are located near the opening of egress channel 2, highlighting the potential importance of this channel in CYP2J2 binding and inhibition. These findings suggest that if a drug inhibits CYP2J2 and interacts with one of these four residues, then it may have a higher risk of QT prolongation and more preclinical studies are warranted to assess cardiovascular safety.
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) epoxygenases are a special subset of heme-containing CYP enzymes capable of performing the epoxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) and the metabolism of xenobiotics. This dual functionality positions epoxygenases along a metabolic crossroad. Therefore, structure-function studies are critical for understanding their role in bioactive oxy-lipid synthesis, drug-PUFA interactions, and for designing therapeutics that directly target the epoxygenases. To better exploit CYP epoxygenases as therapeutic targets, there is a need for improved understanding of epoxygenase structure-function. Of the characterized epoxygenases, human CYP2J2 stands out as a potential target because of its role in cardiovascular physiology. In this review, the early research on the discovery and activity of epoxygenases is contextualized to more recent advances in CYP epoxygenase enzymology with respect to PUFA and drug metabolism. Additionally, this review employs CYP2J2 epoxygenase as a model system to highlight both the seminal works and recent advances in epoxygenase enzymology. Herein we cover CYP2J2's interactions with PUFAs and xenobiotics, its tissue-specific physiological roles in diseased states, and its structural features that enable epoxygenase function. Additionally, the enumeration of research on CYP2J2 identifies the future needs for the molecular characterization of CYP2J2 to enable a new axis of therapeutic design.
Epidemiological studies have shown that inflammation plays a critical role in the development and progression of various chronic diseases, including cancers, neurological diseases, hepatic fibrosis, diabetic retinopathy, and vascular diseases. Decursin and decursinol angelate (DA) are pyranocoumarin compounds obtained from the roots of Angelica gigas. Several studies have described the anti-inflammatory effects of decursin and DA. Decursin and DA have shown potential anti-inflammatory activity by modulating growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor, transcription factors such as signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells, cellular enzymes including matrix metalloproteinases cyclooxygenase, and protein kinases such as extracellular receptor kinase, phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase, and protein kinase C. These compounds have the ability to induce apoptosis by activating pro-apoptotic proteins and the caspase cascade, and reduced the expression of anti-apoptotic proteins such as B-cell lymphoma 2 and B-cell lymphoma-extra-large. Interaction with multiple molecular targets and cytotoxic effects, these two compounds are favorable candidates for treating various chronic inflammatory diseases such as cancers (prostate, breast, leukemia, cervical, and myeloma), rheumatoid arthritis, diabetic retinopathy, hepatic fibrosis, osteoclastogenesis, allergy, and Alzheimer's disease. We have summarized the preliminary studies regarding the biological effects of decursin and DA. In this review, we will also highlight the functions of coumarin compounds that can be translated to a clinical practice for the treatment and prevention of various inflammatory ailments.
Endothelial and vascular smooth cells generate cytochrome P450 (CYP) arachidonic acid metabolites that can impact endothelial cell function and vascular homeostasis. The objective of this review is to focus on the physiology and pharmacology of endothelial CYP metabolites. The CYP pathway produces two types of eicosanoid products: epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs), formed by CYP epoxygenases, and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs), formed by CYP hydroxylases. Advances in CYP enzymes, EETs, and 20-HETE by pharmacological and genetic means have led to a more complete understanding of how these eicosanoids impact on endothelial cell function. Endothelial-derived EETs were initially described as endothelial-derived hyperpolarizing factors. It is now well recognized that EETs importantly contribute to numerous endothelial cell functions. On the other hand, 20-HETE is the predominant CYP hydroxylase synthesized by vascular smooth muscle cells. Like EETs, 20-HETE acts on endothelial cells and impacts importantly on endothelial and vascular function. An important aspect for EETs and 20-HETE endothelial actions is their interactions with hormonal and paracrine factors. These include interactions with the renin-angiotensin system, adrenergic system, puringeric system, and endothelin. Alterations in CYP enzymes, 20-HETE, or EETs contribute to endothelial dysfunction and cardiovascular diseases such as ischemic injury, hypertension, and atherosclerosis. Recent advances have led to the development of potential therapeutics that target CYP enzymes, 20-HETE, or EETs. Thus, future investigation is required to obtain a more complete understanding of how CYP enzymes, 20-HETE, and EETs regulate endothelial cell function.
Previous studies have shown that paricalcitol (PA) has a protective effect on the kidneys. However, the exact molecular mechanism by which PA affects diabetic nephropathy (DN) progression remains uncertain. PBMCs of patients with DN were isolated, and CYP2J2 and VDR levels were detected by qPCR. Pearson correlation analysis was utilized to detect the relationship between uACR and CYP2J2 and VDR and between CYP2J2 and VDR. The protective effects of PA on DN have been examined by TUNEL, HE staining, ELISA, and Flow cytometry assays in STZ-induced mice. Moreover, THP-1 cells were stimulated with HG/LPS for in vitro studies. ELISA, qPCR, western blot, and Flow cytometry assays were utilized to assess the effects of PA on DN progression by regulating CYP2J2. The interaction between CYP2J2 and VDR was analyzed by CHIP-qPCR and luciferase experiments. CYP2J2 and VDR levels were downregulated and uACR level was upregulated in DN patients. CYP2J2 and VDR were positively correlated in PBMCs. Both CYP2J2 and VDR are inversely correlated with uACR. Moreover, after PA treatment, 11, 12-EET levels increased, inflammatory factor levels decreased, and M2 macrophage polarization was promoted in STZ-induced mice and HG/LPS-triggered THP-1 cells. Depletion of CYP2J2 and VDR decreased 11, 12-EET level, enhanced inflammatory factor levels, and inhibited M2 macrophage polarization, which were reversed by CYP2J2 overexpression in HG/LPS-treated cells. Furthermore, VDR bound to the CYP2J2 promoter and promoted CYP2J2 transcriptional expression. The present work pointed out a new use for PA to inhibit DN progression by increasing EET level, inhibiting inflammatory response, and inducing M2 macrophage polarization via regulating the VDR/CYP2J2 axis.
