Cytochrome P450 2U1; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of arachidonic acid and its conjugates. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR; NADPH- ferrihemoprotein reductase). Acts as an omega and omega-1 hydroxylase for arachidonic acid and possibly for other long chain fatty acids. May modulate the arachidonic acid signaling pathway and play a role in other fatty acid signaling processes. May downregulat [...] 
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a syndrome designation describing inherited disorders in which lower extremity weakness and spasticity are the predominant symptoms. There are more than 50 genetic types of HSP. HSP affects individuals of diverse ethnic groups with prevalence estimates ranging from 1.2 to 9.6 per 100,000. Symptoms may begin at any age. Gait impairment that begins after childhood usually worsens very slowly over many years. Gait impairment that begins in infancy and early childhood may not worsen significantly. Postmortem studies consistently identify degeneration of corticospinal tract axons (maximal in the thoracic spinal cord) and degeneration of fasciculus gracilis fibers (maximal in the cervico-medullary region). HSP syndromes thus appear to involve motor-sensory axon degeneration affecting predominantly (but not exclusively) the distal ends of long central nervous system (CNS) axons. In general, proteins encoded by HSP genes have diverse functions including (1) axon transport (e.g. SPG30/KIF1A, SPG10/KIF5A and possibly SPG4/Spastin); (2) endoplasmic reticulum morphology (e.g. SPG3A/Atlastin, SPG4/Spastin, SPG12/reticulon 2, and SPG31/REEP1, all of which interact); (3) mitochondrial function (e.g. SPG13/chaperonin 60/heat-shock protein 60, SPG7/paraplegin; and mitochondrial ATP6); (4) myelin formation (e.g. SPG2/Proteolipid protein and SPG42/Connexin 47); (5) protein folding and ER-stress response (SPG6/NIPA1, SPG8/K1AA0196 (Strumpellin), SGP17/BSCL2 (Seipin), "mutilating sensory neuropathy with spastic paraplegia" owing to CcT5 mutation and presumably SPG18/ERLIN2); (6) corticospinal tract and other neurodevelopment (e.g. SPG1/L1 cell adhesion molecule and SPG22/thyroid transporter MCT8); (7) fatty acid and phospholipid metabolism (e.g. SPG28/DDHD1, SPG35/FA2H, SPG39/NTE, SPG54/DDHD2, and SPG56/CYP2U1); and (8) endosome membrane trafficking and vesicle formation (e.g. SPG47/AP4B1, SPG48/KIAA0415, SPG50/AP4M1, SPG51/AP4E, SPG52/AP4S1, and VSPG53/VPS37A). The availability of animal models (including bovine, murine, zebrafish, Drosophila, and C. elegans) for many types of HSP permits exploration of disease mechanisms and potential treatments. This review highlights emerging concepts of this large group of clinically similar disorders.
Cytochrome P450 2U1 (CYP2U1) identified from the human genome remains poorly known since few data are presently available on its physiological function(s) and substrate(s) specificity. CYP2U1 mutations are associated with complicated forms of hereditary spastic paraplegia, alterations of mitochondrial architecture and bioenergetics. In order to better know the biological roles of CYP2U1, we used a bioinformatics approach. The analysis of the data invited us to focus on leukotriene B(4) (LTB(4)), an important inflammatory mediator. Here, we show that CYP2U1 efficiently catalyzes the hydroxylation of LTB(4) predominantly on its omega-position. We also report docking experiments of LTB(4) in a 3D model of truncated CYP2U1 that are in agreement with this hydroxylation regioselectivity. The involvement of CYP2U1 in the metabolism of LTB(4) could have strong physiological consequences in cerebral pathologies including ischemic stroke because CYP2U1 is predominantly expressed in the brain.
The cytochrome P450 enzymes are highly expressed in the liver and are involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics. Because of the initiatives associated with the Human Genome Project, a great progress has recently been seen in the identification and characterization of novel extrahepatic P450s, including CYP2S1, CYP2R1, CYP2U1 and CYP2W1. Like the hepatic enzymes, these P450s may play a role in the tissue-specific metabolism of foreign compounds, but they may also have important endogenous functions. CYP2S1 has been shown to metabolize all-trans retinoic acid and CYP2R1 is a major vitamin D 25-hydroxylase. Regarding their metabolism of xenobiotics, much remains to be established, but CYP2S1 metabolizes naphthalene and it is likely that these P450s are responsible for metabolic activation of several different kinds of xenobiotic chemicals and contribute to extrahepatic toxicity and carcinogenesis.
Cytochrome P450 2U1 (CYP2U1) exhibits several distinctive characteristics among the 57 human CYPs, such as its presence in almost all living organisms with a highly conserved sequence, its particular gene organization with only five exons, its major location in thymus and brain, and its protein sequence involving an unusually long N-terminal region containing 8 proline residues and an insert of about 20 amino acids containing 5 arginine residues after the transmembrane helix. Few substrates, including fatty acids, N-arachidonoylserotonin (AS), and some drugs, have been reported so far. However, its biological roles remain largely unknown, even though CYP2U1 mutations have been involved in some pathological situations, such as complicated forms of hereditary spastic paraplegia. These data together with its ability to hydroxylate some fatty acids and AS suggest its possible role in lipid metabolism.
BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis (OA) is one of degenerative-related arthritis, which can be aggravated by low-grade synovitis. It is known that arachidonic acid (AA) dysmetabolism brings OA synovitis. However, the impact of synovial AA metabolism pathway (AMP) related genes on OA remains uncovered. METHODS: Here, we conducted a comprehensive analysis to explore the impact of AA metabolism genes in OA synovium. We obtained transcriptome expression profiles from three raw datasets related to OA synovium (GSE12021, GSE29746, GSE55235) and identified the hub genes of AA metabolism pathways (AMP) in OA synovium. An OA occurrence diagnostic model was constructed and validated based on the identified hub genes. Then, we explored the correlation between hub gene expression and the immune-related module using CIBERSORT and MCP-counter analysis. The unsupervised consensus clustering analysis and weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) were utilized to identify robust clusters of identified genes in each cohort. Moreover, the interaction between the hub genes of AMP and immune cells was elucidated through single-cell RNA (scRNA) analysis by scRNA sequencing data from GSE152815. RESULTS: We found that the expression of AMP-related genes was up-regulated in OA synovium, and seven hub genes (LTC4S, PTGS2, PTGS1, MAPKAPK2, CBR1, PTGDS, and CYP2U1) were identified. The diagnostic model that combined the identified hub genes showed great clinical validity in diagnosing OA (AUC = 0.979). Moreover, significant associations were noticed between the hub genes' expression, immune cell infiltration, and inflammatory cytokine levels. The 30 OA patients were randomized and clustered into three groups using WGCNA analysis based on the hub genes, and diverse immune status was found in different clusters. Of interest, older patients were more likely to be classified into a cluster with higher levels of inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and less infiltration of immune cells. Based on the scRNA-sequencing data, we found that the hub genes had relatively higher expression in macrophages and B cells than other immune cells. Moreover, inflammation-related pathways were significantly enriched in macrophages. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that AMP-related genes are closely involved in alterations of OA synovial inflammation. The transcriptional level of hub genes could serve as a potential diagnostic marker for OA.
Hereditary spastic paraplegias are heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders. Understanding of their pathogenic mechanisms remains sparse, and therapeutic options are lacking. We characterized a mouse model lacking the Cyp2u1 gene, loss of which is known to be involved in a complex form of these diseases in humans. We showed that this model partially recapitulated the clinical and biochemical phenotypes of patients. Using electron microscopy, lipidomic, and proteomic studies, we identified vitamin B2 as a substrate of the CYP2U1 enzyme, as well as coenzyme Q, neopterin, and IFN-alpha levels as putative biomarkers in mice and fluids obtained from the largest series of CYP2U1-mutated patients reported so far. We also confirmed brain calcifications as a potential biomarker in patients. Our results suggest that CYP2U1 deficiency disrupts mitochondrial function and impacts proper neurodevelopment, which could be prevented by folate supplementation in our mouse model, followed by a neurodegenerative process altering multiple neuronal and extraneuronal tissues.
BACKGROUND: The tissue-specific expression of cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP, P450) in the human brain may influence the therapeutic response to, and side effects of, neuroactive drugs including alcohol. However, the distribution of many P450s, especially poorly characterized CYP2 forms, within specific regions of the brain remains obscure, partly due to the paucity of available tissue and difficulty in discriminating between related P450s with available antibodies. METHODS: In this study, we analyzed the expression of CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP2J2, CYP2S1, CYP2U1, and CYP2W1 proteins in human prefrontal cortex (PFC) and amygdala (AMG) by immunoblotting with antibodies for which the P450 form specificity had been enhanced by affinity purification. These brain regions were selected as they mediate the addictive effects of cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption, substances known to modulate P450 expression in other tissues. PFC and AMG samples from alcoholic smokers, alcoholic nonsmokers, nonalcoholic smokers, and nonalcoholic nonsmokers were studied to assess the effect of alcohol use and smoking on the expression of these proteins. RESULTS: Of the P450s studied, CYP2E1 and CYP2U1 were expressed in all samples analyzed (n = 26 and 22 for CYP2E1 and CYP2U1, respectively), and elevated in alcoholics. CYP2U1 expression was also slightly increased in smokers. Expression of both P450s was increased in AMG compared to PFC of the same individuals. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of CYP2E1 and CYP2U1 protein expression in human AMG. Our results suggest that CYP2U1 expression may be modulated by alcohol and tobacco, with potential consequent effects on the metabolism of drugs and endogenous chemicals by this enzyme.
PURPOSE: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a recessive disorder involving skin, eyes and arteries, mainly caused by ABCC6 pathogenic variants. However, almost one fifth of patients remain genetically unsolved despite extensive genetic screening of ABCC6, as illustrated in a large French PXE series of 220 cases. We searched for new PXE gene(s) to solve the ABCC6-negative patients. METHODS: First, family-based exome sequencing was performed, in one ABCC6-negative PXE patient with additional neurological features, and her relatives. CYP2U1, involved in hereditary spastic paraplegia type 56 (SPG56), was selected based on this complex phenotype, and the presence of two candidate variants. Second, CYP2U1 sequencing was performed in a retrospective series of 46 additional ABCC6-negative PXE probands. Third, six additional SPG56 patients were evaluated for PXE skin and eye phenotype. Additionally, plasma pyrophosphate dosage and functional analyses were performed in some of these patients. RESULTS: 6.4% of ABCC6-negative PXE patients (n = 3) harboured biallelic pathogenic variants in CYP2U1. PXE skin lesions with histological confirmation, eye lesions including maculopathy or angioid streaks, and various neurological symptoms were present. CYP2U1 missense variants were confirmed to impair protein function. Plasma pyrophosphate levels were normal. Two SPG56 patients (33%) presented some phenotypic overlap with PXE. CONCLUSION: CYP2U1 pathogenic variants are found in unsolved PXE patients with neurological findings, including spastic paraplegia, expanding the SPG56 phenotype and highlighting its overlap with PXE. The pathophysiology of ABCC6 and CYP2U1 should be explored to explain their respective role and potential interaction in ectopic mineralization.
The recent identification of drug-metabolizing enzymes cytochrome P450 (CYP) in the human blood-brain barrier (BBB) raises the question of whether these enzymes act in concert with ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters to limit the brain distributions of drugs. We recently demonstrated several CYP genes in freshly isolated human brain microvessels; the main isoforms expressed were CYP1B1 and CYP2U1. Many studies using different experimental approaches have revealed that P-glycoprotein (P-gp, ABCB1), breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP, ABCG2) and the multidrug resistance-associated protein 4 (MRP4, ABCC4) are the main ABC transporters in the human BBB. The first part of this review covers recent studies on the expression, regulation and function of CYP450 and ABC transporters in the rodent and human BBBs. The second part focuses on the possible interplay between some CYPs and certain ABC transporters at the BBB, which makes it a determining element of brain drug concentrations and thus of the effects of centrally acting drugs.
The extrahepatic CYP enzymes, CYP1B1 and CYP2U1, have been predominantly found in both astrocytes and brain microvessels. We investigated the alteration in the production of hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) from arachidonic acid (AA) mainly via CYP1B1 and CYP2U1 by glutamate. CYP1B1 and CYP2U1 mRNA levels were dose-dependently induced by glutamate in human U251 glioma cells and hCMEC/D3 blood-brain barrier cells. The increases in the CYP1B1 and CYP2U1 mRNA levels and the binding of CREB to CYP1B1 and CYP2U1 promoters following glutamate treatment were attenuated by mGlu5 receptor antagonist. The mRNA levels of CYP1B1 and CYP2U1 were increased in the cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum from adult rats that received a subcutaneous injection of monosodium l-glutamate at 1, 3, 5, and 7 days of age; meanwhile, the protein levels of CYP1B1 and CYP2U1 in the astrocytes were induced by glutamate. Glutamate treatment significantly increased the production of 5-HETE, 8-HETE, 11-HETE, and 20-HETE in the cortex and cerebellum. These data suggested that the neuron-astrocyte reciprocal signaling can change the CYP-mediated AA metabolism (e.g. EETs and HETEs) in astrocytes via its specific receptor.
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a neurological disorder characterized by a progressive spasticity and muscle weakness of the lower limbs. It is divided into two subtypes, uncomplicated and complicated forms. Biallelic mutations in the cytochrome P450 2U1 gene (CYP2U1) are associated with spastic paraplegia type 56 (SPG56), manifesting both uncomplicated and complicated HSP. Accompanying clinical features include intellectual disability, dystonia, cerebellar ataxia, subclinical peripheral neuropathy, visual impairment, as well as abnormalities in brain magnetic resonance imaging. As a rare clinical feature, delayed myelination has previously been reported in only two patients with CYP2U1 mutations. Here, we report a patient with SPG56 with novel compound heterozygous mutations in CYP2U1 which were identified by whole exome sequencing. Our patient exhibited complex features together with delayed myelination, broadening the phenotypic spectrum of SPG56, and implying that CYP2U1 should be screened in HSP with delayed myelination.
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is an inherited disorder of the central nervous system mainly characterized by gradual spasticity and weakness of the lower limbs. SPG56 is a rare autosomal recessive early onset complicated form of HSP caused by mutations in CYP2U1. The CYP2U1 enzyme was shown to catalyze the hydroxylation of arachidonic acid. Here, we report two further SPG56 families carrying three novel CYP2U1 missense variants and the development of an in vitro biochemical assay to determine the pathogenicity of missense variants of uncertain clinical significance. We compared spectroscopic, enzymatic, and structural (from a 3D model) characteristics of the over expressed wild-type or mutated CYP2U1 in HEK293T cells. Our findings demonstrated that most of the tested missense variants in CYP2U1 were functionally inactive because of a loss of proper heme binding or destabilization of the protein structure. We also showed that functional data do not necessarily correlate with in silico predictions of variants pathogenicity, using different bioinformatic phenotype prediction tools. Our results therefore highlight the importance to use biological tools, such as the enzymatic test set up in this study, to evaluate the effects of newly identified variants in clinical settings.
SPG56 is an autosomal recessive form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) associated with mutations in CYP2U1. There is no clear documentation of visual impairment in the few reported cases of SPG56, although this form is complex on clinical ground and visual deficit are extremely frequent in complicated HSP. We report three patients in a consanguineous family harboring the novel homozygous c.1168C>T (p.R390*) in SPG56/CYP2U1, and showing a pigmentary degenerative maculopathy associated with progressive spastic paraplegia. Furthermore, we characterized precisely the ophthalmologic phenotype through indirect ophthalmoscopy, retinal optical coherence tomography and visual evoked potentials. This is the first formal report of pigmentary degenerative maculopathy associated with a CYP2U1 homozygous mutation.
Currently, 57 active cytochrome P450 (CYP) genes and 58 pseudogenes are known to be present in the human genome. Among the genes discovered by initiatives in the human genome project are CYP2R1, CYP2W1, CYP2S1, CYP2U1 and CYP3A43, the latter apparently encoding a pseudoenzyme. The function, polymorphism and regulation of these genes are still to be discovered to a great extent. The polymorphism of drug metabolizing CYPs is extensive and influences the outcome of drug therapy causing lack of response or adverse drug reactions. The basis for the differences in the global distribution of the polymorphic variants is inactivating gene mutations and subsequent genetic drift. However, polymorphic alleles carrying multiple active gene copies also exist and are suggested in case of CYP2D6 to be caused by positive selection due to development of alkaloid resistance in North East Africa about 10,000-5000 BC. The knowledge about the CYP genes and their polymorphisms is of fundamental importance for effective drug therapy and for drug development as well as for understanding metabolic activation of carcinogens and other xenobiotics. Here, a short review of the current knowledge is given.
Long chain fatty acids have recently emerged as critical signaling molecules in neuronal, cardiovascular, and renal processes, yet little is presently known about the precise mechanisms controlling their tissue distribution and bioactivation. We have identified a novel cytochrome P450, CYP2U1, which may play an important role in modulating the arachidonic acid signaling pathway. Northern blot and real-time PCR analysis demonstrated that CYP2U1 transcripts were most abundant in the thymus and the brain (cerebellum), indicating a specific physiological role for CYP2U1 in these tissues. Recombinant human CYP2U1 protein, expressed in baculovirus-infected Sf9 insect cells, was found to metabolize arachidonic acid exclusively to two region-specific products as determined by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. These metabolites were identified as 19- and 20-hydroxy-modified arachidonic acids by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis. In addition to omega/omega-1 hydroxylation of arachidonic acid, CYP2U1 protein also catalyzed the hydroxylation of structurally related long chain fatty acid (docosahexaenoic acid) but not fatty acids such as lauric acid or linoleic acid. This is the first report of the cloning and functional expression of a new human member of P450 family 2, CYP2U1, which metabolizes long chain fatty acids. Based on the ability of CYP2U1 to generate bioactive eicosanoid derivatives, we postulate that CYP2U1 plays an important physiological role in fatty acid signaling processes in both cerebellum and thymus.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical phenotype and genetic characteristics of a child with Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). METHODS: A child with HSP who was admitted to the Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University on August 10, 2020 due to discovery of tiptoeing for 2 years was selected as the study subject, and relevant clinical data was collected. Peripheral blood samples of the child and her parents were collected for the extraction of genomic DNA. And trio-whole exome sequencing (trio-WES) was carried out. Candidate variants were verified by Sanger sequencing. Bioinformatic software was used to analyze the conservation of variant sites. RESULTS: The child was a 2-year-and-10-month-old female with clinical manifestations including increased muscle tone of lower limbs, pointed feet, and cognitive language delay. Trio-WES results showed that she had harbored compound heterozygous variants of c.865C>T (p.Gln289*) and c.1126G>A (p.Glu376Lys) of the CYP2U1 gene. And the corresponding amino acid for c.1126G>A (p.Glu376Lys) is highly conserved among various species. Based on guidelines from the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, the c.865C>T was predicted as a pathogenic variant (PVS1+PM2_Supporting), and c.1126G>A was rated as a variant of uncertain significance (PM2_Supporting+PM3+PP3). CONCLUSION: The child was diagnosed with HSP type 56 due to compound variants of the CYP2U1 gene. Above findings have enriched the mutation spectrum of the CYP2U1 gene.
The domestic Muscovy duck (Cairina moschata) provide unique genetic resources patterned by both tropical environmental conditions and human activities, the evaluation of their genetic diversity and population structure will shade light on the mechanism of their remarkable adaptive capacities. We therefore analyzed the variation in mtDNA cytochrome b and nuclear DNA CYP2U1 sequences of 378 Nigerian Muscovy ducks (comprising of 287 de novo and 91 downloaded) plus 80 published sequences of Muscovy ducks from India. The results showed high haplotype diversity (0.800 +/- 0.023) among Nigerian Muscovy duck populations with 91 distinct haplotypes for the nuclear DNA CYP2U1 gene but low (0.266 +/- 0.033) for cytochrome b with 31 haplotypes. The median-joining networks of both markers grouped Nigerian Muscovy ducks into two; the first group consisting of only Nigerian Muscovy duck populations, and the second group Nigerian with Indian populations. Neutrality test results indicated that Nigerian populations experienced recent population expansion and/or genetic hitchhiking. A geographic signal was absent in line with previously studied poultry species in Nigeria. The most prominent haplotype dominated across all regions in Nigeria, which may be due to extensive genetic intermixing except for the Indian population (F (ST) = 0.02550, P = 0.01075). This indicated low genetic differentiation between and within Nigerian Muscovy duck as revealed by the suitability of the nuclear DNA CYP2U1 gene.
Since the proposal to define a separate subgroup of inborn errors of metabolism involved in the biosynthesis and remodelling of phospholipids, sphingolipids and long chain fatty acids in 2013, this group is rapidly expanding. This review focuses on the disorders involved in the biosynthesis of phospholipids. Phospholipids are involved in uncountable cellular processes, e.g. as structural components of membranes, by taking part in vesicle and mitochondrial fusion and fission or signal transduction. Here we provide an overview on both pathophysiology and the extremely heterogeneous clinical presentations of the disorders reported so far (Sengers syndrome (due to mutations in AGK), MEGDEL syndrome (or SERAC defect, SERAC1), Barth syndrome (or TAZ defect, TAZ), congenital muscular dystrophy due to CHKB deficiency (CHKB). Boucher-Neuhauser/Gordon Holmes syndrome (PNPLA6), PHARC syndrome (ABHD12), hereditary spastic paraplegia type 28, 54 and 56 (HSP28, DDHD1; HSP54, DDHD2; HSP56, CYP2U1), Lenz Majewski syndrome (PTDSS1), spondylometaphyseal dysplasia with cone-rod dystrophy (PCYT1A), atypical haemolytic-uremic syndrome due to DGKE deficiency (DGKE).
BACKGROUND: Cytochrome P450 2U1 (CYP2U1) has been identified from the human genome and is highly conserved in the living kingdom. It is considered as an "orphan" protein as few data are available on its physiological function(s) and spectral characteristics. Its only known substrates reported so far are unsaturated fatty acids such as arachidonic acid (AA), and, more recently, N-arachidonoylserotonin (AS) and some xenobiotics related to debrisoquine (Deb) and terfenadine. METHODS: We have expressed CYP2U1 in E. coli and performed UV-vis and EPR spectroscopy experiments with purified CYP2U1 alone and in the presence of substrates and imidazole and pyridine derivatives. Docking experiments using a 3D homology model of CYP2U1 were done to explain the observed spectroscopic data and the different regioselectivities of the oxidations of AA and AS. RESULTS: The UV-vis and EPR spectra of native recombinant human CYP2U1 revealed a predominant low-spin hexacoordinate Fe(III) state. Imidazole (Im) derivatives, such as miconazole, acted as Fe(III) ligands, contrary to ketoconazole, whereas the previously described substrates AS and Deb led to "reverse type I" difference UV-vis spectra. These data, as well as the different regioselectivities of AA and AS oxidations, were supported by docking experiments performed on our previously reported CYP2U1 3D model. MAJOR CONCLUSION AND GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Our study describes for the first time the mode of interaction of several Fe(III)-heme ligands and substrates with the active site of CYP2U1 on the basis of spectroscopic and molecular docking data. The good agreement between these data validates the used CYP2U1 3D model which should help the design of new substrates or inhibitors of this orphan CYP.
The human cytochrome P450 2U1 (CYP2U1) has been described as a novel extrahepatic P450. CYP2U1 is a highly conserved gene mainly expressed in brain and thymus, but also at lower levels in kidney, lung or heart. This selective tissue distribution suggests important endogenous functions, in particular in the conversion of arachidonic acid into two bioactive compounds, the 19- and 20-HETE. To investigate the extent of CYP2U1 genetic polymorphism in 70 French individuals, a screening for sequence variations in the 5'-flanking and protein encoding regions was performed using PCR-SSCP and sequencing strategies. Four polymorphisms were identified and correspond to -204C>A and -241T>C in the 5'-flanking region, -37G>A in the 5'-untranslated region, and IVS2-17T>C in the intron 2. The most frequent mutations, -241T>C (59.7%) and IVS2-17T>C (66.0%), did not seem to alter CYP2U1 lung expression. These results suggest that CYP2U1 exhibits few genetic variations and support a probable role in endogenous processes.
