Cytochrome P450 2C8; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of various endogenous substrates, including fatty acids, steroid hormones and vitamins. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Primarily catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) with a preference for the last double bond. Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Metabol [...] 
During the last 10-15 years, cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8 has emerged as an important drug-metabolizing enzyme. CYP2C8 is highly expressed in human liver and is known to metabolize more than 100 drugs. CYP2C8 substrate drugs include amodiaquine, cerivastatin, dasabuvir, enzalutamide, imatinib, loperamide, montelukast, paclitaxel, pioglitazone, repaglinide, and rosiglitazone, and the number is increasing. Similarly, many drugs have been identified as CYP2C8 inhibitors or inducers. In vivo, already a small dose of gemfibrozil, i.e., 10% of its therapeutic dose, is a strong, irreversible inhibitor of CYP2C8. Interestingly, recent findings indicate that the acyl-beta-glucuronides of gemfibrozil and clopidogrel cause metabolism-dependent inactivation of CYP2C8, leading to a strong potential for drug interactions. Also several other glucuronide metabolites interact with CYP2C8 as substrates or inhibitors, suggesting that an interplay between CYP2C8 and glucuronides is common. Lack of fully selective and safe probe substrates, inhibitors, and inducers challenges execution and interpretation of drug-drug interaction studies in humans. Apart from drug-drug interactions, some CYP2C8 genetic variants are associated with altered CYP2C8 activity and exhibit significant interethnic frequency differences. Herein, we review the current knowledge on substrates, inhibitors, inducers, and pharmacogenetics of CYP2C8, as well as its role in clinically relevant drug interactions. In addition, implications for selection of CYP2C8 marker and perpetrator drugs to investigate CYP2C8-mediated drug metabolism and interactions in preclinical and clinical studies are discussed.
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) superfamily members CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 are polymorphically expressed enzymes that are involved in the metabolic inactivation of several drugs, including, among others, antiepileptics, NSAIDs, oral hypoglycemics, and anticoagulants. Many of these drugs have a narrow therapeutic index, and growing evidence indicates a prominent role of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 polymorphisms in the therapeutic efficacy and in the development of adverse effects among patients treated with drugs that are CYP2C8 or CYP2C9 substrates. In this review, we summarize present knowledge on human variability in the frequency of variant CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 alleles. Besides an expected interethnic variability in allele frequencies, a large intraethnic variability exists. Among Asian subjects, for example, statistically significant differences (p < 0.0001) in CYP2C9*3 allele frequencies between Chinese and Japanese individuals have been reported. In addition, individuals from East Asia present different allele frequencies for CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 compared with South Asian subjects (p < 0.0001). Among Caucasian Europeans, statistically significant differences for the frequency of CYP2C8*3, CYP2C9*2, and CYP2C9*3 exist (p < 0.0001). This indicates that Asian individuals or Caucasian European individuals cannot be considered as homogeneous groups regarding CYP2C8 or CYP2C9 allele frequencies. Caucasian American subjects also show a large variability in allele frequencies, which is likely to be related to ethnic ancestry. A higher frequency of variant CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 alleles is expected among Caucasian Americans with South European ancestry than in individuals with North European ancestry. The findings summarized in this review suggest that among individuals with Asian or European ancestry, intraethnic differences in the risk of developing adverse effects with drugs that are CYP2C8 or CYP2C9 substrates are to be expected. In addition, the observed intraethnic variability reinforces the need for proper selection of control subjects and points against the use of surrogate control groups for studies involving association of CYP2C8 or CYP2C9 alleles with adverse drug reactions or spontaneous diseases.
CYP2C8 is a member of Cytochrome P450 enzymes system. It plays an important role in metabolizing a wide range of exogenous and endogenous compounds. CYP2C8 is involved in the metabolism of more than 100 drugs, typical substrates include: anticancer agents, antidiabetic agents, antimalarial agents, lipid lowering drugs and many others that constitute 20% of clinically prescribed drugs. Genetic variations of CYP2C8 have been reported with different frequencies in different populations. These genetic polymorphisms can lead to differences in the efficacy and safety of different types of medications metabolized by CYP2C8. The aim of this study was to investigate the allele frequencies of CYP2C8*3 (rs10509681 and rs11572080) and CYP2C8*4 (rs1058930) polymorphisms in three populations living in Jordan; Circassians and Chechens and Jordanian-Arabs and compare those frequencies with other populations. A total of 200 healthy Jordanians, 93 Circassians and 88 Chechens were included in this study. Genotyping of CYP2C8*3 and CYP2C8*4 polymorphisms was done by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP). Using the Chi-square test, we found that the prevalence of CYP2C8*3 and *4 among the three populations were significantly different. Moreover, the mutant allele CYP2C8*3 (416A) was only detected in the Jordanian-Arab population with an allele frequency of 0.082, while the mutant allele CYP2C8*4 (792G) was detected with frequencies of 0.065, 0.122, 0.017 in Jordanian-Arabs, Circassians and Chechens, respectively. As our results show, CYP2C8*3 was undetectable in our Circassians and Chechens samples, on the other hand, Circassians had the highest allele frequency of CYP2C8*4 compared to Chechens and Jordanian-Arabs. These genetic variations of the gene encoding the CYP2C8 drug metabolizing enzymes can lead to clinical differences in drug metabolism and ultimately variations in drug effectiveness and toxicities. This study provides evidence for the importance of personalized medicine in these populations and can be the foundation for future clinical studies.
As substrates of CYP2C8, CYP3A4/5 and CYP2D6, chloroquine's (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine's (HCQ) efficacy and safety may be affected by variants in the genes encoding these enzymes. This paper aims to assimilate the current evidence on the pharmacogenomics of CQ/HCQ and to identify risk phenotypes affecting the safety or efficacy of these drugs. It has been found that some CYP3A5, CYP2D6 and CYP2C8 genetic variants may affect the safety or effectiveness of CQ/HCQ. The phenotypes predictively representing ultra-rapid and poor metabolizers have been considered high-risk phenotypes. After considering these high-risk phenotypes in different ethnic groups, it is predicted that a considerable proportion of patients taking CQ/HCQ may be at risk of either therapeutic failure or severe toxicities.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to summarize the potential impact of CYP2C8 and SLCO1B1 genetic polymorphisms on repaglinide pharmacokinetics. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted using electronic databases. Eligible studies reported data from pharmacokinetic evaluations of repaglinide in healthy adults according to different categories of CYP2C8 and SLCO1B1 genetic polymorphisms. RESULTS: Six studies including a total of 191 participants met the inclusion criteria. We noted that CYP2C8 *1/*3 carriers exhibited lower AUC(0-infinity) (SMD: -0.77; 95%CI: -1.23 to -0.30; P=0.001) and Cmax (SMD: -0.94; 95%CI: - 1.41 to -0.47; P<0.001) than CYP2C8 *1/*1 carriers. There were no significant differences in AUC(0-infinity), Cmax, t1/2 and mean change in blood glucose concentration between *1/*4 and *1/*1 carriers. Further, *3/*3 carriers had lower Cmax (SMD: -1.42; 95%CI: -2.66 to -0.17; P=0.026) than *1/*1 carriers. Additionally, *3/*3 carriers had lower Cmax than *1/*3 carriers (SMD: -1.20; 95%CI: -2.40 to -0.00; P=0.050). Finally, we noted that repaglinide pharmacokinetics did not differ by SLCO1B1 genotype. CONCLUSION: The current systematic review and meta-analysis indicated that the genotype of CYP2C8, but not SLCO1B1, may affect repaglinide pharmacokinetics. However, because of the comparatively insufficient number of published studies included, our conclusions require support from additional studies.
Malaria is a major infectious disease. In the last 10 years it has killed more than 20 million people, mainly small children in Africa. The highly efficacious artemisinine combination therapy is being launched globally, constituting the main hope for fighting the disease. Amodiaquine is a main partner in these combinations. Amodiaquine is almost entirely metabolized by the polymorphic cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoform 2C8 to the pharmacologically active desethylamodiaquine. The question remains whether the efficacy of amodiaquine is affected by the gene polymorphism. Genotype-inferred low metabolizers are found in 1-4% of African populations, which corresponds to millions of expected exposures to the drug. In vivo pharmacokinetic data on amodiaquine is limited. By combining it with published in vitro pharmacodynamic and drug metabolism information, we review and predict the possible relevance, or lack of, of CYP2C8 polymorphisms in the present and future efficacy of amodiaquine. Chloroquine and dapsone, both substrates of CYP2C8, are also discussed in the same context.
A substantial part of the interindividual variability in response to drugs and xenobiotics is related to genetically-determined impairment in drug metabolism. Several drug-metabolising enzymes are polymorphic in humans and often polymorphisms are strongly related to altered drug biodisposition and to the risk of developing adverse effects. Drugs used in general anaesthesia undergo polymorphic metabolism. Among these, halothane is metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2E1 and, to a lesser extent, by CYP3A4 and CYP2A6. CYP2E1 also plays a key role in the metabolism of isoflurane, sevoflurane, enflurane and desflurane. CYP2B6, CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 play a relevant role in the metabolism of ketamine. The enzymes involved in the metabolism of thiopental and etomidate remains to be elucidated. Propofol is metabolized mainly by glucuronidation by uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) and by hydroxylation by CYP2B6 and CYP2C enzymes. The enzymes SULT1A1 and NQO1 participate in later steps in propofol metabolism. All the above-mentioned anaesthetic-metabolising enzymes are polymorphic in man. The present review analyzes the importance of enzymes in the metabolism of anaesthetics and common polymorphisms related to the biotransformation of general anaesthetics and it raises hypotheses on genetic and non-genetics factors related to altered response to anaesthetics that require further investigation. Based on functional relevance and allele frequencies, we identify the most promising targets for the clinical use of pharmacogenomic techniques in anaesthesia to prevent altered pharmacokinetics or adverse drug effects.
Paclitaxel is one of the most widely used and effective anticancer drugs. Paclitaxel's clinical utility spans many tumor sites, including treatment of ovarian, breast, lung, head and neck, and unknown primary cancers. As is the case with most chemotherapy drugs, paclitaxel is administered empirically with little individualization of dose other than adjustment for body surface area. Metabolism of the drug is predominantly by the liver by cytochromes P450 2C8 and 3A4. Recent evidence points to the presence of polymorphisms in these enzymes. The clinical relevance of these polymorphisms is not yet fully explored, though they are expected to be key in fulfilling the ultimate goal of individualized dosing of paclitaxel. Here we review the pharmacology of paclitaxel and consider the possible effects pharmacogenetics may have on paclitaxel therapy.
AIMS: Patients on treatment with oral fixed dose imatinib are frequently under- or overexposed to the drug. We investigated the association between the gene activity score (GAS) of imatinib-metabolizing cytochromes (CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2C8) and imatinib and nor-imatinib exposure. We also investigated the impact of concurrent drug-drug-interactions (DDIs) on the association between GAS and imatinib exposure. METHODS: Serial plasma samples were collected from 33 GIST patients treated with imatinib 400 mg daily within a prospective clinical trial. Imatinib and nor-imatinib C(trough) were quantified by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Genetic polymorphisms with a functional impact on imatinib-metabolizing cytochromes were identified and a GAS was calculated for each gene. A DDI-adjusted GAS was also generated. RESULTS: Imatinib and nor-imatinib C(trough) were measured in 161 plasma samples. CYP2D6 GAS and metabolizer status based on genotype were associated with imatinib and (imatinib + nor-imatinib) C(trough) . CYP2D6 poor and intermediate metabolizers were predicted to have a lower nor-imatinib/imatinib metabolic ratio than normal metabolizers (0.197 and 0.193 vs. 0.247, P = .0205), whereas CYP2C8*3 carriers had a higher ratio than CYP2C8*1/*1 patients (0.263 vs. 0.201, P = .0220). CYP2C9 metabolizer status was inversely related to the metabolic ratio with an effect probably driven by the linkage disequilibrium between CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C8*3. The CYP2D6 DDI-adjusted GAS was still predictive of imatinib exposure. CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight that CYP2D6 plays a major role in imatinib pharmacokinetics, but other players (i.e., CYP2C8) may influence imatinib exposure. These findings could drive the selection of patients more susceptible to imatinib under- or overexposure who could be candidates for personalized treatment and intensified monitoring strategies.
Taxane-based chemotherapy regimens are used as first-line treatment for breast cancer. Neurotoxicity, mainly taxane-induced peripheral neuropathy (TIPN), remains the most important dose-limiting adverse event. Multiple genes may be associated with TIPN; however, the strength and direction of the association remain unclear. For this reason, we systematically reviewed observational studies of TIPN pharmacogenetic markers in breast cancer treatment. We conducted a systematic search of terms alluding to breast cancer, genetic markers, taxanes, and neurotoxicity in Ovid, ProQuest, PubMed, Scopus, Virtual Health, and Web of Science. We assessed the quality of evidence and bias profile. We extracted relevant variables and effect measures. Whenever possible, we performed random-effects gene meta-analyses and examined interstudy heterogeneity with meta-regression models and subgroup analyses. This study follows the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) and STrengthening the REporting of Genetic Association Studies (STREGA) reporting guidance. A total of 42 studies with 19,431 participants were included. These evaluated 262 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across 121 genes. We conducted meta-analyses on 23 genes with 60 SNPs (19 studies and 6246 participants). Thirteen individual SNPs (ABCB1-rs2032582, ABCB1-rs3213619, BCL6/-rs1903216, /CAND1-rs17781082, CYP1B1-rs1056836, CYP2C8-rs10509681, CYP2C8-rs11572080, EPHA5-rs7349683, EPHA6-rs301927, FZD3-rs7001034, GSTP1-rs1138272, TUBB2A-rs9501929, and XKR4-rs4737264) and the overall SNPs' effect in four genes (CYP3A4, EphA5, GSTP1, and SLCO1B1) were statistically significantly associated with TIPN through meta-analysis. In conclusion, through systematic review and meta-analysis, we found that polymorphisms, and particularly 13 SNPs, are associated with TIPN, suggesting that genetics does play a role in interindividual predisposition. Further studies could potentially use these findings to develop individual risk profiles and guide decision making.
Temsirolimus, a derivative of sirolimus, exhibits potent antitumor properties. It was the goal of this study to identify yet unknown temsirolimus metabolites generated after incubation with human liver microsomes. Previously, 23-hydroxy-, 24-hydroxy, 12-hydroxy, hydroxy-piperidine and 27-O-desmethyl temsirolimus had been described.Metabolite structures were identified using high-resolution mass spectrometry, MS/iontrap (MS(n)) and comparison of fragmentation patterns of the metabolites with those of temsirolimus and other known sirolimus derivatives. Moreover, enzyme kinetic parameters of temsirolimus metabolite formation as well as the contribution of individual recombinant cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes to temsirolimus metabolism were investigated.Human liver microsomes mainly hydroxylated and/or demethylated temsirolimus. The structures of the following metabolites were identified: O-demethylated metabolites: 39-O-desmethyl, 16-O-desmethyl and 27-O-desmethyl temsirolimus; hydroxylated metabolites: hydroxy piperidine temsirolimus, 11-hydroxy, 12-hydroxy, 14-hydroxy, 23-hydroxy, 24-hydroxy, 25-hydroxy, 45/46-hydroxy and 49-hydroxy temsirolimus; demethylated-hydroxylated metabolites: 16-O-desmethyl, 24-hydroxy; 16-O-desmethyl, 23-hydroxy and 16-O-desmethyl 46-hydroxy temsirolimus; didemethylated metabolite: 27,39-O-didesmethyl temsirolimus; and dihydroxylated metabolite: 12,24-dihydroxy temsirolimus. It was confirmed that CYP3A4 represents the predominant enzyme responsible for temsirolimus metabolism. Moreover, CYP3A5 as well as CYP2C8 also showed significant activities especially resulting in the formation of 27-O-desmethyl, 25-hydroxy and hydroxy-piperidine temsirolimus.It is concluded that temsirolimus is metabolized to more than 20 metabolites, not counting metabolism via the sirolimus pathway. Eighteen of these metabolites could be structurally identified using ion trap MS(n) and high-resolution mass spectrometry. Moreover, the present study showed that, in addition to CYP3A4, metabolism via CYP3A5 and CYP2C8 also represent significant metabolic pathways.
Daprodustat is the first oral hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor approved recently for the treatment of anemia caused by chronic kidney disease (CKD) in adults receiving dialysis. We evaluated the role of organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP)1B-mediated hepatic uptake transport in the pharmacokinetics (PKs) of daprodustat using in vitro and in vivo studies, and physiologically-based PK (PBPK) modeling of its drug-drug interactions (DDIs) with inhibitor drugs. In vitro, daprodustat showed specific transport by OATP1B1/1B3 in the transfected cell systems and primary human and monkey hepatocytes. A single-dose oral rifampin (OATP1B inhibitor) reduced daprodustat intravenous clearance by a notable 9.9 +/- 1.2-fold (P < 0.05) in cynomolgus monkeys. Correspondingly, volume of distribution at steady-state was also reduced by 5.0 +/- 1.1-fold, whereas the half-life change was minimal (1.5-fold), corroborating daprodustat hepatic uptake inhibition by rifampin. A PBPK model accounting for OATP1B-CYP2C8 interplay was developed, which well described daprodustat PK and DDIs with gemfibrozil (CYP2C8 and OATP1B inhibitor) and trimethoprim (weak CYP2C8 inhibitor) within 25% error of the observed data in healthy subjects. About 18-fold increase in daprodustat area under the curve (AUC) following gemfibrozil treatment was found to be associated with strong CYP2C8 inhibition and moderate OATP1B inhibition. Moreover, PK modulation in hepatic dysfunction and subjects with CKD, in comparison to healthy control, was well-captured by the model. CYP2C8 and/or OATP1B inhibitor drugs (e.g., gemfibrozil, clopidogrel, rifampin, and cyclosporine) were predicted to perpetrate moderate-to-strong DDIs in healthy subjects, as well as, in target CKD population. Daprodustat can be used as a sensitive CYP2C8 index substrate in the absence of OATP1B modulation.
OBJECTIVES: The study aims to investigate the impact of gene polymorphisms on blood hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) concentrations in patients with SLE and provide guidelines for individualised care. METHODS: 489 Chinese patients with SLE taking HCQ for more than 3 months were collected in this study. The blood HCQ, desethylhydroxychloroquine (DHCQ) and desethylchloroquine concentrations were measured. The optimal blood concentration of HCQ was determined by receiver operating characteristic curve analysis. Single nucleotide polymorphisms of metabolic enzymes involved in HCQ metabolism were genotyped and the associations with treatment effects were investigated. RESULTS: The cut-off value of HCQ was 559.67 ng/mL, with sensitivity and specificity values of 0.51 and 0.89, respectively. The TC and CC genotypes of CYP2C8 (rs7910936) were significantly related to the increase in blood HCQ concentrations, and the CYP2C8 (rs10882521) TT genotype was associated with lower blood HCQ concentrations. The DHCQ:HCQ ratio was highest in patients with the GG genotype of the CYP2D6*10 (rs1065852) polymorphism and lowest in those with the AA genotype. Patients with the CYP2C8 (rs7910936) CC genotype were more likely to achieve the optimal blood concentration (p=0.030) in HCQ 200 mg/day group and patients with the CYP2D6*10 (rs1065852) GG genotype were more likely to reach the optimal blood concentration (p=0.049) in 400 mg/day group. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the optimal blood concentration of HCQ measured approximately 12-18 hours after the last dosage may be between 500 and 600 ng/mL in Chinese patients with SLE. The observed variations in HCQ concentrations between individuals can potentially be attributed to genetic polymorphisms in CYP2D6*10 (rs1065852) and CYP2C8 (rs7910936 and rs10882521). Genotypical testing of patients and regular monitoring of blood levels are recommended for optimising HCQ dosage management in Chinese patients with SLE. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ChiCTR2300070628.
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8 is a drug metabolizing enzyme of major importance. The lipid-lowering drug gemfibrozil has been identified as a strong inhibitor of CYP2C8 in vivo. This effect is due to mechanism-based inhibition of CYP2C8 by gemfibrozil 1-O-beta-glucuronide. In vivo, gemfibrozil is a fairly selective CYP2C8 inhibitor, which lacks significant inhibitory effect on other CYP enzymes. Gemfibrozil can, however, have a smaller but clinically meaningful inhibitory effect on membrane transporters, such as organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 and organic anion transporter 3. Areas covered: This review describes the inhibitory effects of gemfibrozil on CYP enzymes and membrane transporters. The clinical drug interactions caused by gemfibrozil and the different mechanisms contributing to the interactions are reviewed in detail. Expert opinion: Gemfibrozil is a useful probe inhibitor of CYP2C8 in vivo, but its effect on membrane transporters has to be taken into account in study design and interpretation. Moreover, gemfibrozil could be used to boost the pharmacokinetics of CYP2C8 substrate drugs. Identification of gemfibrozil 1-O-beta-glucuronide as a potent mechanism-based inhibitor of CYP2C8 has led to recognition of glucuronide metabolites as perpetrators of drug-drug interactions. Recently, also acyl glucuronide metabolites of clopidogrel and deleobuvir have been shown to strongly inhibit CYP2C8.
Aim: The influence of variants in pharmacokinetics-related genes on long-term exposure to tacrolimus (TAC)-based therapy and clinical outcomes was investigated. Patients & methods: Brazilian kidney recipients were treated with TAC combined with everolimus (n = 178) or mycophenolate sodium (n = 97). The variants in CYP2C8, CYP2J2, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, POR, ABCB1, ABCC2, ABCG2, SLCO1B1 and SLCO2B1 were analyzed. Main results:CYP3A5*3/*3 genotype influenced increase in TAC concentration from week 1 to month 6 post-transplantation (p < 0.05). The living donor and CYP2C8*3 variant were associated with reduced risk for delayed graft function (OR = 0.07; 95% CI = 0.03-0.18 and OR = 0.45; 95% CI = 0.20-0.99, respectively, p < 0.05). Conclusion: The CYP3A5*3 variant is associated with increased early exposure to TAC. Living donor and CYP2C8*3 variant seem to be protective factors for delayed graft function in kidney recipients.
Genetic variations in CYP 2C (CYP2C) subfamily, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 contribute to interindividual variability in the metabolism of clinically used drugs. Changes in the drug metabolizing activity of CYP2C members may cause unexpected and serious adverse drug reactions and inadequate therapeutic effects. Therefore, CYP2C gene polymorphism is used as a genome biomarker for predicting responsiveness to administered drugs. The most direct method for understanding the extent of the effects of CYP2C gene polymorphism on drug pharmacokinetics is by evaluating the blood and urine concentrations of the drug in subjects. However, in vivo tests are highly invasive, and considering the risk of adverse drug reactions, the burden on the patient may be significant. In addition, examining the functions of rare variant enzymes with an allele frequency of </=1% requires at least several hundred subjects. Furthermore, it is extremely difficult to evaluate the functions of all variant enzymes in an in vivo test. On the other hand, in vitro enzyme activity can be evaluated using a heterologous expression system to avoid the aforementioned problems. In vitro tests are extremely important as they complement in vivo information. This review focuses on recent findings of in vitro studies on 3 highly polymorphic CYP2C members: CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19.
Troglitazone induced an idiosyncratic, hepatocellular injury-type hepatotoxicity in humans. Statistically, double null genotype of glutathione S-transferase isoforms, GSTT1 and GSTM1, was a risk factor, indicating a low activity of the susceptible patients in scavenging chemically reactive metabolites. CYP3A4 and CYP2C8 were involved in the metabolic activation and CYP3A4 was inducible by repeated administrations of troglitazone. The genotype analysis, however, indicated that the metabolic idiosyncrasy resides in the degradation of but not in the production of the toxic metabolites of troglitazone. Antibody against hepatic aldolase B was detected in the case patients, suggesting involvement of immune reaction in the toxic mechanism. Troglitazone induced apoptotic cell death in human hepatocytes at a high concentration, and this property may have served as the immunological danger signal, which is thought to play an important role in activating immune reactions. Hypothesis is proposed in analogy to the virus-induced hepatitis. After the troglitazone-case, pharmaceutical companies implemented screening systems for chemically reactive metabolites at early stage of drug development, taking both the amount of covalent binding to the proteins in vitro and the assumed clinical dose level into consideration. At the post-marketing stage, gene analyses of the case patients, if any, to find pharmacogenetic biomarkers could be a powerful tool for contraindicating to the risky patients.
AIM: First, evaluate if patients carrying putatively diminished activity CYP2C8 genotype have longer paclitaxel exposure (e.g., time above threshold concentration of 0.05 muM [T(c >0.05)]). Second, screen additional pharmacogenes for associations with T(c >0.05). Methods: Pharmacogene panel genotypes were translated into genetic phenotypes for associations with T(c >0.05) (n = 58). RESULTS: Patients with predicted low-activity CYP2C8 had shorter T(c >0.05) after adjustment for age, body surface area and race (9.65 vs 11.03 hrs, beta = 5.47, p = 0.02). This association was attributed to CYP2C8*3 (p = 0.006), not CYP2C8*4 (p = 0.58). Patients with predicted low-activity SLCO1B1 had longer T(c >0.05) (12.12 vs 10.15 hrs, beta = 0.85, p = 0.012). CONCLUSION: Contrary to previous publications, CYP2C8*3 may confer increased paclitaxel metabolic activity. SLCO1B1 and CYP2C8 genotype may explain some paclitaxel pharmacokinetic variability.
Cytochrome P450 monooxygenases provide important pathways for the metabolic clearance of drugs and toxins in humans. These enzymes are expressed from multiple genes and exhibit complex patterns of differential and overlapping substrate selectivity. Recent structures of microsomal P450s determined by X-ray crystallography have provided a structural basis for understanding differences in substrate recognition. This review will describe similarities and differences in the active site structures of four human microsomal cytochrome P450 monooxygenases, 2A6, 2C8, 2C9, and 3A4, that contribute extensively to drug and toxin metabolism.
Paclitaxel, a standard chemotherapeutic agent for several types of cancer, including ovarian, breast, and non-small-cell lung cancer, causes peripheral neuropathy as an adverse effect in 60-70% of the patients. The utility of combination therapy with paclitaxel and goshajinkigan, a traditional Japanese Kampo medicine, in managing paclitaxel-induced neuropathy during chemotherapy has been explored. Paclitaxel is predominantly metabolized in the liver by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8 to produce 6alpha-hydroxypaclitaxel and by CYP3A4 to produce 3'-p-hydroxypaclitaxel. In this study, we evaluated the inhibitory or inducing effects of goshajinkigan extract (GJG) and its representative and bioavailable constituents, geniposidic acid, plantagoguanidinic acid, paeoniflorin, catalpol, loganin, and neoline, on the metabolism of paclitaxel via CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 using pooled human liver microsomes and cultured human cryopreserved hepatocytes to provide the drug information about the pharmacokinetic interaction of this combination therapy. GJG significantly inhibited the production of 3'-p-hydroxypaclitaxel and 6alpha-hydroxypaclitaxel in vitro in a concentration-dependent manner. The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) values of GJG were 4.5 and 7.8 mg/ml, respectively, for 3'-p-hydroxypaclitaxel and 6alpha-hydroxypaclitaxel productions. Neoline inhibited the production of 3'-p-hydroxypaclitaxel at 50 muM, but not at lower concentrations. Apart from neoline, other GJG constituents (at concentrations up to 50 or 10 muM of all test substances) did not exhibit inhibitory or inducing effects. Since GJG showed the inhibitory effect on the metabolism of paclitaxel at much higher concentrations than those used clinically, it can be concluded that GJG product does not exhibit any pharmacokinetic interaction with paclitaxel in clinical practice.
