Cytochrome P450 2B6; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of endocannabinoids and steroids. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH-- hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of arachidonoylethanolamide (anandamide) to 8,9-, 11,12-, and 14,15- epoxyeicosatrienoic acid ethanolamides (EpETrE-EAs), potentially modulating endocannabinoid system signaling. Hydroxylates steroid hormon [...] 
Serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; i.e., citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and sertraline), serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (i.e., desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, levomilnacipran, milnacipran, and venlafaxine), and serotonin modulators with SSRI-like properties (i.e., vilazodone and vortioxetine) are primary pharmacologic treatments for major depressive and anxiety disorders. Genetic variation in CYP2D6, CYP2C19, and CYP2B6 influences the metabolism of many of these antidepressants, which may potentially affect dosing, efficacy, and tolerability. In addition, the pharmacodynamic genes SLC6A4 (serotonin transporter) and HTR2A (serotonin-2A receptor) have been examined in relation to efficacy and side effect profiles of these drugs. This guideline updates and expands the 2015 Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) guideline for CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 genotypes and SSRI dosing and summarizes the impact of CYP2D6, CYP2C19, CYP2B6, SLC6A4, and HTR2A genotypes on antidepressant dosing, efficacy, and tolerability. We provide recommendations for using CYP2D6, CYP2C19, and CYP2B6 genotype results to help inform prescribing these antidepressants and describe the existing data for SLC6A4 and HTR2A, which do not support their clinical use in antidepressant prescribing.
INTRODUCTION: Ketamine is a pharmaceutical drug possessing both analgesic and anaesthetic properties. As an anaesthetic, it induces anaesthesia by producing analgesia with a state of altered consciousness while maintaining airway tone, respiratory drive, and hemodynamic stability. At lower doses, it has psychoactive properties and has gained popularity as a recreational drug. OBJECTIVES: To review the epidemiology, mechanisms of toxicity, pharmacokinetics, clinical features, diagnosis and management of ketamine toxicity. METHODS: Both OVID MEDLINE (January 1950-April 2023) and Web of Science (1900-April 2023) databases were searched using the term "ketamine" in combination with the keywords "pharmacokinetics", "kinetics", "poisoning", "poison", "toxicity", "ingestion", "adverse effects", "overdose", and "intoxication". Furthermore, bibliographies of identified articles were screened for additional relevant studies. These searches produced 5,268 non-duplicate citations; 185 articles (case reports, case series, pharmacokinetic studies, animal studies pertinent to pharmacology, and reviews) were considered relevant. Those excluded were other animal investigations, therapeutic human clinical investigations, commentaries, editorials, cases with no clinical relevance and post-mortem investigations. EPIDEMIOLOGY: Following its introduction into medical practice in the early 1970s, ketamine has become a popular recreational drug. Its use has become associated with the dance culture, electronic and dubstep dance events. MECHANISM OF ACTION: Ketamine acts primarily as a non-competitive antagonist on the glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, causing the loss of responsiveness that is associated with clinical ketamine dissociative anaesthesia. PHARMACOKINETICS: Absorption of ketamine is rapid though the rate of uptake and bioavailability is determined by the route of exposure. Ketamine is metabolized extensively in the liver. Initially, both isomers are metabolized to their major active metabolite, norketamine, by CYP2B6, CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 isoforms. The hydroxylation of the cyclohexan-1-one ring of norketamine to the three positional isomers of hydroxynorketamine occurs by CYP2B6 and CYP2A6. The dehydronorketamine metabolite occurs either by direct dehydrogenation from norketamine via CYP2B6 metabolism or non-enzymatic dehydration of hydroxynorketamine. Norketamine, the dehydronorketamine isomers, and hydroxynorketamine have pharmacological activity. The elimination of ketamine is primarily by the kidneys, though unchanged ketamine accounts for only a small percentage in the urine. The half-life of ketamine in humans is between 1.5 and 5 h. CLINICAL FEATURES: Acute adverse effects following recreational use are diverse and can include impaired consciousness, dizziness, irrational behaviour, hallucinations, abdominal pain and vomiting. Chronic use can result in impaired verbal information processing, cystitis and cholangiopathy. DIAGNOSIS: The diagnosis of acute ketamine intoxication is typically made on the basis of the patient's history, clinical features, such as vomiting, sialorrhea, or laryngospasm, along with neuropsychiatric features. Chronic effects of ketamine toxicity can result in cholangiopathy and cystitis, which can be confirmed by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and cystoscopy, respectively. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of acute clinical toxicity is predominantly supportive with empiric management of specific adverse effects. Benzodiazepines are recommended as initial treatment to reduce agitation, excess neuromuscular activity and blood pressure. Management of cystitis is multidisciplinary and multi-tiered, following a stepwise approach of pharmacotherapy and surgery. Management of cholangiopathy may require pain management and, where necessary, biliary stenting to alleviate obstructions. Chronic effects of ketamine toxicity are typically reversible, with management focusing on abstinence. CONCLUSIONS: Ketamine is a dissociative drug employed predominantly in emergency medicine; it has also become popular as a recreational drug. Its recreational use can result in acute neuropsychiatric effects, whereas chronic use can result in cystitis and cholangiopathy.
The Pharmacogene Variation Consortium (PharmVar) catalogs star (*) allele nomenclature for the polymorphic human CYP2B6 gene. Genetic variation within the CYP2B6 gene locus impacts the metabolism or bioactivation of clinically important drugs. Of particular importance are efficacy and safety concerns regarding: efavirenz, which is used for the treatment of HIV type-1 infection; methadone, a mainstay in the treatment of opioid use disorder and as an analgesic; ketamine, used as an antidepressant and analgesic; and bupropion, which is prescribed to treat depression and for smoking cessation. This GeneFocus provides a comprehensive overview and summary of CYP2B6 and describes how haplotype information catalogued by PharmVar is utilized by the Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase (PharmGKB) and the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC).
Methadone is a mu (mu) opioid receptor agonist used clinically in adults and children to manage opioid use disorder, neonatal abstinence syndrome, and acute and chronic pain. It is typically marketed as a racemic mixture of R- and S-enantiomers. R-methadone has 30-to 50-fold higher analgesic potency than S-methadone, and S-methadone has a greater adverse effect (prolongation) on the cardiac QTc interval. Methadone undergoes stereoselective metabolism. CYP2B6 is the primary enzyme responsible for catalyzing the metabolism of both enantiomers to the inactive metabolites, S- and R-2-ethylidene-1,5-dimethyl-3,3-diphenylpyrrolidine (S- and R-EDDP). Genetic variation in the CYP2B6 gene has been investigated in the context of implications for methadone pharmacokinetics, dose, and clinical outcomes. Most CYP2B6 variants result in diminished or loss of CYP2B6 enzyme activity, which can lead to higher plasma methadone concentrations (affecting S- more than R-methadone). However, the data do not consistently indicate that CYP2B6-based metabolic variability has a clinically significant effect on methadone dose, efficacy, or QTc prolongation. Expert analysis of the published literature does not support a change from standard methadone prescribing based on CYP2B6 genotype (updates at www.cpicpgx.org).
Pharmacogenomics is increasingly important to guide objective, safe, and effective individualised prescribing. Personalised prescribing has revolutionised treatments in the past decade, allowing clinicians to maximise drug efficacy and minimise adverse effects based on a person's genetic profile. Opioids, the gold standard for cancer pain relief, are among the commonest medications prescribed in palliative care practice. This narrative review examines the literature surrounding opioid pharmacogenomics and its applicability to the palliative care cancer population. There is currently limited intersection between the fields of palliative care and pharmacogenomics, but growing evidence presents a need to build linkages between the two disciplines. Pharmacogenomic evidence guiding opioid prescribing is currently available for codeine and tramadol, which relates to CYP2D6 gene variants. However, these medications are prescribed less commonly for pain in palliative care. Research is accelerating with other opioids, where oxycodone (CYP2D6) and methadone (CYP2B6, ABCB1) already have moderate evidence of an association in terms of drug metabolism and downstream analgesic response and side effects. OPRM1 and COMT are receiving increasing attention and have implications for all opioids, with changes in opioid dosage requirements observed but they have not yet been studied widely enough to be considered clinically actionable. Current evidence indicates that incorporation of pharmacogenomic testing into opioid prescribing practice should focus on the CYP2D6 gene and its actionable variants. Although opioid pharmacogenomic tests are not widely used in clinical practice, the progressively reducing costs and rapid turnover means greater accessibility and affordability to patients, and thus, clinicians will be increasingly asked to provide guidance in this area. The upsurge in pharmacogenomic research will likely discover more actionable gene variants to expand international guidelines to impact opioid prescribing. This rapidly expanding area requires consideration and monitoring by clinicians in order for key findings with clinical implications to be accessible, meaningfully interpretable and communicated.
Worldwide, approximately one billion people smoke cigarettes. Cigarette smoking persists in part because long-term smoking cessation rates are modest on existing treatments. Smoking cessation outcomes are influenced by genetic factors, including genetic variation in enzymes that metabolize nicotine and smoking cessation medications, as well as in receptor targets for nicotine and treatment medications. For example, smokers with genetically slow nicotine metabolism have higher cessation success on behavioural counseling and nicotine patches compared with smokers with genetically fast nicotine metabolism. In this review, we highlight new progress in our understanding of how genetic variation in the pharmacological targets of nicotine and smoking cessation medications could be used to tailor smoking cessation therapy, increase quit rates, and reduce tobacco-related harm.
BACKGROUND: CYP2B6 (cytochrome P450 subfamily IIB polypeptide 6), encoded by the CYP2B6 gene, is a critical enzyme involved in clopidogrel metabolism. However, the association between CYP2B6 polymorphisms and the efficacy of clopidogrel in minor stroke or transient ischemic attack for secondary stroke prevention remains unclear. METHODS: Based on CHANCE (Clopidogrel in High-Risk Patients With Acute Nondisabling Cerebrovascular Events) randomized clinical trial of aspirin plus clopidogrel versus aspirin alone, we investigated the role of CYP2B6 polymorphisms and the efficacy of clopidogrel in patients with minor stroke or transient ischemic attack in China from October 2009 to July 2012. A total of 2853 patients were successfully genotyped for CYP2B6-516G>T, rs3745274 and CYP2B6-1456 T>C, rs2054675. The primary efficacy and safety outcomes were new stroke and any bleeding within 90 days. RESULTS: Among the 2853 patients, 32.8% were identified as the carriers of the CYP2B6-516 GT/TT or -1456 TC/CC genotype. The incidences of 90-day new stroke in aspirin plus clopidogrel and aspirin alone groups were 7.1% versus 11.3% among noncarriers, respectively; and 9.7% versus 12.2% among carriers, respectively. The efficacy of aspirin plus clopidogrel versus aspirin alone was not significantly different (P interaction=0.29) in noncarriers (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.61 [95% CI, 0.45-0.83]) compared to carriers (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.80 [95% CI, 0.54-1.18]). The incidence (n=51) of 90-day any bleeding in aspirin plus clopidogrel and aspirin alone groups were 2.2% (21 bleeds) versus 1.9% (18 bleeds) among noncarriers (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.11 [95% CI, 0.59-2.09]) and 1.9% (9 bleeds) versus 0.7% (3 bleeds) among carriers (adjusted hazard ratio, 3.23 [95% CI, 0.86-12.12]). Similar findings were observed during the 1-year follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: In this post hoc analysis of the CHANCE trial, we did not observe a significant difference in the efficacy of aspirin plus clopidogrel compared with aspirin in carriers versus noncarriers of CYP2B6-516 GT/TT or -1456 TC/CC genotype. Our results suggest that both carriers and noncarriers suffering from a minor stroke are likely to benefit from aspirin plus clopidogrel treatment over aspirin monotherapy for secondary prevention. REGISTRATION: URL: https://www. CLINICALTRIALS: gov; Unique identifier: NCT00979589.
Diazepam is a benzodiazepine (BZD) used worldwide for a variety of conditions. Long-term use of diazepam increases the risk for developing tolerance and dependence and for the occurrence of adverse drug reactions (ADRs). CYP3A4 and CYP2C19 mainly metabolize diazepam and are therefore the primary pharmacogenetic candidate biomarkers. In this work, we aimed to explore the impact of CYP3A4 and CYP2C19 phenotypes and of 99 additional variants in other 31 pharmacogenes (including other CYP, UGT, NAT2 and CES enzymes, ABC and SLC transporters) on diazepam pharmacokinetic variability and safety. 30 healthy volunteers that had participated in a single-dose bioequivalence clinical trial of two diazepam formulations were enrolled in the present candidate gene pharmacogenetic study. CYP2C19 poor metabolizers (PMs) showed an almost 2-fold increase in AUC(0-infinity/)DW compared to rapid (RMs) or normal (NM) metabolizers, and a 1.46-fold increase compared to intermediate metabolizers (IMs). CYP2B6 PMs showed a 2,74-fold higher AUC(0-infinity)/DW compared to RMs, and 2.10-fold compared to NMs (p < 0.007). A dose reduction of 25-50 % may be appropriate for CYP2C19 or CYP2B6 PMs to avoid ADRs, dependence and tolerance. Combined CYP2C19 +CYP2B6 PMs may not use diazepam or sharper dose adjustments (e.g., a dose reduction of 50-70 %) may be advisable. To our knowledge, this is the first work to report a strong relationship between CYP2B6 phenotype and diazepam pharmacokinetics. Additional nominal associations (i.e., 0.007 <p < 0.05) between ABCG2, ABCB1, NAT2 and UGT1A4 polymorphisms and pharmacokinetic variability were observed; further research should elaborate on the clinical relevance of the described associations.
Human CYP2B6 enzyme although constitutes relatively low proportion (1-4%) of hepatic cytochrome P450 content, it is the major catalyst of metabolism of several clinically important drugs (efavirenz, cyclophosphamide, bupropion, methadone). High interindividual variability in CYP2B6 function, contributing to impaired drug-response and/or adverse reactions, is partly elucidated by genetic polymorphisms, whereas non-genetic factors can significantly modify the CYP2B6 phenotype. The influence of genetic and phenoconverting non-genetic factors on CYP2B6-selective activity and CYP2B6 expression was investigated in liver tissues from Caucasian subjects (N = 119). Strong association was observed between hepatic S-mephenytoin N-demethylase activity and CYP2B6 mRNA expression (P < 0.0001). In less than one third of the tissue donors, the CYP2B6 phenotype characterized by S-mephenytoin N-demethylase activity and/or CYP2B6 expression was concordant with CYP2B6 genotype, whereas in more than 35% of the subjects, an altered CYP2B6 phenotype was attributed to phenoconverting non-genetic factors (to CYP2B6-specific inhibitors and inducers, non-specific amoxicillin + clavulanic acid treatment and chronic alcohol consumption, but not to the gender). Furthermore, CYP2B6 genotype-phenotype mismatch still existed in one third of tissue donors. In conclusion, identifying potential sources of CYP2B6 variability and considering both genetic variations and non-genetic factors is a pressing requirement for appropriate elucidation of CYP2B6 genotype-phenotype mismatch.
CYP2B6 is a human microsomal cytochrome P450 enzyme with broad substrate selectivity. CYP2B6 is the only functional member of the human CYP2B gene subfamily, which differs from the situation in rodents, such as mouse, where multiple functional Cyp2b genes are expressed. Recent studies with Cyp2b knockout or knockdown mouse models have yielded insights into the in vivo roles of mouse CYP2B enzymes in drug disposition and xenobiotic toxicity. A CYP2B6-humanized mouse model (CYP2A13/2B6/2F1-transgenic/Cyp2abfgs-null), which expresses human CYP2B6 in the liver, and human CYP2A13 and CYP2F1 in the respiratory tract, but not any of the mouse Cyp2b genes, has also been established. In the CYP2B6-humanized mouse, the CYP2B6 transgene is expressed primarily in the liver, where it was found to be active toward prototype CYP2B6 substrate drugs. The regulatory elements of the CYP2B6 transgene appear to be compatible with mouse nuclear receptors that mediate CYP2B induction. Therefore, the CYP2B6-humanized mouse is a valuable animal model for studying the impact of CYP2B6 expression or induction on drug metabolism, drug efficacy, drug-drug interaction, and drug/xenobiotic toxicity. In this mini-review, we provide a brief background on CYP2B6 and the Cyp2b-knockout and CYP2B6-humanized mice, and discuss the potential applications and limitations of the current models.
This review highlights the recent research into the biotransformations and rearrangement of the sulfonylhydrazine-alkylating agent laromustine. Incubation of [(14)C]laromustine with rat, dog, monkey, and human liver microsomes produced eight radioactive components (C-1 to C-8). There was little difference in the metabolite profile among the species examined, partly because NADPH was not required for the formation of most components, which instead involved decomposition and/or hydrolysis. The exception was C-7, a hydroxylated metabolite, largely formed by CYP2B6 and CYP3A4/5. Liquid chromatography-multistage mass spectrometry (LC-MS(n)) studies determined that collision-induced dissociation, and not biotransformation or enzyme catalysis, produced the unique mass spectral rearrangement. Accurate mass measurements performed with a Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer (FTICR-MS) significantly aided determination of the elemental compositions of the fragments and in the case of laromustine revealed the possibility of rearrangement. Further, collision-induced dissociation produced the loss of nitrogen (N2) and methylsulfonyl and methyl isocyanate moieties. The rearrangement, metabolite/decomposition products, and conjugation reactions were analyzed utilizing hydrogen-deuterium exchange, exact mass, (13)C-labeled laromustine, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), and LC-MS(n) experiments to assist with the assignments of these fragments and possible mechanistic rearrangement. Such techniques produced valuable insights into these functions: 1) Cytochrome P450 is involved in C-7 formation but plays little or no role in the conversion of [(14)C]laromustine to C-1 through C-6 and C-8; 2) the relative abundance of individual degradation/metabolite products was not species-dependent; and 3) laromustine produces several reactive intermediates that may produce the toxicities seen in the clinical trials.
BACKGROUND: Dolutegravir is associated with more weight gain than efavirenz. Loss-of-function polymorphisms in CYP2B6 result in higher efavirenz concentrations, which we hypothesized would impair weight gain among people living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV; PLWH) starting efavirenz-based antiretroviral therapy (ART). METHODS: We studied ART-naive participants from the ADVANCE study randomized to the efavirenz /emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) and dolutegravir/emtricitabine/TDF arms. We compared changes in weight and regional fat on DXA from baseline to week 48 between CYP2B6 metabolizer genotypes in the efavirenz arm, and with the dolutegravir arm. RESULTS: There were 342 participants in the dolutegravir arm and 168 in the efavirenz arm who consented to genotyping. Baseline characteristics were similar. Weight gain was greater in women than men. In the efavirenz arm CYP2B6 metaboliser genotype was associated with weight gain (P = .009), with extensive metabolizers gaining the most weight, and with changes in regional fat in women, but not in men. Weight gain was similar in CYP2B6 extensive metabolizers in the efavirenz arm and in the dolutegravir arm (P = .836). The following variables were independently associated with weight gain in all participants: baseline CD4 count, baseline human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) RNA, and CYP2B6 metaboliser genotype. CONCLUSIONS: CYP2B6 metaboliser genotype was associated with weight gain in PLWH starting efavirenz-based ART. Weight gain was similar between CYP2B6 extensive metabolizers in the efavirenz arm and in the dolutegravir arm, suggesting that impaired weight gain among CYP2B6 slow or intermediate metabolizers could explain the increased weight gain on dolutegravir compared with efavirenz observed in ADVANCE and other studies.
Efavirenz (more specifically the S-enantiomer) is a cornerstone antiretroviral therapy for treatment of HIV infection. The major primary metabolite is S-8-hydroxyefavirenz, which does not have antiretroviral activity but is neurotoxic. Cytochrome P450 2B6 (CYP2B6) is the major enzyme catalyzing S-8-hydroxyefavirenz formation. CYP2B6 genetics and drug interactions are major determinants of clinical efavirenz disposition and dose adjustment. In addition, as a prototypic CYP2B6 substrate, S-efavirenz and analogs can inform on the structure, activity, catalytic mechanisms, and stereoselectivity of CYP2B6. Metabolism of R-efavirenz by CYP2B6 remains unexplored. This investigation assessed S-efavirenz metabolism by clinically relevant CYP2B6 genetic variants. This investigation also evaluated R-efavirenz hydroxylation by wild-type CYP2B6.1 and CYP2B6 variants. S-Efavirenz 8-hydroxylation by wild-type CYP2B6.1 and variants exhibited positive cooperativity and apparent cooperative substrate inhibition. On the basis of Cl(max) values, relative activities for S-efavirenz 8-hydroxylation were in the order CYP2B6.4 > CYP2B6.1  approximately  CYP2B6.5  approximately  CYP2B6.17 > CYP2B6.6  approximately  CYP2B6.7  approximately  CYP2B6.9  approximately  CYP2B6.19  approximately  CYP2B6.26; CYP2B6.16 and CYP2B6.18 showed minimal activity. Rates of R-efavirenz metabolism were approximately 1/10 those of S-efavirenz for wild-type CYP2B6.1 and variants. On the basis of Cl(max) values, there was 14-fold enantioselectivity (S > R-efavirenz) for wild-type CYP2B6.1, and 5- to 22-fold differences for other CYP2B6 variants. These results show that both CYP2B6 516G > T (CYP2B6*6 and CYP2B6*9) and 983T > C (CYP2B6*16 and CYP2B6*18) polymorphisms cause canonical diminishment or loss-of-function variants for S-efavirenz 8-hydroxylation, provide a mechanistic basis for known clinical pharmacogenetic differences in efavirenz disposition, and may predict additional clinically important variant alleles. Efavirenz is the most stereoselective CYP2B6 drug substrate yet identified and may be a useful probe for the CYP2B6 active site and catalytic mechanisms. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Clinical disposition of the antiretroviral S-efavirenz is affected by CYP2B6 polymorphisms. Expressed CYP2B6 with 516G>T (CYP2B6*6 and CYP2B6*9), and 983T>C (CYP2B6*16 and CYP2B6*18) polymorphisms had a diminishment or loss of function for efavirenz 8-hydroxylation. This provides a mechanistic basis for efavirenz clinical pharmacogenetics and may predict additional clinically important variant alleles. Efavirenz metabolism showed both cooperativity and cooperative substrate inhibition. With greater than 10-fold enantioselectivity (S- vs. R- metabolism), efavirenz is the most stereoselective CYP2B6 drug substrate yet identified. These findings may provide mechanistic insights.
INTRODUCTION: Efavirenz is an antihuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV) drug metabolized by cytochrome P450 2B6 (CYP2B6) enzyme. Cytochrome P450 2B6 is an enzyme that in humans is encoded by the CYP2B6 gene. Polymorphisms of this gene play a crucial role in the metabolism of drugs such as Efavirenz. This study aims to evaluate the frequency of three clinically significant CYP2B6 polymorphisms (CYP2B6 ( *) 6 (516G > T), CYP2B6 ( *) 4 (785A > G), and CYP2B6 ( *) 5 (1459C > T)) in three major Iranian ethnicities. METHODS: One hundred forty-seven participants from three main Iranian ethnicities were included in this study. After DNA extraction, CYP2B6 ( *) 6 (516G > T), CYP2B6 ( *) 4 (785A > G), and CYP2B6 ( *) 5 (1459C > T) were genotyped using tetra-primer amplification refractory mutation system polymerase chain reaction (ARMS-PCR). RESULTS: The frequency of the mutated allele in the Iranian population for CYP2B6 ( *) 6 (516G > T) was 41.50 (95% CI: 35.81, 47.36), which was significantly lower than in Kurds (59.62, 95% CI: 45.10, 72.99). Similarly, Kurds had a higher frequency of mutated allele of CYP2B6 ( *) 5 (1459C > T) (46.15%, 95% CI: 32.23, 60.53) than in Iranians (24.49%, 95% CI: 19.68, 29.82). The frequency of A and G alleles of CYP2B6 ( *) 4 (785A > G) was 62.59% (95% CI: 56.78, 68.13) and 37.41 (95% CI: 31.87, 43.22), respectively. CONCLUSION: Kurds are at higher risk of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and insufficient anti-HIV response compared to other Iranians.
INTRODUCTION: Bupropion is metabolized to its active metabolite, hydroxybupropion (HB), by the genetically polymorphic cytochrome P450 2B6 (CYP2B6) enzyme. Despite its significant role in bupropion metabolism, the magnitude of the impact of CYP2B6 genotype on the exposure of bupropion has not been quantified. OBJECTIVES: A systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted to quantify the association of bupropion and HB exposure with CYP2B6 variant alleles and genotype-defined metabolizer phenotypes. METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of Science, Scifinder, PsycINFO, and CENTRAL were screened to identify studies that met the following inclusion criteria (search updated on February 2021): (1) area under the plasma drug concentration-time curve (AUC) of bupropion and/or HB in relation to CYP2B6 genotypes was studied, and (2) study participants were genotyped for common CYP2B6 variant alleles including at least CYP2B6*6. The Newcastle Ottawa Scale was used to assess risk of bias in each included study. The ratio of means (RoM) between CYP2B6 genotype or genotype-defined phenotype groups for bupropion exposure was calculated for each study and combined in a meta-analysis. RESULTS: Eleven studies met the inclusion criteria for this systematic review, and 10 (including N = 413 participants) were included in the meta-analysis. All 10 studies involved healthy adult volunteers, where other medications were not allowed. The AUCs of HB and the active moiety (bupropion + HB) were significantly reduced in CYP2B6*6 carriers compared with the non-carriers (HB: RoM 0.77, 95% CI 0.71-0.83; active moiety: RoM 0.81, 95% CI 0.75-0.88). Both CYP2B6 poor and intermediate metabolizers had significantly decreased exposures to HB and the active moiety than normal metabolizers. CONCLUSION: The CYP2B6*6 allele and genotype-determined CYP2B6 poor and intermediate metabolizer phenotypes are associated with significantly lower exposures to HB and the total active moiety. The findings of this study suggest opportunities to further study precision dosing strategies for bupropion therapy based on CYP2B6 genotype.
Tweetable abstract The large interindividual variability in nevirapine pharmacokinetics and clinical effects that remains unexplained by pharmacogenetic prediction is a major limitation for individualized nevirapine treatment.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Pharmacogenomics holds promise in smoking cessation because of its potential to shed light on the complexity of drug metabolism and improve treatments using therapeutic agents. The cytochrome P450 2B6 gene (CYP2B6) encodes CYP2B6 enzyme that has been found to mediate the hydroxylation of bupropion, a smoking cessation aid. CYP2B6 exhibits a range of polymorphic variants that alter the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of bupropion. Genetic variations in CYP2B6 may influence the risk of adverse effects or efficacy of treatment with bupropion. The objective of this review was to investigate the influence of pharmacogenomics on smoking cessation therapy. METHODS: A thorough literature search was conducted on PubMed, SCOPUS and EMBASE using keywords related to bupropion, smoking cessation, pharmacogenomics and CYP2B6. Research and review articles, case reports and clinical and preclinical studies pertinent to the research topic were identified, evaluated and summarized. Cited articles within the above-mentioned sources also provided pertinent information. RESULTS: There is strong literature evidence to prove that CYP2B6 polymorphisms affect pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of bupropion, thus affecting the therapeutic outcome of smoking cessation therapy. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSIONS: Complete understanding of pharmacogenetic variation of bupropion pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics will be beneficial for designing safer and more personalized smoking cessation therapy with improved outcomes.
Drug metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) play a major role in the metabolism and final elimination of most drugs and xenobiotics from the body. Both phase I and phase II enzymes are highly polymorphic. Most studies on the pharmacogenetics (PGx) of DMEs and its influence on interindividual variability have been conducted in Western countries. Middle Easterners, however, may have a different genetic makeup and may be exposed to different environmental factors when compared with their Western counterparts. Thus, results obtained in Western populations cannot be extrapolated to the population of the Middle East, and it is important to examine and document PGx differences and influences within the Middle Eastern population as there have been very little published data from this region. Herein, we provide an update on the genetic polymorphisms of DMEs that were studied in Lebanon and their impact on drug toxicity and efficacy. It is hoped that with more time, additional funds, and perseverance, the PGx of DMEs in Lebanon picks up and becomes closer in quantity and quality to that in the West.
Pharmacogenomics (PGx) provides information about routine precision medicine, based on the patient's genotype. However, many of the available information about human allele frequencies, and about clinical drug-gene interactions, is based on American and European populations. PharmaKoVariome database was constructed to support genetic testing for safe prescription and drug development. It consolidated and stored 2507 diseases, 11 459 drugs and 61 627 drug-target or druggable genes from public databases. PharmaKoVariome precomputed ethnic-specific abundant variants for approximately 120 M single-nucleotide variants of drug-target or druggable genes. A user can search by gene symbol, drug name, disease and reference SNP ID number (rsID) to statistically analyse the frequency of ethnical variations, such as odds ratio and P-values for related genes. In an example study, we observed five Korean-enriched variants in the CYP2B6 and CYP2D6 genes, one of which (rs1065852) is known to be incapable of metabolizing drug. It is also shown that 4-6% of North and East Asians have risk factors for drugs metabolized by the CYP2D6 gene. Therefore, PharmaKoVariome is a useful database for pharmaceutical or diagnostic companies for developing diagnostic technologies that can be applied in the Asian PGx industry. Database URL: http://www.pharmakovariome.com/.
Production of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) has been banned since 2001 but health risks from exposure persist. PCBs are metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes, including CYP2B6. However, the link between CYP2B6 gene polymorphisms and PCB metabolisms is poorly characterized. This study investigated the relationships among serum levels of major indicator PCBs and hydroxylated PCBs (OH-PCBs), which are PCB metabolites, and polymorphisms in CYP2B6. Blood samples (n = 129) were analyzed for single nucleotide polymorphisms in CYP2B6 (p.Q172H and p.K262R), and the corresponding haplotypes (*1, *4, *6) were determined. Concentrations of PCBs and OH-PCBs were determined using gas chromatography and mass spectrometer. Congener-specific variations in PCB metabolism were associated with different CYP2B6 genotypes, particularly * 1/* 4 (hypothesized to increased expression) and * 6/* 6 (hypothesized to decreased expression). For certain PCBs, the * 1/* 4 genotype was linked to increased metabolite-to-parent compound ratios, while * 6/* 6 was associated with decreased ratios, as observed for PCB146 (beta = 0.192, 95 % CI: [0.100, 0.283], p < 0.0001 for *1/*4; beta = -0.235, 95 % CI: [-0.366, -0.105], p = 0.001 for *6/*6). However, other PCBs, such as PCB170 and PCB183, exhibited opposite or more complex patterns. Our findings indicate intricate effects of CYP2B6 gene polymorphisms on PCB metabolism and highlight the potential for genotype-specific risks in PCB-related toxicity.
