Cytochrome P450 2C9; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of various endogenous substrates, including fatty acids and steroids. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Metabolizes cholesterol toward 25-hydroxycholesterol, a physiological regulato [...] 
The Pharmacogene Variation Consortium (PharmVar) catalogues star (*) allele nomenclature for the polymorphic human CYP2C9 gene. Genetic variation within the CYP2C9 gene locus impacts the metabolism or bioactivation of many clinically important drugs, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, phenytoin, antidiabetic agents, and angiotensin receptor blockers. Variable CYP2C9 activity is of particular importance regarding efficacy and safety of warfarin and siponimod as indicated in their package inserts. This GeneFocus provides a comprehensive overview and summary of CYP2C9 and describes how haplotype information catalogued by PharmVar is utilized by the Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase and the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are among the most commonly used analgesics due to their lack of addictive potential. However, NSAIDs have the potential to cause serious gastrointestinal, renal, and cardiovascular adverse events. CYP2C9 polymorphisms influence metabolism and clearance of several drugs in this class, thereby affecting drug exposure and potentially safety. We summarize evidence from the published literature supporting these associations and provide therapeutic recommendations for NSAIDs based on CYP2C9 genotype (updates at www.cpicpgx.org).
The cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 and vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 (VKORC1) genotypes have been strongly and consistently associated with warfarin dose requirements, and dosing algorithms incorporating genetic and clinical information have been shown to be predictive of stable warfarin dose. However, clinical trials evaluating genotype-guided warfarin dosing produced mixed results, calling into question the utility of this approach. Recent trials used surrogate markers as endpoints rather than clinical endpoints, further complicating translation of the data to clinical practice. The present data do not support genetic testing to guide warfarin dosing, but in the setting where genotype data are available, use of such data in those of European ancestry is reasonable. Outcomes data are expected from an on-going trial, observational studies continue, and more work is needed to define dosing algorithms that incorporate appropriate variants in minority populations; all these will further shape guidelines and recommendations on the clinical utility of genotype-guided warfarin dosing.
Pharmacogenetics (PGx) is the relationship between an individual's genetic variations and the response to pharmacological treatment. We chose to perform an overview of reviews on PGx testing-guided treatment for cardiovascular diseases, based on clinically relevant gene-drug pairs. We conducted a search on Medline, Embase and Cochrane Library, from their inception to 18 June 2020. The most studied gene-drug pairs were clopidogrel and warfarin associated with cytochrome p450 and vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subunit 1 genes (CYP2C19, CYP2C9 and VKORC1), classified as critically low quality. There is a need for more quality primary studies and systematic reviews that assess the risk of bias, with consistent definitions of clinical outcomes to consider the benefits of PGx testing for cardiovascular diseases.
INTRODUCTION: Notably differences in CYP2C9 allele frequencies among worldwide populations have been reported, with an interesting low frequency of the CYP2C9*2 allele in Amerindians compared with Admixed and European populations. AREAS COVERED: Literature was searched using the PubMed database and was focused on worldwide original research papers on CYP2C9 alleles and CYP2C9 phenotypes ("predicted" from CYP2C9 genotypes and "measured" metabolic phenotype with a probe drug) among healthy volunteers according to their ethnicity and geographical distribution. Seventy-eight original research articles including a total of 31,978 subjects were identified. EXPERT OPINION: CYP2C9*2 allele is the most frequent in Caucasian populations (average 14%), with the lowest frequencies for Africans (0.46%), East Asians (0.56%) and Native Americans (1.25%), which is in agreement with the hypothesis about the low prevalence in Amerindians. CYP2C9*3 shows the highest frequency among South Asians (11.7%), while CYP2C9*5 (1.56%) and *8 (4.70%) in African Americans. The predicted poor metabolizers (gPMs) were found overall in a low frequency, with the highest frequency detected for South Asians, in accordance with the CYP2C9*3 frequency in these populations. This study shows the worldwide variability in the CYP2C9 allele frequencies across different ethnic and geographic groups. Data about CYP2C9 "measured" metabolic phenotypes is still limited.
The aim of this study was to investigate how variability in multiple genes related to pharmacokinetics affects fluvastatin exposure. We determined fluvastatin enantiomer pharmacokinetics and sequenced 379 pharmacokinetic genes in 200 healthy volunteers. CYP2C9*3 associated with significantly increased area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of both 3R,5S-fluvastatin and 3S,5R-fluvastatin (by 67% and 94% per variant allele copy, P = 3.77 x 10(-9) and P = 3.19 x 10(-12) ). In contrast, SLCO1B1 c.521T>C associated with increased AUC of active 3R,5S-fluvastatin only (by 34% per variant allele copy; P = 8.15 x 10(-8) ). A candidate gene analysis suggested that CYP2C9*2 also affects the AUC of both fluvastatin enantiomers and that SLCO2B1 single-nucleotide variations may affect the AUC of 3S,5R-fluvastatin. Thus, SLCO transporters have enantiospecific effects on fluvastatin pharmacokinetics in humans. Genotyping of both CYP2C9 and SLCO1B1 may be useful in predicting fluvastatin efficacy and myotoxicity.
Personalized medicine seeks to identify the right dose of the right drug for the right patient at the right time. Typically, individualization of therapy is based on the pharmacogenomic makeup of the individual and environmental factors that alter drug disposition and response. In addition to these factors, during pregnancy, a woman's body undergoes many changes that can impact the therapeutic efficacy of medications. Yet, there is minimal research regarding personalized medicine in obstetrics. Adoption of pharmacogenetic testing into the obstetrical care is dependent on evidence of analytical validity, clinical validity, and clinical utility. Here, we briefly present information regarding the potential utility of personalized medicine for treating the obstetric patient for pain with narcotics, hypertension, and preterm labor, and discuss the impediments of bringing personalized medicine to the obstetrical clinic.
BACKGROUND: Genetic polymorphisms of drug metabolizing enzymes can substantially modify the pharmacokinetics of a drug and eventually its efficacy or toxicity; however, inferring a patient's drug metabolizing capacity merely from his or her genotype can lead to false prediction. Non-genetic host factors (age, sex, disease states) and environmental factors (nutrition, comedication) can transiently alter the enzyme expression and activities resulting in genotypephenotype mismatch. Although valproic acid is a well-tolerated anticonvulsant, pediatric patients are particularly vulnerable to valproate injury that can be partly attributed to the age-related differences in metabolic pathways. METHODS: CYP2C9 mediated oxidation of valproate, which is the minor metabolic pathway in adults, appears to become the principal route in children. Genetic and non-genetic variations in CYP2C9 activity can result in significant inter- and intra-individual differences in valproate pharmacokinetics and valproate induced adverse reactions. RESULTS: The loss-of-function alleles, CYP2C9*2 or CYP2C9*3, display significant reduction in valproate metabolism in children; furthermore, low CYP2C9 expression in patients with CYP2C9*1/*1 genotype also leads to a decrease in valproate metabolizing capacity. Due to phenoconversion, the homozygous wild genotype, expected to be translated to CYP2C9 enzyme with normal activity, is transiently switched into poor (or extensive) metabolizer phenotype. CONCLUSION: Novel strategy for valproate therapy adjusted to CYP2C9-status (CYP2C9 genotype and CYP2C9 expression) is strongly recommended in childhood. The early knowledge of pediatric patients' CYP2C9-status facilitates the optimization of valproate dosing which contributes to the avoidance of misdosing induced adverse reactions, such as abnormal blood levels of ammonia and alkaline phosphatase, and improves the safety of children's anticonvulsant therapy.
Objective: This meta-analysis was designed to investigate the associations between SLCO1B1, APOE and CYP2C9 and the lipid-lowering effects and pharmacokinetics of fluvastatin. Methods: Studies were searched from inception to March 2023, including three SNPs related to fluvastatin, SLCO1B1, CYP2C9 and APOE. Weighted mean differences and corresponding 95% CIs were analyzed to evaluate the associations between SNPs and outcomes. Results: SLCO1B1 521T>C was associated with lower total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein reduction. Patients carrying 521CC or total cholesterol had a significantly higher area under the curve than those carrying 521TT, but no significant difference existed. Conclusion: CYP2C9 and SLCO1B1 may be associated with the efficacy and pharmacokinetics of fluvastatin.
BACKGROUND: Warfarin is the most widely used anticoagulant all over the world for prevention and treatment of different thrombotic conditions. Polymorphisms in two genes i.e. CYP2C9 (Cytochrome P450 2C9) and VKORC1 (Vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subunit 1) play a major role in warfarin dose variation and its related adverse effects. Different ethnic groups have shown significant differences in dose requirement. METHOD: A systematic electronic search was carried out in PUBMED and ScienceDirect using different key words like, 'warfarin', 'CYP2C9', 'VKORC1', 'pharmacokinetics', 'metabolites' and 'genetic'. Till date, data from 15 Asian countries for CYP2C9 genotypes and 14 Asian countries for VKORC1 genotypes could be retrieved. RESULTS: Approximately 90% of the subjects from East Asian countries were found to be carriers for VKORC1 1639 'A' or 1173 'T' allele (associated with low dose warfarin), while the prevalence of these alleles in the rest of the Asian countries (except Iran) i.e. South, South East, West and Central Asia ranged between 14 and 80%. Interestingly, an increase in carrier rate for CYP2C9 2 or 3 alleles was observed as we move from East to West Asia and an opposite trend was observed with VKORC1 1639 'A' or 1173 'T' alleles. Countries like Iran, Oman, India and Russia showed a drastic variation in the distribution pattern of these genotypes from that of the neighboring countries. CONCLUSION: The analysis further highlights the importance of genotype based warfarin dosing in each country. Since many Asian countries are still underrepresented in pharmacogenomic research, addition of data from these underrepresented countries will be beneficial for safe warfarin dosing in these patients.
Tweetable abstract Warfarin will remain in use for a long time to come, thus inclusion of African populations in pharmacogenomics is essential to be able to identify all possible biomarkers that are potential predictors for warfarin drug response.
CYP2C9 metabolizes approximately 20% of clinically used drugs, including the narrow therapeutic window drugs warfarin and phenytoin. More than 16,000 variants have been reported in the National Center for Biotechnology Information CYP2C9 database, as well as 58 alleles in the official P450 Nomenclature Committee website. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms represented by the CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 alleles have been studied extensively. However, in addition to these two alleles, other genetic factors and an individual's biological characteristics contribute to the overall drug phenotype. A major bottleneck for CYP2C9 pharmacogenomics in clinical field applications is the lack of knowledge regarding the numerous genetic polymorphisms and their molecular functionalities. An unmet gap exists between the ever-growing number of genetic variants and their molecular mechanisms. In the present review, functional changes of all known CYP2C9 protein coding alleles were predicted using in silico analyses and compared with the in vitro and in vivo data. We also summarize functional information from recently reported CYP2C9 variants. Regarding the previously known CYP2C9 variants, we provide an update on the functional information obtained from in vitro and in vitro data.
Chimeric mice with humanized livers (humanized liver mice) are attractive experimental animal models for drug metabolism and pharmacokinetic studies. The "humanized liver" is a mature and functional liver with zonal position-specific expressions of human cytochrome P450 (P450) enzymes and a global gene expression pattern consistent with that of the mature human liver. Most P450-dependent drug oxidation activities were comparable between microsomes from livers of human and humanized liver mice based on similar expression levels of human P450 enzymes; however, some differences were observed between the two species, including considerable variations in activities of bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation and propafenone 4'-hydroxylation. Human disproportionate and/or unique metabolites of P450 substrate drugs were produced in humanized liver mice. Plasma concentration profiles of typical P450 substrate drugs in humans could be extrapolated from the corresponding data in humanized liver mice using simplified physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling. Drug-drug interaction-mediated hepatic human CYP3A/2C induction by rifampicin (a human pregnane X receptor agonist) was observed in humanized liver mice. The major role of human CYP2C9 in in vivo diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation were determined using human CYP2C9-inactivated chimeric mice using a mechanism-based inhibitor, tienilic acid. Overall, based on the functional characteristics of hepatic human P450 enzymes, humanized liver mice are valuable experimental animals for studying metabolite profiling, pharmacokinetics, and drug interactions.
Warfarin pharmacogenomic testing has become a prime example of the utility of personalized molecular testing in the modern clinical laboratory. Warfarin is a commonly used drug for the prevention and treatment of thromboembolic complications in a variety of clinical situations. However, a number of factors lead to a high interindividual variability in dose requirements. Among the primary factors in this variability are genetic polymorphisms in general patient populations, which can account for 35-50% of varying dose requirements among patients. In this review, we discuss the implications of polymorphisms in the cytochrome P-450 enzyme 2C9 (CYP2C9) and Vitamin K Epoxide Reductase Enzyme Complex subunit 1 (VKORC1) as they relate to therapeutic warfarin dosing. We discuss the clinical utility of pharmacogenomics testing as related to warfarin dosing, and propose a clinical model for the implementation of the pharmacogenomic test results. Finally, we provide a brief overview of the currently available commercial testing platforms with discussion of the complexities of utilizing patented methodologies in bringing genetic testing such as this to the clinical laboratory.
Aim: Phenytoin is metabolized through CYP2C9 and CYP2C19. Polymorphisms of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 may increase plasma concentration and side effects. Materials & methods: Systematic review and meta-analysis were performed to evaluate the effects of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 polymorphism on pharmacokinetic parameters. PubMed, Science Direct, Cochrane library, and Thai databases were systematically searched. Results: Eight observational studies, comprising a total of 633 patients were included. Michaelis-Menten constant was significantly higher in the polymorphism of CYP2C9IM/CYP2C19EM and CYP2C9IM/CYP2C19IM groups as compared with the control groups (CYP2C9EM/CYP2C19EM) at 2.16 and 1.55 mg/l (p < 0.00001, p < 0.0001). The maximum rate of action was significantly lower in the control groups as compared with the polymorphism of CYP2C9IM/CYP2C19EM and CYP2C9IM/CYP2C19IM groups at 3.10 and 3.53 mg/kg/day (p = 0.00001, <0.0001). Conclusion: The dosage regimen for patients in the CYP2C9IM group to achieve phenytoin therapeutic levels was 2.1-3.4 mg/kg/day.
OBJECTIVES: Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (SMX-TMP) is one of the most frequently used antibiotics. SMX is metabolized by N-acetyltransferase (NAT) and cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) to nontoxic or toxic intermediates. Little is known about the association between genetic variations of these enzymes and SMX-TMP-induced liver injury (SILI). The aim of this study was to explore the genetic polymorphisms of NAT2 and CYP2C9 and the susceptibility to SILI in a Han Chinese population. METHODS: A total of 158 patients with SILI and 145 controls were recruited in this study. PCR-based genotyping with matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight was used to assay the major NAT2 and CYP2C9 genotypes including NAT2 rs1495741, rs1041983, rs1801280, CYP2C9 rs1799853, rs1057910 and rs4918758. RESULTS: The SILI group had a higher frequency of the NAT2 rs1495741 variant AA genotype and rs1041983 variant TT genotype than the controls (42.4 vs. 25.5%; P = 0.008, and 40.5 vs. 25.5%; P = 0.022, respectively). The SILI group had more slow acetylators than the controls (43.7 vs. 25.5%; P = 0.001). There were no significant differences in the genetic variations of CYP2C9 between the SILI and control groups. After adjusting for confounding factors, the NAT2 slow acetylators still had an increased risk of SILI (adjusted OR: 2.49; 95% confidence interval: 1.46-4.24; P = 0.001), especially in those with hepatocellular and mixed type SILI. CONCLUSIONS: NAT2 slow acetylators are associated with a higher risk of SILI in the Han Chinese population. However, CYP2C9 genetic polymorphisms are not associated with the susceptibility to SILI.
Due to the rapidly increasing global interest in the use of herbs, phytomedicines and other natural products as medical or complementary remedies, concerns about the clinical medication safety have drawn much attention worldwide. Particularly, many natural ingredients exhibit inhibitory effects on cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, which are the most important Phase I metabolism enzymes in liver. CYP2C9 is one of the most abundant CYP enzymes and responsible for the metabolism of over 15% clinical drugs, including oral sulfonylurea hypoglycemics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, antiepileptics, angiotensin II receptor inhibitors and anticoagulants. Diclofenac (4'-hydroxylase) and tolbutamide (methylhydroxylation) are widely used as probe substrates for CYP2C9. To date, numerous natural products have been reported to have the capabilities of inhibiting the catalytic activity of CYP2C9 and further influencing the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic behaviors of drugs that are mainly metabolized by CYP2C9, leading to potential herb-drug interactions. Moreover, some fatal adverse interactions may occur for drugs with a narrow therapeutic window when they are coadministered with a CYP2C9 inhibitor, especially irreversible inactivators. For the purpose of better understanding the interactions of natural products with CYP2C9, we comprehensively reviewed the characteristics of CYP2C9, the natural ingredients that inhibit CYP2C9, the related research approaches and strategies, the types of inhibition and the underlying mechanisms.
Warfarin is a widely used anticoagulant, and its S-enantiomer has higher potency compared to the R-enantiomer. S-warfarin is mainly metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9, and its pharmacological target is vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subunit 1 (VKORC1). Both CYP2C9 and VKORC1 have genetic polymorphisms, leading to large variations in the pharmacokinetics (PKs) and pharmacodynamics (PDs) of warfarin in the population. This makes dosage management of warfarin difficult, especially in the case of drug-drug interactions (DDIs). This study provides a whole-body physiologically-based pharmacokinetic/PD (PBPK/PD) model of S-warfarin for predicting the effects of drug-drug-gene interactions on S-warfarin PKs and PDs. The PBPK/PD model of S-warfarin was developed in PK-Sim and MoBi. Drug-dependent parameters were obtained from the literature or optimized. Of the 34 S-warfarin plasma concentration-time profiles used, 96% predicted plasma concentrations within twofold range compared to observed data. For S-warfarin plasma concentration-time profiles with CYP2C9 genotype, 364 of 386 predicted plasma concentration values (~94%) fell within the twofold of the observed values. This model was tested in DDI predictions with fluconazole as CYP2C9 perpetrators, with all predicted DDI area under the plasma concentration-time curve to the last measurable timepoint (AUC(last)) ratio within twofold of the observed values. The anticoagulant effect of S-warfarin was described using an indirect response model, with all predicted international normalized ratio (INR) within twofold of the observed values. This model also incorporates a dose-adjustment method that can be used for dose adjustment and predict INR when warfarin is used in combination with CYP2C9 perpetrators.
AIM: The aim of this study was to study potential cytochrome P450 (CYP) induction by dicloxacillin. METHODS: We performed an open-label, randomized, two-phase, five-drug clinical pharmacokinetic cocktail crossover study in 12 healthy men with and without pretreatment with 1 g dicloxacillin three times daily for 10 days. Plasma and urine were collected over 24 h and the concentration of all five drugs and their primary metabolites was determined using a liquid chromatography coupled to triple quadrupole mass spectrometry method. Cryopreserved primary human hepatocytes were exposed to dicloxacillin for 48 h and changes in gene expression and the activity of CYP3A4, CYP2C9, CYP2B6 and CYP1A2 were investigated. The activation of nuclear receptors by dicloxacillin was assessed using luciferase assays. RESULTS: A total of 10 days of treatment with dicloxacillin resulted in a clinically and statistically significant reduction in the area under the plasma concentration-time curve from 0 to 24 h for omeprazole (CYP2C19) geometric mean ratio [GMR] [95% confidence interval (CI)]: 0.33 [0.24, 0.45], tolbutamide (CYP2C9) [GMR (95% CI): 0.73 (0.65, 0.81)] and midazolam (CYP3A4) [GMR (95% CI): 0.54 (0.41, 0.72)]. Additionally, other relevant pharmacokinetic parameters were affected, indicating the induction of CYP2C- and CYP3A4-mediated metabolism by dicloxacillin. Investigations in primary hepatocytes showed a statistically significant dose-dependent increase in CYP expression and activity by dicloxacillin, caused by activation of the pregnane X receptor. CONCLUSIONS: Dicloxacillin is an inducer of CYP2C- and CYP3A-mediated drug metabolism, and we recommend caution when prescribing dicloxacillin to users of drugs with a narrow therapeutic window.
INTRODUCTION: Phenytoin, a widely prescribed old-generation antiepileptic drug, requires careful individualization of dosage to compensate for its prominent pharmacokinetic variability. This article reviews the contribution of genetic polymorphisms affecting the activity of CYP2C9, the main enzyme responsible for phenytoin metabolism, to the variation in phenytoin clearance and susceptibility to adverse effects. AREAS COVERED: Comprehensive and critical review of available evidence concerning the influence of CYP2C9 genetic polymorphism on phenytoin pharmacokinetic and safety profile. EXPERT OPINION: There is extensive evidence that CYP2C9 polymorphisms are an important determinant of the rate of phenytoin metabolism, although other factors including expression of other enzymes such as CYP2C19 and the influence of drug interactions, physiological and disease-related factors may also play a role. Patients carrying CYP2C9 genotypes associated with reduced phenytoin clearance are at greater risk of developing CNS adverse effects as well as serious cutaneous adverse reactions when given usual dosages of phenytoin. The clinical value and cost-effectiveness of CYP2C9 genotyping in improving the safety of phenytoin therapy, however, have not been clearly established and require formal testing in well-designed prospective studies.
