Cytochrome P450 2C19; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Hydroxylates PUFA specifically at the omega-1 position. Catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of PUFA. Also metabolizes plant monoterpenes such as limonene. Oxygenates (R)- and (S)-limo [...] 
Common genetic variation in CYP2C19 (cytochrome P450, family 2, subfamily C, polypeptide 19) *2 and *3 alleles leads to a loss of functional protein, and carriers of these loss-of-function alleles when treated with clopidogrel have significantly reduced clopidogrel active metabolite levels and high on-treatment platelet reactivity resulting in increased risk of major adverse cardiovascular events, especially after percutaneous coronary intervention. The Food and Drug Administration has issued a black box warning advising practitioners to consider alternative treatment in CYP2C19 poor metabolizers who might receive clopidogrel and to identify such patients by genotyping. However, routine clinical use of genotyping for CYP2C19 loss-of-function alleles in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention is not recommended by clinical guidelines because of lack of prospective evidence. To address this critical gap, TAILOR-PCI (Tailored Antiplatelet Initiation to Lessen Outcomes due to Decreased Clopidogrel Response After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention) is a large, pragmatic, randomized trial comparing point-of-care genotype-guided antiplatelet therapy with routine care to determine whether identifying CYP2C19 loss-of-function allele patients prospectively and prescribing alternative antiplatelet therapy is beneficial.
Serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; i.e., citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and sertraline), serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (i.e., desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, levomilnacipran, milnacipran, and venlafaxine), and serotonin modulators with SSRI-like properties (i.e., vilazodone and vortioxetine) are primary pharmacologic treatments for major depressive and anxiety disorders. Genetic variation in CYP2D6, CYP2C19, and CYP2B6 influences the metabolism of many of these antidepressants, which may potentially affect dosing, efficacy, and tolerability. In addition, the pharmacodynamic genes SLC6A4 (serotonin transporter) and HTR2A (serotonin-2A receptor) have been examined in relation to efficacy and side effect profiles of these drugs. This guideline updates and expands the 2015 Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) guideline for CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 genotypes and SSRI dosing and summarizes the impact of CYP2D6, CYP2C19, CYP2B6, SLC6A4, and HTR2A genotypes on antidepressant dosing, efficacy, and tolerability. We provide recommendations for using CYP2D6, CYP2C19, and CYP2B6 genotype results to help inform prescribing these antidepressants and describe the existing data for SLC6A4 and HTR2A, which do not support their clinical use in antidepressant prescribing.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are used extensively for the treatment of gastric acid-related disorders, often over the long term, which raises the potential for clinically significant drug interactions in patients receiving concomitant medications. These drug-drug interactions have been previously reviewed. However, the current knowledge is likely to have advanced, so a thorough review of the literature published since 2006 was conducted. This identified new studies of drug interactions that are modulated by gastric pH. These studies showed the effect of a PPI-induced increase in intragastric pH on mycophenolate mofetil pharmacokinetics, which were characterised by a decrease in the maximum exposure and availability of mycophenolic acid, at least at early time points. Post-2006 data were also available outlining the altered pharmacokinetics of protease inhibitors with concomitant PPI exposure. New data for the more recently marketed dexlansoprazole suggest it has no impact on the pharmacokinetics of diazepam, phenytoin, theophylline and warfarin. The CYP2C19-mediated interaction that seems to exist between clopidogrel and omeprazole or esomeprazole has been shown to be clinically important in research published since the 2006 review; this effect is not seen as a class effect of PPIs. Finally, data suggest that coadministration of PPIs with methotrexate may affect methotrexate pharmacokinetics, although the mechanism of interaction is not well understood. As was shown in the previous review, individual PPIs differ in their propensities to interact with other drugs and the extent to which their interaction profiles have been defined. The interaction profiles of omeprazole and pantoprazole sodium (pantoprazole-Na) have been studied most extensively. Several studies have shown that omeprazole carries a considerable potential for drug interactions because of its high affinity for CYP2C19 and moderate affinity for CYP3A4. In contrast, pantoprazole-Na appears to have lower potential for interactions with other medications. Lansoprazole and rabeprazole also seem to have a weaker potential for interactions than omeprazole, although their interaction profiles, along with those of esomeprazole and dexlansoprazole, have been less extensively investigated. Only a few drug interactions involving PPIs are of clinical significance. Nonetheless, the potential for drug interactions should be considered when choosing a PPI to manage gastric acid-related disorders. This is particularly relevant for elderly patients taking multiple medications, or for those receiving a concomitant medication with a narrow therapeutic index.
Proton Pump inhibitors (PPIs) are commonly used for a variety of acid related disorders. Despite the overall effectiveness and safety profile of PPIs, some patients do not respond adequately or develop treatment related adverse events. This variable response among patients is in part due to genotype variability of CYP2C19, the gene encoding the CYP450 (CYP2C19) isoenzyme responsible for PPIs metabolism. Areas covered: This article provides an overview of the pharmacokinetics and mechanism of action of the currently available PPIs, including the magnitude of CYPC19 contribution to their metabolism. Additionally, the role of CYP2C19 genetic variability in the therapeutic effectiveness or outcomes of PPI therapy is highlighted in details, to provide supporting evidence for the potential value of CYP2C19 genotype-guided approaches to PPI drug therapy. Expert opinion: There is a large body of evidence describing the impact of CYP2C19 variability on PPIs and its potential role in individualizing PPI therapy, yet, CYP2C19 pharmacogenetics has not been widely implemented into clinical practice. More data are needed but CYP2C19 genotype-guided dosing of PPIs is likely to become increasingly common and is expected to improve clinical outcomes, and minimize side effects related to PPIs.
AIMS: Nocturnal acid breakthrough has been considered an unmet need of proton-pump inhibitors. Tegoprazan, a novel potassium-competitive acid blocker, is expected to show improved properties for this unmet need. This study was aimed to compare night-time acid suppression by tegoprazan with that by vonoprazan or esomeprazole, and to explore the effect of CYP2C19 phenotypes on acid-suppressive effects. METHODS: A randomized, open-label, 3-period, 6-sequence crossover study was conducted. A single oral dose of tegoprazan 50 mg, vonoprazan 20 mg or esomeprazole 40 mg was administered at night in each period. Continuous intragastric pH was monitored at baseline and after each dosing. RESULTS: Sixteen healthy subjects (6 CYP2C19 extensive metabolizers, 5 intermediate metabolizers, 5 poor metabolizers) completed the study. After a single dose of tegoprazan, intragastric pH increased more rapidly to over 4 at approximately 1 hour compared to the other treatments, and elevated intragastric pH was maintained stably at night. Tegoprazan exhibited night-time acid suppression for slightly but not significantly longer than vonoprazan, and greater than esomeprazole; % time at pH >/= 4 at night was 66.0%, 60.5% and 36.1% for tegoprazan, vonoprazan and esomeprazole, respectively. Night-time acid suppression by tegoprazan and vonoprazan was not dependent on CYP2C19 phenotypes, while that by esomeprazole tended to be influenced by CYP2C19 phenotypes. CONCLUSION: Tegoprazan produced more rapid, potent and well sustained night-time acid suppression vs. vonoprazan or esomeprazole when administered at night. Furthermore, tegoprazan showed no CYP2C19 phenotype dependency in acid suppression. It suggests the potential of tegoprazan, especially in preventing nocturnal acid breakthrough.
The Pharmacogene Variation Consortium (PharmVar) catalogues star (*) allele nomenclature for the polymorphic human CYP2C19 gene. CYP2C19 genetic variation impacts the metabolism of many drugs and has been associated with both efficacy and safety issues for several commonly prescribed medications. This GeneFocus provides a comprehensive overview and summary of CYP2C19 and describes how haplotype information catalogued by PharmVar is utilized by the Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase and the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC).
There is significant variability in the efficacy and safety of oral P2Y12 inhibitors, which are used to prevent ischemic outcomes in common diseases such as coronary and peripheral arterial disease and stroke. Clopidogrel, a prodrug, is the most used oral P2Y12 inhibitor and is activated primarily after being metabolized by a highly polymorphic hepatic cytochrome CYP2C219 enzyme. Loss-of-function genetic variants in CYP2C219 are common, can result in decreased active metabolite levels and increased on-treatment platelet aggregation, and are associated with increased ischemic events on clopidogrel therapy. Such patients can be identified by CYP2C19 genetic testing and can be treated with alternative therapy. Conversely, universal use of potent oral P2Y12 inhibitors such as ticagrelor or prasugrel, which are not dependent on CYP2C19 for activation, has been recommended but can result in increased bleeding. Recent clinical trials and meta-analyses have demonstrated that a precision medicine approach in which loss-of-function carriers are prescribed ticagrelor or prasugrel and noncarriers are prescribed clopidogrel results in reducing ischemic events without increasing bleeding risk. The evidence to date supports CYP2C19 genetic testing before oral P2Y12 inhibitors are prescribed in patients with acute coronary syndromes or percutaneous coronary intervention. Clinical implementation of such genetic testing will depend on among multiple factors: rapid availability of results or adoption of the concept of performing preemptive genetic testing, provision of easy-to-understand results with therapeutic recommendations, and seamless integration in the electronic health record.
Pharmacogenomics is the examination of how genetic variation influences drug metabolism and response, in terms of both efficacy and safety. In cardiovascular disease, patient-specific diplotypes determine phenotypes, thereby influencing the efficacy and safety of drug treatments, including statins, antiarrhythmics, anticoagulants and antiplatelets. Notably, polymorphisms in key genes, such as CYP2C9, CYP2C19, VKORC1 and SLCO1B1, significantly impact the outcomes of treatment with clopidogrel, warfarin and simvastatin. Furthermore, the CYP2C19 polymorphism influences the pharmacokinetics and safety of the novel hypertrophic cardiomyopathy inhibitor, mavacamten. In this review, we critically assess the clinical application of pharmacogenomics in cardiovascular disease and delineate present and future utilization of pharmacogenomics. This includes insights into identifying missing heritability, the integration of whole genome sequencing and the application of polygenic risk scores to enhance the precision of personalized drug therapy. Our discussion encompasses health economic analyses that underscore the cost benefits associated with pre-emptive genotyping for warfarin and clopidogrel treatments, albeit acknowledging the need for further research in this area. In summary, we contend that cardiovascular pharmacogenomic analyses are underpinned by a wealth of evidence, and implementation is already occurring for some of these gene-drug pairs, but as with any area of medicine, we need to continually gather more information to optimize the use of pharmacogenomics in clinical practice.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are primary treatment options for major depressive and anxiety disorders. CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 polymorphisms can influence the metabolism of SSRIs, thereby affecting drug efficacy and safety. We summarize evidence from the published literature supporting these associations and provide dosing recommendations for fluvoxamine, paroxetine, citalopram, escitalopram, and sertraline based on CYP2D6 and/or CYP2C19 genotype (updates at www.pharmgkb.org).
Invasive aspergillosis (IA) is one of the most common life-threatening complications in immunocompromised patients. Voriconazole is currently the drug of choice for IA treatment. However, some patients with IA suffer clinical deterioration despite voriconazole therapy. Management of voriconazole-refractory IA remains challenging; no useful recommendations have yet been made. Voriconazole-refractory IA can be further categorized as disease attributable to misdiagnosis or co-infection with another mold; inadequate blood voriconazole blood; inadequate tissue drug concentrations attributable to angioinvasion; immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome; or infection with voriconazole-resistant Aspergillus. Hence, when encountering a case of voriconazole-refractory IA, it is necessary to schedule sequential tests to decide whether medical treatment or surgical intervention is appropriate; to adjust the voriconazole dose via drug monitoring; to seek CYP2C19 polymorphisms; to monitor serum galactomannan levels; and to examine the drug susceptibility of the causative Aspergillus species.
Antiplatelet therapy is used in the treatment of patients with acute coronary syndromes, stroke, and those undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. Clopidogrel is the most widely used antiplatelet P2Y12 inhibitor in clinical practice. Genetic variation in CYP2C19 may influence its enzymatic activity, resulting in individuals who are carriers of loss-of-function CYP2C19 alleles and thus have reduced active clopidogrel metabolites, high on-treatment platelet reactivity, and increased ischemic risk. Prospective studies have examined the utility of CYP2C19 genetic testing to guide antiplatelet therapy, and more recently published meta-analyses suggest that pharmacogenetics represents a key treatment strategy to individualize antiplatelet therapy. Rapid genetic tests, including bedside genotyping platforms that are validated and have high reproducibility, are available to guide selection of P2Y12 inhibitors in clinical practice. The aim of this review is to provide an overview of the background and rationale for the role of a guided antiplatelet approach to enhance patient care.
Variability in hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes such as 2C19 and 2D6 may influence side-effect and efficacy outcomes for antipsychotics. Aripiprazole and risperidone are two commonly prescribed antipsychotics, metabolized primarily through CYP2D6. Here, we aimed to provide an overview of the effect of CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 on side-effects of aripiprazole and risperidone, and expand on existing literature by critically examining methodological issues associated with pharmacogenetic studies. A PRISMA compliant search of six electronic databases (Pubmed, PsychInfo, Embase, Central, Web of Science, and Google Scholar) identified pharmacogenetic studies on aripiprazole and risperidone. 2007 publications were first identified, of which 34 were included. Quality of literature was estimated using Newcastle-Ottowa Quality Assessment Scale (NOS) and revised Cochrane Risk of Bias tool. The average NOS score was 5.8 (range: 3-8) for risperidone literature and 5 for aripiprazole (range: 4-6). All RCTs on aripiprazole were rated as high risk of bias, and four out of six for risperidone literature. Study populations ranged from healthy volunteers to inpatient individuals in psychiatric units and included adult and pediatric samples. All n = 34 studies examined CYP2D6. Only one study genotyped for CYP2C19 and found a positive association with neurological side-effects of risperidone. Most studies did not report any relationship between CYP2D6 and any side-effect outcome. Heterogeneity between and within studies limited the ability to synthesize data and draw definitive conclusions. Studies lacked statistical power due to small sample size, selective genotyping methods, and study design. Large-scale randomized trials with multiple measurements, providing robust evidence on this topic, are suggested.
Cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis, an Old World monkey) are widely used in drug development because of their genetic and physiological similarities to humans, and this trend has continued with the use of common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus, a New World monkey). Information on the major drug-metabolizing cytochrome P450 (CYP, P450) enzymes of these primate species indicates that multiple forms of their P450 enzymes have generally similar substrate selectivities to those of human P450 enzymes; however, some differences in isoform, activity, and substrate specificity account for limited species differences in drug oxidative metabolism. This review provides information on the P450 enzymes of cynomolgus macaques and marmosets, including cDNA, tissue expression, substrate specificity, and genetic variants, along with age differences and induction. Typical examples of important P450s to be considered in drug metabolism studies include cynomolgus CYP2C19, which is expressed abundantly in liver and metabolizes numerous drugs. Moreover, genetic variants of cynomolgus CYP2C19 affect the individual pharmacokinetic data of drugs such as R-warfarin. These findings provide a foundation for understanding each P450 enzyme and the individual pharmacokinetic and toxicological results in cynomolgus macaques and marmosets as preclinical models. In addition, the effects of induction on some drug clearances mediated by P450 enzymes are also described. In summary, this review describes genetic and acquired individual differences in cynomolgus and marmoset P450 enzymes involved in drug oxidation that may be associated with pharmacological and/or toxicological effects.
Clopidogrel, a platelet P2Y12 inhibitor, is one of the most widely prescribed drugs in cardiovascular medicine because it reduces ischemic and thrombotic complications. It is a prodrug requiring biotransformation into the active metabolite by the hepatic cytochrome 450 system, especially the CYP2C19 enzyme. Candidate gene studies and genome-wide association studies have identified loss-of-function CYP2C19 variants to be associated with a diminished pharmacologic response. Specifically, compared with noncarriers, carriers of at least one copy of a loss-of-function CYP2C19 allele have  approximately 30% lower levels of active clopidogrel metabolite and  approximately 25% relatively less platelet inhibition with clopidogrel. Moreover, in patients treated with clopidogrel predominantly for percutaneous coronary intervention, carriers of 1 or 2 CYP2C19 loss-of-function alleles are at increased risk for major adverse cardiovascular outcomes, with an  approximately 1.5-fold increase in the risk of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or stroke as well as an  approximately 3-fold increase in risk for stent thrombosis. Tripling the dose of clopidogrel in carriers of a CYP2C19 loss-of-function allele can achieve on-treatment platelet reactivity comparable to that seen with the standard 75 mg dose in wild-type individuals, but the impact on clinical outcomes remains unknown. Alternatively, 2 third-generation P2Y12 inhibitors are available: prasugrel and ticagrelor. These drugs are superior to clopidogrel in reducing ischemic outcomes and are unaffected by CYP2C19 loss-of-function alleles.
Oral P2Y(12) inhibitors are commonly prescribed for cardiovascular disease and include clopidogrel, prasugrel, and ticagrelor. Each of these drugs has its strengths and weaknesses. Prasugrel and ticagrelor are more potent inhibitors of platelet aggregation and were shown to be superior to clopidogrel in preventing major adverse cardiovascular events after an acute coronary syndrome and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in the absence of genotyping. However, both are associated with an increased risk for non-coronary artery bypass-related bleeding. Clopidogrel is a prodrug requiring bioactivation, primarily via the CYP2C19 enzyme. Approximately 30% of individuals have a CYP2C19 no function allele and decreased or no CYP2C19 enzyme activity. Clopidogrel-treated carriers of a CYP2C19 no function allele have decreased exposure to the clopidogrel active metabolite and lesser inhibition of platelet aggregation, which likely contributed to reduced clopidogrel efficacy in clinical trials. The pharmacogenetic data for clopidogrel are most robust in the setting of PCI, but evidence is accumulating for other indications. Guidance is available from expert consensus groups and regulatory agencies to assist with integrating genetic information into P2Y(12) inhibitor prescribing decisions, and CYP2C19 genotype-guided antiplatelet therapy after PCI is one of the most common examples of clinical pharmacogenetic implementation. Herein, we review the evidence for pharmacogenetic associations with clopidogrel response and outcomes with genotype-guided P2Y(12) inhibitor selection and describe guidance to assist with pharmacogenetic implementation. We also describe processes for applying genotype data for P2Y(12) inhibitor therapy selection and remaining gaps in the field. Ultimately, consideration of both clinical and genetic factors may guide selection of P2Y(12) inhibitor therapy that optimally balances the atherothrombotic and bleeding risks.
Tacrolimus is a calcineurin inhibitor used to prevent rejection in allogenic solid organ transplant recipients, which is metabolized in the liver with cytochrome P450 isoforms 3A4 and 3A5 (CYP3A4, CYP3A5). In turn, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), such as Omeprazole - a substrate and inhibitor of CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 enzymes - are administered to kidney transplant patients in order to prevent duodenal and gastric ulcer disease, associated with the glucocorticoid treatment. Simultaneous administration of both drugs in renal patients has the potential to trigger drug interactions. In fact, there are several mechanisms which may impact the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus. Inhibition of the CYP2C19 isoform may suppress the metabolism of omeprazole, subsequently altering its metabolic pathway to be metabolized by the CYP3A4 enzyme in order to maintain adequate biotransformation. Therefore, the competition for CYP3A4 may affect the metabolism of tacrolimus and result in its increased plasma concentrations, as well as in adverse reactions. Another mechanism has been related to the genetic polymorphism of the CYP2C19 isoform. Since all these interactions may lead to dysfunctions of the transplanted kidney, it seems significant to eliminate their consequences, for instance via the administration of drugs which are neither substrates, nor inhibitors of the CYP3A4 enzyme. Finally, the nephrotoxic effect of omeprazole should also be accounted for. Bearing in mind the aforementioned observations, the aim of the presented paper was to review the available studies addressing the effect of omeprazole on the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus.
There is significant interpatient variability in clopidogrel effectiveness, which is due in part to cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C19 genotype. Approximately 30% of individuals carry CYP2C19 loss-of-function alleles, which have been consistently shown to reduce clopidogrel effectiveness after an acute coronary syndrome and percutaneous coronary intervention. Guidelines recommend consideration of prasugrel or ticagrelor in these patients. A clinical trial examining outcomes with CYP2C19 genotype-guided antiplatelet therapy is ongoing. In the meantime, based on the evidence available to date, several institutions have started clinically implementing CYP2C19 genotyping to assist with antiplatelet selection after percutaneous coronary intervention.
Loss-of-function CYP2C19 variants are associated with increased cumulative ischemic outcomes warranting CYP2C19 genotyping prior to clopidogrel administration. TAILOR-PCI was an international, multicenter (40 sites), prospective, randomized trial comparing rapid point of care (POC) genotype-guided vs. conventional anti-platelet therapy. The performance of buccal-based rapid CYP2C19 genotyping performed by non-laboratory-trained staff in TAILOR-PCI was assessed. Pre-trial training and evaluation involved rapid genotyping of 373 oral samples, with 99.5% (371/373) concordance with Sanger sequencing. During TAILOR-PCI, 5302 patients undergoing PCI were randomized to POC rapid CYP2C19 *2, *3, and *17 genotyping versus no genotyping. At 12 months post-PCI, TaqMan genotyping determined 99.1% (2,364/2,385) concordance with the POC results, with 90.7-98.8% sensitivity and 99.2-99.6% specificity. In conclusion, non-laboratory personnel can be successfully trained for on-site instrument operation and POC rapid genotyping with analytical accuracy and precision across multiple international centers, thereby supporting POC genotyping in patient-care settings, such as the cardiac catheterization laboratory.Clinical Trial Registration: https://www.clinicalTrials.gov (Identifier: NCT01742117).
Although current literature indicates both a clinical and a cost-effective benefit of routine genotype-guided treatment of patients treated with clopidogrel, this strategy is not recommended in guidelines. In cardiology, but also in neurology and vascular surgery, the current scientific evidence for this is still insufficient. Nevertheless, the role of pharmacogenetics will gain importance in today's medical world, where the demand for personalised medicine is on the rise. The implementation of genotyping in the clinic will nonetheless be a practical challenge due to a lack of clarity about who will bear the associated costs. In patients with coronary artery disease and a higher bleeding risk, it is valuable to determine the CYP2C19 genotype prior to treatment with clopidogrel. Pending further studies, we recommend that specialists prescribing clopidogrel should determine the CYP2C19 genotype in patients at high risk of recurrent ischemic events.
INTRODUCTION: CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 functional status as defined by genotype is modulated by phenoconversion (PC) due to pharmacokinetic interactions. As of today, there is no data on the effect size of PC for CYP2C19 functional status. The primary aim of this study was to investigate the impact of PC on CYP2C19 functional status. METHODS: Two patient cohorts (total n=316; 44.2+/-15.4 years) were investigated for the functional enzyme status of CYP2C19 applying two different correction methods (PC(Bousman), PC(Hahn&Roll)) as well as serum concentration and metabolite-to-parent ratio of venlafaxine, amitriptyline, mirtazapine, sertraline, escitalopram, risperidone, and quetiapine. RESULTS: There was a decrease in the number of normal metabolizers of CYP2C19 and an increase in the number of poor metabolizers. When controlled for age, sex, and, in the case of amitriptyline, venlafaxine, and risperidone, CYP2D6 functional enzyme status, an association was observed between the CYP2C19 phenotype/functional enzyme status and serum concentration of amitriptyline, sertraline, and escitalopram. DISCUSSION: PC of CYP2C19 changes phenotypes but does not improve correlations with serum concentrations. However, only a limited number of patients received perturbators of CYP2C19. Studies with large numbers of patients are still lacking, and thus, it cannot be decided if there are minor differences and which method of correction to use. For the time being, PC is relevant in individual patients treated with CYP2C19-affecting drugs, for example, esomeprazole. To ensure adequate serum concentrations in these patients, this study suggests the use of therapeutic drug monitoring.
