Cytochrome P450 3A5; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of steroid hormones and vitamins. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Exhibits high catalytic activity for the formation of catechol estrogens from 17beta- estradiol (E2) and estrone (E1), namely 2-hydroxy E1 and E2. Catalyzes 6beta-hydroxylation of the steroid hor [...] 
Human cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 is the most abundant hepatic and intestinal phase I enzyme that metabolizes approximately 50% marketed drugs. The crystal structure of bound and unbound CYP3A4 has been recently constructed, and a small active site and a peripheral binding site are identified. A recent study indicates that CYP3A4 undergoes dramatic conformational changes upon binding to ketoconazole or erythromycin with a differential but substantial (>80%) increase in the active site volume, providing a structural basis for ligand promiscuity of CYP3A4. A number of important drugs have been identified as substrates, inducers and/or inhibitors of CYP3A4. The ability of drugs to act as inducers, inhibitors, or substrates for CYP3A is predictive of whether concurrent administration of these compounds with a known CYP3A substrate might lead to altered drug disposition, efficacy or toxicity. The substrates of CYP3A4 considerably overlap with those of P-glycoprotein (P-gp). To date, the identified clinically important CYP3A4 inhibitors mainly include macrolide antibiotics (e.g., clarithromycin, and erythromycin), anti-HIV agents (e.g., ritonavir and delavirdine), antidepressants (e.g. fluoxetine and fluvoxamine), calcium channel blockers (e.g. verapamil and diltiazem), steroids and their modulators (e.g., gestodene and mifepristone), and several herbal and dietary components. Many of these drugs are also mechanism-based inhibitors of CYP3A4, which involves formation of reactive metabolites, binding to CYP3A4 and irreversible enzyme inactivation. A small number of drugs such as rifampin, phenytoin and ritonavir are identified as inducers of CYP3A4. The orphan nuclear receptor, pregnane X receptor (PXR), have been found to play a critical role in the induction of CYP3A4. The inhibition or induction of CYP3A4 by drugs often causes unfavorable and long-lasting drug-drug interactions and probably fatal toxicity, depending on many factors associated with the enzyme, drugs and the patients. The study of interactions of newly synthesized compounds with CYP3A4 has been incorporated into drug development and detection of possible CYP3A4 inhibitors and inducers during the early stages of drug development is critical in preventing potential drug-drug interactions and side effects. Clinicians are encouraged to have a sound knowledge on drugs that behave as substrates, inhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4, and take proper cautions and close monitoring for potential drug interactions when using drugs that are CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers.
The Pharmacogene Variation Consortium (PharmVar) catalogs star (*) allele nomenclature for the polymorphic human CYP3A5 gene. Genetic variation within the CYP3A5 gene locus impacts the metabolism of several clinically important drugs, including the immunosuppressants tacrolimus, sirolimus, cyclosporine, and the benzodiazepine midazolam. Variable CYP3A5 activity is of clinical importance regarding tacrolimus metabolism. This GeneFocus provides a CYP3A5 gene summary with a focus on aspects regarding standardized nomenclature. In addition, this review also summarizes recent changes and updates, including the retirement of several allelic variants and provides an overview of how PharmVar CYP3A5 star allele nomenclature is utilized by the Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase (PharmGKB) and the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC).
BACKGROUND: Cancer cells use several mechanisms to resist the cytotoxic effects of drugs, resulting in tumor progression and invasion. One such mechanism capitalizes on the body's natural defense against xenobiotics by increasing the rate of xenobiotic efflux and metabolic inactivation. Xenobiotic metabolism typically involves conversion of parent molecules to more soluble and easily excreted derivatives in reactions catalyzed by Phase I and Phase II drug metabolizing enzymes. METHODS: We performed a structured search of peer-reviewed literature on P450 (CYP) 3A, with a focus on CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. RESULTS: Recent reports indicate that components of the xenobiotic response system are upregulated in some diseases, including many cancers. Such components include the pregnane X receptor (PXR), CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 enzymes. The CYP3A enzymes are a subset of the numerous enzymes that are transcriptionally activated following the interaction of PXR and many ligands. CONCLUSION: Intense research is ongoing to understand the functional ramifications of aberrant expression of these components in diseased states with the goal of designing novel drugs that can selectively target them.
As a major cardiovascular risk factor for stroke, coronary artery disease, heart failure and end-stage renal disease, hypertension affects approximately one billion people and causes large economic burden worldwide. Cytochrome P450 3A5 (CYP3A5), belonging to the CYP3A subfamily, has been implicated in the regulation of blood pressure and may serve as a potential risk factor for the development of hypertension. Increased CYP3A5 activity could cause sodium and water retention by affecting the metabolism of cortisol in the kidneys. Furthermore, polymorphic CYP3A5 genotypes have been shown to cause differences in blood pressure response to antihypertensive drugs. Several studies have investigated the role of CYP3A5 in blood pressure response to amlodipine. However, recent data on the role of CYP3A5 in hypertension development and treatment are inconsistent. This review summarizes what is known regarding the relationship of CYP3A5 with hypertension, discusses the limitations in present studies, highlights the gaps and directs research to this field.
Vitamin D has received considerable optimistic attention as a potentially important factor in many pathological states over the past few decades. However, the proportion of the active form of vitamin D metabolites responsible for biological activity is highly questionable in disease states due to flexible alterations in the enzymes responsible for their metabolism. For instance, CYP3A4 plays a crucial role in the biotransformation of vitamin D and other drug substances. Food-drug and/or drug-drug interactions, the disease state, genetic polymorphism, age, sex, diet, and environmental factors all influence CYP3A4 activity. Genetic polymorphisms in CYP450-encoding genes have received considerable attention in the past few decades due to their extensive impact on the pharmacokinetic and dynamic properties of drugs and endogenous substances. In this review, we focused on CYP3A4 polymorphisms and their interplay with vitamin D metabolism and summarized the role of vitamin D in calcium homeostasis, bone diseases, diabetes, cancer, other diseases, and drug substances. We also reviewed clinical observations pertaining to CYP3A4 polymorphisms among the aforementioned disease conditions. In addition, we highlighted the future perspectives of studying the pharmacogenetics of CYP3A4, which may have potential clinical significance for developing novel diagnostic genetic markers that will ascertain disease risk and progression.
Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is the major and most important drug-metabolizing enzyme in humans that oxidizes and clears over a half of all administered pharmaceuticals. This is possible because CYP3A4 is promiscuous with respect to substrate binding and has the ability to catalyze diverse oxidative chemistries in addition to traditional hydroxylation reactions. Furthermore, CYP3A4 binds and oxidizes a number of substrates in a cooperative manner and can be both induced and inactivated by drugs. In vivo, CYP3A4 inhibition could lead to undesired drug-drug interactions and drug toxicity, a major reason for late-stage clinical failures and withdrawal of marketed pharmaceuticals. Owing to its central role in drug metabolism, many aspects of CYP3A4 catalysis have been extensively studied by various techniques. Here, we give an overview of experimental and theoretical methods currently used for investigation and prediction of CYP3A4-ligand interactions, a defining factor in drug metabolism, with an emphasis on the problems addressed and conclusions derived from the studies.
BACKGROUND: The contribution of the CYP3A5 enzyme to the metabolism of clinically used drugs has been established only for a few CYP3A substrates, such as the immunosuppressant tacrolimus, while for drugs used in the field of psychiatry its role is still vague. METHODS: We herein discuss all published data on the contribution of CYP3A5 and its polymorphisms to the metabolism of antipsychotics and antidepressants that are known to be metabolized by CYP3A enzymes, as well as of carbamazepine, an antiepileptic drug used as mood stabilizer. Published papers from 1990 to April 2015 were retrieved from PubMed and Scopus by use of the keywords CYP3A5, CYP3A, gene polymorphism, antipsychotics, psychiatry, pharmacogenomics, haloperidol, risperidone, quetiapine, aripiprazole, clozapine, olanzapine, antidepressants, and carbamazepine. RESULTS: Available evidence is only sparse and no firm conclusions can be drawn on whether CYP3A5 enzyme exhibits affinity and metabolic capacity similar to CYP3A4 for these drugs. Nevertheless, the role of CYP3A5 should be studied further, since there is evidence suggesting that CYP3A5 potentially catalyses alternative metabolic pathways that may give rise to intermediate metabolites with yet unknown pharmacologic properties and may also limit drug bioavailability through intestinal first pass metabolism. Additionally, expression of CYP3A5 may overcome CYP3A4 drug-drug interactions. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, CYP3A5 is an overlooked polymorphic enzyme and its potential in improving psychiatric pharmacogenomics remains to be explored. The impact of CYP3A5 pharmacogenetics in the clinical setting merits the attention of both researchers and clinicians.
A substantial part of the interindividual variability in response to drugs and xenobiotics is related to genetically-determined impairment in drug metabolism. Several drug-metabolising enzymes are polymorphic in humans and often polymorphisms are strongly related to altered drug biodisposition and to the risk of developing adverse effects. Drugs used in general anaesthesia undergo polymorphic metabolism. Among these, halothane is metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2E1 and, to a lesser extent, by CYP3A4 and CYP2A6. CYP2E1 also plays a key role in the metabolism of isoflurane, sevoflurane, enflurane and desflurane. CYP2B6, CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 play a relevant role in the metabolism of ketamine. The enzymes involved in the metabolism of thiopental and etomidate remains to be elucidated. Propofol is metabolized mainly by glucuronidation by uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) and by hydroxylation by CYP2B6 and CYP2C enzymes. The enzymes SULT1A1 and NQO1 participate in later steps in propofol metabolism. All the above-mentioned anaesthetic-metabolising enzymes are polymorphic in man. The present review analyzes the importance of enzymes in the metabolism of anaesthetics and common polymorphisms related to the biotransformation of general anaesthetics and it raises hypotheses on genetic and non-genetics factors related to altered response to anaesthetics that require further investigation. Based on functional relevance and allele frequencies, we identify the most promising targets for the clinical use of pharmacogenomic techniques in anaesthesia to prevent altered pharmacokinetics or adverse drug effects.
Tacrolimus (FK-506) is an immunosuppressant widely used to prevent kidney transplant rejection. Patients receive an initial standard dose and tacrolimus levels are measured in blood. If necessary, the dose is adjusted to reach a blood concentration within the accepted range. There is great interindividual variability in the dose required to achieve the target blood level, and many patients require multiple modifications of the dose to reach the range. One of the main determinants of these differences is a CYP3A5 gene polymorphism that determines that about 80% of Caucasians are poor metabolisers and require lower doses compared to the extensive metabolisers. It has been proposed that transplanted patients could receive an initial Tacrolimus dose based on the CYP3A5 genotype. This could reduce the time to achieve the optimal blood level, reducing the number of dose modifications. However, to be accepted by clinicians and translated to the clinical practice this adapted dose procedure should give additional advantages such as a significant reduction of the rates of nephrotoxicity and rejection, or a lower cost due to less dose modifications of Tacrolimus and less antibody induction therapy.
BACKGROUND: CYP3A5 enzyme encoded by CYP3A5 is important for drug metabolism in gut and liver, whereas P-glycoprotein by ABCB1, is an ATP-dependent drug efflux pump which exports endo- and exogenous substances outside the cell. AIM: The study was to assess the prevalence of CYP3A5 alleles: *1, *2, *3, *4, *6 and *7, and C and T of ABCB1 in Poles, Belarusians and Bosnians and to compare it with the data reported from other European populations. SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Overall, 511 unrelated healthy subjects from Poland (n = 239), Belarus (n = 104) and Bosnia and Herzegovina (n = 168) were included in this study. Allele frequencies and statistical parameters (AMOVA version 2.9.3) were determined. RESULTS: In Poles, Belarusians and Bosnians the *3 allele of CYP3A5 was the most common, and wild-type allele *1, were: 5.8%, 1.6% and 2.1%, respectively. Allele *2 was very rare, and alleles *4, *6 and *7 were not detected. For the populations mentioned above, the ABCB1 allele C was: 48.1%, 51.4%, 52.4%, respectively. CONCLUSION: In compared populations, the distribution of CYP3A5 variants but not ABCB1, differed significantly. Alleles *4, *6 and *7 of CYP3A5 did not occur or occurred rarely.
CYP3A5 genetic variants are associated with tacrolimus metabolism. Controversy remains on whether CYP3A4 increased [*1B (rs2740574), *1 G (rs2242480)] and decreased function [*22 (rs35599367)] genetic variants provide additional information. This retrospective cohort study aims to address whether tacrolimus dose-adjusted trough concentrations differ between combined CYP3A (CYP3A5 and CYP3A4) phenotype groups. Heart transplanted patients (n = 177, between 2008 and 2020) were included and median age was 54 years old. Significant differences between CYP3A phenotype groups in tacrolimus dose-adjusted trough concentrations were found in the early postoperative period and continued to 6 months post-transplant. In CYP3A5 nonexpressers, carriers of CYP3A4*1B or *1 G variants (Group 3) compared to CYP3A4*1/*1 (Group 2) patients were found to have lower tacrolimus dose-adjusted trough concentrations at 2 months. In addition, significant differences were found among CYP3A phenotype groups in the dose at discharge and time to therapeutic range while time in therapeutic range was not significantly different. A combined CYP3A phenotype interpretation may provide more nuanced genotype-guided TAC dosing in heart transplant recipients.
Cytochrome P450 enzymes (P450s) play a critical role in drug metabolism, with the CYP3A subfamily being responsible for the biotransformation of over 50% of marked drugs. While CYP3A enzymes are known for their extensive catalytic versatility, one intriguing and less understood function is the ability to mediate carbon-carbon (C-C) bond cleavage. These uncommon reactions can lead to unusual metabolites and potentially influence drug safety and efficacy. This review focuses on examining examples of C-C bond cleavage catalyzed by CYP3A, exploring the mechanisms, physiological significance, and implications for drug metabolism. Additionally, examples of CYP3A-mediated ring expansion via C-C bond cleavages are included in this review. This work will enhance our understanding of CYP3A-catalyzed C-C bond cleavages and their mechanisms by carefully examining and analyzing these case studies. It may also guide future research in drug metabolism and drug design, improving drug safety and efficacy in clinical practice.
Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is involved in the metabolism of more drugs in clinical use than any other foreign compound-metabolizing enzyme in humans. Recently, increasing evidence has been found showing that variants in the CYP3A4 gene have functional significance and--in rare cases--lead to loss of activity, implying tremendous consequences for patients. This review article highlights the functional consequences of all CYP3A4 variants recognized by the Human Cytochrome P450 (CYP) Allele Nomenclature Database.
Drug oxidation and conjugation mediated by cytochrome P450 (P450) and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) have long been considered to take place separately. However, our recent studies have suggested that CYP3A4 specifically associates with UGT2B7 and alters the regioselectivity of morphine glucuronidation. This observation strongly supports the view that there is functional cooperation between P450 and UGT to facilitate multistep drug metabolism. In recent years, accumulating evidence has suggested an interaction between UGT isoforms or between P450 and UGTs and a change in UGT function by protein-protein association. In this review, we summarize these interactions and discuss their relevance to UGT function.
The calcineurin inhibitor tacrolimus, cornerstone of most immunosuppressive regimens, is a drug with a narrow therapeutic window: underexposure can lead to allograft rejection and overexposure can result in an increased incidence of infections, toxicity and malignancies. Tacrolimus is metabolised in the liver and intestine by the cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) isoforms CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. This review focusses on the clinical aspects of tacrolimus pharmacodynamics, such as efficacy and toxicity. Factors affecting tacrolimus pharmacokinetics, including pharmacogenetics and the rationale for routine CYP3A5*1/*3 genotyping in prospective paediatric renal transplant recipients, are also reviewed. Therapeutic drug monitoring, including pre-dose concentrations and pharmacokinetic profiles with the available "reference values", are discussed. Factors contributing to high intra-patient variability in tacrolimus exposure and its impact on clinical outcome are also reviewed. Lastly, suggestions for future research and clinical perspectives are discussed.
Sirolimus is an antiproliferative and immunosuppressive compound inhibiting the mTOR pathway, which is often activated in congenital low-flow vascular malformations. Studies have demonstrated the efficacy of sirolimus for this disease. Studies in kidney transplant patients suggest that genetic variants can influence these pharmacokinetic parameters. Therefore, a systematic literature search was performed to gain insight into pharmacogenetic studies with sirolimus. Most studies investigated CYP3A4 and CYP3A5, with inconsistent results. No pharmacogenetic studies focusing on sirolimus have been performed for low-flow vascular malformations. We analyzed two common variants of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 (CYP3A4*22 and CYP3A5*3, respectively) in patients (n = 59) with congenital low-flow vascular malformations treated with sirolimus. No association with treatment outcome was identified in this small cohort of patients.
The pregnane X receptor (PXR; NR1I2) is a nuclear hormone receptor (NR) that transcriptionally regulates genes encoding transporters and drug-metabolising enzymes in the liver and intestine. PXR activation leads to enhanced metabolism and elimination of xenobiotics and endogenous compounds such as hormones and bile salts. Relative to other vertebrate NRs, PXR has the broadest specificity for ligand activators by virtue of a large, flexible ligand-binding cavity. In addition, PXR has the most extensive sequence diversity across vertebrate species in the ligand-binding domain of any NR, with significant pharmacological differences between human and rodent PXRs, and especially marked divergence between mammalian and nonmammalian PXRs. The unusual properties of PXR complicate the use of in silico and animal models to predict in vivo human PXR pharmacology. Research into the evolutionary history of the PXR gene has also provided insight into the function of PXR in humans and other animals.
Mounting evidence has revealed that despite the high degree of sequence homology between cytochrome P450 3A isoforms (i.e., CYP3A4 and CYP3A5), they have the propensities to exhibit vastly different irreversible and reversible interactions with a single substrate. We have previously established that benzbromarone (BBR), a potent uricosuric agent used in the management of gout, irreversibly inhibits CYP3A4 via mechanism-based inactivation (MBI). However, it remains unelucidated if CYP3A5-its highly homologous counterpart-is susceptible to inactivation by BBR. Using three structurally distinct probe substrates, we consistently demonstrated that MBI was not elicited in CYP3A5 by BBR. Our in silico covalent docking models and molecular dynamics simulations suggested that disparities in the susceptibilities toward MBI could be attributed to the specific effects of BBR covalent adducts on the F-F' loop. Serendipitously, we also discovered that BBR reversibly activated CYP3A5-mediated rivaroxaban hydroxylation wherein apparent V (max) increased and K (m) decreased with increasing BBR concentration. Fitting data to the two-site model yielded interaction factors alpha and beta of 0.44 and 5.88, respectively, thereby confirming heterotropic activation of CYP3A5 by BBR. Furthermore, heteroactivation was suppressed by the CYP3A inhibitor ketoconazole in a concentration-dependent manner and decreased with increasing preincubation time, implying that activation was incited via binding of parent BBR molecule within the enzymatic active site. Finally, noncovalent docking revealed that CYP3A5 can more favorably accommodate both BBR and rivaroxaban in concert as compared with CYP3A4, which further substantiated our experimental observations. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Although it has been previously demonstrated that benzbromarone (BBR) inactivates CYP3A4, it remains uninterrogated whether it also elicits mechanism-based inactivation in CYP3A5, which shares  approximately 85% sequence similarity with CYP3A4. This study reported that BBR exhibited differential irreversible and reversible interactions with both CYP3A isoforms and further unraveled the molecular determinants underpinning their diverging interactions. These data offer important insight into differential kinetic behavior of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5, which potentially contributes to interindividual variabilities in drug disposition.
Functional CYP3A4*1G (G>A, rs2242480) in cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) regulates the drug-metabolizing enzyme CYP3A4 expression. The objective of this study was to investigate whether CYP3A4*1G regulates both basal and rifampicin (RIF)-induced expression and enzyme activity of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 in gene-edited human HepG2 cells. CYP3A4*1G GG and AA genotype HepG2 cells were established using the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (CRISPR/Cas9) single nucleotide polymorphism technology and homology-directed repair in the CYP3A4*1G GA HepG2 cell line. In CYP3A4*1G GG, GA, and AA HepG2 cells, CYP3A4*1G regulated expression of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 mRNA and protein in an allele-dependent manner. Of note, significantly decreased expression level of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 was observed in CYP3A4*1G AA HepG2 cells. Moreover, the results after RIF treatment showed that CYP3A4*1G decreased the induction level of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 mRNA expression in CYP3A4*1G AA HepG2 cells. At the same time, CYP3A4*1G decreased CYP3A4 enzyme activity and tacrolimus metabolism, especially in CYP3A4*1G GA HepG2 cells. In summary, we successfully constructed CYP3A4*1G GG and AA homozygous HepG2 cell models and found that CYP3A4*1G regulates both basal and RIF-induced expression and enzyme activity of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 in CRISPR/Cas9 CYP3A4*1G HepG2 cells. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4*1G regulates both basal and rifampicin (RIF)-induced expression and enzyme activity of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. This study successfully established CYP3A4*1G (G>A, rs2242480), GG, and AA HepG2 cell models using CRISPR/Cas9, thus providing a powerful tool for studying the mechanism by which CYP3A4*1G regulates the basal and RIF-induced expression of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5.
BACKGROUND: Diazepam is one of the most commonly prescribed pharmaceuticals for the treatment of alcohol withdrawal syndrome (AWS). However, diazepam sometimes is ineffective, and some patients experience dose-dependent adverse drug reactions (ADR). Previous studies have shown that diazepam metabolism involves the CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 isoenzymes, whose activity is highly variable between individuals, which may contribute to differences in clinical response. PURPOSE: The study aimed to investigate the effects of the genetic polymorphisms CYP3A4*22 and CYP3A5*3 on the efficacy and safety of diazepam in patients with AWS. MATERIALS AND METHODS: One hundred male AWS patients received 30 mg/day diazepam by intramuscular injections for 5 days. Genotyping for CYP3A4*22 (rs35599367) and CYP3A5*3 (rs776746) was performed by real-time polymerase chain reaction with allele-specific hybridization. The efficacy and safety assessments were performed using psychometric scales. RESULTS: Patients who carry CT and TT genotypes by polymorphic marker C > T intron 6 (rs35599367) of the CYP3A4 gene had a higher risk for ADR and demonstrated lower safety of diazepam therapy (p < 0.001; two-way ANOVA). CONCLUSION: These results suggest that genotyping for common CYP3A variants might have the potential to guide benzodiazepine withdrawal treatment.
