3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase; Transmembrane glycoprotein that is the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis as well as in the biosynthesis of nonsterol isoprenoids that are essential for normal cell function including ubiquinone and geranylgeranyl proteins.
Human cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 is the most abundant hepatic and intestinal phase I enzyme that metabolizes approximately 50% marketed drugs. The crystal structure of bound and unbound CYP3A4 has been recently constructed, and a small active site and a peripheral binding site are identified. A recent study indicates that CYP3A4 undergoes dramatic conformational changes upon binding to ketoconazole or erythromycin with a differential but substantial (>80%) increase in the active site volume, providing a structural basis for ligand promiscuity of CYP3A4. A number of important drugs have been identified as substrates, inducers and/or inhibitors of CYP3A4. The ability of drugs to act as inducers, inhibitors, or substrates for CYP3A is predictive of whether concurrent administration of these compounds with a known CYP3A substrate might lead to altered drug disposition, efficacy or toxicity. The substrates of CYP3A4 considerably overlap with those of P-glycoprotein (P-gp). To date, the identified clinically important CYP3A4 inhibitors mainly include macrolide antibiotics (e.g., clarithromycin, and erythromycin), anti-HIV agents (e.g., ritonavir and delavirdine), antidepressants (e.g. fluoxetine and fluvoxamine), calcium channel blockers (e.g. verapamil and diltiazem), steroids and their modulators (e.g., gestodene and mifepristone), and several herbal and dietary components. Many of these drugs are also mechanism-based inhibitors of CYP3A4, which involves formation of reactive metabolites, binding to CYP3A4 and irreversible enzyme inactivation. A small number of drugs such as rifampin, phenytoin and ritonavir are identified as inducers of CYP3A4. The orphan nuclear receptor, pregnane X receptor (PXR), have been found to play a critical role in the induction of CYP3A4. The inhibition or induction of CYP3A4 by drugs often causes unfavorable and long-lasting drug-drug interactions and probably fatal toxicity, depending on many factors associated with the enzyme, drugs and the patients. The study of interactions of newly synthesized compounds with CYP3A4 has been incorporated into drug development and detection of possible CYP3A4 inhibitors and inducers during the early stages of drug development is critical in preventing potential drug-drug interactions and side effects. Clinicians are encouraged to have a sound knowledge on drugs that behave as substrates, inhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4, and take proper cautions and close monitoring for potential drug interactions when using drugs that are CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers.
Aging involves progressive impairments in the functional reserve of multiple organs, which might also affect drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics. In addition, the elderly population will develop multiple diseases and, consequently, often has to take several drugs. As the hepatic first-pass effect of highly cleared drugs could be reduced (due to decreases in liver mass and perfusion), the bioavailability of some drugs can be increased in the elderly. Significant changes in body composition occur with advancing age. Lipophilic drugs may have an increased volume of distribution (Vd) with a prolonged half-life, and water-soluble drugs tend to have a smaller Vd. In the elderly, hepatic drug clearance of some drugs can be reduced by up to 30% and CYP-mediated phase I reactions are more likely to be impaired than phase II metabolism, which is relatively preserved in the elderly. Concerning the most important CYP3A4 studies with human liver microsomes and clinical studies with the validated probe, midazolam, it is indicated that there are no significant differences in CYP3A4 activity between young and old populations. Finally, renal excretion is decreased (up to 50%) in about two thirds of elderly subjects, but confounding factors such as hypertension and coronary heart disease account also for a decline in kidney function. In conclusion, age-related physiological and pharmacokinetic changes as well as the presence of comorbidity and polypharmacy will complicate drug therapy in the elderly.
Vitamin D has received considerable optimistic attention as a potentially important factor in many pathological states over the past few decades. However, the proportion of the active form of vitamin D metabolites responsible for biological activity is highly questionable in disease states due to flexible alterations in the enzymes responsible for their metabolism. For instance, CYP3A4 plays a crucial role in the biotransformation of vitamin D and other drug substances. Food-drug and/or drug-drug interactions, the disease state, genetic polymorphism, age, sex, diet, and environmental factors all influence CYP3A4 activity. Genetic polymorphisms in CYP450-encoding genes have received considerable attention in the past few decades due to their extensive impact on the pharmacokinetic and dynamic properties of drugs and endogenous substances. In this review, we focused on CYP3A4 polymorphisms and their interplay with vitamin D metabolism and summarized the role of vitamin D in calcium homeostasis, bone diseases, diabetes, cancer, other diseases, and drug substances. We also reviewed clinical observations pertaining to CYP3A4 polymorphisms among the aforementioned disease conditions. In addition, we highlighted the future perspectives of studying the pharmacogenetics of CYP3A4, which may have potential clinical significance for developing novel diagnostic genetic markers that will ascertain disease risk and progression.
BACKGROUND: Cancer cells use several mechanisms to resist the cytotoxic effects of drugs, resulting in tumor progression and invasion. One such mechanism capitalizes on the body's natural defense against xenobiotics by increasing the rate of xenobiotic efflux and metabolic inactivation. Xenobiotic metabolism typically involves conversion of parent molecules to more soluble and easily excreted derivatives in reactions catalyzed by Phase I and Phase II drug metabolizing enzymes. METHODS: We performed a structured search of peer-reviewed literature on P450 (CYP) 3A, with a focus on CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. RESULTS: Recent reports indicate that components of the xenobiotic response system are upregulated in some diseases, including many cancers. Such components include the pregnane X receptor (PXR), CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 enzymes. The CYP3A enzymes are a subset of the numerous enzymes that are transcriptionally activated following the interaction of PXR and many ligands. CONCLUSION: Intense research is ongoing to understand the functional ramifications of aberrant expression of these components in diseased states with the goal of designing novel drugs that can selectively target them.
Functional CYP3A4*1G (G>A, rs2242480) in cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) regulates the drug-metabolizing enzyme CYP3A4 expression. The objective of this study was to investigate whether CYP3A4*1G regulates both basal and rifampicin (RIF)-induced expression and enzyme activity of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 in gene-edited human HepG2 cells. CYP3A4*1G GG and AA genotype HepG2 cells were established using the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (CRISPR/Cas9) single nucleotide polymorphism technology and homology-directed repair in the CYP3A4*1G GA HepG2 cell line. In CYP3A4*1G GG, GA, and AA HepG2 cells, CYP3A4*1G regulated expression of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 mRNA and protein in an allele-dependent manner. Of note, significantly decreased expression level of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 was observed in CYP3A4*1G AA HepG2 cells. Moreover, the results after RIF treatment showed that CYP3A4*1G decreased the induction level of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 mRNA expression in CYP3A4*1G AA HepG2 cells. At the same time, CYP3A4*1G decreased CYP3A4 enzyme activity and tacrolimus metabolism, especially in CYP3A4*1G GA HepG2 cells. In summary, we successfully constructed CYP3A4*1G GG and AA homozygous HepG2 cell models and found that CYP3A4*1G regulates both basal and RIF-induced expression and enzyme activity of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 in CRISPR/Cas9 CYP3A4*1G HepG2 cells. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4*1G regulates both basal and rifampicin (RIF)-induced expression and enzyme activity of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. This study successfully established CYP3A4*1G (G>A, rs2242480), GG, and AA HepG2 cell models using CRISPR/Cas9, thus providing a powerful tool for studying the mechanism by which CYP3A4*1G regulates the basal and RIF-induced expression of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5.
Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is involved in the metabolism of more drugs in clinical use than any other foreign compound-metabolizing enzyme in humans. Recently, increasing evidence has been found showing that variants in the CYP3A4 gene have functional significance and--in rare cases--lead to loss of activity, implying tremendous consequences for patients. This review article highlights the functional consequences of all CYP3A4 variants recognized by the Human Cytochrome P450 (CYP) Allele Nomenclature Database.
CYP3A5 genetic variants are associated with tacrolimus metabolism. Controversy remains on whether CYP3A4 increased [*1B (rs2740574), *1 G (rs2242480)] and decreased function [*22 (rs35599367)] genetic variants provide additional information. This retrospective cohort study aims to address whether tacrolimus dose-adjusted trough concentrations differ between combined CYP3A (CYP3A5 and CYP3A4) phenotype groups. Heart transplanted patients (n = 177, between 2008 and 2020) were included and median age was 54 years old. Significant differences between CYP3A phenotype groups in tacrolimus dose-adjusted trough concentrations were found in the early postoperative period and continued to 6 months post-transplant. In CYP3A5 nonexpressers, carriers of CYP3A4*1B or *1 G variants (Group 3) compared to CYP3A4*1/*1 (Group 2) patients were found to have lower tacrolimus dose-adjusted trough concentrations at 2 months. In addition, significant differences were found among CYP3A phenotype groups in the dose at discharge and time to therapeutic range while time in therapeutic range was not significantly different. A combined CYP3A phenotype interpretation may provide more nuanced genotype-guided TAC dosing in heart transplant recipients.
Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is the major and most important drug-metabolizing enzyme in humans that oxidizes and clears over a half of all administered pharmaceuticals. This is possible because CYP3A4 is promiscuous with respect to substrate binding and has the ability to catalyze diverse oxidative chemistries in addition to traditional hydroxylation reactions. Furthermore, CYP3A4 binds and oxidizes a number of substrates in a cooperative manner and can be both induced and inactivated by drugs. In vivo, CYP3A4 inhibition could lead to undesired drug-drug interactions and drug toxicity, a major reason for late-stage clinical failures and withdrawal of marketed pharmaceuticals. Owing to its central role in drug metabolism, many aspects of CYP3A4 catalysis have been extensively studied by various techniques. Here, we give an overview of experimental and theoretical methods currently used for investigation and prediction of CYP3A4-ligand interactions, a defining factor in drug metabolism, with an emphasis on the problems addressed and conclusions derived from the studies.
BACKGROUND: The contribution of the CYP3A5 enzyme to the metabolism of clinically used drugs has been established only for a few CYP3A substrates, such as the immunosuppressant tacrolimus, while for drugs used in the field of psychiatry its role is still vague. METHODS: We herein discuss all published data on the contribution of CYP3A5 and its polymorphisms to the metabolism of antipsychotics and antidepressants that are known to be metabolized by CYP3A enzymes, as well as of carbamazepine, an antiepileptic drug used as mood stabilizer. Published papers from 1990 to April 2015 were retrieved from PubMed and Scopus by use of the keywords CYP3A5, CYP3A, gene polymorphism, antipsychotics, psychiatry, pharmacogenomics, haloperidol, risperidone, quetiapine, aripiprazole, clozapine, olanzapine, antidepressants, and carbamazepine. RESULTS: Available evidence is only sparse and no firm conclusions can be drawn on whether CYP3A5 enzyme exhibits affinity and metabolic capacity similar to CYP3A4 for these drugs. Nevertheless, the role of CYP3A5 should be studied further, since there is evidence suggesting that CYP3A5 potentially catalyses alternative metabolic pathways that may give rise to intermediate metabolites with yet unknown pharmacologic properties and may also limit drug bioavailability through intestinal first pass metabolism. Additionally, expression of CYP3A5 may overcome CYP3A4 drug-drug interactions. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, CYP3A5 is an overlooked polymorphic enzyme and its potential in improving psychiatric pharmacogenomics remains to be explored. The impact of CYP3A5 pharmacogenetics in the clinical setting merits the attention of both researchers and clinicians.
Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is present not only in the liver but also in the small intestine, where it functions as a barrier against xenobiotics. Some CYP3A4 substrates exhibit low bioavailability due to intestinal first pass metabolism. The AUCs of such CYP3A4 substrates are remarkably changed by the inhibition, induction, and saturation of CYP3A4 and so prediction of intestinal first-pass metabolism is important. In this article, factors affecting intestinal first-pass metabolism of drugs are reviewed, focusing on the intestinal metabolism by CYP3A. The methods to predict intestinal first-pass metabolism are also reviewed.
Itraconazole is a triazole anti-infective drug that has been proven to prevent and treat a variety of fungal and viral infections and has been considered to be a potential therapeutic remedy for COVID-19 treatment. In this study, we aimed to completely evaluate the impacts of Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) variant proteins and drug interactions on the metabolism of itraconazole in recombinant insect microsomes, and to characterize the potential mechanism of substrate selectivity. Incubations with itraconazole (0.2-15 muM) in the presence/absence of lopinavir or darunavir were assessed by CYP3A4 variants, and the metabolite hydroxyitraconazole concentrations were measured by UPLC-MS/MS. Our data showed that when compared with CYP3A4.1, 4 variants (CYP3A4.9, .10, .28 and .34) displayed no significant differences, and 3 variants (CYP3A4.14, .15 and .19) exhibited increased intrinsic clearance (CL(int)), whereas the remaining 17 variant proteins showed decreased enzyme activities for the catalysis of itraconazole. Moreover, the inhibitory effects of lopinavir and darunavir on itraconazole metabolism varied in different degrees. Furthermore, different changed trend of the kinetic parameters in ten variants (CYP3A4.5, .9, .10, .16, .19, .24, .28, .29, .31, and .33) were observed, especially CYP3A4.5 and CYP3A4.16, and this may be related to the metabolic site-heme iron atom distance. In the present study, we functionally analyzed the effects of 25 CYP3A4 protein variants on itraconazole metabolism for the first time, and provided comprehensive data on itraconazole metabolism in vitro. This may help to better assess the metabolism and elimination of itraconazole in clinic to improve the safety and efficacy of its clinical treatment and also provide new possibilities for the treatment of COVID-19.
Sirolimus is an antiproliferative and immunosuppressive compound inhibiting the mTOR pathway, which is often activated in congenital low-flow vascular malformations. Studies have demonstrated the efficacy of sirolimus for this disease. Studies in kidney transplant patients suggest that genetic variants can influence these pharmacokinetic parameters. Therefore, a systematic literature search was performed to gain insight into pharmacogenetic studies with sirolimus. Most studies investigated CYP3A4 and CYP3A5, with inconsistent results. No pharmacogenetic studies focusing on sirolimus have been performed for low-flow vascular malformations. We analyzed two common variants of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 (CYP3A4*22 and CYP3A5*3, respectively) in patients (n = 59) with congenital low-flow vascular malformations treated with sirolimus. No association with treatment outcome was identified in this small cohort of patients.
The human hepatic cytochrome P-450 3A4 (CYP3A4), recognized as a multifunctional enzyme, has a wide range of substrates including commonly used drugs. Previous investigations demonstrated that the expression of CYP3A4 in human hepatocytes could be regulated by some nuclear receptors (NRs) at transcriptional level under diverse situations. The significance of oxygen on CYP3A4-mediated metabolism seems notable while the regulatory mode of CYP3A4 in the particular case still remains elusive. Recently, striking evidence has emerged that both CYP3A4 and its regulator NR could be inhibited by exposure to hypoxia. Therefore, it is of great importance to elucidate whether and how these NRs act in the transcriptional regulation of CYP3A4 in human hepatocytes under hypoxic conditions. In this review, we mainly summarized transcriptional regulation of the pivotal enzyme CYP3A4 by NRs and explored the possible regulatory pathways of CYP3A4 via these major NRs under hypoxia, expecting to provide favorable evidence for further clinical guidance under such pathological situations.
BACKGROUND: Diazepam is one of the most commonly prescribed pharmaceuticals for the treatment of alcohol withdrawal syndrome (AWS). However, diazepam sometimes is ineffective, and some patients experience dose-dependent adverse drug reactions (ADR). Previous studies have shown that diazepam metabolism involves the CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 isoenzymes, whose activity is highly variable between individuals, which may contribute to differences in clinical response. PURPOSE: The study aimed to investigate the effects of the genetic polymorphisms CYP3A4*22 and CYP3A5*3 on the efficacy and safety of diazepam in patients with AWS. MATERIALS AND METHODS: One hundred male AWS patients received 30 mg/day diazepam by intramuscular injections for 5 days. Genotyping for CYP3A4*22 (rs35599367) and CYP3A5*3 (rs776746) was performed by real-time polymerase chain reaction with allele-specific hybridization. The efficacy and safety assessments were performed using psychometric scales. RESULTS: Patients who carry CT and TT genotypes by polymorphic marker C > T intron 6 (rs35599367) of the CYP3A4 gene had a higher risk for ADR and demonstrated lower safety of diazepam therapy (p < 0.001; two-way ANOVA). CONCLUSION: These results suggest that genotyping for common CYP3A variants might have the potential to guide benzodiazepine withdrawal treatment.
Mounting evidence has revealed that despite the high degree of sequence homology between cytochrome P450 3A isoforms (i.e., CYP3A4 and CYP3A5), they have the propensities to exhibit vastly different irreversible and reversible interactions with a single substrate. We have previously established that benzbromarone (BBR), a potent uricosuric agent used in the management of gout, irreversibly inhibits CYP3A4 via mechanism-based inactivation (MBI). However, it remains unelucidated if CYP3A5-its highly homologous counterpart-is susceptible to inactivation by BBR. Using three structurally distinct probe substrates, we consistently demonstrated that MBI was not elicited in CYP3A5 by BBR. Our in silico covalent docking models and molecular dynamics simulations suggested that disparities in the susceptibilities toward MBI could be attributed to the specific effects of BBR covalent adducts on the F-F' loop. Serendipitously, we also discovered that BBR reversibly activated CYP3A5-mediated rivaroxaban hydroxylation wherein apparent V (max) increased and K (m) decreased with increasing BBR concentration. Fitting data to the two-site model yielded interaction factors alpha and beta of 0.44 and 5.88, respectively, thereby confirming heterotropic activation of CYP3A5 by BBR. Furthermore, heteroactivation was suppressed by the CYP3A inhibitor ketoconazole in a concentration-dependent manner and decreased with increasing preincubation time, implying that activation was incited via binding of parent BBR molecule within the enzymatic active site. Finally, noncovalent docking revealed that CYP3A5 can more favorably accommodate both BBR and rivaroxaban in concert as compared with CYP3A4, which further substantiated our experimental observations. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Although it has been previously demonstrated that benzbromarone (BBR) inactivates CYP3A4, it remains uninterrogated whether it also elicits mechanism-based inactivation in CYP3A5, which shares  approximately 85% sequence similarity with CYP3A4. This study reported that BBR exhibited differential irreversible and reversible interactions with both CYP3A isoforms and further unraveled the molecular determinants underpinning their diverging interactions. These data offer important insight into differential kinetic behavior of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5, which potentially contributes to interindividual variabilities in drug disposition.
With the use of powerful immunosuppressive drugs, organ transplantation has become the treatment of choice for many cases of end-stage chronic organ failure. The calcineurin inhibitors, cyclosporine and tacrolimus, which are the backbone of current immunosuppressive regimens, may be difficult to use because of the large interindividual variability of their pharmacokinetic characteristics and a narrow therapeutic index. Since cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 and CYP3A5 are both involved in their metabolism, the consequences of the polymorphism of these enzymes were studied. It has been recently shown that the CYP3A5*3 polymorphism is associated with both the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic consequences of tacrolimus. The association between the CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 polymorphisms and cyclosporine pharmacokinetics is more questionable. It is important to test these initial results prospectively to improve the individualized use of these drugs.
BACKGROUND: The evidence obtained from experimental studies suggests the tumor-suppressive effects of vitamin D by controlling the differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis in cancerous cells. Furthermore, the deregulation of genes involved in vitamin D metabolism has been reported in several types of cancer. METHODS: In the present study, we investigated the expression level of vitamin D metabolic pathway genes, including VDR, CYP3A4, RXRalpha, and GC, in colorectal cancer (CRC) samples compared with the adjacent tissues by using quantitative RT-PCR. RESULTS: The results indicated significant downregulation of CYP3A4 and VDR genes in CRC tissues compared with the adjacent control tissues (p < 0.01). RXRA and GC expression levels did not show any significant alteration among the studied samples. Moreover, a positive correlation was observed between the expression level of CYP3A4 and VDR genes (p < 0.0001). ROC curve analysis also revealed the potential diagnostic power of CYP3A4 and VDR genes in CRC samples. CONCLUSION: Reduction in the expression of both CYP3A4 and VDR plays an important role in CRC due to the possible impairment in vitamin D metabolism. Further studies concerning the relationship between the expression of these genes and colorectal cancer pathogenesis and treatment are recommended.
In this study, the effects of 17 CYP3A4 variants and drug-drug interactions (DDI) with its mechanism on alectinib metabolism were investigated. In vitro incubation systems of rat liver microsomes (RLM), human liver microsomes (HLM) and recombinant human CYP3A4 variants were established. The formers were used to screen potential drugs that inhibited alectinib metabolism and study the underlying mechanism, and the latter was used to determine the dynamic characteristics of CYP3A4 variants. Alectinib and its main metabolite M4 were quantitatively determined by ultra-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS). The results showed that compared with CYP3A4.1, only CYP3A4.29 showed higher catalytic activity, while the catalytic activity of CYP3A4.4, .7, .8, .12, .14, .16, .17, .18, .19, .20, .23, and .24 decreased significantly. Among them, the catalytic activity of CYP3A4.20 is the lowest, only 2.63% of that of CYP3A4.1. Based on the RLM incubation system in vitro, 81 drugs that may be combined with alectinib were screened, among which 18 drugs had an inhibition rate higher than 80%. In addition, nicardipine had an inhibition rate of 95.09% with a half-maximum inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) value of 3.54 +/- 0.96 muM in RLM and 1.52 +/- 0.038 muM in HLM, respectively. There was a mixture of non-competitive and anti-competitive inhibition of alectinib metabolism in both RLM and HLM. In vivo experiments of Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats, compared with the control group (30 mg/kg alectinib alone), the AUC((0-t)), AUC((0-infinity)), T(max) and C(max) of alectinib administered in combination with 6 mg/kg nicardipine were significantly increased in the experimental group. In conclusion, the metabolism of alectinib was affected by polymorphisms of the CYP3A4 gene and nicardipine. This study provides reference data for clinical individualized administration of alectinib in the future.
INTRODUCTION: Human cytochrome P450 (CYP), particularly CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 is mainly responsible for the metabolism of several drugs including tacrolimus. Significant interracial/interethnic variation in the expression and function of CYP3A5 and CYP3A4 is caused by Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes encoding these proteins. AIM: The present study investigated the genetic polymorphisms CYP3A4*1B, CYP3A4*22, and CYP3A5*3 in the Tunisian population. METHODS: We included in this study, Tunisian healthy subjects and renal transplant recipients receiving tacrolimus. CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 genotyping were performed using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). According to the genotypic combination of the three CYP polymorphisms, we have identified for the first time four metabolizers statuses: slow metabolizers (SM), intermediate metabolizers (IM), high metabolizers (HM), and extensive metabolizers (EM). RESULTS: A total of 101 renal transplant patients and 102 healthy subjects were included. Our results showed that the predominant alleles in the Tunisian population are a wild type of CYP3A4*1B (0.87), likewise CYP3A4*22 (0.975) and CYP3A5*3 (0.82). The genotype frequencies of CYP3A4*1B, CYP3A4*22, and CYP3A5*3 were found to be 3.9%, 0.0%, and 69.5%, respectively. Also, we found a significant linkage disequilibrium between CYP3A4*1B and CYP3A5*3. We approved that the IM is the predominant phenotype in our population with 124 patients followed by and EM with 41 patients, HM in 29 patients and SM in 9 patients. These results showed that Tunisians are most similar to Caucasians. CONCLUSION: The genetic background of these enzymes CYP3A4*1B, CYP3A4*22, and CYP3A5*3 in this study are important in the prescription of personalized medicine.
CYP3A, a key member of the cytochrome P450 (CYP450) superfamily, is integral to drug metabolism, processing a substantial portion of medications. Their role in drug metabolism is particularly prominent, as CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 metabolize approximately 30-50% of known drugs. The genetic polymorphism of CYP3A4/5 is significant inter-individual variability in enzymatic activity, which can result in different pharmacokinetic profiles in response to the same drug among individuals. These polymorphisms can lead to either increased drug toxicity or reduced therapeutic effects, requiring dosage adjustments based on genetic profiles. Consequently, the study of the enzymatic activity of CYP3A4/5 gene variants is of great importance for the formulation of personalized treatment regimens. This article first reviews the role of CYP3A4/5 in drug metabolism in the human body, including inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A4/5 and drug-drug interactions. In terms of genetic polymorphism, it discusses the detection methods, enzymatic kinetic characteristics, and clinical guidelines for CYP3A5. Finally, the article summarizes the importance of CYP3A4/5 in clinical applications, including personalized therapy, management of drug-drug interactions, and adjustment of drug doses. This review contributes to the understanding of the functions and genetic characteristics of CYP3A4/5, allowing for more effective clinical outcomes through optimized drug therapy.
