Alpha-1A adrenergic receptor; This alpha-adrenergic receptor mediates its action by association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol- calcium second messenger system. Its effect is mediated by G(q) and G(11) proteins. Nuclear ADRA1A-ADRA1B heterooligomers regulate phenylephrine(PE)-stimulated ERK signaling in cardiac myocytes. Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRA1A sub-subfamily.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Patient response to the asthma drug classes, bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids and leukotriene modifiers, are characterized by a large degree of heterogeneity, which is attributable in part to genetic variation. Herein, we review and update the pharmacogenetics and pharmaogenomics of common asthma drugs. RECENT FINDINGS: Early studies suggest that bronchodilator reversibility and asthma worsening in patients on continuous short-acting and long-acting beta-agonists are related to the Gly16Arg genotype for the ADRB2. More recent studies including genome-wide association studies implicate variants in other genes contribute to bronchodilator response heterogeneity and fail to replicate asthma worsening associated with continuous beta-agonist use. Genetic determinants of the safety of long-acting beta-agonist require further study. Variants in CRHR1, TBX21, and FCER2 contribute to variability in response for lung function, airways responsiveness, and exacerbations in patients taking inhaled corticosteroids. Variants in ALOX5, LTA4H, LTC4S, ABCC1, CYSLTR2, and SLCO2B1 contribute to variability in response to leukotriene modifiers. SUMMARY: Identification of novel variants that contribute to response heterogeneity supports future studies of single nucleotide polymorphism discovery and include gene expression and genome-wide association studies. Statistical models that predict the genomics of response to asthma drugs will complement single nucleotide polymorphism discovery in moving toward personalized medicine.
Uveal melanoma is the most common primary cancer of the eye, and despite rapidly emerging insights into the molecular profile of this disease, prognosis of patients with metastatic uveal melanoma remains poor with mortality rates unchanged in over 35 years. Early genetic events activate G protein-coupled receptor signaling in nearly all uveal tumors via mutually exclusive mutations in the GNAQ, GNA11, CYSLTR2, or PLCB4 genes. A multitude of signaling cascades downstream of G protein activation, including protein kinase C and mitogen-activated protein kinase activity, are actionable, and many ongoing clinical trials are targeting these pathways. Additional cytogenetic and genetic changes, however, including chromosome 3 monosomy, mutations in the BAP1 tumor suppressor gene, alterations in the splicing factors SRSF2/SF3B1, and mutations in the translation initiation factor EIF1AX, modulate signaling output in uveal tumors and modify the risk of metastases. Here, we review the complex interactions between genetic, molecular signaling, and prognostic profiles in uveal melanoma; the clinical implications of these interactions; and the latest potential targets for rational therapy.
Pigmented epithelioid melanocytoma is a rare cutaneous melanocytic proliferation considered high-grade melanocytoma in the 2018 WHO Classification of Skin Tumors. Little has been reported about the associated genetic drivers in addition to BRAF and MAP2K1 mutations or PRKCA gene fusions. Here, we present a series of 21 cases of PRKAR1A -inactivated melanocytic tumors in which we could assess the associated genetic background. We identified 9 different driver genes related to the common, Spitz, blue nevi, and PRKC -fused groups. Nine cases were associated with a canonical BRAF p.V600E mutation, a hallmark of the common nevus group. They occurred mainly in young adults. All were combined (biphenotypic) cases with a variable proportion of compound nevus. The pigmented epithelioid melanocytoma component was made of thin fascicules or isolated epithelioid cells covered by a dense hyperpigmented melanophage background and was predominantly located in the upper dermis. One such case was malignant. Six cases were associated with Spitz-related genetic anomalies ranging from HRAS or MAP2K1 mutations to gene fusions involving MAP3K8 , MAP3K3 , and RET . They occurred mainly in children and young adults. Morphologically, they showed large confluent junctional nests in a hyperplastic epidermis and a fascicular dermal component of spindled and epithelioid melanocytes with a frequent wedged silhouette. Intravascular invasion was observed in 4/6 cases. Five cases were associated with canonical mutations of the blue nevus group with 4 CYSLTR2 p.L129Q and 1 GNAQ p.Q209L mutations. They were removed mainly in adults and showed a frequent junctional component with epidermal hyperplasia. The dermal component showed dense fascicules of spindled and epithelioid melanocytes predominating over melanophages. One case occurred in a PRKCA -fused tumor in an adolescent with classic morphologic features. These results could potentially shift the concept of PRKAR1A -inactivated melanocytoma, changing from a rather unified model to a more complex one, including genetic subgroup variations with clinical and morphologic specificities. The genetic background of PRKAR1A -inactivated melanocytic tumors should be systematically explored to better understand the extent and clinical behavior of these complex lesions.
Uveal melanoma (UM), a distinct subtype of melanoma, presents unique challenges in its clinical management due to its complex molecular landscape and tendency for liver metastasis. This review highlights recent advancements in understanding the molecular pathogenesis, genetic alterations, and immune microenvironment of UM, with a focus on pivotal genes, such as GNAQ/11, BAP1, and CYSLTR2, and delves into the distinctive genetic and chromosomal classifications of UM, emphasizing the role of mutations and chromosomal rearrangements in disease progression and metastatic risk. Novel diagnostic biomarkers, including circulating tumor cells, DNA and extracellular vesicles, are discussed, offering potential non-invasive approaches for early detection and monitoring. It also explores emerging prognostic markers and their implications for patient stratification and personalized treatment strategies. Therapeutic approaches, including histone deacetylase inhibitors, MAPK pathway inhibitors, and emerging trends and concepts like CAR T-cell therapy, are evaluated for their efficacy in UM treatment. This review identifies challenges in UM research, such as the limited treatment options for metastatic UM and the need for improved prognostic tools, and suggests future directions, including the discovery of novel therapeutic targets, immunotherapeutic strategies, and advanced drug delivery systems. The review concludes by emphasizing the importance of continued research and innovation in addressing the unique challenges of UM to improve patient outcomes and develop more effective treatment strategies.
Cutaneous melanoma (CM) and uveal melanoma (UM) both originate from the melanocytic lineage but are primarily driven by distinct oncogenic drivers, BRAF/NRAS or GNAQ/GNA11, respectively. The melanocytic master transcriptional regulator, MITF, is essential for both CM development and maintenance, but its role in UM is largely unexplored. Here, we use zebrafish models to dissect the key UM oncogenic signaling events and establish the role of MITF in UM tumors. Using a melanocytic lineage expression system, we showed that patient-derived mutations of GNAQ (GNAQQ209L) or its upstream CYSLTR2 receptor (CYSLTR2L129Q) both drive UM when combined with a cooperating mutation, tp53M214K/M214K. The tumor-initiating potential of the major GNAQ/11 effector pathways, YAP, and phospholipase C-beta (PLCbeta)-ERK was also investigated in this system and thus showed that while activated YAP (YAPAA) induced UM with high potency, the patient-derived PLCbeta4 mutation (PLCB4D630Y) very rarely yielded UM tumors in the tp53M214K/M214K context. Remarkably, mitfa deficiency was profoundly UM promoting, dramatically accelerating the onset and progression of tumors induced by Tg(mitfa:GNAQQ209L);tp53M214K/M214K or Tg(mitfa:CYSLTR2L129Q);tp53M214K/M214K. Moreover, mitfa loss was sufficient to cooperate with GNAQQ209L to drive tp53-wild type UM development and allowed Tg(mitfa:PLCB4D630Y);tp53M214K/M214K melanocyte lineage cells to readily form tumors. Notably, all of the mitfa-/- UM tumors, including those arising in Tg(mitfa:PLCB4D630Y);tp53M214K/M214K;mitfa-/- zebrafish, displayed nuclear YAP while lacking hyperactive ERK indicative of PLCbeta signaling. Collectively, these data show that YAP signaling is the major mediator of UM and that MITF acts as a bona fide tumor suppressor in UM in direct opposition to its essential role in CM.
Uveal melanoma (UM) is a currently untreatable form of melanoma with a 50% mortality rate. Characterization of the essential signaling pathways driving this cancer is critical to develop target therapies. Activating mutations in the Galphaq signaling pathway at the level of GNAQ, GNA11, or rarely CYSLTR2 or PLCbeta4 are considered alterations driving proliferation in UM and several other neoplastic disorders. Here, we systematically examined the oncogenic signaling output of various mutations recurrently identified in human tumors. We demonstrate that CYSLTR2 --> GNAQ/11 --> PLCbeta act in a linear signaling cascade that, via protein kinase C (PKC), activates in parallel the MAP-kinase and FAK/Yes-associated protein pathways. Using genetic ablation and pharmacological inhibition, we show that the PKC/RasGRP3/MAPK signaling branch is the essential component that drives the proliferation of UM. Only inhibition of the MAPK branch but not the FAK branch synergizes with inhibition of the proximal cascade, providing a blueprint for combination therapy. All oncogenic signaling could be extinguished by the novel GNAQ/11 inhibitor YM-254890, in all UM cells with driver mutation in the Galphaq subunit or the upstream receptor. Our findings highlight the GNAQ/11 --> PLCbeta --> PKC --> MAPK pathway as the central signaling axis to be suppressed pharmacologically to treat for neoplastic disorders with Galphaq pathway mutations.
BACKGROUND: Activating Galpha(q) signalling mutations are considered an early event in the development of uveal melanoma. Whereas most tumours harbour a mutation in GNAQ or GNA11, CYSLTR2 (encoding G-protein coupled receptor CysLT(2)R) forms a rare alternative. The role of wild-type CysLT(2)R in uveal melanoma remains unknown. METHODS: We performed a digital PCR-based molecular analysis of benign choroidal nevi and primary uveal melanomas. Publicly available bulk and single cell sequencing data were mined to further study mutant and wild-type CYSLTR2 in primary and metastatic uveal melanoma. RESULTS: 1/16 nevi and 2/120 melanomas carried the CYSLTR2 mutation. The mutation was found in a subpopulation of the nevus, while being clonal in both melanomas. In the melanomas, secondary, subclonal CYSLTR2 alterations shifted the allelic balance towards the mutant. The resulting genetic heterogeneity was confirmed in distinct areas of both tumours. At the RNA level, further silencing of wild-type and preferential expression of mutant CYSLTR2 was identified, which was also observed in two CYSLTR2 mutant primary melanomas and one metastatic lesion from other cohorts. In CYSLTR2 wild-type melanomas, high expression of CYSLTR2 correlated to tumour inflammation, but expression originated from melanoma cells specifically. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that CYSLTR2 is involved in both early and late development of uveal melanoma. Whereas the CYSLTR2 p.L129Q mutation is likely to be the initiating oncogenic event, various mechanisms further increase the mutant allele abundance during tumour progression. This makes mutant CysLT(2)R an attractive therapeutic target in uveal melanoma.
Aspirin-induced asthma (AIA) and aspirin-induced urticaria/ angioedema (AIU) are two major aspirin-related allergies. We summarize recent findings related to their molecular genetic mechanisms in order to identify genetic susceptibility markers for differentiating AIU and AIA. The overproduction of cysteinyl leukotriene has been suggested as a mechanism in both AIU and AIA. Increased expression of CYSLTR1 with CYLSTR1 and CYSLTR2 polymorphisms are new findings in AIA, while the ALOX5 promoter polymorphism has been noted in AIU. An HLA study suggested that DPB1*0301 is a strong genetic marker for AIA, and that HLA DRB1*1302 and DQB1*0609 are markers for AIU susceptibility. Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the promoters of EP2, TBX21, COX-2, Fc epsilon RIbeta, and TBXA2R were associated with AIA, while an Fc epsilon RIalpha promoter polymorphism was associated with AIU. The functional studies of the key genes involved in AIA and AIU are summarized. The identification and functional study of genetic markers for AIA and AIU susceptibility would further elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms and facilitate the development of early diagnostic markers to establish therapeutic targets.
Acute and chronic itch are burdensome manifestations of skin pathologies including allergic skin diseases and atopic dermatitis, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are not well understood. Cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs), comprising LTC(4), LTD(4), and LTE(4), are produced by immune cells during type 2 inflammation. Here, we uncover a role for LTC(4) and its signaling through the CysLT receptor 2 (CysLT(2)R) in itch. Cysltr2 transcript is highly expressed in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons linked to itch in mice. We also detected CYSLTR2 in a broad population of human DRG neurons. Injection of leukotriene C(4) (LTC(4)) or its nonhydrolyzable form NMLTC(4), but neither LTD(4) nor LTE(4), induced dose-dependent itch but not pain behaviors in mice. LTC(4)-mediated itch differed in bout duration and kinetics from pruritogens histamine, compound 48/80, and chloroquine. NMLTC(4)-induced itch was abrogated in mice deficient for Cysltr2 or when deficiency was restricted to radioresistant cells. Itch was unaffected in mice deficient for Cysltr1, Trpv1, or mast cells (W(Sh) mice). CysLT(2)R played a role in itch in the MC903 mouse model of chronic itch and dermatitis, but not in models of dry skin or compound 48/80- or Alternaria-induced itch. In MC903-treated mice, CysLT levels increased in skin over time, and Cysltr2(-/-) mice showed decreased itch in the chronic phase of inflammation. Collectively, our study reveals that LTC(4) acts through CysLT(2)R as its physiological receptor to induce itch, and CysLT(2)R contributes to itch in a model of dermatitis. Therefore, targeting CysLT signaling may be a promising approach to treat inflammatory itch.
Over the last ten years, much has been learnt about the genetic characteristics and genetic evolution of uveal melanoma. It has been shown that uveal melanoma differs fundamentally from non-uveal melanoma and is an independent genetic subtype. Compared to other tumours, uveal melanoma has a low mutational burden. There are recurring chromosomal aberrations with losses of 1p, 6q, 8p and 16q, gains of 6p and 8q, and the presence of monosomy 3. GNAQ, GNA11, PLCB4, CYSLTR2, MAPKAPK5, as well as mutations in BAP1, SF3B1, SRSF2 and EIF1AX, the latter being linked to a higher risk of metastasis, have been identified as significantly mutated genes. In rare cases, a BAP1 germline mutation may also be present. In addition to higher risk of uveal melanoma, this variant is also linked with other tumours. In this case, additional work-up, genetic counselling and screening of family members should be offered. While the knowledge about the genetic characteristics of uveal melanoma is already routinely used for diagnostic and prognostic purposes, targeted genotype-dependent therapy of uveal melanoma is currently still missing.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent findings related to the pathogenic mechanisms of aspirin-induced asthma with emphasis on molecular genetic mechanisms. RECENT FINDINGS: The overproduction of cysteinyl leukotrienes with the increased expression of cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CYSLTR1) is a consistent finding in aspirin-induced asthma patients. Recent data have suggested a dysregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 and prostaglandin E2, increased levels of 15-hydroxyeicosatetranoic acid, and decreased lipoxin generation as characteristics of the condition. The HLA allele DPB10301 was documented as a strong genetic marker for susceptibility in an Asian population. Leukotriene C4 synthase has been established as a key genetic determinant of aspirin-induced asthma, but recent studies have demonstrated that several single nucleotide polymorphisms in the promoters of prostaglandin E2 receptor subtype 2, CYSLTR1 and CYSLTR2 and T-box expressed in T cells (TBX21) could increase risk for the condition. Although cyclooxygenase-2 and thromboxane A2 receptor polymorphisms were not associated with aspirin-induced asthma phenotype, they may exert functional effects. SUMMARY: The identification of genetic markers for aspirin-induced asthma susceptibility along with in-vitro functional studies would help to elucidate the pathogenesis of the condition. Further studies of the interactions among genes and between genes and the environment will be essential.
Uveal melanoma is the most common eye cancer in adults and is clinically and genetically distinct from skin cutaneous melanoma. In a subset of cases, the oncogenic driver is an activating mutation in CYSLTR2, the gene encoding the G protein-coupled receptor cysteinyl-leukotriene receptor 2 (CysLTR2). The mutant CYSLTR2 encodes for the CysLTR2-L129Q receptor, with the substitution of Leu to Gln at position 129 (3.43). The ability of CysLTR2-L129Q to cause malignant transformation has been hypothesized to result from constitutive activity, but how the receptor could escape desensitization is unknown. Here, we characterize the functional properties of CysLTR2-L129Q. We show that CysLTR2-L129Q is a constitutively active mutant that strongly drives Gq/11 signaling pathways. However, CysLTR2-L129Q only poorly recruits beta-arrestin. Using a modified Slack-Hall operational model, we quantified the constitutive activity for both pathways and conclude that CysLTR2-L129Q displays profound signaling bias for Gq/11 signaling pathways while escaping beta-arrestin-mediated downregulation. CYSLTR2 is the first known example of a G protein-coupled receptor driver oncogene that encodes a highly biased constitutively active mutant receptor. These results provide new insights into the mechanism of CysLTR2-L129Q oncoprotein signaling and suggest CYSLTR2 as a promising potential therapeutic target in uveal melanoma.
Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary intraocular malignancy in adults, and its metastases are known to be fatal. It is critical to identify molecular markers to be used in potential prognostic evaluation for early diagnosis, treatment, and metastasis or to investigate all aspects of known genetic anomalies. Therefore, this study aimed to analyze the eight genes (GNAQ, GNA11, BAP1, SF3B1, SRSF2, EIF1AX, PLCB4, and CYSLTR2) that are associated with the most common genetic anomalies in UM from a molecular perspective. The genome sequences and expression profiles of 108 UM patients were obtained via bioinformatics tools that provide data from TCGA. The overall mutational load and the mutation patterns for eight genes, in particular, were thoroughly determined. Moreover, PolyPhen2 and SNAP(2) tools were used to estimate the oncogenic/pathogenic properties of identified mutations for UM. In addition to the mutation profile, the effects of the presence of a mutation on gene expression and survival were determined. Finally, STRING network analysis was performed to better understand the functional relationships of mutated proteins in cellular processes. There were 27 missense mutations, 16 frameshift mutations, six nonsense mutations, and three splice region mutations among the 52 mutations found in eight genes, and 26 of them had pathogenic properties. BAP1 m-RNA expression was significantly lower in tumors with the mutant genotype (p = .001). The impact of gene expression, which has poor prognostic importance, on survival is statistically significant for high-expressed BAP1 (p = .0015) and low-expressed CYSLTR2 (p = .0021). To assess the current state of this potentially devastating disease, a molecular perspective has been evaluated. Defining this molecular perspective can be useful in developing targeted drug therapies and personalized medicine.
Blue nevi are common melanocytic tumors arising in the dermal layer of the skin. Similar to uveal melanomas, blue nevi frequently harbor GNAQ and GNA11 mutations. Recently, recurrent CYSLTR2 and PLCB4 mutations were identified in uveal melanomas not harboring GNAQ or GNA11 mutations. All four genes (GNAQ, GNA11, CYSLTR2, and PLCB4) code for proteins involved in the same signaling pathway, which is activated by mutations in these genes. Given the related functional consequences of these mutations and the known genetic similarities between uveal melanoma and blue nevi, we analyzed a cohort of blue nevi to investigate whether CYSLTR2 and PLCB4 mutations occur in tumors lacking GNAQ or GNA11 mutations (as in uveal melanoma). A targeted next-generation sequencing assay covering known activating mutations in GNAQ, GNA11, CYSLTR2, PLCB4, KIT, NRAS, and BRAF was applied to 103 blue nevi. As previously reported, most blue nevi were found to harbor activating mutations in GNAQ (59%, n=61), followed by less frequent mutations in GNA11 (16%, n=17). Additionally, one BRAF (1%) and three NRAS (3%) mutations were detected. In three tumors (3%) harboring none of the aforementioned gene alterations, CYSLTR2 mutations were identified. All three CYSLTR2 mutations were the same c.386T>A, L129Q mutation previously identified in uveal melanoma that has been shown to lead to increased receptor activation and signaling. In summary, our study identifies CYSLTR2 L129Q alterations as a previously unrecognized activating mutation in blue nevi, occuring in a mutually exclusive fashion with known GNAQ and GNA11 mutations. Similar to GNAQ and GNA11 mutations, CYSLTR2 mutations, when present, are likely defining pathogenetic events in blue nevi.
BACKGROUND: Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 and 2 (CysLTR1 and CysLTR2) are involved in allergic processes and play a role in adenotonsillar hyperplasia (AH). Clinically, only CysLTR1 may be blocked by montelukast. Our objective was to compare the expression of CysLTR1 and CysLTR2 in the B and T cells of hyperplasic tonsils of sensitized (SE) and control (NS) snoring children. METHODS: Sixty children, 5 to 10 years of age, referred for adenotonsillectomy, were divided into SE and NS groups, according to their responses to the skin-prick test. Cells from the removed tissues were stained for CysLTR1, CysLTR2, CD19, and CD3 and counted via flow cytometry. messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of the CysLTRs genes was measured real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). RESULTS: The SE group showed reduced expression of the small CD3+/CysLTR1+ lymphocytes (4.6 +/- 2.2 vs 6.5 +/- 5.0; p = 0.04). Regarding the large lymphocytes, the SE group showed lower expression of CD3+/CysLTR1+ (40.9 +/- 14.5 vs 47.6 +/- 11.7; p = 0.05), CD19+/CysLTR1+ (44.6 +/- 16.9 vs 54.1 +/- 12.4; p = 0.01), and CD19+/CysLTR2+ (55.3 +/- 11.3 vs 61.5 +/- 12.6; p = 0.05) lymphocytes. Considering the total number of lymphocytes, the SE group had fewer CD3+/CysLTR1+ lymphocytes (11.1 +/- 5.5 vs 13.7 +/- 6.2; p = 0.04). All other cell populations exhibited reduced expression in the SE group without statistical significance. The expression of CysLTR2 was significantly higher (p < 0.05) than CysLTR1 in most studied cell populations. The mRNA expression did not show significant differences between the groups. CONCLUSION: The expression of CysLTR is higher in the lymphocytes of the NS children, and CysLTR2 shows greater expression than CysLTR1 Respiratory allergies do not appear to be a stimulus for AH occurrence. Newer drugs capable of blocking both CysLTRs warrant further study.
BACKGROUND: Asthma is a chronic disease of the airways and its most common phenotype is characterized by a T2 type response with IgE production and inflammatory mediators in response to common allergens. Cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs), LTC4, LTD4 and LTE4, are mediators known to possess important proinflammatory action. CysLTs can bind to the Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor type 2 (CysLTR2) and activate an inflammatory. Polymorphisms in CysLTR2 have been associated with asthma and atopy, although the mechanism is not clear. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between genetic polymorphisms in CYSLTR2 with asthma phenotypes, atopy markers and helminth infection. METHODS: Genotyping was performed using a panel Illumina and carried out in 1245 participants of SCAALA program (Social Change, Asthma, Allergy in Latin American). Logistic regressions for asthma, helminth infections (Trichuris trichiura and Ascaris lumbricoides) and allergy markers (skin tests and IgE production) were performed using PLINK 1.9 software adjusted for sex, age, helminth infection and ancestry markers. RESULTS: The G allele of rs1323556 was negatively associated with asthma in the additive model (OR 0.74, 95% CI 0.59-0.93) and in the dominant model (OR 0.71, 95% CI 0.53-0.74). The G allele of rs1575464 was also negatively associated with asthma in two genetic models, additive (OR 0.77, 95% CI 0.62-0.96) and dominant (OR 0.73, 95% CI 0.55-0.97). The G allele of rs61735175 was positively associated with asthma severity in the additive model (OR 1.72, 95% CI 1.07-2.77) and in the dominant model (OR 1.77, 95% CI 1.09-2.85). Five SNVs were associated with atopy markers and four SNVs were associated with helminth infections. CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms in the CYSLTR2 gene are associated with asthma, atopy markers and helminth infection in Brazilian individuals, which may lead to protection or risk for such conditions, however, more studies are needed to evaluate the functional of this variants here in described.
Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary intraocular malignancy in the Western world. Recurrent mutations in GNAQ, GNA11, CYSLTR2, PLCB4, BAP1, EIF1AX, and SF3B1 are described as well as non-random chromosomal aberrations. Chromothripsis is a rare event in which chromosomes are shattered and rearranged and has been reported in a variety of cancers including UM. SNP arrays of 249 UM from patients who underwent enucleation, biopsy or endoresection were reviewed for the presence of chromothripsis. Chromothripsis was defined as ten or more breakpoints per chromosome involved. Genetic analysis of GNAQ, GNA11, BAP1, SF3B1, and EIF1AX was conducted using Sanger and next-generation sequencing. In addition, immunohistochemistry for BAP1 was performed. Chromothripsis was detected in 7 out of 249 tumors and the affected chromosomes were chromosomes 3, 5, 6, 8, 12, and 13. The mean total of fragments per chromosome was 39.8 (range 12-116). In 1 UM, chromothripsis was present in 2 different chromosomes. GNAQ, GNA11 or CYSLTR2 mutations were present in 6 of these tumors and 5 tumors harbored a BAP1 mutation and/or lacked BAP1 protein expression by immunohistochemistry. Four of these tumors metastasized and for the fifth only short follow-up data are available. One of these metastatic tumors harbored an SF3B1 mutation. No EIF1AX mutations were detected in any of the tumors. To conclude, chromothripsis is a rare event in UM, occurring in 2.8% of samples and without significant association with mutations in any of the common UM driver genes.
Recurrent activating Galphaq mutations in the spectrum of blue nevi have been well studied. However, the clinicopathologic characteristics of the recently described CYSLTR2-mutant and PLCB4-mutant blue nevi remain limited, owing to their rarity. Herein, we present 7 CYSLTR2-mutant melanocytic neoplasms, including 1 cellular blue nevus, 4 atypical cellular blue nevi, and 2 blue nevus-like melanomas. They occurred on the scalp, breast, flank, forearm, thigh, leg, and ankle of 3 male patients and 4 female patients, with a median age of 43 (25 to 81) years at diagnosis. Five exhibited an exophytic growth, and 6 were heavily pigmented. A fascicular arrangement of medium to large spindle melanocytes was seen in 6 cases, but epithelioid cytology was present in only 2 cases, one of them being focal. A junctional component was present in 3 cases. Immunoreactivity for HMB45 was diffusely present, except in 1 cellular blue nevus. BAP1 nuclear immunoexpression was lost in 1 melanoma case. A canonical CYSLTR2 L129Q hotspot mutation was present in all cases. Altogether, these histopathologic findings suggest that CYSLTR2-mutant melanocytic blue neoplasms frequently exhibit a heavily pigmented exophytic tumor with a silhouette resembling "pigmented epithelioid melanocytoma" rather than usual cellular blue nevus. Moreover, most of these tumors were not clinically recognized as blue nevi and not located in the classic topography of cellular blue nevus aside from the scalp. However, a fascicular arrangement of medium to large-sized spindled melanocytes, as well as a lack of epithelioid or nevoid melanocytes, could be potential diagnostic clues to morphologically distinguish CYSLTR2-mutant tumors from "pigmented epithelioid melanocytoma."
PURPOSE: All uveal melanoma and a fraction of other melanoma subtypes are driven by activation of the G-protein alpha-q (Galpha(q)) pathway. Targeting these melanomas has proven difficult despite advances in the molecular understanding of key driver signaling pathways in the disease pathogenesis. Inhibitors of Galpha(q) have shown promising preclinical results, but their therapeutic activity in distinct Galpha(q) mutational contexts and in vivo have remained elusive. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used an isogenic melanocytic cellular system to systematically examine hotspot mutations in GNAQ (e.g., G48V, R183Q, Q209L) and CYSLTR2 (L129Q) found in human uveal melanoma. This cellular system and human uveal melanoma cell lines were used in vitro and in in vivo xenograft studies to assess the efficacy of Galpha(q) inhibition as a single agent and in combination with MEK inhibition. RESULTS: We demonstrate that the Galpha(q) inhibitor YM-254890 inhibited downstream signaling and in vitro growth in all mutants. In vivo, YM-254890 slowed tumor growth but did not cause regression in human uveal melanoma xenografts. Through comprehensive transcriptome analysis, we observed that YM-254890 caused inhibition of the MAPK signaling with evidence of rebound by 24 hours and combination treatment of YM-254890 and a MEK inhibitor led to sustained MAPK inhibition. We further demonstrated that the combination caused synergistic growth inhibition in vitro and tumor shrinkage in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the combination of Galpha(q) and MEK inhibition provides a promising therapeutic strategy and improved therapeutic window of broadly targeting Galpha(q) in uveal melanoma.See related commentary by Neelature Sriramareddy and Smalley, p. 1217.
Genetic variation in specific G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) is associated with a spectrum of respiratory disease predispositions and drug response phenotypes. Although certain GPCR gene variants can be disease-causing through the expression of inactive, overactive, or constitutively active receptor proteins, many more GPCR gene variants confer risk for potentially deleterious endophenotypes. Endophenotypes are traits, such as bronchiole hyperactivity, atopy, and aspirin intolerant asthma, which have a strong genetic component and are risk factors for a variety of more complex outcomes that may include disease states. GPCR genes implicated in asthma endophenotypes include variants of the cysteinyl leukotriene receptors (CYSLTR1 and CYSLTR2), and prostaglandin D2 receptors (PTGDR and CRTH2), thromboxane A2 receptor (TBXA2R), beta2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2), chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5), and the G protein-coupled receptor associated with asthma (GPRA). This review of the contribution of variability in these genes places the contribution of the cysteinyl leukotriene system to respiratory endophenotypes in perspective. The genetic variant(s) of receptors that are associated with endophenotypes are discussed in the context of the extent to which they contribute to a disease phenotype or altered drug efficacy.
