Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1; Receptor for cysteinyl leukotrienes mediating bronchoconstriction of individuals with and without asthma. Stimulation by LTD4 results in the contraction and proliferation of smooth muscle, edema, eosinophil migration and damage to the mucus layer in the lung. This response is mediated via a G-protein that activates a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system. The rank order of affinities for the leukotrienes is LTD4 >> LTE4 = LTC4 >> LTB4.
In contrast with sun exposure-induced melanoma, rarer melanocytic tumors and neoplasms with low mutational burden present opportunities to study isolated signaling mechanisms. These include uveal melanoma and blue nevi, which are often driven by mutations within the G protein-coupled signaling cascade downstream of cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 2. Here, we review how the same mutations within this pathway drive the growth of melanocytes in one tissue but can inhibit the growth of those in another, exemplifying the role of the tissue environment in the delicate balance between uncontrolled cell growth and senescence.
Cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs) are a group of eicosanoids that regulate the pathogenesis of various human diseases, mainly by signaling through the cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CysLTR1). The aim of this study was to generate and examine the phenotype of CysLTR1 L118F mutant mice. CysLTR1 L118F mutant mice were generated by the simultaneous microinjection of single guide RNA, Cas9 messenger RNA, and donor plasmid into fertilized mouse eggs. The morphological and behavioral characteristics of the resultant CysLTR1 L118F mutant mice were analyzed using an animal phenotype analysis platform, which included the assessment of body length, tail length, grip strength, and locomotor activity. Immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry was performed to identify CysLTR1-interacting proteins, and the intracellular calcium levels were determined using fluorometric imaging plate reader assays. The body length and tail length of CysLTR1 L118F mutant mice were significantly increased compared with wild-type mice. In addition, the grip strength and locomotor activity were remarkably elevated in L118F mutant mice compared with wild-type mice. Only three proteins were found to interact with both wild-type and CysLTR1 L118F proteins, whereas 4 and 13 additional proteins interacted exclusively with wild-type and mutant CysLTR1, respectively. Lastly, the responsiveness of cardiac muscle cells to CysLTs were significantly impaired by the L118F substitution in CysLTR1 proteins. The CysLTR1 L118F point mutation induced significant changes in the mouse morphology and behavior, which might be mediated by alterations of its protein interaction profile.
Drug hypersensitivity reactions (DHRs) are unpredictable, complex responses to medicines in predisposed individuals. They represent a major health problem owing to the number of patients affected and the severity of the clinical conditions they can induce. In addition to environmental factors, the underlying mechanisms of DHRs are also influenced by genetic factors, although considerable gaps remain in our knowledge. Therefore, further study of the genetics of DHRs is necessary to shed light on their underlying mechanisms. In this manuscript, we provide an update on the genetic basis of the most frequent types of DHRs, including those mediated by immunological and nonimmunological mechanisms. For the first group, we will focus on immediate reactions to beta-lactam antibiotics, which are associated mainly with the IgE pathway (IL13, IL4R, LGALS3, and NOD2) and antigen presentation (HLA-DRA), and nonimmediate reactions to allopurinol, anticonvulsants, antibiotics, and antiretrovirals, which are often associated with polymorphisms in the HLA system. For the second group, we will focus on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which are mostly associated with genetic variants in enzymes and receptors from the arachidonic acid pathway (eg, ALOX5, ALOX5AP, PTGDR, and CYSLTR1). The information provided here will be of interest for medical practitioners from a range of disciplines who come across these reactions in their clinical practice, as well as for allergologists.
Our knowledge of genetic predisposing factors of drug hypersensitivity reactions (DHRs) is still scarce. The analysis of the genetic basis of these reactions may contribute to dissect the underlying mechanisms. We will outline current knowledge of the genetic predictors of most common DHRs, including reactions to betalactam antibiotics (BLs), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and biological agents. The predictors of DHRs to BLs are mostly linked to IgE-class switching, IgE pathway and atopy (IL4R, NOD2, LGALS3) in replicated candidate gene studies, and to antigen presentation (HLA-DRA) in the single replicated GWAS performed so far. The HLA-DRA variants are predictors of allergy to penicillins, but not to cephalosporins and they influence also the sensitization against prevalent allergens. The predictors of DHRs against NSAIDs are mostly linked to metabolism of eicosanoids (ALOX5, ALOX5AP, TBXAS1, PTGDR, CYSLTR1). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in histamine biosynthesis and antigen presentation, HLA, could also have a role in DHRs against NSAIDs. The intriguing association of DHRs to NSAIDs with atopy should deserve further attention. Predictors of DHRs against asparaginase and other biological agents relate to antigen presentation (HLA-DRB1 and HLA-A alleles, respectively). The potential relationship of genetic predictors of DHRs with pathomechanisms also involved in environmental exposure and atopy highlights the need to perform GWAS in contrasted populations, taking into account world-wide variations of allele frequencies and contrasted situations of environmental exposure.
Aspirin-induced asthma (AIA) and aspirin-induced urticaria/ angioedema (AIU) are two major aspirin-related allergies. We summarize recent findings related to their molecular genetic mechanisms in order to identify genetic susceptibility markers for differentiating AIU and AIA. The overproduction of cysteinyl leukotriene has been suggested as a mechanism in both AIU and AIA. Increased expression of CYSLTR1 with CYLSTR1 and CYSLTR2 polymorphisms are new findings in AIA, while the ALOX5 promoter polymorphism has been noted in AIU. An HLA study suggested that DPB1*0301 is a strong genetic marker for AIA, and that HLA DRB1*1302 and DQB1*0609 are markers for AIU susceptibility. Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the promoters of EP2, TBX21, COX-2, Fc epsilon RIbeta, and TBXA2R were associated with AIA, while an Fc epsilon RIalpha promoter polymorphism was associated with AIU. The functional studies of the key genes involved in AIA and AIU are summarized. The identification and functional study of genetic markers for AIA and AIU susceptibility would further elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms and facilitate the development of early diagnostic markers to establish therapeutic targets.
Pharmacologic studies have revealed that cysteinyl leukotrienes (CYSLTs) act through two receptors, cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CYSLTR1) and CYSLTR2. CYSLTR1 antagonists are widely used to treat asthma and rhinitis. In this study, we characterized the genomic structure and transcriptional regulation of CYSLTR1 and examined associations between CYSLTR1 polymorphisms and asthma/rhinitis. The experiment of rapid amplification of cDNA end revealed that CYSLTR1 contains three exons and that the entire open reading frame is located in exon 3. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction showed that there were multiple splice variants of CYSLTR1 and that the transcript expression patterns differed from tissues and cell types. The promoter region of CYSLTR1 is from -665 to -30 bp relative to the transcription start site. We identified four polymorphisms (c.-618-434T/C, c.-618-275C/A, c.-618-136G/A, and 927C/T), and transmission disequilibrium tests revealed that none of these polymorphisms was associated with the development of asthma/rhinitis. However, the TCG and CAA haplotypes in the promoter region caused different transcriptional activity. Our findings indicate that CYSLTR1 polymorphisms are not likely to be involved in the development of asthma/rhinitis, but it is possible that these polymorphisms could influence drug responses in individuals with atopic diseases.
PURPOSE: The etiology of allergic rhinitis (AR) is closely correlated with the complex interactions between genetic and environmental factors. This study explored the effect of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of CYSLTR1 gene on the risk of AR and clinical response to montelukast treatment in children. METHODS: A total of 135 children with AR and 100 healthy children were included for subsequent analyses. Genotype and allele distribution of rs321029 SNP of CYSLTR1 gene and inflammatory mediators were detected and compared between AR and healthy children. RESULTS: Genotype and allele frequency of rs321029 SNP of CYSLTR1 gene showed no difference between children with AR and controls or between AR cases with different severity. The total montelukast effective rate of wide-type genotype TT children was significantly higher than variants genotype CC children. CONCLUSION: Polymorphism of rs321029 on CYSLTR1 gene is not related to the susceptibility and severity of AR in children, but it is closely related with the efficacy of montelukast on AR.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent findings related to the pathogenic mechanisms of aspirin-induced asthma with emphasis on molecular genetic mechanisms. RECENT FINDINGS: The overproduction of cysteinyl leukotrienes with the increased expression of cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CYSLTR1) is a consistent finding in aspirin-induced asthma patients. Recent data have suggested a dysregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 and prostaglandin E2, increased levels of 15-hydroxyeicosatetranoic acid, and decreased lipoxin generation as characteristics of the condition. The HLA allele DPB10301 was documented as a strong genetic marker for susceptibility in an Asian population. Leukotriene C4 synthase has been established as a key genetic determinant of aspirin-induced asthma, but recent studies have demonstrated that several single nucleotide polymorphisms in the promoters of prostaglandin E2 receptor subtype 2, CYSLTR1 and CYSLTR2 and T-box expressed in T cells (TBX21) could increase risk for the condition. Although cyclooxygenase-2 and thromboxane A2 receptor polymorphisms were not associated with aspirin-induced asthma phenotype, they may exert functional effects. SUMMARY: The identification of genetic markers for aspirin-induced asthma susceptibility along with in-vitro functional studies would help to elucidate the pathogenesis of the condition. Further studies of the interactions among genes and between genes and the environment will be essential.
Air pollution is associated with early declines in lung function and increased levels of asthma-related cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLT) but a biological pathway linking this rapid response has not been delineated. In this randomized controlled diesel exhaust (DE) challenge study of 16 adult asthmatics, increased exposure-attributable urinary leukotriene E4 (uLTE4, a biomarker of cysteinyl leukotriene production) was correlated (p = 0.04) with declines in forced expiratory volume in 1-second (FEV(1)) within 6 hours of exposure. Exposure-attributable uLTE4 increases were correlated (p = 0.02) with increased CysLT receptor 1 (CysLTR1) methylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells which, in turn, was marginally correlated (p = 0.06) with decreased CysLTR1 expression. Decreased CysLTR1 expression was, in turn, correlated (p = 0.0007) with FEV(1) declines. During the same time period, increased methylation of GPR17 (a negative regulator of CysLTR1) was observed after DE exposure (p = 0.02); this methylation increase was correlated (p = 0.001) with decreased CysLTR1 methylation which, in turn, was marginally correlated (p = 0.06) with increased CysLTR1 expression; increased CysLTR1 expression was correlated (p = 0.0007) with FEV(1) increases. Collectively, these data delineate a potential mechanistic pathway linking increased DE exposure-attributable CysLT levels to lung function declines through changes in CysLTR1-related methylation and gene expression.
The farnesoid-x-receptor (FXR) and the G protein bile acid activated receptor (GPBAR)1 are two bile acid activated receptors highly expressed in entero-hepatic, immune, adipose and cardiovascular tissues. FXR and GPBAR1 are clinically validated targets in the treatment of metabolic disorders and FXR agonists are currently trialled in patients with non-alcoholic steato-hepatitis (NASH). Results of these trials, however, have raised concerns over safety and efficacy of selective FXR ligands suggesting that the development of novel agent designed to impact on multiple targets might have utility in the treatment of complex, multigenic, disorders. Harnessing on FXR and GPBAR1 agonists, several novel hybrid molecules have been developed, including dual FXR and GPBAR1 agonists and antagonists, while exploiting the flexibility of FXR agonists toward other nuclear receptors, dual FXR and peroxisome proliferators-activated receptors (PPARs) and liver-X-receptors (LXRs) and Pregnane-X-receptor (PXR) agonists have been reported. In addition, modifications of FXR agonists has led to the discovery of dual FXR agonists and fatty acid binding protein (FABP)1 and Leukotriene B4 hydrolase (LTB4H) inhibitors. The GPBAR1 binding site has also proven flexible to accommodate hybrid molecules functioning as GPBAR1 agonist and cysteinyl leukotriene receptor (CYSLTR)1 antagonists, as well as dual GPBAR1 agonists and retinoid-related orphan receptor (ROR)gammat antagonists, dual GPBAR1 agonist and LXR antagonists and dual GPBAR1 agonists endowed with inhibitory activity on dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4). In this review we have revised the current landscape of FXR and GPBAR1 based hybrid agents focusing on their utility in the treatment of metabolic associated liver disorders.
PURPOSE: Diabetic macular edema (DME) is the primary cause of vision impairment in diabetic retinopathy (DR) patients. A previous study has shown the efficacy of montelukast, a cysteinyl leukotriene receptor (CysLTR)1 antagonist, in a diabetic mouse model. This study aims to understand the CysLTR1 signaling in retinal endothelial cells and the impact of montelukast. METHODS: Primary human retinal microvascular endothelial cells (HRECs) challenged with 20 ng/mL TNF-alpha and 30 mM D-glucose (D-glu) for six to 24 hours served as a model of endothelial activation. HRECs were incubated with L-glucose (L-glu) as an osmotic control. CysLTR1 knockdown and montelukast pretreatment assessed CysLTR1 antagonism. Gene expression, protein expression, and cell-permeable dyes were utilized to measure autophagy and inflammation. Transendothelial electrical resistance (TER) and transendothelial migration of mononuclear leukocytes across HRECs monolayer were measured as a functional assessment of vascular permeability. RESULTS: Endothelial activation induced by hyperglycemia and inflammation increased CysLTR1 expression, triggering autophagy within two to six hours, IL-1beta production, loss of junction integrity, decreased TER, and increased leukocyte migration within six to 24 hours. Pretreatment with montelukast effectively alleviated these effects, demonstrating its dependence on CysLTR1. CONCLUSIONS: Dysfunctional retinal endothelium initiates a self-reinforcing loop of inflammation, autophagy, and compromised integrity associated with heightened CysLTR1 levels. The antagonistic effect of montelukast against CysLTR1 effectively mitigates these detrimental changes. This study reveals CysLTR1 as a potential therapeutic target in treating DME and offers a novel strategy to mitigate detrimental changes in DR.
Montelukast is a leukotriene receptor antagonist that is known to prevent allergic rhinitis and asthma. Blocking the Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor (CysLTR1), one of the primary receptors of leukotrienes, has been demonstrated to be efficacious in ameliorating experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS), through disrupting chemotaxis of infiltrating T cells. However, the role of CysLTR1 in the pathogenesis of MS is not well understood. Here, we show that MS patients had higher expression of CysLTR1 in the circulation and central nervous system (CNS). The majority of CD4(+) T cells expressed CysLTR1 in MS lesions. Among T-cell subsets, Th17 cells had the highest expression of CysLTR1, and blocking CysLTR1 signalling abrogated their development in vitro. Inhibition of CysLTR1 by montelukast suppressed EAE development in both a prophylactic and therapeutic manner and inhibited myelin loss in EAE mice. Similarly, the in vivo results showed that montelukast inhibited Th17 response in EAE mice and that Th17 cells treated with montelukast had reduced encephalitogenic in adoptive EAE. Our findings strongly suggest that targeting Th17 response by inhibiting CysLTR1 signalling could be a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of MS and CNS inflammatory diseases.
Leukotrienes (LT) are biologically active lipid mediators known to be involved in allergic inflammation. Leukotrienes have been shown to mediate diverse features of allergic conditions including inflammatory cell chemotaxis/activation and smooth muscle contraction. Cysteinyl leukotrienes (LTC(4), LTD(4) and, LTE(4)) and the dihydroxy leukotriene LTB(4) are generated by a series of enzymes/proteins constituting the LT synthetic pathway or 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) pathway. Their function is mediated by interacting with multiple receptors. Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA) and LT synthesis inhibitors (LTSI) have shown clinical efficacy in asthma and more recently in allergic rhinitis. Despite growing knowledge of leukotriene biology, the molecular regulation of these inflammatory mediators remains to be fully understood. Genes encoding enzymes of the 5-LO pathway (i.e. ALOX5, LTC4S and LTA4H) and encoding for LT receptors (CYSLTR1/2 and LTB4R1/2) provide excellent candidates for disease susceptibility and severity; however, their role remains unclear. Preliminary data also suggest that 5-LO pathway/receptor gene polymorphism can predict patient responses to LTSI and LTRA; however, the exact mechanisms require elucidation. The aim of this review was to summarize the recent advances in the knowledge of these important mediators, focusing on genetic and pharmacogenetic aspects in the context of allergic phenotypes.
Montelukast, a Food and Drug Administration-approved drug for asthma and allergic rhinitis modulates leukotriene (LT) receptors and serves as a critical anti-inflammatory agent. Recent research suggests that the LT signaling pathway targeted by montelukast has broader implications for diseases such as fibrosis, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, cerebrovascular disease, and immune defense. This expanded understanding highlights montelukast's potential for repurposing in conditions involving aberrant stress mechanisms, including ocular diseases marked by inflammation, oxidative stress, ER stress, and apoptosis, among several others. This review delves into montelukast's therapeutic mechanisms across various diseases, draws parallels to ocular conditions, and examines clinical trials and associated adverse effects to underscore the unmet need for cysteinyl LT receptor antagonism by montelukast as an effective therapy for visual deficits.
Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) and pulmonary hypertension (PH) have common pathophysiological features, such as the significant remodeling of pulmonary parenchyma and vascular wall. There is no effective specific drug in clinical treatment for these two diseases, resulting in a worse prognosis and higher mortality. This study aimed to screen the common key genes and immune characteristics of PF and PH by means of bioinformatics to find new common therapeutic targets. Expression profiles are downloaded from the Gene Expression Database. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis is used to identify the co-expression modules related to PF and PH. We used the ClueGO software to enrich and analyze the common genes in PF and PH and obtained the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. Then, the differential genes were screened out in another cohort of PF and PH, and the shared genes were crossed. Finally, RT-PCR verification and immune infiltration analysis were performed on the intersection genes. In the result, the positive correlation module with the highest correlation between PF and PH was determined, and it was found that lymphocyte activation is a common feature of the pathophysiology of PF and PH. Eight common characteristic genes (ACTR2, COL5A2, COL6A3, CYSLTR1, IGF1, RSPO3, SCARNA17 and SEL1L) were gained. Immune infiltration showed that compared with the control group, resting CD4 memory T cells were upregulated in PF and PH. Combining the results of crossing characteristic genes in ImmPort database and RT-PCR, the important gene IGF1 was obtained. Knocking down IGF1 could significantly reduce the proliferation and apoptosis resistance in pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells, pulmonary smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts induced by hypoxia, platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB), and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), respectively. Our work identified the common biomarkers of PF and PH and provided a new candidate gene for the potential therapeutic targets of PF and PH in the future.
Despite advances in treatment, asthma continues to be a significant health and economic burden. Although asthma cannot be cured, several drugs, including beta2 agonists, corticosteroids, and leukotriene (LT) modifiers, are well tolerated and effective in minimizing symptoms, improving lung function, and preventing exacerbations. However, inter-patient variability in response to asthma drugs limits their effectiveness. It has been estimated that 60-80% of this inter-patient variability may be attributable to genetic variation. LT modifiers, in particular, have been associated with heterogeneity in response. These drugs exert their action by inhibiting the activity of cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs), which are potent bronchoconstrictors and pro-inflammatory agents. Two classes of LT modifiers are 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5) inhibitors (zileuton) and leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs) [montelukast, pranlukast, and zarfirlukast]. LT modifiers can be used as alternatives to low-dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in mild persistent asthma, as add-on therapy to low- to medium-dose ICS in moderate persistent asthma, and as add-on to high-dose ICS and a long-acting ss2 agonist in severe persistent asthma. At least six genes encode key proteins in the LT pathway: arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5), ALOX5 activating protein (ALOX5AP [FLAP]), leukotriene A4 hydrolase (LTA4H), LTC4 synthase (LTC4S), the ATP-binding cassette family member ABCC1 (multidrug resistance protein 1 [MRP1]), and cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CYSLTR1). Studies have reported that genetic variation in ALOX5, LTA4H, LTC4S, and ABCC1 influences response to LT modifiers. Plasma concentrations of LTRAs vary considerably among patients. Physio-chemical characteristics make it likely that membrane efflux and uptake transporters mediate the absorption of LTRAs into the systemic circulation following oral administration. Genes that encode efflux and uptake transport proteins harbor many variants that could influence the pharmacokinetics, and particularly the bioavailability, of LTRAs, and could contribute to heterogeneity in response. In the future, large, well designed clinical trials studying the pharmacogenetics of LT modifiers in diverse populations are warranted to determine whether a genetic signature can be developed that will accurately predict which patients will respond.
Aspirin intolerant asthma (AIA) is frequently characterized as an aspirin (ASA)-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD). It is a clinical syndrome associated with chronic severe inflammation in the upper and lower airways resulting in chronic rhinitis, sinusitis, recurrent polyposis, and asthma. AERD generally develops secondary to abnormalities in inflammatory mediators and arachidonic acid biosynthesis expression. Upper and lower airway eosinophil infiltration is a key feature of AERD; however, the exact mechanisms of such chronic eosinophilic inflammation are not fully understood. Cysteinyl leukotriene over-production may be a key factor in the induction of eosinophilic activation. Genetic studies have suggested a role for variability of genes in disease susceptibility and response to medication. Potential genetic biomarkers contributing to the AERD phenotype include HLA-DPB1*301, LTC4S, ALOX5, CYSLT, PGE2, TBXA2R, TBX21, MS4A2, IL10 -1082A > G, ACE -262A > T, and CRTH2 -466T > C; the four-locus SNP set was composed of B2ADR 46A > G, CCR3 -520T > G, CysLTR1 -634C > T, and FCER1B -109T > C. Management of AERD is an important issue. Aspirin ingestion may result in significant morbidity and mortality, and patients must be advised regarding aspirin risk. Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA) that inhibit leukotriene pathways have an established role in long-term AERD management and rhinosinusitis. Aspirin desensitization may be required for the relief of upper and lower airway symptoms in AERD patients. Future research should focus on identification of biomarkers for a comprehensive diagnostic approach.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema is a major aspirin-related hypersensitivity often associated with aspirin-intolerant asthma. Genetic studies on aspirin-intolerant asthma have shown chronic overproduction of cysteinyl leukotrienes. The genetic analysis of aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema is limited, however. RECENT FINDINGS: A recent study on HLA genotypes has suggested that the HLA alleles DRB11302 and DQB10609 may be genetic markers for aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema. A polymorphism study that examined nine single-nucleotide polymorphisms of five leukotriene-related genes [ALOX5 (encoding 5-lipoxygenase), ALOX5AP (5-lipoxygenase-activating protein), PTGS2 (cyclooxygenase 2), LTC4S (leukotriene C4 synthase), and CYSLTR1 (cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1)] found that promoter polymorphisms of ALOX5 (-1708A>G) and CYSLTR1 (-634C>T) were significantly different between aspirin-intolerant asthma and aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema, suggesting different contributions to the lipoxygenase pathway. A second polymorphism study, conducted on histamine-related genes, did not find any significant associations with aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema for the genes HNMT (encoding histamine N-methyltransferase), HRH1 or HRH2 (encoding histamine receptor types 1 and 2 respectively), or the gene encoding high-affinity IgE receptor Ibeta (FcepsilonRIbeta); however, the FcepsilonRIalpha gene promoter polymorphism was significantly associated with aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema. This finding has been supported by in vitro functional studies. SUMMARY: The HLA alleles DRB11302 and DQB10609, and the ALOX5 and FcepsilonRIalpha promoter polymorphisms, may contribute to the pathogenesis of aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema. Further investigation to identify candidate genetic markers would help to elucidate the pathogenic mechanism of this condition.
BACKGROUND: Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 and 2 (CysLTR1 and CysLTR2) are involved in allergic processes and play a role in adenotonsillar hyperplasia (AH). Clinically, only CysLTR1 may be blocked by montelukast. Our objective was to compare the expression of CysLTR1 and CysLTR2 in the B and T cells of hyperplasic tonsils of sensitized (SE) and control (NS) snoring children. METHODS: Sixty children, 5 to 10 years of age, referred for adenotonsillectomy, were divided into SE and NS groups, according to their responses to the skin-prick test. Cells from the removed tissues were stained for CysLTR1, CysLTR2, CD19, and CD3 and counted via flow cytometry. messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of the CysLTRs genes was measured real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). RESULTS: The SE group showed reduced expression of the small CD3+/CysLTR1+ lymphocytes (4.6 +/- 2.2 vs 6.5 +/- 5.0; p = 0.04). Regarding the large lymphocytes, the SE group showed lower expression of CD3+/CysLTR1+ (40.9 +/- 14.5 vs 47.6 +/- 11.7; p = 0.05), CD19+/CysLTR1+ (44.6 +/- 16.9 vs 54.1 +/- 12.4; p = 0.01), and CD19+/CysLTR2+ (55.3 +/- 11.3 vs 61.5 +/- 12.6; p = 0.05) lymphocytes. Considering the total number of lymphocytes, the SE group had fewer CD3+/CysLTR1+ lymphocytes (11.1 +/- 5.5 vs 13.7 +/- 6.2; p = 0.04). All other cell populations exhibited reduced expression in the SE group without statistical significance. The expression of CysLTR2 was significantly higher (p < 0.05) than CysLTR1 in most studied cell populations. The mRNA expression did not show significant differences between the groups. CONCLUSION: The expression of CysLTR is higher in the lymphocytes of the NS children, and CysLTR2 shows greater expression than CysLTR1 Respiratory allergies do not appear to be a stimulus for AH occurrence. Newer drugs capable of blocking both CysLTRs warrant further study.
BACKGROUND: In asthma, cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs) play varying roles in the bronchomotor response to multiple provocative stimuli. The contribution of CysLTs on the airway's response to hypertonic saline (HS) inhalation in asthma is unknown. Whether polymorphisms in the leukotriene biosynthetic pathway affect the contribution of CysLTs to this response is also unknown. METHODS: In a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over study, mild and moderate asymptomatic asthmatics underwent inhaled 3% HS challenge by doubling the duration of nebulization (0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 8 min) 2 h after one dose of montelukast (a CysLT receptor 1 [CysLTR1] antagonist) or placebo, and after three-week courses. We examined the effect of the leukotriene C(4) synthase (LTC(4)S) polymorphism (A-444C) on the efficacy of montelukast against HS inhalation in an exploratory manner. RESULTS: In 37 subjects, 2 h after administration of montelukast, the mean provocative dose of HS required to cause a 20% drop in FEV(1) (HS-PD(20)) increased by 59% (9.17 ml after placebo vs. 14.55 ml after montelukast, p=0.0154). Three weeks of cysLTR1 antagonism increased the HS-PD(20) by 84% (10.97 vs. 20.21 ml, p=0.0002). Three weeks of CysLTR1 antagonism appeared to produce greater effects on blocking bronchial hyper-responsiveness (2 h vs. three-week HS-PD(20) values 14.55 vs. 20.21 ml respectively, p=0.0898). We did not observe an effect of the LTC(4)S polymorphism on the response to CysLTR1 antagonism in this cohort. CONCLUSIONS: A significant proportion of HS-induced bronchoconstriction is mediated by release of leukotrienes as evidenced by substantial acute inhibition with a CysLTR1 antagonist. There was a trend toward greater inhibition of bronchial responsiveness with three weeks of therapy as opposed to acute CysLTR1 antagonism. Clinicaltrials.gov registration number NCT00116324.
