Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (quinone), mitochondrial; Catalyzes the conversion of dihydroorotate to orotate with quinone as electron acceptor.
Ferroptosis, a form of regulated cell death that is induced by excessive lipid peroxidation, is a key tumour suppression mechanism(1-4). Glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4)(5,6) and ferroptosis suppressor protein 1 (FSP1)(7,8) constitute two major ferroptosis defence systems. Here we show that treatment of cancer cells with GPX4 inhibitors results in acute depletion of N-carbamoyl-L-aspartate, a pyrimidine biosynthesis intermediate, with concomitant accumulation of uridine. Supplementation with dihydroorotate or orotate-the substrate and product of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH)-attenuates or potentiates ferroptosis induced by inhibition of GPX4, respectively, and these effects are particularly pronounced in cancer cells with low expression of GPX4 (GPX4(low)). Inactivation of DHODH induces extensive mitochondrial lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis in GPX4(low) cancer cells, and synergizes with ferroptosis inducers to induce these effects in GPX4(high) cancer cells. Mechanistically, DHODH operates in parallel to mitochondrial GPX4 (but independently of cytosolic GPX4 or FSP1) to inhibit ferroptosis in the mitochondrial inner membrane by reducing ubiquinone to ubiquinol (a radical-trapping antioxidant with anti-ferroptosis activity). The DHODH inhibitor brequinar selectively suppresses GPX4(low) tumour growth by inducing ferroptosis, whereas combined treatment with brequinar and sulfasalazine, an FDA-approved drug with ferroptosis-inducing activity, synergistically induces ferroptosis and suppresses GPX4(high) tumour growth. Our results identify a DHODH-mediated ferroptosis defence mechanism in mitochondria and suggest a therapeutic strategy of targeting ferroptosis in cancer treatment.
Ferroptosis has recently been demonstrated to be a novel regulated non-apoptotic cell death characterized by iron-dependence and the accumulation of lipid peroxidation that results in membrane damage. Excessive iron induces ferroptosis by promoting the generation of both soluble and lipid ROS via an iron-dependent Fenton reaction and lipoxygenase (LOX) enzyme activity. Cytosolic glutathione peroxidase 4 (cGPX4) pairing with ferroptosis suppressor protein 1 (FSP1) and mitochondrial glutathione peroxidase 4 (mGPX4) pairing with dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) serve as two separate defense systems to detoxify lipid peroxidation in the cytoplasmic as well as the mitochondrial membrane, thereby defending against ferroptosis in cells under normal conditions. However, disruption of these defense systems may cause ferroptosis. Emerging evidence has revealed that ferroptosis plays an essential role in the development of diverse cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), such as hemochromatosis-associated cardiomyopathy, doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity, ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury, heart failure (HF), atherosclerosis, and COVID-19-related arrhythmias. Iron chelators, antioxidants, ferroptosis inhibitors, and genetic manipulations may alleviate the aforementioned CVDs by blocking ferroptosis pathways. In conclusion, ferroptosis plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of various CVDs and suppression of cardiac ferroptosis is expected to become a potential therapeutic option. Here, we provide a comprehensive review on the molecular mechanisms involved in ferroptosis and its implications in cardiovascular disease.
MYC-driven medulloblastoma (MB) is an aggressive pediatric brain tumor characterized by therapy resistance and disease recurrence. Here, we integrated data from unbiased genetic screening and metabolomic profiling to identify multiple cancer-selective metabolic vulnerabilities in MYC-driven MB tumor cells, which are amenable to therapeutic targeting. Among these targets, dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), an enzyme that catalyzes de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis, emerged as a favorable candidate for therapeutic targeting. Mechanistically, DHODH inhibition acts on target, leading to uridine metabolite scarcity and hyperlipidemia, accompanied by reduced protein O-GlcNAcylation and c-Myc degradation. Pyrimidine starvation evokes a metabolic stress response that leads to cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. We further show that an orally available small-molecule DHODH inhibitor demonstrates potent mono-therapeutic efficacy against patient-derived MB xenografts in vivo. The reprogramming of pyrimidine metabolism in MYC-driven medulloblastoma represents an unappreciated therapeutic strategy and a potential new class of treatments with stronger cancer selectivity and fewer neurotoxic sequelae.
For electrons to continuously enter and flow through the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC), they must ultimately land on a terminal electron acceptor (TEA), which is known to be oxygen in mammals. Paradoxically, we find that complex I and dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) can still deposit electrons into the ETC when oxygen reduction is impeded. Cells lacking oxygen reduction accumulate ubiquinol, driving the succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) complex in reverse to enable electron deposition onto fumarate. Upon inhibition of oxygen reduction, fumarate reduction sustains DHODH and complex I activities. Mouse tissues display varying capacities to use fumarate as a TEA, most of which net reverse the SDH complex under hypoxia. Thus, we delineate a circuit of electron flow in the mammalian ETC that maintains mitochondrial functions under oxygen limitation.
Ferroptosis is a form of programmed cell death characterized by elevated intracellular ferrous ion levels and increased lipid peroxidation. Since its discovery and characterization in 2012, considerable progress has been made in understanding the regulatory mechanisms and pathophysiological functions of ferroptosis. Recent findings suggest that numerous organ injuries (e.g., ischemia/reperfusion injury) and degenerative pathologies (e.g., aortic dissection and neurodegenerative disease) are driven by ferroptosis. Conversely, insufficient ferroptosis has been linked to tumorigenesis. Furthermore, a recent study revealed the effect of ferroptosis on hematopoietic stem cells under physiological conditions. The regulatory mechanisms of ferroptosis identified to date include mainly iron metabolism, such as iron transport and ferritinophagy, and redox systems, such as glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4)-glutathione (GSH), ferroptosis-suppressor-protein 1 (FSP1)-CoQ(10), FSP1-vitamin K (VK), dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH)-CoQ, and GTP cyclohydrolase 1 (GCH1)-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)). Recently, an increasing number of studies have demonstrated the important regulatory role played by epigenetic mechanisms, especially DNA, RNA, and protein methylation, in ferroptosis. In this review, we provide a critical analysis of the molecular mechanisms and regulatory networks of ferroptosis identified to date, with a focus on the regulatory role of DNA, RNA, and protein methylation. Furthermore, we discuss some debated findings and unanswered questions that should be the foci of future research in this field.
The mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) is necessary for tumour growth(1-6) and its inhibition has demonstrated anti-tumour efficacy in combination with targeted therapies(7-9). Furthermore, human brain and lung tumours display robust glucose oxidation by mitochondria(10,11). However, it is unclear why a functional ETC is necessary for tumour growth in vivo. ETC function is coupled to the generation of ATP-that is, oxidative phosphorylation and the production of metabolites by the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Mitochondrial complexes I and II donate electrons to ubiquinone, resulting in the generation of ubiquinol and the regeneration of the NAD+ and FAD cofactors, and complex III oxidizes ubiquinol back to ubiquinone, which also serves as an electron acceptor for dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH)-an enzyme necessary for de novo pyrimidine synthesis. Here we show impaired tumour growth in cancer cells that lack mitochondrial complex III. This phenotype was rescued by ectopic expression of Ciona intestinalis alternative oxidase (AOX)(12), which also oxidizes ubiquinol to ubiquinone. Loss of mitochondrial complex I, II or DHODH diminished the tumour growth of AOX-expressing cancer cells deficient in mitochondrial complex III, which highlights the necessity of ubiquinone as an electron acceptor for tumour growth. Cancer cells that lack mitochondrial complex III but can regenerate NAD+ by expression of the NADH oxidase from Lactobacillus brevis (LbNOX)(13) targeted to the mitochondria or cytosol were still unable to grow tumours. This suggests that regeneration of NAD+ is not sufficient to drive tumour growth in vivo. Collectively, our findings indicate that tumour growth requires the ETC to oxidize ubiquinol, which is essential to drive the oxidative TCA cycle and DHODH activity.
Temozolomide (TMZ) is a widely utilized chemotherapy treatment for patients with glioblastoma (GBM), although drug resistance constitutes a major therapeutic hurdle. Emerging evidence suggests that ferroptosis-mediated therapy could offer an appropriate alternative treatment option against cancer cells that are resistant to certain drugs. However, recurrent gliomas display robust ferroptosis resistance, although the precise mechanism of resistance remains elusive. In the present work, we report that proline rich protein 11 (PRR11) depletion significantly sensitizes GBM cells to TMZ by inducing ferroptosis. Mechanistically, PRR11 directly binds to and stabilizes dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), which leads to glioma ferroptosis-resistant in a DHODH-dependent manner in vivo and in vitro. Furthermore, PRR11 inhibits HERC4 and DHODH binding, by suppressing the recruitment of E3 ubiquitin ligase HERC4 and polyubiquitination degradation of DHODH at the K306 site, which maintains DHODH protein stability. Importantly, downregulated PRR11 increases lipid peroxidation and alters DHODH-mediated mitochondrial morphology, thereby promoting ferroptosis and increasing TMZ chemotherapy sensitivity. In conclusion, our results reveal a mechanism via which PRR11 drives ferroptosis resistance and identifies ferroptosis induction and TMZ as an attractive combined therapeutic strategy for GBM.
While acute myeloid leukemia (AML) comprises many disparate genetic subtypes, one shared hallmark is the arrest of leukemic myeloblasts at an immature and self-renewing stage of development. Therapies that overcome differentiation arrest represent a powerful treatment strategy. We leveraged the observation that the majority of AML, despite their genetically heterogeneity, share in the expression of HoxA9, a gene normally downregulated during myeloid differentiation. Using a conditional HoxA9 model system, we performed a high-throughput phenotypic screen and defined compounds that overcame differentiation blockade. Target identification led to the unanticipated discovery that inhibition of the enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) enables myeloid differentiation in human and mouse AML models. In vivo, DHODH inhibitors reduced leukemic cell burden, decreased levels of leukemia-initiating cells, and improved survival. These data demonstrate the role of DHODH as a metabolic regulator of differentiation and point to its inhibition as a strategy for overcoming differentiation blockade in AML.
Although 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is the primary chemotherapy treatment for colorectal cancer (CRC), its efficacy is limited by drug resistance. Ferroptosis activation is a promising treatment for 5-FU-resistant cancer cells; however, potential therapeutic targets remain elusive. This study investigated ferroptosis vulnerability and dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) activity using stable, 5-FU-resistant CRC cell lines and xenograft models. Ferroptosis was characterized by measuring malondialdehyde levels, assessing lipid metabolism and peroxidation, and using mitochondrial imaging and assays. DHODH function is investigated through gene knockdown experiments, tumor behavior assays, mitochondrial import reactions, intramitochondrial localization, enzymatic activity analyses, and metabolomics assessments. Intracellular lipid accumulation and mitochondrial DHODH deficiency led to lipid peroxidation overload, weakening the defense system of 5-FU-resistant CRC cells against ferroptosis. DHODH, primarily located within the inner mitochondrial membrane, played a crucial role in driving intracellular pyrimidine biosynthesis and was redistributed to the cytosol in 5-FU-resistant CRC cells. Cytosolic DHODH, like its mitochondrial counterpart, exhibited dihydroorotate catalytic activity and participated in pyrimidine biosynthesis. This amplified intracellular pyrimidine pools, thereby impeding the efficacy of 5-FU treatment through molecular competition. These findings contribute to the understanding of 5-FU resistance mechanisms and suggest that ferroptosis and DHODH are promising therapeutic targets for patients with CRC exhibiting resistance to 5-FU.
Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH)-mediated ferroptosis defense is a targetable vulnerability in cancer. Currently, only a few DHODH inhibitors have been utilized in clinical practice. To further enhance DHODH targeting, we introduced the mitochondrial targeting group triphenylphosphine (TPP) to brequinar (BRQ), a robust DHODH inhibitor, resulting in the creation of active molecule B2. This compound exhibits heightened anticancer activity, effectively inhibiting proliferation in various cancer cells, and restraining tumor growth in melanoma xenografts in mice. B2 achieves these effects by targeting DHODH, triggering the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), promoting mitochondrial lipid peroxidation, and inducing ferroptosis in B16F10 and A375 cells. Surprisingly, B2 significantly downregulates PD-L1 and alleviates immune suppression. Importantly, B2 exhibits no apparent adverse effects in mice. Collectively, these findings highlight that enhancing the mitochondrial targeting capability of the DHODH inhibitor is a promising therapeutic approach for melanoma treatment.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a fatal disease characterized by the accumulation of undifferentiated myeloblasts, and agents that promote differentiation have been effective in this disease but are not curative. Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase inhibitors (DHODHi) have the ability to promote AML differentiation and target aberrant malignant myelopoiesis. We introduce HOSU-53, a DHODHi with significant monotherapy activity, which is further enhanced when combined with other standard-of-care therapeutics. We further discovered that DHODHi modulated surface expression of CD38 and CD47, prompting the evaluation of HOSU-53 combined with anti-CD38 and anti-CD47 therapies, where we identified a compelling curative potential in an aggressive AML model with CD47 targeting. Finally, we explored using plasma dihydroorotate (DHO) levels to monitor HOSU-53 safety and found that the level of DHO accumulation could predict HOSU-53 intolerability, suggesting the clinical use of plasma DHO to determine safe DHODHi doses. Collectively, our data support the clinical translation of HOSU-53 in AML, particularly to augment immune therapies. Potent DHODHi to date have been limited by their therapeutic index; however, we introduce pharmacodynamic monitoring to predict tolerability while preserving antitumor activity. We additionally suggest that DHODHi is effective at lower doses with select immune therapies, widening the therapeutic index.
Transcription and metabolism both influence cell function, but dedicated transcriptional control of metabolic pathways that regulate cell fate has rarely been defined. We discovered, using a chemical suppressor screen, that inhibition of the pyrimidine biosynthesis enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) rescues erythroid differentiation in bloodless zebrafish moonshine (mon) mutant embryos defective for transcriptional intermediary factor 1 gamma (tif1gamma). This rescue depends on the functional link of DHODH to mitochondrial respiration. The transcription elongation factor TIF1gamma directly controls coenzyme Q (CoQ) synthesis gene expression. Upon tif1gamma loss, CoQ levels are reduced, and a high succinate/alpha-ketoglutarate ratio leads to increased histone methylation. A CoQ analog rescues mon's bloodless phenotype. These results demonstrate that mitochondrial metabolism is a key output of a lineage transcription factor that drives cell fate decisions in the early blood lineage.
Leflunomide, an isoxazole derivative, is a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug. It has successfully been used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis as a feasible alternative to methotrexate. Recently, leflunomide has been used in certain dermatologic conditions. Medline/PubMed search revealed only 201 articles of its application in dermatologic conditions, of which 21 were relevant for inclusion. Prime mode of action of leflunomide is through the inhibition of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, a key enzyme in the de novo pyrimidine synthesis pathway used by lymphocytes for clonal expansion. The current level of evidence and strength of recommendation suggest its use in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. However, the use of leflunomide in severe atopic dermatitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Wegener's granulomatosis, primary Sjogren's syndrome, bullous pemphigoid, dermatomyositis, sarcoidosis and systemic sclerosis still requires further evaluation.
It has been 10 years since the concept of ferroptosis was put forward and research focusing on ferroptosis has been increasing continuously. Ferroptosis is driven by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation, which can be antagonized by glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), ferroptosis inhibitory protein 1 (FSP1), dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) and Fas-associated factor 1 (FAF1). Various cellular metabolic events, including lipid metabolism, can modulate ferroptosis sensitivity. It is worth noting that the reprogramming of lipid metabolism in cancer cells can promote the occurrence and development of tumors. The metabolic flexibility of cancer cells opens the possibility for the coordinated targeting of multiple lipid metabolic pathways to trigger cancer cells ferroptosis. In addition, cancer cells must obtain immortality, escape from programmed cell death including ferroptosis, to promote cancer progression, which provides new perspectives for improving cancer therapy. Targeting the vulnerability of ferroptosis has received attention as one of the significant possible strategies to treat cancer given its role in regulating tumor cell survival. We review the impact of iron and lipid metabolism on ferroptosis and the potential role of the crosstalk of lipid metabolism reprogramming and ferroptosis in antitumor immunity and sum up agents targeting lipid metabolism and ferroptosis for cancer therapy.
BACKGROUND: Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) has long been recognized as an important drug target for proliferative and parasitic diseases, including compounds that exhibit trypanocidal action and broad-spectrum antiviral activity. Despite numerous and successful efforts in structural and functional characterization of DHODHs, as well as in the development of inhibitors, DHODH hot spots remain largely unmapped and underexplored. OBJECTIVE: This review describes the tools that are currently available for the identification and characterization of hot spots in protein structures and how freely available webservers can be exploited to predict DHODH hot spots. Moreover, it provides for the first time a review of the antiviral properties of DHODH inhibitors. METHODS: X-ray structures from human (HsDHODH) and Trypanosoma cruzi DHODH (TcDHODH) had their hot spots predicted by both FTMap and Fragment Hotspot Maps web servers. RESULTS: FTMap showed that hot spot occupancy in HsDHODH is correlated with the ligand efficiency (LE) of its known inhibitors, and Fragment Hotspot Maps pointed out the contribution of selected moieties to the overall LE. The conformational flexibility of the active site loop in TcDHODH was found to have a major impact on the druggability of the orotate binding site. In addition, both FTMap and Fragment Hotspot Maps servers predict a novel pocket in TcDHODH dimer interface (S6 site). CONCLUSION: This review reports how hot spots can be exploited during hit-to-lead steps, docking studies or even to improve inhibitor binding profile and by doing so using DHODH as a model, points to new drug development opportunities.
Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) is rate-limiting enzyme in biosynthesis of pyrimidone which catalyzes the oxidation of dihydro-orotate to orotate. Orotate is utilized in the biosynthesis of uridine-monophosphate. DHODH inhibitors have shown promise as antiviral agent against Cytomegalovirus, Ebola, Influenza, Epstein Barr and Picornavirus. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 action of DHODH inhibitors are also coming up. In this review, we have reviewed the safety and efficacy of approved DHODH inhibitors (leflunomide and teriflunomide) against COVID-19. In target-centered in silico studies, leflunomide showed favorable binding to active site of MPro and spike: ACE2 interface. In artificial-intelligence/machine-learning based studies, leflunomide was among the top 50 ligands targeting spike: ACE2 interaction. Leflunomide is also found to interact with differentially regulated pathways [identified by KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) and reactome pathway analysis of host transcriptome data] in cogena based drug-repurposing studies. Based on GSEA (gene set enrichment analysis), leflunomide was found to target pathways enriched in COVID-19. In vitro, both leflunomide (EC50 41.49 +/- 8.8 mumol/L) and teriflunomide (EC50 26 mumol/L) showed SARS-CoV-2 inhibition. In clinical studies, leflunomide showed significant benefit in terms of decreasing the duration of viral shredding, duration of hospital stay and severity of infection. However, no advantage was seen while combining leflunomide and IFN alpha-2a among patients with prolonged post symptomatic viral shredding. Common adverse effects of leflunomide were hyperlipidemia, leucopenia, neutropenia and liver-function alteration. Leflunomide/teriflunomide may serve as an agent of importance to achieve faster virological clearance in COVID-19, however, findings needs to be validated in bigger sized placebo controlled studies.
Gastric cancer (GC) contains subpopulations of cancer stem cells (CSCs), which are described as the main contributors in tumor initiation and metastasis. It is necessary to clarify the molecular mechanism underlying CSCs phenotype and develop novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets for gastric cancer. Here, we show that POLQ positively regulates stem cell-like characteristics of gastric cancer cells, knockdown of POLQ suppressed the stemness of GC cells in vitro and in vivo. Further mechanistic studies revealed that POLQ knockdown could downregulate the expression of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH). DHODH overexpression rescued the reduced stemness resulted by POLQ knockdown. Furthermore, we found that POLQ expression correlated with resistance to ferroptosis, and POLQ inhibition renders gastric cancer cells more vulnerable to ferroptosis. Further investigation revealed that POLQ regulated DHODH expression via the transcription factors E2F4, thereby regulating ferroptosis resistance and stemness of gastric cancer cells. Given the importance of POLQ in stemness and ferroptosis resistance of GC, we further evaluated the therapeutic potential of POLQ inhibitor novobiocin, the results show that novobiocin attenuates the stemness of GC cells and increased ferroptosis sensitivity. Moreover, the combination of POLQ inhibitor and ferroptosis inducer synergistically suppressed MGC-803 xenograft tumor growth and diminished metastasis. Our results identify a POLQ-mediated stemness and ferroptosis defense mechanism and provide a new therapeutic strategy for gastric cancer.
The flavoenzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase catalyzes the stereoselective oxidation of (S)-dihydroorotate to orotate in the fourth of the six conserved enzymatic reactions involved in the de novo pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway. Inhibition of pyrimidine metabolism by selectively targeting DHODHs has been exploited in the development of new therapies against cancer, immunological disorders, bacterial and viral infections, and parasitic diseases. Through a chronological narrative, this review summarizes the efforts of the scientific community to achieve our current understanding of structural and biochemical properties of DHODHs. It also attempts to describe the latest advances in medicinal chemistry for therapeutic development based on the selective inhibition of DHODH, including an overview of the experimental techniques used for ligand screening during the process of drug discovery.
Proper nucleosides availability is crucial for the proliferation of living entities (eukaryotic cells, parasites, bacteria, and virus). Accordingly, the uses of inhibitors of the de novo nucleosides biosynthetic pathways have been investigated in the past. In the following we have focused on dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), the fourth enzyme in the de novo pyrimidine nucleosides biosynthetic pathway. We first described the different types of enzyme in terms of sequence, structure, and biochemistry, including the reported bioassays. In a second part, the series of inhibitors of this enzyme along with a description of their potential or actual uses were reviewed. These inhibitors are indeed used in medicine to treat autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis or multiple sclerosis (leflunomide and teriflunomide) and have been investigated in treatments of cancer, virus, and parasite infections (i.e., malaria) as well as in crop science.
