Disks large homolog 4; Interacts with the cytoplasmic tail of NMDA receptor subunits and shaker-type potassium channels. Required for synaptic plasticity associated with NMDA receptor signaling. Overexpression or depletion of DLG4 changes the ratio of excitatory to inhibitory synapses in hippocampal neurons. May reduce the amplitude of ASIC3 acid-evoked currents by retaining the channel intracellularly. May regulate the intracellular trafficking of ADR1B. Also regulates AMPA-type glutamate receptor (AMPAR) immobilization at postsynaptic density keeping the channels in an activated stat [...] 
PURPOSE: Postsynaptic density protein-95 (PSD-95), encoded by DLG4, regulates excitatory synaptic function in the brain. Here we present the clinical and genetic features of 53 patients (42 previously unpublished) with DLG4 variants. METHODS: The clinical and genetic information were collected through GeneMatcher collaboration. All the individuals were investigated by local clinicians and the gene variants were identified by clinical exome/genome sequencing. RESULTS: The clinical picture was predominated by early onset global developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder, all of which point to a brain disorder. Marfanoid habitus, which was previously suggested to be a characteristic feature of DLG4-related phenotypes, was found in only nine individuals and despite some overlapping features, a distinct facial dysmorphism could not be established. Of the 45 different DLG4 variants, 39 were predicted to lead to loss of protein function and the majority occurred de novo (four with unknown origin). The six missense variants identified were suggested to lead to structural or functional changes by protein modeling studies. CONCLUSION: The present study shows that clinical manifestations associated with DLG4 overlap with those found in other neurodevelopmental disorders of synaptic dysfunction; thus, we designate this group of disorders as DLG4-related synaptopathy.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a form of dementia characterized by progressive memory decline and cognitive dysfunction. With only one FDA-approved therapy, effective treatment strategies for AD are urgently needed. In this study, we found that microRNA-485-3p (miR-485-3p) was overexpressed in the brain tissues, cerebrospinal fluid, and plasma of patients with AD, and its antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) reduced Abeta plaque accumulation, tau pathology development, neuroinflammation, and cognitive decline in a transgenic mouse model of AD. Mechanistically, miR-485-3p ASO enhanced Abeta clearance via CD36-mediated phagocytosis of Abeta in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, miR-485-3p ASO administration reduced apoptosis, thereby effectively decreasing truncated tau levels. Moreover, miR-485-3p ASO treatment reduced secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-1beta and TNF-alpha, and eventually relieved cognitive impairment. Collectively, our findings suggest that miR-485-3p is a useful biomarker of the inflammatory pathophysiology of AD and that miR-485-3p ASO represents a potential therapeutic candidate for managing AD pathology and cognitive decline.
Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease. An imbalance between the production and clearance of Abeta (amyloid beta) is considered to be actively involved in AD pathogenesis. Macroautophagy/autophagy is a major cellular pathway leading to the removal of aggregated proteins, and upregulation of autophagy represents a plausible therapeutic strategy to combat overproduction of neurotoxic Abeta. PPARA/PPARalpha (peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha) is a transcription factor that regulates genes involved in fatty acid metabolism and activates hepatic autophagy. We hypothesized that PPARA regulates autophagy in the nervous system and PPARA-mediated autophagy affects AD. We found that pharmacological activation of PPARA by the PPARA agonists gemfibrozil and Wy14643 induces autophagy in human microglia (HM) cells and U251 human glioma cells stably expressing the human APP (amyloid beta precursor protein) mutant (APP-p.M671L) and this effect is PPARA-dependent. Administration of PPARA agonists decreases amyloid pathology and reverses memory deficits and anxiety symptoms in APP-PSEN1DeltaE9 mice. There is a reduced level of soluble Abeta and insoluble Abeta in hippocampus and cortex tissues from APP-PSEN1DeltaE9 mice after treatment with either gemfibrozil or Wy14643, which promoted the recruitment of microglia and astrocytes to the vicinity of Abeta plaques and enhanced autophagosome biogenesis. These results indicated that PPARA is an important factor regulating autophagy in the clearance of Abeta and suggested gemfibrozil be assessed as a possible treatment for AD.Abbreviation: Abeta: amyloid beta; ACTB: actin beta; ADAM10: ADAM metallopeptidase domain 10; AD: Alzheimer disease; AIF1/IBA1: allograft inflammatory factor 1; ANOVA: analysis of variance; APOE: apolipoprotein E; APP: amyloid beta precursor protein; APP-PSEN1DeltaE9: APPswe/PSEN1dE9; BAFA1: bafilomycin A(1); BDNF: brain derived neurotrophic factor; BECN1: beclin 1; CD68: CD68 molecule; CREB1: cAMP responsive element binding protein 1; DAPI: 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; DLG4/PSD-95: discs large MAGUK scaffold protein 4; DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide; ELISA: enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; FDA: U.S. Food and Drug Administration; FKBP5: FK506 binding protein 5; GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; gemfibrozil: 5-(2,5-dimethylphenoxy)-2,2-dimethylpentanoic acid; GFAP: glial fibrillary acidic protein; GLI2/THP1: GLI family zinc finger 2; HM: human microglia; IL6: interleukin 6; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; NC: negative control; OQ: opposite quadrant; PPARA/PPARalpha, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha; PSEN1/PS1: presenilin 1; SEM: standard error of the mean; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; SYP: synaptophysin; TFEB: transcription factor EB; TNF/TNF-alpha: tumor necrosis factor; TQ: target quadrant; WT: wild type; Wy14643: 2-[4-chloro-6-(2,3-dimethylanilino)pyrimidin-2-yl]sulfanylacetic acid.
Cognitive impairment caused by systemic chemotherapy is a critical question that perplexes the effective implementation of clinical treatment, but related molecular events are poorly understood. Herein, we show that bortezomib exposure leads to microglia activation and cognitive impairment, this occurs along with decreased nuclear translocation of TFEB (transcription factor EB), which is linked to macroautophagy/autophagy disorder, STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) phosphorylation and IL23A (interleukin 23 subunit alpha) expression. Pharmacological enhancement of TFEB nuclear translocation by digoxin restores lysosomal function and reduces STAT3-dependent endothelial IL23A secretion. As a consequence, we found that brain endothelial-specific ablation of Il23a ameliorated both microglia activation and cognitive dysfunction. Thus, the endothelial TFEB-STAT3-IL23A axis in the brain represents a critical cellular event for initiating bortezomib-mediated aberrant microglial activation and synapse engulfment. Our results suggest the reversal of TFEB nuclear translocation may provide a novel therapeutic approach to prevent symptoms of cognitive dysfunction during clinical use of bortezomib.Abbreviations: AAV: adeno-associated virus; BBB: blood-brain barrier; BTZ: bortezomib; DG: digoxin; DGs: dentate gyrus; DLG4/PSD95: discs large MAGUK scaffold protein 4; HBMECs: human brain microvascular endothelial cells; HP: hippocampus; IL23A: interleukin 23 subunit alpha; MBVECs: mouse brain vascular endothelial cells; mPFC: medial prefrontal cortex; NORT: novel object recognition test; OLT: object location test; PLX5622: 6-fluoro-N-([5-fluoro-2-methoxypyridin-3-yl]methyl)-5-(5-methyl-1H-pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridin-3- yl)methyl; PPP3/calcineurin: protein phosphatase 3; SBEs: STAT3 binding elements; shRNA: small hairpin RNA; SLC17A7/VGLUT1: solute carrier family 17 member 7; SLC32A1/VGAT: solute carrier family 32 member 1; STAT3: signal transducer and activator of transcription 3, TFEB: transcription factor EB; Ub: ubiquitin.
Schizophrenia (SCZD) is a debilitating neurological disorder with a world-wide prevalence of 1%; there is a strong genetic component, with an estimated heritability of 80-85%. Although post-mortem studies have revealed reduced brain volume, cell size, spine density and abnormal neural distribution in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of SCZD brain tissue and neuropharmacological studies have implicated dopaminergic, glutamatergic and GABAergic activity in SCZD, the cell types affected in SCZD and the molecular mechanisms underlying the disease state remain unclear. To elucidate the cellular and molecular defects of SCZD, we directly reprogrammed fibroblasts from SCZD patients into human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) and subsequently differentiated these disorder-specific hiPSCs into neurons (Supplementary Fig. 1). SCZD hiPSC neurons showed diminished neuronal connectivity in conjunction with decreased neurite number, PSD95-protein levels and glutamate receptor expression. Gene expression profiles of SCZD hiPSC neurons identified altered expression of many components of the cyclic AMP and WNT signalling pathways. Key cellular and molecular elements of the SCZD phenotype were ameliorated following treatment of SCZD hiPSC neurons with the antipsychotic loxapine. To date, hiPSC neuronal pathology has only been demonstrated in diseases characterized by both the loss of function of a single gene product and rapid disease progression in early childhood. We now report hiPSC neuronal phenotypes and gene expression changes associated with SCZD, a complex genetic psychiatric disorder.
Human genome-wide association studies (GWAS) suggest a functional role for central glutamate receptor signaling and plasticity in body weight regulation. Here, we use UK Biobank GWAS summary statistics of body mass index (BMI) and body fat percentage (BF%) to identify genes encoding proteins known to interact with postsynaptic alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Loci in/near discs large homolog 4 (DLG4) and protein interacting with C kinase 1 (PICK1) reached genome-wide significance (P < 5 x 10(-8)) for BF% and/or BMI. To further evaluate the functional role of postsynaptic density protein-95 (PSD-95; gene name: DLG4) and PICK1 in energy homeostasis, we used dimeric PSD-95/disc large/ZO-1 (PDZ) domain-targeting peptides of PSD-95 and PICK1 to demonstrate that pharmacological inhibition of PSD-95 and PICK1 induces prolonged weight-lowering effects in obese mice. Collectively, these data demonstrate that the glutamate receptor scaffolding proteins, PICK1 and PSD-95, are genetically linked to obesity and that pharmacological targeting of their PDZ domains represents a promising therapeutic avenue for sustained weight loss.
OBJECTIVE: The postsynaptic density protein of excitatory neurons PSD-95 is encoded by discs large MAGUK scaffold protein 4 (DLG4), de novo pathogenic variants of which lead to DLG4-related synaptopathy. The major clinical features are developmental delay, intellectual disability (ID), hypotonia, sleep disturbances, movement disorders, and epilepsy. Even though epilepsy is present in 50% of the individuals, it has not been investigated in detail. We describe here the phenotypic spectrum of epilepsy and associated comorbidities in patients with DLG4-related synaptopathy. METHODS: We included 35 individuals with a DLG4 variant and epilepsy as part of a multicenter study. The DLG4 variants were detected by the referring laboratories. The degree of ID, hypotonia, developmental delay, and motor disturbances were evaluated by the referring clinician. Data on awake and sleep electroencephalography (EEG) and/or video-polygraphy and brain magnetic resonance imaging were collected. Antiseizure medication response was retrospectively assessed by the referring clinician. RESULTS: A large variety of seizure types was reported, although focal seizures were the most common. Encephalopathy related to status epilepticus during slow-wave sleep (ESES)/developmental epileptic encephalopathy with spike-wave activation during sleep (DEE-SWAS) was diagnosed in >25% of the individuals. All but one individual presented with neurodevelopmental delay. Regression in verbal and/or motor domains was observed in all individuals who suffered from ESES/DEE-SWAS, as well as some who did not. We could not identify a clear genotype-phenotype relationship even between individuals with the same DLG4 variants. SIGNIFICANCE: Our study shows that a subgroup of individuals with DLG4-related synaptopathy have DEE, and approximately one fourth of them have ESES/DEE-SWAS. Our study confirms DEE as part of the DLG4-related phenotypic spectrum. Occurrence of ESES/DEE-SWAS in DLG4-related synaptopathy requires proper investigation with sleep EEG.
Postsynaptic densities (PSDs) are membrane semi-enclosed, submicron protein-enriched cellular compartments beneath postsynaptic membranes, which constantly exchange their components with bulk aqueous cytoplasm in synaptic spines. Formation and activity-dependent modulation of PSDs is considered as one of the most basic molecular events governing synaptic plasticity in the nervous system. In this study, we discover that SynGAP, one of the most abundant PSD proteins and a Ras/Rap GTPase activator, forms a homo-trimer and binds to multiple copies of PSD-95. Binding of SynGAP to PSD-95 induces phase separation of the complex, forming highly concentrated liquid-like droplets reminiscent of the PSD. The multivalent nature of the SynGAP/PSD-95 complex is critical for the phase separation to occur and for proper activity-dependent SynGAP dispersions from the PSD. In addition to revealing a dynamic anchoring mechanism of SynGAP at the PSD, our results also suggest a model for phase-transition-mediated formation of PSD.
Within the central nervous system, Wnt7a/b are unambiguously discriminated from other Wnt ligands by an endothelial receptor complex made of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored Reck and the adhesion G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) Gpr124. Reck is a Wnt7a/b-specific receptor, while Gpr124 facilitates the delivery of Reck-bound Wnt7a/b ligands to Frizzled, through partially characterized mechanisms. We report that, in zebrafish, the Gpr124-Frizzled interactions are dominated by intracellular scaffolds that exploit the striking molecular mimicry between Gpr124 and Frizzled intracellular domains (ICDs): an internal Dvl-binding motif and a C-terminal ETTV motif that recruits Dlg4 and Magi3. By contrast, mammalian Gpr124 receptors exhibit an ICD-independent interaction mechanism governed by species-specific attributes of their transmembrane and extracellular domains. This mechanism seemingly evolved to replace the Dvl-mediated mechanism. By contrasting zebrafish, mouse, and human Gpr124, this study provides insights into the evolution of Gpr124/Reck function across the vertebrate clade, a receptor complex uniquely implicated in Wnt ligand-specific cellular responses.
Individuals with genetic elimination of MLKL (mixed lineage kinase domain like pseudokinase) exhibit an increased susceptibility to neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer disease (AD). However, the mechanism is not yet fully understood. Here, we observed significant compromise in macroautophagy/autophagy in the brains of mlkl knockout (KO) mice, as evidenced by the downregulation of BECN1/Beclin1 and ULK1 (unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1). We identified UBA52 (ubiquitin A-52 residue ribosomal protein fusion product 1) as the binding partner of MLKL under physiological conditions. Loss of Mlkl induced a decrease in ubiquitin levels by preventing UBA52 cleavage. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the deubiquitinase (DUB) USP7 (ubiquitin specific peptidase 7) mediates the processing of UBA52, which is regulated by MLKL. Moreover, our results indicated that the reduction of BECN1 and ULK1 upon Mlkl loss is attributed to a decrease in their lysine 63 (K63)-linked polyubiquitination. Additionally, single-nucleus RNA sequencing revealed that the loss of Mlkl resulted in the disruption of multiple neurodegenerative disease-related pathways, including those associated with AD. These results were consistent with the observation of cognitive impairment in mlkl KO mice and exacerbation of AD pathologies in an AD mouse model with mlkl deletion. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that MLKL-USP7-UBA52 signaling is required for autophagy in brain through maintaining ubiquitin homeostasis, and highlight the contribution of Mlkl loss-induced ubiquitin deficits to the development of neurodegeneration. Thus, the maintenance of adequate levels of ubiquitin may provide a novel perspective to protect individuals from multiple neurodegenerative diseases through regulating autophagy.Abbreviations: 4HB: four-helix bundle; AAV: adeno-associated virus; AD: Alzheimer disease; AIF1: allograft inflammatory factor 1; APOE: apolipoprotein E; APP: amyloid beta precursor protein; Abeta: amyloid beta; BECN1: beclin 1; co-IP: co-immunoprecipitation; DEGs: differentially expressed genes; DLG4: discs large MAGUK scaffold protein 4; DUB: deubiquitinase; EBSS: Earle's balanced salt solution; GFAP: glial fibrillary acidic protein; HRP: horseradish peroxidase; IL1B: interleukin 1 beta; IL6: interleukin 6; IPed: immunoprecipitated; KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; KO: knockout; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MLKL: mixed lineage kinase domain like pseudokinase; NSA: necrosulfonamide; OPCs: oligodendrocyte precursor cells; PFA: paraformaldehyde; PsKD: pseudo-kinase domain; SYP: synaptophysin; UB: ubiquitin; UBA52: ubiquitin A-52 residue ribosomal protein fusion product 1; UCHL3: ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L3; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; UMAP: uniform manifold approximation and projection; UPS: ubiquitin-proteasome system; USP7: ubiquitin specific peptidase 7; USP9X: ubiquitin specific peptidase 9 X-linked.
The postsynaptic density (PSD) is a massive protein complex, critical for synaptic strength and plasticity in excitatory neurons. Here, the scaffolding protein PSD-95 plays a crucial role as it organizes key PSD components essential for synaptic signaling, development, and survival. Recently, variants in DLG4 encoding PSD-95 were found to cause a neurodevelopmental disorder with a variety of clinical features including intellectual disability, developmental delay, and epilepsy. Genetic variants in several of the interaction partners of PSD-95 are associated with similar phenotypes, suggesting that deficient PSD-95 may affect the interaction partners, explaining the overlapping symptoms. Here, we review the transmembrane interaction partners of PSD-95 and their association with neurodevelopmental disorders. We assess how the structural changes induced by DLG4 missense variants may disrupt or alter such protein-protein interactions, and we argue that the pathological effect of DLG4 variants is, at least partly, exerted indirectly through interaction partners of PSD-95. This review presents a direction for functional studies to elucidate the pathogenic mechanism of deficient PSD-95, providing clues for therapeutic strategies.
In animals, memory formation and recall are essential for their survival and for adaptations to a complex and often dynamically changing environment. During memory formation, experiences prompt the activation of a selected and sparse population of cells (engram cells) that undergo persistent physical and/or chemical changes allowing long-term memory formation, which can last for decades. Over the past few decades, important progress has been made on elucidating signaling mechanisms by which synaptic transmission leads to the induction of activity-dependent gene regulation programs during the different phases of learning (acquisition, consolidation, and recall). But what are the molecular mechanisms that govern the expression of immediate-early genes (IEGs; c-fos, Npas4) and plasticity-related genes (PRGs; Dlg4/PSD95 and Grin2b/NR2B) in memory ensemble? Studies in relatively simple in vitro and in vivo neuronal model systems have demonstrated that synaptic activity during development, or when induced by chemical stimuli (i.e., cLTP, KCl, picrotoxin), activates the NMDAR-Ca(2+)-CREB signaling pathway that upregulates gene expression through changes in the epigenetic landscape (i.e., histone marks and DNA methylation) and/or 3D chromatin organization. The data support a model in which epigenetic modifications in promoters and enhancers facilitate the priming and activation of these regulatory regions, hence leading to the formation of enhancer-promoter interactions (EPIs) through chromatin looping. The exploration of whether similar molecular mechanisms drive gene expression in learning and memory has presented notable challenges due to the distinct phases of learning and the activation of only sparse population of cells (the engram). Consequently, such studies demand precise temporal and spatial control. By combining activity-dependent engram tagging strategies (i.e., TRAP mice) with multi-omics analyses (i.e., RNA-seq, ChiP-seq, ATAC-seq, and Hi-C), it has been recently possible to associate changes in the epigenomic landscape and/or 3D genome architecture with transcriptional waves in engram cells of mice subjected to contextual fear conditioning (CFC), a relevant one-shot Pavlovian learning task. These studies support the role of specific epigenetic mechanisms and of the 3D chromatin organization during the control of gene transcription waves in engram cells. Advancements in our comprehension of the molecular mechanisms driving memory ensemble will undoubtedly play a crucial role in the development of better-targeted strategies to tackle cognitive diseases, including Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia, among other information-processing disorders.
The postsynaptic density (PSD) consists of a lattice-like array of interacting proteins that organizes and stabilizes synaptic receptors, ion channels, structural proteins, and signaling molecules required for normal synaptic transmission and synaptic function. The scaffolding and hub protein postsynaptic density protein-95 (PSD-95) is a major element of central chemical synapses and interacts with glutamate receptors, cell adhesion molecules, and cytoskeletal elements. In fact, PSD-95 can regulate basal synaptic stability as well as the activity-dependent structural plasticity of the PSD and, therefore, of the excitatory chemical synapse. Several studies have shown that PSD-95 is highly enriched at excitatory synapses and have identified multiple protein structural domains and protein-protein interactions that mediate PSD-95 function and trafficking to the postsynaptic region. PSD-95 is also a target of several signaling pathways that induce posttranslational modifications, including palmitoylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, nitrosylation, and neddylation; these modifications determine the synaptic stability and function of PSD-95 and thus regulate the fates of individual dendritic spines in the nervous system. In the present work, we review the posttranslational modifications that regulate the synaptic localization of PSD-95 and describe their functional consequences. We also explore the signaling pathways that induce such changes.
The rare autosomal dominant brain disorder DLG4-related synaptopathy is caused by de novo variants in DLG4 (encoding PSD-95), the majority of which are predicted to be protein-truncating. In addition to splice site variants, a number of synonymous and missense DLG4 variants are predicted to exert their effect through altered RNA splicing, although the pathogenicity of these variants is uncertain without functional RNA studies. Here, we describe a young boy with a deep intronic DLG4 variant (c.2105+235C>T) identified using whole genome sequencing. By using reverse-transcription PCR on RNA derived from peripheral blood, we demonstrate that DLG4 mRNA expression is detectable in blood and the deep intronic variant gives rise to two alternative DLG4 transcripts, one of which includes a pseudoexon. Both alternative transcripts are out-of-frame and predicted to result in protein-truncation, thereby establishing the genetic diagnosis for the proband. This adds to the evidence concerning the pathogenic potential of deep intronic variants and underlines the importance of functional studies, even in cases where reported tissue-specific gene expression might suggest otherwise.
Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we identified a physical interaction between CD46 and DLG4. CD46 is a ubiquitous human cell-surface receptor for the complement components C3b and C4b and for measles virus and human herpesvirus 6. DLG4 is a scaffold protein important for neuronal signaling and is homologous to the Drosophila tumor suppressor DLG. We show that an interaction between CD46 and DLG4 is important for polarization in epithelial cells. Specifically, we show (i) biochemical evidence for an interaction between CD46 and DLG4, (ii) that this interaction is specific for the Cyt1 (but not Cyt2) domain of CD46, (iii) that both CD46 and an alternatively spliced isoform of DLG4 are polarized in normal human epithelial cells, and (iv) that the polarized expression of CD46 in epithelial cells requires the DLG4-binding domain and alters with expression of a truncated form of DLG4. This is the first identification of a direct and cytoplasmic domain-specific interaction between CD46 and an intracellular signaling molecule and provides a molecular mechanism for the polarization of CD46. These data also indicate that, in addition to the known role for DLG4 in neuronal cells, DLG4 may be important for polarization in epithelial cells.
The PDZ domain is one of the most common protein-protein interaction domains in humans, and it is found in all kingdoms of life. We will review recent progress in the understanding of biophysical aspects of PDZ domains with emphasis on the folding and binding reactions. Finally, we discuss an intriguing correlation between stability and binding of peptide for PDZ2 from PTP-BL.
Despite the central role PSD-95 plays in anchoring postsynaptic AMPARs, how PSD-95 itself is tethered to postsynaptic sites is not well understood. Here we show that the F-actin binding protein alpha-actinin binds to the very N terminus of PSD-95. Knockdown (KD) of alpha-actinin phenocopies KD of PSD-95. Mutating lysine at position 10 or lysine at position 11 of PSD-95 to glutamate, or glutamate at position 53 or glutamate and aspartate at positions 213 and 217 of alpha-actinin, respectively, to lysine impairs, in parallel, PSD-95 binding to alpha-actinin and postsynaptic localization of PSD-95 and AMPARs. These experiments identify alpha-actinin as a critical PSD-95 anchor tethering the AMPAR-PSD-95 complex to postsynaptic sites.
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is a proteolytic pathway that is essential for life maintenance and vital functions, and its disruption causes serious impairments, e.g., disease development. Thus, the UPS is properly regulated. Here we show novel UPS-related factors: the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) and Fmr1 autosomal homolog 1 (FXR1) proteins and discs large MAGUK scaffold protein 4 (Dlg4) mRNA, which are associated with Fragile X syndrome, are involved in UPS activity. Fmr1-, Fxr1- and Dlg4-knockdown and Fmr1- and Fxr1-knockdown resulted in increased ubiquitination and proteasome activity, respectively. FXR1 protein was further confirmed to be associated with proteasomes, and Dlg4 mRNA itself was found to be involved in the UPS. Knockdown of these genes also affected neurite outgrowth. These findings provide new insights into the regulatory mechanism of the UPS and into the interpretation of the pathogenesis of diseases in which these genes are involved as UPS-related factors.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) interact with target mRNAs at specific sites to induce cleavage of the message or inhibit translation. The specific function of most mammalian miRNAs is unknown. We have predicted target sites on the 3' untranslated regions of human gene transcripts for all currently known 218 mammalian miRNAs to facilitate focused experiments. We report about 2,000 human genes with miRNA target sites conserved in mammals and about 250 human genes conserved as targets between mammals and fish. The prediction algorithm optimizes sequence complementarity using position-specific rules and relies on strict requirements of interspecies conservation. Experimental support for the validity of the method comes from known targets and from strong enrichment of predicted targets in mRNAs associated with the fragile X mental retardation protein in mammals. This is consistent with the hypothesis that miRNAs act as sequence-specific adaptors in the interaction of ribonuclear particles with translationally regulated messages. Overrepresented groups of targets include mRNAs coding for transcription factors, components of the miRNA machinery, and other proteins involved in translational regulation, as well as components of the ubiquitin machinery, representing novel feedback loops in gene regulation. Detailed information about target genes, target processes, and open-source software for target prediction (miRanda) is available at http://www.microrna.org. Our analysis suggests that miRNA genes, which are about 1% of all human genes, regulate protein production for 10% or more of all human genes.
MAGUKs are proteins that act as key scaffolds in surface complexes containing receptors, adhesion proteins, and various signaling molecules. These complexes evolved prior to the appearance of multicellular animals and play key roles in cell-cell intercommunication. A major example of this is the neuronal synapse, which contains several presynaptic and postsynaptic MAGUKs including PSD-95, SAP102, SAP97, PSD-93, CASK, and MAGIs. Here, they play roles in both synaptic development and in later synaptic plasticity events. During development, MAGUKs help to organize the postsynaptic density via associations with other scaffolding proteins, such as Shank, and the actin cytoskeleton. They affect the clustering of glutamate receptors and other receptors, and these associations change with development. MAGUKs are involved in long-term potentiation and depression (e.g., via their phosphorylation by kinases and phosphorylation of other proteins associated with MAGUKs). Importantly, synapse development and function are dependent on the kind of MAGUK present. For example, SAP102 shows high mobility and is present in early synaptic development. Later, much of SAP102 is replaced by PSD-95, a more stable synaptic MAGUK; this is associated with changes in glutamate receptor types that are characteristic of synaptic maturation.
