D(2) dopamine receptor; Dopamine receptor whose activity is mediated by G proteins which inhibit adenylyl cyclase; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Rationale: Breast cancer (BrCa) is the most common cancer worldwide, and the 5-year relative survival rate has declined in patients diagnosed at stage IV. Advanced BrCa is considered as incurable, which still lack effective treatment strategies. Identifying and characterizing new tumor suppression genes is important to establish effective prognostic biomarkers or therapeutic targets for late-stage BrCa. Methods: RNA-seq was applied in BrCa tissues and normal breast tissues. Through analyzing differentially expressed genes, DRD2 was selected for further analysis. And expression and promoter methylation status of DRD2 were also determined. DRD2 functions were analyzed by various cell biology assays in vitro. Subcutaneous tumor model was used to explore DRD2 effects in vivo. A co-cultivated system was constructed to investigate interactions of DRD2 and macrophages in vitro. WB, IHC, IF, TUNEL, qRT-PCR, Co-IP, Antibody Array, and Mass Spectrum analysis were further applied to determine the detailed mechanism. Results: In BrCa, DRD2 was found to be downregulated due to promoter methylation. Higher expression of DRD2 positively correlated with longer survival times especially in HER2-positive patients. DRD2 also promoted BrCa cells sensitivity to Paclitaxel. Ectopic expression of DRD2 significantly inhibited BrCa tumorigenesis. DRD2 also induced apoptosis as well as necroptosis in vitro and in vivo. DRD2 restricted NF-kappaB signaling pathway activation through interacting with beta-arrestin2, DDX5 and eEF1A2. Interestingly, DRD2 also regulated microenvironment as it facilitated M1 polarization of macrophages, and triggered GSDME-executed pyroptosis. Conclusion: Collectively, this study novelly manifests the role of DRD2 in suppressing BrCa tumorigenesis, predicting prognosis and treatment response. And this study further reveals the critical role of DRD2 in educating M1 macrophages, restricting NF-kappaB signaling pathway and triggering different processes of programmed cell death in BrCa. Taking together, those findings represent a predictive and therapeutic target for BrCa.
Relatively little is known about the neuropathophysiology of binge-eating disorder (BED). Here, the evidence from neuroimaging, neurocognitive, genetics, and animal studies are reviewed to synthesize our current understanding of the pathophysiology of BED. Binge-eating disorder may be conceptualized as an impulsive/compulsive disorder, with altered reward sensitivity and food-related attentional biases. Neuroimaging studies suggest there are corticostriatal circuitry alterations in BED similar to those observed in substance abuse, including altered function of prefrontal, insular, and orbitofrontal cortices and the striatum. Human genetics and animal studies suggest that there are changes in neurotransmitter networks, including dopaminergic and opioidergic systems, associated with binge-eating behaviors. Overall, the current evidence suggests that BED may be related to maladaptation of the corticostriatal circuitry regulating motivation and impulse control similar to that found in other impulsive/compulsive disorders. Further studies are needed to understand the genetics of BED and how neurotransmitter activity and neurocircuitry function are altered in BED and how pharmacotherapies may influence these systems to reduce BED symptoms.
Recent work highlights the importance of genetic variants that influence brain structure and function in conferring risk for polygenic obesity. The neurotransmitter dopamine (DA) has a pivotal role in energy balance by integrating metabolic signals with circuits supporting cognitive, perceptual, and appetitive functions that guide feeding. It has also been established that diet and obesity alter DA signaling, leading to compulsive-like feeding and neurocognitive impairments. This raises the possibility that genetic variants that influence DA signaling and adaptation confer risk for overeating and cognitive decline. Here, we consider the role of two common gene variants, FTO and TaqIA rs1800497 in driving gene x environment interactions promoting obesity, metabolic dysfunction, and cognitive change via their influence on DA receptor subtype 2 (DRD2) signaling.
Intermediate phenotypes may contribute to elucidate the genetic determinants of schizophrenia. A regulatory dopamine 2-receptor gene (DRD2) polymorphism (rs1076560; G>T) has been identified as a genetic risk factor for schizophrenia. Studies report conflicting results on its involvement in schizophrenia intermediate phenotypes and no systematic review on this topic has been published. Therefore, we aimed to assess whether this polymorphism is implicated in schizophrenia intermediate phenotypes by performing a systematic review and meta-analysis. Alternative allele carrier status negatively affected all intermediate phenotypes except for brain morphology, for which inconsistent genotype effects were found. Specifically, alternative allele carriers showed inefficient brain recruitment in healthy subjects and decreased brain recruitment in schizophrenia patients. Finally, significant results of the meta-analysis on functional magnetic resonance imaging in healthy subjects pinpointed rs1076560-associated brain regions, in particular the fronto-striatal network. To increase homogeneity and thus improve comparability in future genetic studies investigating SCZ intermediate phenotypes, we highlight methodological caveats and provide suggestions to circumvent such pitfalls.
Many of the individual differences in cognition, motivation, and learning-and the disruption of these processes in neurological conditions-are influenced by genetic factors. We provide an integrative synthesis across human and animal studies, focusing on a recent spate of evidence implicating a role for genes controlling dopaminergic function in frontostriatal circuitry, including COMT, DARPP-32, DAT1, DRD2, and DRD4. These genetic effects are interpreted within theoretical frameworks developed in the context of the broader cognitive and computational neuroscience literature, constrained by data from pharmacological, neuroimaging, electrophysiological, and patient studies. In this framework, genes modulate the efficacy of particular neural computations, and effects of genetic variation are revealed by assays designed to be maximally sensitive to these computations. We discuss the merits and caveats of this approach and outline a number of novel candidate genes of interest for future study.
The role of dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) polymorphisms in schizophrenia remains controversial. We performed a meta-analysis to determine whether DRD2 polymorphisms influence the risk of schizophrenia and examined the relationship between rs1799732, rs1801028, and rs1800rs028 an23381d rs1800497 genetic variants and the etiology of schizophrenia. Relevant case-control studies were retrieved by database searches and selected according to established inclusion criteria. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated to evaluate the strength of the associations. Meta-regression, subgroup analysis, sensitivity analysis, and cumulative meta-analysis were performed. A total of 76 studies with 16096 cases and 18965 controls were included. Specifically, 24 studies with 6075 cases and 6643 controls involved rs1799732, 36 studies with 8043 cases and 10194 controls involved rs1801028 and 16 studies with 1978 cases and 2128 controls involved rs1800497. No significant associations were observed between rs1799732 and rs1800rs732 and rs1800497 and schizophrenia. The rs1801028 locus was associated with schizophrenia, with a pooled OR of 1.221 (95% CI = 1.037-1.438, P = 0.016). This meta-analysis indicates that the rs1801028 locus may be associated with schizophrenia. These data provide possible references for future case-control studies related to schizophrenia.
BACKGROUND: Although dopamine D2 receptor antagonists lead to dose-dependent prolactin (PRL) elevations proportionate to their D2 affinity, considerable inter-individual differences exist. We conducted a meta-analytic review of associations between genetic variations in the dopamine D2 receptor gene (DRD2) and PRL levels in antipsychotic-treated subjects. METHODS: Systematic literature search (5/8/2015) was performed to find published studies of pharmacogenetic associations between two DRD2 variants, Taq1A (rs1800497) and -141C Ins/Del (rs1799732), and PRL levels during antipsychotic treatment (excluding aripiprazole). Patients were included independent of age or diagnosis. Random effects models were used and Hedges' g was calculated as the effect size measure. Subgroup analyses explored the effect of sex and diagnosis, (males vs females; schizophrenia vs non-schizophrenia). RESULTS: Altogether, 11 studies (n=1034, schizophrenia-spectrum=475) for Taq1A polymorphism, and 4 studies (n=451, schizophrenia-spectrum=274) for -141C Ins/Del polymorphism, each reporting on PRL levels but not on the proportion of patients with hyperprolactinemia, were meta-analyzed. Across all patients, there was no statistically significant association between PRL levels and either DRD2 Taq1A genotype or DRD2 -141C Ins/Del genotype. However, in patients with schizophrenia, PRL levels were significantly higher in DRD2 Taq1A A1 carriers than A1 non-carriers (studies=5, n=475, Hedges' g=0.250, 95% CI=0.068-0.433, p=0.007, I(2)=0%). DISCUSSION: Although there was no significant association between either DRD2 Taq1A genotype or DRD2 -141C Ins/Del genotype and PRL levels in all included patients, our results suggest that DRD2 Taq1A genotype may affect antipsychotic-related PRL levels in patients with schizophrenia. Because of the small sample size, further studies are needed to confirm these results.
Converging evidence suggests that oxytocin (OT) is associated with creative thinking (CT) and that release of OT depends on ADP ribosyl-cyclases (CD38 and CD157). Neural mechanisms of CT and OT show a strong association with dopaminergic (DA) pathways, yet the link between CT and CD38, CD157, dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) peripheral gene expression remain inconclusive, thus limiting our understanding of the neurobiology of CT. To address this issue, two principal domains of CT, divergent thinking (AUT), were assessed. In men, both AUT is associated with gene expression of CD38, CD157, and their interaction CD38 x CD157. There were no significant associations for DA expression (DRD2, COMT, DRD2 x COMT) on both CT measures. However, analysis of the interactions of OT and DA systems reveal significant interactions for AUT in men. The full model explained a sizable 39% of the variance in females for the total CT score. The current findings suggest that OT and DA gene expression contributed significantly to cognition and CT phenotype. This provides the first empirical foundation of a more refined understanding of the molecular landscape of CT.
The TaqIA D2 dopamine receptor (DRD2) minor (A1) allele was first associated with severe alcoholism a decade ago. Since then, studies both confirming and not confirmnning this finding were reported. However, a meta-analysis of a large number of Caucasian alcoholics (both more severe and less severe) and controls (both assessed and unassessed for substance use disorders) revealed a significantly higher frequency (p < 10(-6)) and prevalence (p < 10(-8)) of the DRD2 A1 allele in the alcoholics. Further analysis showed that the more severe alcoholics had a 3-fold higher prevalence of the DRD2 A1 allele than the assessed controls (p < 10(-10)), whereas no difference was found between the less severe alcoholics and the unassessed controls. DRD2 exonic or promoter mutations have not yet been associated with alcoholism, although two intronic variants at the TaqIB and intron 6 sites, which are in linkage disequilibrium with the TaqIA site, were associated with this disorder. Variants of the DRD2 gene have also been associated with cocaine, nicotine and opioid dependence, obesity and gambling. It is hypothesised that the DRD2 is a reinforcement or reward gene. Although less intensively studied than substance use disorders, the DRD2 gene has been implicated in Tourette's syndrome (TS), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and certain symptoms associated with affective disorders and schizophrenia. Further, DRD2 variants have been implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD) and in iatrogenically-induced movement disorders, as well as in certain migraineurs. Phenotypic differences have been associated with DRD2 variants. These include reduced D2 dopamine receptor numbers and diminished glucose metabolism in the brain of subjects who carry the DRD2 A1 allele. In addition, phenotypic differences have been found in neurocognitive and personality characteristics, and in treatment outcome of DRD2 variants. The involvement of the DRD2 gene in certain neuropsychiatric disorders opens up the potential of a targeted pharmacogenomic approach to the prevention and treatment of these disorders.
PURPOSE: Temozolomide resistance remains a major obstacle in the treatment of glioblastoma (GBM). The combination of temozolomide with another agent could offer an improved treatment option if it could overcome chemoresistance and prevent side effects. Here, we determined the critical drug that cause ferroptosis in GBM cells and elucidated the possible mechanism by which drug combination overcomes chemoresistance. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Haloperidol/temozolomide synergism was assessed in GBM cell lines with different dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) expression in vitro and in vivo. Inhibitors of ferroptosis, autophagy, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA) were used to validate the specific mechanisms by which haloperidol and temozolomide induce ferroptosis in GBM cells. RESULTS: In the present work, we demonstrate that the DRD2 level is increased by temozolomide in a time-dependent manner and is inversely correlated with temozolomide sensitivity in GBM. The DRD2 antagonist haloperidol, a butylbenzene antipsychotic, markedly induces ferroptosis and effectively enhances temozolomide efficacy in vivo and in vitro. Mechanistically, haloperidol suppressed the effect of temozolomide on cAMP by antagonizing DRD2 receptor activity, and the increases in cAMP/PKA triggered ER stress, which led to autophagy and ferroptosis. Furthermore, elevated autophagy mediates downregulation of FTH1 expression at the posttranslational level in an autophagy-dependent manner and ultimately leads to ferroptosis. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide experimental evidence for repurposing haloperidol as an effective adjunct therapy to inhibit adaptive temozolomide resistance to enhance the efficacy of chemoradiotherapy in GBM, a strategy that may have broad prospects for clinical application.
GIPC1, GIPC2 and GIPC3 consist of GIPC homology 1 (GH1) domain, PDZ domain and GH2 domain. The regions around the GH1 and GH2 domains of GIPC1 are involved in dimerization and interaction with myosin VI (MYO6), respectively. The PDZ domain of GIPC1 is involved in interactions with transmembrane proteins [IGF1R, NTRK1, ADRB1, DRD2, TGFbetaR3 (transforming growth factorbeta receptor type III), SDC4, SEMA4C, LRP1, NRP1, GLUT1, integrin alpha5 and VANGL2], cytosolic signaling regulators (APPL1 and RGS19) and viral proteins (HBc and HPV-18 E6). GIPC1 is an adaptor protein with dimerizing ability that loads PDZ ligands as cargoes for MYO6-dependent endosomal trafficking. GIPC1 is required for cell-surface expression of IGF1R and TGFbetaR3. GIPC1 is also required for integrin recycling during cell migration, angiogenesis and cytokinesis. On early endosomes, GIPC1 assembles receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and APPL1 for activation of PI3K-AKT signaling, and G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and RGS19 for attenuation of inhibitory Galpha signaling. GIPC1 upregulation in breast, ovarian and pancreatic cancers promotes tumor proliferation and invasion, whereas GIPC1 downregulation in cervical cancer with human papillomavirus type 18 infection leads to resistance to cytostatic transforming growth factorbeta signaling. GIPC2 is downregulated in acute lymphocytic leukemia owing to epigenetic silencing, while Gipc2 is upregulated in estrogen-induced mammary tumors. Somatic mutations of GIPC2 occur in malignant melanoma, and colorectal and ovarian cancers. Germ-line mutations of the GIPC3 or MYO6 gene cause nonsyndromic hearing loss. As GIPC proteins are involved in trafficking, signaling and recycling of RTKs, GPCRs, integrins and other transmembrane proteins, dysregulation of GIPCs results in human pathologies, such as cancer and hereditary deafness.
SignificanceDespite the identification of neural circuits and circulating hormones in olfactory regulation, the peripheral targets for olfactory modulation remain relatively unexplored. Here we show that dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) is expressed in the cilia and somata of mature olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs), while nasal dopamine (DA) is mainly released from the sympathetic nerve terminals, which innervate the mouse olfactory mucosa (OM). We further demonstrate that DA-DRD2 signaling in the nose plays important roles in regulating olfactory function using genetic and pharmacological approaches. Moreover, the local DA synthesis in mouse OM is reduced during hunger, which contributes to starvation-induced olfactory enhancement. Altogether, we demonstrate that nasal DA and DRD2 receptor can serve as the potential peripheral targets for olfactory modulation.
Oculogyric crises are acute episodes of sustained, typically upward, conjugate deviation of the eyes. Oculogyric crises usually occur as the result of acute D2-dopamine receptor blockade, but the brain areas causally involved in generating this symptom remain elusive. Here, we used data from 14 previously reported cases of lesion-induced oculogyric crises and employed lesion network mapping to identify their shared connections throughout the brain. This analysis yielded a common network that included basal ganglia, thalamic and brainstem nuclei, as well as the cerebellum. Comparison of this network with gene expression profiles associated with the dopamine system revealed spatial overlap specifically with the gene coding for dopamine receptor type 2 (DRD2), as defined by a large-scale transcriptomic database of the human brain. Furthermore, spatial overlap with DRD2 and DRD3 gene expression was specific to brain lesions associated with oculogyric crises when contrasted to lesions that led to other movement disorders. Our findings identify a common neural network causally involved in the occurrence of oculogyric crises and provide a pathophysiological link between lesion locations causing this syndrome and its most common pharmacological cause, namely DRD2 blockade.
The TaqIA single nucleotide variant (SNV) has been tested for association with addictions in a huge number of studies. TaqIA is located in the ankyrin repeat and kinase domain containing 1 gene (ANKK1) that codes for a receptor interacting protein kinase. ANKK1 maps on the NTAD cluster along with the dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2), the tetratricopeptide repeat domain 12 (TTC12) and the neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1) genes. The four genes have been associated with addictions, although TTC12 and ANKK1 showed the strongest associations. In silico and in vitro studies revealed that ANKK1 is functionally related to the dopaminergic system, in particular with DRD2. In antisocial alcoholism, epistasis between ANKK1 TaqIA and DRD2 C957T SNVs has been described. This clinical finding has been supported by the study of ANKK1 expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of alcoholic patients and controls. Regarding the ANKK1 protein, there is direct evidence of its location in adult and developing central nervous system. Together, these findings of the ANKK1 gene and its protein suggest that the TaqIA SNV is a marker of brain differences, both in structure and in dopaminergic function, that increase individual risk to addiction development.
The dopaminergic system plays a pivotal role in the central nervous system via its five diverse receptors (D1-D5). Dysfunction of dopaminergic system is implicated in many neuropsychological diseases, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a common mental disorder that prevalent in childhood. Understanding the relationship of five different dopamine (DA) receptors with ADHD will help us to elucidate different roles of these receptors and to develop therapeutic approaches of ADHD. This review summarized the ongoing research of DA receptor genes in ADHD pathogenesis and gathered the past published data with meta-analysis and revealed the high risk of DRD5, DRD2, and DRD4 polymorphisms in ADHD.
Research in healthy adults suggests that C957T polymorphism of the dopamine D2 receptor encoding DRD2 and the Taq1A polymorphism of the neighbouring gene ankyrin repeat and kinase domain containing 1 (ANKK1) alter dopaminergic signalling and may influence prefrontally-mediated executive functions. A systematic review and meta-analysis was carried out on the evidence for the association of DRD2 C957T and ANKK1 Taq1A polymorphisms in performance on tasks relating to the three core domains of executive function: working memory, response inhibition and cognitive flexibility in healthy adults. CINAHL, MEDLINE, PsycARTICLES and PsychINFO databases were searched for predefined key search terms associated with the two polymorphisms and executive function. Studies were included if they investigated a healthy adult population with the mean age of 18-65 years, no psychiatric or neurological disorder and only the healthy adult arm were included in studies with any case-control design. Data from 17 independent studies were included in meta-analysis, separated by the Taq1A and C957T polymorphisms and by executive function tests: working memory (Taq1A, 6 samples, n = 1270; C957 T, 6 samples, n = 977), cognitive flexibility (C957 T, 3 samples, n = 620), and response inhibition (C957 T, 3 samples, n = 598). The meta-analyses did not establish significant associations between these gene polymorphisms of interest and any of the executive function domains. Theoretical implications and methodological considerations of these findings are discussed.
BACKGROUND: The specific underlying pathogenesis of prolactinoma has not been clarified yet, to the best of our knowledge. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling including p38alpha MAPK (MAPK14), p38beta (MAPK11), p38gamma (MAPK12) and p38delta (MAPK13) is associated with the development and progression of several types of cancer. METHODS: Immunofluorescence analysis was performed on the prolactin (PRL) and MAPK14 expressions of pituitary gland in C57BL/6 mice and human prolactinoma specimen. In the present study, the role of MAPK14 in prolactinoma was determined using estradiol-induced mice and dopamine D2 receptor knockout (DRD2(-/-)) mice models in C57BL/6 wild-type (WT), MAPK14(-/-) and DRD2(-/-)MAPK14(+/-) mice. GH3 cells were transfected with different sets of MAPK14 small interfering RNA, which to study MAPK14 and PRL expression in GH3 cells. RESULTS: Immunofluorescence analysis showed that PRL and MAPK14 expression were colocalized and increased in the pituitary gland of mice and human prolactinoma specimen compared with the control specimen. It was shown that PRL and MAPK14 expression was colocalized and increased significantly in the pituitary gland of estradiol-injected prolactinoma mice compared with the control mice. Knockout of MAPK14 significantly inhibited tumor overgrowth, and PRL expression was decreased in estradiol-induced mice. Furthermore, MAPK14 knockout of DRD2(-/-)MAPK14(+/-) mice significantly reduced the overgrowth of pituitary gland and PRL production and secretion compared with DRD2(-/-) mice. MAPK14 knockout using siRNA inhibited PRL production in GH3 cells. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that MAPK14 serves a promoting role in the formation of prolactinoma, and highlights the potential of MAPK14 as a potential therapeutic target in the treatment of prolactinoma.
Psychosis is a characterizing feature of many mental disorders that dramatically affects human thoughts and perceptions, influencing the ability to distinguish between what is real and what is not. Both genetic and environmental factors, such as stressful events or drug use, play a pivotal role in the development of symptomatology and therefore changes in the epigenome may be of relevance in modeling a psychotic phenotype. According to the well-documented dysregulation of endocannabinoid and dopaminergic system genes in schizophrenia, we investigated DNA methylation cannabinoid type 1 receptor (CNR1) and dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) genes in saliva samples from psychotic subjects using pyrosequencing. The epigenetic mark was significantly higher and directly correlated for both genes in psychotic subjects compared to healthy controls. We also showed that these DNA methylation levels were lower in psychotic subjects reporting current delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) consumption, a well-known risk factor for developing psychosis throughout the lifespan, resembling those of controls at least for the DRD2 gene. Overall, our data confirm the key role of CNR1 and DRD2 gene regulation in psychosis and suggest DNA methylation levels at specific CpG sites as potential biomarkers, but just in those psychotic subjects not consuming THC.
We investigated the effect of stem cell marker dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) on the proliferation of hormone-receptor-negative breast cancer cells. High-throughput DNA methylation sequencing on an 850 K chip was used to pre-screen breast cancer tissues with significant methylation differences. The expression of DRD2 in breast cancer and normal breast tissues, and clinical risk factors, were detected by pyrophosphoric acid validation and immunohistochemistry. In vitro and in vivo experiments verified the possible molecular signaling pathways. DRD2 promoter region was hypomethylated in hormone-receptor-negative breast cancer or with high-risk factors compared to the normal tissues. The proliferation of breast cancer cells was enhanced after DRD2 was upregulated and decreased after DRD2 was downregulated. In vivo experiments found that tumor growth and the expression of antigen KI-67 (Ki67) and the cluster of differentiation 31 (CD31) were improved by the overexpression of DRD2 and inhibited by the down expression of DRD2. In vivo and in vitro experiments demonstrated the phosphorylation of filamin A and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (FLNA-ERK) was influenced by the expression of DRD2, suggesting DRD2 plays a role in the FLNA-ERK signaling pathway. Methylation inhibitors (5-aza-2-deoxycytidine, 5-azadc) partially reversed the inhibitory effect of DRD2 down expression on cell proliferation, migration, and tumor growth in animal models, indicating that inhibition of DRD2 methylation promotes cancer development. This study demonstrated the DRD2 promoter region is hypomethylated in hormone-receptor-negative breast cancer or with high-risk factors. The methylation status of the DRD2 promoter and FLNA-ERK signaling pathway and the DRD2 expression in breast cancer treatment need to be considered.
Adolescence is a period of development characterized by numerous neurobiological changes that significantly influence behavior and brain function. Adolescence is of particular interest due to the alarming statistics indicating that mortality rates increase two to three-fold during this time compared to childhood, due largely to a peak in risk-taking behaviors resulting from increased impulsivity and sensation seeking. Furthermore, there exists large unexplained variability in these behaviors that are in part mediated by biological factors. Recent advances in molecular genetics and functional neuroimaging have provided a unique and exciting opportunity to non-invasively study the influence of genetic factors on brain function in humans. While genes do not code for specific behaviors, they do determine the structure and function of proteins that are essential to the neuronal processes that underlie behavior. Therefore, studying the interaction of genotype with measures of brain function over development could shed light on critical time points when biologically mediated individual differences in complex behaviors emerge. Here we review animal and human literature examining the neurobiological basis of adolescent development related to dopamine neurotransmission. Dopamine is of critical importance because of (1) its role in cognitive and affective behaviors, (2) its role in the pathogenesis of major psychopathology, and (3) the protracted development of dopamine signaling pathways over adolescence. We will then focus on current research examining the role of dopamine-related genes on brain function. We propose the use of imaging genetics to examine the influence of genetically mediated dopamine variability on brain function during adolescence, keeping in mind the limitations of this approach.
