D(3) dopamine receptor; Dopamine receptor whose activity is mediated by G proteins which inhibit adenylyl cyclase. Promotes cell proliferation.
The SNP rs167771 of the dopamine-3-receptor gene (DRD3) has been associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in samples from the United Kingdom, The Netherlands and Spain. The DRD3 polymorphisms of rs167771 are significantly associated with a specific type of repetitive and stereotyped behavior, called sameness. Repetitive and stereotyped behavior occurs in several neuropsychiatric disorders and the combined picture across these disorders strongly suggests the involvement of the basal ganglia - frontal lobe circuitry. In autism, abnormalities of the basal ganglia, in particular the caudate nucleus, are the best replicated findings in neuroimaging studies. Interestingly, the DRD3 gene is highly expressed in the basal ganglia, most notably the caudate nucleus. The rs167771 SNP was recently also found to be related to risperidone-induced extra-pyramidal side effects (EPS) in patients with autism, which is important since risperidone is approved for the treatment of aggression, irritability and rigid behavior in ASD. To conclude, striatum abnormalities in autism are associated with repetitive and stereotyped behavior in autism and may be related to DRD3 polymorphisms.
Psychotropic medications are used for numerous psychiatric and neurologic disorders, and are associated with in some cases life-threatening adverse effects, high acquisition costs, stringent monitoring requirements, and potential interactions with other medications. Because of the risks of adverse effects and need for adherence, risk mitigation strategies are being implemented to protect consumers. An understanding of receptor activities, cytochrome P450 2D6 and 2C19 metabolism, overlapping pharmacology, and polymorphic biomarkers for the dopamine 2 D2 receptor gene (DRD2) and dopamine 3 D3 receptor gene (DRD3), serotonin 2A and 2C receptor genes (5HTR2A and 5HTR2C), and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) variants creates opportunities for the integration of pharmacogenomics, and can assist in the application of personalized medicine in this arena. In this review, we discuss the current impression of pharmacogenomic principles pertaining to select psychotropics, with attention given to the atypical antipsychotics, due to their wide use across a broad spectrum of psychiatric disorders (e.g. bipolar disorder, depression, schizophrenia). Patents involving aripiprazole, clozapine, olanzapine, and risperidone will be discussed.
Essential hypertension is caused by the interaction of genetic, behavioral, and environmental factors. Abnormalities in the regulation of renal ion transport cause essential hypertension. The renal dopaminergic system, which inhibits sodium transport in all the nephron segments, is responsible for at least 50% of renal sodium excretion under conditions of moderate sodium excess. Dopaminergic signals are transduced by two families of receptors that belong to the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily. D(1)-like receptors (D(1)R and D(5)R) stimulate, while D2-like receptors (D(2)R, D(3)R, and D(4)R) inhibit adenylyl cyclases. The dopamine receptor subtypes, themselves, or by their interactions, regulate renal sodium transport and blood pressure. We review the role of the D(1)R and D(3)R and their interaction in the natriuresis associated with volume expansion. The D(1)R- and D(3)R-mediated inhibition of renal sodium transport involves PKA and PKC-dependent and -independent mechanisms. The D(3)R also increases the degradation of NHE3 via USP-mediated ubiquitinylation. Although deletion of Drd1 and Drd3 in mice causes hypertension, DRD1 polymorphisms are not always associated with human essential hypertension and polymorphisms in DRD3 are not associated with human essential hypertension. The impaired D(1)R and D(3)R function in hypertension is related to their hyper-phosphorylation; GRK4gamma isoforms, R65L, A142V, and A486V, hyper-phosphorylate and desensitize D(1)R and D(3)R. The GRK4 locus is linked to and GRK4 variants are associated with high blood pressure in humans. Thus, GRK4, by itself, and by regulating genes related to the control of blood pressure may explain the "apparent" polygenic nature of essential hypertension.
Currently available antipsychotic drugs (APDs) carry significant though highly variable, liability to neurologic and metabolic side effects. Pharmacogenetics approaches offer the possibility of identifying patient-specific biomarkers for predicting risk of these side effects. To date, a few single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a handful of genes have received convergent support across multiple studies. The primary focus has been on SNPs in dopamine and serotonin receptor genes: persuasive meta-analytic evidence exists for an effect of the dopamine D2 and D3 receptor genes (DRD2 and DRD3) in risk for tardive dyskinesia (TD) and for an effect of variation at the 5-HT2C receptor gene (HTR2C) for liability to APD-induced weight gain. However, effect sizes appear to be modest, and pharmacoeconomic considerations have not been sufficiently studied, thereby limiting clinical applicability at this time. Effects of these genes and others on risk for TD, extrapyramidal side effects, hyperprolactinemia, and weight gain are reviewed in this article.
BACKGROUND: A possible genetic contribution of dopamine D3 receptor (DRD3) to cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD) has yet to be investigated. OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of rs6280 (Ser9Gly) genotype on PD patients' cognitive performance and to clarify possible interactions with psychopathology. METHODS: Two hundred and fifty-three consecutive PD patients underwent neurological and neuropsychological evaluations, which included: Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), Hoehn & Yahr scale (H&Y), Dementia Rating Scale-2 (DRS-2), and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS). rs6280 polymorphism was genotyped for all PD patients and for 270 ethnically matched healthy volunteers (HC). Non-parametric group comparisons and logistic regressions were used for data analyses. RESULTS: rs6280 genotype did not differ between PD and HC groups. PD patients with rs6280 CC genotype had more impaired cognitive performance (i.e., <1st percentile of demographically adjusted norms) on DRS-2 subscales Initiation/Perseveration and Construction than those with TT genotype. These associations remained statistically significant when other covariates (e.g., demographic features, disease duration, severity of motor symptoms in OFF and ON states, anti-parkinsonian medication, and psychopathology symptoms) were taken into consideration. PD patients with rs6280 TC had less anxiety (i.e., HADS Anxiety>/=11) than those with TT (p = 0.012). This association was also independent of other covariates. CONCLUSIONS: Study findings suggest that rs6280 CC genotype predisposes to executive dysfunction and visuoconstructional deficits, whereas the heterozygous genotype protects from anxiety in PD. These effects do not appear to be dependent of one another. rs6280 is not a genotypic susceptibility factor for PD.
BACKGROUND: The identification of bipolar disorder (BD) type II patients has both treatment and prognostic implications. Better understanding of its underlying genetics may yield useful diagnostic tools. METHODS: A systematic review on BDII genetics was done using articles published in 2009-2019, following PRISMA recommendations. RESULTS: The most studied polymorphism was BDNF Val66Met with several gene-gene interactions within the dopaminergic system. Associations were reported within the monoaminergic systems (DRD3, ADH1B and SLC6A4), calcium (CACNB2 and CACNG2) and cAMP (PDE1DA, PDE4B and DISC1) signal transduction pathways and the immune system (TNFalpha, IFNdelta and IL-10). Chromosomes 2, 3 and 10 were associated with BDII and polygenic risk scores distinguished between BD subtypes and with major depressive disorder. CONCLUSIONS: Research on BDII stems from BDI findings, however with a stronger contribution of gene-gene interactions and low-effect alleles on known neuroplasticity and monoaminergic system genes. Genome studies point to transdiagnostic backgrounds, with wider associations across bipolar spectrum disorders. Findings able to accurately differentiate BDII remain elusive, dependent on better phenotypic characterization and new research methods.
A previous exploratory analysis of a COMT gene single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and a DRD3 SNP by our group suggested possible contributions to pain-related acute care utilization in people with sickle cell disease (SCD). Our aim was to extend the analysis to gene-spanning haplotypes of COMT SNPs and DRD3 SNPs to investigate possible associations with pain intensity and pain-related acute care utilization in an SCD cohort. Genotyping was conducted, and clinical data were collected, including self-reported pain intensity using PAINReportIt((R)) (average of current pain and least and worst in past 24 hours, average pain intensity [API]) and medical record-extracted, pain-related acute care utilization data of 130 adults with SCD. Haplotype blocks were identified based on linkage disequilibria (COMT = 7 haploblocks; DRD3 = 8 haploblocks). Regression analyses were tested for association between haplotypes and API and utilization, yielding several significant findings. For COMT block 1 (rs2075507, rs4646310, rs737865), the A-G-G haplotype was associated with higher API compared to the reference A-G-A (p = 0.02), whereas the A-A-A haplotype was associated with higher utilization (p = 0.02). For DRD3 block 2 (rs9817063, rs2134655, rs963468, and rs3773679), relative to reference T-C-G-C, the T-T-G-C haplotype was associated with higher utilization (p = 0.01). For DRD3 block 4 (rs167770, rs324029, and rs324023), the A-G-T haplotype was associated with higher API (p = 0.04) and utilization (p < 0.001) relative to reference G-A-T, whereas the A-A-T haplotype was associated with higher utilization (p = 0.01). We found COMT and DRD3 haplotypes associated with pain-related SCD features, suggesting that in future studies more emphasis be placed on cis effects of SNP alleles in evaluating genetic contributions to SCD pain and acute care utilization for pain.
BACKGROUND: Recent evidence has shown dopamine as a major regulator of inflammation. Accordingly, dopaminergic regulation of immune cells plays an important role in the physiopathology of inflammatory disorders. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory disease involving a CD4(+) T-cell-driven autoimmune response to central nervous system (CNS) derived antigens. Evidence from animal models has suggested that B cells play a fundamental role as antigen-presenting cells (APC) re-stimulating CD4(+) T cells in the CNS as well as regulating T-cell response by mean of inflammatory or anti-inflammatory cytokines. Here, we addressed the role of the dopamine receptor D3 (DRD3), which displays the highest affinity for dopamine, in B cells in animal models of MS. METHODS: Mice harbouring Drd3-deficient or Drd3-sufficient B cells were generated by bone marrow transplantation into recipient mice devoid of B cells. In these mice, we compared the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) induced by immunization with a myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-derived peptide (pMOG), a model that leads to CNS-autoimmunity irrespective of the APC-function of B cells, or by immunization with full-length human MOG protein (huMOG), a model in which antigen-specific activated B cells display a fundamental APC-function in the CNS. APC-function was assessed in vitro by pulsing B cells with huMOG-coated beads and then co-culturing with MOG-specific T cells. RESULTS: Our data show that the selective Drd3 deficiency in B cells abolishes the disease development in the huMOG-induced EAE model. Mechanistic analysis indicates that although DRD3-signalling did not affect the APC-function of B cells, DRD3 favours the CNS-tropism in a subset of pro-inflammatory B cells in the huMOG-induced EAE model, an effect that was associated with higher CXCR3 expression. Conversely, the results show that the selective Drd3 deficiency in B cells exacerbates the disease severity in the pMOG-induced EAE model. Further analysis shows that DRD3-stimulation increased the expression of the CNS-homing molecule CD49d in a B-cell subset with anti-inflammatory features, thus attenuating EAE manifestation in the pMOG-induced EAE model. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that DRD3 in B cells exerts a dual role in CNS-autoimmunity, favouring CNS-tropism of pro-inflammatory B cells with APC-function and promoting CNS-homing of B cells with anti-inflammatory features. Thus, these results show DRD3-signalling in B cells as a critical regulator of CNS-autoimmunity.
Until recently, it has largely been assumed that G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) function as monomeric entities. However, over the past few years, we and others have documented that GPCRs can form dimers and oligomers, leading to a re-evaluation of the mechanisms thought to mediate GPCR function. Despite the growing number of investigations into dimerization, little is known about the structural basis of receptor-receptor interactions and the functional consequences of dimer formation. Here, we present a brief review of some insights we have gained into the dimerization of dopamine and serotonin receptors. We have demonstrated that agonist-regulated trafficking is identical for receptor monomers and dimers, however, agonist treatment appears to stabilise the receptor oligomers. An investigation of the structural assembly between receptors involved in dimerization showed that there are several sites of interaction including hydrophobic transmembrane domain interactions and intermolecular disulphide bonds. We have also examined receptor hetero-oligomerization and demonstrated the potential for novel functions as a result of these associations. Finally, as a result of these observations, we have been able to present evidence that GPCRs function as oligomers in the cell.
Many neurodegenerative and psychiatric malignancies like Parkinson' disease (PD) originate from an imbalance of 17beta-Estradiol (E2) in the human brain. However, the peripheral side effects of the usage of E2 for PD therapy and less understanding of the molecular mechanism hinder establishing its neurotherapeutic potential. In the present work, systemic side effects were overcome by targeted delivery using Dopamine receptor D3 (DRD3) conjugated E2-loaded chitosan nanoparticles (Ab-ECSnps) that showed a promising delivery to the brain. E2 is a specific calpain inhibitor that fosters neurodegeneration by disrupting mitochondrial function, while B-cell-specific Moloney murine leukemia virus integration region 1 (BMI1), an epigenetic regulator, is crucial in preserving mitochondrial homeostasis. We showed the administration of Ab-ECSnps inhibits calpain's translocation into mitochondria while promoting the translocation of BMI1 to mitochondria, thereby conferring neurotherapeutic benefits by enhancing cell viability, increasing mitochondrial DNA copy number, and preserving mitochondrial membrane potential. Further, we showed a novel molecular mechanism of BMI1 regulation by calpain that might contribute to maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis for attenuating PD. Concomitantly, Ab-ECSnps showed neurotherapeutic potential in the in vivo PD model. We showed for the first time that our brain-specific targeted delivery might regulate calpain-mediated BMI1 expression, thereby preserving mitochondrial homeostasis to alleviate PD.
Genetics are presumed to contribute 30-40% to opioid use disorder (OUD), allowing for the possibility that genetic markers could be used to identify personal risk for developing OUD. We aimed to test the potential association among 180 candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 120 of which were related to the dopamine reward pathway and 60 related to pharmacokinetics. Participants were randomly recruited in 2020-2021 in a cross-sectional genetic association study. Self-reported health history including Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) OUD criteria and buccal swabs were collected. A total of 1,301 participants were included in the analyses for this study. Of included participants, 250 met the DSM-5 criteria for ever having OUD. Logistic regression, adjusting for age and biologic sex, was used to characterize the association between each SNP and DSM-5 criteria consistent with OUD. Six SNPs found in four genes were associated with OUD: increased odds with CYP3A5 (rs15524 and rs776746) and DRD3 (rs324029 and rs2654754), and decreased odds with CYP3A4 (rs2740574) and CYP1A2 (rs2069514). Homozygotic CYP3A5 (rs15524 and rs776746) had the highest adjusted odds ratio of 2.812 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.737, 4.798) and 2.495 (95% CI 1.670, 3.835), respectively. Variants within the dopamine reward and opioid metabolism pathways have significant positive (DRD3 and CYP3A5) and negative (CYP3A4 and CYP1A2) associations with OUD. Identification of these variants provides promising possibilities for genetic prognostic and therapeutic targets for future investigation.
Despite risperidone's proven safety and efficacy, existing pharmacogenetic knowledge could be applied to improve its clinical use. The present work aims to summarize the information about genetic polymorphisms affecting risperidone adverse reactions and efficacy during routine clinical practice. The most relevant genes involved in the metabolism of the drug (i.e., CYP2D6, CYP3A and ABCB1) appear to have the greatest potential to predict differences in plasma concentrations of the drug and its interactions, but also relate to side effects, such as neuroleptic syndrome, weight gain or polydipsia. Other genes that have been found in association at least twice with any adverse reactions including metabolic changes, extrapyramidal symptoms or prolactine increase are: 5HT2A; 5HT2C; 5HT6; DRD2; DRD3; and BDNF. Some of these genes (5HTR2A, DRD2 and DRD3), along with 5-HTTLPR and COMT, have also been reported to be related with negative clinical outcomes. However, there is not yet enough evidence to support their routine screening during clinical practice.
Dopamine receptors belong to a large super-gene family of receptors which are linked to their signal transduction pathways through heterotrimeric G proteins. A variety of signalling events are known to be regulated by dopamine receptors including adenylate cyclase and phospholipase activities and various ion channels. Prior to the advent of molecular cloning technology, dopamine receptors were believed to belong to two subtypes, D1 and D2. This distinction was based on both pharmacological and functional criteria. We now know that at least five different dopamine receptors exist although they can still be described as to belonging within "D1" and "D2" subfamilies. The D1 subfamily consists of two receptors-the D1 and D5, whereas the D2, D3 and D4 receptors comprise the D2 subfamily. The cloning and molecular characteristics of these five receptors are described in this review.
Association studies in outbred populations represent an important paradigm for investigation of complex traits, such as bipolar disorder, both to follow-up regions of interest from linkage studies (by systematic linkage disequilibrium mapping and positional candidate studies) and for pure functional studies. The advantages of the association method include its relative robustness to genetic heterogeneity and the ability to detect much smaller effect sizes than are detectable using feasible sample sizes in linkage studies. The candidate gene approach is potentially very powerful, particularly when used within the context of a VAPSE (variation affecting protein structure or expression) paradigm, but a major problem is that the efficiency in the choice of candidates is inevitably a function of the level of previous understanding of disease pathophysiology. To date, most candidate gene studies in bipolar disorder have focussed on the major neurotransmitter systems that are influenced by medication used in clinical management of the disorder. Early studies often used anonymous markers in the hope of detecting linkage disequilibrium but recently direct examination of polymorphisms of known or presumed functional relevance has become more usual. Most studies in the literature have been of the unrelated case-control design with samples rarely exceeding 200-300 subjects. No definitive findings have yet emerged although there have been some interesting preliminary findings including those with polymorphisms within the genes encoding catechol-o-methyl transferase (COMT), monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) and the serotonin transporter (hSERT; 5-HTT). In this article we critically review the current status of the literature within the context of the important methodological issues and limitations inherent in the use of association studies for genetic dissection of bipolar disorder. We conclude by examining likely future directions and developments in the field.
Genetic factors undoubtedly play an important role in determining vulnerability to bipolar disorder but the task of finding susceptibility genes is not trivial. Candidate gene studies, usually employing the association approach, offer the potential to discover the genes of relatively modest effect size that are expected for a complex genetic disorder. Candidate gene approaches depend crucially on our current understanding of disease pathophysiology, and attention has consequently been focussed on a limited range of neurotransmitter systems implicated by the action of drug treatments. Despite no unequivocal, consistently replicated findings, a number of intriguing results have emerged in the literature, both for bipolar disorder in general and for subtypes such as bipolar affective puerperal psychosis and rapid cycling bipolar illness. Genes of particular current interest include those encoding the serotonin transporter, monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) and catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT). As susceptibility genes are found and knowledge of aetiology advanced it is likely that many more candidate genes in novel biological systems will attract attention.
BACKGROUND: Several studies indicated that antipsychotic treatment response and side effect manifestation can be different due to inter-individual variability in genetic variations. AIM OF THE STUDY: Here we perform a case-control study to explore a potential association between schizophrenia and variants within the antipsychotic drug molecular targets (DRD1, DRD2, DRD3, HTR2A, HTR6) and metabolizing enzymes (CYP2D6, COMT) genes in Armenian population including also analysis of their possible relationship with disease clinical symptoms. METHODS: A total of 18 SNPs was studied in patients with schizophrenia (n = 78) and healthy control subjects (n = 77) using MassARRAY genotyping. RESULTS: We found that two studied genetic variants, namely DRD2 rs4436578*C and HTR2A rs6314*A are underrepresented in the group of patients compared to healthy subjects. After the correction for multiple testing, the rs4436578*C variant remained significant while the rs6314*A reported borderline significance. No significant differences in minor allele frequencies for other studied variants were identified. Also, a relationship between the genotypes and age of onset as well as disease duration has been detected. CONCLUSIONS: The DRD2 rs4436578*C genetic variant might have protective role against schizophrenia, at least in Armenians.
Dopamine D(3) receptors (Drd3) have been implicated in the control of responding by drug-related conditioned incentive stimuli. We review recent studies of the effects of Drd3 antagonists or partial agonists on the control of self-administration of intravenous (IV) cocaine, IV morphine and oral ethanol on reward-rich and lean schedules, in reinstatement tests, on second-order schedules and on the acquisition and expression of conditioned place preference (CPP) and conditioned motor activity. For comparison, related studies where conditioned stimuli are based on nutritional reward also are considered. When self-administration depends more heavily on conditioned cues for its maintenance, for example on second-order schedules or lean ratio schedules, Drd3 antagonists or partial agonists reduce responding. Although data are limited, similar effects may be seen for responding for cues based on drugs or nutritional rewards. Drd3 agents also block the ability of conditioned cues to reinstate responding for cocaine or food. Published results suggest that Drd3 plays a more important role in the expression than in the acquisition of a CPP or conditioned motor activity. The mechanism mediating the role of Drd3 in the control of responding by conditioned incentive stimuli remains unknown but it has been found that Drd3 receptors increase in number in the nucleus accumbens during conditioning. Perhaps Drd3 participates in the molecular mechanisms underlying the role of dopamine and of dopamine receptor subtypes in reward-related incentive learning.
OBJECTIVES: Psychotropic drugs are widely prescribed in Parkinson's disease (PD) without regard to their pathobiological effects, and these drugs affect the transcription of a large number of genes. Effects of these drugs on PD risk gene transcription were therefore surveyed. METHODS: Results summarize a comprehensive survey of psychotropic effects on messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression evident in published data for 70 genes linked to PD risk. RESULTS: Psychotropic drugs can meaningfully affect PD risk gene mRNA transcription, including antipsychotics (upregulate dopamine receptors D2 and D3 (DRD2, DRD3); downregulate low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 8 (LRP8), ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1 (UCHL1, also known as PARK5)), haloperidol (upregulates DRD3, parkin (PRKN, also known as PARK2), DRD2; downregulates brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)), risperidone (upregulates monoamine oxidase B (MAOB), DRD2), olanzapine (upregulates transmembrane protein 163 (TMEM163), BDNF, glutathione S-transferase mu 1 (GSTM1), MAOB, DRD2, solute carrier organic anion transporter family, member 3A1 (SLCO3A1)), aripiprazole (upregulates DRD2), quetiapine, paliperidone, lurasidone, carbamazepine, and many antidepressants (upregulate BDNF), lithium and bupropion (downregulate BDNF), amitriptyline (upregulates DRD3, DRD2), imipramine (upregulates BDNF, DRD3, DRD2), desipramine (upregulates BDNF, DRD3), and fluoxetine (upregulates acid beta-glucosidase (GBA), coiled-coil domain containing 62 (CCDC62), BDNF, DRD3, UCHL1, unc-13 homolog B (UNC13B), and perhaps huntingtin interacting protein 1 related (HIP1R); downregulates microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), methylcrotonoyl-coenzyme A carboxylase I (MCCC1), GSTM1, 28kDa calbindin 1 (CALB1)). Fluoxetine effects on BDNF and UCHL1 in GEO Profiles were statistically robust. CONCLUSIONS: This report provides an initial summary and framework to understand the potential impact of psychotropic drugs on PD-relevant genes. Antipsychotics and serotoninergic antidepressants may potentially attenuate PD risk, and lithium and bupropion may augment risk, through MAPT, GBA, CCDC62, HIP1R, BDNF, and DRD2 transcription, with MAPT, GBA, and CCDC62 being strongly associated with PD risk in recent meta-analyses. Limitations of these findings and a research agenda to better relate them to the nigrostriatum and PD are discussed.
Fluorescent ligands are versatile tools for the study of G protein-coupled receptors. Depending on the fluorophore, they can be used for a range of different applications, including fluorescence microscopy and bioluminescence or fluorescence resonance energy transfer (BRET or FRET) assays. Starting from phenylpiperazines and indanylamines, privileged scaffolds for dopamine D(2)-like receptors, we developed dansyl-labeled fluorescent ligands that are well accommodated in the binding pockets of D(2) and D(3) receptors. These receptors are the target proteins for the therapy for several neurologic and psychiatric disorders, including Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. The dansyl-labeled ligands exhibit binding affinities up to 0.44 nM and 0.29 nM at D(2)R and D(3)R, respectively. When the dansyl label was exchanged for sterically more demanding xanthene or cyanine dyes, fluorescent ligands 10a-c retained excellent binding properties and, as expected from their indanylamine pharmacophore, acted as agonists at D(2)R. While the Cy3B-labeled ligand 10b was used to visualize D(2)R and D(3)R on the surface of living cells by total internal reflection microscopy, ligand 10a comprising a rhodamine label showed excellent properties in a NanoBRET binding assay at D(3)R.
Results of candidate gene investigations in ADHD have been difficult to replicate. The complexity of the phenotypes and their underlying determinants, and the relatively small effect sizes of genetic variants may, in part, be contributing to these inconsistencies. The objective of this study is to conduct an exploratory analysis using a comprehensive approach to investigate the role of candidate genes. This approach combines a dimensional behavioural approach akin to Research Domain Criteria (RDoC), a pharmaco-dynamic evaluation of behaviours relevant to ADHD, together with association and linkage testing in a large sample of children with ADHD. Parents, teachers, and research staff evaluated children with ADHD under three experimental conditions (EC): 1 week of baseline observation, followed by 1 week of methylphenidate (MPH) and 1 week of placebo, administered in a double-blind crossover order. Several quantitative behavioural and cognitive dimensions relevant for ADHD were also assessed. We combined family-based (FBAT) and quantitative trait genetic analyses (n = 575 probands with members of their nuclear families) to investigate the role of DRD3 (Ser-9-Gly) in ADHD and its relevant behavioural dimensions. Comparing the behaviours of children with different genotypes under the three EC showed a nominal association between the T allele and poorer behavioural scores during the MPH week (as assessed by teachers), particularly in boys. With the family-based analysis, the T allele showed a nominal association with increased risk for ADHD, response to placebo and MPH as assessed by research staff, and the modulation of other behavioural and cognitive dimensions. These results provide convergent, albeit preliminary evidence for the implication of the DRD3 (Ser-9-Gly) polymorphism in the aetiology of ADHD and the modulation of its various behavioural dimensions, including RDoC cognitive constructs and response to pharmacological probes. This illustrative example suggests that this research paradigm might help to reliably uncover the role of other candidate genes in ADHD.
