D(1B) dopamine receptor; Dopamine receptor whose activity is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Results of behavioral genetic and molecular genetic studies have converged to suggest that both genetic and nongenetic factors contribute to the development of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We review this literature, with a particular emphasis on molecular genetic studies. Family, twin, and adoption studies provide compelling evidence that genes play a strong role in mediating susceptibility to ADHD. This fact is most clearly seen in the 20 extant twin studies, which estimate the heritability of ADHD to be .76. Molecular genetic studies suggest that the genetic architecture of ADHD is complex. The few genome-wide scans conducted thus far are not conclusive. In contrast, the many candidate gene studies of ADHD have produced substantial evidence implicating several genes in the etiology of the disorder. For the eight genes for which the same variant has been studied in three or more case-control or family-based studies, seven show statistically significant evidence of association with ADHD on the basis of the pooled odds ratio across studies: DRD4, DRD5, DAT, DBH, 5-HTT, HTR1B, and SNAP-25.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a highly heritable disorder with a multifactorial pattern of inheritance. For complex conditions such as this, biologically based phenotypes that lie in the pathway from genes to behavior may provide a more powerful target for molecular genetic studies than the disorder as a whole. Although their use in ADHD is relatively new, such "endophenotypes" have aided the clarification of the etiology and pathophysiology of several other conditions in medicine and psychiatry. In this article, we review existing data on potential endophenotypes for ADHD, emphasizing neuropsychological deficits because assessment tools are cost effective and relatively easy to implement. Neuropsychological impairments, as well as measures from neuroimaging and electrophysiological paradigms, show correlations with ADHD and evidence of heritability, but the familial or genetic overlap between these constructs and ADHD remains unclear. We conclude that these endophenotypes will not be a quick fix for the field but offer potential if careful consideration is given to issues of heterogeneity, measurement and statistical power.
Although the efficacy of medications for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is well demonstrated in clinical trials, substantial numbers of patients fail to remain on therapy, and there is tremendous variability in tolerability and treatment acceptance. The emerging science of pharmacogenomics seeks to identify patterns of genetic variation that will direct individually tailored treatment regimens and enhance long-term adherence. For this review, existing studies in ADHD pharmacogenomics were reviewed to assess current knowledge and provide a basis for planning future research. Twelve studies were identified. The majority investigated the role of candidate genes in predicting clinical response to methylphenidate. The most frequently studied is DAT1, although findings are inconsistent, with the 10-repeat polymorphism predicting both increased and decreased symptom reduction in various reports. Other candidates include DRD4, DRD5, DBH, 5HTT, SNAP-25, and COMT. One study was based on quantitative trait analyses in a genome-wide scan. Although interest in ADHD pharmacogenomics is encouraging, preliminary studies have been limited by small sample sizes, inconsistent research designs, retrospective reports, and a focus on symptom response. Future studies should emphasize large, prospective trials, assess multiple medications in individual subjects, and consider a full range of pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Extensive local invasion of glioblastoma (GBM) cells within the central nervous system (CNS) is one factor that severely limits current treatments. The aim of this study was to uncover genes involved in the invasion process, which could also serve as therapeutic targets. For the isolation of invasive GBM cells from non-invasive cells, we used a three-dimensional organotypic co-culture system where glioma stem cell (GSC) spheres were confronted with brain organoids (BOs). Using ultra-low input RNA sequencing (ui-RNA Seq), an invasive gene signature was obtained that was exploited in a therapeutic context. METHODS: GFP-labeled tumor cells were sorted from invasive and non-invasive regions within co-cultures. Ui-RNA sequencing analysis was performed to find a gene cluster up-regulated in the invasive compartment. This gene cluster was further analyzed using the Connectivity MAP (CMap) database. This led to the identification of SKF83566, an antagonist of the D1 dopamine receptor (DRD1), as a candidate therapeutic molecule. Knockdown and overexpression experiments were performed to find molecular pathways responsible for the therapeutic effects of SKF83566. Finally, the effects of SKF83566 were validated in orthotopic xenograft models in vivo. RESULTS: Ui-RNA seq analysis of three GSC cell models (P3, BG5 and BG7) yielded a set of 27 differentially expressed genes between invasive and non-invasive cells. Using CMap analysis, SKF83566 was identified as a selective inhibitor targeting both DRD1 and DRD5. In vitro studies demonstrated that SKF83566 inhibited tumor cell proliferation, GSC sphere formation, and invasion. RNA sequencing analysis of SKF83566-treated P3, BG5, BG7, and control cell populations yielded a total of 32 differentially expressed genes, that were predicted to be regulated by c-Myc. Of these, the UHRF1 gene emerged as the most downregulated gene following treatment, and ChIP experiments revealed that c-Myc binds to its promoter region. Finally, SKF83566, or stable DRD1 knockdown, inhibited the growth of orthotopic GSC (BG5) derived xenografts in nude mice. CONCLUSIONS: DRD1 contributes to GBM invasion and progression by regulating c-Myc entry into the nucleus that affects the transcription of the UHRF1 gene. SKF83566 inhibits the transmembrane protein DRD1, and as such represents a candidate small therapeutic molecule for GBMs.
Although multiple studies have shown the role genetics plays in personality disorders and in addictions, few have studied the genetic aspects of their comorbidity. Here, we carried out a cross-sectional study in a sample comprising 303 Caucasian polydrug-consuming patients. The presence of personality disorders was evaluated using the International Personality Disorder Examination, and genes related to dopamine, serotonin and monoamine oxidase (MAO) were genotyped. A significant relationship was observed between the bp 279 DRD5 variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism and paranoid personality disorder (OR(95%CI) = 2.186 (1.074; 4.449); p = 0.006) . The bp 182 (OR(95%CI) = 0.407 (0.178; 0.931); p = 0.033) and bp 184 (OR(95%CI) = 0.391 (0.188; 0.813); p = 0.012) alleles of the MAOB VNTR were also associated with antisocial personality disorder. Among patients with addictions, paranoid personality disorder should also be considered in addition to the importance of antisocial and borderline personality disorders. The higher frequency of the bp 279 DRD5 VNTR allele found in patients with paranoid personality disorder, as well as the associations between alleles of the MAOB VNTR and antisocial personality disorder, support the monoaminergic bases of these personality disorders, especially when dealing with patients with addictions.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a developmental disorder and dopaminergic dysfunction in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) may play a role. Our previous research indicated that theobromine (TB), a methylxanthine, enhances cognitive function in rodents via the PFC. This study investigates TB's effects on hyperactivity and cognitive function in stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR), an ADHD animal model. Male SHRs (6-week old) received a diet containing 0.05% TB for 40 days, while control rats received normal diets. Age-matched male Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) served as genetic controls. During the TB administration period, we conducted open-field tests and Y-maze tasks to evaluate hyperactivity and cognitive function, then assessed dopamine concentrations and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), dopamine receptor D1-5 (DRD1-5), dopamine transporter (DAT), vesicular monoamine transporter-2 (VMAT-2), synaptosome-associated protein-25 (SNAP-25), and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expressions in the PFC. Additionally, the binding affinity of TB for the adenosine receptors (ARs) was evaluated. Compared to WKY, SHR exhibited hyperactivity, inattention and working memory deficits. However, chronic TB administration significantly improved these ADHD-like behaviors in SHR. TB administration also normalized dopamine concentrations and expression levels of TH, DRD2, DRD4, SNAP-25, and BDNF in the PFC of SHR. No changes were observed in DRD1, DRD3, DRD5, DAT, and VMAT-2 expression between SHR and WKY rats, and TB intake had minimal effects. TB was found to have affinity binding to ARs. These results indicate that long-term TB supplementation mitigates hyperactivity, inattention and cognitive deficits in SHR by modulating dopaminergic nervous function and BDNF levels in the PFC, representing a potential adjunctive treatment for ADHD.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder that almost certainly represents the common outcome of multiple causal pathways and it is now generally accepted that genetic factors make a significant contribution to these pathways. Behavioral studies suggest a heritability of approximately 0.76. While molecular genetic approaches have identified a range of potential candidate genes, it is now clear that the genetics of ADHD are characterized by a number of genes each of which makes a small but significant contribution to the overall risk. Several genome-wide linkage studies have been conducted and, although there are considerable differences in findings between studies, several regions have been supported across several studies (bin 16.4, 5p13, 11q22-25, 17p11). The contribution of several candidate genes has been supported by meta-analyses (DRD4, DRD5, DAT1, HTR1B and SNAP25). Genome-wide association scans are starting to appear but have not yet had sufficient power to produce conclusive results. Gene-environment interactions, which are as yet relatively understudied, are likely to be of importance in fully understanding the role of genes in ADHD and will be discussed.
Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children is a neurobehavioral disorder characterized by inattention, hyperactivity, and/or impulsivity. The biochemical abnormalities and genetic factors play significant roles in the etiology of ADHD. These symptoms affect the behavior performance and social relationships of children in school and at home. Recently, many studies about biochemical abnormalities in ADHD have been published. Several research groups have also suggested the genetic contribution to ADHD, and attempted to identify susceptibility and candidate genes for this disorder through the genetic linkage and association studies. To date, these studies have reported substantial evidence implicating several genes (dopaminergic: DRD4, DAT1, DRD5, COMT; noradrenergic: DBH, ADRA2A; serotonergic: 5-HTT, HTR1B, HTR2A; cholinergic: CHRNA4, and central nervous system development pathway: SNAP25, BDNF) in the etiology of ADHD. Understanding the biochemistry and genetics of ADHD will allow us to provide a useful addition with other treatment procedures for ADHD.
Individual vulnerability to develop neurological and psychiatric disorders is associated with both genetic and environmental factors. Association studies in patients have explored the contribution of gene variants in the dopaminergic system in these disorders. This system is involved in motor control, endocrinological function, the reward system and cognition. The diverse physiological functions of dopamine are mediated by five different dopamine receptors, encoded by the genes DRD1, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4 and DRD5. These genes have various types of polymorphisms that can produce changes in the genetic product or expression levels. In recent years, the development of new technologies for genetic analysis, and a wider comprehension of the genetic sequences of these genes have increased our understanding of the implications of the dopaminergic system in both health and pathological states. It has also allowed the identification of genetic variants that may represent risk or protection factors for a variety of psychiatric disorders.
Aims: Reactive oxygen species are highly reactive molecules generated in different subcellular compartments. Both the dopamine D5 receptor (D(5)R) and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident peroxiredoxin-4 (PRDX4) play protective roles against oxidative stress. This study is aimed at investigating the interaction between PRDX4 and D(5)R in regulating oxidative stress in the kidney. Results: Fenoldopam (FEN), a D(1)R and D(5)R agonist, increased PRDX4 protein expression, mainly in non-lipid rafts, in D(5)R-HEK 293 cells. FEN increased the co-immunoprecipitation of D(5)R and PRDX4 and their colocalization, particularly in the ER. The efficiency of Forster resonance energy transfer was increased with FEN treatment measured with fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy. Silencing of PRDX4 increased hydrogen peroxide production, impaired the inhibitory effect of FEN on hydrogen peroxide production, and increased the production of interleukin-1beta, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and caspase-12 in renal cells. Furthermore, in Drd5(-/-) mice, which are in a state of oxidative stress, renal cortical PRDX4 was decreased whereas interleukin-1beta, TNF, and caspase-12 were increased, relative to their normotensive wild-type Drd5(+/+) littermates. Innovation: Our findings demonstrate a novel relationship between D(5)R and PRDX4 and the consequent effects of this relationship in attenuating hydrogen peroxide production in the ER and the production of proinflammatory cytokines. This study provides the potential for the development of biomarkers and new therapeutics for renal inflammatory disorders, including hypertension. Conclusion: PRDX4 interacts with D(5)R to decrease oxidative stress and inflammation in renal cells that may have the potential for translational significance. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 38, 1150-1166.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common childhood behavioral condition which affects 2-10% of school age children worldwide. Although the underlying molecular mechanism for the disorder is poorly understood, familial, twin and adoption studies suggest a strong genetic component. Here we provide a state-of-the-art review of the molecular genetics of ADHD incorporating evidence from candidate gene and linkage designs, as well as genome-wide association (GWA) studies of common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and rare copy number variations (CNVs). Bioinformatic methods such as functional enrichment analysis and protein-protein network analysis are used to highlight biological processes of likely relevance to the aetiology of ADHD. Candidate gene associations of minor effect size have been replicated across a number of genes including SLC6A3, DRD5, DRD4, SLC6A4, LPHN3, SNAP-25, HTR1B, NOS1 and GIT1. Although case-control SNP-GWAS have had limited success in identifying common genetic variants for ADHD that surpass critical significance thresholds, quantitative trait designs suggest promising associations with Cadherin13 and glucose-fructose oxidoreductase domain 1 genes. Further, CNVs mapped to glutamate receptor genes (GRM1, GRM5, GRM7 and GRM8) have been implicated in the aetiology of the disorder and overlap with bioinformatic predictions based on ADHD GWAS SNP data regarding enriched pathways. Although increases in sample size across multi-center cohorts will likely yield important new results, we advocate that this must occur in parallel with a shift away from categorical case-control approaches that view ADHD as a unitary construct, towards dimensional approaches that incorporate endophenotypes and statistical classification methods.
Retinal pigmented epithelial (RPE) cells play an important role in retinal fibrotic diseases such as proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR). The purpose of this study was to elucidate the involvement of dopamine receptor signaling in regulating the fibrotic activation of RPE cells. Dopamine receptor expression, the effect of dopamine on fibrotic activity, and dopamine production were measured in the human RPE cell line ARPE-19. The fibrotic activation of RPE cells was evaluated in response to treatments with selective dopamine receptor agonists and antagonists by measuring gene expression, migration, proliferation, and fibronectin deposition. DRD2 and DRD5 are the dominant dopaminergic receptors expressed in ARPE-19 cells and TGF-beta stimulation enhances the autocrine release of dopamine, which we show further exasperates fibrotic activation. Finally, treatment with D2 dopamine receptor antagonists or D5 dopamine receptor agonists inhibits profibrotic gene expression, migration, proliferation, and fibronectin deposition and thus may serve as effective mechanisms for treating retinal fibrosis including PVR.
Dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine and cabergoline have been successfully used in the treatment of pituitary prolactinomas and other neuroendocrine tumors. However, their therapeutic mechanisms are not fully understood. In this study we demonstrated that DRD5 (dopamine receptor D5) agonists were potent inhibitors of pituitary tumor growth. We further found that DRD5 activation increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), inhibited the MTOR pathway, induced macroautophagy/autophagy, and led to autophagic cell death (ACD) in vitro and in vivo. In addition, DRD5 protein was highly expressed in the majority of human pituitary adenomas, and treatment of different human pituitary tumor cell cultures with the DRD5 agonist SKF83959 resulted in growth suppression, and the efficacy was correlated with the expression levels of DRD5 in the tumors. Furthermore, we found that DRD5 was expressed in other human cancer cells such as glioblastomas, colon cancer, and gastric cancer. DRD5 activation in these cell lines suppressed their growth, inhibited MTOR activity, and induced autophagy. Finally, in vivo SKF83959 also inhibited human gastric cancer cell growth in nude mice. Our studies revealed novel mechanisms for the tumor suppressive effects of DRD5 agonists, and suggested a potential use of DRD5 agonists as a novel therapeutic approach in the treatment of different human tumors and cancers.
The dopaminergic system plays a pivotal role in the central nervous system via its five diverse receptors (D1-D5). Dysfunction of dopaminergic system is implicated in many neuropsychological diseases, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a common mental disorder that prevalent in childhood. Understanding the relationship of five different dopamine (DA) receptors with ADHD will help us to elucidate different roles of these receptors and to develop therapeutic approaches of ADHD. This review summarized the ongoing research of DA receptor genes in ADHD pathogenesis and gathered the past published data with meta-analysis and revealed the high risk of DRD5, DRD2, and DRD4 polymorphisms in ADHD.
BACKGROUND: Dystonia is a movement disorder with high heterogeneity regarding phenotypic appearance and etiology that occurs in both sporadic and familial forms. The etiology of the disease remains unknown. However, there is increasing evidence suggesting that a small number of gene alterations may lead to dystonia. Although pathogenic variants to the familial type of dystonia have been extensively reviewed and discussed, relatively little is known about the contribution of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to dystonia. This review focuses on the potential role of SNPs and other variants in dystonia susceptibility. METHODS: We searched the PubMed database for peer-reviewed articles published in English, from its inception through January 2018, that concerned human studies of dystonia and genetic variants. The following search terms were included: "dystonia" in combination with the following terms: 1) "polymorphisms" and 2) "SNPs" as free words. RESULTS: A total of 43 published studies regarding TOR1A, BDNF, DRD5, APOE, ARSG, NALC, OR4X2, COL4A1, TH, DDC, DBH, MAO, COMT, DAT, GCH1, PRKRA, MR-1, SGCE, ATP1A3, TAF1, THAP1, GNAL, DRD2, HLA-DRB, CBS, MTHFR, and MS genes, were included in the current review. DISCUSSION: To date, a few variants, which are possibly involved in several molecular pathways, have been related to dystonia. Large cohort studies are needed to determine robust associations between variants and dystonia with adjustment for other potential cofounders, in order to elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms of dystonia and the net effect of the genes.
Many genetic studies have focussed on dopamine receptors and their relationship to neuropsychiatric disease. Schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and substance abuse have been the most studied, but no conclusive linkage or association has been found. The possible influence of dopamine receptor variants on drug response has not received as much attention. While there is some evidence that polymorphisms and mutations in dopamine receptors can alter functional activity and pharmacological profiles, no conclusive data link these gene variants to drug response or disease. The lack of unequivocal findings may be related, in part, to the subtle changes in receptor pharmacology that these polymorphisms and mutations mediate. These subtle effects may be obscured by the influence of genes controlling drug metabolism and kinetics. Further insight into the pharmacogenetics of dopamine receptors may require not just more studies, but novel approaches to the study of complex genetic traits and diseases.
PURPOSE: Dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) is a G protein-coupled receptor antagonized by ONC201, an anticancer small molecule in clinical trials for high-grade gliomas and other malignancies. DRD5 is a dopamine receptor family member that opposes DRD2 signaling. We investigated the expression of these dopamine receptors in cancer and their influence on tumor cell sensitivity to ONC201. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The Cancer Genome Atlas was used to determine DRD2/DRD5 expression broadly across human cancers. Cell viability assays were performed with ONC201 in >1,000 Genomic of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer and NCI60 cell lines. IHC staining of DRD2/DRD5 was performed on tissue microarrays and archival tumor tissues of glioblastoma patients treated with ONC201. Whole exome sequencing was performed in RKO cells with and without acquired ONC201 resistance. Wild-type and mutant DRD5 constructs were generated for overexpression studies. RESULTS: DRD2 overexpression broadly occurs across tumor types and is associated with a poor prognosis. Whole exome sequencing of cancer cells with acquired resistance to ONC201 revealed a de novo Q366R mutation in the DRD5 gene. Expression of Q366R DRD5 was sufficient to induce tumor cell apoptosis, consistent with a gain-of-function. DRD5 overexpression in glioblastoma cells enhanced DRD2/DRD5 heterodimers and DRD5 expression was inversely correlated with innate tumor cell sensitivity to ONC201. Investigation of archival tumor samples from patients with recurrent glioblastoma treated with ONC201 revealed that low DRD5 expression was associated with relatively superior clinical outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: These results implicate DRD5 as a negative regulator of DRD2 signaling and tumor sensitivity to ONC201 DRD2 antagonism.
OBJECTIVE: Parkinson's disease (PD) patients are usually treated with L-dopa and/or dopaminergic agonists, which act by binding five types of dopaminergic receptors (DRD1-DRD5). Peripheral immune cells are known to express dopamine receptors on their membrane surface, and therefore they could be directly affected by the treatment. Regulatory cells are the main modulators of inflammation, but it is not clear whether dopaminergic treatment could affect their functions. While only regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been proved to express dopamine receptors, it is not known whether other regulatory cells such as CD8regs, regulatory B cells (Bregs), tolerogenic dendritic cells, and intermediate monocytes also express them. METHODS: The expression of dopamine receptors in Tregs, CD8regs, Bregs, tolerogenic dendritic cells, and intermediate monocytes was herein evaluated. cDNA from 11 PD patients and 9 control subjects was obtained and analyzed. RESULTS: All regulatory cell populations expressed the genes coding for dopamine receptors, and this expression was further corroborated by flow cytometry. These findings may allow us to propose regulatory populations as possible targets for PD treatment. CONCLUSIONS: This study opens new paths to deepen our understanding on the effect of PD treatment on the cells of the regulatory immune response.
ADHD is a polygenic disorder due to the additive effect of genes affecting dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, GABA, and other neurotransmitters. Some of the specific loci involved are dopamine genes--DRD2, DRD4, DRD5, and the dopamine transporter; norepinephrine (NE) and epinephrine (EPI) genes--dopamine beta-hydroxylase, ADRA2A, ADRA2C, PNMT, norepinephrine transporter, MAOA, COMT; serotonin genes--TDO2, HTR1A, HTR1DA, serotonin transporter; GABA genes--GABRB3; androgen receptor and other genes. This model is consistent with all of the present knowledge about ADHD including (a) the increased frequency of ADHD in the relatives of ADHD probands, (b) the presence of a wide spectrum of comorbid behaviors (depression, anxiety, learning, conduct, oppositional-defiant, conduct and substance abuse disorders) in ADHD probands and their relatives on both parental sides, (c) the close relationship to Tourette syndrome (TS), (d) the failure to find the genes for TS using linkage analysis, (e) the brain imaging studies showing hypometabolism of the frontal lobes, (f) the relationship between dopamine D2 receptor density and regional blood flow, (g) the correlation between tics and dopamine D2 receptor density in TS, (h) the motor hyperactivity of dopamine transporter and dopamine D3 receptor gene knockout mice, (i) the LeMoal and Shaywitz dopamine deficiency animal models of ADHD, (j) the NE models of ADHD, (k) the failure to explain ADHD on the basis of any single neurotransmitter defect, (l) the response of ADHD to dopamine and alpha 2-adrenergic agonists, (m) the small percentage of the variance of specific behaviors accounted for by each gene, and numerous other aspects of ADHD. The implications of the polygenic model for the understanding, diagnosis and treatment of ADHD and TS, as well as other psychiatric disorders, are reviewed.
Increasing evidence supports the involvement of both heritable and environmental risk factors in major depression (MD) and suicidal behavior (SB). Studies investigating gene-environment interaction (G x E) may be useful for elucidating the role of biological mechanisms in the risk for mental disorders. In the present paper, we review the literature regarding the interaction between genes modulating brain functions and stressful life events in the etiology of MD and SB and discuss their potential added benefit compared to genetic studies only. Within the context of G x E investigation, thus far, only a few reliable results have been obtained, although some genes have consistently shown interactive effects with environmental risk in MD and, to a lesser extent, in SB. Further investigation is required to disentangle the direct and mediated effects that are common or specific to MD and SB. Since traditional G x E studies overall suffer from important methodological limitations, further effort is required to develop novel methodological strategies with an interdisciplinary approach.
