Polycomb protein EED; Polycomb group (PcG) protein. Component of the PRC2/EED-EZH2 complex, which methylates 'Lys-9' and 'Lys-27' of histone H3, leading to transcriptional repression of the affected target gene. Also recognizes 'Lys-26' trimethylated histone H1 with the effect of inhibiting PRC2 complex methyltransferase activity on nucleosomal histone H3 'Lys-27', whereas H3 'Lys-27' recognition has the opposite effect, enabling the propagation of this repressive mark. The PRC2/EED- EZH2 complex may also serve as a recruiting platform for DNA methyltransferases, thereby linking two ep [...] 
The SUZ12 gene encodes a subunit of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) that is essential for development by silencing the expression of multiple genes. Germline heterozygous variants in SUZ12 have been found in Imagawa-Matsumoto syndrome (IMMAS) characterized by overgrowth and multiple dysmorphic features. Similarly, both EZH2 and EED also encode a subunit of PRC2 each and their pathogenic variants cause Weaver syndrome and Cohen-Gibson syndrome, respectively. Clinical manifestations of these syndromes significantly overlap, although their different prevalence rates have recently been noted: generalized overgrowth, intellectual disability, scoliosis, and excessive loose skin appear to be less prevalent in IMMAS than in the other two syndromes. We could not determine any apparent genotype-phenotype correlation in IMMAS. The phenotype of neurofibromatosis type 1 arising from NF1 deletion was also shown to be modified by the deletion of SUZ12, 560 kb away. This review deepens our understanding of the clinical and genetic characteristics of IMMAS together with other overgrowth syndromes related to PRC2. We also report on a novel IMMAS patient carrying a splicing variant (c.1023+1G>C) in SUZ12. This patient had a milder phenotype than other previously reported IMMAS cases, with no macrocephaly or overgrowth phenotypes, highlighting the clinical variation in IMMAS.
Neoplasms of the peripheral nervous system represent a heterogenous group with a wide spectrum of morphological features and biological potential. They range from benign and curable by complete excision (schwannoma and soft tissue perineurioma) to benign but potentially aggressive at the local level (plexiform neurofibroma) to the highly malignant (malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors [MPNST]). In this review, we discuss the diagnostic and pathologic features of common peripheral nerve sheath tumors, particularly those that may be encountered in the intracranial compartment or in the spine and paraspinal region. The discussion will cover schwannoma, neurofibroma, atypical neurofibromatous neoplasms of uncertain biological potential, intraneural and soft tissue perineurioma, hybrid nerve sheath tumors, MPNST, and the recently renamed enigmatic tumor, malignant melanotic nerve sheath tumor, formerly referred to as melanotic schwannoma. We also discuss the diagnostic relevance of these neoplasms to specific genetic and familial syndromes of nerve, including neurofibromatosis 1, neurofibromatosis 2, and schwannomatosis. In addition, we discuss updates in our understanding of the molecular alterations that represent key drivers of these neoplasms, including neurofibromatosis type 1 and type 2, SMARCB1, LZTR1, and PRKAR1A loss, as well as the acquisition of CDKN2A/B mutations and alterations in the polycomb repressor complex members (SUZ12 and EED) in the malignant progression to MPNST. In summary, this review covers practical aspects of pathologic diagnosis with updates relevant to neurosurgical practice.
Owing to the relationship between extracellular vesicles (EVs) and physiological and pathological conditions, the interest in EVs is exponentially growing. EVs hold high hopes for novel diagnostic and translational discoveries. This review provides an expert-based update of recent advances in the methods to study EVs and summarizes currently accepted considerations and recommendations from sample collection to isolation, detection, and characterization of EVs. Common misconceptions and methodological pitfalls are highlighted. Although EVs are found in all body fluids, in this review, we will focus on EVs from human blood, not only our most complex but also the most interesting body fluid for cardiovascular research.
Polycomb repressive complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and PRC2) cooperate to determine cell identity by epigenetic gene expression regulation. However, the mechanism of PRC2 recruitment by means of recognition of PRC1-mediated H2AK119ub1 remains poorly understood. Our PRC2 cryo-electron microscopy structure with cofactors JARID2 and AEBP2 bound to a H2AK119ub1-containing nucleosome reveals a bridge helix in EZH2 that connects the SET domain, H3 tail, and nucleosomal DNA. JARID2 and AEBP2 each interact with one ubiquitin and the H2A-H2B surface. JARID2 stimulates PRC2 through interactions with both the polycomb protein EED and the H2AK119-ubiquitin, whereas AEBP2 has an additional scaffolding role. The presence of these cofactors partially overcomes the inhibitory effect that H3K4me3 and H3K36me3 exert on core PRC2 (in the absence of cofactors). Our results support a key role for JARID2 and AEBP2 in the cross-talk between histone modifications and PRC2 activity.
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a collection of biologically diverse cancers characterized by distinct transcriptional patterns, biology, and immune composition. TNBCs subtypes include two basal-like (BL1, BL2), a mesenchymal (M) and a luminal androgen receptor (LAR) subtype. Through a comprehensive analysis of mutation, copy number, transcriptomic, epigenetic, proteomic, and phospho-proteomic patterns we describe the genomic landscape of TNBC subtypes. Mesenchymal subtype tumors display high mutation loads, genomic instability, absence of immune cells, low PD-L1 expression, decreased global DNA methylation, and transcriptional repression of antigen presentation genes. We demonstrate that major histocompatibility complex I (MHC-I) is transcriptionally suppressed by H3K27me3 modifications by the polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2). Pharmacological inhibition of PRC2 subunits EZH2 or EED restores MHC-I expression and enhances chemotherapy efficacy in murine tumor models, providing a rationale for using PRC2 inhibitors in PD-L1 negative mesenchymal tumors. Subtype-specific differences in immune cell composition and differential genetic/pharmacological vulnerabilities suggest additional treatment strategies for TNBC.
PALI1 is a newly identified accessory protein of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) that catalyzes H3K27 methylation. However, the roles of PALI1 in cancer are yet to be defined. Here, we report that PALI1 is upregulated in advanced prostate cancer (PCa) and competes with JARID2 for binding to the PRC2 core subunit SUZ12. PALI1 further interacts with the H3K9 methyltransferase G9A, bridging the formation of a unique G9A-PALI1-PRC2 super-complex that occupies a subset of G9A-target genes to mediate dual H3K9/K27 methylation and gene repression. Many of these genes are developmental regulators required for cell differentiation, and their loss in PCa predicts poor prognosis. Accordingly, PALI1 and G9A drive PCa cell proliferation and invasion in vitro and xenograft tumor growth in vivo. Collectively, our study shows that PALI1 harnesses two central epigenetic mechanisms to suppress cellular differentiation and promote tumorigenesis, which can be targeted by dual EZH2 and G9A inhibition.
Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a key epigenetic multiprotein complex involved in the regulation of gene expression in metazoans. PRC2 is formed by a tetrameric core that endows the complex with histone methyltransferase activity, allowing it to mono-, di- and tri-methylate histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me1/2/3); H3K27me3 is a hallmark of facultative heterochromatin. The core complex of PRC2 is bound by several associated factors that are responsible for modulating its targeting specificity and enzymatic activity. Depletion and/or mutation of the subunits of this complex can result in severe developmental defects, or even lethality. Furthermore, mutations of these proteins in somatic cells can be drivers of tumorigenesis, by altering the transcriptional regulation of key tumour suppressors or oncogenes. In this review, we present the latest results from structural studies that have characterised PRC2 composition and function. We compare this information with data and literature for both gain-of function and loss-of-function missense mutations in cancers to provide an overview of the impact of these mutations on PRC2 activity.
The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a conserved multiprotein, repressive chromatin complex essential for development and maintenance of eukaryotic cellular identity. PRC2 comprises a trimeric core of SUZ12, EED and EZH1/2, which together with RBBP4/7 is sufficient to catalyse mono-methylation, di-methylation and tri-methylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me1/2/3). These histone methyltransferase activities of PRC2 are deregulated in several human cancers and certain developmental disorders, such as Weaver Syndrome. Core PRC2 associates with several accessory proteins, which organise to define two main subassemblies, PRC2.1 and PRC2.2. Here we review new biochemical and structural studies that are providing critical insights into how core and accessory PRC2 subunits coordinate the faithful deposition of H3K27 methylations genome-wide.
Polycomb repressive complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and 2) are required for heritable repression of developmental genes. The cis- and trans-acting factors that contribute to epigenetic inheritance of mammalian Polycomb repression are not fully understood. Here, we show that, in human cells, ectopically induced Polycomb silencing at initially active developmental genes, but not near ubiquitously expressed housekeeping genes, is inherited for many cell divisions. Unexpectedly, silencing is heritable in cells with mutations in the H3K27me3 binding pocket of the Embryonic Ectoderm Development (EED) subunit of PRC2, which are known to disrupt H3K27me3 recognition and lead to loss of H3K27me3. This mode of inheritance is less stable and requires intact PRC2 and recognition of H2AK119ub1 by PRC1. Our findings suggest that maintenance of Polycomb silencing is sensitive to local genomic context and can be mediated by PRC1-dependent H2AK119ub1 and PRC2 independently of H3K27me3 recognition.
EED within the PRC2 complex is crucial for chromatin regulation particularly in tumor development, making its inhibition a promising epigenetic therapeutic strategy. Significant advancement in PRC2 inhibitor development has been achieved with an approved EZH2 inhibitor in the market and with others in the clinical trials. However, current EZH2 inhibitors are limited to specific blood cancers and encounter therapeutic resistance. EED stabilizes PRC2 complex and enhances its activity through unique allosteric mechanisms, thereby acting as both a scaffold protein and a recognizer of H3K27me3 making it an attractive drug target. This review provides an overview of epigenetic therapeutic strategies targeting EED, including allosteric inhibitors, PPI inhibitors, and PROTACs, together with brief discussions on the relevant challenges, opportunities, and future directions.
Exploring the complexity of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) unveils a diversity of potential cell fates; however, the exact timing and mechanisms by which early cell states diverge into distinct EMT trajectories remain unclear. Studying these EMT trajectories through single-cell RNA sequencing is challenging due to the necessity of sacrificing cells for each measurement. In this study, we employed optimal-transport analysis to reconstruct the past trajectories of different cell fates during TGF-beta-induced EMT in the MCF10A cell line. Our analysis revealed three distinct trajectories leading to low EMT, partial EMT, and high EMT states. Cells along the partial EMT trajectory showed substantial variations in the EMT signature and exhibited pronounced stemness. Throughout this EMT trajectory, we observed a consistent downregulation of the EED and EZH2 genes. This finding was validated by recent inhibitor screens of EMT regulators and CRISPR screen studies. Moreover, we applied our analysis of early-phase differential gene expression to gene sets associated with stemness and proliferation, pinpointing ITGB4, LAMA3, and LAMB3 as genes differentially expressed in the initial stages of the partial versus high EMT trajectories. We also found that CENPF, CKS1B, and MKI67 showed significant upregulation in the high EMT trajectory. While the first group of genes aligns with findings from previous studies, our work uniquely pinpoints the precise timing of these upregulations. Finally, the identification of the latter group of genes sheds light on potential cell cycle targets for modulating EMT trajectories.
Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is an epigenetic regulator that trimethylates lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3) and is essential for embryonic development and cellular differentiation. H3K27me3 is associated with transcriptionally repressed chromatin and is established when PRC2 is allosterically activated upon methyl-lysine binding by the regulatory subunit EED. Automethylation of the catalytic subunit enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) stimulates its activity by an unknown mechanism. Here, we show that human PRC2 forms a dimer on chromatin in which an inactive, automethylated PRC2 protomer is the allosteric activator of a second PRC2 that is poised to methylate H3 of a substrate nucleosome. Functional assays support our model of allosteric trans-autoactivation via EED, suggesting a previously unknown mechanism mediating context-dependent activation of PRC2. Our work showcases the molecular mechanism of auto-modification-coupled dimerization in the regulation of chromatin-modifying complexes.
Erythema elevatum et diutinum (EED) is a rare, chronic dermatosis. It has been associated with extracutaneous findings, including arthralgias, scleritis, panuveitis, peripheral ulcerative keratitis, oral and penile ulcers, and neuropathy. Additionally, EED is connected with various systemic diseases, including HIV, IgA paraproteinemia, myelomas, neutrophilic dermatoses, and inflammatory bowel diseases. The presence of such extracutaneous manifestations in EED patients suggests that EED may be a multiorgan entity. Extracutaneous manifestations in EED may involve deposition of circulating immune complexes; thus, patients with EED should be evaluated for systemic manifestations to ensure targeted management.
Environmental enteric dysfunction (EED) is a diffuse small bowel disorder associated with poor growth, inadequate responses to oral vaccines, and nutrient malabsorption in millions of children worldwide. We identify loss of the small intestinal Paneth and goblet cells that are critical for innate immunity, reduced villous height, increased bile acids, and dysregulated nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) synthesis signaling as potential mechanisms underlying EED and which also correlated with diminished length-for-age z score. Isocaloric low-protein diet (LPD) consumption in mice recapitulated EED histopathology and transcriptomic changes in a microbiota-independent manner, as well as increases in serum and fecal bile acids. Children with refractory EED harbor single-nucleotide polymorphisms in key enzymes involved in NAD(+) synthesis. In mice, deletion of Nampt, the gene encoding the rate-limiting enzyme in the NAD(+) salvage pathway, from intestinal epithelium also reduced Paneth cell function, a deficiency that was further aggravated by LPD. Separate supplementation with NAD(+) precursors or bile acid sequestrant partially restored LPD-associated Paneth cell defects and, when combined, fully restored all histopathology defects in LPD-fed mice. Therapeutic regimens that increase protein and NAD(+) contents while reducing excessive bile acids may benefit children with refractory EED.
The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) can methylate at lysine 27 of histone H3 at the trimethylation level (H3K27me3). This leads to gene silencing and is known to be dysregulated in many cancers. PRC2 is made up of three core subunits: EZH2, SUZ12, and EED. EED is essential for the regulation of PRC2 function by binding to H3K27me3. Targeting the allosteric site within EED offers new strategies to disrupt the PRC2 activity. In this minireview, we summarize some of the recent developments in small molecules that target EED and its interaction with other core proteins in the PRC2 complex.
Control of gene expression is exerted at a number of different levels, one of which is the accessibility of genes and their controlling elements to the transcriptional machinery. Accessibility is dictated broadly by the degree of chromatin compaction, which is influenced in part by polycomb group proteins. EZH2, together with SUZ12 and EED, forms the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which catalyzes trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3). PRC2 may recruit other polycomb complexes, DNA methyltransferases, and histone deacetylases, resulting in additional transcriptional repressive marks and chromatin compaction at key developmental loci. Overexpression of EZH2 is a marker of advanced and metastatic disease in many solid tumors, including prostate and breast cancer. Mutation of EZH2 Y641 is described in lymphoma and results in enhanced activity, whereas inactivating mutations are seen in poor prognosis myeloid neoplasms. No histone demethylating agents are currently available for treatment of patients, but 3-deazaneplanocin (DZNep) reduces EZH2 levels and H3K27 trimethylation, resulting in reduced cell proliferation in breast and prostate cancer cells in vitro. Furthermore, synergistic effects are seen for combined treatment with DNA demethylating agents and histone deacetylation inhibitors, opening up the possibility of refined epigenetic treatments in the future.
The discussion in this review centers around the significant relationships between EZH2 and the initiation, progression, metastasis, metabolism, drug resistance, and immune regulation of cancer. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins, which encompass two primary Polycomb repressor complexes (PRC1 and PRC2), have been categorized. PRC2 consists mainly of four subunits, namely EZH2, EED, SUZ12, and RbAp46/48. As the crucial catalytic component within the PRC2 complex, EZH2 plays a pivotal role in controlling a wide range of biological processes. Overexpression/mutations of EZH2 have been detected in a wide variety of tumors. Several mechanisms of EZH regulation have been identified, including regulation EZH2 mRNA by miRNAs, LncRNAs, accessibility to DNA via DNA-binding proteins, post-translational modifications, and transcriptional regulation. EZH2 signaling triggers cancer progression and may intervene with anti-tumor immunity; therefore it has charmed attention as an effective therapeutic target in cancer therapy. Numerous nucleic acid-based therapies have been used in the modification of EZH2. In addition to gene therapy approaches, pharmaceutical compounds can be used to target the EZH2 signaling pathway in the treatment of cancer. EZH2-associated tumor cells and immune cells enhance the effects of the immune response in a variety of human malignancies. The combination of epigenetic modifying agents, such as anti-EZH2 compounds with immunotherapy, could potentially be efficacious even in the context of immunosuppressive tumors. Summary, understanding the mechanisms underlying resistance to EZH2 inhibitors may facilitate the development of novel drugs to prevent or treat relapse in treated patients.
Treatment-resistant cancer, such as neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC), is a lethal disease with limited therapeutic options. RB1 is a tumor suppressor gene that is lost in a majority of NEPC tumors. In this issue of the JCI, Wang and colleagues examined how RB1 loss may sensitize cancer cells to ferroptosis inducers through elevation of ACSL4, a key enzyme that promotes lipid peroxidation and triggers ferroptosis. We discuss a high potential of RB1-deficient cells to undergo ferroptosis due to the elevation of ACSL4. This is normally kept in check by abundant expression of GPX4, an antioxidant enzyme, in cancer cells. This balance, however, is tilted by GPX4 inhibitors, leading to massive ferroptosis. We highlight possible therapeutic strategies that exploit this inherent vulnerability for targeting RB1-deficient, treatment-resistant cancer.
Numerous molecular processes conduct epigenetic regulation of protein transcription to maintain cell specification. In this review, we discuss molecular mechanisms of the Polycomb group of proteins and its enzymatic role in epigenetics. More specifically, we focus on the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and the effects of its repressive marker. We have compiled information regarding the biological structure and how that impacts the stability of the complex. In addition, we examined functions of the individual core proteins of PRC2 in relation to the accessory proteins that interact with the complex. Lastly, we discuss the implications of unregulated and downregulated PRC2 activity in Alzheimer's disease and cancer and possible methods of treatment related to PRC2 regulation.
INTRODUCTION: EZH2 is an important epigenetic regulator that forms the PRC2 complex with SUZ12, EED and RbAp46/48. As the key catalytic subunit of PRC2, EZH2 regulates the trimethylation of histone H3K27, which in turn promotes chromatin condensation and represses the transcription of relevant target genes. EZH2 overexpression and mutations are strictly related to tumor proliferation, invasion and metastasis. Currently, a large number of highly specific EZH2 inhibitors have been developed and some have already been in clinical trials. AREAS COVERED: The aim of the present review is to provide an overview of the molecular mechanisms of EZH2 inhibitors and to highlight the research advances in the patent literature published from 2017 to date. A search of the literature and patents for EZH2 inhibitors and degraders was performed using the Web of Science, SCIFinder, WIPO, USPTO, EPO and CNIPA databases. EXPERT OPINION: In recent years, a great number of structurally diverse EZH2 inhibitors have been identified, including EZH2 reversible inhibitors, EZH2 irreversible inhibitors, EZH2-based dual inhibitors and EZH2 degraders. Despite the multiple challenges, EZH2 inhibitors offer promising potential for the treatment of various diseases, such as cancers.
