Ephrin-A4; Cell surface GPI-bound ligand for Eph receptors, a family of receptor tyrosine kinases which are crucial for migration, repulsion and adhesion during neuronal, vascular and epithelial development. Binds promiscuously Eph receptors residing on adjacent cells, leading to contact-dependent bidirectional signaling into neighboring cells. May play a role in the interaction between activated B-lymphocytes and dendritic cells in tonsils.
Abnormal development of corpus callosum is relatively common and causes a broad spectrum of cognitive impairments in humans. We use acallosal Neurod2/6-deficient mice to study callosal axon guidance within the ipsilateral cerebral cortex. Initial callosal tracts form but fail to traverse the ipsilateral cingulum and are not attracted towards the midline in the absence of Neurod2/6. We show that the restoration of Ephrin-A4 (EfnA4) expression in the embryonic neocortex of Neurod2/6-deficient embryos is sufficient to partially rescue targeted callosal axon growth towards the midline. EfnA4 cannot directly mediate reverse signaling within outgrowing axons, but it forms co-receptor complexes with TrkB (Ntrk2). The ability of EfnA4 to rescue the guided growth of a subset of callosal axons in Neurod2/6-deficient mice is abolished by the co-expression of dominant negative TrkBK571N (kinase-dead) or TrkBY515F (SHC-binding deficient) variants, but not by TrkBY816F (PLCgamma1-binding deficient). Additionally, EphA4 is repulsive to EfnA4-positive medially projecting axons in organotypic brain slice culture. Collectively, we suggest that EfnA4-mediated reverse signaling acts via TrkB-SHC and is required for ipsilateral callosal axon growth accuracy towards the midline downstream of Neurod family factors.
Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) is a rare, autosomal dominant disorder characterized by anomalies affecting the limbs, apocrine glands, dentition, and genital development. This syndrome is caused by haploinsufficiency in the T-Box3 gene (TBX3), with considerable variability in the clinical phenotype being observed even within families. We describe a one-year-old female with unilateral, postaxial polydactyly, and bilateral fifth fingernail duplication. Next-generation sequencing revealed a novel, likely pathogenic, variant predicted to affect the canonical splice site in intron 3 of the TBX3 gene (c.804 + 1G > A, IVS3 + 1G > A). This variant was inherited from the proband's father who was also diagnosed with UMS with the additional clinical finding of congenital, sagittal craniosynostosis. Subsequent whole genome analysis in the proband's father detected a variant in the EFNA4 gene (c.178C > T, p.His60Tyr), which has only been reported to be associated with sagittal craniosynostosis in one patient prior to this report but reported in other cranial suture synostosis. The findings in this family extend the genotypic spectrum of UMS, as well as the phenotypic spectrum of EFNA4-related craniosynostosis.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common type of liver cancer. Ephrin A4 (EFNA4) acts as an oncogene in multiple cancers but is little known in HCC. It is revealed that EFNA4 is highly expressed in patients with HCC and influences the proliferation of HCC cells; however, detailed regulatory mechanism of EFNA4 in HCC needs to be unveiled. Here, we discovered that EFNA4 was highly expressed in HCC cell lines. EFNA4 knockdown greatly suppressed cell proliferation, migration and invasion, as well as inhibiting angiogenesis in Huh7 cells. EFNA4 was demonstrated to interact with pygopus-2 (PYGO2) and positively regulate PYGO2 expression. Gene gain- and loss-of-function experiments revealed that the anti-tumor effect of EFNA4 knockdown was partly abolished by PYGO2 overexpression. Furthermore, EFNA4 knockdown blocked wnt/beta-catenin signaling in Huh7 cells, which was then abolished by PYGO2. In conclusion, this study further ensured the oncogenic role of EFNA4 in HCC, and disclosed that EFNA4 knockdown suppressed cell proliferation, invasion, angiogenesis, and wnt/beta-catenin signaling in HCC by downregulating PYGO2.
EFNA4, a member of the Ephrin-A ligand family, may influence hepatocellular carcinoma cells through two distinct mechanisms: one reliant on specific Eph receptor binding and the other independent of receptor involvement. However, EFNA4's influence on HCC via non-Eph receptor pathways remains unclear. In this study, we aimed to investigate the role of EFNA4 in a receptor-independent environment. Firstly, we constructed an environment lacking Eph receptors via CRISPR/Cas9 and found that EFNA4 could still partially promote HCC proliferation and metastasis in vivo and in vitro. Further analyses of apoptosis, ROS, and GPX4 expression revealed that overexpression of EFNA4 would inhibit ferroptosis in HCC. Mechanistically, EFNA4 was positively correlated with SLC7A11 and directly interacted with SLC7A11 in HCC via bioinformatics analysis. We demonstrated that the structural domain (a.a. 161-201) of EFNA4 specifically binds to the domain (a.a. 222-501) of SLC7A11, which led to the deubiquitination of SLC7A11. Subsequently, we found that EFNA4 would recruit the deubiquitinase USP9X, resulting in inhibition of SLC7A11 degradation, which ultimately inhibits ferroptosis and enhances the proliferation and metastasis of HCC. In conclusion, we demonstrated that EFNA4 promotes the proliferation and metastasis of HCC independent of Eph receptors by inhibiting ferroptosis and advancing the deubiquitination of SLC7A11 by recruiting the deubiquitinase USP9X. This indicates that EFNA4 could act as a potential prognostic marker and a prospective therapeutic target in patients with HCC.
Current understanding of the genetic factors contributing to the etiology of non-syndromic craniosynostosis (NSC) remains scarce. The present work investigated the presence of variants in ALX4, EFNA4, and TWIST1 genes in children with NSC to verify if variants within these genes may contribute to the occurrence of these abnormal phenotypes. A total of 101 children (aged 45.07+/-40.94 months) with NSC participated in this cross-sectional study. Parents and siblings of the probands were invited to participate. Medical and family history of craniosynostosis were documented. Biological samples were collected to obtain genomic DNA. Coding exons of human TWIST1, ALX4, and EFNA4 genes were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and Sanger sequenced. Five missense variants were identified in ALX4 in children with bilateral coronal, sagittal, and metopic synostosis. A de novo ALX4 variant, c.799G>A: p.Ala267Thr, was identified in a proband with sagittal synostosis. Three missense variants were identified in the EFNA4 gene in children with metopic and sagittal synostosis. A TWIST1 variant occurred in a child with unilateral coronal synostosis. Variants were predicted to be among the 0.1% (TWIST1, c.380C>A: p. Ala127Glu) and 1% (ALX4, c.769C>T: p.Arg257Cys, c.799G>A: p.Ala267Thr, c.929G>A: p.Gly310Asp; EFNA4, c.178C>T: p.His60Tyr, C.283A>G: p.Lys95Glu, c.349C>A: Pro117Thr) most deleterious variants in the human genome. With the exception of ALX4, c.799G>A: p.Ala267Thr, all other variants were present in at least one non-affected family member, suggesting incomplete penetrance. Thus, these variants may contribute to the development of craniosynostosis, and should not be discarded as potential candidate genes in the diagnosis of this condition.
The activities of the ephrin family in breast cancer (BrCa) are complex. Family A receptors (EPHA) and ligands (EFNA) can act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors and are implicated in chemoresistance. Here, we examined the expression pattern and prognostic value of the EPHA/EFNA family in patients with breast cancer, including patients with different subtypes or different chemotherapy cohorts. In the UALCAN database, the mRNA expression of EPHA1, EPHA10, EFNA1, EFNA3, and EFNA4 was significantly higher, whereas that of EPHA2, EPHA4, EPHA5, and EFNA5 was significantly lower in breast cancer tissues than in paracancerous tissues. The transcriptional levels of EPHA/EFNA family members were correlated with intrinsic subclasses of breast cancer. The relationship between EPHA/EFNA and the clinicopathological parameters of BrCa was analyzed using bc-GenExMiner V4.5. EPHA1, EPHA2, EPHA4, EPHA7, EFNA3, EFNA4, and EFNA5 were upregulated in estrogen receptor- (ER-) and progesterone receptor- (PR-) negative tumors, whereas EPHA3, EPHA6, and EFNA1 were upregulated in ER- and PR-positive tumors. EPHA1, EPHA2, EFNA3, and EFNA4 mRNA expression was significantly higher in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2- (HER2-) positive tumors than in HER2-negative tumors. Triple-negative status was positively correlated with EPHA1, EPHA2, EPHA4, EPHA7, EFNA3, EFNA4, and EFNA5 and negatively correlated with EPHA3 and EPHA10 mRNA expression. Genetic alterations of EPHA/EFNA in breast cancer varied from 1.1% to 10% for individual genes, as determined by the cBioPortal database. The Kaplan-Meier plotter indicated that high EphA7 mRNA expression was associated with poor overall survival (OS) and recurrence-free survival (RFS), especially in the HER2 and luminal A subtypes. EFNA4 was predicted to have poor OS and RFS in breast cancers, especially in luminal B, basal-like subtype, and patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. High EPHA3 expression was significantly associated with better OS and RFS, especially in the luminal A subtype, but with poor RFS in BrCa patients receiving chemotherapy. Our findings systematically elucidate the expression pattern and prognostic value of the EPHA/EFNA family in BrCa, which might provide potential prognostic factors and novel targets in BrCa patients, including those with different subtypes or treated with chemotherapy.
Both ephrins (EFNs) and their receptors (Ephs) are membrane-bound, restricting their interactions to the sites of direct cell-to-cell interfaces. They are widely expressed, often co-expressed, and regulate developmental processes, cell adhesion, motility, survival, proliferation, and differentiation. Both tumor suppressor and oncogene activities are ascribed to EFNs and Ephs in various contexts. A major conundrum regarding the EFN/Eph system concerns their large number and functional redundancy given the promiscuous cross-activation of ligands and receptors and the overlapping intracellular signaling pathways. To address this issue, we treated human epidermal keratinocytes with five EFNAs individually and defined the transcriptional responses in the cells. We found that a large set of genes is coregulated by all EFNAs. However, although the responses to EFNA3, EFNA4, and EFNA5 are identical, the responses to EFNA1 and EFNA2 are characteristic and distinctive. All EFNAs induce epidermal differentiation markers and suppress cell adhesion genes, especially integrins. Ontological analysis showed that all EFNAs induce cornification and keratin genes while suppressing wound healing-associated, signaling, receptor, and extracellular matrix-associated genes. Transcriptional targets of AP1 are selectively suppressed by EFNAs. EFNA1 and EFNA2, but not the EFNA3, EFNA4, EFNA5 cluster, regulate the members of the ubiquitin-associated proteolysis genes. EFNA1 specifically induces collagen production. Our results demonstrate that the EFN-Eph interactions in the epidermis, although promiscuous, are not redundant but specific. This suggests that different members of the EFN/Eph system have specific, clearly demarcated functions.
Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD) encompasses a range of trophoblast-derived disorders. The most common type of GTD is hydatidiform mole (HM). Some of HMs can further develop into malignant gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN). Aberrant expression of microRNA (miRNA) is widely reported to be involved in the initiation and progression of cancers. MiRNA expression profile also has been proved to be the useful signature for diagnosis, staging, prognosis, and response to chemotherapy. Till now, the profile of miRNA in the progression of GTD has not been determined. In this study, a total of 34 GTN and 60 complete HMs (CHM) trophoblastic tissues were collected. By miRNA array screening and qRT-PCR validating, six miRNAs, including miR-370-3p, -371a-5p, -518a-3p, -519d-3p, -520a-3p, and -934, were identified to be differentially expressed in GTN vs. CHM. Functional analyses further proved that miR-371a-5p and miR-518a-3p promoted proliferation, migration, and invasion of choriocarcinoma cells. Moreover, we demonstrated that miR-371a-5p was negatively related to protein levels of its predictive target genes BCCIP, SOX2, and BNIP3L, while miR-518a-3p was negatively related to MST1 and EFNA4. For the first time, we proved that miR-371a-5p and miR-518a-3p directly targeted to 3'-UTR regions of BCCIP and MST1, respectively. Additionally, we found that miR-371a-5p and miR-518a-3p regulated diverse pathways related to tumorigenesis and metastasis in choriocarcinoma cells. The results presented here may offer new clues to the progression of GTD and may provide diagnostic biomarkers for GTN.
Gastric cancer represents an aggressive malignancy and a leading contributor to cancer death. Ephrin-A4 (EFNA4) has been proposed to be related to the immune microenvironment and prognosis of gastric cancer. This study was undertaken to discuss the participation and mechanism of EFNA4 in the development of gastric cancer. RT-qPCR and western blot examined EFNA4 and Pygopus2 (Pygo2) expression in gastric cancer cells. After transfection of EFNA4 interference plasmids or co-transfection of EFNA4 interference plasmids and Pygo2 overexpression plasmids, cell proliferation was detected by the CCK-8 method and EDU staining. Wound healing, Transwell, TUNEL, and endothelial cell tube formation assays detected cell migration, invasion, apoptosis, and angiogenesis, respectively. Western blot examined the expression of metastasis-, apoptosis-, angiogenesis-, and Wnt signaling-associated proteins. Cell stemness was estimated by the sphere formation assay, RT-qPCR, and western blot. Through the experimental data, it was noticed that EFNA4 expression was increased in gastric cancer cells. Knockdown of EFNA4 suppressed the proliferation, migration, invasion, angiogenesis as well as stemness while aggravating the apoptosis of gastric cancer cells. Also, EFNA4 depletion reduced Pygo2 protein expression and then inactivated Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. Further elevation of Pygo2 reversed the impacts of EFNA4 silencing on Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration, invasion, angiogenesis as well as stemness in gastric cancer. Accordingly, the knockdown of EFNA4 might downregulate Pygo2 and inactivate Wnt/beta-catenin signaling to exert protective effects against gastric cancer.
In the bi-directional signaling system comprising ephrins (EFNs) and ephrin receptors (Ephs), both EFNs and Ephs simultaneously function both as ligands and as receptors. Importantly, the EFN/Eph system is deregulated in human cancers and has been implicated in the metastatic processes because of its effects on the adhesion and migration of epithelial cells. The idiosyncratic function of Ephs, membrane-bound receptor kinases, as extracellular signaling ligands, has not been extensively studied. This prompted us to explore the transcriptional targets regulated by Ephs acting solely as ligands. To define the ligand function of EphB2 in human epidermal keratinocytes, we treated these cells with EphB2 as Fc-conjugate dimmers, which thus act exclusively as extracellular ligands. We compared the EphB2 and EFNA4 effects during a 48 h time course, using transcriptional profiling. We found that EphB2, acting as a ligand, promotes epidermal differentiation. For example, EphB2 induces expression of markers of epidermal differentiation, including keratins KRT1 and KRT10, SPRRs, desmosomal proteins and cell cycle inhibitors, while suppressing basal layer markers, integrins and cell cycle proteins. The effects of EphB2 are delayed relative to those of EFNA4. Unlike EFNA4, EphB2 did not induce lipid metabolism proteins, this particular aspect of epidermal differentiation seems not to be regulated by EphB2. Our results define the transcriptional targets of the reverse signaling by EphB2 acting exclusively as a ligand and begin to characterize this intriguing function of Ephs.
Boundaries between cellular compartments often serve as signaling interfaces during embryogenesis. The coronal suture is a major growth center of the skull vault and develops at a boundary between cells derived from neural crest and mesodermal origin, forming the frontal and parietal bones, respectively. Premature fusion of these bones, termed coronal synostosis, is a common human developmental anomaly. Known causes of coronal synostosis include haploinsufficiency of TWIST1 and a gain of function mutation in MSX2. In Twist1(+/-) mice with coronal synostosis, we found that the frontal-parietal boundary is defective. Specifically, neural crest cells invade the undifferentiated mesoderm of the Twist1(+/-) mutant coronal suture. This boundary defect is accompanied by an expansion in Msx2 expression and reduction in ephrin-A4 distribution. Reduced dosage of Msx2 in the Twist1 mutant background restores the expression of ephrin-A4, rescues the suture boundary and inhibits craniosynostosis. Underlining the importance of ephrin-A4, we identified heterozygous mutations in the human orthologue, EFNA4, in three of 81 patients with non-syndromic coronal synostosis. This provides genetic evidence that Twist1, Msx2 and Efna4 function together in boundary formation and the pathogenesis of coronal synostosis.
About 20% of patients with diabetes suffer from chronic pain with neuropathic characteristics. We investigated the multivariate associations between 92 neurology-related proteins measured in serum from 190 patients with painful and painless diabetic neuropathy. Participants were recruited from the Pain in Neuropathy Study, an observational cross-sectional multicentre study in which participants underwent deep phenotyping. In the exploration cohort, two groups were defined by hierarchical cluster analyses of protein data. The proportion of painless vs painful neuropathy did not differ between the two groups, but one group had a significantly higher grade of neuropathy as measured by the Toronto Clinical Scoring System (TCSS). This finding was replicated in the replication cohort. Analyzing both groups together, we found that a group of 11 inter-correlated proteins (TNFRSF12A, SCARB2, N2DL-2, SKR3, EFNA4, LAYN, CLM-1, CD38, UNC5C, GFR-alpha-1, and JAM-B) were positively associated with TCSS values. Notably, EFNA4 and UNC5C are known to be part of axon guidance pathways. To conclude, although cluster analysis of 92 neurology-related proteins did not distinguish painful from painless diabetic neuropathy, we identified 11 proteins which positively correlated to neuropathy severity and warrant further investigation as potential biomarkers.
Ephrin type-A receptor 10 (EPHA10) has been implicated as a potential target for breast and prostate cancer therapy. However, its involvement in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) remains unclear. We demonstrated that EPHA10 supports in vivo tumor growth and lymphatic metastasis of OSCC cells. OSCC cell migration, epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), and sphere formation were found to be regulated by EPHA10, and EPHA10 was found to drive expression of some EMT- and stemness-associated transcription factors. Among EPHA10 ligands, exogenous ephrin A4 (EFNA4) induced the most OSCC cell migration and sphere formation, as well as up-regulation of SNAIL, NANOG, and OCT4. These effects were abolished by extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) inhibition and NANOG knockdown. Also, EPHA10 was required for EFNA4-induced cell migration, sphere formation, and expression of NANOG and OCT4 mRNA. Our microarray dataset revealed that EFNA4 mRNA expression was associated with expression of NANOG and OCT4 mRNA, and OSCC patients showing high co-expression of EFNA4 with NANOG or OCT4 mRNA demonstrated poor recurrence-free survival rates. Targeting forward signaling of the EFNA4-EPHA10 axis may be a promising therapeutic approach for oral malignancies, and the combination of EFNA4 mRNA and downstream gene expression may be a useful prognostic biomarker for OSCC.
PF-06647263, a novel antibody-drug conjugate consisting of an anti-EFNA4 antibody linked to a calicheamicin payload, has shown potent antitumor activity in human xenograft tumor models, including triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). In the dose-escalation part 1 of this multicenter, open-label, phase I study (NCT02078752), successive cohorts of patients (n, 48) with advanced solid tumors and no available standard therapy received PF-06647263 every 3 weeks (Q3W) or every week (QW), following a modified toxicity probability interval (mTPI) method (initial dosing: 0.015 mg/kg Q3W). Primary objective in part 1 was to estimate the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and select the recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D). In part 2 (dose-expansion cohort), 12 patients with pretreated, metastatic TNBC received PF-06647263 at the RP2D to further evaluate tumor response and overall safety. PF-06647263 QW administration (n, 23) was better tolerated than the Q3W regimen (n, 25) with only 1 DLT reported (thrombocytopenia). The most common AEs with the QW regimen (fatigue, nausea, vomiting, mucosal inflammation, thrombocytopenia, and diarrhea) were mostly mild to moderate in severity. The MTD was not estimated. PF-06647263 exposures increased in a dose-related manner across the doses evaluated. The RP2D was determined to be 0.015 mg/kg QW. Six (10%) patients achieved a confirmed partial response and 22 (36.7%) patients had stable disease. No correlations were observed between tumor responses and EFNA4 expression levels. Study findings showed manageable safety and favorable PK for PF-06647263 administered QW at the RP2D, with preliminary evidence of limited antitumor activity in patients with TNBC and ovarian cancer.
PURPOSE: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and ovarian cancer each comprise heterogeneous tumors, for which current therapies have little clinical benefit. Novel therapies that target and eradicate tumor-initiating cells (TIC) are needed to significantly improve survival. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A panel of well-annotated patient-derived xenografts (PDX) was established, and surface markers that enriched for TIC in specific tumor subtypes were empirically determined. The TICs were queried for overexpressed antigens, one of which was selected to be the target of an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC). The efficacy of the ADC was evaluated in 15 PDX models to generate hypotheses for patient stratification. RESULTS: We herein identified E-cadherin (CD324) as a surface antigen able to reproducibly enrich for TIC in well-annotated, low-passage TNBC and ovarian cancer PDXs. Gene expression analysis of TIC led to the identification of Ephrin-A4 (EFNA4) as a prospective therapeutic target. An ADC comprising a humanized anti-EFNA4 monoclonal antibody conjugated to the DNA-damaging agent calicheamicin achieved sustained tumor regressions in both TNBC and ovarian cancer PDX in vivo. Non-claudin low TNBC tumors exhibited higher expression and more robust responses than other breast cancer subtypes, suggesting a specific translational application for tumor subclassification. CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate the potential of PF-06647263 (anti-EFNA4-ADC) as a first-in-class compound designed to eradicate TIC. The use of well-annotated PDX for drug discovery enabled the identification of a novel TIC target, pharmacologic evaluation of the compound, and translational studies to inform clinical development.
Most current research has focused on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) alone; however, it is important to understand the complex mechanism of COPD progression to LUAD. This study is the first to explore the unique and jointly molecular mechanisms in the pathogenesis of COPD and LUAD across several datasets based on a variety of analysis methods. We used weighted correlation network analysis to search hub genes in two datasets from public databases: GSE10072 and GSE76925. We explored the unique and jointly molecular mechanistic signatures of the two diseases in pathogenesis through enrichment analysis, immune infiltration analysis, and therapeutic targets analysis. Finally, the results were confirmed using real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR. Fifteen hub genes were identified: GPI, EZH2, EFNA4, CFB, ENO1, SH3PXD2B, SELL, CORIN, MAD2L1, CENPF, TOP2A, ASPM, IGFBP2, CDKN2A, and ELF3. For the first time, SELL, CORIN, GPI, and EFNA4 were found to play a role in the etiology of COPD and LUAD. The LUAD genes identified were primarily involved in the cell cycle and DNA replication processes; COPD genes we found were related to ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, ribosome, and T/B-cell receptor signaling pathways. The tumor microenvironment of LUAD pathogenesis was influenced by CD4 + T cells, type 1 regulatory T cells, and T helper 1 cells. T follicular helper cells, natural killer T cells, and B cells all impact the immunological inflammation in COPD. The results of drug targets analysis suggest that cisplatin and tretinoin, as well as bortezomib and metformin may be potential targeted therapy for patients with COPD combined LUAD. These signatures may be provided a new direction for developing early interventions and treatments to improve the prognosis of COPD and LUAD.
In order to identify potential specific gene networks of Hepatitis C virus (HCV) related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was performed, which may provide an insight into the potential mechanism of the HCC development. HCV-related HCC and normal sample data were downloaded from GEO, T test of limma package was used to screen different expression genes (DEGs); KEGG pathway was used to analyze related biochemical pathways, and WGCNA was used to construct clustering trees and screen hub genes in the HCC-specific modules. A total of 1151 DEGs were authenticated between the HCC and normal liver tissue samples, including 433 upregulated and 718 downregulated genes. Among these genes, three specific modules of HCC were constructed, including Tan, Yellow and Cyan, but only Yellow module had a significant enrichment score in substance combination module with three hub genes: SLA2547, EFNA4 and MME. Although Tan and Cyan separately had four and three hub genes, but the bio-functions of them did not have significant enrichment scores (score < 2). SLA2547, EFNA4 and MME may play important roles in the substance combination of HCV-related HCC, so studying the function of this gene network may provide us a deeper understanding of HCV-related HCC.
Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common tumors; one of the reasons for its poor prognosis is that GC cells can resist normal cell death process and therefore develop distant metastasis. Cuproptosis is a novel type of cell death and a limited number of studies have been conducted on the relationship between cuproptosis-related genes (CRGs) in GC. The purpose of the present study was to establish a prognostic model of CRGs and provide directions for the diagnosis and treatment of GC. Transcriptome and clinical data of patients with GC were collected from The Cancer Genome Atlas and Gene Expression Omnibus datasets. Single sample gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) and the randomized forest method were used to establish the prognostic model. Kaplan-Meier survival curve, receiver operating characteristics diagram and a nomogram were used to evaluate the reliability of the model. GSEA and gene set variation analysis (GSVA) were used to examine enrichment pathways between high and low risk groups. Finally, immunohistochemical analysis was used to examine ephrin 4 (EFNA4) expression in GC samples and determine the prognosis of patients with GC based on the expression pattern of EFNA4. A group of 7 predictive models (RTKN2, INO80B, EFNA4, ELF2, MUSTN, KRTAP4, and ARHGEF40) was established which were correlated with CRGs. This model can be used as an independent prognostic factor to predict the prognosis of patients with GC. GSEA and GSVA results indicated that high risk patients with GC were mainly associated with the enrichment of ANGIOGENESIS and TGF_BETA_SIGNALING pathways. Finally, EFNA4 expression in GC was significantly higher than that in normal tissues, and patients with GC and high EFNA4 expression exhibited improved prognosis. In conclusion, the prognosis model based on CRGs could be used as the basis for predicting the potential prognosis of patients with GC and provide new insights for the treatment of GC.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the expression of cytokine, nociception-associated ion channel, and axon guidance genes in patients with skin cell fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) differs from healthy controls, potentially contributing to pain and small-fiber degeneration in FMS. METHODS: We prospectively recruited 128 patients and 26 healthy controls. All study participants underwent neurological examination, and a skin punch biopsy was obtained from the lateral calf and thigh. Skin samples were processed to histologically determine intraepidermal nerve fiber density (IENFD) and for primary fibroblast and keratinocyte cell cultures. Gene expression of selected pro- and antiinflammatory cytokines, nociception-associated ion channels, and axon guidance cues was assessed with quantitative real-time PCR. RESULTS: In fibroblasts, transforming growth factor-ss1 (TGF-ss1) gene expression was higher in patients with FMS compared to controls (calf and thigh: p < 0.001). Also, expression was higher in patients than in controls for these variables: hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channel 2 (calf: p < 0.01), ephrin-A4 (EFNA4; calf: p < 0.05, thigh: p < 0.001), and ephrin receptor-A4 (EPHA4; thigh: p < 0.05). In keratinocytes, interleukin 10 gene expression was higher in patients with FMS than in controls (thigh: p < 0.05). While no intergroup difference was found for nociception-associated ion channels, EFNA4 and EPHA4 (calf: p < 0.01 each) expression was higher in patients with FMS than in controls. Axon guide expression did not correlate with IENFD. CONCLUSION: In FMS, skin cells may contribute to cutaneous nociception by differentially expressing membrane-bound and soluble pain mediators and axon pathfinders.
The aim of this study is to compare the expression patterns of tyrosine kinases and their ligand activators between matched myometrium and leiomyoma tissues. Total RNA extracted from 42 pairs of matched leiomyomal and adjacent myometrial tissues were hybridized to a set of 840 customized oligonucleotide microarrays to compare the expression profiles of 244 selected human genes including 90 tyrosine kinases and 103 ligands. Among the 244 genes surveyed, 38 were found to exhibit differential expression between pairs of myometrium and leiomyoma tissues. Clustering analysis of the expression ratios of these 38 genes from 42 pairs of samples led to the subdivision of fibroid samples into three groups, based in principle on the expression ratios of two peptide ligands, CYR61 and EFNA4. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR measurements of an additional 32 pairs of samples further confirmed the three subgroups. The altered expression of ligand activators between myometrium and leiomyoma suggest that tyrosine kinases regulated by CYR61 and EFNA4 may be exploited as therapeutic targets to develop non-surgical treatments of symptomatic leiomyomas.
