Macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for CSF1 and IL34 and plays an essential role in the regulation of survival, proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic precursor cells, especially mononuclear phagocytes, such as macrophages and monocytes. Promotes the release of proinflammatory chemokines in response to IL34 and CSF1, and thereby plays an important role in innate immunity and in inflammatory processes. Plays an important role in the regulation of osteoclast proliferation and differentiation, the regulat [...] 
AIMS: Proteomic profiling offers an expansive approach to biomarker discovery and mechanistic hypothesis generation for LV remodelling, a critical component of heart failure (HF). We sought to identify plasma proteins cross-sectionally associated with left ventricular (LV) size and geometry in a diverse population-based cohort without known cardiovascular disease (CVD). METHODS AND RESULTS: Among participants of the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA), we quantified plasma abundances of 1305 proteins using an aptamer-based platform at exam 1 (2000-2002) and exam 5 (2010-2011) and assessed LV structure by cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) at the same time points. We used multivariable linear regression with robust variance to assess cross-sectional associations between plasma protein abundances and LV structural characteristics at exam 1, reproduced findings in later-life at exam 5, and explored relationships of associated proteins using annotated enrichment analysis. We studied 763 participants (mean age 60 +/- 10 years at exam 1; 53% female; 19% Black race; 31% Hispanic ethnicity). Following adjustment for renal function and traditional CVD risk factors, plasma levels of 3 proteins were associated with LV mass index at both time points with the same directionality (FDR < 0.05): leptin (LEP), renin (REN), and cathepsin-D (CTSD); 20 with LV end-diastolic volume index: LEP, NT-proBNP, histone-lysine N-methyltransferase (EHMT2), chordin-like protein 1 (CHRDL1), tumour necrosis factor-inducible gene 6 protein (TNFAIP6), NT-3 growth factor receptor (NTRK3), c5a anaphylatoxin (C5), neurogenic locus notch homologue protein 3 (NOTCH3), ephrin-B2 (EFNB2), osteomodulin (OMD), contactin-4 (CNTN4), gelsolin (GSN), stromal cell-derived factor 1 (CXCL12), calcineurin subunit B type 1 (PPP3R1), insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R), bone sialoprotein 2 (IBSP), interleukin-11 (IL-11), follistatin-related protein 1 (FSTL1), periostin (POSTN), and biglycan (BGN); and 4 with LV mass-to-volume ratio: RGM domain family member B (RGMB), transforming growth factor beta receptor type 3 (TGFBR3), ephrin-A2 (EFNA2), and cell adhesion molecule 3 (CADM3). Functional annotation implicated regulation of the PI3K-Akt pathway, bone morphogenic protein signalling, and cGMP-mediated signalling. CONCLUSIONS: We report proteomic profiling of LV size and geometry, which identified novel associations and reinforced previous findings on biomarker candidates for LV remodelling and HF. If validated, these proteins may help refine risk prediction and identify novel therapeutic targets for HF.
Sarcopenia is a medical condition that progressively develops with age and results in reduced skeletal muscle mass, alteration in muscle composition, and decreased muscle strength. Several clinical studies suggested that sarcopenia disproportionally affects males and females with age. Despite this knowledge, the molecular mechanism governing the pathophysiology is not well understood in a sex-specific manner. In this study, we utilized human gastrocnemius muscles from males and females to identify differentially regulated genes with age. We found 269 genes with at least a twofold expression difference in the aged muscle transcriptome. Among the female muscle samples, there were 239 differentially regulated genes, and the novel protein-coding genes include KIF20A, PIMREG, MTRNR2L6, TRPV6, EFNA2, RNF24, and SFN. In aged male skeletal muscle, there were 166 differentially regulated genes, and the novel-protein coding genes are CENPK, CDKN2A, BHLHA15, and EPHA. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment revealed glucose catabolism, NAD metabolic processes, and muscle fiber transition pathways that are involved in aged female skeletal muscle, whereas replicative senescence, cytochrome C release, and muscle composition pathways are disrupted in aged male skeletal muscle. Targeting these novels, differentially regulated genes, and signaling pathways could serve as sex-specific therapeutic targets to combat the age-related onset of sarcopenia and promote healthy aging.
Hsa_circ_0006859 has been found as a possible biomarker for postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOP) with an effect on the osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs), but the underlying mechanism is unclear. Bioinformatics analysis was used to identify dysregulated RNAs involved in osteoporosis based on public datasets. Function assays were used to determine the functions of hsa_circ_0006859 on cell proliferation and osteogenic differentiation in vitro. It was found that hsa_circ_0006859 was upregulated in OVX mice-derived BMSCs, but lowly expressed during osteogenic differentiation. Overexpressing hsa_circ_0006859 inhibited the cell proliferation and osteogenesis of BMSCs and hFOB 1.19 cells, vice versa. Bilateral ovariectomy (OVX) was used to induce PMOP in mice. The interactions among circ_0006859, miR-642b-5p/miR-483-3p, and EFNA2/DOCK3 were determined using the RIP assay. Silencing circ_0006859 relieved PMOP in mice. Mechanistically, circ_0006859 bound to miR-642b-5p/miR-483-3p directly, while miR-642b-5p and miR-483-3p respectively targeted EFNA2 and DOCK3. Hsa_circ_0006859 downregulated the expression of miR-642b-5p/miR-483-3p to upregulate EFNA2/DOCK3. Additionally, miR-642b-5p/miR-483-3p targeted EFNA2/DOCK3 to inhibit BMSCs osteogenic differentiation and facilitate osteoporosis progression by inactivating the Wnt signaling. In conclusion, hsa_circ_0006859 is involved in PMOP by targeting miR-642b-5p/EFNA2 and miR-483-3p/DOCK3 axes to maintain the Wnt-signaling pathway, which may be a novel possible therapeutic targets and biomarkers for PMOP.
PURPOSE: To identify genomic imbalances and candidate loci in idiopathic male infertility. METHODS: Affymetrix CytoScan 750K Array was used to analyze genomic imbalances and candidate loci in 34 idiopathic infertile cases of different phenotypes (hypo-spermatogenesis, n = 8; maturation arrest, n = 7; and Sertoli cell-only syndrome, n = 13, severe oligozoospermia, n = 6, and 10 normozoospermic fertile men). Ten ethnically matched controls were screened for comparison. RESULTS: The cytogenetic array analysis detected a genomic gain at the 19p13.3 region in 9 (26.47%) cases, with the highest frequency in patients with Sertoli cell-only syndrome (SCOS) (38%). Its complete absence in the control group suggests its likely pathogenic nature. In addition to Y-classical, micro, and partial deletions, the duplication in 19p13.3 could serve as a unique biomarker for evaluation of infertility risk. The common region across the individuals harboring the duplication identified STK11, ATP5D, MIDN, CIRBP, and EFNA2 genes which make them strong candidates for further investigations. The largest duplicated region identified in this study displayed a major network of 7 genes, viz., CIRBP, FSTL3, GPX4, GAMT, KISS1R, STK11, and PCSK4, associated with reproductive system development and function. The role of chance was ruled out by screening of ethnically matched controls. CONCLUSION: The result clearly indicates the significance of 19p13.3 duplication in infertile men with severe testicular phenotypes. The present study underlines the utility and significance of whole genomic analysis in the cases of male infertility which goes undiagnosed due to limitations in the conventional cytogenetic techniques and for identifying genes that are essential for spermatogenesis.
BACKGROUND: Changes in gene-specific promoter methylation may result from aging and environmental influences. Atherosclerosis is associated with aging and environmental effects. Thus, promoter methylation profiling may be used as an epigenetic tool to evaluate the impact of aging and the environment on atherosclerosis development. However, gene-specific methylation changes are currently inadequate epigenetic markers for predicting atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease pathogenesis. RESULTS: We profiled and validated changes in gene-specific promoter methylation associated with atherosclerosis using stenosis radiophenotypes of cranial vessels and blood inflammatory cells rather than direct sampling of atherosclerotic plaques. First, we profiled gene-specific promoter methylation changes using digital restriction enzyme analysis of methylation (DREAM) sequencing in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from eight samples each of cranial vessels with and without severe-stenosis radiophenotypes. Using DREAM sequencing profiling, 11 tags were detected in the promoter regions of the ACVR1C, ADCK5, EFNA2, ENOSF1, GLS2, KNDC1, MTNR1B, PACSIN3, PAX8-AS1, TLDC1, and ZNF7 genes. Using methylation evaluation, we found that EFNA2, ENOSF1, GLS2, KNDC1, MTNR1B, PAX8-AS1, and TLDC1 showed > 5% promoter methylation in non-plaque intima, atherosclerotic vascular tissues, and buffy coats. Using logistic regression analysis, we identified hypomethylation of MTNR1B as an independent variable for the stenosis radiophenotype prediction model by combining it with traditional atherosclerosis risk factors including age, hypertension history, and increases in creatinine, lipoprotein (a), and homocysteine. We performed fivefold cross-validation of the prediction model using 384 patients with ischemic stroke (50 [13%] no-stenosis and 334 [87%] > 1 stenosis radiophenotype). For the cross-validation, the training dataset included 70% of the dataset. The prediction model showed an accuracy of 0.887, specificity to predict stenosis radiophenotype of 0.940, sensitivity to predict no-stenosis radiophenotype of 0.533, and area under receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.877 to predict stenosis radiophenotype from the test dataset including 30% of the dataset. CONCLUSIONS: We identified and validated MTNR1B hypomethylation as an epigenetic marker to predict cranial vessel atherosclerosis using stenosis radiophenotypes and blood inflammatory cells rather than direct atherosclerotic plaque sampling.
Both ephrins (EFNs) and their receptors (Ephs) are membrane-bound, restricting their interactions to the sites of direct cell-to-cell interfaces. They are widely expressed, often co-expressed, and regulate developmental processes, cell adhesion, motility, survival, proliferation, and differentiation. Both tumor suppressor and oncogene activities are ascribed to EFNs and Ephs in various contexts. A major conundrum regarding the EFN/Eph system concerns their large number and functional redundancy given the promiscuous cross-activation of ligands and receptors and the overlapping intracellular signaling pathways. To address this issue, we treated human epidermal keratinocytes with five EFNAs individually and defined the transcriptional responses in the cells. We found that a large set of genes is coregulated by all EFNAs. However, although the responses to EFNA3, EFNA4, and EFNA5 are identical, the responses to EFNA1 and EFNA2 are characteristic and distinctive. All EFNAs induce epidermal differentiation markers and suppress cell adhesion genes, especially integrins. Ontological analysis showed that all EFNAs induce cornification and keratin genes while suppressing wound healing-associated, signaling, receptor, and extracellular matrix-associated genes. Transcriptional targets of AP1 are selectively suppressed by EFNAs. EFNA1 and EFNA2, but not the EFNA3, EFNA4, EFNA5 cluster, regulate the members of the ubiquitin-associated proteolysis genes. EFNA1 specifically induces collagen production. Our results demonstrate that the EFN-Eph interactions in the epidermis, although promiscuous, are not redundant but specific. This suggests that different members of the EFN/Eph system have specific, clearly demarcated functions.
BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the third leading cause of death globally. COPD patients with cachexia or weight loss have increased risk of death independent of body mass index (BMI) and lung function. We tested the hypothesis genetic variation is associated with weight loss in COPD using a genome-wide association study approach. METHODS: Participants with COPD (N = 4308) from three studies (COPDGene, ECLIPSE, and SPIROMICS) were analysed. Discovery analyses were performed in COPDGene with replication in SPIROMICS and ECLIPSE. In COPDGene, weight loss was defined as self-reported unintentional weight loss > 5% in the past year or low BMI (BMI < 20 kg/m(2) ). In ECLIPSE and SPIROMICS, weight loss was calculated using available longitudinal visits. Stratified analyses were performed among African American (AA) and Non-Hispanic White (NHW) participants with COPD. Single variant and gene-based analyses were performed adjusting for confounders. Fine mapping was performed using a Bayesian approach integrating genetic association results with linkage disequilibrium and functional annotation. Significant gene networks were identified by integrating genetic regions associated with weight loss with skeletal muscle protein-protein interaction (PPI) data. RESULTS: At the single variant level, only the rs35368512 variant, intergenic to GRXCR1 and LINC02383, was associated with weight loss (odds ratio = 3.6, 95% confidence interval = 2.3-5.6, P = 3.2 x 10(-8) ) among AA COPD participants in COPDGene. At the gene level in COPDGene, EFNA2 and BAIAP2 were significantly associated with weight loss in AA and NHW COPD participants, respectively. The EFNA2 association replicated among AA from SPIROMICS (P = 0.0014), whereas the BAIAP2 association replicated in NHW from ECLIPSE (P = 0.025). The EFNA2 gene encodes the membrane-bound protein ephrin-A2 involved in the regulation of developmental processes and adult tissue homeostasis such as skeletal muscle. The BAIAP2 gene encodes the insulin-responsive protein of mass 53 kD (IRSp53), a negative regulator of myogenic differentiation. Integration of the gene-based findings participants with PPI data revealed networks of genes involved in pathways such as Rho and synapse signalling. CONCLUSIONS: The EFNA2 and BAIAP2 genes were significantly associated with weight loss in COPD participants. Collectively, the integrative network analyses indicated genetic variation associated with weight loss in COPD may influence skeletal muscle regeneration and tissue remodelling.
Lung cancer seriously threatens human health. To explore the molecular mechanism of 20(S)-Protopanaxadiol (PPD) on human non-small cell lung cancer cells, we investigated the transcriptional profile of PPD-treated NCI-H1299 cells. Cell proliferation, cell cycle, and apoptosis were detected using cell counting kit-8 and flow cytometry, respectively. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between PPD-treated and untreated cells were determined using RNA sequencing and bioinformatic analysis. Protein phosphorylation was detected using Western blotting. Data of mRNA expression profiles of lung cancer were from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and analyzed using R software version 4.3.1. PPD showed an inhibitory effect on the proliferation of NCI-H1299 cells and induced apoptosis. There were 938 upregulated genes and 466 downregulated genes in PPD-treated cells, and DEGs were primarily enriched in the MAPK signaling pathway. The detection of phosphorylation revealed that the phosphorylation of ERK and p38 MAPK was significantly reduced in PPD-treated cells. Further comparison of PPD-regulated DEGs with clinical data of lung adenocarcinoma demonstrated that most downregulated genes in tumor tissues were upregulated in PPD-treated cells or vice versa. Two PPD-downregulated genes HSPA2 and EFNA2 were associated with patients' overall survival. Therefore, PPD could inhibit NCI-H1299 cells by affecting gene expression and regulating ERK and p38 MAPK pathways.
The Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant polyposis disorder with increased risk of multiple cancers. STK11/LKB1 (hereafter named STK11) germline mutations account for the large majority of PJS cases whereas large deletions account for about 30% of the cases. We report here the first thorough molecular characterization of 15 large deletions identified in a cohort of 51 clinically well-characterized PJS patients. The deletions were identified by MLPA analysis and characterized by custom CGH-array and quantitative PCR to define their boundaries. The deletions, ranging from 2.9 to 180 kb, removed one or more loci contiguous to the STK11 gene in six patients, while partial STK11 gene deletions were present in the remaining nine cases. By means of DNA sequencing, we were able to precisely characterize the breakpoints in each case. Of the 30 breakpoints, 16 were located in Alu elements, revealing non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) as the putative mechanism for the deletions of the STK11 gene, which lays in a region with high Alu density. In the remaining cases, other mechanisms could be hypothesized, such as microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ) or non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ). In conclusion we here demonstrated the non-random occurrence of large deletions associated with PJS. All our patients had a classical PJS phenotype, which shows that haploinsufficiency for SBNO2, C19orf26, ATP5D, MIDN, C19orf23, CIRBP, C19orf24,and EFNA2, does not apparently affect their clinical phenotype.
EFNA1, EFNA2, EFNA3, EFNA4, EFNA5, EFNB1, EFNB2 and EFNB3 are EFN family ligands for EPH family receptors. EFN/EPH signaling pathway networks with the WNT signaling pathway during embryogenesis, tissue regeneration, and carcinogenesis. Comparative genomics analyses on EFNB1, EFNB2 and EFNB3 were performed by using bioinformatics and human intelligence (humint). EFNB1 mRNA was expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells, neural tissues, diffuse type gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, brain tumors and esophageal cancer, EFNB2 mRNA in human ES cells, neural tissues and colon cancer, EFNB3 mRNA in human ES cells, neural tissues, brain tumors, pancreatic cancer and colon cancer. Because triple TCF/LEF-binding sites were identified within the 5'-promoter region of human EFNB3 gene, comparative genomics analyses on EFNB3 orthologs were further performed. Chimpanzee EFNB3 gene, consisting of five exons, was identified within AC164921.3 genome sequence. AY421228.1 was not a correct coding sequence for chimpanzee EFNB3. Chimpanzee EFNB3 gene was found to encode a 340-amino-acid protein showing 99.4% and 96.6% total-amino-acid identity with human EFNB3 and mouse Efnb3, respectively. Three TCF/LEF-binding sites within human EFNB3 promoter were conserved in chimpanzee EFNB3 promoter, and the second TCF/LEF-binding site in rodent Efnb3 promoters. CpG hypermethylation of EFNB3 promoter with 63.2% GC content as well as deletion of EFNB3 gene closely linked to TP53 tumor suppressor gene at human chromosome 17p13.1 should be investigated to elucidate the mechanism of infrequent EFNB3 upregulation in human colorectal cancer. EFNB3, identified as potential transcriptional target of WNT/beta-catenin signaling pathway, is a pharmacogenomics target in the fields of regenerative medicine and oncology.
Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common and lethal extracranial solid tumor of childhood. Despite aggressive therapy, more than half of the children with advanced NB will die of uncontrolled metastatic disease. After chemotherapy, tumor-initiating cells (TICs) could persist, cause relapses and metastasis. The aim of this study is to demonstrate the tumor-initiating properties of CD133high NB cells and to identify new specific genetic abnormalities. Isolation of the CD133high cell population from NB cell lines was followed by neurosphere formation, soft agar assays, and orthotopic injections in NOD/SCID/IL2Rgammac-null mice. A differential genotyping analysis was performed with Affymetrix SNP 6.0 arrays on CD133low and CD133high populations and the frequency of the abnormalities of 36 NB tumors was determined. Our results show that CD133high NB cells possess tumor-initiating properties, as CD133high cells formed significantly more neurospheres and produced significantly more colonies in soft agar than CD133low. Injection of 500 CD133high cells was sufficient to generate primary tumors and frequent metastases in mice. Differential genotyping analysis demonstrated two common regions with gains (16p13.3 and 19p13.3) including the gene EFNA2 in the CD133high population, and two with loss of heterozygosity (16q12.1 and 21q21.3) in the CD133low population. The gain of EFNA2 correlated with increased expression of the corresponding protein. These abnormalities were found in NB samples and some were significantly correlated with CD133 expression. Our results show that CD133high NB cells have TICs properties and present different genotyping characteristics compared to CD133low cells. Our findings reveal insights into new therapeutic targets in NB TICs.
BACKGROUND: The molecular adsorbent recirculating system (MARS) is an albumin-dialysis modality that has been investigated predominantly in patients with acute and acute-on-chronic liver failure. OBJECTIVES: To report the clinical efficacy and safety of MARS therapy for intractable pruritus in cholestasis patients with stable chronic liver disease, characterizing the impact of MARS on cytokine levels and on the transcriptome in the blood compartment. METHODS: MARS therapy was performed on three patients with cholestatic liver disease using 8 h runs for two consecutive days. The expression levels of 65 cytokines⁄chemokines and 24,000 genes were profiled by Luminex (Luminex Corporation, USA) and microarray, respectively. RESULTS: A quality-of-life assessment demonstrated a marked improvement during therapy, which was sustained in two of three patients. No bleeding or infectious complications were observed. Bile acid levels were markedly reduced following MARS (mean [+/- SD] pretreatment 478.9+/-112.2 micromol⁄L versus post-treatment 89.7+/-68.8 micromol⁄L). Concordant decreases in cytokine⁄chemokine levels were noted for interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, IL-12 (p40), RANTES, tranforming growth factor-alpha, tumour necrosis factor-alpha and thrombopoietin following MARS. On microarray profiling, biologically relevant concordant changes among all patients were evident for 20 different genes (10 upregulated and 10 downregulated). The upregulation of several potentially immune suppressive⁄regulatory genes (eg, early growth response 3 [EGR-3], ephrin-A2 [EFNA2] and serum amyloid A1 [SAA1]), concurrent with downregulation of genes involved in innate immunity (eg, toll-like receptor 4 interactor with leucine-rich repeats [TRIL]) and inflammation (eg, ephrin receptor B1 [EPHB1]), was observed. CONCLUSIONS: This investigative approach offers new insights into intractable pruritus and suggests future therapeutic targets. The clinical benefit of MARS in cholestasis patients with intractable pruritus may not exclusively result from filtration of pruritogens, but also from systemic changes in cytokine⁄chemokine levels and changes in gene expression of blood cells.
Lumbar degenerative disc disease (DDD) is a multifaceted progressive condition and often accompanied by disc herniation (DH) and/or degenerative spondylolisthesis (DS). Given the high prevalence of the disease (up to 20% according to some estimates) and the high costs associated with its care, there is a need to explore novel therapies such as regenerative medicine. Exploring these novel therapies first warrants investigation of molecular pathways underlying these disorders. Here, we show results from next generation RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on mRNA isolated from 10 human nucleus pulposus (NP) samples of lumbar degenerated discs (DH and DS; n = 5 for each tissue) and other musculoskeletal tissues (Bone, cartilage, growth plate, and muscle; n = 7 for each tissue). Pathway and network analyses based on gene ontology (GO) terms were used to identify the biological functions of differentially expressed mRNAs. A total of 701 genes were found to be significantly upregulated in lumbar NP tissue compared to other musculoskeletal tissues. These differentially expressed mRNAs were primarily involved in DNA damage, immunity and G1/S transition of mitotic cell cycle. Interestingly, DH-specific signaling genes showed major network in chemotactic (e.g., CXCL10, CXCL11, IL1RL2 and IL6) and matrix-degrading pathway (e.g., MMP16, ADAMTSL1, 5, 8, 12, and 15), while DS-specific signaling genes were found to be those involved in cell adhesion (e.g., CDH1, EPHA1 and EFNA2) and inflammatory cytokines (e.g., CD19, CXCL5, CCL24, 25 and XCL2). Our findings provide new leads for therapeutic drug discovery that would permit optimization of medical or pharmacological intervention for cases of lumbar DDD.
The Eph-related receptor tyrosine kinases constitute a large family of receptors with most members displaying specific expression patterns in the developing embryo. Ligands for Eph receptor tyrosine kinases, recently renamed ephrins, comprise a family of at least 8 membrane-bound members that display promiscuous binding to Eph receptors. Here we report the characterization of a human cDNA clone with high homology to the gene encoding the murine ephrin-A2 ligand. The human gene encodes a single 2.4-kb mRNA with a restricted and developmentally-regulated tissue distribution pattern. In the fetus, ephrin-A2 mRNA is expressed in brain and intestine, whereas in the adult, high levels of ephrin-A2 mRNA are detectable in lung and intestine. Using PCR-based screening of genomic DNA from human x rodent hybrid cell lines, the gene encoding ephrin-A2 (EFNA2) was assigned to chromosome 19. Fluorescence in situ hybridization to metaphase chromosome preparations refined this localization to band p13.3.
BACKGROUND: The incidence of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is increasing worldwide with different prognosis even in early-stage patients. We aimed to identify a prognostic panel with multiple DNA methylation biomarkers to predict survival in early-stage LUAD patients of different racial groups. METHODS: The methylation array, pyrosequencing methylation assay, Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier analyses were conducted to build the risk score equations of selected probes in a training cohort of 69 Asian LUAD patients. The risk score model was verified in another cohort of 299 Caucasian LUAD patients in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. RESULTS: We performed a Cox regression analysis, in which the regression coefficients were obtained for eight probes corresponding to eight genes (AGTRL1, ALDH1A3, BDKRB1, CTSE, EFNA2, NFAM1, SEMA4A and TMEM129). The risk score was derived from sum of each methylated probes multiplied by its corresponding coefficient. Patients with the risk score greater than the median value showed poorer overall survival compared with other patients (p = 0.007). Such a risk score significantly predicted patients showing poor survival in TCGA cohort (p = 0.036). A multivariate analysis was further performed to demonstrate that the eight-probe panel association with poor outcome in early-stage LUAD patients remained significant even after adjusting for different clinical variables including staging parameters (hazard ratio, 2.03; p = 0.039). CONCLUSIONS: We established a proof-of-concept prognostic panel consisting of eight-probe signature to predict survival of early-stage LUAD patients of Asian and Caucasian populations.
Heterozygous loss of Twist1 function causes coronal synostosis in both mice and humans. We showed previously that in mice this phenotype is associated with a defect in the neural crest-mesoderm boundary within the coronal suture, as well as with a reduction in the expression of ephrin A2 (Efna2), ephrin A4 (Efna4) and EphA4 in the coronal suture. We also demonstrated that mutations in human EFNA4 are a cause of non-syndromic coronal synostosis. Here we investigate the cellular mechanisms by which Twist1, acting through Eph-ephrin signaling, regulates coronal suture development. We show that EphA4 mutant mice exhibit defects in the coronal suture and neural crest-mesoderm boundary that phenocopy those of Twist1(+/-) mice. Further, we demonstrate that Twist1 and EphA4 interact genetically: EphA4 expression in the coronal suture is reduced in Twist1 mutants, and compound Twist1-EphA4 heterozygotes have suture defects of greater severity than those of individual heterozygotes. Thus, EphA4 is a Twist1 effector in coronal suture development. Finally, by DiI labeling of migratory osteogenic precursor cells that contribute to the frontal and parietal bones, we show that Twist1 and EphA4 are required for the exclusion of such cells from the coronal suture. We suggest that the failure of this process in Twist1 and EphA4 mutants is the cause of craniosynostosis.
