Epidermal growth factor receptor; Receptor tyrosine kinase binding ligands of the EGF family and activating several signaling cascades to convert extracellular cues into appropriate cellular responses. Known ligands include EGF, TGFA/TGF-alpha, AREG, epigen/EPGN, BTC/betacellulin, epiregulin/EREG and HBEGF/heparin- binding EGF. Ligand binding triggers receptor homo- and/or heterodimerization and autophosphorylation on key cytoplasmic residues. The phosphorylated receptor recruits adapter proteins like GRB2 which in turn activates complex downstream signaling cascades. Activates at leas [...] 
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) belongs to the ERBB family of tyrosine kinase receptors. EGFR signaling cascade is a key regulator in cell proliferation, differentiation, division, survival, and cancer development. In this review, the EGFR structure and its mutations, signaling pathway, ligand binding and EGFR dimerization, EGF/EGFR interaction, and the progress in the development of EGFR inhibitors have been explored.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a growth factor receptor that induces cell differentiation and proliferation upon activation through the binding of one of its ligands. The receptor is located at the cell surface, where the binding of a ligand activates a tyrosine kinase in the intracellular region of the receptor. This tyrosine kinase phosphorylates a number of intracellular substrates that activates pathways leading to cell growth, DNA synthesis and the expression of oncogenes such as fos and jun. EGFR is thought to be involved the development of cancer, as the EGFR gene is often amplified, and/or mutated in cancer cells. In this review we will focus on: (I) the structure and function of EGFR, (II) implications of receptor/ligand coexpression and EGFR mutations or overexpression, (III) its effect on cancer cells, (IV) the development of the malignant phenotype and (V) the clinical aspects of therapeutic targeting of EGFR.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are the second most common oncogenic driver event in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Classical activating mutations (exon 19 deletions and the L858R point mutation) comprise the vast majority of EGFR mutations and are well defined as strong predictors for good clinical response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFRi). However, low frequency mutations including point mutations, deletions, insertions and duplications occur within exons 18-25 of the EGFR gene in NSCLC and are associated with poorer responses to EGFRi. Despite an increased uptake of more sensitive detection methods to identify rare EGFR mutations in patients, our understanding of the biology of these rare EGFR mutations is poor compared to classical mutations. In particular, clinical data focused on these mutations is lacking due to their rarity and challenges in trial recruitment, resulting in an absence of effective treatment strategies for many low frequency EGFR mutations. In this review, we describe the structural and mechanistic features of rare EGFR mutations in NSCLC and discuss the preclinical and clinical evidence for EGFRi response for individual rare EGFR mutations. We also discuss EGFRi sensitivity for complex EGFR mutations, and conclude by offering a perspective on the outstanding questions and future steps required to make advances in the treatment of NSCLC patients that harbour rare EGFR mutations.
The ErbB receptor family, also known as the EGF receptor family or type I receptor family, includes the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) or ErbB1/Her1, ErbB2/Her2, ErbB3/Her3, and ErbB4/Her4. Among all RTKs, EGFR was the first RTK identified and the first one linked to cancer. Thus, EGFR has also been the most intensively studied among all RTKs. ErbB receptors are activated after homodimerization or heterodimerization. The ErbB family is unique among the various groups of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) in that ErbB3 has impaired kinase activity, while ErbB2 does not have a direct ligand. Therefore, heterodimerization is an important mechanism that allows the activation of all ErbB receptors in response to ligand stimulation. The activated ErbB receptors bind to many signaling proteins and stimulate the activation of many signaling pathways. The specificity and potency of intracellular signaling pathways are determined by positive and negative regulators, the specific composition of activating ligand(s), receptor dimer components, and the diverse range of proteins that associate with the tyrosine phosphorylated C-terminal domain of the ErbB receptors. ErbB receptors are overexpressed or mutated in many cancers, especially in breast cancer, ovarian cancer, and non-small cell lung cancer. The overexpression and overactivation of ErbB receptors are correlated with poor prognosis, drug resistance, cancer metastasis, and lower survival rate. ErbB receptors, especially EGFR and ErbB2 have been the primary choices as targets for developing cancer therapies.
The physiological function of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is to regulate epithelial tissue development and homeostasis. In pathological settings, mostly in lung and breast cancer and in glioblastoma, the EGFR is a driver of tumorigenesis. Inappropriate activation of the EGFR in cancer mainly results from amplification and point mutations at the genomic locus, but transcriptional upregulation or ligand overproduction due to autocrine/paracrine mechanisms has also been described. Moreover, the EGFR is increasingly recognized as a biomarker of resistance in tumors, as its amplification or secondary mutations have been found to arise under drug pressure. This evidence, in addition to the prominent function that this receptor plays in normal epithelia, has prompted intense investigations into the role of the EGFR both at physiological and at pathological level. Despite the large body of knowledge obtained over the last two decades, previously unrecognized (herein defined as 'noncanonical') functions of the EGFR are currently emerging. Here, we will initially review the canonical ligand-induced EGFR signaling pathway, with particular emphasis to its regulation by endocytosis and subversion in human tumors. We will then focus on the most recent advances in uncovering noncanonical EGFR functions in stress-induced trafficking, autophagy, and energy metabolism, with a perspective on future therapeutic applications.
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is a transmembrane glycoprotein that constitutes one of the four members of ErbB family of tyrosine kinase receptors. Activation of EGFR leads to autophosphorylation of receptor tyrosine kinase that initiates a cascade of downstream signaling pathways involved in regulating cellular proliferation, differentiation, and survival. EGFR is abnormally activated by various mechanisms like receptor overexpression, mutation, ligand-dependent receptor dimerization, ligand-independent activation and is associated with the development of variety of human cancers. EGFR inhibition is one of the key targets for cancer chemotherapy. Approval of tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib, gefitinib, and lapatinib for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer led to tremendous development of novel EGFR inhibitors in the last decade. Diverse class of chemical compounds from the synthetic origin has been extensively studied. This review highlights the various classes of synthetically derived molecules which have been reported in the last few years as potential EGFR and EGFR/ErbB-2 dual inhibitors. A brief synthetic methodology to access these compounds has been highlighted along with the SAR. We strongly believe that this review will provide a platform to the synthetic chemists and biologists to design and synthesize new and potent compounds that inhibit EGFR and ErbB-2.
The ligand-stimulated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been extensively studied in the analysis of molecular mechanisms regulating endocytic traffic and the role of that traffic in signal transduction. Although such studies have largely focused on mitogenic signaling and dysregulated traffic in tumorigenesis, there is growing interest in the potential role of EGFR traffic in cell survival and the consequent response to cancer therapy. Here we review recent advances in our understanding of molecular mechanisms regulating ligand-stimulated EGFR activation, internalization, and post-endocytic sorting. The role of EGFR overexpression/mutation and new modulators of EGFR traffic in cancer and the response to cancer therapeutics are also discussed. Finally, we speculate on the relationship between EGFR traffic and cell survival.
The Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is frequently expressed at elevated levels in different forms of cancer and expression often correlates positively with cancer progression and poor prognosis. Different mutant forms of this protein also contribute to cancer heterogeneity. A constitutively active form of EGFR, EGFRvIII is one of the most important variants. EGFR is responsible for the maintenance and functions of cancer stem cells (CSCs), including stemness, metabolism, immunomodulatory-activity, dormancy and therapy-resistance. EGFR regulates these pathways through several signaling cascades, and often cooperates with other RTKs to exert further control. Inhibitors of EGFR have been extensively studied and display some anticancer efficacy. However, CSCs can also acquire resistance to EGFR inhibitors making effective therapy even more difficult. To ameliorate this limitation of EGFR inhibitors when used as single agents, it may be of value to simultaneously combine multiple EGFR inhibitors or use EGFR inhibitors with regulators of other important cancer phenotype regulating molecules, such as STAT3, or involved in important processes such as DNA repair. These combinatorial approaches require further experimental confirmation, but if successful would expand and improve therapeutic outcomes employing EGFR inhibitors as one arm of the therapy.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in a variety of human epithelial tumors, often as a consequence of gene amplification. Tumors with EGFR gene amplification frequently contain EGFR gene rearrangements, with the most common extracellular domain mutation being EGFRvIII. This mutation leads to a deletion of exons 2-7 of the EGFR gene and renders the mutant receptor incapable of binding any known ligand. Despite this, EGFRvIII displays low-level constitutive signaling that is augmented by reduced internalization and downregulation. Aberrant EGFRvIII signaling has been shown to be important in driving tumor progression and often correlates with poor prognosis. It is clear that EGFRvIII is expressed in a considerable proportion of patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). The presence of EGFRvIII in other tumor types, however, remains controversial. In this review, we critically analyze the evidence for the expression of EGFRvIII in a range of tumor types and discuss recent findings pertinent to its function and biology in GBM.
All patients with metastatic lung, colorectal, pancreatic or head and neck cancers who initially benefit from epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeted therapies eventually develop resistance. An increasing understanding of the number and complexity of resistance mechanisms highlights the Herculean challenge of killing tumors that are resistant to EGFR inhibitors. Our growing knowledge of resistance pathways provides an opportunity to develop new mechanism-based inhibitors and combination therapies to prevent or overcome therapeutic resistance in tumors. We present a comprehensive review of resistance pathways to EGFR-targeted therapies in lung, colorectal and head and neck cancers and discuss therapeutic strategies that are designed to circumvent resistance.
Osimertinib is the only EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) capable of overcoming EGFR-T790M-mutated NSCLC, but osimertinib-resistant EGFR triple mutations (Del19/T790M/C797S or L858R/T790M/C797S) have been reported. Although allosteric EGFR TKIs (e.g., EAI-045) that potentially overcome L858R/T790M/C797S have been identified, there are no effective inhibitors against Del19/T790M/C797S. In this study, we identified CH7233163 as having the potential to overcome EGFR-Del19/T790M/C797S. CH7233163 showed potent antitumor activities against tumor with EGFR-Del19/T790M/C797S in vitro and in vivo In addition to EGFR-Del19/T790M/C797S, the characterization assays showed that CH7233163 more selectively inhibits various types of EGFR mutants (e.g., L858R/T790M/C797S, L858R/T790M, Del19/T790M, Del19, and L858R) over wild type. Furthermore, crystal structure analysis suggested that CH7233163 is a noncovalent ATP-competitive inhibitor for EGFR-Del19/T790M/C797S that utilizes multiple interactions with the EGFR's alphaC-helix-in conformation to achieve potent inhibitory activity and mutant selectivity. Therefore, we conclude that CH7233163 is a potentially effective therapy for osimertinib-resistant patients, especially in cases of EGFR-Del19/T790M/C797S.
Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. In tumors, the important role of noncoding RNA regulatory networks has been more and more reveal. EGFR has been identified as an oncogenic driver of NSCLC, especially activating mutations EGFR and its inhibition with specific TKIs can generate dramatic tumor responses. Studies have shown that EGFR plays significant roles in the progression of NSCLC. Subset analysis of the small proportion of patients with EGFR-mutant lung cancer showed a disease-free survival benefit, but was underpowered to detect a survival advantage. Herein, we highlight the progression of EGFR, noncoding RNA, and their roles in carcinogenesis. We also focus on anti-lung cancer drug development and EGFR-related drug resistance.
The receptor for the epidermal growth factor (EGF) and related ligands (EGFR), the prototypal member of the superfamily of receptors with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, is widely expressed on many cell types, including epithelial and mesenchymal lineages. Upon activation by at least five genetically distinct ligands (including EGF, transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF alpha) and heparin-binding EGF (HB-EGF)), the intrinsic kinase is activated and EGFR tyrosyl-phosphorylates itself and numerous intermediary effector molecules, including closely-related c-erbB receptor family members. This initiates myriad signaling pathways, some of which attenuate receptor signaling. The integrated biological responses to EGFR signaling are pleiotropic including mitogenesis or apoptosis, enhanced cell motility, protein secretion, and differentiation or dedifferentiation. In addition to being implicated in organ morphogenesis, maintenance and repair, upregulated EGFR signaling has been correlated in a wide variety of tumors with progression to invasion and metastasis. Thus, EGFR and its downstream signaling molecules' are targets for therapeutic interventions in wound repair and cancer.
Targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) through an allosteric mechanism provides a potential therapeutic strategy to overcome drug-resistant EGFR mutations that emerge within the ATP binding site. Here, we develop an allosteric EGFR degrader, DDC-01-163, which can selectively inhibit the proliferation of L858R/T790M (L/T) mutant Ba/F3 cells while leaving wildtype EGFR Ba/F3 cells unaffected. DDC-01-163 is also effective against osimertinib-resistant cells with L/T/C797S and L/T/L718Q EGFR mutations. When combined with an ATP-site EGFR inhibitor, osimertinib, the anti-proliferative activity of DDC-01-163 against L858R/T790M EGFR-Ba/F3 cells is enhanced. Collectively, DDC-01-163 is a promising allosteric EGFR degrader with selective activity against various clinically relevant EGFR mutants as a single agent and when combined with an ATP-site inhibitor. Our data suggests that targeted protein degradation is a promising drug development approach for mutant EGFR.
Targeting the EGFR with small-molecule inhibitors is a confirmed valid strategy in cancer therapy. Since the FDA approval of the first EGFR-TKI, erlotinib, great efforts have been devoted to the discovery of new potent inhibitors. Until now, fourteen EGFR small-molecule inhibitors have been globally approved for the treatment of different types of cancers. Although these drugs showed high efficacy in cancer therapy, EGFR mutations have emerged as a big challenge for these drugs. In this review, we focus on the EGFR small-molecule inhibitors that have been approved for clinical uses in cancer therapy. These drugs are classified based on their chemical structures, target kinases, and pharmacological uses. The synthetic routes of these drugs are also discussed. The crystal structures of these drugs with their target kinases are also summarized and their bonding modes and interactions are visualized. Based on their binding interactions with the EGFR, these drugs are also classified into reversible and irreversible inhibitors. The cytotoxicity of these drugs against different types of cancer cell lines is also summarized. In addition, the proposed metabolic pathways and metabolites of the fourteen drugs are discussed, with a primary focus on the active and reactive metabolites. Taken together, this review highlights the syntheses, target kinases, crystal structures, binding interactions, cytotoxicity, and metabolism of the fourteen globally approved EGFR inhibitors. These data should greatly help in the design of new EGFR inhibitors.
Anti-Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) therapies have been recently developed for the treatment of multiple cancer types. At the time when they were introduced in clinical practice, there was little knowledge of the molecular bases of tumor sensitivity and resistance to these novel targeted compounds. By using the framework of anti-EGFR inhibitors as treatment for colorectal cancer patients, we will review the knowledge we have reached until now in improving the development of a personalized cancer therapy and we will try to indicate the future challenges this field will face in the future.
The mechanism by which the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is activated upon dimerization has eluded definition. We find that the EGFR kinase domain can be activated by increasing its local concentration or by mutating a leucine (L834R) in the activation loop, the phosphorylation of which is not required for activation. This suggests that the kinase domain is intrinsically autoinhibited, and an intermolecular interaction promotes its activation. Using further mutational analysis and crystallography we demonstrate that the autoinhibited conformation of the EGFR kinase domain resembles that of Src and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). EGFR activation results from the formation of an asymmetric dimer in which the C-terminal lobe of one kinase domain plays a role analogous to that of cyclin in activated CDK/cyclin complexes. The CDK/cyclin-like complex formed by two kinase domains thus explains the activation of EGFR-family receptors by homo- or heterodimerization.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a well-known oncogenic driver in lung and other cancers. In glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the EGFR deletion variant III (EGFRvIII) is frequently found alongside EGFR amplification. Agents targeting the EGFR axis have shown limited clinical benefits in GBM and the role of EGFRvIII in GBM is poorly understood. To shed light on the role of EGFRvIII and its potential as a therapeutic target, we determined X-ray crystal structures of a monomeric EGFRvIII extracellular region (ECR). The EGFRvIII ECR resembles the unliganded conformation of EGFR, including the orientation of the C-terminal region of domain II. Domain II is mostly disordered, but the ECR structure is compact. We selected a nanobody with preferential binding to EGFRvIII relative to EGFR and structurally defined an epitope on domain IV that is occluded in the unliganded intact EGFR. These findings suggest new avenues for EGFRvIII targeting in GBM.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an essential driver of oncogenic signalling, and EGFR inhibitors are some of the earliest examples of successful targeted therapies in multiple types of cancer. The tractability of EGFR as a therapeutic target is overshadowed by the inevitable drug resistance that develops. Overcoming resistance mechanisms requires a deeper understanding of EGFR regulation in cancer cells. In this review, we discuss our recent discovery that the palmitoyltransferase DHHC20 palmitoylates EGFR on the C-terminal domain and plays a critical role in signal regulation during oncogenesis. Inhibiting DHHC20 expression or mutating the palmitoylation site on EGFR alters the EGF-induced signalling kinetics from a transient signal to a sustained signal. The change in signalling is accompanied by a decrease in cell proliferation in multiple human cancer cell lines. Our in vivo studies demonstrate that ablating the gene Zdhhc20 by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated inhibition in a mouse model of oncogenic Kras-driven lung adenocarcinoma potently inhibits tumorigenesis. The negative effect on tumorigenesis is mediated by EGFR since the expression of a palmitoylation-resistant mutant form of EGFR also inhibits Kras-driven lung adenocarcinoma. Finally, reducing EGFR palmitoylation increases the sensitivity of multiple cancer cell lines to existing inhibitors of EGFR and downstream signalling effector pathways. We will discuss the implications of these effects and strategies for targeting these new vulnerabilities.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) takes centre stage in carcinogenesis throughout its entire cellular trafficking odyssey. When loaded in extracellular vesicles (EVs), EGFR is one of the key proteins involved in the transfer of information between parental cancer and bystander cells in the tumour microenvironment. To hijack EVs, EGFR needs to play multiple signalling roles in the life cycle of EVs. The receptor is involved in the biogenesis of specific EV subpopulations, it signals as an active cargo, and it can influence the uptake of EVs by recipient cells. EGFR regulates its own inclusion in EVs through feedback loops during disease progression and in response to challenges such as hypoxia, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and drugs. Here, we highlight how the spatiotemporal rules that regulate EGFR intracellular function intersect with and influence different EV biogenesis pathways and discuss key regulatory features and interactions of this interplay. We also elaborate on outstanding questions relating to EGFR-driven EV biogenesis and available methods to explore them. This mechanistic understanding will be key to unravelling the functional consequences of direct anti-EGFR targeted and indirect EGFR-impacting cancer therapies on the secretion of pro-tumoural EVs and on their effects on drug resistance and microenvironment subversion.
