E3 SUMO-protein ligase EGR2; Sequence-specific DNA-binding transcription factor. Binds to two specific DNA sites located in the promoter region of HOXA4. Belongs to the EGR C2H2-type zinc-finger protein family.
Fatty acid uptake and altered metabolism constitute hallmarks of metastasis(1,2), yet evidence of the underlying biology, as well as whether all dietary fatty acids are prometastatic, is lacking. Here we show that dietary palmitic acid (PA), but not oleic acid or linoleic acid, promotes metastasis in oral carcinomas and melanoma in mice. Tumours from mice that were fed a short-term palm-oil-rich diet (PA), or tumour cells that were briefly exposed to PA in vitro, remained highly metastatic even after being serially transplanted (without further exposure to high levels of PA). This PA-induced prometastatic memory requires the fatty acid transporter CD36 and is associated with the stable deposition of histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation by the methyltransferase Set1A (as part of the COMPASS complex (Set1A/COMPASS)). Bulk, single-cell and positional RNA-sequencing analyses indicate that genes with this prometastatic memory predominantly relate to a neural signature that stimulates intratumoural Schwann cells and innervation, two parameters that are strongly correlated with metastasis but are aetiologically poorly understood(3,4). Mechanistically, tumour-associated Schwann cells secrete a specialized proregenerative extracellular matrix, the ablation of which inhibits metastasis initiation. Both the PA-induced memory of this proneural signature and its long-term boost in metastasis require the transcription factor EGR2 and the glial-cell-stimulating peptide galanin. In summary, we provide evidence that a dietary metabolite induces stable transcriptional and chromatin changes that lead to a long-term stimulation of metastasis, and that this is related to a proregenerative state of tumour-activated Schwann cells.
Reversing ventricular remodeling represents a promising treatment for the post-myocardial infarction (MI) heart failure (HF). Here, we report a novel small molecule HHQ16, an optimized derivative of astragaloside IV, which effectively reversed infarction-induced myocardial remodeling and improved cardiac function by directly acting on the cardiomyocyte to reverse hypertrophy. The effect of HHQ16 was associated with a strong inhibition of a newly discovered Egr2-affiliated transcript lnc9456 in the heart. While minimally expressed in normal mouse heart, lnc9456 was dramatically upregulated in the heart subjected to left anterior descending coronary artery ligation (LADL) and in cardiomyocytes subjected to hypertrophic stimulation. The critical role of lnc9456 in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was confirmed by specific overexpression and knockout in vitro. A physical interaction between lnc9456 and G3BP2 increased NF-kappaB nuclear translocation, triggering hypertrophy-related cascades. HHQ16 physically bound to lnc9456 with a high-affinity and induced its degradation. Cardiomyocyte-specific lnc9456 overexpression induced, but knockout prevented LADL-induced, cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction. HHQ16 reversed the effect of lnc9456 overexpression while lost its protective role when lnc9456 was deleted, further confirming lnc9456 as the bona fide target of HHQ16. We further identified the human ortholog of lnc9456, also an Egr2-affiliated transcript, lnc4012. Similarly, lnc4012 was significantly upregulated in hypertrophied failing hearts of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. HHQ16 also specifically bound to lnc4012 and caused its degradation and antagonized its hypertrophic effects. Targeted degradation of pathological increased lnc4012/lnc9456 by small molecules might serve as a novel promising strategy to regress infarction-induced cardiac hypertrophy and HF.
THP-1 monocyte, which can be differentiated into macrophages by PMA, is widely used in researches on pathogen infection and host innate immunity, but reports on the induction methods of PMA are different and lack a unified standard, and the transcriptome characteristics of macrophage compared with THP-1 cells remains unclear. In this research, we examined the differentiation effect of three factors including induction time, cell seeding density and PMA concentration by detecting the positive rate of CD14 expression. The concentration of 80ng/ml of PMA, the induction time of 24h, and the cell seeding density of 5x105 cells/ml, could respectively facilitates a relatively higher CD14 positive rate in THP-1 cells. Under this optimized conditions, the CD14 positive rate of THP-1 cells can reach 66.52%. Transcriptome sequencing showed that after the above induction, the mRNA expression of 3113 genes which were closely related to cell communication, signal transduction, cell response to stimulus, signaling receptor binding and cytokine activity were up-regulated, and the top 10 genes were RGS1, SPP1, GDF15, IL-1B, HAVCR2, SGK1, EGR2, TRAC, IL-8 and EBI3. While the mRNA expression of 2772 genes which were associated with cell cycle process, DNA binding and replication and cell division, were down-regulated, and the top genes were SERPINB10, TRGC2, SERPINB2, TRGC1, MS4A3, MS4A4E, TRGJP1, MS4A6A, TRGJP2, MS4A4A. This research optimized the induction method on THP-1 cell differentiation from three aspects and delineated the transcriptomic profile of PMA-induced THP-1 cells, laying a foundation for the construction method of cell model and for the functional study of macrophage.
Brain PCO(2) is sensed primarily via changes in [H(+)]. Small pH changes are detected in the medulla oblongata and trigger breathing adjustments that help maintain arterial PCO(2) constant. Larger perturbations of brain CO(2)/H(+), possibly also sensed elsewhere in the CNS, elicit arousal, dyspnea, and stress, and cause additional breathing modifications. The retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN), a rostral medullary cluster of glutamatergic neurons identified by coexpression of Phoxb and Nmb transcripts, is the lynchpin of the central respiratory chemoreflex. RTN regulates breathing frequency, inspiratory amplitude, and active expiration. It is exquisitely responsive to acidosis in vivo and maintains breathing autorhythmicity during quiet waking, slow-wave sleep, and anesthesia. The RTN response to [H(+)] is partly an intrinsic neuronal property mediated by proton sensors TASK-2 and GPR4 and partly a paracrine effect mediated by astrocytes and the vasculature. The RTN also receives myriad excitatory or inhibitory synaptic inputs including from [H(+)]-responsive neurons (e.g., serotonergic). RTN is silenced by moderate hypoxia. RTN inactivity (periodic or sustained) contributes to periodic breathing and, likely, to central sleep apnea. RTN development relies on transcription factors Egr2, Phox2b, Lbx1, and Atoh1. PHOX2B mutations cause congenital central hypoventilation syndrome; they impair RTN development and consequently the central respiratory chemoreflex.
OBJECTIVE: Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT, also referred to as pre-B cell colony-enhancing factor or visfatin) is critically required for the maintenance of cellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) supply catalysing the rate-limiting step of the NAD salvage pathway. NAMPT is strongly upregulated in inflammation including IBD and counteracts an increased cellular NAD turnover mediated by NAD-depleting enzymes. These constitute an important mechanistic link between inflammatory, metabolic and transcriptional pathways and NAD metabolism. DESIGN: We investigated the impact of NAMPT inhibition by the small-molecule inhibitor FK866 in the dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) model of colitis and the azoxymethane/DSS model of colitis-associated cancer. The impact of NAD depletion on differentiation of mouse and human primary monocytes/macrophages was studied in vitro. Finally, we tested the efficacy of FK866 compared with dexamethasone and infliximab in lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMNC) isolated from patients with IBD. RESULTS: FK866 ameliorated DSS-induced colitis and suppressed inflammation-associated tumorigenesis in mice. FK866 potently inhibited NAMPT activity as demonstrated by reduced mucosal NAD, resulting in reduced abundances and activities of NAD-dependent enzymes including PARP1, Sirt6 and CD38, reduced nuclear factor kappa B activation, and decreased cellular infiltration by inflammatory monocytes, macrophages and activated T cells. Remarkably, FK866 effectively supressed cytokine release from LPMNCs of patients with IBD. As FK866 was also effective in Rag1(-⁄-) mice, we mechanistically linked FK866 treatment with altered monocyte/macrophage biology and skewed macrophage polarisation by reducing CD86, CD38, MHC-II and interleukin (IL)-6 and promoting CD206, Egr2 and IL-10. CONCLUSION: Our data emphasise the importance of NAD immunometabolism for mucosal immunity and highlight FK866-mediated NAMPT blockade as a promising therapeutic approach in acute intestinal inflammation.
The durability of an antitumor immune response is mediated in part by the persistence of progenitor exhausted CD8(+) T cells (Tpex). Tpex serve as a resource for replenishing effector T cells and preserve their quantity through self-renewal. However, it is unknown how T cell receptor (TCR) engagement affects the self-renewal capacity of Tpex in settings of continued antigen exposure. Here we use a Lewis lung carcinoma model that elicits either optimal or attenuated TCR signaling in CD8(+) T cells to show that formation of Tpex in tumor-draining lymph nodes and their intratumoral persistence is dependent on optimal TCR engagement. Notably, attenuated TCR stimulation accelerates the terminal differentiation of optimally primed Tpex. This TCR-reinforced Tpex development and self-renewal is coupled to proximal positioning to dendritic cells and epigenetic imprinting involving increased chromatin accessibility at Egr2 and Tcf1 target loci. Collectively, this study highlights the critical function of TCR engagement in sustaining Tpex during tumor progression.
The immortalized human renal proximal tubular epithelial cell line HK-2 is most commonly used to study renal cell physiology and human kidney diseases with tubulointerstitial fibrosis such as diabetic nephropathy, obstructive uropathy or allograft fibrosis. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is the main pathological process of tubulointerstitial fibrosis in vitro. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a key inducer of EMT. Several pro-fibrotic gene expression differences have been observed in a TGF-beta-induced EMT model of HK-2 cells. However, growth conditions and medium formulations might greatly impact these differences. We investigated gene and protein expression of HK-2 cells cultured in six medium formulations. TGF-beta1 increased the expression of ACTA2, TGFB1, COL4A1, EGR2, VIM and CTGF genes while reducing PPARG in all medium formulations. Interestingly, TGF-beta1 treatment either increased or decreased EGR1, FN, IL6 and C3 gene expression, depending on medium formulations. The cell morphology was slightly affected, but immunoblots revealed TGFB1 and vimentin protein overexpression in all media. However, fibronectin expression as well as the nuclear translocation of EGR1 was medium dependent. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that, using the HK-2 in vitro model of EMT, the meticulous selection of appropriate cell culture medium formulation is essential to achieve reliable scientific results.
SLE is an autoimmune disease characterized by multiple organ damage mediated by autoantibodies and autoreactive T cells. Approaches utilizing genetically engineered mice as well as genome-wide association studies have identified a number of lupus-related genes. Recently, early growth response gene 2 (Egr2) and Egr3 have emerged as regulatory molecules that suppress excessive immune responses. Mice deficient for Egr2 and Egr3 develop a lupus-like disease with dysregulated activation of effector T cells. Furthermore, Egr2 and Egr3 confer suppressive activity to CD4(+) T cells and regulate the production of inhibitory cytokines such as IL-10 and TGF-beta1. These findings may have implications for a wide range of immune-related pathologies and suggest the possibility that efforts exploiting Egr2 and Egr3 could aid in the development of therapeutic applications. This review summarizes the recent advances regarding the roles of Egr2 and Egr3 on T cells in the control of autoimmunity.
Patient-Derived Organoids (PDO) and Xenografts (PDX) are the current gold standards for patient-derived models of cancer (PDMC). Nevertheless, how patient tumor cells evolve in these models and the impact on drug response remains unclear. Herein, the transcriptomic and chromatin accessibility landscapes of matched colorectal cancer (CRC) PDO, PDX, PDO-derived PDX (PDOX), and original patient tumors (PT) are compared. Two major remodeling axes are discovered. The first axis delineates PDMC from PT, and the second axis distinguishes PDX and PDO. PDOX are more similar to PDX than PDO, indicating the growth environment is a driving force for chromatin adaptation. Transcription factors (TF) that differentially bind to open chromatins between matched PDO and PDOX are identified. Among them, KLF14 and EGR2 footprints are enriched in PDOX relative to matched PDO, and silencing of KLF14 or EGR2 promoted tumor growth. Furthermore, EPHA4, a shared downstream target gene of KLF14 and EGR2, altered tumor sensitivity to MEK inhibitor treatment. Altogether, patient-derived CRC cells undergo both common and distinct chromatin remodeling in PDO and PDX/PDOX, driven largely by their respective microenvironments, which results in differences in growth and drug sensitivity and needs to be taken into consideration when interpreting their ability to predict clinical outcome.
Uveitis is a vision-threatening disease primarily driven by a dysregulated immune response, with retinal microglia playing a pivotal role in its progression. Although the transcription factor EGR2 is known to be closely associated with uveitis, including Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease and Behcet's disease, and is essential for maintaining the dynamic homeostasis of autoimmunity, its exact role in uveitis remains unclear. In this study, diminished EGR2 expression was observed in both retinal microglia from experimental autoimmune uveitis (EAU) mice and inflammation-induced human microglia cell line (HMC3). We constructed a mice model with conditional knockout of EGR2 in microglia and found that EGR2 deficiency resulted in increased intraocular inflammation. Meanwhile, EGR2 overexpression downregulated the expression of inflammatory cytokines as well as cell migration and proliferation in HMC3 cells. Next, RNA sequencing and ChIP-PCR results indicated that EGR2 directly bound to its downstream target growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) and further regulated GDF15 transcription. Furthermore, intravitreal injection of GDF15 recombinant protein was shown to ameliorate EAU progression in vivo. Meanwhile, knockdown of GDF15 reversed the phenotype of EGR2 overexpression-induced microglial inflammation in vitro. In summary, this study highlighted the protective role of the transcription factor EGR2 in AU by modulating the microglial phenotype. GFD15 was identified as a downstream target of EGR2, providing a unique target for uveitis treatment.
Currently more than 30 genes are known to be responsible for genetically determined neuropathies. Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is the most frequent of these hereditary neuropathies, with a prevalence of 4.7 to 36 per 100 000. In its demyelinating forms (CMT1), approximately 70% of cases are associated with a duplication of the PMP22gene. In its axonal forms (CMT2), 10-20% of the cases may be associated with a mutation of the MFN2gene. For North African patients with recessive transmission, a mutation of the LMNA gene must be sought. It is essential to stress the great variability of the phenotype--clinical, electrophysiological, and histologic--between and within families. A detailed analysis of these criteria, together with consideration of ethnic origin, may guide the search for the causal mutation. Whether the case involves certainly hereditary transmission or a sporadic form, it is desirable to be able to examine the maximum number of the patient's kin, both clinically and electrophysiologically. The forms with recessive transmission usually have a very early onset and are more serious than the dominant forms. The early- and very early-onset forms of CMT are increasingly better distinguished: congenital hypomyelination neuropathy (mutations of PMP22, MPZ or EGR2), or more axonal forms, including SMARD1 (Spinal muscle atrophy with respiratory distress; mutations of IGHMBP2) and EOHMSN (Early-onset hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy; mutations of MFN2). The prevention of cutaneous (ulcerations), bone, and amputation complications is very important in patients with hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies, because of the severity of the sensory disorders.
A growing body of studies indicate that small noncoding RNAs, especially microRNAs (miRNA), play a crucial role in response to peripheral nerve injuries. During Wallerian degeneration and regeneration processes, they orchestrate several pathways, in particular the MAPK, AKT, and EGR2 (KROX20) pathways. Certain miRNAs show specific expression profiles upon a nerve lesion correlating with the subsequent nerve regeneration stages such as dedifferentiation and with migration of Schwann cells, uptake of debris, neurite outgrowth and finally remyelination of regenerated axons. This review highlights (a) the specific expression profiles of miRNAs upon a nerve lesion and (b) how miRNAs regulate nerve regeneration by acting on distinct pathways and linked proteins. Shedding light on the role of miRNAs associated with peripheral nerve regeneration will help researchers to better understand the molecular mechanisms and deliver targets for precision medicine.
Gut microbiota is responsible for essential functions in human health. Several communication axes between gut microbiota and other organs via neural, endocrine, and immune pathways have been described, and perturbation of gut microbiota composition has been implicated in the onset and progression of an emerging number of diseases. Here, we analyzed peripheral nerves, dorsal root ganglia (DRG), and skeletal muscles of neonatal and young adult mice with the following gut microbiota status: a) germ-free (GF), b) gnotobiotic, selectively colonized with 12 specific gut bacterial strains (Oligo-Mouse-Microbiota, OMM12), or c) natural complex gut microbiota (CGM). Stereological and morphometric analyses revealed that the absence of gut microbiota impairs the development of somatic median nerves, resulting in smaller diameter and hypermyelinated axons, as well as in smaller unmyelinated fibers. Accordingly, DRG and sciatic nerve transcriptomic analyses highlighted a panel of differentially expressed developmental and myelination genes. Interestingly, the type III isoform of Neuregulin1 (NRG1), known to be a neuronal signal essential for Schwann cell myelination, was overexpressed in young adult GF mice, with consequent overexpression of the transcription factor Early Growth Response 2 (Egr2), a fundamental gene expressed by Schwann cells at the onset of myelination. Finally, GF status resulted in histologically atrophic skeletal muscles, impaired formation of neuromuscular junctions, and deregulated expression of related genes. In conclusion, we demonstrate for the first time a gut microbiota regulatory impact on proper development of the somatic peripheral nervous system and its functional connection to skeletal muscles, thus suggesting the existence of a novel 'Gut Microbiota-Peripheral Nervous System-axis.'
Our laboratory has a long-standing research interest in understanding how lipid-activated transcription factors, nuclear hormone receptors, contribute to dendritic cell and macrophage gene expression regulation, subtype specification, and responses to a changing extra and intracellular milieu. This journey in the last more than two decades took us from identifying target genes for various RXR heterodimers to systematically mapping nuclear receptor-mediated pathways in dendritic cells to identifying hierarchies of transcription factors in alternative polarization in macrophages to broaden the role of nuclear receptors beyond strictly ligand-regulated gene expression. We detail here the milestones of the road traveled and draw conclusions regarding the unexpectedly broad role of nuclear hormone receptors as epigenomic components of dendritic cell and macrophage gene regulation as we are getting ready for the next challenges.
The ubiquitin-proteasome system plays an important role in various celluar processes. WWP2, a recently identified ubiquitin E3 ligase, has been proved a multifunctional gene by degradation a series of targets via ubiquitin-dependent proteasome system, including PETN, Smads, Oct4, EGR2, TIRF and so. Hereafter, we reviewed the recent research process about the function of WWP2.
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) participate in the maintenance of tolerance to self-antigens and suppressive control of excessive immune responses to exogenous antigens. A lack or dysfunction of these cells is responsible for the pathogenesis and development of many autoimmune diseases. It is well known that CD4 Tregs play a major role in controlling immune responses and can be classified into two main populations: thymus-derived naturally occurring Tregs (nTregs) and induced Tregs (iTregs) generated from CD4(+)CD25(-) precursors in the peripheral lymphoid organs. The most extensively studied Tregs are the nTregs, which express the interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor CD25 and the transcription factor Forkhead box P3 (Foxp3). On the other hand, iTregs contain multiple heterogeneous subsets, including interleukin (IL)-10-producing CD4 type I Tregs (Tr1 cells) and transforming growth factor -beta-producing Th3 cells, and so on. However, the extent of the contribution of iTregs to immunoregulation in normal animals has been difficult to evaluate because of the lack of suitable cell surface markers. It has been found recently that IL-10-secreting iTregs can be delineated as CD4(+)CD25(-)Foxp3(-) T cells that characteristically express both the lymphocyte activation gene-3 (LAG3) and the early growth response gene-2 (EGR2). In this review, opinions about the roles of LAG3 and EGR2 in Tregs are presented.
OBJECTIVE: Recent research has suggested that m6A modification takes on critical significance to Neurodegeneration. As indicated by the genome-wide map of m6A mRNA, genes in Alzheimer's disease model achieved significant m6A methylation. This study aimed to investigate the hub gene and pathway of m6A modification in the pathogenesis of AD. Moreover, possible brain regions with higher gene expression levels and compounds exerting potential therapeutic effects were identified. Thus, this study can provide a novel idea to explore the treatment of AD. METHODS: Differential expression genes (DEGs) of GSE5281 and GSE48350 from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database were screened using the Limma package. Next, the enrichment analysis was conducted on the screened DEGs. Moreover, the functional annotation was given for N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modification gene. The protein-protein interaction network (PPI) analysis and the visualization analysis were conducted using STRING and Cytoscape. The hub gene was identified using CytoHubba. The expression levels of Hub genes in different regions of brain tissue were analyzed based on Human Protein Atlas (HPA) database and Bgee database. Subsequently, the candidate drugs targeting hub genes were screened using cMAP. RESULTS: A total of 42 m6A modified genes were identified in AD (20 up-regulated and 22 down-regulated genes). The above-described genes played a certain role in biological processes (e.g., retinoic acid, DNA damage response and cysteine-type endopeptidase activity), cellular components (e.g., mitochondrial protein complex), and molecular functions (e.g., RNA methyltransferase activity and ubiquitin protein ligase). KEGG results suggested that the above-mentioned genes were primarily involved in the Hippo signaling pathway of neurodegeneration disease. A total of 10 hub genes were screened using the protein-protein interaction network, and the expression of hub genes in different regions of human brain was studied. Furthermore, 10 compounds with potential therapeutic effects on AD were predicted. CONCLUSION: This study revealed the potential role of the m6A modification gene in Alzheimer's disease through the bioinformatics analysis. The biological changes may be correlated with retinoic acid, DNA damage response and cysteine-type endopeptidase activity, which may occur through Hippo signaling pathway. The hub genes (SOX2, KLF4, ITGB4, CD44, MSX1, YAP1, AQP1, EGR2, YWHAZ and TFAP2C) and potential drugs may provide novel research directions for future prognosis and precise treatment.
Natural killer (NK) cells are critical to the innate immune system, as they recognize antigens without prior sensitization, and contribute to the control and clearance of viral infections and cancer. However, a significant proportion of NK cells in mice and humans do not express classical inhibitory receptors during their education process and are rendered naturally "anergic", i.e., exhibiting reduced effector functions. The molecular events leading to NK cell anergy as well as their relation to those underlying NK cell exhaustion that arises from overstimulation in chronic conditions, remain unknown. Here, we characterize the "anergic" phenotype and demonstrate functional, transcriptional, and phenotypic similarities to the "exhausted" state in tumor-infiltrating NK cells. Furthermore, we identify zinc finger transcription factor Egr2 and diacylglycerol kinase DGKalpha as common negative regulators controlling NK cell dysfunction. Finally, experiments in a 3D organotypic spheroid culture model and an in vivo tumor model suggest that a nanoparticle-based delivery platform can reprogram these dysfunctional natural killer cell populations in their native microenvironment. This approach may become clinically relevant for the development of novel anti-tumor immunotherapeutic strategies.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The early growth response 2 gene (EGR2) mutations are associated with a group of hereditary neuropathy, including axonal neuropathy and hypomyelinating neuropathy or Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) type 1D. We aim to perform an electrodiagnostic, nerve imaging, and histological study of EGR2-associated neuropathy. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of two patients with EGR2-related neurology at our hospital. The neuropathy was confirmed by the nerve conduction study. Nerve imaging and sural biopsies were performed in two patients. RESULTS: Two unrelated boys exhibited early-onset length-dependent neuropathy. Next generation sequencing identified EGR2 gene with previously described E412K mutation in the third zine finger domain in patient 1 and a previously undescribed variant D355N mutation in the first zinc finger domain in patient 2. The magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbosacral plexus showed no abnormalities in patient 1 and thickened lumbosacral plexuses in patient 2. Electrophysiology and nerve biopsies showed a prominent axonal neuropathy, accompanied with demyelinating involvement. CONCLUSION: Therefore, it seemed that the EGR2 mutations could cause not only the known demyelinating type and axonal type but also mixed-type CMT. Our findings expanded the phenotypic heterogeneities of EGR2-associated neuropathy.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a serious health problem worldwide, which ultimately leads to end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Renal fibrosis is the common pathway and major pathological manifestation for various CKD proceeding to ESRD. However, the underlying mechanisms and effective therapies are still ambiguous. Early growth response 2 (EGR2) is reportedly involved in organ formation and cell differentiation. To determine the role of EGR2 in renal fibrosis, we respectively confirmed the increased expression of EGR2 in kidney specimens from both CKD patients and mice with location in proximal tubules. Genetic deletion of EGR2 attenuated obstructive nephropathy while EGR2 overexpression further promoted renal fibrosis in mice subjected to unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) due to extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition mediating by partial epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as well as imbalance between matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitor of MMPs (TIMPs). We found that EGR2 played a critical role in Smad3 phosphorylation, and inhibition of EGR2 reduced partial EMT leading to blockade of ECM accumulation in cultured human kidney 2 cells (HK2) treated with transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1). In addition, the transcription co-stimulator signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) phosphorylation was confirmed to regulate the transcription level of EGR2 in TGF-beta1-induced HK2 cells. In conclusion, this study demonstrated that EGR2 played a pathogenic role in renal fibrosis by a p-STAT3-EGR2-p-Smad3 axis. Thus, targeting EGR2 could be a promising strategy for CKD treatment.
