Histone acetyltransferase p300; Functions as histone acetyltransferase and regulates transcription via chromatin remodeling. Acetylates all four core histones in nucleosomes. Histone acetylation gives an epigenetic tag for transcriptional activation. Mediates cAMP-gene regulation by binding specifically to phosphorylated CREB protein. Mediates acetylation of histone H3 at 'Lys-122' (H3K122ac), a modification that localizes at the surface of the histone octamer and stimulates transcription, possibly by promoting nucleosome instability. Mediates acetylation of histone H3 at 'Lys-27' (H3K [...] 
CCS1477 (inobrodib) is a potent, selective EP300/CBP bromodomain inhibitor which induces cell-cycle arrest and differentiation in hematologic malignancy model systems. In myeloid leukemia cells, it promotes rapid eviction of EP300/CBP from an enhancer subset marked by strong MYB occupancy and high H3K27 acetylation, with downregulation of the subordinate oncogenic network and redistribution to sites close to differentiation genes. In myeloma cells, CCS1477 induces eviction of EP300/CBP from FGFR3, the target of the common (4; 14) translocation, with redistribution away from IRF4-occupied sites to TCF3/E2A-occupied sites. In a subset of patients with relapsed or refractory disease, CCS1477 monotherapy induces differentiation responses in AML and objective responses in heavily pre-treated multiple myeloma. In vivo preclinical combination studies reveal synergistic responses to treatment with standard-of-care agents. Thus, CCS1477 exhibits encouraging preclinical and early-phase clinical activity by disrupting recruitment of EP300/CBP to enhancer networks occupied by critical transcription factors.
Early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ETP ALL) is an aggressive malignancy of unknown genetic basis. We performed whole-genome sequencing of 12 ETP ALL cases and assessed the frequency of the identified somatic mutations in 94 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cases. ETP ALL was characterized by activating mutations in genes regulating cytokine receptor and RAS signalling (67% of cases; NRAS, KRAS, FLT3, IL7R, JAK3, JAK1, SH2B3 and BRAF), inactivating lesions disrupting haematopoietic development (58%; GATA3, ETV6, RUNX1, IKZF1 and EP300) and histone-modifying genes (48%; EZH2, EED, SUZ12, SETD2 and EP300). We also identified new targets of recurrent mutation including DNM2, ECT2L and RELN. The mutational spectrum is similar to myeloid tumours, and moreover, the global transcriptional profile of ETP ALL was similar to that of normal and myeloid leukaemia haematopoietic stem cells. These findings suggest that addition of myeloid-directed therapies might improve the poor outcome of ETP ALL.
Epigenetic alterations play an important role in tumor progression of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). However, the biological relevance of epigenetic gene mutations on tumor microenvironment remains to be determined. The core set of genes relating to histone methylation (KMT2D, KMT2C, EZH2), histone acetylation (CREBBP, EP300), DNA methylation (TET2), and chromatin remodeling (ARID1A) were detected in the training cohort of 316 patients by whole-genome/exome sequencing (WGS/WES) and in the validation cohort of 303 patients with newly diagnosed DLBCL by targeted sequencing. Their correlation with peripheral blood immune cells and clinical outcomes were assessed. Underlying mechanisms on tumor microenvironment were investigated both in vitro and in vivo. Among all 619 DLBCL patients, somatic mutations in KMT2D (19.5%) were most frequently observed, followed by mutations in ARID1A (8.7%), CREBBP (8.4%), KMT2C (8.2%), TET2 (7.8%), EP300 (6.8%), and EZH2 (2.9%). Among them, CREBBP/EP300 mutations were significantly associated with decreased peripheral blood absolute lymphocyte-to-monocyte ratios, as well as inferior progression-free and overall survival. In B-lymphoma cells, the mutation or knockdown of CREBBP or EP300 inhibited H3K27 acetylation, downregulated FBXW7 expression, activated the NOTCH pathway, and downstream CCL2/CSF1 expression, resulting in tumor-associated macrophage polarization to M2 phenotype and tumor cell proliferation. In B-lymphoma murine models, xenografted tumors bearing CREBBP/EP300 mutation presented lower H3K27 acetylation, higher M2 macrophage recruitment, and more rapid tumor growth than those with CREBBP/EP300 wild-type control via FBXW7-NOTCH-CCL2/CSF1 axis. Our work thus contributed to the understanding of aberrant histone acetylation regulation on tumor microenvironment as an alternative mechanism of tumor progression in DLBCL.
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is an evolutionarily conserved and widespread histone mark like lysine acetylation (Kac). Here we report that p300 functions as a lysine 2-hyroxyisobutyryltransferase to regulate glycolysis in response to nutritional cues. We discovered that p300 differentially regulates Khib and Kac on distinct lysine sites, with only 6 of the 149 p300-targeted Khib sites overlapping with the 693 p300-targeted Kac sites. We demonstrate that diverse cellular proteins, particularly glycolytic enzymes, are targeted by p300 for Khib, but not for Kac. Specifically, deletion of p300 significantly reduces Khib levels on several p300-dependent, Khib-specific sites on key glycolytic enzymes including ENO1, decreasing their catalytic activities. Consequently, p300-deficient cells have impaired glycolysis and are hypersensitive to glucose-depletion-induced cell death. Our study reveals an p300-catalyzed, Khib-specific molecular mechanism that regulates cellular glucose metabolism and further indicate that p300 has an intrinsic ability to select short-chain acyl-CoA-dependent protein substrates.
Gene expression is regulated by promoters and enhancers marked by histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac), which is established by the paralogous histone acetyltransferases (HAT) EP300 and CBP. These enzymes display overlapping regulatory roles in untransformed cells, but less characterized roles in cancer cells. We demonstrate that the majority of high-risk pediatric neuroblastoma (NB) depends on EP300, whereas CBP has a limited role. EP300 controls enhancer acetylation by interacting with TFAP2beta, a transcription factor member of the lineage-defining transcriptional core regulatory circuitry (CRC) in NB. To disrupt EP300, we developed a proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC) compound termed "JQAD1" that selectively targets EP300 for degradation. JQAD1 treatment causes loss of H3K27ac at CRC enhancers and rapid NB apoptosis, with limited toxicity to untransformed cells where CBP may compensate. Furthermore, JQAD1 activity is critically determined by cereblon (CRBN) expression across NB cells. SIGNIFICANCE: EP300, but not CBP, controls oncogenic CRC-driven transcription in high-risk NB by binding TFAP2beta. We developed JQAD1, a CRBN-dependent PROTAC degrader with preferential activity against EP300 and demonstrated its activity in NB. JQAD1 has limited toxicity to untransformed cells and is effective in vivo in a CRBN-dependent manner. This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 587.
Lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) are a family of epigenetic enzymes involved in the regulation of gene expression; they represent a promising class of emerging drug targets. The frequent molecular dysregulation of these enzymes, as well as their mechanistic links to biological functions that are crucial to cancer, have led to exploration around the development of small-molecule inhibitors against KATs. Despite early challenges, recent advances have led to the development of potent and selective enzymatic and bromodomain (BRD) KAT inhibitors. In this review we discuss the discovery and development of new KAT inhibitors and their application as oncology therapeutics. Additionally, new chemically induced proximity approaches are presented, offering opportunities for unique target selectivity profiles and tissue-specific targeting of KATs. Emerging clinical data for CREB binding protein (CREBBP)/EP300 BRD inhibitors and KAT6 catalytic inhibitors indicate the promise of this target class in cancer therapeutics.
Aims: Lipid peroxidation occurring in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cells leads to ferroptosis. Lysophosphatidylcholine acyl-transferase 3 (LPCAT3) plays a key role in providing raw materials for lipid peroxidation by promoting esterification of polyunsaturated fatty acids to phospholipids. Whether LPCAT3 determines ferroptosis sensitivity and the mechanism by which its expression is regulated in LUAD has not been reported. Results: LPCAT3 and acyl-coenzyme A (CoA) synthetase long-chain family member (ACSL)4 levels were positively associated with ferroptosis sensitivity in LUAD cell lines. Overexpression of LPCAT3 and ACSL4 sensitized LUAD cells to ferroptosis, while LPCAT3 and ACSL4 knockout showed the opposite effect. Zinc-finger E-box-binding (ZEB) was shown to directly bind the LPCAT3 promoter to stimulate its transcription in a Yes-associated protein (YAP)-dependent manner. An interaction between YAP and ZEB was also observed. E1A-binding protein p300 (EP300) simultaneously bound with YAP and ZEB, and induced H3K27Ac for LPCAT3 transcription. This mechanism was verified in primary LUAD cell and xenograft models. The ACSL4, LPCAT3, and YAP combination can jointly determine LUAD ferroptosis sensitivity. Innovation: The binding site of ZEB exists in the -1600 to -1401 nt region of LPCAT3 promoter, which promotes LPCAT3 transcription after ZEB binding. ZEB and YAP bind, and the ZEB zinc-finger cluster domain and YAP WW domain are crucial for their binding. EP300 may bind with YAP via its Bromo domain and with ZEB via its CBP/p300-HAT domain. In addition, the combination of ACSL4, LPCAT3, and YAP to determine ferroptosis sensitivity of LUAD cells is better than prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), transferrin receptor (TFRC), or NADPH oxidase 1 (NOX1). Conclusion: LPCAT3 transcription is regulated by YAP, ZEB, and EP300. LUAD ferroptosis sensitivity can be determined by the combination of ACSL4, LPCAT3, and YAP. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 39, 491-511.
Glioblastoma (GBM), an aggressive brain malignancy with a cellular hierarchy dominated by GBM stem cells (GSCs), evades antitumor immunity through mechanisms that remain incompletely understood. Like most cancers, GBMs undergo metabolic reprogramming toward glycolysis to generate lactate. Here, we show that lactate production by patient-derived GSCs and microglia/macrophages induces tumor cell epigenetic reprogramming through histone lactylation, an activating modification that leads to immunosuppressive transcriptional programs and suppression of phagocytosis via transcriptional upregulation of CD47, a "don't eat me" signal, in GBM cells. Leveraging these findings, pharmacologic targeting of lactate production augments efficacy of anti-CD47 therapy. Mechanistically, lactylated histone interacts with the heterochromatin component chromobox protein homolog 3 (CBX3). Although CBX3 does not possess direct lactyltransferase activity, CBX3 binds histone acetyltransferase (HAT) EP300 to induce increased EP300 substrate specificity toward lactyl-CoA and a transcriptional shift toward an immunosuppressive cytokine profile. Targeting CBX3 inhibits tumor growth by both tumor cell-intrinsic mechanisms and increased tumor cell phagocytosis. Collectively, these results suggest that lactate mediates metabolism-induced epigenetic reprogramming in GBM that contributes to CD47-dependent immune evasion, which can be leveraged to augment efficacy of immuno-oncology therapies.
Melanomas can adopt multiple transcriptional states. Little is known about the epigenetic drivers of these cell states, limiting our ability to regulate melanoma heterogeneity. Here, we identify stress-induced HDAC8 activity as driving melanoma brain metastasis development. Exposure of melanocytes and melanoma cells to multiple stresses increases HDAC8 activation leading to a neural crest-stem cell transcriptional state and an amoeboid, invasive phenotype that increases seeding to the brain. Using ATAC-Seq and ChIP-Seq we show that increased HDAC8 activity alters chromatin structure by increasing H3K27ac and enhancing accessibility at c-Jun binding sites. Functionally, HDAC8 deacetylates the histone acetyltransferase EP300, causing its enzymatic inactivation. This, in turn, increases binding of EP300 to Jun-transcriptional sites and decreases binding to MITF-transcriptional sites. Inhibition of EP300 increases melanoma cell invasion, resistance to stress and increases melanoma brain metastasis development. HDAC8 is identified as a mediator of transcriptional co-factor inactivation and chromatin accessibility that drives brain metastasis.
The internal exposure dose of bisphenol S (BPS) is increasing since its use as a substitute for BPA. The relationship between BPS and nonalcoholic liver disease (NAFLD) and the underlying mechanism remain unclarified. In this study, we evaluated the correlation of BPS with NAFLD in populations from the Jiangsu Survey and the 2013-2016 National Health Nutrition Examination Survey and unraveled the molecular pathway by which BPS blocked hepatic autophagy, contributing to lipid accumulation. The study found that serum and urine BPS were associated with NAFLD risks in both the Chinese and US populations. For each additional unit of the BPS level, the NAFLD risk increased by 3.163-fold (serum) and 3.979-fold (urine) in the Chinese population. In addition, after BPS exposure at a dose equivalent to human exposure for 20 weeks, mice developed liver lipid accumulation. BPS could trigger PPARalpha-mediated transcriptional activation of EP300 expression. BPS promoted the translocation of EP300 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm to regulate the acetylation of Raptor and the activation of mTORC1, which in turn induced autophagy blockage and interfered with lipid degradation in hepatocytes. Conversely, knockdown of EP300 reduced Raptor acetylation and ameliorated autophagy blockage. This study demonstrated that EP300 was a key enzyme for the development of BPS-related NAFLD and provided novel evidence that BPS causes NAFLD.
Phenotypic alterations in resident vascular cells contribute to the vascular remodeling process in diseases such as pulmonary (arterial) hypertension [P(A)H]. How the molecular interplay between transcriptional coactivators, transcription factors (TFs), and chromatin state alterations facilitate the maintenance of persistently activated cellular phenotypes that consequently aggravate vascular remodeling processes in PAH remains poorly explored. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) in pulmonary artery fibroblasts (FBs) from adult human PAH and control lungs revealed 2460 differentially transcribed genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) revealed extensive differential distribution of transcriptionally accessible chromatin signatures, with 4152 active enhancers altered in PAH-FBs. Integrative analysis of RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data revealed that the transcriptional signatures for lung morphogenesis were epigenetically derepressed in PAH-FBs, including coexpression of T-box TF 4 (TBX4), TBX5, and SRY-box TF 9 (SOX9), which are involved in the early stages of lung development. These TFs were expressed in mouse fetuses and then repressed postnatally but were maintained in persistent PH of the newborn and reexpressed in adult PAH. Silencing of TBX4, TBX5, SOX9, or E1A-associated protein P300 (EP300) by RNA interference or small-molecule compounds regressed PAH phenotypes and mesenchymal signatures in arterial FBs and smooth muscle cells. Pharmacological inhibition of the P300/CREB-binding protein complex reduced the remodeling of distal pulmonary vessels, improved hemodynamics, and reversed established PAH in three rodent models in vivo, as well as reduced vascular remodeling in precision-cut tissue slices from human PAH lungs ex vivo. Epigenetic reactivation of TFs associated with lung development therefore underlies PAH pathogenesis, offering therapeutic opportunities.
p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP), two homologous lysine acetyltransferases in metazoans, have a myriad of cellular functions. They exert their influence mainly through their roles as transcriptional regulators but also via nontranscriptional effects inside and outside of the nucleus on processes such as DNA replication and metabolism. The versatility of p300/CBP as molecular tools has led to their exploitation by viral oncogenes for cellular transformation and by cancer cells to achieve and maintain an oncogenic phenotype. How cancer cells use p300/CBP in their favor varies depending on the cellular context and is evident by the growing list of loss- and gain-of-function genetic alterations in p300 and CBP in solid tumors and hematological malignancies. Here, we discuss the biological functions of p300/CBP and how disruption of these functions by mutations and alterations in expression or subcellular localization contributes to the cancer phenotype.
The mammalian SWI/SNF-like BAF complexes play critical roles during animal development and pathological conditions. Previous gene deletion studies and characterization of human gene mutations implicate that the complexes both repress and activate a large number of genes. However, the direct function of the complexes in cells remains largely unclear due to the relatively long-term nature of gene deletion or natural mutation. Here we generate a mouse line by knocking in the auxin-inducible degron tag (AID) to the Smarca4 gene, which encodes BRG1, the essential ATPase subunit of the BAF complexes. We show that the tagged BRG1 can be efficiently depleted by osTIR1 expression and auxin treatment for 6 to 10 h in CD4 + T cells, hepatocytes, and fibroblasts isolated from the knock-in mice. The acute depletion of BRG1 leads to decreases in nascent RNAs and RNA polymerase II binding at a large number of genes, which are positively correlated with the loss of BRG1. Further, these changes are correlated with diminished accessibility at DNase I Hypersensitive Sites (DHSs) and p300 binding. The acute BRG1 depletion results in three major patterns of nucleosome shifts leading to narrower nucleosome spacing surrounding transcription factor motifs and at enhancers and transcription start sites (TSSs), which are correlated with loss of BRG1, decreased chromatin accessibility and decreased nascent RNAs. Acute depletion of BRG1 severely compromises the Trichostatin A (TSA) -induced histone acetylation, suggesting a substantial interplay between the chromatin remodeling activity of BRG1 and histone acetylation. Our data suggest BRG1 mainly plays a direct positive role in chromatin accessibility, RNAPII binding, and nascent RNA production by regulating nucleosome positioning and facilitating transcription factor binding to their target sites.
Chemical discovery efforts commonly target individual protein domains. Many proteins, including the EP300/CBP histone acetyltransferases (HATs), contain several targetable domains. EP300/CBP are critical gene-regulatory targets in cancer, with existing high potency inhibitors of either the catalytic HAT domain or protein-binding bromodomain (BRD). A domain-specific inhibitory approach to multidomain-containing proteins may identify exceptional-responding tumor types, thereby expanding a therapeutic index. Here, we discover that targeting EP300/CBP using the domain-specific inhibitors, A485 (HAT) or CCS1477 (BRD) have different effects in select tumor types. Group 3 medulloblastoma (G3MB) cells are especially sensitive to BRD, compared with HAT inhibition. Structurally, these effects are mediated by the difluorophenyl group in the catalytic core of CCS1477. Mechanistically, bromodomain inhibition causes rapid disruption of genetic dependency networks that are required for G3MB growth. These studies provide a domain-specific structural foundation for drug discovery efforts targeting EP300/CBP and identify a selective role for the EP300/CBP bromodomain in maintaining genetic dependency networks in G3MB.
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is characterized by moderate to severe intellectual disability, distinctive facial features, and broad thumbs and great toes. RTS is caused by haploinsufficiency of CREBBP or EP300 gene.
CREB binding protein (CBP) and p300 are critical regulators of hematopoiesis through both their transcriptional coactivator and acetyltransferase activities. Loss or mutation of CBP/p300 results in hematologic deficiencies in proliferation and differentiation as well as disruption of hematopoietic stem cell renewal and the microenvironment. Aberrant lysine acetylation mediated by CBP/p300 has recently been implicated in the genesis of multiple hematologic cancers. Understanding the effects of disrupting the acetyltransferase activity of CBP/p300 could pave the way for new therapeutic approaches to treat patients with these diseases.
The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1) is a master regulator of cell growth and metabolism. Leucine (Leu) activates mTORC1 and many have tried to identify the mechanisms whereby cells sense Leu in this context. Here we describe that the Leu metabolite acetyl-coenzyme A (AcCoA) positively regulates mTORC1 activity by EP300-mediated acetylation of the mTORC1 regulator, Raptor, at K1097. Leu metabolism and consequent mTORC1 activity are regulated by intermediary enzymes. As AcCoA is a Leu metabolite, this process directly correlates with Leu abundance, and does not require Leu sensing via intermediary proteins, as has been described previously. Importantly, we describe that this pathway regulates mTORC1 in a cell-type-specific manner. Finally, we observed decreased acetylated Raptor, and inhibited mTORC1 and EP300 activity in fasted mice tissues. These results provide a direct mechanism for mTORC1 regulation by Leu metabolism.
Aging-associated cardiac hypertrophy (AACH) increases susceptibility to heart failure in the elderly. Chromatin remodeling contributes to the gene reprogramming in AACH; however, the intrinsic regulations remain elusive. We performed a transcriptome analysis for AACH in comparison with pressure-overload-induced pathological cardiac hypertrophy in mice and identified myeloid leukemia factor 1 (MLF1) as an aging-sensitive factor whose expression was reduced during aging but could be reversed by anti-aging administrations. In human AC16 cardiomyocytes, silencing MLF1 suppressed H2O2-induced cell senescence while the phenotype was exacerbated by MLF1 overexpression. RNA-seq analysis revealed that MLF1 functioned as a transcription activator, regulating genomic-clustered genes that mainly involved in inflammation and development. ATAC-seq analysis showed a prominent reduction in chromatin accessibility at the promoter regions of senescence effectors, like IL1B and p21, after MLF1 knockdown. Despite a potential interaction of MLF1 with the histone methyltransferase PRC2, its inhibition failed to reverse the impact of MLF1 knockdown. Instead, MLF1-mediated regulation was blunted by inhibiting the acetyltransferase EP300. CUT&Tag analysis showed that MLF1 bound to target promoters and recruited EP300 to promote H3K27ac deposition. Collectively, we identify MLF1 as a pro-aging epigenetic orchestrator that recruits EP300 to facilitate opening of the condensed chromatin encompassing senescence effectors.
Early placenta development involves cytotrophoblast differentiation into extravillous trophoblast (EVT) and syncytiotrophoblast (STB). Defective trophoblast development and function may result in severe pregnancy complications, including fetal growth restriction and pre-eclampsia. The incidence of these complications is increased in pregnancies of fetuses affected by Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a developmental disorder predominantly caused by heterozygous mutations in CREB-binding protein (CREBBP) or E1A-binding protein p300 (EP300). Although the acetyltransferases CREBBP and EP300 are paralogs with many overlapping functions, the increased incidence of pregnancy complications is specific for EP300 mutations. We hypothesized that these complications have their origin in early placentation and that EP300 is involved in that process. Therefore, we investigated the role of EP300 and CREBBP in trophoblast differentiation, using human trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) and trophoblast organoids. We found that pharmacological CREBBP/EP300 inhibition blocks differentiation of TSCs into both EVT and STB lineages, and results in an expansion of TSC-like cells under differentiation-inducing conditions. Specific targeting by RNA interference or CRISPR/Cas9-mediated mutagenesis demonstrated that knockdown of EP300 but not CREBBP, inhibits trophoblast differentiation, consistent with the complications seen in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome pregnancies. By transcriptome sequencing, we identified transforming growth factor alpha (TGFA, encoding TGF-alpha) as being strongly upregulated upon EP300 knockdown. Moreover, supplementing differentiation medium with TGF-alpha, which is a ligand for the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), likewise affected trophoblast differentiation and resulted in increased TSC-like cell proliferation. These findings suggest that EP300 facilitates trophoblast differentiation by interfering with at least EGFR signaling, pointing towards a crucial role for EP300 in early human placentation.
Patients carrying autosomal dominant mutations in the histone/lysine acetyl transferases CBP or EP300 develop a neurodevelopmental disorder: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS). The biological pathways underlying these neurodevelopmental defects remain elusive. Here, we unravel the contribution of a stress-responsive pathway to RSTS. We characterize the structural and functional interaction between CBP/EP300 and heat-shock factor 2 (HSF2), a tuner of brain cortical development and major player in prenatal stress responses in the neocortex: CBP/EP300 acetylates HSF2, leading to the stabilization of the HSF2 protein. Consequently, RSTS patient-derived primary cells show decreased levels of HSF2 and HSF2-dependent alteration in their repertoire of molecular chaperones and stress response. Moreover, we unravel a CBP/EP300-HSF2-N-cadherin cascade that is also active in neurodevelopmental contexts, and show that its deregulation disturbs neuroepithelial integrity in 2D and 3D organoid models of cerebral development, generated from RSTS patient-derived iPSC cells, providing a molecular reading key for this complex pathology.
