Ephrin type-A receptor 8; Receptor tyrosine kinase which binds promiscuously GPI- anchored ephrin-A family ligands residing on adjacent cells, leading to contact-dependent bidirectional signaling into neighboring cells. The signaling pathway downstream of the receptor is referred to as forward signaling while the signaling pathway downstream of the ephrin ligand is referred to as reverse signaling. The GPI-anchored ephrin-A EFNA2, EFNA3, and EFNA5 are able to activate EPHA8 through phosphorylation. With EFNA5 may regulate integrin-mediated cell adhesion and migration on fibronectin sub [...] 
The Eph (erythropoietin-producing human hepatocellular) receptor family, the largest subclass of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), plays essential roles in embryonic development and neurogenesis. The intracellular Sterile Alpha Motif (SAM) domain presents a critical structural feature that distinguishes Eph receptors from other RTKs and participates in recruiting and binding downstream molecules. This study identified SASH1 (SAM and SH3 domain containing 1) as a novel Eph receptor-binding partner through SAM-SAM domain interactions. Our comprehensive biochemical analyses revealed that SASH1 selectively interacts with Eph receptors via its SAM1 domain, displaying the highest affinity for EphA8. The high-resolution crystal structure of the EphA8-SASH1 complex provided insights into the specific intermolecular interactions between these proteins. Cellular assays confirmed that EphA8 and SASH1 co-localize and co-precipitate in mammalian cells, with cancer mutations (EphA8 R942H or G978D) impairing this interaction. We demonstrated that SAM-SAM interaction is critical for SASH1-mediated regulation of EphA8 kinase activity, shedding new light on the Eph signaling pathway and expanding our understanding of the molecular basis of the tumor suppressor gene SASH1.
Kinase drug discovery represents an active area of therapeutic research, with previous pharmaceutical success improving patient outcomes across a wide variety of human diseases. In pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), innovative pharmaceutical strategies such as kinase targeting have been unable to appreciably increase patient survival. This may be due, in part, to unchecked desmoplastic reactions to pancreatic tumors. Desmoplastic stroma enhances tumor development and progression while simultaneously restricting drug delivery to the tumor cells it protects. Emerging evidence indicates that many of the pathologic fibrotic processes directly or indirectly supporting desmoplasia may be driven by targetable protein tyrosine kinases such as Fyn-related kinase (FRK); B lymphoid kinase (BLK); hemopoietic cell kinase (HCK); ABL proto-oncogene 2 kinase (ABL2); discoidin domain receptor 1 kinase (DDR1); Lck/Yes-related novel kinase (LYN); ephrin receptor A8 kinase (EPHA8); FYN proto-oncogene kinase (FYN); lymphocyte cell-specific kinase (LCK); tec protein kinase (TEC). Herein, we review literature related to these kinases and posit signaling networks, mechanisms, and biochemical relationships by which this group may contribute to PDAC tumor growth and desmoplasia.
Interaction with bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) has been suggested as an important mechanism for the progression of multiple myeloma (MM) cells, while exosomes are crucial mediators for cell-to-cell communication. The study was to investigate the miRNA profile changes in exosomes released by BMSCs of MM patients and explore their possible function roles.The microarray datasets of exosomal miRNAs in BMSCs were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database (GSE110271: 6 MM patients, 2 healthy donors; GSE78865: 4 donors and 2 MM patients; GSE39571: 7 MM patients and 4 controls). The differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs) were identified using the LIMMA method. The target genes of DEMs were predicted by the miRwalk 2.0 database and the hub genes were screened by constructing the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, module analysis and overlapping with the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) after overexpression or knockout of miRNAs.Three downregulated DEMs were found to distinguish MM from normal and MM-MGUS controls in the GSE39571 dataset; one downregulated and one upregulated DEMs (hsa-miR-10a) could differentiate MM from normal and MM-MGUS controls in the GSE110271-GSE78865 merged dataset. Furthermore, 11 downregulated (hsa-miR-16) and 1 upregulated DEMs were shared between GSE39571 and merged dataset when comparing MM with normal samples. The target genes were predicted for these 17 DEMs. PPI with module analysis showed IGF1R and CCND1 were hub genes and regulated by hsa-miR-16. Furthermore, EPHA8 was identified as a DEG that was downregulated in MM cells when the use of has-miR-10a mimics; while IGF1R, CCND1, CUL3, and ELAVL1 were also screened as DEGs that were upregulated in MM cells when silencing of hsa-miR-16.BMSCs-derived exosomal miR-10a and miR-16 may be involved in MM progression by regulating EPHA8 or IGF1R/CCND1/CUL3/ELAVL1, respectively. These exosomal miRNAs or genes may represent potential biomarkers for diagnosis of MM and prediction of progression and targets for developing therapeutic drugs.
EphA8 is one of the Eph receptors in the Eph/ephrin receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) subfamily. During tumorigenesis, EphA8 is involved in angiogenesis, cell adhesion and migration. In this study, we determined the mRNA and protein expression levels of EphA8 in cancerous and normal ovarian tissue samples by quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) (N = 60) and tissue microarray immunohistochemistry analysis (TMA-IHC) (N = 223) respectively. EphA8 protein levels in cancer tissues were correlated with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients' clinical characteristics and overall survival. Both EphA8 mRNA and protein levels were significantly higher in EOC tissues than in normal or benign ovarian tissues (all P < 0.05). High EphA8 protein level was associated older age at diagnosis, higher FIGO stage, positive lymph nodes, presence of metastasis, positive ascitic fluid, and higher serum CA-125 level. High EphA8 protein level is an independent prognostic marker in EOC. We conclude that EphA8 acts as an oncogene in EOC development and progression. Detection of EphA8 expression could be a useful prognosis marker and targeting EphA8 represents a novel strategy for EOC treatment.
EphA8 is a member of the erythropoietin-producing hepatocellular receptor (Eph) family of receptor tyrosine kinases. Ephs and their ephrins ligands play crucial roles in many cellular processed by mediating intracellular signaling resulting from cell-cell interactions. But the underlying mechanisms of EphA8 in gastric cancer (GC) remains unclearly. 298 clinical specimens in tissues microarray, and was found to be significantly higher in GC tissues compared with nontumor tissues (p < 0.001). EphA8 expression was also strongly associated with differentiation level (p = 0.025), tumor-node-metastasis stage (p = 0.019), and poor 5 years survival (p < 0.001). A panel of GC cell lines showed reduced proliferation, invasion, and migration capacities after RNA-mediated knockdown of EphA8, concomitant with downregulation of the proliferation-related proteins (cyclin A, cyclin D1, and cyclin-dependent kinase 4) and the metastasis-related (matrix metalloproteinases MMP2, and MMP9). EphA8 knockdown also decreased expression of the protease ADAM10 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10) and ADAM10-related protein AKT, suggesting an interaction between EphA8 and ADAM10. In conclusion, we found that EphA8, which is highly expressed in GC tissues, stimulates proliferation, invasion, and migration of cancer cells, and is an independent risk factor for poor prognosis of GC. These dates suggest that EphA8 could be new diagnostic and/or therapeutic targets for GC.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play a critical role in the development of cancers. However, the role of miRNAs in glioma is still poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that microRNA-10a (miR-10a) promotes cell migration and invasion by negatively regulating the expression of Eph tyrosine kinase receptor A8 (EphA8). Ectopic expression of EphA8 counteracts the promotion of migration and invasion induced by miR-10a. We further demonstrate that miR-10a and EphA8 regulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to affect cell migration and invasion. Collectively, we unveil a branch of the miR-10a/EphA8 pathway that regulates the progression of glioma.
BACKGROUND Oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma (OTSCC) is the most common malignancy of the oral cavity. Here we explore the potential effects of EphA8, which is one of the receptors in Ephs subfamily of RTKs (receptor tyrosine kinases), in the progression and prognosis of OTSCC. MATERIAL AND METHODS A total of 119 OTSCC patients were enrolled in this retrospective study. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) were utilized to examine the expression of EphA8 in OTSSC tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues. The relationship between EphA8 expression and the clinicopathological features of OTSCC patients were analyzed by chi-square. Survival analysis was carried out with Kaplan-Meier curve and the related log-rank test. Multivariate analysis was then undertaken to assess the prognosis factor by utilizing the Cox proportional hazard regression model. In addition, MTT assay and Matrigel invasion assay were performed to examine the effects of EphA8 on the proliferation and invasion capacities of human oral squamous carcinoma cells (SCC-25) and human tongue squamous cell carcinoma cells (H357). RESULTS Q-PCR and IHC staining revealed that EphA8 was highly expressed in OTSCC tissues, especially in advanced stage OTSCC tissues. Kaplan-Meier curve showed that high EphA8 expression was significantly associated with poor prognosis, similar to age, smoking habit, drinking habit, tumor size, and TNM stage. Multivariate analysis indicated that EphA8 expression could serve as an independent prognostic factor in OTSCC. In vitro experiments revealed that overexpression of EphA8 might promote the progression of OTSCC via enhancing the invasion capacity but not proliferation capacity of tumor cells. CONCLUSIONS EphA8 was highly expressed in OTSCC tissues and was significantly associated with poor prognosis of OTSCC.
Erythropoietin‑producing hepatocellular receptors (Ephs) comprise the largest subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases and have been reported to be involved in a variety of biological cellular processes, including tumorigenesis and cancer progression. The present study aimed to determine the expression levels and clinicopathological significance of EphA8 in breast cancer (BC) using immunohistochemistry analysis of tissue microarrays. The results of the present study revealed that EphA8 expression levels were upregulated in BC tissue and were associated with tumor size and TNM stage. In addition, upregulated expression levels of EphA8 were identified to be a poor prognostic biomarker for patients with BC. The knockdown of EphA8 expression using short hairpin RNA resulted in increased levels of apoptosis as well as decreased proliferation, migration and invasion of BC cells both in vivo and in vitro. The knockdown of EphA8 also decreased the phosphorylation of AKT, which was accompanied by downregulation of Bcl‑2 expression levels and upregulation of p53, Caspase‑3 and Bax expression levels. Moreover, knockdown of EphA8 expression increased the chemosensitivity of BC cells to paclitaxel. In conclusion, the results of the present study indicated that EphA8 may be a useful prognostic marker in BC and that knockdown of EphA8 may represent a novel strategy in adjuvant chemotherapy for the treatment of BC.
Recent studies indicate that endocytosis of Eph-ephrin complexes may be one of the mechanisms by which a high affinity cell-cell adhesion is converted to a repulsive interaction. In this study, we show that EphA8 undergoes clathrin-mediated endocytosis upon treatment with ephrin-A5, and that EphA8 is associated tightly with Tiam-1, a Rac-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor. Analysis of EphA8 deletion mutants revealed that a juxtamembrane region in EphA8 is critically involved in endocytosis of EphA8-ephrinA5 complexes. An EphA8 mutant lacking this juxtamembrane portion was defective for endocytosis with ephrinA5, and also displayed a weak association with Tiam-1. Expression of an endocytosis-defective version of EphA8 resulted in a low level of Rac activity in response to ephrin-A5 stimulation. More importantly, down-regulation of Tiam-1 resulted in inefficient endocytosis of EphA8-ephrinA5 complexes. These results suggest that Tiam-1 plays a role in clathrin-dependent endocytosis of EphA8-ephrinA5 complexes.
Ephrin B1 and its cognate receptor, Eph receptor B2, key regulators of embryogenesis, are expressed in human atherosclerotic plaque and inhibit adult human monocyte chemotaxis. Few data exist, however, regarding the gene expression profiles of the ephrin (EFN) and Eph receptor (EPH) family of genes in atherosclerosis-related human cells. Gene expression profiles were determined of all 21 members of this gene family in atherosclerosis-related cells by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis. The following 17 members were detected in adult human peripheral blood monocytes: EFNA1 and EFNA3 - EFNA5 (coding for ephrins A1 and A3 - A5); EPHA1, EPHA2, EPHA4 - EPHA6 and EPHA8 (coding for Eph receptors A1, A2, A4 - A6 and A8); EFNB1 and EFNB2 (coding for ephrins B1 and B2); and EPHB1 - EPHB4 and EPHB6 (coding for Eph receptors B1 - B4 and B6). THP-1 monocytic cells, Jurkat T cells and adult arterial endothelial cells also expressed multiple EFN and EPH genes. These results indicate that a wide variety of ephrins and Eph receptors might affect monocyte chemotaxis, contributing to the development of atherosclerosis. Their pathological significance requires further study.
We examined signaling differences between two co-stimulatory molecules, CD28 and ICAM-1 by analyzing transcription factors and proteins that are activated downstream of these co-stimulations. We observed that FAST-1, a crucial protein in the TGFbeta signaling pathway, was activated by only ICAM-1 co-stimulation, and not by CD28. We also observed that receptor tyrosine kinases Csk, Dtk, FGFR1 and ROR2 were phosphorylated upon CD28 co-stimulation and IGF-1R, HGFR, MuSK and EphA8 were phosphorylated upon ICAM-1 co-stimulation. Together, these findings suggest that these two co-stimulators induce the activation of different sets of proteins, suggesting that each co-stimulatory molecule has its unique signaling profile.
Recent genetic studies suggest that ephrins may function in a kinase-independent Eph receptor pathway. Here we report that expression of EphA8 in either NIH 3T3 or HEK293 cells enhanced cell adhesion to fibronectin via alpha(5)beta(1)- or beta(3) integrins. Interestingly, a kinase-inactive EphA8 mutant also markedly promoted cell attachment to fibronectin in these cell lines. Using a panel of EphA8 point mutants, we have demonstrated that EphA8 kinase activity does not correlate with its ability to promote cell attachment to fibronectin. Analysis using EphA8 extracellular and intracellular domain mutants has revealed that enhanced cell adhesion is dependent on ephrin A binding to the extracellular domain and the juxtamembrane segment of the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor. EphA8-promoted adhesion was efficiently inhibited by wortmannin, a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) inhibitor. Additionally, we found that EphA8 had associated PI 3-kinase activity and that the p110gamma isoform of PI 3-kinase is associated with EphA8. In vitro binding experiments revealed that the EphA8 juxtamembrane segment was sufficient for the formation of a stable complex with p110gamma. Similar results were obtained in assay using cells stripped of endogenous ephrin A ligands by treatment with preclustered ephrin A5-Fc proteins. In addition, a membrane-targeted lipid kinase-inactive p110gamma mutant was demonstrated to stably associate with EphA8 and suppress EphA8-promoted cell adhesion to fibronectin. Taken together, these results suggest the presence of a novel mechanism by which the EphA8 receptor localizes p110gamma PI 3-kinase to the plasma membrane in a tyrosine kinase-independent fashion, thereby allowing access to lipid substrates to enable the signals required for integrin-mediated cell adhesion.
The Eph receptors are the largest known family of receptor protein tyrosine kinases, which play important roles with their ligands called ephrin in the neural development, angiogenesis, and vascular network assembly. It was previously shown that ephrin-A2, -A3 and -A5 bind to, and activate the EphA8 receptor tyrosine kinase, respectively. In this study, we have examined if there are other additional ephrin ligands interacting with the EphA8 receptor tyrosine kinase expressed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. For this purpose, we have constructed chimeric ephrin-A1, -A4, -B1, -B2 or -B3 ligands consisting of the Fc portion of human IgG fused to their carboxyl-terminus. Both ephrin-A1 and ephrin-A4 chimeric ligands efficiently bound to the EphA8 receptor expressed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts, whereas the transmembrane ligands including ephrin-B1, -B2 and -B3 did not. Additionally we have demonstrated that both the EphA8-TrkB chimeric receptor and the EphA8 receptor expressed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts are efficiently tyrosine-phosphorylated upon stimulating with epthin-A1 or -A4 but none of transmembrane ephrin-B proteins. These results strongly indicate that the EphA8 receptor functions exclusively as an glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked ephrin ligand-dependent receptor protein tyrosine kinase.
BACKGROUND: Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PCPG) are rare catecholamine-secreting endocrine tumors deriving from chromaffin cells of the embryonic neural crest. Although distinct molecular PCPG subtypes have been elucidated, certain characteristics of these tumors have yet to be fully examined, namely the tumor microenvironment (TME). To further understand tumor-stromal interactions in PCPG subtypes, the present study deconvoluted bulk tumor gene expression to examine ligand-receptor interactions. METHODS: RNA-sequencing data primary solid PCPG tumors were derived from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Tumor purity was estimated using two robust algorithms. The tumor purity estimates and bulk tumor expression values allowed for non-negative linear regression to predict the average expression of each gene in the stromal and tumor compartments for each PCPG molecular subtype. The predicted expression values were then used in conjunction with a previously curated ligand-receptor database and scoring system to evaluate top ligand-receptor interactions. RESULTS: Across all PCPG subtypes compared to normal samples, tumor-to-tumor signaling between bone morphogenic proteins 7 (BMP7) and 15 (BMP15) and cognate receptors ACVR2B and BMPR1B was increased. In addition, tumor-to-stroma signaling was enriched for interactions between predicted tumor-originating delta-like ligand 3 (DLL3) and predicted stromal NOTCH receptors. Stroma-to-tumor signaling was enriched for interactions between ephrins A1 and A4 with ephrin receptors EphA5, EphA7, and EphA8. Pseudohypoxia subtype tumors displayed increased predicted stromal expression of genes related to immune-exhausted T-cell response, including those for inhibitory receptors HAVCR2 and CTLA4. CONCLUSION: The current exploratory study predicted stromal and tumor through compartmental deconvolution and yielded previously unrecognized interactions and putative biomarkers in PCPG.
The Rab family of small guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) plays a vital role in membrane trafficking. Its active GTP-bound state is driven by guanine nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs). Ras and Rab interactor (or Ras interaction/interference)-like (RINL), which contains a conserved VPS9 domain critical for GEF action, was recently identified as a new Rab5 subfamily GEF in vitro. However, its detailed function and interacting molecules have not yet been fully elucidated. Here we found that RINL has GEF activity for the Rab5 subfamily proteins by measuring their GTP-bound forms in cultured cells. We also found that RINL interacts with odin, a member of the ankyrin-repeat and sterile-alpha motif (SAM) domain-containing (Anks) protein family. In addition, the Eph tyrosine kinase receptor EphA8 formed a ternary complex with both RINL and odin. Interestingly, RINL expression in cultured cells reduced EphA8 levels in a manner dependent on both its GEF activity and interaction with odin. In addition, knockdown of RINL increased EphA8 level in HeLa cells. Our findings suggest that RINL, as a GEF for Rab5 subfamily, is implicated in the EphA8-degradation pathway via its interaction with odin.
Endocytosis of Eph-ephrin complexes may be an important mechanism for converting cell-cell adhesion to a repulsive interaction. Here, we show that an endocytosis-defective EphA8 mutant forms a complex with EphAs and blocks their endocytosis in cultured cells. Further, we used bacterial artificial chromosome transgenic (Tg) mice to recapitulate the anterior>posterior gradient of EphA in the superior colliculus (SC). In mice expressing the endocytosis-defective EphA8 mutant, the nasal axons were aberrantly shifted to the anterior SC. In contrast, in Tg mice expressing wild-type EphA8, the nasal axons were shifted to the posterior SC, as predicted for the enhanced repellent effect of ephrinA reverse signalling. Importantly, Rac signalling was shown to be essential for EphA-ephrinA internalization and the subsequent nasal axonal repulsion in the SC. These results indicate that endocytosis of the Eph-ephrin complex is a key mechanism by which axonal repulsion is generated for proper guidance and topographic mapping.
Eph receptors and ephrins have been implicated in a variety of cellular processes, including morphology and motility, because of their ability to modulate intricate signaling networks. Here we show that the phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain-containing proteins AIDA-1b and Odin are tightly associated with the EphA8 receptor in response to ligand stimulation. Both AIDA-1b and Odin belong to the ankyrin repeat and sterile alpha motif domain-containing (Anks) protein family. The PTB domain of Anks family proteins is crucial for their association with the juxtamembrane domain of EphA8, whereas EphA8 tyrosine kinase activity is not required for this protein-protein interaction. In addition, we found that Odin is a more physiologically relevant partner of EphA8 in mammalian cells. Interestingly, overexpression of the Odin PTB domain alone attenuated EphA8-mediated inhibition of cell migration in HEK293 cells, suggesting that it acts as a dominant-negative mutant of the endogenous Odin protein. More importantly, small interfering RNA-mediated Odin silencing significantly diminished ephrinA5-induced EphA8 signaling effects, which inhibit cell migration in HEK293 cells and retract growing neurites of Neuro2a cells. Taken together, our findings support a possible function for Anks family proteins as scaffolding proteins of the EphA8 signaling pathway.
EphA7 has been implicated in the regulation of apoptotic cell death in neural epithelial cells. In this report, we provide evidence that EphA7 interacts with caspase-8 to induce apoptotic cell signaling. First, a pull-down assay using biotinylated ephrinA5-Fc showed that EphA7 coprecipitated with wild type caspase-8 or catalytically inactive caspase-8 mutant. Second, co-transfection of EphA7 with caspase-8 significantly increased the number of cleaved caspase-3 positive apoptotic cells under an experimental condition where transfection of EphA7 or caspase-8 alone did not affect cell viability or apoptosis. EphA4 also had a causative role in inducing apoptotic cell death with caspase-8, whereas EphA8 did not. Third, caspase-8 catalytic activity was essential for the apoptotic signaling cascade, whereas tyrosine kinase activity of the EphA4 receptor was not. Interestingly, we found that kinaseinactive EphA4 was well co-localized at the plasma membrane with catalytically inactive caspase-8, suggesting that an interaction between these mutant proteins was more stable. Finally, we observed that the extracellular region of the EphA7 receptor was critical for interacting with caspase-8, whereas the cytoplasmic region of EphA7 was not. Therefore, we propose that Eph receptors physically associate with a transmembrane protein to form an apoptotic signaling complex and that this unidentified receptorlike protein acts as a biochemical linker between the Eph receptor and caspase-8.
PURPOSE: Breast cancer treatment is associated with adverse effects, which may delay return-to-work. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) may influence the risk and severity of treatment toxicities, which in turn could delay return-to-work. We examined the association of 26 SNPs with return-to-work in premenopausal women with breast cancer. METHODS: Using Danish registries, we identified premenopausal women diagnosed with non-distant metastatic breast cancer during 2007‒2011, assigned adjuvant combination chemotherapy including cyclophosphamide and docetaxel. We genotyped 26 SNPs in 20 genes (ABCB1, ABCC2, ABCG2, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, CYP3A, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, GSTP1, SLCO1B1, SLCO1B3, ARHGEF10, EPHA4, EPHA5, EPHA6, EPHA8, ERCC1, ERCC2, FGD4 and TRPV1) using TaqMan assays. We computed the cumulative incidence of return-to-work (defined as 4 consecutive weeks of work) up to 10 years after surgery, treating death and retirement as competing events and fitted cause-specific Cox regression models to estimate crude hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of return-to-work. We also examined stable labor market attachment (defined as 12 consecutive weeks of work). RESULTS: We included 1,964 women. No associations were found for 25 SNPs. The cumulative incidence of return-to-work varied by CYP3A5 rs776746 genotype. From 6 months to 10 years after surgery, return-to-work increased from 25 to 94% in wildtypes (n = 1600), from 17 to 94% in heterozygotes (n = 249), and from 7 to 82% in homozygotes (n = 15). The HR showed delayed return-to-work in CYP3A5 rs776746 homozygotes throughout follow-up (0.48, 95% CI 0.26, 0.86), compared with wildtypes. Estimates were similar for stable labor market attachment. CONCLUSION: Overall, the SNPs examined in the study did not influence return-to-work or stable labor market attachment after breast cancer in premenopausal women. Our findings did suggest that the outcomes were delayed in homozygote carriers of CYP3A5 rs776746, though the number of homozygotes was low.
Immunogenic cell death (ICD) induces anti-tumor immunity and aids in dismantling the immunosuppressive immune microenvironment (TME), which belongs to a type of regulated cell death. The differentiation of gastric cancer (GC) subtypes and the discovery of prognostic biomarkers are crucial for its treatment because GC is a disease that is both highly heterogeneous and aggressive. However, although the induction of ICD in tumor cells is associated with a favorable prognosis, the exact mechanism of its role in GC remains unclear. Transcriptome profiling data and clinical data of GC patients were retrieved from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Herein, patients were classified with the consensus clustering algorithm, and the associated biological functions and immune microenvironment infiltration were explored based on the expression of ICD-associated genes. A risk score signature consisting of 11 ICD-related genes was established via the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator regression (LASSO) method. We have retrieved similar studies in recent years and compared them with our study using the time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. Gene set variation analysis (GSVA) and single sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) were performed to explore the association between the signature and tumor microenvironment (TME). Two distinct subtypes associated with ICD in GC were identified, each with a different prognosis. The ICD-high expression subtype was associated with higher immune cell infiltration and a better prognosis. The ICD-related gene signature containing 11 genes (CGB5, Z84468.1, APOA5, EPHA8, CLEC18C, TLR7, MUC7, MUC15, CTLA4, CALB2, and UGT2B28), could independently and accurately predict the prognosis of GC. In this study, an ICD-based classification was conducted to assist in the diagnosis and personalized therapy for GC. The ICD-related genes risk score model was established to predict prognosis.
