Eosinophil peroxidase heavy chain; Mediates tyrosine nitration of secondary granule proteins in mature resting eosinophils. Shows significant inhibitory activity towards Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv by inducing bacterial fragmentation and lysis; Belongs to the peroxidase family. XPO subfamily.
Enterococci are a part of human microbiota and a leading cause of multidrug resistant infections. Here, we identify a family of Enterococcus pore-forming toxins (Epxs) in E. faecalis, E. faecium, and E. hirae strains isolated across the globe. Structural studies reveal that Epxs form a branch of beta-barrel pore-forming toxins with a beta-barrel protrusion (designated the top domain) sitting atop the cap domain. Through a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screen, we identify human leukocyte antigen class I (HLA-I) complex as a receptor for two members (Epx2 and Epx3), which preferentially recognize human HLA-I and homologous MHC-I of equine, bovine, and porcine, but not murine, origin. Interferon exposure, which stimulates MHC-I expression, sensitizes human cells and intestinal organoids to Epx2 and Epx3 toxicity. Co-culture with Epx2-harboring E. faecium damages human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and intestinal organoids, and this toxicity is neutralized by an Epx2 antibody, demonstrating the toxin-mediated virulence of Epx-carrying Enterococcus.
BACKGROUND: The relative utility of eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) and blood and sputum eosinophil counts as disease biomarkers in asthma is uncertain. OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the utility of EPX as a biomarker of systemic and airway eosinophilic inflammation in asthma. METHODS: EPX protein was measured by immunoassay in serum and sputum in 110 healthy controls to establish a normal reference range and in repeated samples of serum and sputum collected during 3 years of observation in 480 participants in the Severe Asthma Research Program 3. RESULTS: Over 3 years, EPX levels in patients with asthma were higher than normal in 27% to 31% of serum samples and 36% to 53% of sputum samples. Eosinophils and EPX correlated better in blood than in sputum (r(s) values of 0.74 and 0.43, respectively), and high sputum EPX levels occurred in 27% of participants with blood eosinophil counts less than 150 cells/muL and 42% of participants with blood eosinophil counts between 150 and 299 cells/muL. Patients with persistently high sputum EPX values for 3 years were characterized by severe airflow obstruction, frequent exacerbations, and high mucus plug scores. In 59 patients with asthma who started mepolizumab during observation, serum EPX levels normalized in 96% but sputum EPX normalized in only 49%. Lung function remained abnormal even when sputum EPX normalized. CONCLUSIONS: Serum EPX is a valid protein biomarker of systemic eosinophilic inflammation in asthma, and sputum EPX levels are a more sensitive biomarker of airway eosinophilic inflammation than sputum eosinophil counts. Eosinophil measures in blood frequently miss airway eosinophilic inflammation, and mepolizumab frequently fails to normalize airway eosinophilic inflammation even though it invariably normalizes systemic eosinophilic inflammation.
BACKGROUND: Whether IgE affects eosinophil migration in chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) remains largely unclear. Moreover, our understanding of local IgE, eosinophils, and omalizumab efficacy in CRSwNP remains limited. OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether IgE acts directly on eosinophils and determined its role in omalizumab therapy. METHODS: Eosinophils and their surface receptors were detected by hematoxylin and eosin staining and flow cytometry. IgE and its receptors, eosinophil peroxidase (EPX), eosinophilic cationic protein, and CCR3 were detected by immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. Functional analyses were performed on blood eosinophils and polyp tissues. Logistic regression was performed to screen for risk factors. Receiver operating characteristic curve was generated to evaluate the accuracy. RESULTS: Both FcepsilonRI and CD23 were expressed on eosinophils. The expression of FcepsilonRI and CD23 on eosinophil in nasal polyp tissue was higher than in peripheral blood (both P < .001). IgE and EPX colocalized in CRSwNP. IgE directly promoted eosinophil migration by upregulating CCR3 in CRSwNP but not in healthy controls. Omalizumab and lumiliximab were found to be effective in restraining this migration, indicating CD23 was involved in IgE-induced eosinophil migration. Both IgE(+) and EPX(+) cells were significantly reduced after omalizumab treatment in those who experienced response (IgE(+) cells, P = .001; EPX(+) cells, P = .016) but not in those with no response (IgE(+) cells, P = .060; EPX(+) cells, P = .151). Baseline IgE(+) cell levels were higher in those with response compared to those without response (P = .024). The baseline local IgE(+) cell count predicted omalizumab efficacy with an accuracy of 0.811. CONCLUSIONS: IgE directly promotes eosinophil migration, and baseline local IgE(+) cell counts are predictive of omalizumab efficacy in CRSwNP.
Eosinophils are involved in tissue homeostasis. Herein, we unveiled eosinophils as important regulators of bone homeostasis. Eosinophils are localized in proximity to bone-resorbing osteoclasts in the bone marrow. The absence of eosinophils in DeltadblGATA mice results in lower bone mass under steady-state conditions and amplified bone loss upon sex hormone deprivation and inflammatory arthritis. Conversely, increased numbers of eosinophils in IL-5 transgenic mice enhance bone mass under steady-state conditions and protect from hormone- and inflammation- mediated bone loss. Eosinophils strongly inhibit the differentiation and demineralization activity of osteoclasts and lead to profound changes in the transcriptional profile of osteoclasts. This osteoclast-suppressive effect of eosinophils is based on the release of eosinophil peroxidase causing impaired reactive oxygen species and mitogen-activated protein kinase induction in osteoclast precursors. In humans, the number and the activity of eosinophils correlates with bone mass in healthy participants and rheumatoid arthritis patients. Taken together, experimental and human data indicate a regulatory function of eosinophils on bone.
The analysis of eosinophil shape change and mediator secretion is a useful tool in understanding how eosinophils respond to immunological stimuli and chemotactic factors. Eosinophils undergo dramatic shape changes, along with secretion of the granule-derived enzyme eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) in response to chemotactic stimuli including platelet-activating factor (PAF) and CCL11 (eotaxin-1). Here, we describe the analysis of eosinophil shape change by confocal microscopy analysis and provide an experimental approach for comparing unstimulated cells with those that have been stimulated to undergo chemotaxis. In addition, we illustrate two different degranulation assays for EPX using OPD and an ELISA technique and show how eosinophil degranulation may be assessed from in vitro as well as ex vivo stimulation.
Eosinophilic airway inflammation, complicated by bronchial asthma and eosinophilic chronic rhinosinusitis (ECRS), is difficult to treat. The disease may become refractory when eosinophilic mucin associated with eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) and autoantibodies fills in the paranasal sinus and small airway. This study investigated the functional role of an anti-EPX antibody in eosinophilic mucin of ECRS in eosinophilic airway inflammation. Eosinophilic mucin was obtained from patients with ECRS. The effects of the anti-EPX antibody on dsDNA release from eosinophils and eosinophilic mucin decomposition were evaluated. Immunofluorescence or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were performed to detect the anti-EPX antibody and its supernatant and serum levels in eosinophilic mucin, respectively. The serum levels of the anti-EPX antibody were positively correlated with sinus computed tomography score and fractionated exhaled nitrogen oxide. Patients with refractory ECRS had higher serum levels of the anti-EPX antibody than those without. However, dupilumab treatment decreased the serum levels of the anti-EPX antibody. Immunoglobulins (Igs) in the immunoprecipitate of mucin supernatants enhanced dsDNA release from eosinophils, whereas the neutralization of Igs against EPX stopped dsDNA release. Furthermore, EPX antibody neutralization accelerated mucin decomposition and restored corticosteroid sensitivity. Taken together, the anti-EPX antibody may be involved in the formulation of eosinophilic mucin and be used as a clinical marker and therapeutic target for intractable eosinophilic airway inflammation.
BACKGROUND: Patients with eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) require long-lasting resolution of inflammation to prevent fibrostenosis and dysphagia. However, the dissociation between symptoms and histologic improvement suggests persistent molecular drivers despite histologic remission. OBJECTIVE: We characterized persisting molecular alterations in pediatric patients with EoE using tissue transcriptomics and proteomics. METHODS: Esophageal biopsy samples (n = 247) collected prospectively during 189 endoscopies from pediatric patients with EoE (n = 36, up to 11 follow-up endoscopies) and pediatric controls (n = 44, single endoscopies) were subjected to bulk transcriptomics (n = 96) and proteomics (n = 151). Intercellular junctions (desmoglein-1/3, desmoplakin, E-cadherin) and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (vimentin:E-cadherin ratio) were assessed by immunofluorescence staining. RESULTS: Active EoE (>/=15 eosinophils per high-power field [eos/hpf]), inactive EoE (<15 eos/hpf), and deep-remission EoE (0 eos/hpf) were diagnosed in 107 of 185, 78 of 185, and 41 of 185 biopsy samples, respectively. Among the dysregulated genes (up-/downregulated 310/112) and proteins (up-/downregulated 68/16) between active EoE and controls, 17 genes, and 6 proteins remained dysregulated in inactive EoE. Using persistently upregulated genes (n = 9) and proteins (n = 3) only, such as ALOX15, CXCL1, CXCL6, CTSG, CDH26, PRRX1, CLC, EPX, and periostin (POSTN), was sufficient to separate inactive EoE and deep-remission biopsy samples from control tissue. While 32 differentially expressed genes persisted in deep-remission EoE compared to controls, the proteome normalized except for persistently upregulated POSTN. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition normalized in inactive EoE, whereas desmosome recovery remained impaired as a result of desmoglein-1 downregulation. CONCLUSION: The analysis of molecular changes shows persistent EoE-associated esophageal dysregulation despite histologic remission. These data expand our understanding of inflammatory processes and possible mechanisms that underlie tissue remodeling in EoE.
The epigenome is at the intersection of the environment, genotype, and cellular response. DNA methylation of cytosine nucleotides, the most studied epigenetic modification, has been systematically evaluated in human studies by using untargeted epigenome-wide association studies (EWASs) and shown to be both sensitive to environmental exposures and associated with allergic diseases. In this narrative review, we summarize findings from key EWASs previously conducted on this topic; interpret results from recent studies; and discuss the strengths, challenges, and opportunities regarding epigenetics research on the environment-allergy relationship. The majority of these EWASs have systematically investigated select environmental exposures during the prenatal and early childhood periods and allergy-associated epigenetic changes in leukocyte-isolated DNA and more recently in nasal cells. Overall, many studies have found consistent DNA methylation associations across cohorts for certain exposures, such as smoking (eg, aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor gene [AHRR] gene), and allergic diseases (eg, EPX gene). We recommend the integration of both environmental exposures and allergy or asthma within long-term prospective designs to strengthen causality as well as biomarker development. Future studies should collect paired target tissues to examine compartment-specific epigenetic responses, incorporate genetic influences in DNA methylation (methylation quantitative trait locus), replicate findings across diverse populations, and carefully interpret epigenetic signatures from bulk, target tissue or isolated cells.
Active research during recent years has clearly shown that the eosinophil is a potent inflammatory cell taking active part in almost all kinds of inflammatory processes. The activity of the human eosinophil is mediated by the secretion of four well characterized cytotoxic proteins, ECP, EPO, EPX/EDN and MBP in addition to lipid mediators such as LTC4 and PAF and toxic oxygen metabolites. The cytotoxic potential of the eosinophil has been demonstrated in a number of diseases with a close association of eosinophil accumulation with secretion of granule proteins and tissue injury. Also the measurements of the proteins in various body fluids have provided evidence for the active participation of eosinophils in a number of diseases such as asthma, ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis to mention a few. The identification of the principles that attract eosinophils to the sites of inflammation must be a major goal in our attempts to control the activity of this potents cell.
An association between severe infant bronchiolitis due to respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and subsequent wheezing is well documented. High levels of urinary eosinophil protein X (U-EPX) have been related to active disease in asthmatic children. The aim of this study was to analyse whether RSV bronchiolitis leads to an increase in U-EPX levels and whether wheezing is more common in children with high U-EPX values. Seventeen infants requiring in-ward care for verified RSV lower respiratory tract infection were followed and compared with age-matched controls. A reference group without a history of RSV bronchiolitis was also included. At inclusion at mean age 3.3 months and at follow-up at mean age 32.9 months, U-EPX levels were comparable in the RSV group. However, at follow-up at mean age 6.4 months, the RSV group had significantly increased levels of U-EPX compared with inclusion (median 167.8; range 46.2-470.7 vs. 122.8; 43.7-266.0 microg/mmol creatinine; P=0.023) and also significantly increased compared with the 6-month-old controls (167.8 vs. 93.0; 19.0-204.0 microg/mmol creatinine; P=0.0095). RSV infected subjects that experienced wheezing had significantly higher U-EPX values both at inclusion and at age 32.9 months than those who did not. Also, in the reference group (mean age 18.4 months), the children who had wheezed during the preceding year had higher U-EPX levels than those who had not wheezed. In conclusion, RSV bronchiolitis severe enough to require in-ward care produces a significant, but transient increase in U-EPX. Furthermore, a high U-EPX at baseline appears to be associated with an increased risk of future wheezing.
Eosinophils are important immune cells that have been implicated in resistance to gastrointestinal nematode (GIN) infections in both naturally and experimentally infected sheep. Proteins of particular importance appear to be IgA-Fc alpha receptor (FcalphaRI), C-C chemokine receptor type 3 (CCR3), proteoglycan 3 (PRG3, major basic protein 2) and EPX (eosinophil peroxidase). We used known human nucleotide sequences to search the ruminant genomes, followed by translation to protein and sequence alignments to visualize differences between sequences and species. Where a sequence was retrieved for cow, but not for sheep and goat, this was used additionally as a reference sequence. In this review, we show that eosinophil function varies among host species. Consequently, investigations into the mechanisms of ruminant immune responses to GIN should be conducted using the natural host. Specifically, we address differences in protein sequence and structure for eosinophil proteins.
OBJECTIVE: Eosinophils are hallmarks in allergic type 2 inflammation and are known to release cytotoxic granule proteins that contribute to inflammation. Eosinophils develop in the bone marrow from hematopoietic stem cells and once mature, have a limited lifespan in culture, making them difficult to study ex vivo. IL-33 has increasingly been shown as a key regulator of type 2 inflammation via signaling through its receptor, ST2. The present study was conducted to detail a method of eosinophil differentiation from hematopoietic stem cells and determine the response to IL-33. METHODS: CD34+ and CD14+ cells were isolated from donor apheresis cones and differentiated into eosinophils or macrophage controls, respectively. Morphologic, transcriptional and protein analyses were performed to validate this method of eosinophil differentiation. The effect of IL-33 on differentiated eosinophils was assessed using qPCR, immunofluorescence, and multiplex cytokine array. RESULTS: CD34 differentiated eosinophils appear morphologically similar by H&E and express eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) protein as well as the conventional eosinophil transcripts EPX, CLC, and MBP. In addition, differentiated eosinophils expressed both isoforms of the IL-33 receptor, ST2L and sST2 throughout the differentiation process. Transcript levels of both IL-33 receptors were up-regulated by treatment with IL-33 at earlier timepoints in the differentiation. These cells also expressed IL-4 and IL-13 mRNA which were up-regulated by IL-33 as well. Notably, IL-13 expression was significantly higher with IL-33 treatment compared to media control at every timepoint measured. IL-33 significantly increased cellular secretion of IL-13 protein at most timepoints throughout differentiation. IL-8, LIF, CCL1, CCL5, CCL7, and CCL8 were also significantly secreted after IL-33 stimulation. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that CD34 differentiated eosinophils are morphologically and phenotypically similar to peripheral eosinophils. The release of specific cytokines in direct response to IL-33 may contribute to the pathogenesis of type 2 inflammation and facilitates new avenues for studying eosinophils as effector cells in vitro.
BACKGROUND: Bidirectional interactions between eosinophils and mast cells (MCs) have been reported in various allergic diseases. Bone marrow (BM) eosinophilia, and to a lesser extent blood eosinophilia, is common in systemic mastocytosis (SM), but its significance remains unknown. OBJECTIVE: We described blood and BM eosinophil characteristics in SM. METHODS: A large collection of BM biopsy samples was analyzed using immunohistochemical staining and whole-slide imaging. Eosinophil and extracellular granules were detected by eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) staining and MCs by KIT staining. Complementary analyses were conducted using flow cytometry and immunofluorescence. RESULTS: Eosinophil infiltrates and large areas of eosinophil degranulation were observed within or around BM MC infiltrates in SM. EPX staining surface, highlighting intact eosinophils and eosinophil degranulation, was higher in nonadvanced SM (n = 37 BM biopsy samples) compared with both controls (n = 8, P = .0003) and advanced SM (n = 24, P = .014). In nonadvanced SM, positive correlations were observed between serum tryptase levels and percentages of eosinophil counts in BM aspirations (Spearman r coefficient r = 0.38, P = .038), eosinophils count in BM biopsy samples (r = 0.45, P = .007), EPX staining (r = 0.37, P = .035), and eosinophil degranulation (r = 0.39, P = .023). Eosinophil counts in BM biopsy samples also correlated with MC counts (r = 0.47, P = .006) and KIT staining surface (r = 0.49, P = .003). BM MCs expressed IL-5 receptor and other usual eosinophil cytokine/chemokine receptors, and blood eosinophils displayed several increased surface markers compared with controls, suggesting an activated state. CONCLUSION: Our data suggest possible cross talk between MCs and eosinophils, supporting MC tryptase release and MC activation-related symptoms. This suggests a rationale for targeting eosinophils in nonadvanced SM not fully controlled by other therapies.
Individual symptoms of allergy such as asthma, dermatitis, rhinitis have many different underlying mechanisms. The detailed characterization of the inflammatory mechanisms underlying symptom development in the individual patient is important in order to optimally control treatment. Measurement of eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) in sputum or blood and eosinophil protein X/eosinophil derived neurotoxin (EPX/EDN) in urine may be used to read the involvement of the eosinophil granulocyte in the process. An important information as eosinophil dominated processes seem to be particularly sensitive to corticosteroid treatment. The possibilities to measure the involvement of other inflammatory cells exist today, but are only used to a small extent. The dream would be that every patient with an inflammatory disease is characterized with respect to the profile of involving cells and mediators. Such information would provide us with a unique understanding of the underlying mechanisms of the development of disease symptoms and the possibilities of treating these.
BACKGROUND: Local airway autoimmune responses may contribute to steroid dependence and persistent eosinophilia in severe asthma. Auto-IgG antibodies directed against granule proteins such as eosinophil peroxidase (EPX), macrophage scavenger receptor with collagenous structure (MARCO) and nuclear/extranuclear antigens (antinuclear antibodies (ANAs)) have been reported. Our objective was to describe the prevalence and clinical characteristics of asthmatic patients with airway autoreactivity, and to assess if this could be predicted from clinical history of autoreactivity. METHODS: We analysed anti-EPX, anti-MARCO and ANAs in 218 sputum samples collected prospectively from 148 asthmatic patients, and evaluated their association with lung function parameters, blood/airway inflammation, severity indices and exacerbations. Additionally, 107 of these patients consented to fill out an autoimmune checklist to determine personal/family history of systemic autoimmune disease and symptoms. RESULTS: Out of the 148 patients, 59 (40%) were anti-EPX IgG(+), 53 (36%) were anti-MARCO IgG(+) and 64 out of 129 (50%) had >/=2 nuclear/extranuclear autoreactivities. A composite airway autoreactivity score (CAAS) demonstrated that 82 patients (55%) had >/=2 airway autoreactivities (considered as CAAS(+)). Increased airway eosinophil degranulation (OR 15.1, 95% CI 1.1-199.4), increased blood leukocytes (OR 3.5, 95% CI 1.3-10.1) and reduced blood lymphocytes (OR 0.19, 95% CI 0.04-0.84) predicted CAAS(+). A third of CAAS(+) patients reported an exacerbation, associated with increased anti-EPX and/or anti-MARCO IgG (p<0.05). While no association was found between family history or personal diagnosis of autoimmune disease, 30% of CAAS(+) asthmatic patients reported sicca symptoms (p=0.02). Current anti-inflammatory (inhaled/oral corticosteroids and/or adjunct anti-interleukin-5 biologics) treatment does not attenuate airway autoantibodies, irrespective of eosinophil suppression. CONCLUSION: We report 55% of moderate-severe asthmatic patients to have airway autoreactivity that persists despite anti-inflammatory treatment and is associated with exacerbations.
Previous studies showed that the biological activity and the eosinophil content of eosinophil cationic protein (ECP, RNase 3) are determined by single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ECP (RNase3) gene. In this study, we report the prevalence of a common SNP in the eosinophil protein x/eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EPX/EDN, RNase2) and the association with the cellular contents of EPX/EDN and ECP. The genes were sequenced and the EPX/EDN405(G>C) rs2013109 SNPs were also determined by TaqMan 5'nuclease allelic discrimination assay. ECP and EPX/EDN in purified eosinophils or in whole blood extracts were analysed by sensitive immunoassays. The study included 379 non-allergic and allergic subjects. The genotype prevalence of the EPX/EDN405(G>C) polymorphism was GG 59%, GC 36% and CC 6%. The cellular contents of ECP and EPX/EDN were related in a reciprocal fashion with the sums of the protein contents being constant. The contents were associated with the ECP562(G>C) rs2233860 and EPX/EDN405(G>C) gene polymorphisms. The cellular content of eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) was not associated with the ECP and EPX/EDN genotypes. The prevalence of the EPX/EDN405(G>C) genotypes and the contents of the proteins were similar in non-allergic and allergic subjects.The production and storage of the two ancestral proteins, ECP and EPX/EDN likely share common regulatory mechanisms, which result in opposing productions of the two proteins.
BACKGROUND: Diagnosis of eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) requires manual quantification of tissue eosinophils. Eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) is an eosinophil-specific, cytoplasmic granule protein released during degranulation. AIMS: The objective of this study was to evaluate image analysis of EPX immunohistochemistry as an automated method for histologic diagnosis of EoE. METHODS: We performed a secondary analysis of prospectively collected esophageal biopsies obtained from adult subjects with EoE and controls. Tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and evaluated for peak eosinophils per high power field (eos/hpf). The same slides were de-stained and re-stained to detect EPX for direct comparison. Slides were digitized, and EPX staining area/mm(2) was quantified using image analysis. Paired samples were compared for changes in EPX staining in treatment responders and non-responders. RESULTS: Thirty-eight EoE cases and 49 controls were analyzed. Among EoE subjects, matched post-treatment biopsies were available for 21 responders and 10 non-responders. Baseline EPX/mm(2) was significantly increased in EoE subjects and decreased in treatment responders. EPX quantification correlated strongly with eos/hpf (r = 0.84, p < 0.0001) and identified EoE subjects with high diagnostic accuracy (AUC 0.95, p < 0.0001). The optimal diagnostic EPX-positive pixel/area threshold was 17,379 EPX/mm(2). Several controls (5/49) with < 15 eos/hpf on H&E staining exceeded this cutoff. CONCLUSIONS: EPX/mm(2) correlates strongly with eos/hpf, accurately identifies subjects with EoE, and decreases in treatment responders. Automated quantification of intact eosinophils and their degranulation products may enhance pathologic assessment. Future studies are needed to correlate EPX/mm(2) with symptoms, endoscopic findings, and esophageal distensibility.
BACKGROUND: Biotherapies targeting IL-5 allow a tangible improvement of asthma. However, all patients do not respond the same way to these treatments. Even if high blood eosinophil counts seem to be associated with a reduction in exacerbations with treatment targeting IL-5, we lack biomarkers for the prediction of remission after these very expensive treatments. RESEARCH QUESTION: Are there biomarkers of remission after therapy targeting IL-5 in the sputum of patients with severe eosinophilic asthma? STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: This observational study included 52 patients with severe asthma initiated with anti-IL-5 therapy and recruited from the asthma clinic of the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire of Liege, Belgium. Remission was defined as patients who combined the following at 1 year after therapy: no chronic treatment with oral corticosteroids; no exacerbation; asthma control questionnaire score < 1.5, asthma control test score > 19, or both; FEV(1) of >/= 80% predicted, improvement of FEV(1) of >/= 10%, or both; and a blood eosinophil count < 300 cells/muL. Eosinophil peroxidase (EPX), IgE, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, IL-25, IL-33, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), and eotaxin-1 levels were measured in the sputum of these patients before anti-IL-5 treatment. RESULTS: Among the 52 patients, 11 were classified as being in remission. These patients were characterized by higher sputum eosinophil, macrophage, and lymphocyte counts, whereas the sputum neutrophil percentage was lower than in the nonremission group. In addition, the sputum eotaxin-1, TSLP, IL-5, EPX, and IgE protein levels were higher at baseline in the remission group compared with the nonremission group. Univariate regression analysis revealed that male vs female sex, sputum neutrophil percentage, eotaxin-1, IL-5, and EPX were potential predictors of remission. INTERPRETATION: Sputum type 2 markers seemed to be potentially predictive of remission after anti-IL-5 therapy in a cohort of patients with severe eosinophilic asthma. These results need validation on a larger cohort.
Asthma is a heterogeneous disease characterized by chronic airway inflammation, reversible airflow limitation, and airway remodeling. Eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) is the most abundant secondary granule protein unique to activated eosinophils. In this study, we aimed to illustrate the effect of EPX on the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in BEAS-2B cells. Our research found that both EPX and ADAM33 were negatively correlated with FEV1/FVC and FEV1%pred, and positively correlated with IL-5 levels. Asthma patients had relatively higher levels of ADAM33 and EPX compared to the healthy control group. The expression of TSLP, TGF-beta1 and ADAM33 in the EPX intervention group was significantly higher. Moreover, EPX could promote the proliferation, migration and EMT of BEAS-2B cells, and the effect of EPX on various factors was significantly improved by the PI3K inhibitor LY294002. The findings from this study could potentially offer a novel therapeutic target for addressing airway remodeling in bronchial asthma, particularly focusing on EMT.
BACKGROUND: IL-5-dependent residential and IL-18-transformed pathogenic eosinophils have been reported; however, the role of IL-18-transformed CD274-expressing pathogenic eosinophils compared to IL-5-generated eosinophils in promoting airway obstruction in asthma has not yet been examined. METHODS: Eosinophils are detected by tissue anti-MBP and anti-EPX immunostaining, CD274 expression by flow cytometry, and airway resistance using the Buxco FinePointe RC system. RESULTS: We show that A. fumigatus-challenged wild-type mice, and different gene-deficient mice including naive CC10-IL-18-transgenic mice, accumulate mostly peribronchial and perivascular CD274-expressing eosinophils except naive CD2-IL-5-transgenic mice. Additionally, we show that CD2-IL-5 transgenic mice following rIL-18 treatment accumulate high number of CD274-expressing perivascular and peribronchial eosinophils with induced collagen, goblet cell hyperplasia and airway resistance compared to saline-challenged CD2-IL5 transgenic mice. Furthermore, we also show that even A. fumigatus-challenged IL-5 (-/-) mice and rIL-18 given DeltadblGATA mice accumulate CD274-expressing eosinophil-associated asthma pathogenesis including airway obstruction. Most importantly, we provide evidence that neutralization of CD274 and IL-18 in A. fumigatus-challenged mice ameliorate experimental asthma. Taken together, the data presented are clinically significant in establishing that anti-IL-18 neutralization is a novel immunotherapy to restrict asthma pathogenesis. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that IL-18 is critical for inducing asthma pathogenesis, and neutralization of CD274 is a potential immunotherapeutic strategy for asthma.
