Keratin, type I cytoskeletal 14; The nonhelical tail domain is involved in promoting KRT5- KRT14 filaments to self-organize into large bundles and enhances the mechanical properties involved in resilience of keratin intermediate filaments in vitro.
A prerequisite for all HER2 directed therapies is the demonstration of HER2 receptor protein overexpression and/or gene amplification by in situ hybridization (ISH). ASCO and CAP have published several HER2 test guidelines over the past 15 years for both breast and gastric cancer. The latest version for breast cancer (2018) focuses on special issues of ISH related to the definitions of special diagnostic groups (1-5). The guidelines for gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma (2017), essentially based on ToGA trial data, are now also being used for other tumors such as pancreas, gallbladder, and non-small-cell lung cancer. For colorectal cancer, a modified testing procedure has been proposed. Recently, besides overexpression and amplification, a third type of HER gene alteration, namely mutation, has gained much interest. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) allows detection of both amplification and mutation of the HER2 gene providing new options of therapy especially in the case of activating mutations.
Trastuzumab is a humanized mAb directed against the extracellular domain of the tyrosine kinase receptor HER2. Trastuzumab has shown clinical activity in HER2-overexpressing breast cancers and, at present, is currently approved for patients whose tumours have this abnormality, in both the metastatic and the adjuvant setting. Several issues about its optimal use, however, are still unresolved. One of the reasons for these uncertainties lies in the absence of conclusive data about its mechanism of action and possible primary or acquired resistance mechanisms. Therefore, clinical questions such as how to optimize patient selection, how to prevent resistance to trastuzumab, or what is the optimal management of those patients whose tumours progress during treatment still await convincing answers. This review summarises the current knowledge on the preclinical and clinical evidence about the mechanism of action of trastuzumab and on the mechanisms underlying the development of resistance and also briefly discusses their possible clinical implications.
The year 2007 marks exactly two decades since Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor-2 (HER2) was functionally implicated in the pathogenesis of human breast cancer. This finding established the HER2 oncogene hypothesis for the development of some human cancers. The subsequent two decades have brought about an explosion of information about the biology of HER2 and the HER family. An abundance of experimental evidence now solidly supports the HER2 oncogene hypothesis and etiologically links amplification of the HER2 gene locus with human cancer pathogenesis. The molecular mechanisms underlying HER2 tumorigenesis appear to be complex and a unified mechanistic model of HER2-induced transformation has not emerged. Numerous hypotheses implicating diverse transforming pathways have been proposed and are individually supported by experimental models and HER2 may indeed induce cell transformation through multiple mechanisms. Here I review the evidence supporting the oncogenic function of HER2, the mechanisms that are felt to mediate its oncogenic functions, and the evidence that links the experimental evidence with human cancer pathogenesis.
HER2 is an important prognostic and predictive biomarker in breast cancer. Its detection makes it possible to define which patients will benefit from a targeted treatment. While assessment of HER2 status by immunohistochemistry in positive vs negative categories is well implemented and reproducible, the introduction of a new "HER2-low" category could raise some concerns about its scoring and reproducibility. We herein described the current HER2 testing methods and the application of innovative machine learning techniques to improve these determinations, as well as the main challenges and opportunities related to the implementation of digital pathology in the up-and-coming AI era.
The tumor biopsy remains essential for breast cancer diagnosis and characterization. Indeed, the treatment is decided according to histological subtype, and according to the presence of targetable molecular alterations. Notably, the presence of hormone receptors, ERBB2 hyperexpression or the existence of PIK3CA or ESR1 mutations are among the alterations commonly investigated. But these biological characteristics are determined only partially by tumor biopsy, due to tumor heterogeneity or tumor plasticity that happens spontaneously or under treatment. Liquid biopsy, and in particular circulating tumor DNA and circulating tumor cells, is a non-invasive method to identify and characterize the presence of cancer in the blood. The aim of this review is to determine the value of liquid biopsy to enhance or replace the data provided by a tumor biopsy.
Breast cancer with HER2-amplification accounts for 20 % of breast cancers. The management of patients has dramatically changed with the advent of anti-HER2 treatment, especially the monoclonal antibodies since 2000 in the metastatic and (neo)-adjuvant setting, leading to an improvement of patient outcomes. If therapeutic arsenal has been gradually enhanced with the targeting of HER receptors family, resistances to these treatments are observed, hence the development of new therapeutic strategies. This review provides an updated look of novel therapeutic strategies in HER2-positive breast cancer, as well as future perspectives, both in the adjuvant and metastatic setting.
HER2, a human epidermal growth factor, being activated by amplification, is a negative prognostic factor in breast cancer. HER2 is the target of anti-HER2 antibodies (Trastuzumab, Pertuzumab...). For more than 10 years, breast cancers have been classified into HER2 positive and HER2 negative. However, the advent of new cytotoxic drugs combined with anti-HER2 antibodies, such as TDM1 or trastuzumab deruxtecan, have shown very promising therapeutic activity in patients with low HER2 expression breast cancer. These new therapeutic perspectives encourage a better identification of low HER2 tumours in order to identify patients who could benefit from them. Thus, the classification of breast tumours evolves to individualize HER2-negative tumours (score 0), HER2-positive tumours (score 3+ and 2+ amplified) and HER2-low tumours (scores 1+ and 2+ not-amplified). HER2-low tumours are common and represent more than half of all breast cancers. To identify these HER2-low tumours, pathology laboratories should not change their usual technique calibrated according to ASCO/CAP and GEFPICS recommendations. Until more clinical data about response to these new treatment strategies are available, GEFPICS does not require pathologists to identify this HER2-low category. Nevertheless, this designation will allow clinicians to identify patients whose tumours fall into this category in the very short term and offer them new treatment options.
INTRODUCTION: Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 gene (HER2 [also known as ERBB2]) alterations have been identified as oncogenic drivers and potential therapeutic targets in lung cancers. The molecular associations of HER2 gene amplification, mutation, and HER2 protein overexpression in lung cancers have not been distinctly defined. To explore these associations, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and the University of Colorado combined their data on HER2 alterations in lung cancers. METHODS: Tumor specimens from 175 patients with lung adenocarcinomas and no prior targeted therapy were evaluated for the presence of HER2 amplification and mutation and HER2 protein overexpression. Amplification was assessed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and defined as an HER2-to-chromosome enumeration probe 17 ratio of at least 2.0. Mutation was assessed by fragment analysis, mass spectrometry genotyping, and Sanger sequencing. Overexpression was assessed by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. The frequencies of HER2 amplification and mutation and HER2 overexpression were calculated and their overlap examined. RESULTS: HER2 amplification was detected by FISH in 5 of 175 cases (3%). HER2 mutation was detected in 4 of 148 specimens (3%), including three identical 12-base pair insertions (p.A775_G776insYVMA) and a 9-base pair insertion, all in exon 20. None of the HER2-mutant cases was amplified. HER2 overexpression (2+ or 3+) on IHC staining was not detected in the 25 specimens available for testing, and negative IHC staining correlated with the negative results according to FISH. CONCLUSIONS: HER2 mutations are not associated with HER2 amplification, thus suggesting a distinct entity and therapeutic target. HER2-positive lung cancer may not be an adequate term, and patient cohorts for the study of HER2-targeted agents should be defined by the specific HER2 alteration present.
HER-2 (c-erbB2, neu) receptor is the molecular marker of ductal breast cancer although it is verexpressed in other adenocarcinoma as well (e.g.endometrial, colorectal and lung cancers). The increased receptor expression is most frequently (90-97%) due to gene amplification. Detection of the overexpression of HER-2 helps to determine prognosis, to predict chemoresistance and to select for Herceptin therapy. HER-2 overexpression can be estimated either by immunohistochemistry or by fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH). Standardization of the immunohistochemical HER-2 tests is the best in HercepTest DAKO), however, the frequent 2+level requires complementary FISH test to verify gene amplification. This combination is not necessary at low (0-1+) or high (3+) level of immunohistochemical reactions, because the correlation with gene amplification status is acceptably high. Recently several new anti-HER-2 antibodies have been introduced into HER-2 diagnostics in various countries. According to our experiences we recommend to combine rationally the immunohistochemistry and FISH techniques to determine the HER-2 status in breast cancer.
In clinical trials evaluating antibody-conjugated drugs (ADCs), HER2-low breast cancer is defined through protein immunohistochemistry scoring (IHC) 1+ or 2+ without gene amplification. However, in daily practice, the accuracy of IHC is compromised by inter-observer variability. Herein, we aimed to identify HER2-low breast cancer primary tumors by leveraging gene expression profiling. A discovery approach was applied to gene expression profile of institutional INT1 (n = 125) and INT2 (n = 84) datasets. We identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in each specific HER2 IHC category 0, 1+, 2+ and 3+. Principal Component Analysis was used to generate a HER2-low signature whose performance was evaluated in the independent INT3 (n = 95), and in the publicly available TCGA and GSE81538 datasets. The association between the HER2-low signature and HER2 IHC categories was evaluated by Kruskal-Wallis test with post hoc pair-wise comparisons. The HER2-low signature discriminatory capability was assessed by estimating the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). Gene Ontology and KEGG analyses were performed to evaluate the HER2-low signature genes functional enrichment. A HER2-low signature was computed based on HER2 IHC category-specific DEGs. The twenty genes included in the signature were significantly enriched with lipid and steroid metabolism pathways, peptidase regulation, and humoral immune response. The HER2-low signature values showed a bell-shaped distribution across IHC categories (low values in 0 and 3+; high values in 1+ and 2+), effectively distinguishing HER2-low from 0 (p < 0.001) to 3+ (p < 0.001). Notably, the signature values were higher in tumors scored with 1+ as compared to 0. The HER2-low signature association with IHC categories and its bell-shaped distribution was confirmed in the independent INT3, TCGA and GSE81538 datasets. In the combined INT1 and INT3 datasets, the HER2-low signature achieved an AUC value of 0.74 (95% confidence interval, CI 0.67-0.81) in distinguishing HER2-low vs. the other categories, outperforming the individual ERBB2 mRNA AUC value of 0.52 (95% CI 0.43-0.60). These results represent a proof-of-concept for an observer-independent gene-expression-based classifier of HER2-low status. The herein identified 20-gene signature shows promise in distinguishing between HER2 0 and HER2-low expressing tumors, including those scored as 1+ at IHC, and in developing a selection approach for ADCs candidates.
The HercepTest was approved 20+ years ago as the companion diagnostic test for trastuzumab in human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) or ERBB2 gene-amplified/overexpressing breast cancers. Subsequent HER2 immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays followed, including the now most common Ventana 4B5 assay. Although this IHC assay has become the clinical standard, its reliability, reproducibility, and accuracy have largely been approved and accepted on the basis of concordance among small numbers of pathologists without validation in a real-world setting. In this study, we evaluated the concordance and interrater reliability of scoring HER2 IHC in 170 breast cancer biopsies by 18 breast cancer-specialized pathologists from 15 institutions. We used the Observers Needed to Evaluate Subjective Tests method to determine the plateau of concordance and the minimum number of pathologists needed to estimate interrater agreement values for large numbers of raters, as seen in the real-world setting. We report substantial discordance within the intermediate categories (<1% agreement for 1+ and 3.6% agreement for 2+) in the 4-category HER2 IHC scoring system. The discordance within the IHC 0 cases is also substantial with an overall percent agreement (OPA) of only 25% and poor interrater reliability metrics (0.49 Fleiss' kappa, 0.55 intraclass correlation coefficient). This discordance can be partially reduced by using a 3-category system (28.8% vs 46.5% OPA for 4-category and 3-category scoring systems, respectively). Observers Needed to Evaluate Subjective Tests plots suggest that the OPA for the task of determining a HER2 IHC score 0 from not 0 plateaus statistically around 59.4% at 10 raters. Conversely, at the task of scoring HER2 IHC as 3+ or not 3+ pathologists' concordance was much higher with an OPA that plateaus at 87.1% with 6 raters. This suggests that legacy HER2 IHC remains valuable for finding the patients in whom the ERBB2 gene is amplified but unacceptably discordant in assigning HER2-low or HER2-negative status for the emerging HER2-low therapies.
HER2 is a transmembrane growth factor receptor found in normal and malignant breast epithelial cells. Phosphorylation of the intracellular tyrosine kinase results in intracellular signaling and activation of genes involved in cell growth. Overexpression of HER2 has independent prognostic significance in early breast cancer and may also predict response to hormonal and cytotoxic therapies, although this latter role is less well studied. Prospective stratification of HER2 status in current clinical trials may more accurately delineate these roles. Anti-HER2 therapy, using a humanized monoclonal antibody, has enhanced survival when given with chemotherapy compared with chemotherapy alone in patients with metastatic HER2-overexpressing breast cancer. A potential limitation to its use in the adjuvant setting is the increased incidence of cardiotoxicity in patients treated either concurrently or previously with anthracyclines; carefully designed prospective adjuvant trials are currently being launched. HER2 is a relatively new prognostic marker and holds promise for predicting response to various therapies and for target-specific therapy.
HER2/neu amplification/overexpression is the only somatic mutation widely considered to be a marker of disease outcome and response to treatment in breast cancer. Pathologists have made large efforts to achieve accuracy in characterizing HER2/neu status. The introduction of transtuzumab contributed to development of additional measures to identify sensitive and resistant subclasses of HER2/neu-positive tumors. In this article, we describe the latest advances in HER2/neu status diagnostic assessment and the most relevant research emerging from "Omics" (genomics, epigenetics, transcriptomics, and proteomics) studies on HER2/neu-positive breast cancer. A large quantity of biomarkers from different studies highlighted HER2/neu-positive specific proliferation, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis mechanisms, as well as immunological and metabolic behavior. Major driver genes of tumor progression have had a candidate status (GRB7, MYC, CCND1, EGFR, etc.), even though the main role for HER2/neu is largely recognized. Nonetheless, existing omics data and HER2/neu-positive molecular profiles seem to suggest that few proteogenomic alterations in HER2, EGFR, and PI3K networks could significantly affect the effectiveness of transtuzumab. The systematic search of molecular alterations in and across these pathways can help to select the most appropriate drug for a given patient based on in-depth understanding of complexity in tumor biology.
CONTEXT: HER2 is a membrane tyrosine kinase and oncogene that is overexpressed and gene amplified in about 20% of breast cancers. When activated it provides the cell with potent proliferative and antiapoptosis signals and it is the major driver of tumor development and progression for this subset of breast cancer. When shown to be overexpressed or amplified by appropriate methods, HER2 is a valuable treatment target. OBJECTIVES: To review the basic biology of the HER2 signaling network, to discuss various approved methods for its detection in clinical specimens, and to describe the impressive results of therapies targeting HER2. DATA SOURCES: Selected literature searchable on PubMed as well as older studies revealed by the literature review were reviewed. CONCLUSION: HER2 is an important member of a complex signaling network and when gene amplified, it results in an aggressive subtype of breast cancer. Patients with tumors found to overexpress HER2 protein or to be amplified for the gene are candidates for therapy that significantly reduces mortality.
Human epidermal growth factor receptors (HER/erbB) constitute a family of four cell surface receptors involved in transmission of signals controlling normal cell growth and differentiation. A range of growth factors serve as ligands, but none is specific for the HER2 receptor. HER receptors exist as both monomers and dimers, either homo- or heterodimers. Ligand binding to HERI, HER3 or HER4 induces rapid receptor dimerization, with a marked preference for HER2 as a dimer partner. Moreover, HER2-containing heterodimers generate intracellular signals that are significantly stronger than signals emanating from other HER combinations. In normal cells, few HER2 molecules exist at the cell surface, so few heterodimers are formed and growth signals are relatively weak and controllable. When HER2 is overexpressed multiple HER2 heterodimers are formed and cell signaling is stronger, resulting in enhanced responsiveness to growth factors and malignant growth. This explains why HER2 overexpression is an indicator of poor prognosis in breast tumors and may be predictive of response to treatment. HER2 is a highly specific and promising target for new breast cancer treatments. The recombinant human anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody (rhuMAb-HER2, trastuzumab, Herceptin) induces rapid removal of HER2 from the cell surface, thereby reducing its availability to heterodimers and reducing oncogenicity.
The HER family of receptors has an important role in the network of cell signals controlling cell growth and differentiation. Although the activity of the HER receptor is strictly controlled in normal cells, HER2 receptor overexpression plays a pivotal role in transformation and tumorigenesis. HER2 gene amplification and/or overexpression of the receptor has been detected in subsets of a wide range of human cancers including breast cancer, and is an indicator of poor prognosis. It is proposed that overexpressed HER2 in combination with HER3 causes high activity of cell-signaling networks, thereby resulting in tumor cell proliferation. Thus, the HER2 receptor is an attractive target for new anti-cancer treatments. Monoclonal antibodies directed against the receptor are the most promising of these, and the humanized anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody trastuzumab (Herceptin) has shown significant clinical efficacy in clinical trials. The anti-tumor mechanisms of anti-HER2 monoclonal antibodies are not completely understood. However, some tumor types are not sensitive to trastuzumab, suggesting that the response of a tumor to trastuzumab may not only be dependent on overexpressed HER2, but may also be influenced by other members of the HER receptor family expressed in the tumor cell.
HER-2 (ErbB-2, c-erbB2 or Her2/neu), a member of the HER-family, is directly involved in the pathogenesis and progression of several human cancers; as such, it is also often considered as a poor prognostic factor. Following the revolutionary impact of anti-HER-2 therapy in breast cancer patients, the role of HER-2 and its blockade has also been extensively evaluated in other tumor types, including gastric and colorectal adenocarcinoma. The aims of this review are to recall the important results achieved with the use of HER-2 inhibitors in both gastric and colorectal cancer, and to discuss on the updates available on the role of HER-2 as prognostic and predictive factor in these malignancies.
Human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2/neu; erbB2) belongs to a family of four transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases involved in signal transduction pathways that regulate cell growth and proliferation. Amplification or overexpression of HER2/neu occurs in about 30% of human breast and ovarian cancers and is associated with a poor clinical outcome, including short survival time and short time to relapse. Recent advances in our understanding of HER2/neu signaling pathways have greatly increased our knowledge of breast cancer tumorigenesis and have provided new targets for treating breast and ovarian tumors that overexpress HER2/neu. This review will focus on the signaling network mediated by HER2/neu in breast cancer and discuss our understanding of these pathways, which seem to be particularly important in mediating cell survival and growth under a wide variety of circumstances in breast cancer.
HER2 is a 185-kDa transmembrane oncoprotein encoded by the HER2 gene. It is located on chromosome 17q21 and is overexpressed in approximately 15% of invasive breast cancers. In addition, it is a poor prognostic factor for survival and disease progression. Approximately 30% of HER2-positive tumors also express a series of carboxy-terminal HER2 fragments known as p95HER2, in addition to the full-length HER receptor. Previous studies have found that p95HER2 represents an independent prognostic marker in patients with HER2-positive disease. Moreover, p95HER2 status might be a decisive factor when choosing between different therapies because p95HER2 fragment-positive tumors are resistant to trastuzumab but respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as lapatinib, as do p95HER2-negative tumors. p95HER2 fragments arise through at least two different mechanisms: proteolytic shedding of the full-length p185HER2 receptor extracellular domain and translation of HER2 mRNA from internal initiation codons. The present review is based primarily on recent studies suggesting p95HER2 constitutes a new surrogate marker for an aggressive HER2-positive breast cancer subtype with distinct clinical and biological features.
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) is over-expressed in 15% to 30% of breast cancers and is a poor prognostic marker in node-positive patients. HER-2 expression is an indicator of greater sensitivity to anthracycline-based chemotherapy and is the major criterion for selection for treatment with the anti-HER-2 antibody trastuzumab (Herceptin). Fluorescence in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry (IHC) are the 2 most commonly used methods for detection of the gene and protein, respectively. Criticisms have been levied at the IHC method of identifying HER-2 overexpression but convenience and costs of this technique cannot be overlooked. Modifications to the IHC technique and scoring accommodate for many of the problems that derive from variables in preanalytical and analytic factors that influence results but standardization is currently impossible to attain. Deficiencies in fluorescence in situ hybridization assay also exist and alternative molecular methods of assay are explored in this review.
