Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-3; Tyrosine-protein kinase that plays an essential role as cell surface receptor for neuregulins. Binds to neuregulin-1 (NRG1) and is activated by it; ligand-binding increases phosphorylation on tyrosine residues and promotes its association with the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. May also be activated by CSPG5. Involved in the regulation of myeloid cell differentiation.
The ErbB receptor family, also known as the EGF receptor family or type I receptor family, includes the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) or ErbB1/Her1, ErbB2/Her2, ErbB3/Her3, and ErbB4/Her4. Among all RTKs, EGFR was the first RTK identified and the first one linked to cancer. Thus, EGFR has also been the most intensively studied among all RTKs. ErbB receptors are activated after homodimerization or heterodimerization. The ErbB family is unique among the various groups of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) in that ErbB3 has impaired kinase activity, while ErbB2 does not have a direct ligand. Therefore, heterodimerization is an important mechanism that allows the activation of all ErbB receptors in response to ligand stimulation. The activated ErbB receptors bind to many signaling proteins and stimulate the activation of many signaling pathways. The specificity and potency of intracellular signaling pathways are determined by positive and negative regulators, the specific composition of activating ligand(s), receptor dimer components, and the diverse range of proteins that associate with the tyrosine phosphorylated C-terminal domain of the ErbB receptors. ErbB receptors are overexpressed or mutated in many cancers, especially in breast cancer, ovarian cancer, and non-small cell lung cancer. The overexpression and overactivation of ErbB receptors are correlated with poor prognosis, drug resistance, cancer metastasis, and lower survival rate. ErbB receptors, especially EGFR and ErbB2 have been the primary choices as targets for developing cancer therapies.
BACKGROUND: Pulmonary hypertension, characterized by vascular remodeling, currently lacks curative therapeutic options. The dysfunction of pulmonary artery endothelial cells plays a pivotal role in the initiation and progression of pulmonary hypertension (PH). ErbB3 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 3), also recognized as HER3, is a member of the ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases. METHODS: Microarray, immunofluorescence, and Western blotting analyses were conducted to investigate the pathological role of ErbB3. Blood samples were collected for biomarker examination from healthy donors or patients with hypoxic PH. The pathological functions of ErbB3 were further validated in rodents subjected to chronic hypoxia- and Sugen-induced PH, with or without adeno-associated virus-mediated ErbB3 overexpression, systemic deletion, or endothelial cell-specific ErbB3 knockdown. Primary human pulmonary artery endothelial cells and pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells were used to elucidate the underlying mechanisms. RESULTS: ErbB3 exhibited significant upregulation in the serum, lungs, distal pulmonary arteries, and pulmonary artery endothelial cells isolated from patients with PH compared with those from healthy donors. ErbB3 overexpression stimulated hypoxia-induced endothelial cell proliferation, exacerbated pulmonary artery remodeling, elevated systolic pressure in the right ventricle, and promoted right ventricular hypertrophy in murine models of PH. Conversely, systemic deletion or endothelial cell-specific knockout of ErbB3 yielded opposite effects. Coimmunoprecipitation and proteomic analysis identified YB-1 (Y-box binding protein 1) as a downstream target of ErbB3. ErbB3 induced nuclear translocation of YB-1 and subsequently promoted hypoxia-inducible factor 1/2alpha transcription. A positive loop involving ErbB3-periostin-hypoxia-inducible factor 1/2alpha was identified to mediate the progressive development of this disease. MM-121, a human anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibody, exhibited both preventive and therapeutic effects against hypoxia-induced PH. CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals, for the first time, that ErbB3 serves as a novel biomarker and a promising target for the treatment of PH.
Activating mutations in HER2 (ERBB2) drive the growth of a subset of breast and other cancers and tend to co-occur with HER3 (ERBB3) missense mutations. The HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor neratinib has shown clinical activity against HER2-mutant tumors. To characterize the role of HER3 mutations in HER2-mutant tumors, we integrate computational structural modeling with biochemical and cell biological analyses. Computational modeling predicts that the frequent HER3(E928G) kinase domain mutation enhances the affinity of HER2/HER3 and reduces binding of HER2 to its inhibitor neratinib. Co-expression of mutant HER2/HER3 enhances HER2/HER3 co-immunoprecipitation and ligand-independent activation of HER2/HER3 and PI3K/AKT, resulting in enhanced growth, invasiveness, and resistance to HER2-targeted therapies, which can be reversed by combined treatment with PI3Kalpha inhibitors. Our results provide a mechanistic rationale for the evolutionary selection of co-occurring HER2/HER3 mutations and the recent clinical observations that HER3 mutations are associated with a poor response to neratinib in HER2-mutant cancers.
Activating KRAS mutations (KRAS*) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) drive anabolic metabolism and support tumor maintenance. KRAS* inhibitors show initial antitumor activity followed by recurrence due to cancer cell-intrinsic and immune-mediated paracrine mechanisms. Here, we explored the potential role of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in enabling KRAS* bypass and identified CAF-derived NRG1 activation of cancer cell ERBB2 and ERBB3 receptor tyrosine kinases as a mechanism by which KRAS*-independent growth is supported. Genetic extinction or pharmacological inhibition of KRAS* resulted in up-regulation of ERBB2 and ERBB3 expression in human and murine models, which prompted cancer cell utilization of CAF-derived NRG1 as a survival factor. Genetic depletion or pharmacological inhibition of ERBB2/3 or NRG1 abolished KRAS* bypass and synergized with KRAS(G12D) inhibitors in combination treatments in mouse and human PDAC models. Thus, we found that CAFs can contribute to KRAS* inhibitor therapy resistance via paracrine mechanisms, providing an actionable therapeutic strategy to improve the effectiveness of KRAS* inhibitors in PDAC patients.
Human epidermal growth factor receptor-3 (ERBB3) is a member of the ERBB receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and is expressed in many malignancies. Along with other ERBB receptors, ERBB3 is associated with regulating normal cell proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, and survival, and has received increased research attention for its involvement in cancer therapies. ERBB3 expression or co-expression levels have been investigated as predictive factors for cancer prognosis and drug sensitivity. Additionally, the association between the elevated expression of ERBB3 and treatment failure in cancer therapy further established ERBB3-targeting therapy as a crucial therapeutic approach. This review delves into the molecular mechanisms of ERBB3-driven resistance to targeted therapeutics against ERBB2 and EGFR and other signal transduction inhibitors, endocrine therapy, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. Using preclinical and clinical evidence, we synthesise and explicate how various aspects of aberrant ERBB3 activities-such as compensatory activation, signal crosstalk interactions, dysregulation in the endocytic pathway, mutations, ligand-independent activation, intrinsic kinase activity, and homodimerisation-can lead to resistance development and/or treatment failures. Several ERBB3-directed monoclonal antibodies, bispecific antibodies, and the emerging antibody-drug conjugate demonstrate encouraging clinical outcomes for improving therapeutic efficacy and overcoming resistance, especially when combined with other anti-cancer approaches. More research efforts are needed to identify appropriate biomarkers tailored for ERBB3-targeted therapies.
The enteric nervous system mediates reflexes independently of the brain and spinal cord and transmits signals bidirectionally between the gut and the brain. Hirschsprung disease and chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIPO) and pediatric CIPO are examples of congenital defects that impair gastrointestinal motility. In this issue of the JCI, Thuy-Linh Le et al. analyzed eight patients with defects in tissue that arose from the neural crest. The patients carried homozygous or heterozygous variants in ERBB3 or ERBB2, which encode transmembrane epidermal growth factor receptors that bind neuroregulin 1 (NRG1). Notably, the genetic variants resulted in loss of function with decreased expression or aberrant phosphorylation of the ERBB3/ERBB2 receptors. Experiments using mice revealed that Erbb3 and Erbb2 were expressed in enteric neuronal progenitor cells. This study is an outstanding example of descriptive observation that begs for mechanistic exploration to reveal precisely how the NRG1/ERBB3/ERBB2 pathway influences ENS development.
As small non-coding regulatory RNAs, microRNAs are capable of silencing gene expression by translational repression or mRNA degradation. Accumulating evidence indicates that deregulation of microRNAs is often associated with human malignancies and suggests a causal role of microRNAs in neoplasia, presumably because microRNAs can function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. Among them, miR-205 is significantly underexpressed in breast tumors compared with matched normal breast tissue although miR-205 has been shown to be upregulated in some other type of tumors. Furthermore, breast cancer cell lines, including MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231, express a lower level of miR-205 than the non-malignant MCF-10A cells. Ectopic expression of miR-205 significantly inhibits cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth as well as cell invasion. These findings establish the tumor suppressive role of miR-205, which is probably through direct targeting of oncogenes such as ErbB3 and Zeb1. Therefore, miR-205 may serve as a unique therapeutic target for breast cancer.
ERBB3/HER3 is emerging as a molecular target for various cancers. HER3 is overexpressed and activated in a number of cancer types under the conditions of acquired resistance to other HER family therapeutic interventions such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors and antibody therapies. Regulation of the HER3 expression and signaling involves numerous HER3 interacting proteins. These proteins include PI3K, Shc, and E3 ubiquitin ligases NEDD4 and Nrdp1. Furthermore, recent identification of a number of HER3 oncogenic mutations in colon and gastric cancers elucidate the role of HER3 in cancer development. Despite the strong evidence regarding the role of HER3 in cancer, the current understanding of the regulation of HER3 expression and activation requires additional research. Moreover, the lack of biomarkers for HER3-driven cancer poses a big challenge for the clinical development of HER3 targeting antibodies. Therefore, a better understanding of HER3 regulation should improve the strategies to therapeutically target HER3 for cancer therapy.
AIMS: Diabetes mellitus (DM) increases heart failure incidence and worsens prognosis, but its molecular basis is poorly defined in humans. We aimed to define the diabetic myocardial transcriptome and validate hits in their circulating protein form to define disease mechanisms and biomarkers. METHODS AND RESULTS: RNA-sequencing data from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project was used to define differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in right atrial (RA) and left ventricular (LV) myocardium from people with vs. without DM (type 1 or 2). DEGs were validated as plasma proteins in the UK Biobank cohort, searching for directionally concordant differential expression. Validated plasma proteins were characterized in UK Biobank participants, irrespective of diabetes status, using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, incident heart failure, and cardiovascular mortality. We found 32 and 32 DEGs associated with DM in the RA and LV, respectively, with no overlap between these. Plasma proteomic data were available for 12, with ERBB3, NRXN3, and HSPA2 (all LV hits) exhibiting directional concordance. Irrespective of DM status, lower circulating ERBB3 and higher HSPA2 were associated with impaired LV contractility and higher LV mass. Participants in the lowest quartile of circulating ERBB3 or highest quartile of circulating HSPA2 had increased incident heart failure and cardiovascular death vs. all other quartiles. CONCLUSION: DM is characterized by lower Erbb3 and higher Hspa2 expression in the myocardium, with directionally concordant differences in their plasma protein concentration. These are associated with LV dysfunction, incident heart failure, and cardiovascular mortality.
Protein kinases are one of the largest families of evolutionarily related proteins and the third most common protein class of human genome. All the protein kinases share the same structural organization. They are made up of an extracellular domain, transmembrane domain and an intra cellular kinase domain. Missense mutations in these kinases have been studied extensively and correlated with various neurological disorders. Individual mutations in the kinase domain affect the functions of protein. The enhanced or reduced expression of protein leads to hyperactivation or inactivation of the signalling pathways, resulting in neurodegeneration. Here, we present extensive analyses of missense mutations in the tyrosine kinase focussing on the neurodegenerative diseases encompassing structure function relationship. This is envisaged to enhance our understanding about the neurodegeneration and possible therapeutic measures.
HER3 is a member of the HER (EGFR/ErbB) receptor family consisting of four closely related type 1 transmembrane receptors (EGFR, HER2, HER3, and HER4). HER receptors are part of a complex signaling network intertwined with the Ras/Raf/MAPK, PI3K/AKT, JAK/STAT, and PKC signaling pathways. Aberrant activation of the HER receptors and downstream signaling molecules tips the balance on cellular events, leading to various types of cancers. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and small molecule inhibitors targeting EGFR and HER2 tyrosine kinase activities exhibit clinical benefits in the treatment of several types of cancers, but their clinical efficacy is limited by the occurrence of drug resistance. HER3 is the preferred dimerization partner of HER2 and it is well established that HER3 plays an important role in drug resistance to EGFR- and HER2-targeting therapies. Since HER3 has limited kinase activity, mAbs are being explored to target HER3 for cancer therapy. Currently, approximately a dozen of anti-HER3 mAbs are at different stages of clinical development. However, the lack of established biomarkers has made it more challenging to stratify cancer patients to whom HER3-targeting therapies can be more effective. In this review, we focus on the validation of HER3 as a cancer drug target, the recent development in biomarker discovery for anti-HER3 therapies, and the progress made in the clinical development of HER3-targeting mAbs.
ErbB3 receptors are unique members of the erbB receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), which are often aberrantly expressed and/or activated in human cancers. Unlike other members in the family, erbB3 lacks or has impaired kinase activity. To transduce cell signaling, erbB3 has to interact with other RTKs and to be phosphorylated by its interactive partners, of those, erbB2 is the most important one. ErbB3 is frequently co-expressed with other RTKs in cancer cells to activate oncogenic signaling, such as phosphoinositide-3-kinase/protein kinase B (Akt) pathway, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK)/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, Janus kinase (Jak)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) pathway, etc. and thereby promote tumorigenesis. Numerous studies have demonstrated that activation of erbB3 signaling plays an important role in the progression of a variety of tumor types, such as erbB2-overexpressing breast cancer, castration-resistant prostate cancer, platinum refractory/resistant ovarian cancer, epidermal growth factor receptor TKI-resistant non-small-cell lung cancer, and others. Basic research on the underlying mechanisms implicated the functions of erbB3 as a major cause of treatment failure in cancer therapy. Thus, concomitant inhibition of erbB3 is thought to be required to overcome the resistance and to effectively treat human cancers. This review focuses on the latest advances in our understanding of erbB3-initiated signaling in the development of resistance to cancer treatments.
ERBB3/HER3 is one of the four members of the epidermal growth factor receptor (ERBB) family. It is activated by binding to ligands Neuregulin-1 and Neuregulin-2. Since ERBB3 lacks intrinsic kinase activity, signal transduction occurs through formation of heterodimers with EGFR, ERBB2, and ERBB4. ERBB3 is a signaling specialist since it has six binding sites for the p85 SH2 adapter subunit of phosphoinositide 3' kinases. These lipid kinases coordinate regulation of metabolism, cell size, proliferation, survival, and angiogenesis. Not surprisingly, ERBB3 signaling has been linked to cancer etiology and progression. In breast cancer, the partnership of ERBB2 and ERBB3 may be crucial for the aggressive properties of cancers with ERBB2 amplification, and may contribute to pre-existing and acquired resistance to therapy. This partnership creates opportunities for improving efficacy of ERBB-targeted pharmaceuticals, by interfering with coupling of ERBB2 to ERBB3 through dimerization inhibitors, and by use of therapeutic compounds that target AKT-dependent pathways activated through ERBB3. Additional therapeutic opportunities may be identified through better understanding of how ERBBs are regulated and deployed in normal mammary gland processes. Work using mouse models has identified the main processes regulated by each of the four ERBBs, which has practical implications in understanding breast cancer etiology, and eventual development of better prognostic, predictive, and therapeutic tools.
We discovered a novel somatic gene fusion, CD74-NRG1, by transcriptome sequencing of 25 lung adenocarcinomas of never smokers. By screening 102 lung adenocarcinomas negative for known oncogenic alterations, we found four additional fusion-positive tumors, all of which were of the invasive mucinous subtype. Mechanistically, CD74-NRG1 leads to extracellular expression of the EGF-like domain of NRG1 III-beta3, thereby providing the ligand for ERBB2-ERBB3 receptor complexes. Accordingly, ERBB2 and ERBB3 expression was high in the index case, and expression of phospho-ERBB3 was specifically found in tumors bearing the fusion (P < 0.0001). Ectopic expression of CD74-NRG1 in lung cancer cell lines expressing ERBB2 and ERBB3 activated ERBB3 and the PI3K-AKT pathway, and led to increased colony formation in soft agar. Thus, CD74-NRG1 gene fusions are activating genomic alterations in invasive mucinous adenocarcinomas and may offer a therapeutic opportunity for a lung tumor subtype with, so far, no effective treatment. SIGNIFICANCE: CD74-NRG1 fusions may represent a therapeutic opportunity for invasive mucinous lung adenocarcinomas, a tumor with no effective treatment that frequently presents with multifocal unresectable disease.
The erbB receptors, including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), erbB2 (also known as HER2/neu), erbB3 (or HER3), and erbB4 (or HER4), are often aberrantly activated in a wide variety of human cancers. They are excellent targets for selective anti-cancer therapies because of their transmembrane location and pro-oncogenic activity. While several therapeutic agents against erbB2 and/or EGFR have been used in the treatment of human cancers with efficacy, there has been relatively less emphasis on erbB3 as a molecular target. Elevated expression of erbB3 is frequently observed in various malignancies, where it promotes tumor progression via interactions with other receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) due to its lack of or weak intrinsic kinase activity. Studies on the underlying mechanisms implicate erbB3 as a major cause of treatment failure in cancer therapy, mainly through activation of the PI-3 K/Akt, MEK/MAPK, and Jak/Stat signaling pathways as well as Src kinase. It is believed that inhibition of erbB3 signaling may be required to overcome therapeutic resistance and effectively treat cancers. To date, no erbB3-targeted therapy has been approved for cancer treatment. Targeting of erbB3 receptor with a monoclonal antibody (Ab) is the only strategy currently under preclinical study and clinical evaluation. In this review, we focus on the role of erbB3-initiated signaling in the development of cancer drug resistance and discuss the latest advances in identifying therapeutic strategies inactivating erbB3 to overcome the resistance and enhance efficacy of cancer therapeutics.
The membrane mucin MUC4 (human) is abundantly expressed in many epithelia, where it is proposed to play a protective role, and is overexpressed in some epithelial tumors. Studies on the rat homologue, Muc4, indicate that it acts through anti-adhesive or signaling mechanisms. In particular, Muc4/MUC4 can serve as a ligand/modulator of the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2, regulating its phosphorylation and the phosphorylation of its partner ErbB3, with or without the involvement of the ErbB3 ligand neuregulin. Muc4/MUC4 can also modulate cell apoptosis via multiple mechanisms, both ErbB2 dependent and independent. Muc4/MUC4 expression is regulated by multiple mechanisms, ranging from transcriptional to post-translational. The roles of MUC4 in tumors suggest that it may be valuable as a tumor marker or target for therapy.
The four members of the ERBB (HER) family of transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases are frequently activated in cancer by several mechanisms, such as mutation, amplification, or autocrine ligand-receptor stimulation. We recently identified gene fusions involving the ERBB ligand gene, NRG1, which represent a novel mechanism for ERBB pathway deregulation. These fusions lead to expression and presentation of the EGF-like domain of NRG1 on the cell surface, which binds to ERBB3 in an autocrine and juxtacrine manner, thus inducing the formation of ERBB2-ERBB3 heterodimers, and subsequent activation of the PI3K-AKT and MAPK signaling pathways. These fusion genes were exclusively detected in lung adenocarcinomas of never smokers of the invasive mucinous subtype, which usually presents as a multifocal and unresectable disease, for which no effective treatment exists. Considering the large amount of drugs that target ERBB2 (HER2) and ERBB3 (HER3), and which are currently in different stages of clinical development, detecting and targeting NRG1 fusions in invasive mucinous lung adenocarcinomas may represent a therapeutic opportunity for this aggressive disease.
ErbB3, a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor family, reportedly plays an essential role in the regulation of cancer progression and therapeutic resistance. Numerous studies have indicated that ErbB3 binding protein 1 (Ebp1), a binding partner for ErbB3, plays an important regulatory role in the expression and function of ErbB3, but there is no agreement as to whether Ebp1 also has an ErbB3-independent function in cancer and how it might contribute to tumorigenesis. In this review, we will discuss the different functions of the two Ebp1 isoforms, p48 and p42, that may be responsible for the potentially dual role of Ebp1 in cancer growth.
Genetic changes in the ERBB family of receptor tyrosine kinases serve as oncogenic driver events and predictive biomarkers for ERBB inhibitor drugs. ERBB3 is a pseudokinase member of the family that, although lacking a fully active kinase domain, is well known for its potent signaling activity as a heterodimeric complex with ERBB2. Previous studies have identified few transforming ERBB3 mutations while the great majority of the hundreds of different somatic ERBB3 variants observed in different cancer types remain of unknown significance. Here, we describe an unbiased functional genetics screen of the transforming potential of thousands of ERBB3 mutations in parallel. The screen based on a previously described iSCREAM (in vitro screen of activating mutations) platform, and addressing ERBB3 pseudokinase signaling in a context of ERBB3/ERBB2 heterodimers, identified 18 hit mutations. Validation experiments in Ba/F3, NIH 3T3, and MCF10A cell backgrounds demonstrated the presence of both previously known and unknown transforming ERBB3 missense mutations functioning either as single variants or in cis as a pairwise combination. Drug sensitivity assays with trastuzumab, pertuzumab and neratinib indicated actionability of the transforming ERBB3 variants.
Significant progress has been made over the last decade in elucidating the mechanisms employed by receptor protein tyrosine kinases (RTKs) in transducing extracellular signals critical for the regulation of diverse cellular activities. Nevertheless, revealing the biological significance of a subset of the RTKs that contain catalytically inactive protein tyrosine kinase domains has proven more elusive. ErbB3 has served as the prototype for models of catalytically inactive RTK function, performing the role of signal diversification in heterodimeric receptor complexes with other ErbB subfamily members. The receptor related to tyrosine kinases (RYK) is unique amongst the catalytically inactive RTKs. Based on structural or functional properties of the extracellular domain, RYK cannot be classified into an existing RTK subfamily. Recent genetic analyses of mouse Ryk and its Drosophila orthologue derailed have defined a role for this novel subfamily of receptors in the control of craniofacial development and neuronal pathway selection, respectively. Recent biochemical data lead us to propose a model that involves RYK in signal crosstalk and scaffold assembly with Eph receptors. This model is consistent with the established roles of Eph receptors and ephrins in craniofacial and nervous system morphogenesis. BioEssays 23:34-45, 2001.
