Proepiregulin; Ligand of the EGF receptor/EGFR and ERBB4. Stimulates EGFR and ERBB4 tyrosine phosphorylation. Contributes to inflammation, wound healing, tissue repair, and oocyte maturation by regulating angiogenesis and vascular remodeling and by stimulating cell proliferation.
Aberrant activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR/ERBB1) by erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog (ERBB) ligands contributes to various tumor malignancies, including lung cancer and colorectal cancer (CRC). Epiregulin (EREG) is one of the EGFR ligands and is low expressed in most normal tissues. Elevated EREG in various cancers mainly activates EGFR signaling pathways and promotes cancer progression. Notably, a higher EREG expression level in CRC with wild-type Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) is related to better efficacy of therapeutic treatment. By contrast, the resistance of anti-EGFR therapy in CRC was driven by low EREG expression, aberrant genetic mutation and signal pathway alterations. Additionally, EREG overexpression in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is anticipated to be a therapeutic target for EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI). However, recent findings indicate that EREG derived from macrophages promotes NSCLC cell resistance to EGFR-TKI treatment. The emerging events of EREG-mediated tumor promotion signals are generated by autocrine and paracrine loops that arise from tumor epithelial cells, fibroblasts, and macrophages in the tumor microenvironment (TME). The TME is a crucial element for the development of various cancer types and drug resistance. The regulation of EREG/EGFR pathways depends on distinct oncogenic driver mutations and cell contexts that allows specific pharmacological targeting alone or combinational treatment for tailored therapy. Novel strategies targeting EREG/EGFR, tumor-associated macrophages, and alternative activation oncoproteins are under development or undergoing clinical trials. In this review, we summarize the clinical outcomes of EREG expression and the interaction of this ligand in the TME. The EREG/EGFR pathway may be a potential target and may be combined with other driver mutation targets to combat specific cancers.
The role of brain immune compartments in glioma evolution remains elusive. We profile immune cells in glioma microenvironment and the matched peripheral blood from 11 patients. Glioblastoma exhibits specific infiltration of blood-originated monocytes expressing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) ligands EREG and AREG, coined as tumor-associated monocytes (TAMo). TAMo infiltration is mutually exclusive with EGFR alterations (p = 0.019), while co-occurring with mesenchymal subtype (p = 4.7 x 10(-7)) and marking worse prognosis (p = 0.004 and 0.032 in two cohorts). Evolutionary analysis of initial-recurrent glioma pairs and single-cell study of a multi-centric glioblastoma reveal association between elevated TAMo and glioma mesenchymal transformation. Further analyses identify FOSL2 as a TAMo master regulator and demonstrates that FOSL2-EREG/AREG-EGFR signaling axis promotes glioma invasion in vitro. Collectively, we identify TAMo in tumor microenvironment and reveal its driving role in activating EGFR signaling to shape glioma evolution.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) regulates many crucial cellular programs, with seven different activating ligands shaping cell signaling in distinct ways. Using crystallography and other approaches, we show how the EGFR ligands epiregulin (EREG) and epigen (EPGN) stabilize different dimeric conformations of the EGFR extracellular region. As a consequence, EREG or EPGN induce less stable EGFR dimers than EGF-making them partial agonists of EGFR dimerization. Unexpectedly, this weakened dimerization elicits more sustained EGFR signaling than seen with EGF, provoking responses in breast cancer cells associated with differentiation rather than proliferation. Our results reveal how responses to different EGFR ligands are defined by receptor dimerization strength and signaling dynamics. These findings have broad implications for understanding receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling specificity. Our results also suggest parallels between partial and/or biased agonism in RTKs and G-protein-coupled receptors, as well as new therapeutic opportunities for correcting RTK signaling output.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently mutated in human cancer(1,2), and is an important therapeutic target. EGFR inhibitors have been successful in lung cancer, where mutations in the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain activate the receptor(1), but not in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)(3), where mutations occur exclusively in the extracellular region. Here we show that common extracellular GBM mutations prevent EGFR from discriminating between its activating ligands(4). Different growth factor ligands stabilize distinct EGFR dimer structures(5) that signal with different kinetics to specify or bias outcome(5,6). EGF itself induces strong symmetric dimers that signal transiently to promote proliferation. Epiregulin (EREG) induces much weaker asymmetric dimers that drive sustained signalling and differentiation(5). GBM mutations reduce the ability of EGFR to distinguish EREG from EGF in cellular assays, and allow EGFR to form strong (EGF-like) dimers in response to EREG and other low-affinity ligands. Using X-ray crystallography, we further show that the R84K GBM mutation symmetrizes EREG-driven extracellular dimers so that they resemble dimers normally seen with EGF. By contrast, a second GBM mutation, A265V, remodels key dimerization contacts to strengthen asymmetric EREG-driven dimers. Our results argue for an important role of altered ligand discrimination by EGFR in GBM, with potential implications for therapeutic targeting.
BACKGROUND: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is the most common chronic inflammatory skin disease, but its complex pathogenesis is only insufficiently understood, resulting in still limited treatment options. OBJECTIVE: We sought to characterize AD on both transcriptomic and proteomic levels in humans. METHODS: We used skin suction blistering, a painless and nonscarring procedure that can simultaneously sample skin cells and interstitial fluid. We then compared results with conventional biopsies. RESULTS: Suction blistering captured epidermal and most immune cells equally well as biopsies, except for mast cells and nonmigratory CD163+ macrophages that were only present in biopsy isolates. Using single-cell RNA sequencing, we found comparable transcriptional profiles of key inflammatory pathways between blister and biopsy AD, but suction blistering was superior in cell-specific resolution for high-abundance transcripts (KRT1/KRT10, KRT16/KRT6A, S100A8/S100A9), which showed some background signals in biopsy isolates. Compared with healthy controls, we found characteristic upregulation of AD-typical cytokines such as IL13 and IL22 in T(h)2 and T(h)22 cells, respectively, but we also discovered these mediators in proliferating T cells and natural killer T cells, that also expressed the antimicrobial cytokine IL26. Overall, not T cells, but myeloid cells were most strongly enriched in AD, and we found dendritic cell (CLEC7A, amphiregulin/AREG, EREG) and macrophage products (CCL13) among the top upregulated proteins in AD blister fluid proteomic analyses. CONCLUSION: These data show that by using cutting-edge technology, suction blistering offers several advantages over conventional biopsies, including better transcriptomic resolution of skin cells, combined with proteomic information from interstitial fluid, unraveling novel inflammatory players that shape the cellular and proteomic microenvironment of AD.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common and aggressive primary brain tumor, has a high mortality rate despite extensive efforts to develop new treatments. GBM exhibits both intra- and intertumor heterogeneity, lending to resistance and eventual tumor recurrence. Large-scale genomic and proteomic analysis of GBM tumors has uncovered potential drug targets. Effective and "druggable" targets must be validated to embark on a robust medicinal chemistry campaign culminating in the discovery of clinical candidates. Here, we review recent developments in GBM drug discovery and delivery. To identify GBM drug targets, we performed extensive bioinformatics analysis using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas project. We discovered 20 genes, BOC, CLEC4GP1, ELOVL6, EREG, ESR2, FDCSP, FURIN, FUT8-AS1, GZMB, IRX3, LITAF, NDEL1, NKX3-1, PODNL1, PTPRN, QSOX1, SEMA4F, TH, VEGFC, and C20orf166AS1 that are overexpressed in a subpopulation of GBM patients and correlate with poor survival outcomes. Importantly, nine of these genes exhibit higher expression in GBM versus low-grade glioma and may be involved in disease progression. In this review, we discuss these proteins in the context of GBM disease progression. We also conducted computational multi-parameter optimization to assess the blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability of small molecules in clinical trials for GBM treatment. Drug delivery in the context of GBM is particularly challenging because the BBB hinders small molecule transport. Therefore, we discuss novel drug delivery methods, including nanoparticles and prodrugs. Given the aggressive nature of GBM and the complexity of targeting the central nervous system, effective treatment options are a major unmet medical need. Identification and validation of biomarkers and drug targets associated with GBM disease progression present an exciting opportunity to improve treatment of this devastating disease.
Pancreatic adenosquamous carcinoma (PASC) - a rare pathological pancreatic cancer (PC) type - has a poor prognosis due to high malignancy. To examine the heterogeneity of PASC, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) profiling with sample tissues from a healthy donor pancreas, an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, and a patient with PASC. Of 9,887 individual cells, ten cell subpopulations were identified, including myeloid, immune, ductal, fibroblast, acinar, stellate, endothelial, and cancer cells. Cancer cells were divided into five clusters. Notably, cluster 1 exhibited stem-like phenotypes expressing UBE2C, ASPM, and TOP2A. We found that S100A2 is a potential biomarker for cancer cells. LGALS1, NPM1, RACK1, and PERP were upregulated from ductal to cancer cells. Furthermore, the copy number variations in ductal and cancer cells were greater than in the reference cells. The expression of EREG, FCGR2A, CCL4L2, and CTSC increased in myeloid cells from the normal pancreas to PASC. The gene sets expressed by cancer-associated fibroblasts were enriched in the immunosuppressive pathways. We demonstrate that EGFR-associated ligand-receptor pairs are activated in ductal-stromal cell communications. Hence, this study revealed the heterogeneous variations of ductal and stromal cells, defined cancer-associated signaling pathways, and deciphered intercellular interactions following PASC progression.
BACKGROUND: This study is aimed at investigating the changes in relevant pathways and the differential expression of related gene expression after ischemic stroke (IS) at the single-cell level using multiple weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) and single-cell analysis. METHODS: The transcriptome expression datasets of IS samples and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) profiles of cerebrovascular tissues were obtained by searching the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. First, gene pathway scoring was calculated via gene set variation analysis (GSVA) and was imported into multiple WGCNA to acquire key pathways and pathway-related hub genes. Furthermore, SCENIC was used to identify transcription factors (TFs) regulating these core genes using scRNA-seq data. Finally, the pseudotemporal trajectory analysis was used to analyse the role of these TFs on various cell types under hypoxic and normoxic conditions. RESULTS: The scores of 186 KEGG pathways were obtained via GSVA using microarray expression profiles of 40 specimens. WGCNA of the KEGG pathways revealed the two following pathways: calcium signaling pathway and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathways. Subsequently, WGCNA of the gene expression matrix of the samples revealed the calcium signaling pathway-related genes (AC079305.10, BCL10, BCL2A1, BRE-AS1, DYNLL2, EREG, and PTGS2) that were identified as core genes via correlation analysis. Furthermore, SCENIC and pseudotemporal analysis revealed JUN, IRF9, ETV5, and PPARA score gene-related TFs. Jun was found to be associated with hypoxia in endothelial cells, whereas Irf9 and Etv5 were identified as astrocyte-specific TFs associated with oxygen concentration in the mouse cerebral cortex. CONCLUSIONS: Calcium signaling pathway-related genes (AC079305.10, BCL10, BCL2A1, BRE-AS1, DYNLL2, EREG, and PTGS2) and TFs (JUN, IRF9, ETV5, and PPARA) were identified to play a key role in IS. This study provides a new perspective and basis for investigating the pathogenesis of IS and developing new therapeutic approaches.
Increased translocation of intestinal bacteria is a hallmark of chronic liver disease and contributes to hepatic inflammation and fibrosis. Here we tested the hypothesis that the intestinal microbiota and Toll-like receptors (TLRs) promote hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a long-term consequence of chronic liver injury, inflammation, and fibrosis. Hepatocarcinogenesis in chronically injured livers depended on the intestinal microbiota and TLR4 activation in non-bone-marrow-derived resident liver cells. TLR4 and the intestinal microbiota were not required for HCC initiation but for HCC promotion, mediating increased proliferation, expression of the hepatomitogen epiregulin, and prevention of apoptosis. Gut sterilization restricted to late stages of hepatocarcinogenesis reduced HCC, suggesting that the intestinal microbiota and TLR4 represent therapeutic targets for HCC prevention in advanced liver disease.
STUDY QUESTION: Does metformin inhibit excessive androgen-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in mouse granulosa cells (GCs) in vivo and in vitro? SUMMARY ANSWER: Metformin inhibits testosterone-induced ER stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) activation by suppressing p38 MAPK phosphorylation in ovarian GCs. WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is associated with hyperandrogenism. Excessive testosterone induces ER stress and UPR activation in human cumulus cells, leading to cell apoptosis. Metformin has potential inhibitory effects on ER stress and UPR activation, as demonstrated in human pancreatic beta cells and obese mice. STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Cumulus cells and follicular fluid were collected from 25 women with PCOS and 25 controls at our IVF centre. A dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-induced PCOS mouse model was constructed and treated with or without metformin. Primary mouse GCs and cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs) were cultured with testosterone, metformin, a p38 MAPK inhibitor, or p38 MAPK small interfering RNA. PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: The levels of UPR sensor proteins and UPR-related genes were measured in cumulus cells from PCOS and control patients by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and western blot. The ovaries, oocytes, GCs and COCs were collected from PCOS mice treated with metformin and controls. The expressions of ER stress markers and p38 MAPK phosphorylation were assessed by qPCR, western blot and immunofluorescence. A subsequent in vitro analysis with primary cultured GCs and COCs was used to confirm the influence of metformin on ER stress activation by qPCR and western blot. Finally, the effects of ER stress activation on GCs and COCs in relation to LH responsiveness were examined by qPCR and COC expansion. MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: The expression of the ER stress markers GRP78, CHOP and XBP1s in the cumulus cells was higher in PCOS patients than in control patients, as were the levels of the UPR sensor proteins p-IRE1alpha, p-EIF2alpha and GRP78. Compared to those of control mice, the ovaries, GCs and COCs of DHT-treated PCOS mice showed increased levels of ER stress marker genes and proteins. Hyperandrogenism in PCOS mouse ovaries also induced p38 MAPK phosphorylation in COCs and GCs. Metformin inhibited ER stress activation was associated with decreased p-p38 MAPK levels. In vitro experiments, testosterone-induced ER stress was mitigated by metformin or p38 MAPK inhibition in primary cultured GCs and COCs. COCs expanded rapidly in the presence of testosterone during LH administration, and ovulation-related genes, namely, Areg, Ereg, Ptgs2, Sult1e1, Ptx3 and Tnfaip6, were strongly expressed in the COCs and GCs. These effects were reversed by treatment with metformin, an ER stress inhibitor or by knockdown of p38 MAPK. LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The number of PCOS patients in this study was small. WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: This study provides further evidence for metformin as a PCOS treatment. STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): This study was funded by the National Key Research and Developmental Program of China (2018YFC1004800), the Key Research and Development Program of Zhejiang Province (2017C03022), the Zhejiang Province Medical Science and Technology Plan Project (2017KY085, 2018KY457), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31701260, 81401264, 81701514), and the Special Funds for Clinical Medical Research of the Chinese Medical Association (16020320648). The authors report no conflict of interest in this work and have nothing to disclose. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: N/A.
BACKGROUND: Glioma is the most prevalent primary tumor of the central nervous system. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant form of glioma with an extremely poor prognosis. A novel, regulated cell death form of copper-induced cell death called "cuproptosis" provides a new prospect for cancer treatment by regulating cuproptosis. METHODS: Data from bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis (The Cancer Genome Atlas cohort and Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas cohort) and single cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) analysis were integrated to reveal their relationships. A scoring system was constructed according to the cuproptosis-related gene expression, and core genes were experimentally verified using real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), Western blot (WB), immunohistochemistry (IHC), and immunofluorescence (IF). Moreover, cell counting kit-8 (CCK8), colony formation, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation, transwell, and flow cytometry cell cycle were performed to evaluate cell proliferation, invasion, and migration. RESULTS: The Cuproptosis Activation Scoring (CuAS) Model has stable and independent prognostic efficacy, as verified by two CGGA datasets. Epiregulin (EREG), the gene of the model has the most contributions in the principal component analysis (PCA), is an onco-immunological gene that can affect immunity by influencing the expression of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) and mediate the process of cuproptosis by influencing the expression of ferredoxin 1 (FDX1). Single cell transcriptome analysis revealed that high CuAS GBM cells are found in vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) + malignant cells. Oligodendrocyte transcription factor 1 (OLIG1) + malignant is the original clone, and VEGF and CD99 are the differential pathways of specific cell communication between the high and low CuAS groups. This was also demonstrated by immunofluorescence in the tissue sections. Furthermore, CuAS has therapeutic potential for immunotherapy, and we predict that many drugs (methotrexate, NU7441, KU -0063794, GDC-0941, cabozantinib, and NVP-BEZ235) may be used in patients with high CuAS. CONCLUSION: EREG is the core onco-immunological biomarker of CuAS and modulates the cross-talk between VEGF and CD99 signaling in glioblastoma, and CuAS may provide support for immunotherapy and chemotherapy.
BACKGROUND: Although, micropeptides encoded by non-coding RNA have been shown to have an important role in a variety of tumors processes, there have been no reports on micropeptide in renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Based on the micropeptide MIAC (micropeptide inhibiting actin cytoskeleton) discovered and named in the previous work, this study screened its tumor spectrum, and explored its mechanism of action and potential diagnosis and treatment value in the occurrence and development of renal carcinoma. METHODS: The clinical significance of MIAC in RCC was explored by bioinformatics analysis through high-throughput RNA-seq data from 530 patients with kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC) in the TCGA database, and the detection of clinical samples of 70 cases of kidney cancer. In vitro and in vivo experiments to determine the role of MIAC in renal carcinoma cell growth and metastasis; High-throughput transcriptomics, western blotting, immunoprecipitation, molecular docking, affinity experiments, and Streptavidin pulldown experiments identify MIAC direct binding protein and key regulatory pathways. RESULTS: The analysis of 600 renal carcinoma samples from different sources revealed that the expression level of MIAC is significantly decreased, and corelated with the prognosis and clinical stage of tumors in patients with renal carcinoma. Overexpression of MIAC in renal carcinoma cells can significantly inhibit the proliferation and migration ability, promote apoptosis of renal carcinoma cells, and affect the distribution of cells at various stages. After knocking down MIAC, the trend is reversed. In vivo experiments have found that MIAC overexpression inhibit the growth and metastasis of RCC, while the synthetized MIAC peptides can significantly inhibit the occurrence and development of RCC in vitro and in vivo. Further mechanistic studies have demonstrated that MIAC directly bind to AQP2 protein, inhibit EREG/EGFR expression and activate downstream pathways PI3K/AKT and MAPK to achieve anti-tumor effects. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed for the first time the tumor suppressor potential of the lncRNA-encoded micropeptide MIAC in RCC, which inhibits the activation of the EREG/EGFR signaling pathway by direct binding to AQP2 protein, thereby inhibiting renal carcinoma progression and metastasis. This result emphasizes that the micropeptide MIAC can provide a new strategy for the diagnosis and treatment of RCC.
Embryo implantation and decidualization are crucial for a successful pregnancy. How the inflammatory response is regulated during these processes is undefined. Pyroptosis is an inflammatory form of cell death mediated by gasdermin D (GSDMD). Through in vivo, cultured epithelial cells and organoids, it is shown that pyroptosis occurs in epithelial cells at the implantation site. Compared with those on day 4 of pseudopregnancy and delayed implantation, pyroptosis-related protein levels are significantly increased on day 4 of pregnancy and activated implantation, suggesting that blastocysts are involved in regulating pyroptosis. Blastocyst-derived cathepsin B (CTSB) is stimulated by preimplantation estradiol-17beta and induces pyroptosis in epithelial cells. Pyroptosis-induced IL-18 secretion from epithelial cells activates a disintegrin and metalloprotease 12 (ADAM12) to process the epiregulin precursor into mature epiregulin. Epiregulin (EREG) enhances in vitro decidualization in mice. Pyroptosis-related proteins are detected in the mid-secretory human endometrium and are elevated in the recurrent implantation failure endometrium. Lipopolysaccharide treatment in pregnant mice causes implantation failure and increases pyroptosis-related protein levels. Therefore, the data suggest that modest pyroptosis is beneficial for embryo implantation and decidualization. Excessive pyroptosis can be harmful and lead to pregnancy failure.
The global burden of colorectal cancer (CRC) has rapidly increased in recent years. Dysregulated cholesterol homeostasis facilitated by extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling transforms the tumor microenvironment. Collagen I, a major with ECM component is highly expressed in colorectal tumors with infiltrative growth. Although oxysterol binding protein (OSBP)-related proteins accommodate tumorigenesis, OSBPL2, which is usually involved in deafness, is not associated with CRC progression. Therefore, we aimed to investigate the pathological function of OSBPL2 and identify the molecular link between ECM-Collagen I and OSBPL2 in CRC to facilitate the development of new treatments for CRC. OSBPL2 predicted a favorable prognosis in stage IV CRC and substantially repressed Collagen I-induced focal adhesion, migration, and invasion. The reduction of OSBPL2 activated ERK signaling through the VCAN/AREG/EREG axis during CRC growth, while relying on PARP1 via ZEB1 in CRC metastasis. OSBPL2 defect supported colorectal tumor growth and metastasis, which were suppressed by the ERK and PARP1 inhibitors SCH772984 and AG14361, respectively. Overall, our findings revealed that the Collagen I-induced loss of OSBPL2 aggravates CRC progression through VCAN-mediated ERK signaling and the PARP1/ZEB1 axis. This demonstrates that SCH772984 and AG14361 are reciprocally connective therapies for OSBPL2(Low) CRC, which could contribute to further development of targeted CRC treatment.
Oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) is highly heterogeneous, varying by oncogenic signals and cellular context. While its dual role, in the initial inhibition potentially later leading to promotion of tumors through the senescence-associated secretory phenotype, is still a matter of debate, it is undeniable that OIS is critical to understanding tumorigenesis. A major obstacle to OIS research is the absence of a universally accepted marker. Here, we present a robust OIS-specific transcriptomic secretory phenotype, termed oncogene-induced senescence secretory phenotype (OIS-SP), which can identify OIS across multiple biological contexts from in vitro datasets to in vivo human samples. We apply a meta-analytic machine learning pipeline to harmonize a deliberately varied selection of Ras-Raf-MEK-induced senescence datasets of differing origins, oncogenic signals and cell types. Finally we make use of bypass data to identify key genes and eliminate genes associated with quiescence, so identifying 40 OIS-SP genes. Within this set, we determined a robust core of five OIS-SP genes (FBLN1, CXCL12, EREG, CST1 and MMP10). Importantly, these 5 OIS-SP genes showed clear, consistent regulation patterns across various human Ras-Raf-MEK-mutated tumor tissues, which suggests that OIS-SP may be a novel cancer driver phenotype with an unexpectedly critical role in tumorigenesis.
Epithelial organoids derived from intestinal tissue, called enteroids, recapitulate many aspects of the organ in vitro and can be used for biological discovery, personalized medicine, and drug development. Here, we interrogated the cell signaling environment within the developing human intestine to identify niche cues that may be important for epithelial development and homeostasis. We identified an EGF family member, EPIREGULIN (EREG), which is robustly expressed in the developing human crypt. Enteroids generated from the developing human intestine grown in standard culture conditions, which contain EGF, are dominated by stem and progenitor cells and feature little differentiation and no spatial organization. Our results demonstrate that EREG can replace EGF in vitro, and EREG leads to spatially resolved enteroids that feature budded and proliferative crypt domains and a differentiated villus-like central lumen. Multiomic (transcriptome plus epigenome) profiling of native crypts, EGF-grown enteroids, and EREG-grown enteroids showed that EGF enteroids have an altered chromatin landscape that is dependent on EGF concentration, downregulate the master intestinal transcription factor CDX2, and ectopically express stomach genes, a phenomenon that is reversible. This is in contrast to EREG-grown enteroids, which remain intestine like in culture. Thus, EREG creates a homeostatic intestinal niche in vitro, enabling interrogation of stem cell function, cellular differentiation, and disease modeling.
Overexpression of the EGFR ligands amphiregulin (AREG)/epiregulin (EREG) may be a surrogate of EGFR dependency regardless of sidedness in metastatic colorectal cancer. High AREG/EREG may be coupled with negative hyper-selection (i.e., lack of genomic drivers of primary resistance beyond RAS and BRAF) to identify patients with right-sided tumors and potential sensitivity to EGFR blockade. See related article by Williams et al., p. 4153.
(1) Background: Epiregulin (EREG) is a ligand of EGFR and ErB4 involved in the development and the progression of various cancers including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Its overexpression in HNSCC is correlated with short overall survival and progression-free survival but predictive of tumors responding to anti-EGFR therapies. Besides tumor cells, macrophages and cancer-associated fibroblasts shed EREG in the tumor microenvironment to support tumor progression and to promote therapy resistance. Although EREG seems to be an interesting therapeutic target, no study has been conducted so far on the consequences of EREG invalidation regarding the behavior and response of HNSCC to anti-EGFR therapies and, more specifically, to cetuximab (CTX); (2) Methods: EREG was silenced in various HNSCC cell lines. The resulting phenotype (growth, clonogenic survival, apoptosis, metabolism, ferroptosis) was assessed in the absence or presence of CTX. The data were confirmed in patient-derived tumoroids; (3) Results: Here, we show that EREG invalidation sensitizes cells to CTX. This is illustrated by the reduction in cell survival, the alteration of cell metabolism associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and the initiation of ferroptosis characterized by lipid peroxidation, iron accumulation and the loss of GPX4. Combining ferroptosis inducers (RSL3 and metformin) with CTX drastically reduces the survival of HNSCC cells but also HNSCC patient-derived tumoroids; (4) Conclusions: The loss of EREG might be considered in clinical settings as a predictive biomarker for patients that might undergo ferroptosis in response to CTX and that might benefit the most from the combination of ferroptosis inducers and CTX.
Epiregulin (EREG) is a member of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) family. An increasing body of evidence has demonstrated the pivotal role of EREG in the pathogenesis and progression of various malignancies. However, the clinical significance and biological role of EREG in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) have yet to be fully elucidated. We found that EREG is highly expressed in PDAC tissues compared with paracancerous tissues through public databases and clinical samples. High EREG expression predicted worse overall survival (OS) and recurrence-free survival (RFS) in patients with PDAC. Multivariate analysis revealed that EREG can serve as an independent prognostic indicator. In addition, EREG silencing inhibited PDAC cell proliferation, migration, progression, altered cell cycle, facilitated apoptosis in vitro and suppressed tumor growth in vivo. Conversely, EREG overexpression facilitated the proliferation, migration, and invasion in PaTu-8988 t cell. Through transcriptome sequencing and experimental verification, we found EREG mediates PDAC tumorigenesis through ERK/p38 MAPK signaling pathway. Moreover, we found EREG expression is closely related to PD-L1 expression in PDAC tissues and cells. Therefore, EREG is expected to be a prospective prognostic and therapeutic marker for PDAC.
Dysregulated Epiregulin (EREG) can activate epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and promote tumor progression in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). However, the mechanisms underlying EREG dysregulation remain largely unknown. Here, we showed that dysregulated EREG was highly associated with enhanced PDL1 in HNSCC tissues. Treatment of HNSCC cells with EREG resulted in upregulated PDL1 via the c-myc pathway. Of note, we found that N-glycosylation of EREG was essential for its stability, membrane location, biological function, and upregulation of its downstream target PDL1 in HNSCC. EREG was glycosylated at N47 via STT3B glycosyltransferases, whereas mutations at N47 site abrogated N-glycosylation and destabilized EREG. Consistently, knockdown of STT3B suppressed glycosylated EREG and inhibited PDL1 in HNSCC cells. Moreover, treatment of HNSCC cells with NGI-1, an inhibitor of STT3B, blocked STT3B-mediated glycosylation of EREG, leading to its degradation and suppression of PDL1. Finally, combination of NGI-1 treatment with anti-PDLl therapy synergistically enhanced the efficacy of immunotherapy of HNSCC in vivo. Taken together, STT3B-mediated N-glycosylation is essential for stabilization of EREG, which mediates PDL1 upregulation and immune evasion in HNSCC.
