Serine/threonine-protein kinase/endoribonuclease IRE2; Induces translational repression through 28S ribosomal RNA cleavage in response to ER stress. Pro-apoptotic. Appears to play no role in the unfolded-protein response, unlike closely related proteins.
OBJECTIVE: The optimal therapeutic response in cancer patients is highly dependent upon the differentiation state of their tumours. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a lethal cancer that harbours distinct phenotypic subtypes with preferential sensitivities to standard therapies. This study aimed to investigate intratumour heterogeneity and plasticity of cancer cell states in PDA in order to reveal cell state-specific regulators. DESIGN: We analysed single-cell expression profiling of mouse PDAs, revealing intratumour heterogeneity and cell plasticity and identified pathways activated in the different cell states. We performed comparative analysis of murine and human expression states and confirmed their phenotypic diversity in specimens by immunolabeling. We assessed the function of phenotypic regulators using mouse models of PDA, organoids, cell lines and orthotopically grafted tumour models. RESULTS: Our expression analysis and immunolabeling analysis show that a mucus production programme regulated by the transcription factor SPDEF is highly active in precancerous lesions and the classical subtype of PDA - the most common differentiation state. SPDEF maintains the classical differentiation and supports PDA transformation in vivo. The SPDEF tumour-promoting function is mediated by its target genes AGR2 and ERN2/IRE1beta that regulate mucus production, and inactivation of the SPDEF programme impairs tumour growth and facilitates subtype interconversion from classical towards basal-like differentiation. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings expand our understanding of the transcriptional programmes active in precancerous lesions and PDAs of classical differentiation, determine the regulators of mucus production as specific vulnerabilities in these cell states and reveal phenotype switching as a response mechanism to inactivation of differentiation states determinants.
This chapter provides an overview of our present understanding of mechanisms of sensing protein folding status and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in eukaryotic cells. The ER folds and matures most secretory and transmembrane proteins. Mis- or unfolded proteins are sensed by specialized ER stress sensors, such as IRE1, PERK and ATF6, which initiate several cellular responses and signaling pathways to restore ER homeostasis. These intracellular signaling events are called the unfolded protein response (UPR). Here we focus on how ER stress and protein folding status in the ER are sensed by the ER stress sensors by summarizing results from recent structural, biochemical and genetic approaches.
BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is a lung cancer subtype with poor prognosis. We investigated the prognostic value of methylation- and homologous recombination deficiency (HRD)-associated gene signatures in LUAD. METHODS: Data on RNA sequencing, somatic mutations, and methylation were obtained from TCGA database. HRD scores were used to stratify patients with LUAD into high and low HRD groups and identify differentially mutated and expressed genes (DMEGs). Pearson correlation analysis between DMEGs and methylation yielded methylation-associated DMEGs. Cox regression analysis was used to construct a prognostic model, and the distribution of clinical features in the high- and low-risk groups was compared. RESULTS: Patients with different HRD scores showed different DNA mutation patterns. There were 272 differentially mutated genes and 6294 differentially expressed genes. Fifty-seven DMEGs were obtained; the top 10 upregulated genes were COL11A1, EXO1, ASPM, COL12A1, COL2A1, COL3A1, COL5A2, DIAPH3, CAD, and SLC25A13, while the top 10 downregulated genes were C7, ERN2, DLC1, SCN7A, SMARCA2, CARD11, LAMA2, ITIH5, FRY, and EPHB6. Forty-two DMEGs were negatively correlated with 259 methylation sites. Gene ontology and pathway enrichment analysis of the DMEGs revealed enrichment of loci involved in extracellular matrix-related remodeling and signaling. Six out of the 42 methylation-associated DMEGs were significantly associated with LUAD prognosis and included in the prognostic model. The model effectively stratified high- and low-risk patients, with the high-risk group having more patients with advanced stage disease. CONCLUSION: We developed a novel prognostic model for LUAD based on methylation and HRD. Methylation-associated DMEGs may function as biomarkers and therapeutic targets for LUAD. Further studies are needed to elucidate their roles in LUAD carcinogenesis.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease is characterized by early and persistent mucus accumulation and neutrophilic inflammation in the distal airways. Identification of the factors in CF mucopurulent secretions that perpetuate CF mucoinflammation may provide strategies for novel CF pharmacotherapies. We show that IL-1beta, with IL-1alpha, dominated the mucin prosecretory activities of supernatants of airway mucopurulent secretions (SAMS). Like SAMS, IL-1beta alone induced MUC5B and MUC5AC protein secretion and mucus hyperconcentration in CF human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells. Mechanistically, IL-1beta induced the sterile alpha motif-pointed domain containing ETS transcription factor (SPDEF) and downstream endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus signaling 2 (ERN2) to upregulate mucin gene expression. Increased mRNA levels of IL1B, SPDEF, and ERN2 were associated with increased MUC5B and MUC5AC expression in the distal airways of excised CF lungs. Administration of an IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) blocked SAMS-induced expression of mucins and proinflammatory mediators in CF HBE cells. In conclusion, IL-1alpha and IL-1beta are upstream components of a signaling pathway, including IL-1R1 and downstream SPDEF and ERN2, that generate a positive feedback cycle capable of producing persistent mucus hyperconcentration and IL-1alpha and/or IL-1beta-mediated neutrophilic inflammation in the absence of infection in CF airways. Targeting this pathway therapeutically may ameliorate mucus obstruction and inflammation-induced structural damage in young CF children.
Rationale: The goal was to connect elements of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) pathogenesis, including chronic endoplasmic reticulum stress in respiratory epithelia associated with injury/inflammation and remodeling, distal airway mucus obstruction and honeycomb cyst formation with accumulation of MUC5B (mucin 5B), and associations between IPF risk and polymorphisms in the MUC5B promoter. Objectives: To test whether the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress sensor protein ERN2 (ER-to-nucleus signaling 2) and its downstream effector, the spliced form of XBP1S (X-box-binding protein 1), regulate MUC5B expression and differentially activate the MUC5B promoter variant in respiratory epithelia. Methods: Primary human airway epithelial (HAE) cells, transgenic mouse models, human IPF lung tissues, and cell lines expressing XBP1S and MUC5B promoters were used to explore relationships between the ERN2/XBP1S pathway and MUC5B. An inhibitor of the pathway, KIRA6, and XBP1 CRISPR-Cas9 were used in HAE cells to explore therapeutic potential. Measurements and Main Results: ERN2 regulated MUC5B and MUC5AC mRNAs. Downstream XBP1S selectively promoted MUC5B expression in vitro and in distal murine airway epithelia in vivo. XBP1S bound to the proximal region of the MUC5B promoter and differentially upregulated MUC5B expression in the context of the MUC5B promoter rs35705950 variant. High levels of ERN2 and XBP1S were associated with excessive MUC5B mRNAs in distal airways of human IPF lungs. Cytokine-induced MUC5B expression in HAE cells was inhibited by KIRA6 and XBP1 CRISPR-Cas9. Conclusions: A positive feedback bistable ERN2-XBP1S pathway regulates MUC5B-dominated mucus obstruction in IPF, providing an unfolded protein response-dependent mechanism linking the MUC5B promoter rs35705950 polymorphism with IPF pathogenesis. Inhibiting ERN2-dependent pathways/elements may provide a therapeutic option for IPF.
Fragile X Mental Retardation protein (FMRP), widely known for its role in hereditary intellectual disability, is an RNA-binding protein (RBP) that controls translation of select mRNAs. We discovered that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress induces phosphorylation of FMRP on a site that is known to enhance translation inhibition of FMRP-bound mRNAs. We show ER stress-induced activation of Inositol requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1), an ER-resident stress-sensing kinase/endoribonuclease, leads to FMRP phosphorylation and to suppression of macrophage cholesterol efflux and apoptotic cell clearance (efferocytosis). Conversely, FMRP deficiency and pharmacological inhibition of IRE1 kinase activity enhances cholesterol efflux and efferocytosis, reducing atherosclerosis in mice. Our results provide mechanistic insights into how ER stress-induced IRE1 kinase activity contributes to macrophage cholesterol homeostasis and suggests IRE1 inhibition as a promising new way to counteract atherosclerosis.
Barrier epithelial cells lining the mucosal surfaces of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts interface directly with the environment. As such, these tissues are continuously challenged to maintain a healthy equilibrium between immunity and tolerance against environmental toxins, food components, and microbes. An extracellular mucus barrier, produced and secreted by the underlying epithelium plays a central role in this host defense response. Several dedicated molecules with a unique tissue-specific expression in mucosal epithelia govern mucosal homeostasis. Here, we review the biology of Inositol-requiring enzyme 1beta (IRE1beta), an ER-resident endonuclease and paralogue of the most evolutionarily conserved ER stress sensor IRE1alpha. IRE1beta arose through gene duplication in early vertebrates and adopted functions unique from IRE1alpha which appear to underlie the basic development and physiology of mucosal tissues.
Ribonucleases (RNases) are a group of enzymes that cleave RNAs at phosphodiester bonds resulting in remarkably diverse biological consequences. This review focuses on mammalian RNases that are capable of, or potentially capable of, cleaving messenger RNA (mRNA) as well as other RNAs in cells and play roles in the development of human cancers. The aims of this review are to provide an overview of the roles of currently known mammalian RNases, and the evidence that associate them as regulators of tumor development. The roles of these RNases as oncoproteins and/or tumor suppressors in influencing cell growth, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and other cellular hallmarks of cancer will be presented and discussed. The RNases under discussion include RNases from the conventional mRNA decay pathways, RNases that are activated under cellular stress, RNases from the miRNA pathway, and RNases with multifunctional activity.
BACKGROUND: Early data has indicated that EGFR 19Del mutation and EGFR L585R mutation are two different types of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, how the different molecular mechanisms participate in the process of mediastinal lymph node metastasis (MLNM) in lung adenocarcinoma (LA) harboring EGFR 19Del and EGFR L858R mutation remains unknown. We thus explored the genes responsible for MLNM in LA with EGFR 19Del or L858R mutation. METHODS: We performed transcriptome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis from 10 patients with LA resection specimens of primary tumors. Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was used to validate gene expressions. RESULTS: There were 69 mRNAs upregulated and 100 mRNAs downregulated in five samples with MLNM compared with samples without MLN metastasis. EEF1A2 and ERN2 were observed exhibiting different expression patterns in EGFR 19Del and EGFR L858R samples with MLNM. In samples harboring EGFR 19Del mutation, the expression of EEF1A2 gene in samples with MLNM was significantly lower compared with samples without MLN metastasis, and in samples with EGFR L858R, it was significantly higher in samples with MLNM. The expression pattern of ERN2 was opposite to EEF1A2. In addition, several other genes including SLC6A11, IGHV3-48, IGHV3-43, DUSP9, and HOXA9 were also shown to be associated with invasion and metastasis and exhibited an expression pattern similar to EEF1A2 and ERN2 in EGRF 19Del and L858R mutation tumors. CONCLUSIONS: EEF1A2 and ERN2 were for the first time observed exhibiting distinct expression patterns in MLNM in lung adenocarcinomas harboring EGFR 19Del and EGFR L858R mutation by interindividual DEGs analysis. KEY POINTS: Significant findings of the study In our study, we focused on the mechanisms of metastasis and invasion that different EGFR mutations conferred and identified two critical genes separately involved in this process in EGFR 19Del and L858R mutation tumors. What this study adds Our findings not only reinforced theoretical foundations that the EGFR 19Del and L858R mutation tumors should be considered as two kinds of diseases, but also laid the fundamentals for precise determination of the mediastinal lymph node radiation field and improvement of clinical outcome.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a network of intracellular signaling pathways that maintain the protein-folding capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in eukaryotic cells. Dedicated molecular sensors embedded in the ER membrane detect incompletely folded or unfolded proteins in the ER lumen and activate a transcriptional program that increases the abundance of the ER according to need. In metazoans the UPR additionally regulates translation and thus relieves unfolded protein load by globally reducing protein synthesis. If homeostasis in the ER cannot be reestablished, the metazoan UPR switches from the prosurvival to the apoptotic mode. The UPR involves a complex, coordinated action of many genes that is controlled by one ER-embedded sensor, Ire1, in yeasts, and three sensors, Ire1, PERK, and ATF6, in higher eukaryotes, including human. We discuss the emerging molecular understanding of the UPR and focus on the structural biology of Ire1 and PERK, the two recently crystallized UPR sensors.
Various cellular conditions such as synthesis of abundant proteins, expressions of mutant proteins and oxidative stress lead to accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen. This type of stress is called ER stress. The excessive ER stress causes cellular damages followed by apoptosis. When ER stress occurs, cells are activated ER stress response (unfolded protein response) to avoid cellular damages. Recently, it has been clear that ER stress response plays crucial roles not only in cell survival after ER stress but also in regulating various cellular functions and tissue formations. In particular, ER stress and ER stress response regulate protein quality control, secretory protein production, and smooth secretion of proteins in the cells such as osteoblasts which synthesize and secrete enormous matrix proteins.
Secretory and transmembrane proteins enter the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as unfolded proteins and exit as either folded proteins in transit to their target organelles or as misfolded proteins targeted for degradation. The unfolded protein response (UPR) maintains the protein-folding homeostasis within the ER, ensuring that the protein-folding capacity of the ER meets the load of client proteins. Activation of the UPR depends on three ER stress sensor proteins, Ire1, PERK, and ATF6. Although the consequences of activation are well understood, how these sensors detect ER stress remains unclear. Recent evidence suggests that yeast Ire1 directly binds to unfolded proteins, which induces its oligomerization and activation. BiP dissociation from Ire1 regulates this oligomeric equilibrium, ultimately modulating Ire1's sensitivity and duration of activation. The mechanistic principles of ER stress sensing are the focus of this review.
The stimuli for neuronal cell death in neurodegenerative disorders are multi-factorial and may include genetic predisposition, environmental factors, cellular stressors such as oxidative stress and free radical production, bioenergy failure, glutamate-induced excitotoxicity, neuroinflammation, disruption of Ca(2+) -regulating systems, mitochondrial dysfunction and misfolded protein accumulation. Cellular stress disrupts functioning of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a critical organelle for protein quality control, leading to induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR). ER stress may contribute to neurodegeneration in a range of neurodegenerative disorders. This review summarizes the molecular events occurring during ER stress and the unfolded protein response and it specifically evaluates the evidence suggesting the ER stress response plays a role in neurodegenerative disorders.
The efficient turnover of messenger RNA represents an important mechanism that allows the cell to control gene expression. Until recently, the mechanism of mRNA decay was mainly attributed to exonucleases, comprising enzymes that degrade RNAs from the ends of the molecules. This article summarizes the endoribonucleases, comprising enzymes that cleave RNA molecules internally, which were identified in more recent years in eukaryotic mRNA metabolism. Endoribonucleases have received little attention in the past, based on the difficulty in their identification and a lack of understanding of their physiological significance. This review aims to compare the similarities and differences among this group of enzymes, as well as their known cellular functions. Despite the many differences in protein structure, and thus difficulties in identifying them based on amino acid sequence, most endoribonucleases possess essential cellular functions and have been shown to play an important role in mRNA turnover.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is triggered by perturbations in ER function such as those caused by protein misfolding or by increases in protein secretion. Eukaryotic cells respond to ER stress by activating 3 ER-resident proteins, activating transcription factor-6, inositol requiring protein-1, and protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK). These proteins direct signaling pathways that relieve ER stress in a process known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). In pathological settings, however, prolonged UPR activation can promote cell death, and this process has recently emerged as an important concept in atherosclerosis. We review here the evidence for UPR activation and cell death in macrophages, smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells in the context of advanced atherosclerosis as well as the existing literature regarding mechanisms of UPR-induced cell death. Knowledge in this area may suggest new therapeutic targets relevant to the formation of clinically dangerous atherosclerotic plaques.
Resistance to current cancer therapies has forced scientists to investigate new avenues of therapy distinct from those aimed at single targets, to strategies based on targeting families of proteins, on which cancers rely for their ability to survive stress. Two such protein families are the heat shock proteins (HSP), especially the HSP90 family, and proteins involved in mediating the unfolded protein response (UPR). HSP90 stabilises key survival factors in cancer cells including AKT, ERB2 and HIF1alpha, which alone makes HSP90 inhibitors extremely interesting as potential therapies. In addition targeting HSP90 can destabilise the UPR inducing cell death. A broad range of cancer-types rely on the UPR to correctly fold key signalling proteins properly, as well as to allow the cell to cope with the hypoxic environment associated with tumour development. These associations suggest that a range of tumours may be targeted using HSP90 inhibitors and that the development of specific inhibitors of the UPR may be of interest. In this article, based on work in multiple myeloma, we highlight the importance of targeting multiple signalling pathways simultaneously, using the UPR and heat shock proteins as examples, as a means of effectively killing cancer cells.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) and several neurodegenerative disorders known as tauopathies are characterized by misfolding and aggregation of tau protein. Although several studies have suggested the potential of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) as treatment for neurodegenerative diseases, the role of TCM in treating AD and tauopathies have not been well explored. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tau protein was coupled to the DsRed fluorophore by fusing a pro-aggregation mutant of repeat domain of tau (DeltaK280 tauRD) with DsRed. The DeltaK280 tauRD-DsRed fusion gene was then used to generate Tet-On 293 and SH-SY5Y cell clones as platforms to test the efficacy of 39 aqueous extracts of TCM in reducing tau misfolding and in neuroprotection. RESULTS: Seven TCM extracts demonstrated a significant reduction in tau misfolding and reactive oxidative species with low cytotoxicity in the DeltaK280 tauRD-DsRed 293 cell model. Glycyrrhiza inflata and Panax ginseng also demonstrated the potential to improve neurite outgrowth in the DeltaK280 tauRD-DsRed SH-SY5Y neuronal cell model. G. inflata further rescued the upregulation of ERN2 (pro-apoptotic) and downregulation of unfolded-protein-response-mediated chaperones ERP44, DNAJC3, and SERP1 in DeltaK280 tauRD-DsRed 293 cells. CONCLUSION: This in vitro study provides evidence that G. inflata may be a novel therapeutic for AD and tauopathies. Future applications of G. inflata on animal models of AD and tauopathies are warranted to corroborate its effect of reducing misfolding and potential disease modification.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) has evolved to counter the stresses that occur in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as a result of misfolded proteins. This sophisticated quality control system attempts to restore homeostasis through the action of a number of different pathways that are coordinated in the first instance by the ER stress-senor proteins IRE1, ATF6 and PERK. However, prolonged ER-stress-related UPR can have detrimental effects on cell function and, in the longer term, may induce apoptosis. Connective tissue cells such as fibroblasts, osteoblasts and chondrocytes synthesise and secrete large quantities of proteins and mutations in many of these gene products give rise to heritable disorders of connective tissues. Until recently, these mutant gene products were thought to exert their effect through the assembly of a defective extracellular matrix that ultimately disrupted tissue structure and function. However, it is now becoming clear that ER stress and UPR, because of the expression of a mutant gene product, is not only a feature of, but may be a key mediator in the initiation and progression of a whole range of different connective tissue diseases. This review focuses on ER stress and the UPR that characterises an increasing number of connective tissue diseases and highlights novel therapeutic opportunities that may arise.
Altered proteostasis is a salient feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD), highlighting the occurrence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and abnormal protein aggregation. ER stress triggers the activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), a signaling pathway that enforces adaptive programs to sustain proteostasis or eliminate terminally damaged cells. IRE1 is an ER-located kinase and endoribonuclease that operates as a major stress transducer, mediating both adaptive and proapoptotic programs under ER stress. IRE1 signaling controls the expression of the transcription factor XBP1, in addition to degrade several RNAs. Importantly, a polymorphism in the XBP1 promoter was suggested as a risk factor to develop AD. Here, we demonstrate a positive correlation between the progression of AD histopathology and the activation of IRE1 in human brain tissue. To define the significance of the UPR to AD, we targeted IRE1 expression in a transgenic mouse model of AD. Despite initial expectations that IRE1 signaling may protect against AD, genetic ablation of the RNase domain of IRE1 in the nervous system significantly reduced amyloid deposition, the content of amyloid beta oligomers, and astrocyte activation. IRE1 deficiency fully restored the learning and memory capacity of AD mice, associated with improved synaptic function and improved long-term potentiation (LTP). At the molecular level, IRE1 deletion reduced the expression of amyloid precursor protein (APP) in cortical and hippocampal areas of AD mice. In vitro experiments demonstrated that inhibition of IRE1 downstream signaling reduces APP steady-state levels, associated with its retention at the ER followed by proteasome-mediated degradation. Our findings uncovered an unanticipated role of IRE1 in the pathogenesis of AD, offering a novel target for disease intervention.
Recent transcript profiling and microarray studies are beginning to unveil some of the mysteries of sleep. One of the most important clues has been the identification of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resident chaperone, immunoglobulin binding protein (BiP), that increases with sleep deprivation in all species studied. BiP, an ER resident chaperone, is the key cellular marker and master regulator of a signaling pathway called the ER stress response or unfolded protein response. The ER stress response occurs in 3 phases. It is healthy, protective and adaptive when the ER stress is moderate. Failure of the adaptive response leads to the activation of an inflammatory response. When the ER stress burden is great and prolonged, executioner pathways are activated. Collectively this work provides new evidence that modest sleep deprivation induces cellular stress that activates an adaptive response. Aging tilts the response to sleep deprivation from one that is adaptive and protective to one that is maladaptive. Understanding the pathways activated by sleep loss and the mechanisms by which they occur will allow the development of therapies to protect the brain during prolonged wakefulness and specifically in sleep disorders including those associated with aging.
