Tyrosine-protein kinase Fer; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts downstream of cell surface receptors for growth factors and plays a role in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, microtubule assembly, lamellipodia formation, cell adhesion, cell migration and chemotaxis. Acts downstream of EGFR, KIT, PDGFRA and PDGFRB. Acts downstream of EGFR to promote activation of NF- kappa-B and cell proliferation. May play a role in the regulation of the mitotic cell cycle. Plays a role in the insulin receptor signaling pathway and in activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Acts downstream o [...] 
BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common joint disease and is the leading cause of chronic disability among older people. Chondrocyte death and extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation was involved in OA pathogenesis. Ferroptosis was an iron-dependent cell death associated with peroxidation of lipids. Here, we proved that ferroptosis exists in OA and identified glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) as an important regulator of OA. METHODS: Ferroptosis-related alterations were analyzed in human OA and undamaged cartilage. Expression of GPX4 was examined in 55 paired human OA samples. Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) and Deferoxamine (DFO) were used to treat OA, in vitro and in vivo. Alterations of GPX4-mediated signaling pathway were identified by RNA-seq analysis. AAV-Gpx4-shRNA were used to downregulate GPX4 expression in vivo. FINDINGS: Transcriptomic, biochemical, and microscopical analyses indicated that ferroptosis was closely associated with OA. Expression of GPX4 in the OA cartilage from 55 OA patients were significantly lower than undamaged cartilage. Fer-1 and DFO could protect OA in a necroptosis-independent manner, suggesting that ferroptosis exists in OA prog. Importantly, GPX4 downregulation could increase the sensitivity of chondrocytes to oxidative stress and aggravate ECM degradation through the MAPK/NFkappaB pathway. Furthermore, downregulation of GPX4 expression by AAV-Gpx4 shRNA aggravated OA in vivo. INTERPRETATION: Ferroptosis contributes to OA pathogenesis and GPX4 was the intersection of two mechanisms in regulating OA progression: ferroptosis and ECM degradation. FUNDING: This work was supported by the Projects of International Cooperation and Exchanges of National Natural Science Funding of China (Grant no. 81820108020), the National Key Research and Development Project of China (Grant no. 2018YFC1106300) and the Basic Science Program of Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital (Grant no. ynms202102).
Iron is a trace mineral that is highly significant to endurance athletes. Iron is critical to optimal athletic performance because of its role in energy metabolism, oxygen transport, and acid-base balance. Endurance athletes are at increased risk for suboptimal iron status, with potential negative consequences on performance, because of the combination of increased iron needs and inadequate dietary intake. This review paper summarizes the role of iron in maximal and submaximal exercise and describes the effects of iron deficiency on exercise performance. Mechanisms that explain the increased risk of iron deficiency in endurance athletes, including exercise-associated inflammation and hepcidin release on iron sequestration, are described. Information on screening athletes for iron deficiency is presented, and suggestions to increase iron intake through diet modification or supplemental iron are provided.
Psoriasis is a common, chronic, and recurrent inflammatory disease. It is characterized by hyperproliferation and abnormal differentiation of keratinocytes. Keratinocyte death is also involved in many pathophysiological conditions and amplifies the inflammatory cascade. As a newly recognized form of cell death, ferroptosis is involved in several inflammatory diseases. In this study, we aimed to investigate a previously unrecognized role for ferroptosis in psoriasis. Ferroptosis is mediated by lipid peroxidation and iron overload. Compared with normal lesions, the mRNA expression of acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4), prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), and transferrin receptor (TFRC) were highly expressed in psoriatic lesions, with decreased levels of glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), ferritin light chain (FTL), and ferritin heavy chain 1 (FTH1). The protein levels of ACSL4 and GPX4 were consistent with their mRNA levels. A similar tendency of ferroptosis was also observed in erastin-treated human primary keratinocytes and the Imiquimod (IMQ)-induced model of psoriasis. To investigate the correlation between inflammation and peroxidation, we analyzed single-cell RNA-sequencing data and identified 15 cell types. There was a high correlation between the activity of the lipid oxidation and the Th22/Th17 response in keratinocytes at a single-cell level. Moreover, ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1), a potent inhibitor of lipid peroxidation, suppressed ferroptosis-related changes in erastin-treated keratinocytes and alleviated psoriasiform dermatitis of IMQ-induced models. Additionally, Fer-1 blocked inflammatory responses in vitro and in vivo, reducing the production of cytokines including TNF-alpha, IL-6, IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-17, IL-22, and IL-23. This study revealed an expression pattern of ferroptosis in which specific molecules enhance inflammatory reactions in psoriasis.
The cerebral cortex is an intricate structure that controls human features such as language and cognition. Cortical functions rely on specialized neurons that emerge during development from complex molecular and cellular interactions. Neurodevelopmental disorders occur when one or several of these steps is incorrectly executed. Although a number of causal genes and disease phenotypes have been identified, the sequence of events linking molecular disruption to clinical expression mostly remains obscure. Here, focusing on human malformations of cortical development, we illustrate how complex interactions at the genetic, cellular, and circuit levels together contribute to diversity and variability in disease phenotypes. Using specific examples and an online resource, we propose that a multilevel assessment of disease processes is key to identifying points of vulnerability and developing new therapeutic strategies.
Iron is an essential trace element ensuring many functions in the body. However, excess iron can be toxic with deleterious consequences on function and tissue integrity. The understanding of the molecular and cellular mechanisms allowing iron level to be kept at physiological concentration has greatly progressed in recent years, in particular with the identification of the iron-regulatory hormone, hepcidin and its receptor ferroportin, the sole iron exporter known to date. This discovery has improved our ability to diagnose and manage iron disorders and offered new therapeutic perspectives for an important class of human diseases. However many questions remain to be answered. With the development of high-throughput techniques and the "omics" strategies (transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, etc.), we should be able in the coming years to identify new iron regulatory pathways and to assign original roles for iron in normal cellular processes but also in diseases. A more complete iron regulatory network should be established with the identification of the crosstalk between intracellular and systemic iron homeostasis.
OBJECTIVE: Atherosclerotic vascular disease remains the principal cause of death and disability among patients with type 2 diabetes. Unfortunately, the problem is not adequately resolved by therapeutic strategies with currently available drugs or approaches that solely focus on optimal glycemic control. To identify the key contributors and better understand the mechanism of diabetic atherosclerotic vascular disease, we aimed to elucidate the key genetic characteristics and pathological pathways in atherosclerotic vascular disease through nonbiased bioinformatics analysis and subsequent experimental demonstration and exploration in diabetic atherosclerotic vascular disease. METHODS AND RESULTS: Sixty-eight upregulated and 23 downregulated genes were identified from the analysis of gene expression profiles (GSE30169 and GSE6584). A comprehensive bioinformatic assay further identified that ferroptosis, a new type of programmed cell death and HMOX1 (a gene that encodes heme oxygenase), were vital factors in atherosclerotic vascular disease. We further demonstrated that diabetes significantly increased ferroptosis and HMOX1 levels compared to normal controls. Importantly, the ferroptosis inhibitor ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) effectively attenuated diabetic atherosclerosis, suggesting the causative role of ferroptosis in diabetic atherosclerosis development. At the cellular level, Fer-1 ameliorated high glucose high lipid-induced lipid peroxidation and downregulated ROS production. More importantly, HMOX1 knockdown attenuated Fe2+ overload, reduced iron content and ROS, and alleviated lipid peroxidation, which led to a reduction in ferroptosis in diabetic human endothelial cells. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that HMOX1 upregulation is responsible for the increased ferroptosis in diabetic atherosclerosis development, suggesting that HMOX1 may serve as a potential therapeutic or drug development target for diabetic atherosclerosis.
This study was focused on exploring the role of the HIV-1 Tat protein in mediating microglial ferroptosis. Exposure of mouse primary microglial cells (mPMs) to HIV-1 Tat protein resulted in induction of ferroptosis, which was characterized by increased expression of Acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4), in turn, leading to increased generation of oxidized phosphatidylethanolamine, elevated levels of lipid peroxidation, upregulated labile iron pool (LIP) and ferritin heavy chain-1 (FTH1), decreased glutathione peroxidase-4 and mitochondrial outer membrane rupture. Also, inhibition of ferroptosis by ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) or deferoxamine (DFO) treatment suppressed ferroptosis-related changes in mPMs. Similarly, the knockdown of ACSL4 by gene silencing also inhibited ferroptosis induced by HIV-1 Tat. Furthermore, increased lipid peroxidation resulted in increased release of proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNFalpha, IL6, and IL1beta and microglial activation. Pretreatment of mPMs with Fer-1 or DFO further blocked HIV-1 Tat-mediated microglial activation in vitro and reduced the expression and release of proinflammatory cytokines. We identified miR-204 as an upstream modulator of ACSL4, which was downregulated in mPMs exposed to HIV-1 Tat. Transient transfection of mPMs with miR-204 mimics reduced the expression of ACSL4 while inhibiting HIV-1 Tat-mediated ferroptosis and the release of proinflammatory cytokines. These in vitro findings were further validated in HIV-1 transgenic rats as well as HIV + ve human brain samples. Overall, this study underscores a novel mechanism(s) underlying HIV-1 Tat-mediated ferroptosis and microglial activation involving miR-204-ACSL4 signaling.
Humans are inevitably exposed to ethyl carbamate (EC) via consumption of fermented food and beverages. EC, known as an environmental toxin, can cause oxidative stress-mediated severe toxicity, but the underlying mechanisms remain unveiled. Ferroptosis is a newly identified ROS-mediated non-apoptotic cell death characterized by iron accumulation and excessive lipid oxidation. In this study, we first found that EC triggered ferroptosis in liver cells by detection of decreased cell viability, GSH, GPX4 and Ferritin levels, as well as increased iron and MDA contents. Ferroptosis inhibitor ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) pretreatment rescued ferroptotic damage, indicating that ferroptosis was critical for EC-caused cell death. Furthermore, GSH synthesis precursor N-acetylcysteine displayed significant anti-ferroptotic properties and we suggested that GSH depletion might be the main cause of ferroptosis under EC exposure. EC-triggered GSH depletion mainly depended on suppressed GSH synthesis via inhibition of SLC7A11 and GCLC expressions. Notably, EC blocked Nrf2 activation by repression of phosphorylation modification and nuclear translocation, which further resulted in ferroptosis occurrence. We also observed EC-induced liver dysfunction and inflammation, accompanied with oxidative stress, ferroptosis and downregulated Nrf2 signaling in Balb/c mice, which could be effectively reversed by Fer-1 and tBHQ pretreatment. Together, our study indicated that ferroptosis is a new mechanism for EC-caused toxicity, which was attributed to Nrf2 inactivation and GSH depletion.
The proteomic analysis from samples of patients with preeclampsia (PE) displayed a low level of ferritin light chains (FTL), but we do not know what the significance of reduced FTL in PE pathophysiology is. To address this question, we first demonstrated that FTL was expressed in first- and third-trimester cytotrophoblasts, including extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs), of the human placenta. Furthermore, a pregnant rat model of FTL knockdown was successfully established by intravenously injecting adenoviruses expressing shRNA targeting FTL. In pregnant rats with downregulated FTL, we observed PE-like phenotypes and impaired spiral arterial remodelling, implying a causal relationship between FTL downregulation and PE. Blocking ferroptosis with ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) significantly rescued the above PE-like phenotypes in pregnant rats with FTL knockdown. Furthermore, using trophoblast cell line and chorionic villous explant culture assays, we showed that FTL downregulation induced cell death, especially ferroptosis, resulting in defective uterine spiral artery remodelling. Eventually, this conclusion from the animal model was verified in PE patients' placental tissues. Taken together, this study revealed for the first time that FTL reduction during pregnancy triggered ferroptosis and then caused defective uterine spiral artery remodelling, thereby leading to PE.
Gastric cancer represents a malignant type of cancer worldwide. Tanshinone IIA (Tan IIA), a pharmacologically active component isolated from the rhizome of the Chinese herb Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge (Danshen), has been reported to possess an anti-cancer effect in gastric cancer. However, its mechanisms are still not fully understood. In the present study, we found that Tan IIA induced ferroptosis in BGC-823 and NCI-H87 gastric cancer cells. Tan IIA increased lipid peroxidation and up-regulated Ptgs2 and Chac1 expression, two markers of ferroptosis. Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1), an inhibitor of lipid peroxidation, inhibited Tan IIA caused-lipid peroxidation and Ptgs2 and Chac1 expression. In addition, Tan IIA also up-regulated p53 expression and down-regulated xCT expression. Tan IIA caused decreased intracellular glutathione (GSH) level and cysteine level and increased intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) level. p53 knockdown attenuated Tan IIA-induced lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis. Tan IIA also induced lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis in BGC-823 xenograft model, and the anti-cancer effect of Tan IIA was attenuated by Fer-1 in vivo. Therefore, Tan IIA could suppress the proliferation of gastric cancer via inducing p53 upregulation-mediated ferroptosis. Our study have identified a novel mechanism of Tan IIA against gastric cancer, and might provide a critical insight into the application of Tan IIA in gastric cancer intervention.
Iron is essential for functioning of cells and of the body as a whole. Perls staining allows the histopathological identification of iron deposits. By classifying hepatic siderosis as parenchymal, mesenchymal or mixed, it may guide the search for its etiology. HFE1 hemochromatosis is the most common siderosis. Its diagnosis is currently based on genetic analysis. Its expressivity being variable and its penetrance incomplete, the demonstration of hepatic siderosis may represent a mode of discovery.
BACKGROUND: Chondrocyte ferroptosis plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis (OA), regulated by the SLC7A11/GPX4 signaling pathway. Icariin (ICA), a flavonoid glycoside, exhibits strong anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities. This study investigated whether ICA could modulate the SLC7A11/GPX4 signaling to inhibit chondrocyte ferroptosis and alleviate OA. PURPOSE: The objective was to explore the impact of ICA on chondrocyte ferroptosis in OA and its modulation of the SLC7A11/GPX4 signaling pathway. METHODS: The anti-ferroptosis effects of ICA were evaluated in an interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta)-treated SW1353 cell model, using Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) and Erastin (Era) as ferroptosis inhibitor and inducer, respectively, along with GPX4 knockdown via lentivirus-based shRNA. Additionally, the therapeutic efficacy of ICA on OA-related articular cartilage damage was assessed in rats through histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC). RESULTS: IL-1beta treatment upregulated the expression of OA-associated matrix metalloproteinases (MMP3 and MMP1), a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS-5), and increased intracellular ROS, lipid ROS, and MDA levels while downregulating collagen II and SOX9 expression in SW1353 cells. ICA treatment countered the IL-1beta-induced upregulation of MMPs and ADAMTS-5, restored collagen II and SOX9 expression, and reduced intracellular ROS, lipid ROS, and MDA levels. Furthermore, IL-1beta upregulated P53 but downregulated SLC7A11 and GPX4 expression in SW1353 cells, effects that were mitigated by ICA or Fer-1 treatment. Significantly, ICA also alleviated Era-induced ferroptosis, whereas it had no effect on GPX4-silenced SW1353 cells. In vivo, ICA treatment reduced articular cartilage damage in OA rats by partially restoring collagen II and GPX4 expression, inhibiting cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation and chondrocyte ferroptosis. CONCLUSION: ICA treatment mitigated chondrocyte ferroptosis and articular cartilage damage by enhancing the SLC7A11/GPX4 signaling, suggesting its potential as a therapeutic agent for OA interventions.
The present study aimed to evaluate the role and mechanism of ferrostatin‑1 (Fer‑1) in oxalate (Ox)‑induced renal tubular epithelial cell injury, fibrosis, and calcium oxalate (CaOx) stone formation. A CaOx model in mice kidneys was established via intraperitoneal injection of 80 mg/kg glyoxylic acid for 14 days. The mice were randomly divided into three groups (n=6), namely, the control (Con), the CaOx group, and the CaOx + Fer‑1 group. Cultured human renal tubular epithelial cells (HK‑2 cells) were randomly divided into three groups (n=3), namely, the control (Con), the Ox group, and the Ox + Fer‑1 group. The levels of heme oxygenase 1 (HO‑1), superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2), glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), and solute carrier family 7 member 11 (SLC7A11) were assessed by immunofluorescence and western blot analysis. Renal tubular injury and apoptosis were evaluated by H&E and TUNEL staining. Kidney interstitial fibrosis was evaluated by Masson and Sirius red staining, and the levels of E‑cadherin, vimentin and alpha‑SMA were detected by immunofluorescence or western blot analysis. Mitochondrial structure was observed using a transmission electron microscope. The levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were determined by flow cytometry and CaOx stone formation was evaluated by von Kossa staining. The results revealed that in comparison with the Con group, mitochondrial injury under glyoxylic acid treatment was observed by TEM. The expression of GPX4 and SLC7A11 in the CaOx and Ox groups was downregulated (P<0.05), whereas the expression of HO‑1 and SOD2 was upregulated (P<0.05). Renal tissue damage, apoptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells, and interstitial fibrosis were increased in the CaOx and Ox groups (P<0.05). In comparison with the CaOx or Ox group, the expression of GPX4 and SLC7A11 in the CaOx + Fer‑1 or Ox + Fer‑1 group was upregulated (P<0.05), whereas that of HO‑1 and SOD2 was downregulated (P<0.05). Renal tissue damage, apoptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells and interstitial fibrosis were decreased following Fer‑1 treatment (P<0.05). The ROS level was also decreased following Fer‑1 treatment. Moreover, CaOx stone formation was decreased in the CaOx + Fer‑1 group (P<0.05). In conclusion, Fer‑1 alleviated Ox‑induced renal tubular epithelial cell injury, fibrosis, and CaOx stone formation by inhibiting ferroptosis.
Anti-inflammatory, anti-atherogenic and anti-diabetic properties of adiponectin make this adipokine an attractive target in the metabolism research. Given its biological role, genetic variation in adiponectin affecting its function might consequently play a role in the pathophysiology of various metabolic disorders. In this light, genetic aspects of adiponectin including its gene structure, heritability of serum concentrations and the role of genetic variation have been addressed in multiple genetic studies. Here, we provide a brief summary of adiponectin genetics with focus on gene structure and genetic variation controlling circulating adiponectin levels. We summarize the main findings from genome-wide linkage and association studies that have revealed the major genetic determinants of serum adiponectin. Beside genetic variants in the adiponectin gene, several other genes/loci (ARL15, CDH13, KNG1, FER, ETV5) contributing to the variability in circulating adiponectin have been identified. The majority of these variants are significantly associated with metabolic phenotypes relevant to metabolic diseases (e.g. obesity or type 2 diabetes (T2D)). Considering the protective properties of adiponectin in diseases such as T2D, comprehensive analyses of genetic variants including rare as well as frequent polymorphisms might provide insights on the specific role of adiponectin in the pathophysiology of metabolic diseases.
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter widely conserved from ancient organisms lacking nervous systems through man, and its presence precedes the appearance of nervous systems on both developmental and evolutionary time scales. Serotonin receptor subtypes diversified approximately at the time period during which vertebrates diverged from invertebrates. The biological and clinical importance of serotonin receptors, may benefit from studies on their evolution. Although potentially informative about their pathophysiological functions, reviews on this topic are sparse. Several observations support basic functions mediated by serotonin, both in periphery and central nervous system. In particular, 5-HT(2B) receptors have been implicated in embryonic development, including cell proliferation, survival, and/or differentiation, in either neural crest cell derivatives, myeloid cell lineage, or heart embryogenesis. In this review, we collected existing data about the genomic association between the RPN2 proteasome subunit gene Psmd1 and the 5-HT(2B) receptor gene Htr2b. We discuss about the possibility that, during genome duplications, a single copy of this pair of genes has been conserved, suggesting a strong selective pressure. Many basic physiological functions in which serotonin system is involved could be linked to the early association of these two genes in pre-vertebrates. Their evolutionary association highlights the possibility that the 5-HT(2B) receptor gene, Htr2b, is the common ancestor of 5-HT(2A/2B/2C)-receptor subfamily. Disentangling these possibilities could bring new understanding of the respective importance of these receptors in pathophysiology of serotonin.
Exposure to PM(2.5) is correlated with cardiac remodeling, of which cardiac hypertrophy is one of the main clinical manifestations. Ferroptosis plays an important role in cardiac hypertrophy. However, the potential mechanism of PM(2.5)-induced cardiac hypertrophy through ferroptosis remains unclear. This study aimed to explore the molecular mechanism of cardiac hypertrophy caused by PM(2.5) and the intervention role of MitoQ involved in this process. The results showed that PM(2.5) could induce cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction in mice. Meanwhile, the characteristics of ferroptosis were observed, such as iron homeostasis imbalance, lipid peroxidation, mitochondrial damage and abnormal expression of key molecules. MitoQ treatment could effectively mitigate these alternations. After treating human cardiomyocyte AC16 with PM(2.5), ferroptosis activator (Erastin) and inhibitor (Fer-1), it was found that PM(2.5) could promote ferritinophagy and lead to lipid peroxidation, mitochondrial dysfunction as well as the accumulation of intracellular and mitochondrial labile iron. Subsequently, mitophagy was activated and provided an additional source of labile iron, enhancing the sensitivity of AC16 cells to ferroptosis. Furthermore, Fer-1 alleviated PM(2.5)-induced cytotoxicity and iron overload in the cytoplasm and mitochondria of AC16 cells. It was worth noting that during the process of PM(2.5) caused ferroptosis, abnormal iron metabolism mediated the activation of ferritinophagy and mitophagy in a temporal order. In addition, NCOA4 knockdown reversed the iron homeostasis imbalance and lipid peroxidation caused by PM(2.5), thereby alleviating ferroptosis. In summary, our study found that iron homeostasis imbalance-mediated the crosstalk of ferritinophagy and mitophagy played an important role in PM(2.5)-induced ferroptosis and cardiac hypertrophy.
Iron is an essential nutrient to life. However, the ability of iron to cycle between the oxidized and reduced forms contributes to the formation of reactive oxygen species. The generation of free radicals leads to oxidative stress and the initiation of signaling pathways involved in cell survival or cell death. The iron homeostasis is very carefully regulated and dysregulation of iron metabolism contributes to various human pathologies. The work carried out in recent years has revealed new cellular processes and mechanisms like ferritinophagy, that deepen our understanding of iron homeostasis. Ferritinophagy is a form of selective macroautophagy whereby ferritin, an iron storage protein, is degraded in the lysosome. Here, we describe iron homeostasis and review recent discoveries regarding the mechanism of ferritinophagy and its relationship to a new form of cell-death iron-dependent, the ferroptosis.
Fer and its sperm and cancer specific variant, FerT, are non-receptor tyrosine kinases which play roles in cancer progression and metastasis. Recent studies have shed light on the regulatory role of these kinases in ensuring proper sperm function. Comparison of the regulatory cascades in which Fer and FerT are engaged in sperm and cancer cells presents an interesting picture, in which similar regulatory interactions of these enzymes are integrated in a similar or different regulatory context in the two cell types. These diverse compositions extend from the involvement of Fer in modulation of actin cytoskeleton integrity and function, to the unique regulatory interactions of Fer with PARP-1 and the PP1 phosphatase. Furthermore, recent findings link the metabolic regulatory roles of Fer and FerT in sperm and cancer cells. In the current review, we discuss the above detailed aspects, which portray Fer and FerT as new regulatory links between sperm and malignant cells. This perspective view can endow us with new analytical and research tools that will deepen our understanding of the regulatory trajectories and networks that govern these two multi-layered systems.
Neuronal Cl(-) homeostasis is regulated by the activity of two cation chloride co-transporters (CCCs), the K(+)-Cl(-) cotransporter KCC2 and the Na(+)-K(+)-Cl(-) cotransporter NKCC1, which are primarily extruding and importing chloride in neurons, respectively. Several neurological and psychiatric disorders including epilepsy, neuropathic pain, schizophrenia and autism are associated with altered neuronal chloride (Cl(-)) homeostasis. A current view is that the accumulation of intracellular Cl(-) in neurons as a result of KCC2 down-regulation and/or NKCC1 up-regulation may weaken inhibitory GABA signaling and thereby promote the development of pathological activities. CCC activity is determined mainly by their level of expression in the plasma membrane. Furthermore, CCCs undergo "diffusion-trapping" in the membrane, a mechanism that is rapidly adjusted by activity-dependent post-translational modifications i.e. phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of key serine and threonine residues. This represents probably the most rapid cellular mechanism for adapting CCC function to changes in neuronal activity. Therefore, interfering with these mechanisms may help restoring Cl(-) homeostasis and inhibition under pathological conditions. This article is part of the special issue entitled 'Mobility and trafficking of neuronal membrane proteins'.
Normal iron metabolism is highly regulated and takes a crucial role in the maintenance of cell functions. The plasmatic iron bioavailability control is a key step of this metabolism which involves numerous proteins implicated at various levels, including the digestive iron absorption by enterocytes, and iron release from macrophages. These two phenomenons are modulated in a coordonated fashion by the plasmatic level of hepcidin, a peptide mainly synthetized by the liver, secreted in plasma and modulating the expression of ferroportin, the cellular exporter of iron, and thus the iron egress. Numerous factors are able to modulate the hepcidin expression, including iron status, erythropoietic activity, inflammation and hepatic status which are already identified. Abnormalities occurring in the regulation of hepcidin expression may favour the development of iron metabolism disturbance, including systemic iron overload or relative iron deficiency. The use of hepcidin for diagnostic purpose or as a therapeutic target remains to be determined.
