Free fatty acid receptor 4; Receptor for medium and long-chain free fatty acids (FFAs). Signals via a G(q)/G(11)-coupled pathway. Acts as a receptor for omega- 3 fatty acids and mediates robust anti-inflammatory effects, particularly in macrophages and fat cells. The anti-inflammatory effects involve inhibition of TAK1 through a beta-arrestin 2 (ARRB2)/TAB1-dependent effect, but independent of the G(q)/G(11)- coupled pathway. Mediates potent insulin sensitizing and antidiabetic effects by repressing macrophage-induced tissue inflammation. May mediate the taste of fatty acids. Mediates  [...] 
Fatty acids are metabolized and synthesized as energy substrates during biological responses. Long- and medium-chain fatty acids derived mainly from dietary triglycerides, and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) produced by gut microbial fermentation of the otherwise indigestible dietary fiber, constitute the major sources of free fatty acids (FFAs) in the metabolic network. Recently, increasing evidence indicates that FFAs serve not only as energy sources but also as natural ligands for a group of orphan G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) termed free fatty acid receptors (FFARs), essentially intertwining metabolism and immunity in multiple ways, such as via inflammation regulation and secretion of peptide hormones. To date, several FFARs that are activated by the FFAs of various chain lengths have been identified and characterized. In particular, FFAR1 (GPR40) and FFAR4 (GPR120) are activated by long-chain saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, while FFAR3 (GPR41) and FFAR2 (GPR43) are activated by SCFAs, mainly acetate, butyrate, and propionate. In this review, we discuss the recent reports on the key physiological functions of the FFAR-mediated signaling transduction pathways in the regulation of metabolism and immune responses. We also attempt to reveal future research opportunities for developing therapeutics for metabolic and immune disorders.
Long-chain fatty acids (FAs) are components of plasma membranes and an efficient fuel source and also serve as metabolic regulators through FA signaling mediated by membrane FA receptors. Impaired tissue FA uptake has been linked to major complications of obesity, including insulin resistance, cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes. Fatty acid interactions with a membrane receptor and the initiation of signaling can modify pathways related to nutrient uptake and processing, cell proliferation or differentiation, and secretion of bioactive factors. Here, we review the major membrane receptors involved in FA uptake and FA signaling. We focus on two types of membrane receptors for long-chain FAs: CD36 and the G protein-coupled FA receptors FFAR1 and FFAR4. We describe key signaling pathways and metabolic outcomes for CD36, FFAR1, and FFAR4 and highlight the parallels that provide insight into FA regulation of cell function.
Individual free fatty acids (FAs) play important roles in metabolic homeostasis, many through engagement with more than 40G protein-coupled receptors. Searching for receptors to sense beneficial omega-3 FAs of fish oil enabled the identification of GPR120, which is involved in a spectrum of metabolic diseases. Here, we report six cryo-electron microscopy structures of GPR120 in complex with FA hormones or TUG891 and G(i) or G(iq) trimers. Aromatic residues inside the GPR120 ligand pocket were responsible for recognizing different double-bond positions of these FAs and connect ligand recognition to distinct effector coupling. We also investigated synthetic ligand selectivity and the structural basis of missense single-nucleotide polymorphisms. We reveal how GPR120 differentiates rigid double bonds and flexible single bonds. The knowledge gleaned here may facilitate rational drug design targeting to GPR120.
Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is closely associated with an increased risk of dementia and cognitive impairment, and a complex interaction of genetic and environmental dietary factors may be implicated. Free fatty acid receptor 4 (Ffar4) may bridge the genetic and dietary aspects of MetS development. However, the role of Ffar4 in MetS-related cognitive dysfunction is unclear. In this study, we found that Ffar4 expression is down-regulated in MetS mice and MetS patients with cognitive impairment. Conventional and microglial conditional knockout of Ffar4 exacerbated high-fat diet (HFD)-induced cognitive dysfunction and anxiety, whereas microglial Ffar4 overexpression improved HFD-induced cognitive dysfunction and anxiety. Mechanistically, we found that microglial Ffar4 regulated microglial activation through type I interferon signaling. Microglial depletion and NF-kappaB inhibition partially reversed cognitive dysfunction and anxiety in microglia-specific Ffar4 knockout MetS mice. Together, these findings uncover a previously unappreciated role of Ffar4 in negatively regulating the NF-kappaB-IFN-beta signaling and provide an attractive therapeutic target for delaying MetS-associated cognitive decline.
Increased energy intake can lead to obesity, which increases the risk for the development of diabetes and cancer. Free fatty acids regulate numerous cellular processes, like insulin secretion, inflammation, proliferation, and cell migration. Dysregulation of these cellular functions by increased lipid intake plays a significant role in the development of diseases like diabetes and cancer. Free fatty acid receptors 1 and 4 (FFAR1 and FFAR4) are two free fatty acid receptors under increasing investigation for their roles in diabetes and more recently also cancer. Both receptors bind medium- to long-chain, saturated and omega-3 unsaturated fatty acids. Increasing evidence shows that enhanced FFAR1 and FFAR4 signaling reduces diabetes symptoms but enhances tumor growth and migration of various cancer types like melanoma and prostate cancer. This review gives an overview of the role of FFAR1 and FFAR4 in diabetes and cancer and discusses their potential to function as targets for treatment.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: G protein-coupled receptor (GPR) 120 has been implicated in regulating metabolic syndromes with anti-inflammatory function. However, the role of GPR120 in intestinal inflammation is unknown. Here, we investigated whether and how GPR120 regulates CD4(+) T cell function to inhibit colitis development. METHODS: Dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis model, Citrobacter rodentium infection model, and CD4(+) T cell adoptive transfer model were used to analyze the role of GPR120 in regulating colitis development. The effect of GPR120 on CD4(+) T cell functions was analyzed by RNA sequencing, flow cytometry, and Seahorse metabolic assays. Mice were administered GPR120 agonist for investigating the potential of GPR120 agonist in preventing and treating colitis. RESULTS: Deficiency of GPR120 in CD4(+) T cells resulted in more severe colitis in mice upon dextran sodium sulfate insult and enteric infection. Transfer of GPR120-deficient CD4(+)CD45Rb(hi) T cells induced more severe colitis in Rag(-/-) mice with lower intestinal interleukin (IL) 10(+)CD4(+) T cells. Treatment with the GPR120 agonist CpdA promoted CD4(+) T cell production of IL10 by up-regulating Blimp1 and enhancing glycolysis, which was regulated by mTOR. GPR120 agonist-treated wild-type, but not IL10-deficient and Blimp1-deficient, T helper 1 cells induced less severe colitis. Furthermore, oral administration of GPR120 agonist protected mice from intestinal inflammation in both prevention and treatment schemes. Gpr120 expression was positively correlated with Il10 expression in the human colonic mucosa, including patients with inflammatory bowel diseases. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show the role of GPR120 in regulating intestinal CD4(+) T cell production of IL10 to inhibit colitis development, which identifies GPR120 as a potential therapeutic target for treating inflammatory bowel diseases.
Inflammatory bowel disease, whose major forms are Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, is characterized by chronic inflammation of the gut due to the loss of tolerance toward antigens normally contained in the gut lumen. G protein-coupled receptor (GPR) 120 has gained considerable attention as a potential therapeutic target for metabolic disorders due to its implication in the production of the incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide 1 and the secretion of cholecystokinin. Recent studies have also highlighted the role of GPR120 in regulating immune system activity and inflammation. GPR120, expressed by intestinal epithelial cells, proinflammatory macrophages, enteroendocrine L cells, and CD4+ T cells, suppresses proinflammatory and enhances anti-inflammatory cytokine production, suggesting that GPR120 might have a pivotal role in intestinal inflammation and represent a possible therapeutic target in inflammatory bowel disease. This narrative review aims at summarizing the role of GPR120 in the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis through the analysis of the most recent studies.
Omega-3 fatty acids (omega-3 FAs) have potential anti-inflammatory activity in a variety of inflammatory human diseases, but the mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we show that stimulation of macrophages with omega-3 FAs, including eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and other family members, abolished NLRP3 inflammasome activation and inhibited subsequent caspase-1 activation and IL-1beta secretion. In addition, G protein-coupled receptor 120 (GPR120) and GPR40 and their downstream scaffold protein beta-arrestin-2 were shown to be involved in inflammasome inhibition induced by omega-3 FAs. Importantly, omega-3 FAs also prevented NLRP3 inflammasome-dependent inflammation and metabolic disorder in a high-fat-diet-induced type 2 diabetes model. Our results reveal a mechanism through which omega-3 FAs repress inflammation and prevent inflammation-driven diseases and suggest the potential clinical use of omega-3 FAs in gout, autoinflammatory syndromes, or other NLRP3 inflammasome-driven inflammatory diseases.
Increased adipose tissue lipogenesis is associated with enhanced insulin sensitivity. Mice overexpressing the Glut4 glucose transporter in adipocytes have elevated lipogenesis and increased glucose tolerance despite being obese with elevated circulating fatty acids. Lipidomic analysis of adipose tissue revealed the existence of branched fatty acid esters of hydroxy fatty acids (FAHFAs) that were elevated 16- to 18-fold in these mice. FAHFA isomers differ by the branched ester position on the hydroxy fatty acid (e.g., palmitic-acid-9-hydroxy-stearic-acid, 9-PAHSA). PAHSAs are synthesized in vivo and regulated by fasting and high-fat feeding. PAHSA levels correlate highly with insulin sensitivity and are reduced in adipose tissue and serum of insulin-resistant humans. PAHSA administration in mice lowers ambient glycemia and improves glucose tolerance while stimulating GLP-1 and insulin secretion. PAHSAs also reduce adipose tissue inflammation. In adipocytes, PAHSAs signal through GPR120 to enhance insulin-stimulated glucose uptake. Thus, FAHFAs are endogenous lipids with the potential to treat type 2 diabetes.
Omega-3 fatty acids (omega-3 FAs), DHA and EPA, exert anti-inflammatory effects, but the mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, we show that the G protein-coupled receptor 120 (GPR120) functions as an omega-3 FA receptor/sensor. Stimulation of GPR120 with omega-3 FAs or a chemical agonist causes broad anti-inflammatory effects in monocytic RAW 264.7 cells and in primary intraperitoneal macrophages. All of these effects are abrogated by GPR120 knockdown. Since chronic macrophage-mediated tissue inflammation is a key mechanism for insulin resistance in obesity, we fed obese WT and GPR120 knockout mice a high-fat diet with or without omega-3 FA supplementation. The omega-3 FA treatment inhibited inflammation and enhanced systemic insulin sensitivity in WT mice, but was without effect in GPR120 knockout mice. In conclusion, GPR120 is a functional omega-3 FA receptor/sensor and mediates potent insulin sensitizing and antidiabetic effects in vivo by repressing macrophage-induced tissue inflammation.
Enhanced osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast activity contribute to the development of osteoporosis, which is characterized by increased bone resorption and inadequate bone formation. As novel antiosteoporotic therapeutics are needed, understanding the genetic regulation of human osteoclastogenesis could help identify potential treatment targets. This study aimed to provide an overview of transcriptional reprogramming during human osteoclast differentiation. Osteoclasts were differentiated from CD14(+) monocytes from eight female donors. RNA sequencing during differentiation revealed 8 980 differentially expressed genes grouped into eight temporal patterns conserved across donors. These patterns revealed distinct molecular functions associated with postmenopausal osteoporosis susceptibility genes based on RNA from iliac crest biopsies and bone mineral density SNPs. Network analyses revealed mutual dependencies between temporal expression patterns and provided insight into subtype-specific transcriptional networks. The donor-specific expression patterns revealed genes at the monocyte stage, such as filamin B (FLNB) and oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor 1 (OLR1, encoding LOX-1), that are predictive of the resorptive activity of mature osteoclasts. The expression of differentially expressed G-protein coupled receptors was strong during osteoclast differentiation, and these receptors are associated with bone mineral density SNPs, suggesting that they play a pivotal role in osteoclast differentiation and activity. The regulatory effects of three differentially expressed G-protein coupled receptors were exemplified by in vitro pharmacological modulation of complement 5 A receptor 1 (C5AR1), somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2), and free fatty acid receptor 4 (FFAR4/GPR120). Activating C5AR1 enhanced osteoclast formation, while activating SSTR2 decreased the resorptive activity of mature osteoclasts, and activating FFAR4 decreased both the number and resorptive activity of mature osteoclasts. In conclusion, we report the occurrence of transcriptional reprogramming during human osteoclast differentiation and identified SSTR2 and FFAR4 as antiresorptive G-protein coupled receptors and FLNB and LOX-1 as potential molecular markers of osteoclast activity. These data can help future investigations identify molecular regulators of osteoclast differentiation and activity and provide the basis for novel antiosteoporotic targets.
Free fatty acids (FFAs) are implicated in the pathogenesis of metabolic diseases that includes obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and cardiovascular disease (CVD). FFAs serve as ligands for free fatty acid receptors (FFARs) that belong to the family of rhodopsin-like G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and are expressed throughout the body to maintain energy homeostasis under changing nutritional conditions. Free fatty acid receptor 4 (FFAR4), also known as G protein-coupled receptor 120, is a long-chain fatty acid receptor highly expressed in adipocytes, endothelial cells, and macrophages. Activation of FFAR4 helps maintain metabolic homeostasis by regulating adipogenesis, insulin sensitivity, and inflammation. Furthermore, dysfunction of FFAR4 is associated with insulin resistance, obesity, and eccentric remodeling in both humans and mice, making FFAR4 an attractive therapeutic target for treating or preventing metabolic diseases. While much of the previous literature on FFAR4 has focused on its role in obesity and diabetes, recent studies have demonstrated that FFAR4 may also play an important role in the development of atherosclerosis and CVD. Most notably, FFAR4 activation reduces monocyte-endothelial cell interaction, enhances cholesterol efflux from macrophages, reduces lesion size in atherogenic mouse models, and stimulates oxylipin production in myocytes that functions in a feed-forward cardioprotective mechanism. This review will focus on the role of FFAR4 in metabolic diseases and highlights an underappreciated role of FFAR4 in the development of atherosclerosis and CVD.
Increasing experimental and clinical evidence points toward a very important role for the gut microbiome and its associated metabolism in human health and disease, including in cardiovascular disorders. Free fatty acids (FFAs) are metabolically produced and utilized as energy substrates during almost every biological process in the human body. Contrary to long- and medium-chain FFAs, which are mainly synthesized from dietary triglycerides, short-chain FFAs (SCFAs) derive from the gut microbiota-mediated fermentation of indigestible dietary fiber. Originally thought to serve only as energy sources, FFAs are now known to act as ligands for a specific group of cell surface receptors called FFA receptors (FFARs), thereby inducing intracellular signaling to exert a variety of cellular and tissue effects. All FFARs are G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that play integral roles in the regulation of metabolism, immunity, inflammation, hormone/neurotransmitter secretion, etc. Four different FFAR types are known to date, with FFAR1 (formerly known as GPR40) and FFAR4 (formerly known as GPR120) mediating long- and medium-chain FFA actions, while FFAR3 (formerly GPR41) and FFAR2 (formerly GPR43) are essentially the SCFA receptors (SCFARs), responding to all SCFAs, including acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid. As with various other organ systems/tissues, the important roles the SCFARs (FFAR2 and FFAR3) play in physiology and in various disorders of the cardiovascular system have been revealed over the last fifteen years. In this review, we discuss the cardiovascular implications of some key (patho)physiological functions of SCFAR signaling pathways, particularly those regulating the neurohormonal control of circulation and adipose tissue homeostasis. Wherever appropriate, we also highlight the potential of these receptors as therapeutic targets for cardiovascular disorders.
Heart failure (HF) characterized by cardiac remodeling is a condition in which inflammation and fibrosis play a key role. Dietary supplementation with n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) seems to produce good results. In fact, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) have anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties and different cardioprotective mechanisms. In particular, following their interaction with the nuclear factor erythropoietin 2 related factor 2 (NRF2), the free fatty acid receptor 4 (Ffar4) receptor, or the G-protein coupled receptor 120 (GPR120) fibroblast receptors, they inhibit cardiac fibrosis and protect the heart from HF onset. Furthermore, n-3 PUFAs increase the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), reduce global longitudinal deformation, E/e ratio (early ventricular filling and early mitral annulus velocity), soluble interleukin-1 receptor-like 1 (sST2) and high-sensitive C Reactive protein (hsCRP) levels, and increase flow-mediated dilation. Moreover, lower levels of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and serum norepinephrine (sNE) are reported and have a positive effect on cardiac hemodynamics. In addition, they reduce cardiac remodeling and inflammation by protecting patients from HF onset after myocardial infarction (MI). The positive effects of PUFA supplementation are associated with treatment duration and a daily dosage of 1-2 g. Therefore, both the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) define dietary supplementation with n-3 PUFAs as an effective therapy for reducing the risk of hospitalization and death in HF patients. In this review, we seek to highlight the most recent studies related to the effect of PUFA supplementation in HF. For that purpose, a PubMed literature survey was conducted with a focus on various in vitro and in vivo studies and clinical trials from 2015 to 2021.
BACKGROUND: Airway remodeling is associated with severity and treatment insensitivity in asthma. This study aimed to investigate the effects of G protein-coupled receptor 120 (GPR120) stimulation on alleviating allergic inflammation and remodeling of airway epithelium. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Ovalbumin (OVA)-challenged BALB/c mice and type-2-cytokine (IL-4 and IL-13)-exposed 16HBE human bronchial epithelial cells were treated with GSK137647A, a selective GPR120 agonist. Markers of allergic inflammation and airway remodeling were determined. RESULTS: GSK137647A attenuated inflammation and mucus secretion in airway epithelium of OVA-challenged mice. Stimulation of GPR120 in 16HBE suppressed expression of asthma-associated cytokines and cytokine-induced expression of pathogenic mucin-MUC5AC. These effects were abolished by co-treatment with AH7614, a GPR120 antagonist. Moreover, GPR120 stimulation in 16HBE cells reduced expression of fibrotic markers including fibronectin protein and ACTA2 mRNA and inhibited epithelial barrier leakage induced by type-2 inflammation via rescuing expression of zonula occludens-1 protein. Furthermore, GPR120 stimulation prevented the cytokine-induced airway epithelial remodeling via suppression of STAT6 and Akt phosphorylation. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that GPR120 activation alleviates allergic inflammation and remodeling of airway epithelium partly through inhibition of STAT6 and Akt. GPR120 may represent a novel therapeutic target for diseases associated with remodeling of airway epithelium, including asthma.
GPR120 receptor functions as a receptor for omega-3 fatty acid, involving regulating the secretion of gastrointestinal peptide hormone, adipogenesis, adipogenic differentiation and anti-inflammatory process and the like in the aspect of biological functions. In view that the dysfunction of GPR120 receptor is closely correlated with metabolic disorders, GPR120 may act as a novel potential therapeutic target for the treatment of obesity, insulin resistance, Type 2 diabetes and so on. Therefore, mounting scientists devote themselves to probing the molecular mechanism of the biological function of GPR120 receptor and their ligands for the treatment of impaired metabolic health. Herein, we summarize the mechanisms of signal transduction through GPR120 receptor, and discovery and development of GPR120 agonists thereof.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is a gut hormone secreted from the upper small intestine, which plays an important physiological role in the control of glucose metabolism through its incretin action to enhance glucose-dependent insulin secretion. GIP has also been implicated in postprandial lipid homeostasis. GIP is secreted from enteroendocrine K-cells residing in the intestinal epithelium. K-cells sense a variety of components found in the gut lumen following food consumption, resulting in an increase in plasma GIP signal dependent on the nature and quantity of ingested nutrients. We review the evidence for an important role of sodium-coupled glucose uptake through SGLT1 for carbohydrate sensing, of free-fatty acid receptors FFAR1/FFAR4 and the monoacyl-glycerol sensing receptor GPR119 for lipid detection, of the calcium-sensing receptor CASR and GPR142 for protein sensing, and additional modulation by neurotransmitters such as somatostatin and galanin. These pathways have been identified through combinations of in vivo, in vitro and molecular approaches.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review explores the recent literature on the role of CD36 in the taste of fat, eating behavior and obesity risk in rodents and humans. RECENT FINDINGS: During the last decade, evidence was accumulated supporting the existence of a taste of fat responsible for the spontaneous preference for lipid-rich foods. Surprisingly, the multifunctional membrane-associated protein CD36 appears to play a significant role in this system in rodents. Recently, another plausible gustatory lipid sensor, the GPR120, was also identified in mice, revealing that the mechanism involved in oral fat detection is more complex than initially expected. Interestingly, lingual CD36 and GPR120 display a differential regulation during a meal suggesting complementary functions. CD36 and GPR120 have also been identified in human taste buds. Implication of lingual CD36 in the chemoreception of fat in foods and consequences on eating behavior and obesity risk is actively studied in various species. SUMMARY: Recent studies suggest that lingual CD36 is involved in the attraction for fatty foods in rodents. The fact that it is also expressed in taste buds in humans raises the possibility of a universal function as gustatory lipid sensor able to affect eating behavior.
Free Fatty Acid receptor 4 (FFA4), also known as GPR120, is a G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) responsive to long-chain fatty acids that is attracting considerable attention as a potential novel therapeutic target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Although no clinical studies have yet been initiated to assess efficacy in this indication, a significant number of primary publications and patents have highlighted the ability of agonists with potency at FFA4 to improve glucose disposition and enhance insulin sensitivity in animal models. However, the distribution pattern of the receptor suggests that targeting FFA4 may also be useful in other conditions, ranging from cancer to lung function. Here, we discuss and contextualise the basis for these ideas and the results to support these conclusions.
Free fatty acid receptor 4 (FFAR4)/GPR120 comprises a receptor for medium- and long-chain fatty acids. We previously identified phytosphingosine (PHS) as a novel ligand of FFAR4. Although many natural FFAR4 ligands have carboxyl groups, PHS does not, thus suggesting that binding to FFAR4 is driven by a completely different mechanism than other natural ligands such as alpha-linolenic acid (ALA). To test this hypothesis, we performed docking simulation analysis using a FFAR4 homology model based on a protein model derived from the crystal structure of activated turkey beta-1 adrenoceptor. The docking simulation revealed that the probable hydrogen bonds to FFAR4 differ between various ligands. In particular, binding was predicted between R264 of the FFAR4 and the oxygen of the carboxylate group in ALA, as well as between E249 of the FFAR4 and the oxygen of the hydroxy group at the C4-position in PHS. Alanine substitution at E249 (E249A) dramatically reduced PHS-induced FFAR4 activation but demonstrated a weaker effect on ALA-induced FFAR4 activation. Kinetic analysis and K(m) values clearly demonstrated that the E249A substitution resulted in reduced affinity for PHS but not for ALA. Additionally, we observed that sphingosine, lacking a hydroxyl group at C4-position, could not activate FFAR4. Our data show that E249 of the FFAR4 receptor is crucial for binding to the hydroxy group at the C4-position in PHS, and this is a completely different molecular mechanism of binding from ALA. Because GPR120 agonists have attracted attention as treatments for type 2 diabetes, our findings may provide new insights into their development.
