Tyrosine-protein kinase SYK; Non-receptor tyrosine kinase which mediates signal transduction downstream of a variety of transmembrane receptors including classical immunoreceptors like the B-cell receptor (BCR). Regulates several biological processes including innate and adaptive immunity, cell adhesion, osteoclast maturation, platelet activation and vascular development. Assembles into signaling complexes with activated receptors at the plasma membrane via interaction between its SH2 domains and the receptor tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAM domains. The association with the receptor can a [...] 
Over half of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cases diagnosed worldwide are in China(1-3). However, whole-genome analysis of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-associated HCC in Chinese individuals is limited(4-8), with current analyses of HCC mainly from non-HBV-enriched populations(9,10). Here we initiated the Chinese Liver Cancer Atlas (CLCA) project and performed deep whole-genome sequencing (average depth, 120x) of 494 HCC tumours. We identified 6 coding and 28 non-coding previously undescribed driver candidates. Five previously undescribed mutational signatures were found, including aristolochic-acid-associated indel and doublet base signatures, and a single-base-substitution signature that we termed SBS_H8. Pentanucleotide context analysis and experimental validation confirmed that SBS_H8 was distinct to the aristolochic-acid-associated SBS22. Notably, HBV integrations could take the form of extrachromosomal circular DNA, resulting in elevated copy numbers and gene expression. Our high-depth data also enabled us to characterize subclonal clustered alterations, including chromothripsis, chromoplexy and kataegis, suggesting that these catastrophic events could also occur in late stages of hepatocarcinogenesis. Pathway analysis of all classes of alterations further linked non-coding mutations to dysregulation of liver metabolism. Finally, we performed in vitro and in vivo assays to show that fibrinogen alpha chain (FGA), determined as both a candidate coding and non-coding driver, regulates HCC progression and metastasis. Our CLCA study depicts a detailed genomic landscape and evolutionary history of HCC in Chinese individuals, providing important clinical implications.
The plasma protein fibrinogen is encoded by 3 structural genes (FGA, FGB, and FGG) that are transcribed to mRNA, spliced, and translated to 3 polypeptide chains (Aalpha, Bbeta, and gamma, respectively). These chains are targeted for secretion, decorated with post-translational modifications, and assembled into a hexameric "dimer of trimers" (AalphaBbetagamma)(2). Fully assembled fibrinogen is secreted into the blood as a 340 kDa glycoprotein. Fibrinogen is one of the most prevalent coagulation proteins in blood, and its expression is induced by inflammatory cytokines, wherein circulating fibrinogen levels may increase up to 3-fold during acute inflammatory events. Abnormal levels of circulating fibrinogen are associated with bleeding and thrombotic disorders, as well as several inflammatory diseases. Notably, therapeutic strategies to modulate fibrinogen levels have shown promise in experimental models of disease. Herein, we review pathways mediating fibrinogen synthesis, from gene expression to secretion. Knowledge of these mechanisms may lead to the identification of biomarkers and new therapeutic targets to modulate fibrinogen in health and disease.
Fibrinogen is a 340-kDa plasma glycoprotein constituted by two sets of symmetrical trimers, each formed by the Aalpha, Bbeta, and gamma chains (respectively coded by the FGA, FGB, and FGG genes). Quantitative fibrinogen deficiencies (hypofibrinogenemia, afibrinogenemia) are rare congenital disorders characterized by low or unmeasurable plasma fibrinogen antigen levels. Their genetic basis is represented by mutations within the fibrinogen genes. To date, only eight mutations, all affecting a small region of the fibrinogen gamma chain, have been reported to cause hereditary hypofibrinogenemia with hepatic storage (HHHS), a disorder characterized by protein aggregation in the endoplasmic reticulum, hypofibrinogenemia, and liver disease of variable severity. Here, we will briefly review the clinic characteristics of HHHS patients and the histological feature of their hepatic inclusions, and we will focus on the molecular genetic basis of this peculiar type of coagulopathy.
The Aalpha, Bbeta and gamma polypeptide chains of fibrinogen are encoded by a three gene cluster on human chromosome four. The fibrinogen genes (FGB-FGA-FGG) are expressed almost exclusively in hepatocytes where their output is coordinated to ensure a sufficient mRNA pool for each chain and maintain an abundant plasma fibrinogen protein level. Fibrinogen gene expression is controlled by the activity of proximal promoters which contain binding sites for hepatocyte transcription factors, including proteins which influence fibrinogen transcription in response to acute-phase inflammatory stimuli. The fibrinogen gene cluster also contains cis regulatory elements; enhancer sequences with liver activities identified by sequence conservation and functional genomics. While the transcriptional control of this gene cluster is fascinating biology, the medical impetus to understand fibrinogen gene regulation stems from the association of cardiovascular disease risk with high level circulating fibrinogen. In the general population this level varies from about 1.5 to 3.5 g/l. This variation between individuals is influenced by genotype, suggesting there are genetic variants contributing to fibrinogen levels which reside in fibrinogen regulatory loci. A complete picture of how fibrinogen genes are regulated will therefore point towards novel sources of regulatory variants. In this review we discuss regulation of the fibrinogen genes from proximal promoters and enhancers, the influence of acute-phase stimulation, post-transcriptional regulation by miRNAs and functional regulatory variants identified in genetic studies. Finally, we discuss the fibrinogen locus in light of recent advances in understanding chromosomal architecture and suggest future directions for researching the mechanisms that control fibrinogen expression.
OBJECTIVE: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is difficult to diagnose at resectable stage. Recent studies have suggested that extracellular vesicles (EVs) contain long RNAs. The aim of this study was to develop a diagnostic (d-)signature for the detection of PDAC based on EV long RNA (exLR) profiling. DESIGN: We conducted a case-control study with 501 participants, including 284 patients with PDAC, 100 patients with chronic pancreatitis (CP) and 117 healthy subjects. The exLR profile of plasma samples was analysed by exLR sequencing. The d-signature was identified using a support vector machine algorithm and a training cohort (n=188) and was validated using an internal validation cohort (n=135) and an external validation cohort (n=178). RESULTS: We developed a d-signature that comprised eight exLRs, including FGA, KRT19, HIST1H2BK, ITIH2, MARCH2, CLDN1, MAL2 and TIMP1, for PDAC detection. The d-signature showed high accuracy, with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.960, 0.950 and 0.936 in the training, internal validation and external validation cohort, respectively. The d-signature was able to identify resectable stage I/II cancer with an AUC of 0.949 in the combined three cohorts. In addition, the d-signature showed superior performance to carbohydrate antigen 19-9 in distinguishing PDAC from CP (AUC 0.931 vs 0.873, p=0.028). CONCLUSION: This study is the first to characterise the plasma exLR profile in PDAC and to report an exLR signature for the detection of pancreatic cancer. This signature may improve the prognosis of patients who would have otherwise missed the curative treatment window.
Fibrinogen is an important plasma protein composed of three polypeptide chains, fibrinogen alpha (FGA), beta, and gamma. Apart from being an inflammation regulator, fibrinogen also plays a role in tumor progression. Liver cancer usually has a poor prognosis, with chronic hepatitis being the main cause of liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). FGA serves as a serological marker for chronic hepatitis, but its relationship with liver cancer remains unclear. Through bioinformatics analysis and agarose gel electrophoresis, we found that FGA was downregulated in HCC and correlated with tumor stage and grade. By constructing both FGA gene knockout and overexpression cell models, we demonstrated that overexpressing FGA inhibited migration and invasion of liver cancer cells through Transwell migration/invasion and wound healing assays. Western blotting experiments showed that FGA overexpression increased the expression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition marker protein E-cadherin while decreasing N-cadherin and slug protein expression. In addition, FGA knockout activated the PI3K/AKT pathway. In a mouse model of metastatic tumors, overexpression of FGA restricted the spread of tumor cells. In conclusion, FGA exhibits an inhibitory effect on tumor metastasis, providing new insights for the treatment of advanced HCC metastatic tumors.
Introduction: Systemic amyloidosis is a diverse group of diseases that, although rare, pose a serious health issue and can lead to organ failure and death. Amyloid typing is essential in determining the causative protein and initiating proper treatment. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics is currently the most sensitive and accurate means of typing amyloid. Areas covered: Amyloidosis can be systemic or localized, acquired or hereditary, and can affect any organ or tissue. Diagnosis requires biopsy, histological analysis, and typing of the causative protein to determine treatment. The kidneys are the most commonly affected organ in systemic disease. Fibrinogen alpha chain amyloidosis (AFib) is the most prevalent form of hereditary renal amyloidosis. Select mutations in the fibrinogen Aalpha (FGA) gene lead to AFib. Expert commentary: Mass spectrometry is currently the most specific and sensitive method for amyloid typing. Identification of the mutated fibrinogen alpha chain can be difficult in the case of 'private' frameshift mutations, which dramatically change the sequences of the expressed fibrinogen alpha chain. A combination of expert pathologist review, mass spectrometry, and gene sequencing can allow for confident diagnosis and determination of the fibrinogen alpha chain mutated sequence.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to identify novel biomarkers for diagnosis and prediction of active eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) through data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis. METHODS: Plasma samples from 11 EGPA patients and 10 healthy controls (HCs) were analysed through DIA to identify potential biomarkers. The results were validated in 32 EGPA patients, 24 disease controls (DCs), and 20 HCs using ELISA. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to assess the diagnostic value of candidate biomarkers. RESULTS: Thirty-five differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) (24 upregulated and 11 downregulated) were screened between the EGPA and HC groups. Five proteins, including serine proteinase inhibitor A3 (SERPINA3), alpha-fibrinogen (FGA), alpha-1 acid glycoprotein 1(AGP1), inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H3 (ITIH3), and serum amyloid A1 (SAA1), were significantly upregulated in EGPA compared with HCs. Apart from SAA1, all proteins were also higher in EGPA patients compared with DCs. Furthermore, a panel of SERPINA3 and SAA1 exhibited potential diagnostic value for EGPA, with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.953, while a panel of SERPINA3, FGA, AGP1 and ITIH3 showed good discriminative power for differentiating EGPA from DCs, with an AUC of 0.926. Moreover, SERPINA3, FGA and AGP levels were significantly higher in active EGPA and correlated well with disease activity. A combination of SERPINA3 and AGP1 exhibited an excellent AUC of 0.918 for disease activity assessment. CONCLUSION: SERPINA3, FGA, AGP1, ITIH3 and SAA1 were identified as potential biomarkers for EGPA diagnosis and disease activity assessment. Among them, as a single biomarker, SERPINA3 had the best diagnostic performance.
Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a potentially permanent movement disorder resulting from chronic use of dopamine receptor blocking agents (DRBA). Identified risk factors include the type of antipsychotic agent, being greater for those of first generation antipsychotics (FGA), the duration of illness and cumulative dose of DRBA and advanced age. Female sex and African and Caucasian ethnicity are additional potential risk factors. Because only a subset of people taking DRBA's develops TD, genetics may play a role. Susceptibility gene candidates include those involved in DRBA metabolism and the targets or receptors of DRBA's. Although met with conflicting data, the following genes may be involved with TD development: the cytochrome P450 gene CYP2D6, involved with metabolism of most antipsychotics, Dopamine D2 and D3 receptor genes, serotonin 2A and 2C receptor genes, vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT 2) gene, involved with intracellular neurotransmitter packaging, and the manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) gene, an antioxidant enzyme. Heparan sulfate proteoglycan 2 (HSPG 2) gene is another potential gene involved with development of TD. The pathogenesis of TD is unknown, however there are three main theories proposed: dopamine receptor supersensitivity resulting from chronic dopamine receptor blockade, oxidative stress and maladaptive synaptic plasticity each of which is discussed further in this article. Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a potentially permanent and disabling adverse effect from certain medications. By definition TD is the insidious onset of rhythmic, repetitive, stereotypic movements of the face, mouth and tongue, often with involvement of the trunk and extremities that occur as a result of dopamine receptor blocking agents (DRBA) [1]. The term tardive refers to the delayed onset of the disorder. The mean prevalence of TD is estimated to be 25.3% in psychiatric patients taking antipsychotics [2]. Compared to the number of people taking these drugs, TD represents a minority. TD is a potentially permanent condition; stopping the offending agent does not always alleviate the condition. Therefore, prevention of TD by avoiding DRBA's if at all possible is ideal. However, there is no apparent way to predict who will develop TD and there are some cases in which DRBA's are necessary for treatment of chronic conditions. As TD has been present since the development of DRBA's, possible risk factors for its development have been studied. Solmi et al. (2018) [3] have written a comprehensive review on this subject.
Reports of Helicobacter pylori (Hp)-naive gastric neoplasm (HpNGN) cases have been rapidly increasing due to the recent increase in the Hp-naive population in Japan. Most HpNGNs exhibit the gastric immunophenotype and a low malignant potential regardless of histological type. Especially, foveolar-type gastric adenoma (FGA) and intestinal-type gastric dysplasia (IGD) rarely progress to invasive carcinoma. FGA is a foveolar epithelial neoplasm that occurs in the fundic gland (oxyntic gland) mucosa and is classified as the flat type or raspberry type (FGA-RA). The flat type is a large, whitish flatly elevated lesion while FGA-RA is a small reddish polyp. Genomically, the flat type is characterized by APC and KRAS gene mutations and FGA-RA by a common single nucleotide variant in the KLF4 gene. This KLF4 single-nucleotide variant reportedly induces gastric foveolar epithelial tumorigenesis and activates both cell proliferation and apoptosis, leading to its slow-growing nature. IGD consists of an intestinalized epithelial dysplasia that develops in the pyloric gland mucosa, characterized as a superficial depressed lesion surrounded by raised mucosa showing a gastritis-like appearance. Immunohistochemically, it exhibits an intestinal or gastrointestinal phenotype and, frequently, p53 overexpression. Thus, IGD shows unique characteristics in HpNGNs and a potential multistep tumorigenic process.
Congenital fibrinogen disorders comprise quantitative disorders defined by a complete absence (afibrinogenemia) or by a decreased level (hypofibrinogenemia) of circulating fibrinogen and qualitative disorders characterized by a discrepancy between the activity and the antigenic levels of fibrinogen (dysfibrinogenemia and hypodysfibrinogenemia). The biological diagnosis is based on a standard haemostasis assessment. All the coagulation tests that depend on the formation of fibrin as the end point are affected; although in dysfibrinogenemia the specificity and sensitivity of routine test depend on reagent and techniques. A genetic exploration permits to confirm the diagnosis and may enhance the prediction of the patient's phenotype. Homozygous or composite heterozygous null mutations are most often responsible for afibrinogenemia while hypofibrinogenemic patients are mainly heterozygous carrier of an afibrinogenemic allele. Heterozygous missense mutations are prevalent in dysfibrinogenemia, with two hot spot localized in exon 2 of the FGA and in the exon 8 of the FGG. The correlation between phenotype and genotype has been identified in some fibrinogen variants, including six mutations clustered in exons 8 and 9 of the FGG leading to hypofibrinogenemia with hepatic inclusions of abnormal fibrinogen aggregates as well as a few mutations associated with an increase risk of thrombotic events. A familial screening and additional functional assays should be carried out when possible.
Hereditary fibrinogen abnormalities comprise two classes of plasma fibrinogen defects: Type I, afibrinogenemia or hypofibrinogenemia, which has absent or low plasma fibrinogen antigen levels (quantitative fibrinogen deficiencies), and Type II, dysfibrinogenemia or hypodysfibrinogenemia, which shows normal or reduced antigen levels associated with disproportionately low functional activity (qualitative fibrinogen deficiencies). In afibrinogenemia and hypofibrinogenemia, most mutations of the FGA, FGB, or FGG fibrinogen encoding genes are null mutations. In some cases, missense or late truncating nonsense mutations allow synthesis of the corresponding fibrinogen chain but intracellular fibrinogen assembly and/or secretion are impaired. Afibrinogenemia is associated with mild-to-severe bleeding, whereas hypofibrinogenemia is most often asymptomatic. Thromboembolism may occur either spontaneously or in association with fibrinogen substitution therapy. Women with afibrinogenemia suffer from recurrent pregnancy loss but this can also occur in women with hypofibrinogenemia. Dysfibrinogenemia, caused mainly by missense mutations, is commonly associated with bleeding, thrombophilia, or both; however, most individuals are asymptomatic. Hypodysfibrinogenemia is a subcategory of this disorder. Even in specialized laboratories, the precise diagnosis of some fibrinogen disorders may be difficult. Determination of the molecular defects is important because it gives the possibility to confirm the diagnosis, to elaborate a diagnostic strategy, to distinguish in some cases that the patient is at risk of thrombosis rather than bleeding, and to enable prenatal diagnosis. However, genotype-phenotype correlations are not easy to establish. Replacement therapy is effective in treating bleeding episodes, but because the pharmacokinetics of fibrinogen after replacement therapy is highly variable among patients, it is important to adjust the treatment individually.
Fibrinogen, a hexameric glycoprotein encoded by three genes - FGA, FGB, FGG - clustered on chromosome 4q is involved in the final steps of coagulation as a precursor of fibrin monomers required for the formation of the haemostatic plug. Inherited disorders of fibrinogen abnormalities are rare and not as well clinically characterized as some other inherited bleeding disorders. To characterize the clinical manifestations, molecular defects and treatment modalities of these rare disorders, a Medline search from January 1966 to September 2007 for these disorders reported in large studies and registries was undertaken. Inherited fibrinogen disorders can manifest as quantitative defects (afibrinogenemia and hypofibrinogenemia) or qualitative defects (dysfibrinogenemia). Quantitative fibrinogen deficiencies may result from mutations affecting fibrinogen synthesis, or processing while qualitative defects are caused by mutations causing abnormal polymerization, defective cross-linking or defective assembly of the fibrinolytic system. Clinical manifestations vary from being asymptomatic to developing catastrophic life-threatening bleeds or thromboembolic events. Management of bleeds includes use of purified plasma-derived concentrates, cryoprecipitate or fresh frozen plasma. Use of some of these products carries risks of viral transmission, antibody development and thromboembolic events. Establishment of registries in Iran, Italy and North America has fostered a better understanding of these disorders with an attempt to explore molecular defects. Rare Bleeding Disorder Registries developed through the United States and international efforts hopefully will encourage development and licensure of safer, effective products.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to explore metabolic abnormalities in cervical squamous cell carcinoma and endocervical adenocarcinoma (CESC) for metabolism-related genes. METHODS: We downloaded expression data for metabolism-related genes, performed differential expression analysis, and applied weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) to identify metabolism-related functional modules. We obtained normalised miRNA expression data and identified master methylation regulators for metabolism-related genes. Cox regression of data on metabolism-related genes was performed to screen for genes that affect the prognosis of patients with CESC. Furthermore, we selected key genes for validation. RESULTS: Our results identified 3620 metabolism-related genes in CESC, 2493 of which contained related mutations. The co-occurrence of CUBN, KALRN, and HERC1 was related to the prognosis of CESC. The fraction of genome altered (FGA) closely correlated with overall survival. In expression analysis, 374 genes were related to the occurrence and prognosis of CESC. We then identified four metabolic pathway modules in WGCNA. Further analysis revealed that glycolysis/gluconeogenesis was related to endothelial cells and that arachidonic acid metabolism was related to cell proliferation. These four modules were also related to the prognosis of CESC. Among CESC-related metabolic genes, two genes were found to be regulated by microRNAs (miRNAs) and methylation, whereas another two genes were coregulated by miRNAs and mutations. CONCLUSIONS: Among metabolism-related genes, 15 genes were related to the prognosis of CESC. The co-occurrence of CUBN/KALRN/HERC1 was associated with CESC prognosis. Glycolysis/gluconeogenesis was related to endothelial cells, and arachidonic acid metabolism was related to cell proliferation.
Congenital fibrinogen disorders are classified into two types of plasma fibrinogen defects: type I (quantitative fibrinogen deficiencies), that is, hypofibrinogenemia or afibrinogenemia, in which there are low or absent plasma fibrinogen antigen levels, respectively, and type II (qualitative fibrinogen deficiencies), that is, dysfibrinogenemia or hypodysfibrinogenemia, in which there are normal or reduced antigen levels associated with disproportionately low functional activity. These disorders are caused by mutations in the three fibrinogen-encoding genes FGA, FGB, and FGG. Afibrinogenemia is associated with mild to severe bleeding, whereas hypofibrinogenemia is often asymptomatic. For these quantitative disorders, the majority of mutations prevent protein production. However, in some cases, missense or late-truncating nonsense mutations allow synthesis of the mutant fibrinogen chain, but intracellular fibrinogen assembly and/or secretion are impaired. Qualitative fibrinogen disorders are associated with bleeding, thrombosis, or both thrombosis and bleeding, but many dysfibrinogenemias are asymptomatic. The majority of cases are caused by heterozygous missense mutations. Here, we review the laboratory and genetic diagnosis of fibrinogen gene anomalies with an updated discussion of causative mutations identified.
Previous clinical studies and work in mouse models have indicated that platelets and microclots might enable the recruitment of immune cells to the pre-metastatic cancer niche, leading to efficacious extravasation of cancer cells through the vessel wall. Here, we investigated the interaction between platelets, endothelial cells, inflammatory cells, and engrafted human and zebrafish cancer cells by live-imaging studies in translucent zebrafish larvae, and show how clotting (and clot resolution) act as foci and as triggers for extravasation. Fluorescent tagging in each lineage revealed their dynamic behaviour and potential roles in these events, and we tested function by genetic and drug knockdown of the contributing players. Morpholino knockdown of fibrinogen subunit alpha (fga) and warfarin treatment to inhibit clotting both abrogated extravasation of cancer cells. The inflammatory phenotype appeared fundamental, and we show that forcing a pro-inflammatory, tnfa-positive phenotype is inhibitory to extravasation of cancer cells.
INTRODUCTION: Congenital afibrinogenemia belongs to the group of autosomal recessive bleeding disorders and represents the absolute deficiency of fibrinogen detected by an antigenic test. This can lead to severe clinical manifestations of the disorder. Therefore, it is very important to take afibrinogenemia into account in the process of the differential diagnostics of the patients. AREAS COVERED: The authors provide a summary of currently available literature about afibrinogenemia. They collected the information from the scientific journals dedicated to thrombosis and hemostasis and searched world-wide databases. Expert commentary: The most frequent clinical manifestation of this disorder is mucosal bleeding, but musculoskeletal bleeding pattern, gynecologic and obstetric issues, spontaneous bleeding, episodes provoked by minor injury or any other intervention, and even paradoxical thromboembolic events have been published. Afibrinogenemia is the consequence of mutations of the homozygous or compound heterozygous type in gene FGA, FGB or FGG encoding fibrinogen. Pregnant women with a family history, or with a history of consanguinity ought to be properly counselled. However, primary prophylaxis of bleeding events is not suggested. The article deals with actual information about afibrinogenemia contributing to its early diagnosis and effective treatment, which in many cases requires multidisciplinary approach.
Age-associated hypercoagulability is accompanied by the increase of plasma levels of some coagulation factors including fibrinogen which may contribute to the increased risk of cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and thrombotic diseases in elderly people. However, the underlying mechanism of increased plasma fibrinogen concentration during aging is still elusive. GRSF1 belongs to the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins F/H (hnRNP F/H) subfamily. Here, we report that GRSF1 attenuates hypercoagulability via negative modulation of fibrinogen expression. We demonstrated that GRSF1 negatively regulated fibrinogen expression at both mRNA and protein levels. GRSF1 directly interacted with the coding region (CDS) of FGA, FGB, and FGG mRNAs, and decreased their stability thus mitigating fibrinogen expression. We further identified that only a few G-tracts within the Fib C domain of FGA, FGB, and FGG CDS and the qRRM2 domain of GRSF1 were required for their interaction. Moreover, we confirmed hypercoagulability and the decrease of GRSF1 expression level during mice aging. Functionally, GRSF1 overexpression in old mice liver decreased fibrinogen plasma level, reduced hypercoagulability, and mitigated blood coagulation activity, whereas GRSF1 knockdown in young mice liver increased fibrinogen plasma level and promoted blood coagulation activity. Collectively, our findings unveil a novel posttranscriptional regulation of fibrinogen by GRSF1 and uncover a critical role of GRSF1 in regulating blood coagulation activity.
BACKGROUND: Our previous work revealed the high expression of fibrinogen alpha chain (FGA) in patients with endometriosis (EM) and that it could promote the migration and invasion of endometrial stromal cells. Angiogenesis is the key condition for the development of EM. This study was aimed to elucidate the role of FGA in endometrial stromal cells involved in angiogenesis in EM. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to detect the microvessel density (MVD) and VEGF expression in the eutopic endometrium samples from EM and non-EM. The conditioned medium (CM) of human primary eutopic endometrial stromal cells (EuESC) and immortalized endometrial stromal cell line hEM15A with FGA knockdown were collected and used to treat human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Then, tube formation assay, EdU assay, wound assay, transwell assay and flow cytometry assays were performed to assess the function of HUEVCs in vitro. The angiogenic capability of HUVECs was further measured using a matrigel plug assay with BALB/c nude mice in vivo. Immunofluorescence was used to detect the expression of F-actin and VE-cadherin. RT-PCR and western blotting were used to detect the expression of angiogenesis-related factors in endometrial stromal cells and downstream signalling pathways in HUVECs. RESULTS: MVD and VEGF expression in the eutopic endometrium of EM patients were significantly higher than those in the normal endometrium of non-EM patients, and the increased MVD in EM indicates an increased risk of recurrence. Functionally, we found that CM of endometrial stromal cells with FGA knockdown could inhibit HUEVCs migration and tube formation in vitro and in vivo, while having no significant effect on HUVECs proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle. Mechanically, the expression of VEGFA, PDGF, FGF-B, VEGF, MMP-2 and MMP-9 was reduced in hEM15A cells with FGA knockdown. CM of hEM15A cells with FGA knockdown reduced the number of microfilaments and pseudopodia, as well as the expression of VE-cadherin, and inhibited the activity of VEGFR2 and the FAK signalling pathway in HUVECs. CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated FGA could enhance the interaction between endometrial stromal cells and HUVECs via the potential VEGA-VEGFR-FAK signalling axis and promote EM angiogenesis, revealing a promising therapeutic approach for EM.
Fibrinogen is a complex protein that plays a key role in the blood clotting process. It is a hexamer composed of two copies of three distinct chains: Aalpha, Bbeta, and gamma encoded by three genes, FGA, FGB, and FGG, clustered on the long arm of chromosome 4. Congenital fibrinogen disorders (CFDs) are divided into qualitative deficiencies (dysfibrinogenemia, hypodysfibrinogenemia) in which the mutant fibrinogen molecule is present in the circulation and quantitative deficiencies (afibrinogenemia, hypofibrinogenemia) with no mutant molecule present in the bloodstream. Phenotypic manifestations are variable, patients may be asymptomatic, or suffer from bleeding or thrombosis. Causative mutations can occur in any of the three fibrinogen genes and can affect one or both alleles. Given the large number of studies reporting on novel causative mutations for CFDs since the review on the same topic published in 2016, we performed an extensive search of the literature and list here 120 additional mutations described in both quantitative and qualitative disorders. The visualization of causative single nucleotide variations placed on the coding sequences of FGA, FGB, and FGG reveals important structure function insight for several domains of the fibrinogen molecule.
