Fibroblast growth factor 7; Plays an important role in the regulation of embryonic development, cell proliferation and cell differentiation. Required for normal branching morphogenesis. Growth factor active on keratinocytes. Possible major paracrine effector of normal epithelial cell proliferation; Belongs to the heparin-binding growth factors family.
Hair loss affects millions of people worldwide, but currently available treatment options are often dissatisfying due to side effects or limited efficacy. Pea sprout extract has been shown to improve hair density when applied topically, but its mode of action and effectiveness upon oral administration remain unknown. Our study has now shown that the application of a fluid containing 2% pea sprout extract on a defined scalp zone of 10 volunteers enhances the expression of defined genes relevant for hair, namely fibroblast growth factor-7 (FGF7) and noggin, by 56 and 85%, respectively. Additionally, a subsequent pilot nutrition intervention study in 21 volunteers proved that pea sprout extract is also effective when consumed as dietary supplement. The daily intake of 100 mg pea sprout extract (AnaGain Nu) for 8 weeks significantly reduced hair loss already after 28 days of treatment (p < 0.002). No adverse events were reported. Consequently, pea sprout extract may be an effective means to safely promote hair growth and reduce hair loss in individuals experiencing excessive hair shedding.
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are highly heterogeneous. With the lack of a comprehensive understanding of CAFs' functional distinctions, it remains unclear how cancer treatments could be personalized based on CAFs in a patient's tumor. We have established a living biobank of CAFs derived from biopsies of patients' non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) that encompasses a broad molecular spectrum of CAFs in clinical NSCLC. By functionally interrogating CAF heterogeneity using the same therapeutics received by patients, we identify three functional subtypes: (1) robustly protective of cancers and highly expressing HGF and FGF7; (2) moderately protective of cancers and highly expressing FGF7; and (3) those providing minimal protection. These functional differences among CAFs are governed by their intrinsic TGF-beta signaling, which suppresses HGF and FGF7 expression. This CAF functional classification correlates with patients' clinical response to targeted therapies and also associates with the tumor immune microenvironment, therefore providing an avenue to guide personalized treatment.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a devastating cardiovascular disease without a clear mechanism or drugs for treatment. Therefore, it is crucial to reveal the underlying molecular mechanism and identify potential drugs for PAH. In this study, we first integrated three human lung tissue datasets (GSE113439, GSE53408, GSE117261) from GEO. A total of 151 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened, followed by KEGG and GO enrichment analyses and PPI network construction. Five hub genes (CSF3R, NT5E, ANGPT2, FGF7, and CXCL9) were identified by Cytoscape (Cytohubba). GSEA and GSVA were performed for each hub gene to uncover the potential mechanism. Moreover, to repurpose known and therapeutic drugs, the CMap database was retrieved, and nine candidate compounds (lypressin, ruxolitinib, triclabendazole, L-BSO, tiaprofenic acid, AT-9283, QL-X-138, huperzine-a, and L-741742) with a high level of confidence were obtained. Then ruxolitinib was selected to perform molecular docking simulations with ANGPT2, FGF7, NT5E, CSF3R, JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, TYK2. A certain concentration of ruxolitinib could inhibit the proliferation and migration of rat pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (rPASMCs) in vitro. Together, these analyses principally identified CSF3R, NT5E, ANGPT2, FGF7 and CXCL9 as candidate biomarkers of PAH, and ruxolitinib might exert promising therapeutic action for PAH.
Our understanding of the regulatory processes of reepithelialization during wound healing is incomplete. In an attempt to map the genes involved in epidermal regeneration and differentiation, we measured gene expression in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded standardized epidermal wounds induced by the suction-blister technique with associated nonwounded skin using NanoString technology. The transcripts of 139 selected genes involved in clotting, immune response to tissue injury, signaling pathways, cell adhesion and proliferation, extracellular matrix remodeling, zinc transport and keratinocyte differentiation were evaluated. We identified 22 upregulated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in descending order of fold change (MMP1, MMP3, IL6, CXCL8, SERPINE1, IL1B, PTGS2, HBEGF, CXCL5, CXCL2, TIMP1, CYR61, CXCL1, MMP12, MMP9, HGF, CTGF, ITGB3, MT2A, FGF7, COL4A1 and PLAUR). The expression of the most upregulated gene, MMP1, correlated strongly with MMP3 followed by IL6 and IL1B. rhIL-1beta, but not rhIL-6, exposure of cultured normal human epidermal keratinocytes and normal human dermal fibroblasts increased both MMP1 mRNA and MMP-1 protein levels, as well as TIMP1 mRNA levels. The increased TIMP1 in wounds was validated by immunohistochemistry. The six downregulated DEGs (COL7A1, MMP28, SLC39A2, FLG1, KRT10 and FLG2) were associated with epidermal maturation. KLK8 showed the strongest correlation with MKI67 mRNA levels and is a potential biomarker for keratinocyte proliferation. The observed gene expression changes correlate well with the current knowledge of physiological reepithelialization. Thus, the gene expression panel described in this paper could be used in patients with impaired healing to identify possible therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND: Muscle satellite cells (MuSCs) exert essential roles in skeletal muscle adaptation to growth, injury and ageing, and their functions are extensively modulated by microenvironmental factors. However, the current knowledge about the interaction of MuSCs with niche cells is quite limited. METHODS: A 10x single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) was performed on porcine longissimus dorsi and soleus (SOL) muscles to generate a single-cell transcriptomic dataset of myogenic cells and other cell types. Sophisticated bioinformatic analyses, including unsupervised clustering analysis, marker gene, gene set variation analysis (GSVA), AUCell, pseudotime analysis and RNA velocity analysis, were performed to explore the heterogeneity of myogenic cells. CellChat analysis was used to demonstrate cell-cell communications across myogenic cell subpopulations and niche cells, especially fibro-adipogenic progenitors (FAPs). Integrated analysis with human and mice datasets was performed to verify the expression of FGF7 across diverse species. The role of FGF7 on MuSC proliferation was evaluated through administering recombinant FGF7 to porcine MuSCs, C2C12, cardiotoxin (CTX)-injured muscle and d-galactose (d-gal)-induced ageing model. RESULTS: ScRNA-seq totally figured out five cell types including myo-lineage cells and FAPs, and myo-lineage cells were further classified into six subpopulations, termed as RCN3(+), S100A4(+), ID3(+), cycling (MKI67(+)), MYF6(+) and MYMK(+) satellite cells, respectively. There was a higher proportion of cycling and MYF6(+) cells in the SOL population. CellChat analysis uncovered a particular impact of FAPs on myogenic cells mediated by FGF7, which was relatively highly expressed in SOL samples. Administration of FGF7 (10 ng/mL) significantly increased the proportion of EdU(+) porcine MuSCs and C2C12 by 4.03 +/- 0.81% (P < 0.01) and 6.87 +/- 2.17% (P < 0.05), respectively, and knockdown of FGFR2 dramatically abolished the pro-proliferating effects (P < 0.05). In CTX-injured muscle, FGF7 significantly increased the ratio of EdU(+)/Pax7(+) cells by 15.68 +/- 5.45% (P < 0.05) and elevated the number of eMyHC(+) regenerating myofibres by 19.7 +/- 4.25% (P < 0.01). Under d-gal stimuli, FGF7 significantly reduced gammaH2AX(+) cells by 17.19 +/- 3.05% (P < 0.01) in porcine MuSCs, induced EdU(+) cells by 4.34 +/- 1.54% (P < 0.05) in C2C12, and restored myofibre size loss and running exhaustion in vivo (all P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Our scRNA-seq reveals a novel interaction between muscle FAPs and satellite cells mediated by FGF7-FGFR2. Exogenous FGF7 augments the proliferation of satellite cells and thus benefits muscle regeneration and counteracts age-related myopathy.
Self-assembly of solid organs from single cells would greatly expand applicability of regenerative medicine. Stem/progenitor cells can self-organize into micro-sized organ units, termed organoids, partially modelling tissue function and regeneration. Here we demonstrated 3D self-assembly of adult and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived fibroblasts, keratinocytes and endothelial progenitors into both, planar human skin in vivo and a novel type of spheroid-shaped skin organoids in vitro, under the aegis of human platelet lysate. Methods: Primary endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs), skin fibroblasts (FBs) and keratinocytes (KCs) were isolated from human tissues and polyclonally propagated under 2D xeno-free conditions. Human tissue-derived iPSCs were differentiated into endothelial cells (hiPSC-ECs), fibroblasts (hiPSC-FBs) and keratinocytes (hiPSC-KCs) according to efficiency-optimized protocols. Cell identity and purity were confirmed by flow cytometry and clonogenicity indicated their stem/progenitor potential. Triple cell type floating spheroids formation was promoted by human platelet-derived growth factors containing culture conditions, using nanoparticle cell labelling for monitoring the organization process. Planar human skin regeneration was assessed in full-thickness wounds of immune-deficient mice upon transplantation of hiPSC-derived single cell suspensions. Results: Organoids displayed a distinct architecture with surface-anchored keratinocytes surrounding a stromal core, and specific signaling patterns in response to inflammatory stimuli. FGF-7 mRNA transfection was required to accelerate keratinocyte long-term fitness. Stratified human skin also self-assembled within two weeks after either adult- or iPSC-derived skin cell-suspension liquid-transplantation, healing deep wounds of mice. Transplant vascularization significantly accelerated in the presence of co-transplanted endothelial progenitors. Mechanistically, extracellular vesicles mediated the multifactorial platelet-derived trophic effects. No tumorigenesis occurred upon xenografting. Conclusion: This illustrates the superordinate progenitor self-organization principle and permits novel rapid 3D skin-related pharmaceutical high-content testing opportunities with floating spheroid skin organoids. Multi-cell transplant self-organization facilitates development of iPSC-based organ regeneration strategies using cell suspension transplantation supported by human platelet factors.
BACKGROUND: Ovarian cancer (OC) is distinguished by its aggressive nature and the limited efficacy of current treatment strategies. Recent studies have emphasized the significant role of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in OC development and progression. METHODS: Employing sophisticated machine learning techniques on bulk transcriptomic datasets, we identified fibroblast growth factor 7 (FGF7), derived from CAFs, as a potential oncogenic factor. We investigated the relationship between FGF7 expression and various clinical parameters. A series of in vitro experiments were undertaken to evaluate the effect of CAFs-derived FGF7 on OC cell activities, such as proliferation, migration, and invasion. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis was also conducted to elucidate the interaction between FGF7 and its receptor. Detailed mechanistic investigations sought to clarify the pathways through which FGF7 fosters OC progression. RESULTS: Our findings indicate that higher FGF7 levels correlate with advanced tumor stages, increased vascular invasion, and poorer prognosis. CAFs-derived FGF7 significantly enhanced OC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Single-cell analysis and in vitro studies revealed that CAFs-derived FGF7 inhibits the ubiquitination and degradation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1alpha) via FGFR2 interaction. Activation of the FGF7/HIF-1alpha pathway resulted in the upregulation of mesenchymal markers and downregulation of epithelial markers. Importantly, in vivo treatment with neutralizing antibodies targeting CAFs-derived FGF7 substantially reduced tumor growth. CONCLUSION: Neutralizing FGF7 in the medium or inhibiting HIF-1alpha signaling reversed the effects of FGF7-mediated EMT, emphasizing the dependence of FGF7-mediated EMT on HIF-1alpha activation. These findings suggest that targeting the FGF7/HIF-1alpha/EMT axis may offer new therapeutic opportunities to intervene in OC progression.
BACKGROUND: Mucinous colorectal adenocarcinoma (MCA) is a distinct subtype of colorectal cancer (CRC) with the most aggressive pattern, but effective treatment of MCA remains a challenge due to its vague pathological characteristics. An in-depth understanding of transcriptional dynamics at the cellular level is critical for developing specialised MCA treatment strategies. METHODS: We integrated single-cell RNA sequencing and spatial transcriptomics data to systematically profile the MCA tumor microenvironment (TME), particularly the interactome of stromal and immune cells. In addition, a three-dimensional bioprinting technique, canonical ex vivo co-culture system, and immunofluorescence staining were further applied to validate the cellular communication networks within the TME. RESULTS: This study identified the crucial intercellular interactions that engaged in MCA pathogenesis. We found the increased infiltration of FGF7(+)/THBS1(+) myofibroblasts in MCA tissues with decreased expression of genes associated with leukocyte-mediated immunity and T cell activation, suggesting a crucial role of these cells in regulating the immunosuppressive TME. In addition, MS4A4A(+) macrophages that exhibit M2-phenotype were enriched in the tumoral niche and high expression of MS4A4A(+) was associated with poor prognosis in the cohort data. The ligand-receptor-based intercellular communication analysis revealed the tight interaction of MUC1(+) malignant cells and ZEB1(+) endothelial cells, providing mechanistic information for MCA angiogenesis and molecular targets for subsequent translational applications. CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides novel insights into communications among tumour cells with stromal and immune cells that are significantly enriched in the TME during MCA progression, presenting potential prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic strategies for MCA. KEY POINTS: Tumour microenvironment profiling of MCA is developed. MUC1(+) tumour cells interplay with FGF7(+)/THBS1(+) myofibroblasts to promote MCA development. MS4A4A(+) macrophages exhibit M2 phenotype in MCA. ZEB1(+) endotheliocytes engage in EndMT process in MCA.
Cervical cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers in women worldwide. While cervical cancer is caused by human papillomavirus (HPV), not all females infected with HPV develop the disease, suggesting that other factors might facilitate its progression. Growing evidence supports the involvement of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) axis in several cancers, including gynecological. However, for cervical cancer, the molecular mechanisms that underpin the disease remain poorly understood, including the role of FGFR signaling. The aim of this study was to investigate FGF(R) signaling in cervical cancer through bioinformatic analysis of cell line and patient data and through detailed expression profiling, manipulation of the FGFR axis, and downstream phenotypic analysis in cell lines (HeLa, SiHa, and CaSki). Expression (protein and mRNA) analysis demonstrated that FGFR1b/c, FGFR2b/c, FGFR4, FGF2, FGF4, and FGF7 were expressed in all three lines. Interestingly, FGFR1 and 2 localized to the nucleus, supporting that nuclear FGFRs could act as transcription factors. Importantly, 2D and 3D cell cultures demonstrated that FGFR activation can facilitate cell functions correlated with invasive disease. Collectively, this study supports an association between FGFR signaling and cervical cancer progression, laying the foundations for the development of therapeutic approaches targeting FGFR in this disease.
Fibroblast growth factor 7 (FGF7), also known as keratinocyte growth factor (KGF), shows a crucial biological significance in tissue development, wound repair, tumorigenesis, and immune reconstruction. In the skeletal system, FGF7 directs the cellular synaptic extension of individual cells and facilities functional gap junction intercellular communication of a collective of cells. Moreover, it promotes the osteogenic differentiation of stem cells via a cytoplasmic signaling network. For cartilage, reports have indicated the potential role of FGF7 on the regulation of key molecules Cx43 in cartilage and Runx2 in hypertrophic cartilage. However, the molecular mechanism of FGF7 in chondrocyte behaviors and cartilage pathological process remains largely unknown. In this review, we systematically summarize the recent biological function of FGF7 and its regulatory role on chondrocytes and cartilage diseases, especially through the hot focus of two key molecules, Runx2 and Cx43. The current knowledge of FGF7 on the physiological and pathological processes of chondrocytes and cartilage provides us new cues for wound repair of cartilage defect and therapy of cartilage diseases.
Renal control of systemic phosphate homeostasis is critical as evident from inborn and acquired diseases causing renal phosphate wasting. At least three transport proteins are responsible for renal phosphate reabsorption: NAPI-IIa (SLC34A1), NAPI-IIc (SLC34A3) and PIT-2 (SLC20A2). These transporters are highly regulated by various cellular mechanisms and factors including acid-base status, electrolyte balance and hormones such as dopamine, glucocorticoids, growth factors, vitamin D3, parathyroid hormone and fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). Whether renal phosphate wasting is caused by inactivating mutations in the NAPI-IIa transporter is controversial. Mutations in the NAPI-IIc transporter cause hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria. Besides the primary inherited defects, there are also inherited defects in major regulators of phosphate homeostasis that lead to alterations in phosphate handling. Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets is due to FGF23 mutations leading to resistance against its own degradation. Similarly, inactivating mutations in the PHEX gene, which causes FGF23 inactivation, cause X-linked hypophosphatemia due to renal phosphate losses. In contrast, mutations in galactosamine:polypeptide N-acetyl-galactosaminyltransferase, responsible for O-glycosylation of FGF23, or in klotho, a cofactor for FGF23 signalling result in hyperphosphatemia. Acquired syndromes of renal phosphate wasting, hypophosphatemia and osteomalacia (tumour-associated osteomalacia) can be due to the excessive synthesis or release of phosphaturic factors (FGF23, FGF-7, MEPE and sFRP4) from mesenchymal tumours. KEYWORDS: bone, FGF23, kidney, phosphate, PTH.
Rhabdomyosarcomas are aggressive pediatric soft-tissue sarcomas and include high-risk PAX3-FOXO1 fusion-gene-positive cases. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) is known to contribute to rhabdomyosarcoma progression; here, we sought to investigate the involvement and potential for therapeutic targeting of other FGFRs in this disease. Cell-based screening of FGFR inhibitors with potential for clinical repurposing (NVP-BGJ398, nintedanib, dovitinib, and ponatinib) revealed greater sensitivity of fusion-gene-positive versus fusion-gene-negative rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines and was shown to be correlated with high expression of FGFR2 and its specific ligand, FGF7. Furthermore, patient samples exhibit higher mRNA levels of FGFR2 and FGF7 in fusion-gene-positive versus fusion-gene-negative rhabdomyosarcomas. Sustained intracellular mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activity and FGF7 secretion into culture media during serum starvation of PAX3-FOXO1 rhabdomyosarcoma cells together with decreased cell viability after genetic silencing of FGFR2 or FGF7 was in keeping with a novel FGF7-FGFR2 autocrine loop. FGFR inhibition with NVP-BGJ398 reduced viability and was synergistic with SN38, the active metabolite of irinotecan. In vivo, NVP-BGJ398 abrogated xenograft growth and warrants further investigation in combination with irinotecan as a therapeutic strategy for fusion-gene-positive rhabdomyosarcomas.
Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) is a member of the heparin-binding fibroblast growth factor family (FGF-7) with a distinctive pattern of target-cell specificity. Studies performed in cell culture suggested that KGF was mitogenically active only on epithelial cells, albeit from a variety of tissues. In contrast, KGF was produced solely by cells of mesenchymal origin, leading to the hypothesis that it might function as a paracrine mediator of mesenchymal-epithelial communication. Biochemical analysis and molecular cloning established that the KGF receptor (KGFR) was a tyrosine kinase isoform encoded by the fgfr-2 gene. Many detailed investigations of KGF and KGFR expression in whole tissue and cell lines largely substantiated the pattern initially perceived in vitro of mesenchymal and epithelial distribution, respectively. Moreover, functional assays in organ culture and in vivo and studies of KGF regulation by sex steroid hormones reinforced the idea that KGF acts predominantly on epithelial cells to elicit a variety of responses including proliferation, migration and morphogenesis.
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a type of highly malignant tumor originating from bile ducts. The prognosis of CCA is poor and the treatment options are limited. The biomarker study of CCA has made little progresses in recent years because of the difficulty to obtain CCA specimens. SOX9 is an important regulator of cholangiocyte proliferation and differentiation. We performed mRNA sequencing of CCA, retrieved TCGA data, and detected SOX9 expression in a large CCA cohort. With WNT3A stimulation, SOX9 expression and transcription was elevated by TCF7. Moreover, SOX9 was substantially up-regulated in CCA tissues and was identified as a prognostic biomarker of CCA. With mRNA sequencing and in vitro/vivo validation, we demonstrated that SOX9 enhanced the transcription and expression of FGF7 and FGFR2. FGF7 was significantly up-regulated in the bile and serum of CCA patients, and may promote CCA proliferation by activating FGFR2 in an autocrine pathway. co-expression of FGF7 and FGFR2 was a more sensitive marker for poor prognosis. SOX9-induced overexpression of FGF7 and FGFR2 was the key reason of SOX9-involved pemigatinib resistance. In conclusion, SOX9 and FGF7 were prognostic biomarkers of CCA. WNT3A-TCF7-SOX9 axis could induce pemigatinib resistance in two independent pathways: (1)SOX9 directly promotes FGFR2 transcription and expression; (2)SOX9 elevates FGF7 expression, which could be secreted from CCA cells and activates FGFR2 phosphorylation in an autocrine pathway.
Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) have been shown to alter growth and differentiation of reproductive tissues in a variety of species. Within the female reproductive tract, the effects of FGFs have been focused on the ovary, and the most studied one is FGF2, which stimulates granulosa cell proliferation and decreases differentiation (decreased steroidogenesis). Other FGFs have also been implicated in ovarian function, and this review summarizes the effects of members of two subfamilies on ovarian function; the FGF7 subfamily that also contains FGF10, and the FGF8 subfamily that also contains FGF18. There are data to suggest that FGF8 and FGF18 have distinct actions on granulosa cells, despite their apparent similar receptor binding properties. Studies of non-reproductive developmental biology also indicate that FGF8 is distinct from FGF18, and that FGF7 is also distinct from FGF10 despite similar receptor binding properties. In this review, the potential mechanisms of differential action of FGF7/FGF10 and FGF8/FGF18 during organogenesis will be reviewed and placed in the context of follicle development. A model is proposed in which FGF8 and FGF18 differentially activate receptors depending on the properties of the extracellular matrix in the follicle.
The angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a primary cell surface viral binding receptor for SARS-CoV-2, so finding new regulatory molecules to modulate ACE2 expression levels is a promising strategy against COVID-19. In the current study, we utilized islet organoids derived from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), animal models and COVID-19 patients to discover that fibroblast growth factor 7 (FGF7) enhances ACE2 expression within the islets, facilitating SARS-CoV-2 infection and resulting in impaired insulin secretion. Using hESC-derived islet organoids, we demonstrated that FGF7 interacts with FGF receptor 2 (FGFR2) and FGFR1 to upregulate ACE2 expression predominantly in beta cells. This upregulation increases both insulin secretion and susceptibility of beta cells to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Inhibiting FGFR counteracts the FGF7-induced ACE2 upregulation, subsequently reducing viral infection and replication in the islets. Furthermore, retrospective clinical data revealed that diabetic patients with severe COVID-19 symptoms exhibited elevated serum FGF7 levels compared to those with mild symptoms. Finally, animal experiments indicated that SARS-CoV-2 infection increased pancreatic FGF7 levels, resulting in a reduction of insulin concentrations in situ. Taken together, our research offers a potential regulatory strategy for ACE2 by controlling FGF7, thereby protecting islets from SARS-CoV-2 infection and preventing the progression of diabetes in the context of COVID-19.
We have recently demonstrated that fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2)-mediated signalling alters progesterone receptor (PR) activity and response of oestrogen receptor alpha (ER)-positive (ER+) breast cancer (BCa) cell lines to anti-ER agents. Little is known about whether the crosstalk between ER and PR, shown to be modulated by the hormonal background, might also be affected by FGFR2. Here, PR-dependent behaviour of ER+ BCa cells was studied in the presence of oestrogen (E2) and progesterone (P4) and/or FGF7. In vitro analyses showed that FGF7/FGFR2 signalling: (a) abolished the effect of P4 on E2-promoted 3D cell growth and response to tamoxifen; (b) regulated ER and PR expression and activity; (c) increased formation of ER-PR complexes; and (d) reversed P4-triggered deregulation of ER-dependent genes. Analysis of clinical data demonstrated that the prognostic value of FGFR2 varied between patients with different menopausal status; that is, high expression of FGFR2 was significantly associated with longer progression-free survival (PFS) in postmenopausal patients, whereas there was no significant association in premenopausal patients. FGFR2 was found to positively correlate with the expression of JunB proto-oncogene, AP-1 transcription factor subunit (JUNB), an ER-dependent gene, only in premenopausal patients. Molecular analyses revealed that the presence of JunB was a prerequisite for FGFR2-mediated abrogation of P4-induced inhibition of cell growth. Our results demonstrate for the first time that the FGF7/FGFR2-JunB axis abolishes the modulatory effects of PR on ER-associated biological functions in premenopausal ER+ BCa. This may provide foundations for a better selection of patients for FGFR-targeting therapeutic strategies.
Stromal-epithelial interactions are key determinants of corneal function. Bi-directional communications occur in a highly coordinated manner between these corneal tissues during normal development, homeostasis, and wound healing. The best characterized stromal to epithelial interactions in the cornea are mediated by the classical paracrine mediators hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and keratinocyte growth factor (KGF). HGF and KGF are produced by the keratocytes to regulate proliferation, motility, differentiation, and possibly other functions, of epithelial cells. Other cytokines produced by keratocytes may also contribute to these interactions. Epithelial to stromal interactions are mediated by cytokines, such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and soluble Fas ligand, that are released by corneal epithelial cells in response to injury. Other, yet to be identified, cytokine systems may be released from the unwounded corneal epithelium to regulate keratocyte viability and function. IL-1 appears to be a master regulator of corneal wound healing that modulates functions such as matrix metalloproteinase production, HGF and KGF production, and apoptosis of keratocyte cells following injury. The Fas/Fas ligand system has been shown to contribute to the immune privileged status of the cornea. However, this cytokine-receptor system probably also modulates corneal cell apoptosis following infection by viruses such as herpes simplex and wounding. Pharmacologic control of stromal-epithelial interactions appears to offer the potential to regulate corneal wound healing and, possibly, treat corneal diseases in which these interactions have a central role.
Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) is a member of the rapidly growing fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family of mitogens. Whereas most FGFs influence proliferation and/or differentiation of various cell types, KGF seems to act specifically on epithelial cells. It has been demonstrated that KGF stimulates proliferation and migration of these cells, but it also affects differentiation processes. Finally, recent studies have demonstrated a protective function of this growth factor in vitro and in vivo. Due to these properties, KGF could play an important role in repair processes. Indeed a series of studies have provided insight into the expression and function of KGF in inflammation and repair of various tissues and organs, and a therapeutic potential of this growth factor has been demonstrated.
BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori as the causative agent of the most common chronic bacterial infectious disease in human still involves a range of clinical challenging complications. In this meantime, the survey of the interaction between H. pylori virulence genes expression and its consequences on gastric antral epithelial cells is Controversial. This study surveyed the correlations between H. pylori cag Pathogenicity Island and virulence factors genes with Fgf7 gene expression as an angiogenic factor in developing gastric cancer in gastric antral epithelial cells of patients with H. pylori infection. METHOD: Gastric antral biopsy samples collected from patients out of exclusion criteria, including consumption of tobacco, alchohol and anti-H. pylori drugs, were categorized into gastric cancer (case group n:53) and gastritis (control group n:50) with and without H. pylori infection to detect changes in cDNA of fgf7 in gastric antral epithelial cells by using Real Time RT PCR. Extracted total RNA from gastric antral biopsy samples was used to synthesize cDNA for real time PCR. Furthermore, the cDNA of H. pylori cag Pathogenicity Island and other virulence factors genes were detected by using specific designed primers and simple PCR. RESULTS: Fgf7 gene expression revealed a significantly increase in gastric antral epithelial cells of gastric cancer and H. pylori-positive patients in contrast with gastritis and H. pylori-negative patients (p < 0.05). In the meanwhile, cag Pathogenicity Island and hopQ genotypes showed a positive correlation with Fgf7 gene expression (fold changes of cDNA) in gastric antral epithelial cells (p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: This study revealed an obvious correlation between Fgf7 gene expression in gastric antral epithelial cells of patients with H. pylori carcinogenic genotypes infection and some host factors including age.
