Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-3; Tyrosine-protein kinase that plays an essential role as cell surface receptor for neuregulins. Binds to neuregulin-1 (NRG1) and is activated by it; ligand-binding increases phosphorylation on tyrosine residues and promotes its association with the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. May also be activated by CSPG5. Involved in the regulation of myeloid cell differentiation.
Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), also referred to as BCR-ABL1-like ALL, is a high-risk subset with a gene expression profile that shares significant overlap with that of Ph-positive (Ph(+)) ALL and is suggestive of activated kinase signaling. Although Ph(+) ALL is defined by BCR-ABL1 fusion, Ph-like ALL cases contain a variety of genomic alterations that activate kinase and cytokine receptor signaling. These alterations can be grouped into major subclasses that include ABL-class fusions involving ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, and PDGFRB that phenocopy BCR-ABL1 and alterations of CRLF2, JAK2, and EPOR that activate JAK/STAT signaling. Additional genomic alterations in Ph-like ALL activate other kinases, including BLNK, DGKH, FGFR1, IL2RB, LYN, NTRK3, PDGFRA, PTK2B, TYK2, and the RAS signaling pathway. Recent studies have helped to define the genomic landscape of Ph-like ALL and how it varies across the age spectrum, associated clinical features and outcomes, and genetic risk factors. Preclinical studies and anecdotal reports show that targeted inhibitors of relevant signaling pathways are active in specific Ph-like ALL subsets, and precision medicine trials have been initiated for this high-risk ALL subset.
The molecular mechanisms responsible for the development and progression of atherosclerotic lesions have not been fully established. Here, we investigated the role played by endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndMT) and its key regulator FGF receptor 1 (FGFR1) in atherosclerosis. In cultured human endothelial cells, both inflammatory cytokines and oscillatory shear stress reduced endothelial FGFR1 expression and activated TGF-beta signaling. We further explored the link between disrupted FGF endothelial signaling and progression of atherosclerosis by introducing endothelial-specific deletion of FGF receptor substrate 2 alpha (Frs2a) in atherosclerotic (Apoe(-/-)) mice. When placed on a high-fat diet, these double-knockout mice developed atherosclerosis at a much earlier time point compared with that their Apoe(-/-) counterparts, eventually demonstrating an 84% increase in total plaque burden. Moreover, these animals exhibited extensive development of EndMT, deposition of fibronectin, and increased neointima formation. Additionally, we conducted a molecular and morphometric examination of left main coronary arteries from 43 patients with various levels of coronary disease to assess the clinical relevance of these findings. The extent of coronary atherosclerosis in this patient set strongly correlated with loss of endothelial FGFR1 expression, activation of endothelial TGF-beta signaling, and the extent of EndMT. These data demonstrate a link between loss of protective endothelial FGFR signaling, development of EndMT, and progression of atherosclerosis.
PURPOSE: FGFR1 overexpression has been associated with endocrine resistance in ER(+) breast cancer. We found FGFR1 localized in the nucleus of breast cancer cells in primary tumors resistant to estrogen suppression. We investigated a role of nuclear FGFR1 on gene transcription and antiestrogen resistance. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tumors from patients treated with letrozole were subjected to Ki67 and FGFR1 IHC. MCF7 cells were transduced with FGFR1(SP-)(NLS) to promote nuclear FGFR1 overexpression. FGFR1 genomic activity in ER(+)/FGFR1-amplified breast cancer cells +/- FOXA1 siRNA or +/- the FGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) erdafitinib was examined by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). The nuclear and chromatin-bound FGFR1 interactome was investigated by mass spectrometry (MS). RESULTS: High nuclear FGFR1 expression in ER(+) primary tumors positively correlated with post-letrozole Ki67 values. Nuclear FGFR1 overexpression influenced gene transcription and promoted resistance to estrogen suppression and to fulvestrant in vivo. A gene expression signature induced by nuclear FGFR1 correlated with shorter survival in the METABRIC cohort of patients treated with antiestrogens. ChIP-Seq revealed FGFR1 occupancy at transcription start sites, overlapping with active transcription histone marks. MS analysis of the nuclear FGFR1 interactome identified phosphorylated RNA-Polymerase II and FOXA1, with FOXA1 RNAi impairing FGFR1 recruitment to chromatin. Treatment with erdafitinib did not impair nuclear FGFR1 translocation and genomic activity. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest nuclear FGFR1 contributes to endocrine resistance by modulating gene transcription in ER(+) breast cancer. Nuclear FGFR1 activity was unaffected by FGFR TKIs, thus supporting the development of treatment strategies to inhibit nuclear FGFR1 in ER+/FGFR1 overexpressing breast cancer.
The brain tumor glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is among the most lethal forms of human cancer. Here, we report that a small subset of GBMs (3.1%; 3 of 97 tumors examined) harbors oncogenic chromosomal translocations that fuse in-frame the tyrosine kinase coding domains of fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) genes (FGFR1 or FGFR3) to the transforming acidic coiled-coil (TACC) coding domains of TACC1 or TACC3, respectively. The FGFR-TACC fusion protein displays oncogenic activity when introduced into astrocytes or stereotactically transduced in the mouse brain. The fusion protein, which localizes to mitotic spindle poles, has constitutive kinase activity and induces mitotic and chromosomal segregation defects and triggers aneuploidy. Inhibition of FGFR kinase corrects the aneuploidy, and oral administration of an FGFR inhibitor prolongs survival of mice harboring intracranial FGFR3-TACC3-initiated glioma. FGFR-TACC fusions could potentially identify a subset of GBM patients who would benefit from targeted FGFR kinase inhibition.
Pilocytic astrocytoma, the most common childhood brain tumor, is typically associated with mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway alterations. Surgically inaccessible midline tumors are therapeutically challenging, showing sustained tendency for progression and often becoming a chronic disease with substantial morbidities. Here we describe whole-genome sequencing of 96 pilocytic astrocytomas, with matched RNA sequencing (n = 73), conducted by the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) PedBrain Tumor Project. We identified recurrent activating mutations in FGFR1 and PTPN11 and new NTRK2 fusion genes in non-cerebellar tumors. New BRAF-activating changes were also observed. MAPK pathway alterations affected all tumors analyzed, with no other significant mutations identified, indicating that pilocytic astrocytoma is predominantly a single-pathway disease. Notably, we identified the same FGFR1 mutations in a subset of H3F3A-mutated pediatric glioblastoma with additional alterations in the NF1 gene. Our findings thus identify new potential therapeutic targets in distinct subsets of pilocytic astrocytoma and childhood glioblastoma.
Scientific evidence is quickly growing that establishes FGF21 as a cytokine that signals both locally and systemically to induce metabolic effects. The focus of this chapter is the receptor/co-receptor signaling complex formed by endocrine FGF21. We provide an introduction to the major components of the complex including the Klotho family of co-receptors, fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs), and the fibroblast growth factor ligands, placing each in the context of its own family members while emphasizing structural features that drive interaction. We subsequently focus specifically on FGF21 signaling through FGFR1c and KLB, describing what is known about each protein's structure and how this drives protein interaction and formation of the signaling complex at the plasma membrane. We subsequently explore the stoichiometry of FGFR1c and KLB at the plasma membrane before and after the addition of FGF21 ligand, comparing how unique features of the interaction could potentially affect signaling intensity. Finally, we discuss how formation of the signaling complex is potentially regulated by other regulatory interactions, including galectins, the extracellular matrix, and co-expression of FGFR5.
Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) kinase inhibitors have been shown to be effective in the treatment of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and other advanced solid tumors harboring FGFR2 alterations, but the toxicity of these drugs frequently leads to dose reduction or interruption of treatment such that maximum efficacy cannot be achieved. The most common adverse effects are hyperphosphatemia caused by FGFR1 inhibition and diarrhea due to FGFR4 inhibition, as current therapies are not selective among the FGFRs. Designing selective inhibitors has proved difficult with conventional approaches because the orthosteric sites of FGFR family members are observed to be highly similar in X-ray structures. In this study, aided by analysis of protein dynamics, we designed a selective, covalent FGFR2 inhibitor. In a key initial step, analysis of long-timescale molecular dynamics simulations of the FGFR1 and FGFR2 kinase domains allowed us to identify differential motion in their P-loops, which are located adjacent to the orthosteric site. Using this insight, we were able to design orthosteric binders that selectively and covalently engage the P-loop of FGFR2. Our drug discovery efforts culminated in the development of lirafugratinib (RLY-4008), a covalent inhibitor of FGFR2 that shows substantial selectivity over FGFR1 (~250-fold) and FGFR4 (~5,000-fold) in vitro, causes tumor regression in multiple FGFR2-altered human xenograft models, and was recently demonstrated to be efficacious in the clinic at doses that do not induce clinically significant hyperphosphatemia or diarrhea.
The ageing suppressor alpha-klotho binds to the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR). This commits FGFR to respond to FGF23, a key hormone in the regulation of mineral ion and vitamin D homeostasis. The role and mechanism of this co-receptor are unknown. Here we present the atomic structure of a 1:1:1 ternary complex that consists of the shed extracellular domain of alpha-klotho, the FGFR1c ligand-binding domain, and FGF23. In this complex, alpha-klotho simultaneously tethers FGFR1c by its D3 domain and FGF23 by its C-terminal tail, thus implementing FGF23-FGFR1c proximity and conferring stability. Dimerization of the stabilized ternary complexes and receptor activation remain dependent on the binding of heparan sulfate, a mandatory cofactor of paracrine FGF signalling. The structure of alpha-klotho is incompatible with its purported glycosidase activity. Thus, shed alpha-klotho functions as an on-demand non-enzymatic scaffold protein that promotes FGF23 signalling.
AIMS: Atherosclerosis (AS) is a leading cause of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Atherosclerotic lesions show increased levels of proteins associated with the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) pathway. However, the functional significance and mechanisms governed by FGFR signalling in AS are not known. In the present study, we investigated fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) signalling in AS development and progression. METHODS AND RESULTS: Examination of human atherosclerotic lesions and aortas of Apoe-/- mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) showed increased levels of FGFR1 in macrophages. We deleted myeloid-expressed Fgfr1 in Apoe-/- mice and showed that Fgfr1 deficiency reduces atherosclerotic lesions and lipid accumulations in both male and female mice upon HFD feeding. These protective effects of myeloid Fgfr1 deficiency were also observed when mice with intact FGFR1 were treated with FGFR inhibitor AZD4547. To understand the mechanistic basis of this protection, we harvested macrophages from mice and show that FGFR1 is required for macrophage inflammatory responses and uptake of oxidized LDL. RNA sequencing showed that FGFR1 activity is mediated through phospholipase-C-gamma (PLCgamma) and the activation of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) but is independent of FGFR substrate 2. CONCLUSION: Our study provides evidence of a new FGFR1-PLCgamma-NF-kappaB axis in macrophages in inflammatory AS, supporting FGFR1 as a potentially therapeutic target for AS-related diseases.
Vascular leakage and inflammation are pathological hallmarks of acute lung injury (ALI)/acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Endothelial cells (ECs) serve as a semipermeable barrier and play a key role in disease progression. It is well known that fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) is required for maintaining vascular integrity. However, how endothelial FGFR1 functions in ALI/ARDS remains obscure. Here, we revealed that conditional deletion of endothelial FGFR1 aggravated LPS-induced lung injury, including inflammation and vascular leakage. Inhibition of its downstream Rho-associated coiled-coil-forming protein kinase 2 (ROCK2) by AAV Vec-tie-shROCK2 or its selective inhibitor TDI01 effectively attenuated inflammation and vascular leakage in a mouse model. In vitro, TNFalpha-stimulated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) showed decreased FGFR1 expression and increased ROCK2 activity. Furthermore, knockdown of FGFR1 activated ROCK2 and thus promoted higher adhesive properties to inflammatory cells and higher permeability in HUVECs. TDI01 effectively suppressed ROCK2 activity and rescued the endothelial dysfunction. These data demonstrated that the loss of endothelial FGFR1 signaling mediated an increase in ROCK2 activity, which led to an inflammatory response and vascular leakage in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, inhibition of ROCK2 activity by TDI01 provided great value and shed light on clinical translation.
Mammalian reproductive success depends on gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurones to stimulate gonadotrophin secretion from the anterior pituitary and activate gonadal steroidogenesis and gametogenesis. Genetic screening studies in patients diagnosed with Kallmann syndrome (KS), a congenital form of hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (CHH), identified several causal mutations, including those in the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) system. This signalling pathway regulates neuroendocrine progenitor cell proliferation, fate specification and cell survival. Indeed, the GnRH neurone system was absent or abrogated in transgenic mice with reduced (ie, hypomorphic) Fgf8 and/or Fgf receptor (Fgfr) 1 expression, respectively. Moreover, we found that GnRH neurones were absent in the embryonic olfactory placode of Fgf8 hypomorphic mice, the putative birthplace of GnRH neurones. These observations, together with those made in human KS/CHH patients, indicate that the FGF8/FGFR1 signalling system is a requirement for the ontogenesis of the GnRH neuronal system and function. In this review, we discuss how epigenetic factors control the expression of genes such as Fgf8 that are known to be critical for GnRH neurone ontogenesis, fate specification, and the pathogenesis of KS/CHH.
The cell-surface glycoprotein CD56 has three major isoforms that play important roles in cell adhesion and signaling, which may promote cell proliferation, differentiation, survival, or migration. It is an important molecule in normal kidney development and acts as a key marker in Wilms tumor stem and progenitor cells. Here, we review the structural and genetic features of the CD56 glycoprotein, and summarize its roles in the normal versus diseased metanephric blastema. We discuss areas of CD56-related research that may complement or improve existing Wilms tumor treatment strategies, including the antibody-drug conjugate lorvotuzumab mertansine that binds to CD56.
BACKGROUND: Inorganic phosphate (Pi) is an essential mineral for human. Hypophosphatemia and hyperphosphatemia cause rickets/osteomalacia and ectopic calcification, respectively, indicating that serum Pi level needs to be regulated. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 23 is a principal hormone to regulate serum Pi level. FGF23 is produced by the bone, especially by the osteoblasts and osteocytes, and works by binding to FGF receptor (FGFR) 1c and alpha-Klotho complex in the kidney. FGF23 reduces serum Pi level by inhibiting both renal phosphate reabsorption and intestinal phosphate absorption via reduction of serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D level. It has been unclear how the bone senses changes of serum Pi level and how the bone regulates the production of FGF23. RECENT FINDINGS: Our recent results indicate that the post-translational modification of FGF23 protein through a gene product of GALNT3 is the main regulatory mechanism of enhanced FGF23 production by high dietary Pi. Furthermore, high extracellular Pi directly activates FGFR1 and its downstream intracellular signaling pathway regulates the expression level of GALNT3. CONCLUSIONS: We propose that FGFR1 works as a Pi-sensing receptor in the regulation of FGF23 production and serum Pi level. There is a negative feedback system, which is a basic mechanism of endocrine regulation, in the regulation of serum Pi involving FGFR1, and FGF23. These findings may lead to the development of new therapeutic methods to treat diseases caused by abnormal Pi level.
Hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension (PH) is one of the most common and deadliest forms of PH. Fibroblast growth factor receptors 1 and 2 (FGFR1/2) are elevated in patients with PH and in mice exposed to chronic hypoxia. Endothelial FGFR1/2 signaling is important for the adaptive response to several injury types and we hypothesized that endothelial FGFR1/2 signaling would protect against hypoxia-induced PH. Mice lacking endothelial FGFR1/2, mice with activated endothelial FGFR signaling, and human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (HPAECs) were challenged with hypoxia. We assessed the effect of FGFR activation and inhibition on right ventricular pressure, vascular remodeling, and endothelial-mesenchymal transition (EndMT), a known pathologic change seen in patients with PH. Hypoxia-exposed mice lacking endothelial FGFRs developed increased PH, while mice overexpressing a constitutively active FGFR in endothelial cells did not develop PH. Mechanistically, lack of endothelial FGFRs or inhibition of FGFRs in HPAECs led to increased TGF-beta signaling and increased EndMT in response to hypoxia. These phenotypes were reversed in mice with activated endothelial FGFR signaling, suggesting that FGFR signaling inhibits TGF-beta pathway-mediated EndMT during chronic hypoxia. Consistent with these observations, lung tissue from patients with PH showed activation of FGFR and TGF-beta signaling. Collectively, these data suggest that activation of endothelial FGFR signaling could be therapeutic for hypoxia-induced PH.
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is a syndrome found to be isolated (IHH) or associated with anosmia, corresponding to the Kallmann syndrome (KS). It comprises a defect in gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion and absent or delayed puberty. Genetic causes have been identified with a high genetic heterogeneity. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), a tyrosine kinase receptor, was one of the first genes whose mutations were identified as causative in KS FGFR1 is responsible for the formation of the GnRH neuron system. Studying patients has not only allowed the identification of new etiologies for this syndrome but also helped to unravel the signaling pathways involved in the development of GnRH neurons and in GnRH control and function. The FGF21/FGFR1/Klotho B (KLB) signaling pathway mediates the response to starvation and other metabolic stresses. Preventing reproduction during nutritional deprivation is an adaptive process that is essential for the survival of species. In this work, Xu et al (2017), using a candidate gene approach, provide a description of the essential role played by this pathway in GnRH biology and in the pathogenesis of IHH and KS They establish a novel link between metabolism and reproduction in humans.
The acquisition of ectopic type I fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR1) is a common feature of prostate cancer (PCa), the most frequently diagnostic cancer in men. However, how ectopic FGFR1 contributes to PCa progression is not well understood. In our study we showed that ablation of FGFR1 in DU145 human PCa cells changed the cell metabolite profile. Among the changes, the choline metabolism profile was the most significantly altered by FGFR1 ablation. Detailed characterization revealed that ablation of FGFR1 altered expression of multiple choline metabolism enzymes. Among the changes of FGFR1-regulated choline metabolic enzymes, downregulation of choline kinase alpha (CHKA) is the most prominent changes, which phosphorylates free choline to phosphocholine. Ablation of FGFR1 blunted the activity of choline to promote cell proliferation and survival. Furthermore, depletion of CHKA compromised FGF signaling activity in DU145 cells. We also first time demonstrated that FGFR1 formed complex with CHKA, suggesting that FGFR1 regulated CHKA at the posttranslational level. Together with the previous report that ectopic FGFR1 contributes to PCa progression and metastasis, our results here unravel a novel mechanism by which FGFR1 promotes PCa progression by dysregulating choline metabolism, and that the crosstalk between FGFR1-choline metabolism can be a potential target for managing PCa progression.
In renal failure, hyperphosphatemia occurs despite a marked elevation in serum fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-23. Abnormal regulation of the FGFR1-Klotho receptor complex may cause a resistance to the phosphaturic action of FGF23. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the regulation of renal Klotho and FGF receptor (FEFR)-1 in healthy and uremic rats induced by 5/6 nephrectomy. In normal rats, the infusion of rat recombinant FGF23 enhanced phosphaturia and increased renal FGFR1 expression; however, Klotho expression was reduced. Uremic rats on a high-phosphate (HP) diet presented hyperphosphatemia with marked elevation of FGF23 and an increased fractional excretion of phosphate (P) that was associated with a marked reduction of Klotho expression and an increase in FGFR1. After neutralization of FGF23 by anti-FGF23 administration, phosphaturia was still abundant, Klotho expression remained low, and the FGFR1 level was reduced. These results suggest that the expression of renal Klotho is modulated by phosphaturia, whereas the FGFR1 expression is regulated by FGF23. Calcitriol (CTR) administration prevented a decrease in renal Klotho expression. In HEK293 cells HP produced nuclear translocation of beta-catenin, together with a reduction in Klotho. Wnt/beta-catenin inhibition with Dkk-1 prevented the P-induced down-regulation of Klotho. The addition of CTR to HP medium was able to recover Klotho expression. In summary, high FGF23 levels increase FGFR1, whereas phosphaturia decreases Klotho expression through the activation of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.-Munoz-Castaneda, J. R., Herencia, C., Pendon-Ruiz de Mier, M. V., Rodriguez-Ortiz, M. E., Diaz-Tocados, J. M., Vergara, N., Martinez-Moreno, J. M., Salmeron, M. D., Richards, W. G., Felsenfeld, A., Kuro-O, M., Almaden, Y., Rodriguez, M. Differential regulation of renal Klotho and FGFR1 in normal and uremic rats.
PURPOSE: Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH) is a rare disorder resulting in absent puberty and infertility. The genetic architecture is complex with multiple loci involved, variable expressivity, and incomplete penetrance. The majority of cases are sporadic, consistent with a disease affecting fertility. The current study aims to investigate mosaicism as a genetic mechanism for CHH, focusing on de novo rare variants in CHH genes. METHODS: We evaluated 60 trios for de novo rare sequencing variants (RSV) in known CHH genes using exome sequencing. Potential mosaicism was suspected among RSVs with altered allelic ratios and confirmed using customized ultradeep sequencing (UDS) in multiple tissues. RESULTS: Among the 60 trios, 10 probands harbored de novo pathogenic variants in CHH genes. Custom UDS demonstrated that three of these de novo variants were in fact postzygotic mosaicism-two in FGFR1 (p.Leu630Pro and p.Gly348Arg), and one in CHD7 (p.Arg2428*). Statistically significant variation across multiple tissues (DNA from blood, buccal, hair follicle, urine) confirmed their mosaic nature. CONCLUSIONS: We identified a significant number of de novo pathogenic variants in CHH of which a notable number (3/10) exhibited mosaicism. This report of postzygotic mosaicism in CHH patients provides valuable information for accurate genetic counseling.
Bone secrets the hormone, fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), as an endocrine organ to regulate blood phosphate level. Phosphate is an essential mineral for the human body, and around 85% of phosphate is present in bone as a constituent of hydroxyapatite, Ca(10)(PO(4))(6)(OH)(2). Because hypophosphatemia induces rickets/osteomalacia, and hyperphosphatemia results in ectopic calcification, blood phosphate (inorganic form) level must be regulated in a narrow range (2.5 mg/dL to 4.5 me/dL in adults). However, as yet it is unknown how bone senses changes in blood phosphate level, and how bone regulates the production of FGF23. Our previous data indicated that high extracellular phosphate phosphorylates FGF receptor 1 (FGFR1) in an unliganded manner, and its downstream intracellular signaling pathway regulates the expression of GALNT3. Furthermore, the post-translational modification of FGF23 protein via a gene product of GALNT3 is the main regulatory mechanism of enhanced FGF23 production due to high dietary phosphate. Therefore, our research group proposes that FGFR1 works as a phosphate-sensing receptor at least in the regulation of FGF23 production and blood phosphate level, and phosphate behaves as a first messenger. Phosphate is involved in various effects, such as stimulation of parathyroid hormone (PTH) synthesis, vascular calcification, and renal dysfunction. Several of these responses to phosphate are considered as phosphate toxicity. However, it is not clear whether FGFR1 is involved in these responses to phosphate. The elucidation of phosphate-sensing mechanisms may lead to the identification of treatment strategies for patients with abnormal phosphate metabolism.
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a multifactorial, heterogenous disease that arises as a result of the interaction between both environmental and genetic factors. Changes in at least three groups of genes encoding structural proteins, epidermal proteases, and protease inhibitors predispose to a defective epidermal barrier and increase the risk of developing AD. Loss-of-function mutations found within the FLG gene encoding the structural protein, filaggrin, represent the most significant genetic factor predisposing to AD identified to date. Enhanced protease activity and decreased synthesis of the lipid lamellae lead to exacerbated breakdown of the epidermal barrier. Environmental factors, including the use of soap and detergents, exacerbate epidermal barrier breakdown, attributed to the elevation of stratum corneum pH. A sustained increase in pH enhances the activity of degradatory proteases and decreases the activity of the lipid synthesis enzymes. The strong association between both genetic barrier defects and environmental insults to the barrier with AD suggests that epidermal barrier dysfunction is a primary event in the development of this disease. Our understanding of gene-environment interactions should lead to a better use of some topical products, avoidance of others, and the increased use and development of products that can repair the skin barrier.
