Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for fibroblast growth factors and plays an essential role in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, migration and apoptosis, and in the regulation of embryonic development. Required for normal embryonic patterning, trophoblast function, limb bud development, lung morphogenesis, osteogenesis and skin development. Plays an essential role in the regulation of osteoblast differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis, and is required for normal skeleton development. Promotes cell p [...] 
BACKGROUND: Alterations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) have emerged as promising drug targets for intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, a rare cancer with a poor prognosis. Futibatinib, a next-generation, covalently binding FGFR1-4 inhibitor, has been shown to have both antitumor activity in patients with FGFR-altered tumors and strong preclinical activity against acquired resistance mutations associated with ATP-competitive FGFR inhibitors. METHODS: In this multinational, open-label, single-group, phase 2 study, we enrolled patients with unresectable or metastatic FGFR2 fusion-positive or FGFR2 rearrangement-positive intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and disease progression after one or more previous lines of systemic therapy (excluding FGFR inhibitors). The patients received oral futibatinib at a dose of 20 mg once daily in a continuous regimen. The primary end point was objective response (partial or complete response), as assessed by independent central review. Secondary end points included the response duration, progression-free and overall survival, safety, and patient-reported outcomes. RESULTS: Between April 16, 2018, and November 29, 2019, a total of 103 patients were enrolled and received futibatinib. A total of 43 of 103 patients (42%; 95% confidence interval, 32 to 52) had a response, and the median duration of response was 9.7 months. Responses were consistent across patient subgroups, including patients with heavily pretreated disease, older adults, and patients who had co-occurring TP53 mutations. At a median follow-up of 17.1 months, the median progression-free survival was 9.0 months and overall survival was 21.7 months. Common treatment-related grade 3 adverse events were hyperphosphatemia (in 30% of the patients), an increased aspartate aminotransferase level (in 7%), stomatitis (in 6%), and fatigue (in 6%). Treatment-related adverse events led to permanent discontinuation of futibatinib in 2% of the patients. No treatment-related deaths occurred. Quality of life was maintained throughout treatment. CONCLUSIONS: In previously treated patients with FGFR2 fusion or rearrangement-positive intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, the use of futibatinib, a covalent FGFR inhibitor, led to measurable clinical benefit. (Funded by Taiho Oncology and Taiho Pharmaceutical; FOENIX-CCA2 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02052778.).
Biliary tract cancer (BTC) is the second most common primary liver cancer after hepatocellular carcinoma and accounts for 2% of cancer-related deaths. BTCs are classified according to their anatomical origin into intrahepatic (iCCA), perihilar, or distal cholangiocarcinoma, as well as gall bladder carcinoma. While the mutational profiles in these anatomical BTC subtypes overlap to a large extent, iCCA is notable for the high frequency of IDH1/2 mutations (10-22%) and the nearly exclusive occurrence of FGFR2 fusions in 10-15% of patients. In recent years, FGFR2 fusions have become one of the most promising targets for precision oncology targeting BTC, with FGFR inhibitors already approved in Europe and the United States for patients with advanced, pretreated iCCA. While the therapeutic potential of nonfusion alterations is still under debate, it is expected that the field of FGFR2-directed therapies will be subject to rapid further evolution and optimization. The scope of this review is to provide an overview of oncogenic FGFR signaling in iCCA cells and highlight the pathophysiology, diagnostic testing strategies, and therapeutic promises and challenges associated with FGFR2-altered iCCA.
Oncogenic activation of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) drives multiple cancers and represents a broad therapeutic opportunity, yet selective targeting of FGFR2 has not been achieved. Although the clinical efficacy of pan-FGFR inhibitors (pan-FGFRi) validates FGFR2 driver status in FGFR2 fusion-positive intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, their benefit is limited by incomplete target coverage due to FGFR1- and FGFR4-mediated toxicities (hyperphosphatemia and diarrhea, respectively) and the emergence of FGFR2 resistance mutations. RLY-4008 is a highly selective, irreversible FGFR2 inhibitor designed to overcome these limitations. In vitro, RLY-4008 demonstrates >250- and >5,000-fold selectivity over FGFR1 and FGFR4, respectively, and targets primary alterations and resistance mutations. In vivo, RLY-4008 induces regression in multiple xenograft models-including models with FGFR2 resistance mutations that drive clinical progression on current pan-FGFRi-while sparing FGFR1 and FGFR4. In early clinical testing, RLY-4008 induced responses without clinically significant off-isoform FGFR toxicities, confirming the broad therapeutic potential of selective FGFR2 targeting. SIGNIFICANCE: Patients with FGFR2-driven cancers derive limited benefit from pan-FGFRi due to multiple FGFR1-4-mediated toxicities and acquired FGFR2 resistance mutations. RLY-4008 is a highly selective FGFR2 inhibitor that targets primary alterations and resistance mutations and induces tumor regression while sparing other FGFRs, suggesting it may have broad therapeutic potential. See related commentary by Tripathi et al., p. 1964. This article is featured in Selected Articles from This Issue, p. 1949.
Somatic hotspot mutations and structural amplifications and fusions that affect fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (encoded by FGFR2) occur in multiple types of cancer(1). However, clinical responses to FGFR inhibitors have remained variable(1-9), emphasizing the need to better understand which FGFR2 alterations are oncogenic and therapeutically targetable. Here we apply transposon-based screening(10,11) and tumour modelling in mice(12,13), and find that the truncation of exon 18 (E18) of Fgfr2 is a potent driver mutation. Human oncogenomic datasets revealed a diverse set of FGFR2 alterations, including rearrangements, E1-E17 partial amplifications, and E18 nonsense and frameshift mutations, each causing the transcription of E18-truncated FGFR2 (FGFR2(DeltaE18)). Functional in vitro and in vivo examination of a compendium of FGFR2(DeltaE18) and full-length variants pinpointed FGFR2-E18 truncation as single-driver alteration in cancer. By contrast, the oncogenic competence of FGFR2 full-length amplifications depended on a distinct landscape of cooperating driver genes. This suggests that genomic alterations that generate stable FGFR2(DeltaE18) variants are actionable therapeutic targets, which we confirmed in preclinical mouse and human tumour models, and in a clinical trial. We propose that cancers containing any FGFR2 variant with a truncated E18 should be considered for FGFR-targeted therapies.
Bemarituzumab (FPA144) is a first-in-class, humanized, afucosylated immunoglobulin G1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) directed against fibroblast growth factor receptor 2b (FGFR2b) with two mechanisms of action against FGFR2b-overexpressing tumors: inhibition of FGFR2b signaling and enhanced antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). Bemarituzumab is being developed as a cancer therapeutic, and we summarize here the key nonclinical data that supported moving it into clinical trials. Bemarituzumab displayed sub-nanomolar cross-species affinity for FGFR2b receptors, with >20-fold enhanced binding affinity to human Fc gamma receptor IIIa compared with the fucosylated version. In vitro, bemarituzumab induced potent ADCC against FGFR2b-expressing tumor cells, and inhibited FGFR2 phosphorylation and proliferation of SNU-16 gastric cancer cells in a concentration-dependent manner. In vivo, bemarituzumab inhibited tumor growth through inhibition of the FGFR2b pathway and/or ADCC in mouse models. Bemarituzumab demonstrated enhanced anti-tumor activity in combination with chemotherapy, and due to bemarituzumab-induced natural killer cell-dependent increase in programmed death-ligand 1, also resulted in enhanced anti-tumor activity when combined with an anti-programmed death-1 antibody. Repeat-dose toxicity studies established the highest non-severely-toxic dose at 1 and 100 mg/kg in rats and cynomolgus monkeys, respectively. In pharmacokinetic (PK) studies, bemarituzumab exposure increase was greater than dose-proportional, with the linear clearance in the expected dose range for a mAb. The PK data in cynomolgus monkeys were used to project bemarituzumab linear PK in humans, which were consistent with the observed human Phase 1 data. These key nonclinical studies facilitated the successful advancement of bemarituzumab into the clinic.
Pemigatinib (PEMAZYRE), a small molecule inhibitor of fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) 1, FGFR2 and FGFR3, received accelerated approval in April 2020 in the USA for the treatment of adults with previously treated, unresectable, locally advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinoma and a FGFR2 fusion or other rearrangement, as detected by a US FDA-approved test. Developed by Incyte Corporation, it is the first targeted treatment for cholangiocarcinoma in the USA. The recommended dosage of pemigatinib is 13.5 mg once daily, administered orally with or without food, on days 1-14 of a 21-day cycle until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. Pemigatinib received orphan designation for the treatment of myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia and rearrangement of PDGFRA, PDGFRB or FGFR1, or with PCM1-JAK2 in August 2019 in the USA. A regulatory assessment for pemigatinib as a treatment for adults with locally advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinoma and a FGFR2 fusion or rearrangement that is relapsed or refractory after >/= 1 line of systemic therapy is underway in the EU. Pemigatinib is also undergoing clinical development in various countries worldwide for use in several other FGFR-driven malignancies (e.g. solid tumour, urothelial carcinoma). This article summarizes the milestones in the development of pemigatinib leading to this first approval for the treatment of adults with previously treated, unresectable, locally advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinoma and a FGFR2 fusion or other rearrangement, as detected by a US FDA-approved test.
FGFR inhibitors are approved for the treatment of advanced cholangiocarcinoma harboring FGFR2 fusions. However, the response rate is moderate, and resistance emerges rapidly due to acquired secondary FGFR2 mutations or due to other less-defined mechanisms. Here, we conducted high-throughput combination drug screens, biochemical analysis, and therapeutic studies using patient-derived models of FGFR2 fusion-positive cholangiocarcinoma to gain insight into these clinical profiles and uncover improved treatment strategies. We found that feedback activation of EGFR signaling limits FGFR inhibitor efficacy, restricting cell death induction in sensitive models and causing resistance in insensitive models lacking secondary FGFR2 mutations. Inhibition of wild-type EGFR potentiated responses to FGFR inhibitors in both contexts, durably suppressing MEK/ERK and mTOR signaling, increasing apoptosis, and causing marked tumor regressions in vivo. Our findings reveal EGFR-dependent adaptive signaling as an important mechanism limiting FGFR inhibitor efficacy and driving resistance and support clinical testing of FGFR/EGFR inhibitor therapy for FGFR2 fusion-positive cholangiocarcinoma. SIGNIFICANCE: We demonstrate that feedback activation of EGFR signaling limits the effectiveness of FGFR inhibitor therapy and drives adaptive resistance in patient-derived models of FGFR2 fusion-positive cholangiocarcinoma. These studies support the potential of combination treatment with FGFR and EGFR inhibitors as an improved treatment for patients with FGFR2-driven cholangiocarcinoma. This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 1171.
BACKGROUND: COPD is an incurable disease and a leading cause of death worldwide. In mice, fibroblast growth factor (FGF)10 is essential for lung morphogenesis, and in humans, polymorphisms in the human FGF10 gene correlate with an increased susceptibility to develop COPD. METHODS: We analysed FGF10 signalling in human lung sections and isolated cells from healthy donor, smoker and COPD lungs. The development of emphysema and PH was investigated in Fgf10(+/-) and Fgfr2b(+/-) (FGF receptor 2b) mice upon chronic exposure to cigarette smoke. In addition, we overexpressed FGF10 in mice following elastase- or cigarette smoke-induced emphysema and pulmonary hypertension (PH). RESULTS: We found impaired FGF10 expression in human lung alveolar walls and in primary interstitial COPD lung fibroblasts. In contrast, FGF10 expression was increased in large pulmonary vessels in COPD lungs. Consequently, we identified impaired FGF10 signalling in alveolar walls as an integral part of the pathomechanism that leads to emphysema and PH development: mice with impaired FGF10 signalling (Fgf10(+/-) and Fgfr2b(+/-) ) spontaneously developed lung emphysema, PH and other typical pathomechanistic features that generally arise in response to cigarette smoke exposure. CONCLUSION: In a therapeutic approach, FGF10 overexpression successfully restored lung alveolar and vascular structure in mice with established cigarette smoke- and elastase-induced emphysema and PH. FGF10 treatment triggered an initial increase in the number of alveolar type 2 cells that gradually returned to the basal level when the FGF10-mediated repair process progressed. Therefore, the application of recombinant FGF10 or stimulation of the downstream signalling cascade might represent a novel therapeutic strategy in the future.
ATP-competitive fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) kinase inhibitors, including BGJ398 and Debio 1347, show antitumor activity in patients with intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) harboring activating FGFR2 gene fusions. Unfortunately, acquired resistance develops and is often associated with the emergence of secondary FGFR2 kinase domain mutations. Here, we report that the irreversible pan-FGFR inhibitor TAS-120 demonstrated efficacy in 4 patients with FGFR2 fusion-positive ICC who developed resistance to BGJ398 or Debio 1347. Examination of serial biopsies, circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA), and patient-derived ICC cells revealed that TAS-120 was active against multiple FGFR2 mutations conferring resistance to BGJ398 or Debio 1347. Functional assessment and modeling the clonal outgrowth of individual resistance mutations from polyclonal cell pools mirrored the resistance profiles observed clinically for each inhibitor. Our findings suggest that strategic sequencing of FGFR inhibitors, guided by serial biopsy and ctDNA analysis, may prolong the duration of benefit from FGFR inhibition in patients with FGFR2 fusion-positive ICC. SIGNIFICANCE: ATP-competitive FGFR inhibitors (BGJ398, Debio 1347) show efficacy in FGFR2-altered ICC; however, acquired FGFR2 kinase domain mutations cause drug resistance and tumor progression. We demonstrate that the irreversible FGFR inhibitor TAS-120 provides clinical benefit in patients with resistance to BGJ398 or Debio 1347 and overcomes several FGFR2 mutations in ICC models.This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 983.
Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) kinase inhibitors have been shown to be effective in the treatment of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and other advanced solid tumors harboring FGFR2 alterations, but the toxicity of these drugs frequently leads to dose reduction or interruption of treatment such that maximum efficacy cannot be achieved. The most common adverse effects are hyperphosphatemia caused by FGFR1 inhibition and diarrhea due to FGFR4 inhibition, as current therapies are not selective among the FGFRs. Designing selective inhibitors has proved difficult with conventional approaches because the orthosteric sites of FGFR family members are observed to be highly similar in X-ray structures. In this study, aided by analysis of protein dynamics, we designed a selective, covalent FGFR2 inhibitor. In a key initial step, analysis of long-timescale molecular dynamics simulations of the FGFR1 and FGFR2 kinase domains allowed us to identify differential motion in their P-loops, which are located adjacent to the orthosteric site. Using this insight, we were able to design orthosteric binders that selectively and covalently engage the P-loop of FGFR2. Our drug discovery efforts culminated in the development of lirafugratinib (RLY-4008), a covalent inhibitor of FGFR2 that shows substantial selectivity over FGFR1 (~250-fold) and FGFR4 (~5,000-fold) in vitro, causes tumor regression in multiple FGFR2-altered human xenograft models, and was recently demonstrated to be efficacious in the clinic at doses that do not induce clinically significant hyperphosphatemia or diarrhea.
Genomic alterations that activate Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 2 (FGFR2) are common in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) and confer sensitivity to FGFR inhibition. However, the depth and duration of response is often limited. Here, we conduct integrative transcriptomics, metabolomics, and phosphoproteomics analysis of patient-derived models to define pathways downstream of oncogenic FGFR2 signaling that fuel ICC growth and to uncover compensatory mechanisms associated with pathway inhibition. We find that FGFR2-mediated activation of Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) maintains a highly glycolytic phenotype. Conversely, FGFR inhibition blocks glucose uptake and glycolysis while inciting adaptive changes, including switching fuel source utilization favoring fatty acid oxidation and increasing mitochondrial fusion and autophagy. Accordingly, FGFR inhibitor efficacy is potentiated by combined mitochondrial targeting, an effect enhanced in xenograft models by intermittent fasting. Thus, we show that oncogenic FGFR2 signaling drives NF-kappaB-dependent glycolysis in ICC and that metabolic reprogramming in response to FGFR inhibition confers new targetable vulnerabilities.
Increasing evidence indicates that success of targeted therapies in the treatment of cancer is context-dependent and is influenced by a complex crosstalk between signaling pathways and between cell types in the tumor. The Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF)/FGF receptor (FGFR) signaling axis highlights the importance of such context-dependent signaling in cancer. Aberrant FGFR signaling has been characterized in almost all cancer types, most commonly non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), breast cancer, glioblastoma, prostate cancer and gastrointestinal cancer. This occurs primarily through amplification and over-expression of FGFR1 and FGFR2 resulting in ligand-independent activation. Mutations and translocations of FGFR1-4 are also identified in cancer. Canonical FGF-FGFR signaling is tightly regulated by ligand-receptor combinations as well as direct interactions with the FGFR coreceptors heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and Klotho. Noncanonical FGFR signaling partners have been implicated in differential regulation of FGFR signaling. FGFR directly interacts with cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, contributing to invasive and migratory properties of cancer cells, whereas interactions with other receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) regulate angiogenic, resistance to therapy, and metastatic potential of cancer cells. The diversity in FGFR signaling partners supports a role for FGFR signaling in cancer, independent of genetic aberration.
Patients with cancer of unknown primary (CUP) carry the double burden of an aggressive disease and reduced access to therapies. Experimental models are pivotal for CUP biology investigation and drug testing. We derived two CUP cell lines (CUP#55 and #96) and corresponding patient-derived xenografts (PDXs), from ascites tumor cells. CUP cell lines and PDXs underwent histological, immune-phenotypical, molecular, and genomic characterization confirming the features of the original tumor. The tissue-of-origin prediction was obtained from the tumor microRNA expression profile and confirmed by single-cell transcriptomics. Genomic testing and fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis identified FGFR2 gene amplification in both models, in the form of homogeneously staining region (HSR) in CUP#55 and double minutes in CUP#96. FGFR2 was recognized as the main oncogenic driver and therapeutic target. FGFR2-targeting drug BGJ398 (infigratinib) in combination with the MEK inhibitor trametinib proved to be synergic and exceptionally active, both in vitro and in vivo. The effects of the combined treatment by single-cell gene expression analysis revealed a remarkable plasticity of tumor cells and the greater sensitivity of cells with epithelial phenotype. This study brings personalized therapy closer to CUP patients and provides the rationale for FGFR2 and MEK targeting in metastatic tumors with FGFR2 pathway activation.
INTRODUCTION: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) accounts for approximately 3% of gastrointestinal malignancies and is associated with a high mortality rate. Recent progress in the understanding of cholangiocarcinoma tumorigenesis and molecular markers has led to the development of several targeted therapies applicable to this disease. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene fusion or translocation, resulting in constitutive activation of the FGFR tyrosine kinase, has been identified as a driver of oncogenesis in 10-15% of intrahepatic CCA. Pemigatinib is an FGFR inhibitor that has demonstrated survival benefit in the second line setting for treatment of CCA with FGFR2 fusion or rearrangement refractory to chemotherapy. Pemigatinib was the first targeted therapy to be approved by the FDA for treatment of cholangiocarcinoma. AREAS COVERED: This article reviews FGFR and its dysregulation in oncogenesis, FGFR inhibitors, especially pemigatinib, utilized in treatment of CCA, common adverse events associated with FGFR inhibitors, and future directions in the field of targeted drug development for CCA. EXPERT OPINION: FGFR inhibitors, including pemigatinib, have shown promise in the management of CCA with FGFR2 fusion or rearrangement; however, acquired resistance remains a major barrier in the field of FGFR inhibitors and requires further study.
PURPOSE: Understanding resistance to selective FGFR inhibitors is crucial to improve the clinical outcomes of patients with FGFR2-driven malignancies. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed sequential ctDNA, +/- whole-exome sequencing, or targeted next-generation sequencing on tissue biopsies from patients with tumors harboring activating FGFR2 alterations progressing on pan-FGFR-selective inhibitors, collected in the prospective UNLOCK program. FGFR2::BICC1 Ba/F3 and patient-derived xenograft models were used for functional studies. RESULTS: Thirty-six patients were included. In cholangiocarcinoma, at resistance to both reversible inhibitors (e.g., pemigatinib and erdafitinib) and the irreversible inhibitor futibatinib, polyclonal FGFR2 kinase domain mutations were frequent (14/27 patients). Tumors other than cholangiocarcinoma shared the same mutated FGFR2 residues, but polyclonality was rare (1/9 patients). At resistance to reversible inhibitors, 14 residues in the FGFR2 kinase domain were mutated-after futibatinib, only the molecular brake N550 and the gatekeeper V565. Off-target alterations in PI3K/mTOR and MAPK pathways were found in 11 patients, often together with on-target mutations. At progression to a first FGFR inhibitor, 12 patients received futibatinib or lirafugratinib (irreversible inhibitors), with variable clinical outcomes depending on previous resistance mechanisms. Two patients with TSC1 or PIK3CA mutations benefited from everolimus. In cell viability assays on Ba/F3 and in pharmacologic studies on patient-derived xenografts, irreversible inhibitors retained better activity against FGFR2 kinase domain mutations, with lirafugratinib active against the recalcitrant V565L/F/Y. CONCLUSIONS: At progression to FGFR inhibitors, FGFR2-driven malignancies are characterized by high intra- and interpatient molecular heterogeneity, particularly in cholangiocarcinoma. Resistance to FGFR inhibitors can be overcome by sequential, molecularly oriented treatment strategies across FGFR2-driven tumors.
ABSTRACT AND AIM: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a highly aggressive and lethal cancer that originates from the biliary epithelium. Systemic treatment options for CCA are currently limited, and the first targeted drug of CCA, pemigatinib, emerged in 2020 for CCA treatment by inhibiting FGFR2 phosphorylation. However, the regulatory mechanism of FGFR2 phosphorylation is not fully elucidated. APPROACH AND RESULTS: Here we screened the FGFR2-interacting proteins and showed that protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) N9 interacts with FGFR2 and negatively regulates FGFR2 pY656/657 . Using phosphatase activity assays and modeling the FGFR2-PTPN9 complex structure, we identified FGFR2 pY656/657 as a substrate of PTPN9, and found that sec. 14p domain of PTPN9 interacts with FGFR2 through ACAP1 mediation. Coexpression of PTPN9 and ACAP1 indicates a favorable prognosis for CCA. In addition, we identified key amino acids and motifs involved in the sec. 14p-APCP1-FGFR2 interaction, including the "YRETRRKE" motif of sec. 14p, Y471 of PTPN9, as well as the PH and Arf-GAP domain of ACAP1. Moreover, we discovered that the FGFR2 I654V substitution can decrease PTPN9-FGFR2 interaction and thereby reduce the effectiveness of pemigatinib treatment. Using a series of in vitro and in vivo experiments including patient-derived xenografts (PDX), we showed that PTPN9 synergistically enhances pemigatinib effectiveness and suppresses CCA proliferation, migration, and invasion by inhibiting FGFR2 pY656/657 . CONCLUSIONS: Our study identifies PTPN9 as a negative regulator of FGFR2 phosphorylation and a synergistic factor for pemigatinib treatment. The molecular mechanism, oncogenic function, and clinical significance of the PTPN9-ACAP1-FGFR2 complex are revealed, providing more evidence for CCA precision treatment.
Human papillomaviruses (HPV) infect and replicate in stratified epithelium at cutaneous and mucosal surfaces. The proliferation and maintenance of keratinocytes, the cells which make up this epithelium, are controlled by a number of growth factor receptors such as the keratinocyte growth factor receptor (KGFR, also called fibroblast growth factor receptor 2b (FGFR2b)), the epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the insulin-like growth factor receptors 1 and 2 (IGF1R and IGF2R). In this review, we will delineate the mutation, gene transcription, translation and processing of the IGF axis within HPV associated cancers. The IGFs are key for developmental and postnatal growth of almost all tissues; we explore whether this crucial axis has been hijacked by HPV.
The association between fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) polymorphism and breast cancer (BC) susceptibility remains inconclusive. The purpose of this systematic review was to evaluate the relationship between FGFR2 (rs2981582, rs2420946 and rs2981578) polymorphism and BC risk. PubMed, Web of science and the Cochrane Library databases were searched before October 11, 2015 to identify relevant studies. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to estimate the strength of associations. Sensitivity and subgroup analyses were conducted. Thirty-five studies published from 2007 to 2015 were included in this meta-analysis. The pooled results showed that there was significant association between all the 3 variants and BC risk in any genetic model. Subgroup analysis was performed on rs2981582 and rs2420946 by ethnicity and Source of controls, the effects remained in Asians, Caucasians, population-based and hospital-based groups. We did not carryout subgroup analysis on rs2981578 for the variant included only 3 articles. This meta-analysis of case-control studies provides strong evidence that FGFR2 (rs2981582, rs2420946 and rs2981578) polymorphisms were significantly associated with the BC risk. For rs2981582 and rs2420946, the association remained significant in Asians, Caucasians, general populations and hospital populations. However, further large scale multicenter epidemiological studies are warranted to confirm this finding and the molecular mechanism for the association need to be elucidated further.
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a heterogeneous group of neoplasms burdened by a dismal prognosis. Several studies have investigated the genomic profile of CCA and identified numerous druggable genetic alterations, including FGFR2 fusions/rearrangements. Approximately 5-7% of CCAs and 10-20% of intrahepatic iCCAs harbor FGFR2 fusions. With the recent advent of FGFR-targeting therapies into clinical practice, a standardization of molecular testing for FGFR2 alterations in CCA will be necessary. In this review, we describe the technical aspects and challenges related to FGFR2 testing in routine practice, focusing on the comparison between Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) and FISH assays, the best timing to perform the test, and on the role of liquid biopsy.
Modulation of the number of functional growth factor receptors on the epithelial cell surface that is exposed to the action of cognate ligands represents a key strategy in cellular physiology to regulate the proliferation rate and the differentiation process. The keratinocyte growth factor receptor (KGFR) and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), among the growth factor receptors expressed on keratinocytes, are believed to play a unique crucial role in controlling epithelial proliferation. KGFR and EGFR appear to also contribute to the cell differentiation process. Modulation of KGFR and EGFR on the proliferation rate and differentiation process has been reported either in in vivo or in vitro conditions. This article reviews the architecture, the ligand binding activated-signaling pathways, and the biologic effects of KGFR and EGFR on keratinocytes.
