Filamin-A; Promotes orthogonal branching of actin filaments and links actin filaments to membrane glycoproteins. Anchors various transmembrane proteins to the actin cytoskeleton and serves as a scaffold for a wide range of cytoplasmic signaling proteins. Interaction with FLNB may allow neuroblast migration from the ventricular zone into the cortical plate. Tethers cell surface- localized furin, modulates its rate of internalization and directs its intracellular trafficking (By similarity). Involved in ciliogenesis. Plays a role in cell-cell contacts and adherens junctions during the de [...] 
X-linked epilepsies are a heterogeneous group of epileptic conditions, which often overlap with X-linked intellectual disability. To date, various X-linked genes responsible for epilepsy syndromes and/or developmental and epileptic encephalopathies have been recognized. The electro-clinical phenotype is well described for some genes in which epilepsy represents the core symptom, while less phenotypic details have been reported for other recently identified genes. In this review, we comprehensively describe the main features of both X-linked epileptic syndromes thoroughly characterized to date (PCDH19-related DEE, CDKL5-related DEE, MECP2-related disorders), forms of epilepsy related to X-linked neuronal migration disorders (e.g., ARX, DCX, FLNA) and DEEs associated with recently recognized genes (e.g., SLC9A6, SLC35A2, SYN1, ARHGEF9, ATP6AP2, IQSEC2, NEXMIF, PIGA, ALG13, FGF13, GRIA3, SMC1A). It is often difficult to suspect an X-linked mode of transmission in an epilepsy syndrome. Indeed, different models of X-linked inheritance and modifying factors, including epigenetic regulation and X-chromosome inactivation in females, may further complicate genotype-phenotype correlations. The purpose of this work is to provide an extensive and updated narrative review of X-linked epilepsies. This review could support clinicians in the genetic diagnosis and treatment of patients with epilepsy featuring X-linked inheritance.
Dysregulation of alternative splicing in prostate cancer is linked to transcriptional programs activated by AR, ERG, FOXA1, and MYC. Here, we show that FOXA1 functions as the primary orchestrator of alternative splicing dysregulation across 500 primary and metastatic prostate cancer transcriptomes. We demonstrate that FOXA1 binds to the regulatory regions of splicing-related genes, including HNRNPK and SRSF1. By controlling trans-acting factor expression, FOXA1 exploits an "exon definition" mechanism calibrating alternative splicing toward dominant isoform production. This regulation especially impacts splicing factors themselves and leads to a reduction of nonsense-mediated decay (NMD)-targeted isoforms. Inclusion of the NMD-determinant FLNA exon 30 by FOXA1-controlled oncogene SRSF1 promotes cell growth in vitro and predicts disease recurrence. Overall, we report a role for FOXA1 in rewiring the alternative splicing landscape in prostate cancer through a cascade of events from chromatin access, to splicing factor regulation, and, finally, to alternative splicing of exons influencing patient survival.
Cervical cancer, primarily squamous cell carcinoma, is the most prevalent gynecologic malignancy. Organoids can mimic tumor development in vitro, but current Matrigel inaccurately replicates the tissue-specific microenvironment. This limitation compromises the accurate representation of tumor heterogeneity. We collected para-cancerous cervical tissues from patients diagnosed with cervical squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC) and prepared uterine cervix extracellular matrix (UCEM) hydrogels. Proteomic analysis of UCEM identified several tissue-specific signaling pathways including human papillomavirus, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT, and extracellular matrix receptor. Secreted proteins like FLNA, MYH9, HSPA8, and EEF1A1 were present, indicating UCEM successfully maintained cervical proteins. UCEM provided a tailored microenvironment for CSCC organoids, enabling formation and growth while preserving tumorigenic potential. RNA sequencing showed UCEM-organoids exhibited greater similarity to native CSCC and reflected tumor heterogeneity by exhibiting CSCC-associated signaling pathways including virus protein-cytokine, nuclear factor kappaB, tumor necrosis factor, and oncogenes EGR1, FPR1, and IFI6. Moreover, UCEM-organoids developed chemotherapy resistance. Our research provides insights into advanced organoid technology through native matrix hydrogels.
Poison exons are naturally occurring, highly conserved alternative exons that contain a premature termination codon. Inclusion of a poison exon in a transcript targets the transcript for nonsense mediated decay, decreasing the amount of protein produced. Poison exons are proposed to play an important role in tissue-specific expression, development and autoregulation of gene expression. Recently, several studies that performed systematic investigations of alternative splicing in the brain have highlighted the abundance of transcripts containing poison exons, some of which are spliced in a cell type-specific manner. Pathogenic variants in or near poison exons that result in aberrant splicing have been identified in several genes including FLNA, SCN1A and SNRPB. Improved understanding of the role of poison exons in development and disease may present opportunities to solve previously undiagnosed disease and to develop therapeutic approaches in the future.
Autophagy is a conserved and tightly regulated intracellular quality control pathway. ULK is a key kinase in autophagy initiation, but whether ULK kinase activity also participates in the late stages of autophagy remains unknown. Here, we found that the autophagosomal SNARE protein, STX17, is phosphorylated by ULK at residue S289, beyond which it localizes specifically to autophagosomes. Inhibition of STX17 phosphorylation prevents such autophagosome localization. FLNA was then identified as a linker between ATG8 family proteins (ATG8s) and STX17 with essential involvement in STX17 recruitment to autophagosomes. Phosphorylation of STX17 S289 promotes its interaction with FLNA, activating its recruitment to autophagosomes and facilitating autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Disease-causative mutations around the ATG8s- and STX17-binding regions of FLNA disrupt its interactions with ATG8s and STX17, inhibiting STX17 recruitment and autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Cumulatively, our study reveals an unexpected role of ULK in autophagosome maturation, uncovers its regulatory mechanism in STX17 recruitment, and highlights a potential association between autophagy and FLNA.
Simufilam is a novel oral drug candidate in Phase 3 clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia. This small molecule binds an altered form of filamin A (FLNA) that occurs in AD. This drug action disrupts FLNA's aberrant linkage to the alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (alpha7nAChR), thereby blocking soluble amyloid beta(1-42) (Abeta(42))'s signaling via alpha7nAChR that hyperphosphorylates tau. Here, we aimed to clarify simufilam's mechanism. We now show that simufilam reduced Abeta(42) binding to alpha7nAChR with a 10-picomolar IC(50) using time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer (TR-FRET), a robust technology to detect highly sensitive molecular interactions. We also show that FLNA links to multiple inflammatory receptors in addition to Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) in postmortem human AD brains and in AD transgenic mice: TLR2, C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4), C-C chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5), and T-cell co-receptor cluster of differentiation 4 (CD4). These aberrant FLNA linkages, which can be induced in a healthy control brain by Abeta(42) incubation, were disrupted by simufilam. Simufilam reduced inflammatory cytokine release from Abeta(42)-stimulated human astrocytes. In the AD transgenic mice, CCR5-G protein coupling was elevated, indicating persistent activation. Oral simufilam reduced both the FLNA-CCR5 linkage and the CCR5-G protein coupling in these mice, while restoring CCR5's responsivity to C-C chemokine ligand 3 (CCL3). By disrupting aberrant FLNA-receptor interactions critical to AD pathogenic pathways, simufilam may promote brain health.
Filamin A (FLNA) is a large actin-binding cytoskeletal protein that is important for cell motility by stabilizing actin networks and integrating them with cell membranes. Interestingly, a C-terminal fragment of FLNA can be cleaved off by calpain to stimulate adaptive angiogenesis by transporting multiple transcription factors into the nucleus. Recently, increasing evidence suggests that FLNA participates in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, in which the interaction of FLNA with transcription factors and/or cell signaling molecules dictate the function of vascular cells. Localized FLNA mutations associate with cardiovascular malformations in humans. A lack of FLNA in experimental animal models disrupts cell migration during embryogenesis and causes anomalies, including heart and vessels, similar to human malformations. More recently, it was shown that FLNA mediates the progression of myocardial infarction and atherosclerosis. Thus, these latest findings identify FLNA as an important novel mediator of cardiovascular development and remodeling, and thus a potential target for therapy. In this update, we summarized the literature on filamin biology with regard to cardiovascular cell function.
Cortical development depends on neuronal migration of both excitatory and inhibitory interneurons. Neuronal migration disorders (NMDs) are conditions characterised by anatomical cortical defects leading to varying degrees of neurocognitive impairment, developmental delay and seizures. Refractory epilepsy affects 15 million people worldwide, and it is thought that cortical developmental disorders are responsible for 25% of childhood cases. However, little is known about the epidemiology of these disorders, nor are their aetiologies fully understood, though many are associated with sporadic genetic mutations. In this review, we aim to highlight X-linked NMDs including lissencephaly, periventricular nodular heterotopia and polymicrogyria because of their mostly familial inheritance pattern. We focus on the most prominent genes responsible: including DCX, ARX, FLNA, FMR1, L1CAM, SRPX2, DDX3X, NSHDL, CUL4B and OFD1, outlining what is known about their prevalence among NMDs, and the underlying pathophysiology. X-linked disorders are important to recognise clinically, as females often have milder phenotypes. Consequently, there is a greater chance they survive to reproductive age and risk passing the mutations down. Effective genetic screening is important to prevent and treat these conditions, and for this, we need to know gene mutations and have a clear understanding of the function of the genes involved. This review summarises the knowledge base and provides clear direction for future work by both scientists and clinicians alike.
Bag3 has been implicated in a wide variety of physiological processes from autophagy to aggresome formation and from cell transformation to survival. We argue that involvement of Bag3 in many of these processes is due to its distinct function in cell signaling. The structure of Bag3 suggests that it can serve as a scaffold that links molecular chaperones Hsp70 and small Hsps with components of a variety of signaling pathways. Major protein-protein interaction motifs of Bag3 that recruit components of signaling pathways are WW domain and PXXP motif that interacts with SH3-domain proteins. Furthermore, Hsp70-Bag3 appears to be a sensor of abnormal polypeptides during the proteotoxic stress. It also serves as a sensor of a mechanical force during mechanotransduction. Common feature of these and probably certain other sensory mechanisms is that they represent responses to specific kinds of abnormal proteins, i.e. unfolded filamin A in case of mechanotransduction or stalled translating polypeptides in case of sensing proteasome inhibition. Overall Hsp70-Bag3 module represents a novel signaling node that responds to multiple stimuli and controls multiple physiological processes.
Glycoprotein Ibalpha (GPIbalpha) is expressed on the surface of platelets and megakaryocytes (MKs) and anchored to the membrane skeleton by filamin A (flnA). Although GPIb and flnA have fundamental roles in platelet biogenesis, the nature of this interaction in megakaryocyte biology remains ill-defined. We generated a mouse model expressing either human wild-type (WT) GPIbalpha (hGPIbalphaWT) or a flnA-binding mutant (hGPIbalphaFW) and lacking endogenous mouse GPIbalpha. Mice expressing the mutant GPIbalpha transgene exhibited macrothrombocytopenia with preserved GPIb surface expression. Platelet clearance was normal and differentiation of MKs to proplatelets was unimpaired in hGPIbalphaFW mice. The most striking abnormalities in hGPIbalphaFW MKs were the defective formation of the demarcation membrane system (DMS) and the redistribution of flnA from the cytoplasm to the peripheral margin of MKs. These abnormalities led to disorganized internal MK membranes and the generation of enlarged megakaryocyte membrane buds. The defective flnA-GPIbalpha interaction also resulted in misdirected release of buds away from the vasculature into bone marrow interstitium. Restoring the linkage between flnA and GPIbalpha corrected the flnA redistribution within MKs and DMS ultrastructural defects as well as restored normal bud size and release into sinusoids. These studies define a new mechanism of macrothrombocytopenia resulting from dysregulated MK budding. The link between flnA and GPIbalpha is not essential for the MK budding process, however, it plays a major role in regulating the structure of the DMS, bud morphogenesis, and the localized release of buds into the circulation.
Recent progress in the study of hereditary large vessel diseases such as Marfan syndrome (MFS) have not only identified responsible genes but also provided better understanding of the pathophysiology and revealed possible new therapeutic targets. Genes identified for these diseases include FBN1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, TGFB2, TGFB3, SKI, EFEMP2, COL3A1, FLNA, ACTA2, MYH11, MYLK and SLC2A10, as well as others. Their dysfunction disrupts the function of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathways, as well as that of the extracellular matrix and smooth muscle contractile apparatus, resulting in progression of structural damage to large vessels, including aortic aneurysms and dissections. Notably, it has been shown that the TGF-beta signaling pathway has a key role in the pathogenesis of MFS and related disorders, which may be important for development of strategies for medical and surgical treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections.
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (Pan-NETs), are heterogeneous neoplasms, whose incidence and prevalence are increasing worldwide. Pan-NETs are characterized by the expression of somatostatin receptors (SSTs). In particular, SST2 is the most widely distributed SST in NETs, thus representing the main molecular target for somatostatin analogs (SSAs). SSAs are currently approved for the treatment of well-differentiated NETs, and radionuclide-labeled SSAs are used for diagnostic and treatment purposes. SSAs, by binding to SSTs, have been shown to inhibit hormone secretion and thus provide control of hypersecretion symptoms, when present, and inhibit tumor proliferation. After SSA binding to SST2, the fate of the receptor is determined by trafficking mechanisms, crucial for the response to endogenous or pharmacological ligands. Although SST2 acts mostly through G protein-dependent mechanism, receptor-ligand complex endocytosis and receptor trafficking further regulate its function. SST2 mediates the decrease of hormone secretion via a G protein-dependent mechanism, culminating with the inhibition of adenylyl cyclase and calcium channels; it also inhibits cell proliferation and increases apoptosis through the modulation of protein tyrosine phosphatases. Moreover, SST2 inhibits angiogenesis and cell migration. In this respect, the cross-talk between SST2 and its interacting proteins, including Filamin A (FLNA) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP), plays a crucial role for SST2 signaling and responsiveness to SSAs. This review will focus on recent studies from our and other groups that have investigated the trafficking and signaling of SST2 in Pan-NETs, in order to provide insights into the mechanisms underlying tumor responsiveness to pharmacological treatments.
BACKGROUND: Periventricular nodular heterotopia (PVNH) is caused by abnormal neuronal migration, resulting in the neurons accumulate as nodules along the surface of the lateral ventricles. PVNH often cause epilepsy, psychomotor development or cognition problem. Mutations in FLNA (Filamin A) is the most common underlying genetic etiology. Our purpose is to delineate the clinical and imaging spectrum that differentiates FLNA-positive and FLNA-negative PVNH patients. METHODS: We included 21 patients with confirmed PVNH. The detailed clinical information, electroencephalography, and other clinical findings were recorded. Detailed brain MR imaging was assessed. Mutation analysis of the FLNA gene was used Sanger sequencing or a next generation sequencing based assay. RESULTS: FLNA mutations were identified in 9 patients (7 females and 2 males), including two nonsense, two splice site, three frameshift, and two missense mutations. In FLNA-positive group, 8 patients had anterior predominant bilateral symmetric presentation and only one had asymmetrical distribution and dilated ventricles. Extra-cerebral features were more often observed in FLNA-positive group than FLNA-negative group. CONCLUSION: Genetics of PVNH is heterogenous, and mutations in FLNA gene account for less than half of the patients in our cohort. Our finding between FLNA-positive and FLNA-negative patients could guide the clinicians to select relevant genetic testing.
PAKs are a family of serine/threonine protein kinases activated by small GTPases of the Rho family, including Rac and Cdc42, and are categorized into group I (isoforms 1, 2 and 3) and group II (isoforms 4, 5 and 6). PAK1 and PAK3 are critically involved in biological mechanisms associated with neurodevelopment, neuroplasticity and maturation of the nervous system, and changes in their activity have been detected in pathological disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease and mental retardation. The group I PAKs have been associated with neurological processes due to their involvement in intracellular mechanisms that result in molecular and cellular morphological alterations that promote cytoskeletal outgrowth, increasing the efficiency of synaptic transmission. Their substrates in these processes include other intracellular signaling molecules, such as Raf, Mek and LIMK, as well as other components of the cytoskeleton, such as MLC and FLNa. In this review, we describe the characteristics of group I PAKs, such as their molecular structure, mechanisms of activation and importance in the neurobiological processes involved in synaptic plasticity.
Filamins cross-link the actin cytoskeleton into orthogonal networks and modulate the response of cells to their chemical and mechanical environment by regulating changes in shape and motility. Null mutations in FLNA, the gene that encodes filamin A, lead to defects in neuronal migration, vascular function and connective tissue integrity. By contrast, missense mutations in this same gene produce a spectrum of malformations in multiple organ systems, especially the skeleton. The production of such distinctly different phenotypes from loss- and gain-of-function mechanisms provokes questions as to how a ubiquitously expressed structural protein can subserve crucial but discrete roles during development in many organ systems.
Filamin A(FLNa) is an actin-binding protein, which participates in the formation of the cytoskeleton, anchors a variety of proteins in the cytoskeleton and regulates cell adhesion and migration. It is involved in signal transduction, cell proliferation and differentiation, pseudopodia formation, vesicle transport, tumor resistance and genetic diseases by binding with interacting proteins. In order to fully elucidate the structure, function and pathogenesis of FLNa, we summarized all substances which directly or indirectly act on FLNa so far, upstream and downstream targets which having effect on it, signaling pathways and their functions. It also recorded the expression and effect of FLNa in different diseases, including hereditary disease and tumors.
Recent studies have reported that filamin A (FLNa) and uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) are highly expressed in various types of cancer, but little is currently known about their roles in cervical cancer (CC). In the present study, immunohistochemical staining of paraffin sections of cervical tissues was performed in order to compare the differential expression of FLNa, UCP2, p16 and Ki67 between CC and high‑grade intraepithelial neoplasia (HSIL). UCP2 and FLNa were knocked down in CC cell lines to investigate the effects on cell proliferation, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, migration and invasion. In addition, the present study investigated the expression of cell‑associated proteins [extracellular signal‑regulated kinase (ERK), phosphorylated (p) ERK, protein kinase B (AKT), p‑AKT and B‑cell lymphoma‑2 (Bcl‑2)] and the mRNA levels of cellular proteins such as Ras, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)‑2 and MMP‑9. FLNa and UCP2 expression levels were significantly higher in CC tissues than in HSIL tissues, with no significant differential expression of p16 or Ki67. UCP2 expression was significantly different in patients with clinical stage II or higher or lymph node metastasis compared with in other patients with cervical cancer. FLNa or UCP2 knockdown slowed or decreased SiHa and HeLa cell proliferation, migration and invasion, with no significant change in apoptosis, and downregulated the protein levels of p‑ERK1/2, and the mRNA levels of Ras, MMP‑2 and MMP‑9. UCP2 knockdown arrested the cell cycle at the G2 phase in SiHa and HeLa cells, while FLNa knockdown arrested the cell cycle at the G2 phase in HeLa cells. The results of the present study revealed that FLNa and UCP2 play roles in the development and progression of CC via the Ras/MAPK/ERK signalling pathway. FLNa and UCP2 are superior to p16 and Ki67 for early prediction of CC, indicating that FLNa and UCP2 may be used for the early diagnosis of CC. UCP2 may be used to predict the prognosis of CC.
Filamin C (FLNC) is one of three filamin proteins (Filamin A (FLNA), Filamin B (FLNB), and FLNC) that cross-link actin filaments and interact with numerous binding partners. FLNC consists of a N-terminal actin-binding domain followed by 24 immunoglobulin-like repeats with two intervening calpain-sensitive hinges separating R15 and R16 (hinge 1) and R23 and R24 (hinge-2). The FLNC subunit is dimerized through R24 and calpain cleaves off the dimerization domain to regulate mobility of the FLNC subunit. FLNC is localized in the Z-disc due to the unique insertion of 82 amino acid residues in repeat 20 and necessary for normal Z-disc formation that connect sarcomeres. Since phosphorylation of FLNC by PKC diminishes the calpain sensitivity, assembly, and disassembly of the Z-disc may be regulated by phosphorylation of FLNC. Mutations of FLNC result in cardiomyopathy and muscle weakness. Although this review will focus on the current understanding of FLNC structure and functions in muscle, we will also discuss other filamins because they share high sequence similarity and are better characterized. We will also discuss a possible role of FLNC as a mechanosensor during muscle contraction.
The incidence of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is steadily rising, and it is associated with a high mortality rate. Clinical samples were collected to detect the expression of HSPB8 and BAG3 in ICC tissues. ICC cells were cultured and transfected with plasmids that overexpressed or silenced specific genes to investigate the impact of gene expression alterations on cell function. qPCR and Western blot techniques were utilized to measure gene and protein expression levels. A wound healing assay was conducted to assess cell migration ability. The Transwell assay was used to assess cell invasion ability. Co-IP was used to verify the binding relationship between HSPB8 and BAG3. The effects of HSPB8 and BAG3 on lung metastasis of tumors in vivo were verified by constructing a metastatic tumor model. Through the above experiments, we discovered that the expressions of HSPB8 and BAG3 were up-regulated in ICC tissues and cells, and their expressions were positively correlated. The metastatic ability of ICC cells could be promoted or inhibited by upregulating or downregulating the expression of BAG3. Furthermore, the HSPB8-BAG3 chaperone complex resulted in the abnormal degradation of Filamin A by activating autophagy. Increased expression of Filamin A inhibits the migration and invasion of ICC cells. Overexpression of HSPB8 and BAG3 in vivo promoted the lung metastasis ability of ICC cells. The HSPB8-BAG3 chaperone complex promotes ICC cell migration and invasion by regulating CASA-mediated degradation of Filamin A, offering insights for enhancing ICC therapeutic strategies.
Filamin A (FLNa), the first non-muscle actin filament cross-linking protein, was identified in 1975. Thirty five years of FLNa research has revealed its structure in great detail, discovered its isoforms (FLNb and c), and identified over 90 binding partners including channels, receptors, intracellular signaling molecules, and even transcription factors. Due to this diversity, mutations in human FLN genes result in a wide range of anomalies with moderate to lethal consequences. This review focuses on the structure and functions of FLNa in cell migration and adhesion.
