Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as a cell-surface receptor for VEGFA, VEGFB and PGF, and plays an essential role in the development of embryonic vasculature, the regulation of angiogenesis, cell survival, cell migration, macrophage function, chemotaxis, and cancer cell invasion. May play an essential role as a negative regulator of embryonic angiogenesis by inhibiting excessive proliferation of endothelial cells. Can promote endothelial cell proliferation, survival and angiogenesis in adulthood. Its function in promoting cell proliferati [...] 
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an endothelial cell-specific mitogen in vitro and an angiogenic inducer in a variety of in vivo models. Hypoxia has been shown to be a major inducer of VEGF gene transcription. The tyrosine kinases Flt-1 (VEGFR-1) and Flk-1/KDR (VEGFR-2) are high-affinity VEGF receptors. The role of VEGF in developmental angiogenesis is emphasized by the finding that loss of a single VEGF allele results in defective vascularization and early embryonic lethality. VEGF is critical also for reproductive and bone angiogenesis. Substantial evidence also implicates VEGF as a mediator of pathological angiogenesis. In situ hybridization studies demonstrate expression of VEGF mRNA in the majority of human tumors. Anti-VEGF monoclonal antibodies and other VEGF inhibitors block the growth of several tumor cell lines in nude mice. Clinical trials with various VEGF inhibitors in a variety of malignancies are ongoing. Very recently, an anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody (bevacizumab; Avastin) has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer in combination with chemotherapy. Furthermore, VEGF is implicated in intraocular neovascularization associated with diabetic retinopathy and age-related macular degeneration.
BACKGROUND: Preeclampsia (PE) is a common hypertensive pregnancy disorder associated with shallow trophoblast invasion. Although bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) has been shown to promote trophoblast invasion in vitro, its cellular origin and molecular regulation in placenta, as well as its potential role in PE, has yet to be established. Additionally, whether BMP2 and/or its downstream molecules could serve as potential diagnostic or therapeutic targets for PE has not been explored. METHODS: Placentas and sera from PE and healthy pregnant women were subjected to multi-omics analyses, immunoblots, qPCR, and ELISA assays. Immortalized trophoblast cells, primary cultures of human trophoblasts, and first-trimester villous explants were used for in vitro experiments. Adenovirus expressing sFlt-1 (Ad Flt1)-induced PE rat model was used for in vivo studies. FINDINGS: We find globally decreased H3K27me3 modifications and increased BMP2 signalling in preeclamptic placentas, which is negatively correlated with clinical manifestations. BMP2 is derived from Hofbauer cells and epigenetically regulated by H3K27me3 modification. BMP2 promotes trophoblast invasion and vascular mimicry by upregulating BMP6 via BMPR1A-SMAD2/3-SMAD4 signalling. BMP2 supplementation alleviates high blood pressure and fetal growth restriction phenotypes in Ad Flt1-induced rat PE model. INTERPRETATION: Our findings demonstrate that epigenetically regulated Hofbauer cell-derived BMP2 signalling enhancement in late gestation could serve as a compensatory response for shallow trophoblast invasion in PE, suggesting opportunities for diagnostic marker and therapeutic target applications in PE clinical management. FUNDING: National Key Research and Development Program of China (2022YFC2702400), National Natural Science Foundation of China (82101784, 82171648, 31988101), and Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2020QH051, ZR2020MH039).
Osteoporosis is a chronic disease that seriously affects the quality of life and longevity of the elderly, so exploring the mechanism of osteoporosis is crucial for drug development and treatment. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells are stem cells with multiple differentiation potentials in bone marrow, and changing their differentiation direction can change bone mass. As an extracellular superoxide dismutase, Superoxide Dismutase 3 (SOD3) has been proved to play an important role in multiple organs, but the detailed mechanism of action in bone metabolism is still unclear. In this study, the results of clinical serum samples ELISA and single cell sequencing chip analysis proved that the expression of SOD3 was positively correlated with bone mass, and SOD3 was mainly expressed in osteoblasts and adipocytes and rarely expressed in osteoblasts in BMSCs. In vitro experiments showed that SOD3 can promote osteogenesis and inhibit adipogenesis. Compared with WT mice, the mice that were knocked out of SOD3 had a significant decrease in bone mineral density and significant changes in related parameters. The results of HE and IHC staining suggested that knocking out SOD3 would lead to fat accumulation in the bone marrow cavity and weakened osteogenesis. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments indicated that SOD3 affects bone metabolism by promoting osteogenesis and inhibiting adipogenesis. The results of transcriptome sequencing and revalidation showed that SOD3 can affect the expression of FLT1. Through in vitro experiments, we proved that FLT1 can also promote osteogenesis and inhibit adipogenesis. In addition, through the repeated experiments, the interaction between the two molecules (SOD3 and FLT1) was verified again. Finally, it was verified by WB that SOD3 regulates FLT1 to affect bone metabolism through PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways.
OBJECTIVE: This study investigated sex-specific pathogenesis mechanisms in Alzheimer's disease (AD) using single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) data. METHODS: Data from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) were searched using terms "Alzheimer's Disease", "single cell", and "Homo sapiens". Studies excluding APOE E4 and including comprehensive gender information with 10x sequencing methods were selected, resulting in GSE157827 and GSE174367 datasets from human prefrontal cortex samples. Sex-stratified analyses were conducted on these datasets, and the outcomes of the analysis for GSE157827 were compared with those of GSE174367. The findings were validated using expression profiling from the mouse dataset GSE85162. Furthermore, real-time PCR experiments in mice further confirmed these findings. The Seurat R package was used to identify cell types, and batch effects were mitigated using the Harmony R package. Cell proportions by sex were compared using the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test, and gene expression variability was displayed with an empirical cumulative distribution plot. Differentially expressed genes were identified using the FindMarkers function with the MAST test. Transcription factors were analyzed using the RcisTarget R package. RESULTS: Seven cell types were identified: astrocytes, endothelial cells, excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, microglia, oligodendrocytes, and oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. Additionally, five distinct subpopulations of both endothelial and microglial cells were also identified, respectively. Key findings included: (1) In endothelial cells, genes involved in synapse organization, such as Insulin Like Growth Factor 1 Receptor (IGF1R) and Fms Related Receptor Tyrosine Kinase 1(FLT1), showed higher expression in females with AD. (2) In microglial cells, genes in the ribosome pathway exhibited higher expression in males without AD compared to females (with or without AD) and males with AD. (3) Chromodomain Helicase DNA Binding Protein 2 (CHD2) negatively regulated gene expression in the ribosome pathway in male microglia, suppressing AD, this finding was further validated in mice. (4) Differences between Asians and Caucasians were observed based on sex and disease status stratification. CONCLUSIONS: IGF1R and FLT1 in endothelial cells contribute to AD in females, while CHD2 negatively regulates ribosome pathway gene expression in male microglia, suppressing AD in humans and mice.
BACKGROUND: Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) has been linked to development of Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathologically characterized by the accumulation of amyloid beta (Abeta). Microglia (MG) play a crucial role in uptake of Abeta fibrils, and its dysfunction worsens AD. However, the effect of HHcy on MG Abeta phagocytosis remains unstudied. METHODS: We isolated MG from the cerebrum of HHcy mice with genetic cystathionine-beta-synthase deficiency (Cbs(-/-)) and performed bulk RNA-seq. We performed meta-analysis over transcriptomes of Cbs(-/-) mouse MG, human and mouse AD MG, MG Abeta phagocytosis model, human AD methylome, and GWAS AD genes. RESULTS: HHcy and hypomethylation conditions were identified in Cbs(-/-) mice. Through Cbs(-/-) MG transcriptome analysis, 353 MG DEGs were identified. Phagosome formation and integrin signaling pathways were found suppressed in Cbs(-/-) MG. By analyzing MG transcriptomes from 4 AD patient and 7 mouse AD datasets, 409 human and 777 mouse AD MG DEGs were identified, of which 37 were found common in both species. Through further combinatory analysis with transcriptome from MG Abeta phagocytosis model, we identified 130 functional-validated Abeta phagocytic AD MG DEGs (20 in human AD, 110 in mouse AD), which reflected a compensatory activation of Abeta phagocytosis. Interestingly, we identified 14 human Abeta phagocytic AD MG DEGs which represented impaired MG Abeta phagocytosis in human AD. Finally, through a cascade of meta-analysis of transcriptome of AD MG, functional phagocytosis, HHcy MG, and human AD brain methylome dataset, we identified 5 HHcy-suppressed phagocytic AD MG DEGs (Flt1, Calponin 3, Igf1, Cacna2d4, and Celsr) which were reported to regulate MG/MPhi migration and Abeta phagocytosis. CONCLUSIONS: We established molecular signatures for a compensatory response of Abeta phagocytosis activation in human and mouse AD MG and impaired Abeta phagocytosis in human AD MG. Our discoveries suggested that hypomethylation may modulate HHcy-suppressed MG Abeta phagocytosis in AD.
Placental growth factor (PlGF) is a member of the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) family that also comprises VEGF-A (VEGF), VEGF-B, VEGF-C, and VEGF-D. Unlike VEGF, PlGF is dispensable for development and health but has diverse nonredundant roles in tissue ischemia, malignancy, inflammation, and multiple other diseases. Genetic and pharmacological gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies have identified molecular mechanisms of this multitasking cytokine and characterized the therapeutic potential of delivering or blocking PlGF for various disorders.
The preimplantation embryo produces several factors during its development to signal its presence to the maternal organism. This paper will focus on the role of two distinctive cytokine and growth factor systems (interleukin-1 (IL-1) system and the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) system) during early embryonic development and implantation. IL-1 receptor is expressed in the endometrium of various species and antagonising the biological effects of IL-1 leads to implantation failure in mice. We could show that this is due to an endometrial, not an embryonic effect. Furthermore, we could detect the expression of all components of the IL-1 system in preimplantation embryos from mice and humans. We could show a possible influence of IL-1 on other systems involved in embryonic implantation, including invasion (MMPs/TIMPs) and angiogenesis (VEGF), therefore suggesting a role of this cytokine family during early embryonic development. Immediately after contact to the endometrium, the embryo must induce angiogenesis to ensure its survival, VEGF is a potent angiogenetic growth factor. We have shown a cyclic regulation of the soluble VEGF-receptor, sflt, in human endometrium and have detected the expression of the transmembraneous VEGF-receptors, Flt-1 and kinase insert domain containing receptor (KDR) throughout the menstrual cycle. Furthermore, we have shown that the VEGF gene is one of the earliest genes activated during human preimplantation embryo development, giving rise to the assumption that VEGF is crucial for embryonic development.
OBJECTIVE: Intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) causes morbidity and mortality in preterm infants and prenatal exposure to inflammation contributes to brain injury. Moreover, prenatal exposure to severe inflammation increases the risk of IVH in preterm neonates. The current study investigated whether intrauterine exposure to inflammation affects cerebral angiogenesis and its underlying mechanisms. METHODS: Wnt5a, flt1, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A levels in cord blood serum (stored in a bio-bank) of the enrolled patients were measured via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A preterm prenatal inflammation exposure model was established in rats by intraperitoneal injection intraperitoneally during pregnancy. Angiogenesis of cerebral tissue was analyzed using immunohistochemistry. Wnt5a, flt1, and VEGF-A expression levels were measured via immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence, or western blotting. The correlation between Wnt5a and flt1 expression and the cerebral vessel area was also analyzed. RESULTS: The Wnt5a and flt1 levels in the cord blood serum were significantly higher in the amnionitis group than in the non-amnionitis group. The VEGF-A level in the cord blood serum was significantly lower in the amnionitis group. In the rat model, preterm rats in the prenatal inflammation group exhibited increased microglial cell infiltration and decreased vessel area and diameter in the cerebral tissue compared to the control group. Wnt5a was located in microglial cells, and Wnt5a and flt1 expression in brain tissue significantly increased after prenatal lipopolysaccharide (LPS) exposure. VEGF-A expression declined after prenatal LPS exposure. The cerebral vessel area was negatively correlated with Wnt5a and flt1 expression. CONCLUSION: Disordered cerebral angiogenesis is associated with increased Wnt5a-Flt1 activation in microglial cells after exposure to intrauterine inflammation.
PURPOSE: Invasive non-functional pituitary adenomas (NFPAs) constitute 35% of NFPAs. Despite a relatively large body of molecular investigations on the invasiveness of NFPA, the underlying molecular mechanisms of invasiveness are yet to be determined. Herein, we aimed to provide an overview of gene/microRNA(miRNAs) expression alterations in invasive NFPA. METHODS: This article describes a systematic literature review of articles published up to March 23, 2021, on the transcriptional alterations of invasive NFPA. Five digital libraries were searched, and 42 articles in total fulfilled the eligibility criteria. Pathway enrichment was conducted, and protein interactions among the identified deregulated genes were inferred. RESULTS: In total 133 gene/protein transcriptional alterations, comprising 87 increased and 46 decreased expressions, were detected in a collective number of 1001 invasive compared with 1007 non-invasive patients with NFPA. Deregulation of CDH1, PTTG1, CCNB1, SNAI1, SLUG, EZR, and PRKACB, which are associated with epidermal-mesenchymal transition (EMT), was identified. Moreover, six members of the angiogenesis pathway, i.e., VEGFA, FLT1, CCND1, CTNNB1, MYC(c-MYC), and PTTG1, were detected. SLC2A1, FLT1, and VEGFA were also recognized in the hypoxia pathway. Physical interactions of CTNNB1 with FLT1, CCND1, and EZR as well as its indirect interactions with VEGFA, MYC, CCNB1, and PCNA indicate the tight interplay between EMT, angiogenesis, and hypoxia pathways in invasive NFPAs. In addition, Hippo, JAK-STAT, MAPK, Wnt, PI3K-Akt, Ras, TGF-b, VEGF, and ErbB were identified as interwoven signaling pathways. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, invasive NFPA shares very common deregulated signaling pathways with invasive cancers. A large amount of heterogeneity in the reported deregulations in different studies necessitates the validation of the expressional changes of the suggested biomarkers in a large number of patients with invasive NFPA.
Preeclampsia (PE) may pose significant adverse effects on pregnant women. Dysregulation of angiogenesis, trophoblast invasion, and proliferation are known to be associated with PE development and progression. Fms related tyrosine kinase 1 (FLT1), an anti-angiogenic factor, is consistently upregulated in PE patients. Recent papers highlight that aberrant miR-30a-3p expression contributes to PE development. More effects are needed to assess the biological function of placental miR-30a-3p in PE. The soluble FLT1 (sFLT1) and FLT1 levels were tested by ELISA assay and Western blotting assay. mRNA levels were measured by RT-qPCR assay. Colony formation and MTT assays were applied to assess the effect of miR-30a-3p on trophoblast cell proliferation. The serum sFLT1 and placental FLT1 levels were substantially high in patients with PE. Using miRNA microarray assay, we identified miR-30a-3p upregulation in PE patients' placenta tissues. We further confirmed that miR-30a-3p binds to the 3'-UTR of FLT1 gene and positively regulate its expression. Forcing miR-30a-3p expression inhibited trophoblast cell proliferation and vice versa. In conclusion, persistent high levels of FLT1 and miR-30a-3p may pose adverse effects on angiogenesis and trophoblast proliferation in placenta of PE patients. Therefore, targeting FLT1 and miR-30a-3p may serve as ideal strategies for managing patients with PE.
Anti-Flt1 peptide of GNQWFI binds to vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR1 or Flt1) and prevents binding of VEGF, inhibiting VEGFR1-mediated endothelial cell migration and tube formation. Bare gold nanoparticle (AuNP) was known to have anti-angiogenic properties by specific binding with VEGF. In this study, anti-Flt1 peptide (GGNQWFI) and cyanine were chemically conjugated to AuNPs (Flt1@AuNP-cyanine 5.5 or Flt1@AuNP-hydrocyanine 5.5 [HCy5.5]) to enhance antiangiogenic properties with targeting to VEGFR-1 as well as producing Coulomb nanoradiator therapeutic effect on the retinal endothelial cells. Anti-Flt1 AuNP complex showed binding with VEGFR-1 and showed more protein-induced fluorescence enhancement (PIFE) by various VEGFs compared with bare AuNPs, suggesting enhanced antiangiogenic properties compared to bare AuNP. Nonfluorescent Flt1@AuNP-HCy5.5 successfully reacted with reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced from Fenton reactions or a proton-induced Coulomb nanoradiator, enabling quenching-free oxidant fluorescence ROS imaging in HRMECs under oxidative stress. Flt1@AuNP-HCy5.5 alone induced 50% greater cytotoxicity for HRMECs compared to bare AuNPs and 80% greater cell death by the Au-nanoradiator effect. In conclusion, this study describes a new therapeutic anti-Flt1 gold nanocomplex with enhanced antiangiogenic properties and nanoradiator-mediated cytotoxicity on retinal endothelial cells. (c) 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res Part B: Appl Biomater 107B: 1272-1283, 2019.
INTRODUCTION: Macrophages significantly contribute to the regulation of vessel formation under physiological and pathological conditions. Although the angiogenesis-regulating role of alternatively polarized macrophages is quite controversial, a growing number of evidence shows that they can participate in the later phases of angiogenesis, including vessel sprouting and remodeling or regression. However, the epigenetic and transcriptional regulatory mechanisms controlling this angiogenesis-modulating program are not fully understood. RESULTS: Here we show that IL-4 can coordinately regulate the VEGFA-VEGFR1 (FLT1) axis via simultaneously inhibiting the proangiogenic Vegfa and inducing the antiangiogenic Flt1 expression in murine bone marrow-derived macrophages, which leads to the attenuated proangiogenic activity of alternatively polarized macrophages. The IL-4-activated STAT6 and IL-4-STAT6 signaling pathway-induced EGR2 transcription factors play a direct role in the transcriptional regulation of the Vegfa-Flt1 axis. We demonstrated that this phenomenon is not restricted to the murine bone marrow-derived macrophages, but can also be observed in different murine tissue-resident macrophages ex vivo and parasites-elicited macrophages in vivo with minor cell type-specific differences. Furthermore, IL-4 exposure can modulate the hypoxic response of genes in both murine and human macrophages leading to a blunted Vegfa/VEGFA and synergistically induced Flt1/FLT1 expression. DISCUSSION: Our findings establish that the IL-4-activated epigenetic and transcriptional program can determine angiogenesis-regulating properties in alternatively polarized macrophages under normoxic and hypoxic conditions.
New blood vessel growth is generally a rare event in the healthy adult. However, a notable exception to this is the female reproductive tract where cyclic angiogenesis occurs. Striking new vessel growth and remodeling also occurs during placentation; thus angiogenesis is essential for reproductive success. Vascular endothelial growth factor is a potent stimulator of this process and its production and action is tightly regulated. Indeed the placenta is a rich source of a soluble variant of the flt-1 receptor which seems to protect the placenta from the effects of excess vascular endothelial growth factor. The balance between new vessel growth (in the placental villi for example) and endothelial cell loss in the spiral arteries within the decidua is a delicate one. This is influenced by the local production of promotors and inhibitors of endothelial cell activation. Perturbation of this may lead to maternal pathology during pregnancy.
The properties of two VEGF receptors, Flt-1 and KDR, in the signal transduction of VEGF in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were investigated by using two newly developed blocking monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against Flt-1 and KDR. VEGF stimulated the expression of transcription factor Ets-1 as well as matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) and Flt-1 in HUVECs. The KDR/Flt-1 heterodimer and the KDR homodimer mediate the expression of Ets-1, MMP-1, and Flt-1. VEGF also stimulated DNA synthesis and migration of HUVECs. DNA synthesis is mediated by the same signaling system as the expression of Ets-1. In contrast, cell migration is regulated by two distinct signaling systems. The Flt-1 homodimer is required for actin reorganization. The KDR/Flt-1 heterodimer and the KDR homodimer are required for the assembly of vinculin in focal adhesion plaque by regulating the phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and paxillin.
In normal pregnancy, the soluble form of FMS-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFLT1)/ vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 (sVEGFR-1), a VEGF-trapping protein, is expressed in trophoblasts of the placenta, suggesting that it plays an important role in the physiological barrier between fetal and maternal angiogenesis, when stimulated with VEGF-A. In pathological conditions such as preeclampsia (PE), sFLT1 protein is abnormally overexpressed in trophoblasts and secreted into the serum, which could cause hypertension and proteinuria on the maternal side and growth retardation on the fetal side. Detection of an abnormal increase in serum sFLT1 during the early to middle stages of PE is essential for proper initiation of medical care. To carry out this screening for sFLT1, we developed an easier and relatively low-cost sandwich-type ELISA method using a single mixture of human serum sample with an anti-FLT1 antibody and heparin-beads, namely heparin-beads-coupled ELISA (HB-ELISA). This method takes only about 2 h, and the sFLT1 values were similar levels with commercially available recent ELISA kits: the serum sFLT1 protein was approximately 4.3-fold increased in severe PE compared with those in normal pregnancy.
BACKGROUND: Delta-like canonical notch ligand 4 (DLL4) is considered a potential prognostic gene for renal cell carcinoma (RCC). We assessed the molecular mechanisms and novel biomarkers associated with DLL4 during RCC development. METHODS: Four gene expression profiles were downloaded from the GEO database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between RCC and normal renal samples, including common DEGs (co-DEGs). Thereafter, RCC-associated gene exploration was performed and a PPI network was constructed to identify the core genes. Survival analysis of core genes in the high expression group (H group) and low expression group (L group) was also performed. The key genes related to the core genes were investigated, and the miRNA-target genes and TFs-target genes were analyzed. Finally, the expression levels of VEGFA, FLT1, EGLN3, and DLL4 in RCC and paracancerous tissues were determined. RESULTS: A total of 11,867 DEGs and 622 co-DEGs were identified in this study, and 67 RCC-associated genes that were mainly enriched in signal transduction and angiogenesis function were further explored. VEGFA was identified as the core gene. Further, 30 DEGs and 9 DE-miRNAs were identified between the H and L groups. VEGFA was positively correlated with 19 genes, including EGLN3, FLT1, and DLL4. A total of 18 miRNA-target interactions, including miR-134-5p-DLL4, were obtained. VEGFA, FLT1, EGLN3, and DLL4 were significantly expressed in RCC tissues compared with paracancerous tissues. CONCLUSIONS: DLL4 may contribute to the development of RCC by participating in signal transduction and angiogenesis. VEGFA, FLT1, EGLN3, DLL4, and miR-134-5p may be novel biomarkers for RCC.
Conventional antiangiogenetic inhibitors suffered from poor delivery problems that result in unsatisfactory antitumor treatment efficacy. Although the liposomes or nanomaterial-based delivery systems can improve the therapeutic efficacy of antiangiogenic molecules, the assembly process is far too complex. Herein, a nanomaterial or a new nanodrug that could work without the help of a carrier and could be easily synthesized is needed. Au nanoclusters (AuNCs) are a kind of ideal nanostructures that could spontaneously enter into the cell and could be synthesized by a relatively easy one-pot method. Here, changing the traditional ligand glutathione (GSH) into an anti-Flt1 peptide (AF) has enriched the newly synthesized AF@AuNCs with targeted antiangiogenic properties. Based on the specific binding between AF and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR1), the interaction between VEGFR1 and its ligands could be blocked. Furthermore, the expression of VEGFR2 could be downregulated. Compared with pure AF peptide- and GSH-participated AuNCs (GSH@AuNCs), AF@AuNCs were more effective in inhibiting both tube formation and migration of the endothelial cells in vitro. Furthermore, the in vivo chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) experiment and antitumor experiment were conducted to further verify the enhanced antiangiogenesis and tumor inhibition effect of AF@AuNCs. Our findings provide promising evidence of a carrier-free nanodrug for tumors and other vascular hyperproliferative diseases.
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the fifth most common malignancy worldwide, responsible for approximately half a million new cases every year. The treatment of this disease is challenging and characterised by high rates of therapy failure and toxicity, stressing the need for new innovative treatment strategies. MATERIAL AND METHODS: In this study we performed a shRNAmir-based screen on HNSCC cells with the aim to identify tyrosine kinases that are mediating radiotherapy resistance. RESULTS: The receptor tyrosine kinase FLT1 (VEGFR1) was identified as an important driver of cell survival and radioresistance. We show that FLT1 is phosphorylated in HNSCC cells, and document autocrine production of FLT1 ligands VEGFA and VEGFB, leading to receptor activation. Immunohistochemistry on HNSCC patient samples demonstrated FLT1 and VEGFA to be uniformly expressed. Interestingly, FLT1 was selectively overexpressed in tumour tissue as compared to non-cancerous epithelium. Remarkably, we found only membrane permeable FLT1 kinase inhibitors to be effective, which was in agreement with the intracellular localisation of FLT1. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Taken together, we document expression of FLT1 in HNSCC and demonstrate this kinase to modulate radioresistance and cancer cell survival. Given the fact that FLT1 kinase is selectively upregulated in tumour tissue and that its kinase function seems expendable for normal life and development, this kinase holds great promise as a new potential therapeutic target.
Activation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR1/FLT1) and 2 (VEGFR2/KDR) involves receptor dimerization. Formation of VEGFR dimer has so far not been visualized in single intact cells. In the present study we describe different optical assays which can be used to observe dimerization of VEGFR1 and VEGFR2. Bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BIFC) assays confirmed homo,- and heterodimerization of transfected receptors. Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) techniques in living and fixed CHO-K1 cells allowed observation of VEGFR1 homodimer,- and VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 heterodimer formation after ligand stimulation. After inhibition of ligand binding by the VEGFA JH121 antibody VEGFR1 homodimerization was completely abolished. Under the same conditions, cells transfected by VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 maintained relevant receptor heterodimerization. These techniques to monitor VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 homo- and heterodimerization in living and fixed cells may help in the search for new angiogenesis-directed inhibitors of VEGFR dimerization.
Vascular endothelial growth factor-A is a major player in vascular development and a potent vascular permeability factor under physiological and pathological conditions by binding to a decoy receptor Flt1 and its primary receptor Flk1. In this study, we show that Flt1 heterozygous (Flt1(+/-)) mouse embryos grow up to adult without life-threatening abnormalities but exhibit a transient embryonic edema around the nuchal and back regions, which is reminiscent of increased nuchal translucency in human fetuses. Vascular permeability is enhanced and an intricate infolding of the plasma membrane and huge vesicle-like structures are seen in Flt1(+/-) capillary endothelial cells. Flk1 tyrosine phosphorylation is elevated in Flt1(+/-) embryos, but Flk1 heterozygosity does not suppress embryonic edema caused by Flt1 heterozygosity. When Flt1 mutants are crossed with Aspp1(-/-) mice which exhibit a transient embryonic edema with delayed formation and dysfunction of lymphatic vessels, only 5.7% of Flt1(+/-); Aspp1(-/-) mice survive, compared to expected ratio (25%). Our results demonstrate that Flt1 heterozygosity causes a transient embryonic edema and can be a risk factor for embryonic lethality in combination with other mutations causing non-lethal vascular phenotype.
