Receptor-type tyrosine-protein kinase FLT3; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for the cytokine FLT3LG and regulates differentiation, proliferation and survival of hematopoietic progenitor cells and of dendritic cells. Promotes phosphorylation of SHC1 and AKT1, and activation of the downstream effector MTOR. Promotes activation of RAS signaling and phosphorylation of downstream kinases, including MAPK1/ERK2 and/or MAPK3/ERK1. Promotes phosphorylation of FES, FER, PTPN6/SHP, PTPN11/SHP-2, PLCG1, and STAT5A and/or STAT5B. Activation of wild-type FLT3 causes only m [...] 
FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is a type III receptor tyrosine kinase that plays an important role in hematopoietic cell survival, proliferation and differentiation. The most clinically important point is that mutation of the FLT3 gene is the most frequent genetic alteration and a poor prognostic factor in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. There are two major types of FLT3 mutations: internal tandem duplication mutations in the juxtamembrane domain (FLT3-ITD) and point mutations or deletion in the tyrosine kinase domain (FLT3-TKD). Both mutant FLT3 molecules are activated through ligand-independent dimerization and trans-phosphorylation. Mutant FLT3 induces the activation of multiple intracellular signaling pathways, mainly STAT5, MAPK and AKT signals, leading to cell proliferation and anti-apoptosis. Because high-dose chemotherapy and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation cannot sufficiently improve the prognosis, clinical development of FLT3 kinase inhibitors expected. Although several FLT3 inhibitors have been developed, it takes more than 20 years from the first identification of FLT3 mutations until FLT3 inhibitors become clinically available for AML patients with FLT3 mutations. To date, three FLT3 inhibitors have been clinically approved as monotherapy or combination therapy with conventional chemotherapeutic agents in Japan and/or Europe and United states. However, several mechanisms of resistance to FLT3 inhibitors have already become apparent during their clinical trials. The resistance mechanisms are complex and emerging resistant clones are heterogenous. Further basic and clinical studies are required to establish the best therapeutic strategy for AML patients with FLT3 mutations.
FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is expressed almost exclusively in the hematopoietic compartment. Its ligand, FLT3 ligand (FL), induces dimerization and activation of its intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. Activation of FLT3 leads to its autophosphorylation and initiation of several signal transduction cascades. Signaling is initiated by the recruitment of signal transduction molecules to activated FLT3 through binding to specific phosphorylated tyrosine residues in the intracellular region of FLT3. Activation of FLT3 mediates cell survival, cell proliferation, and differentiation of hematopoietic progenitor cells. It acts in synergy with several other cytokines to promote its biological effects. Deregulated FLT3 activity has been implicated in several diseases, most prominently in acute myeloid leukemia where around one-third of patients carry an activating mutant of FLT3 which drives the disease and is correlated with poor prognosis. Overactivity of FLT3 has also been implicated in autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis. The observation that gain-of-function mutations of FLT3 can promote leukemogenesis has stimulated the development of inhibitors that target this receptor. Many of these are in clinical trials, and some have been approved for clinical use. However, problems with acquired resistance to these inhibitors are common and, furthermore, only a fraction of patients respond to these selective treatments. This review provides a summary of our current knowledge regarding structural and functional aspects of FLT3 signaling, both under normal and pathological conditions, and discusses challenges for the future regarding the use of targeted inhibition of these pathways for the treatment of patients.
Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is frequently mutated in haematological malignancies. Although canonical FLT3 mutations including internal tandem duplications (ITDs) and tyrosine kinase domains (TKDs) have been extensively studied, little is known about the clinical significance of non-canonical FLT3 mutations. Here, we first profiled the spectrum of FLT3 mutations in 869 consecutively newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia patients. Our results showed four types of non-canonical FLT3 mutations depending on the affected protein structure: namely non-canonical point mutations (NCPMs) (19.2%), deletion (0.7%), frameshift (0.8%) and ITD outside the juxtamembrane domain (JMD) and TKD1 regions (0.5%). Furthermore, we found that the survival of patients with high-frequency (>1%) FLT3-NCPM in AML was comparable to those with canonical TKD. In vitro studies using seven representative FLT3-deletion or frameshift mutant constructs showed that the deletion mutants of TKD1 and the FLT3-ITD mutant of TKD2 had significantly higher kinase activity than wild-type FLT3, whereas the deletion mutants of JMD had phosphorylation levels comparable with wild-type FLT3. All tested deletion mutations and ITD were sensitive to AC220 and sorafenib. Collectively, these data enrich our understanding of FLT3 non-canonical mutations in haematological malignancies. Our results may also facilitate prognostic stratification and targeted therapy of AML with FLT3 non-canonical mutations.
Clonal hematopoiesis (CH) is a common aging-associated condition with increased risk of hematologic malignancy. Knowledge of the mechanisms driving evolution from CH to overt malignancy has been hampered by a lack of in vivo models that orthogonally activate mutant alleles. Here, we develop independently regulatable mutations in DNA methyltransferase 3A (Dnmt3a) and nucleophosmin 1 (Npm1), observed in human CH and AML, respectively. We find Dnmt3a mutation expands hematopoietic stem and multipotent progenitor cells (HSC/MPPs), modeling CH. Induction of mutant Npm1 after development of Dnmt3a-mutant CH causes progression to myeloproliferative disorder (MPD), and more aggressive MPD is observed with longer latency between mutations. MPDs uniformly progress to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) following transplant, accompanied by a decrease in HSC/MPPs and an increase in myeloid-restricted progenitors, the latter of which propagate AML in tertiary recipient mice. At a molecular level, progression of CH to MPD is accompanied by selection for mutations activating Ras/Raf/MAPK signaling. Progression to AML is characterized by additional oncogenic signaling mutations (Ptpn11, Pik3r1, Flt3) and/or mutations in epigenetic regulators (Hdac1, Idh1, Arid1a). Together, our study demonstrates that Npm1 mutation drives evolution of Dnmt3a-mutant CH to AML and rate of disease progression is accelerated with longer latency of CH.
Integrating human genomics and proteomics can help elucidate disease mechanisms, identify clinical biomarkers and discover drug targets(1-4). Because previous proteogenomic studies have focused on common variation via genome-wide association studies, the contribution of rare variants to the plasma proteome remains largely unknown. Here we identify associations between rare protein-coding variants and 2,923 plasma protein abundances measured in 49,736 UK Biobank individuals. Our variant-level exome-wide association study identified 5,433 rare genotype-protein associations, of which 81% were undetected in a previous genome-wide association study of the same cohort(5). We then looked at aggregate signals using gene-level collapsing analysis, which revealed 1,962 gene-protein associations. Of the 691 gene-level signals from protein-truncating variants, 99.4% were associated with decreased protein levels. STAB1 and STAB2, encoding scavenger receptors involved in plasma protein clearance, emerged as pleiotropic loci, with 77 and 41 protein associations, respectively. We demonstrate the utility of our publicly accessible resource through several applications. These include detailing an allelic series in NLRC4, identifying potential biomarkers for a fatty liver disease-associated variant in HSD17B13 and bolstering phenome-wide association studies by integrating protein quantitative trait loci with protein-truncating variants in collapsing analyses. Finally, we uncover distinct proteomic consequences of clonal haematopoiesis (CH), including an association between TET2-CH and increased FLT3 levels. Our results highlight a considerable role for rare variation in plasma protein abundance and the value of proteogenomics in therapeutic discovery.
Internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations within FMS-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3) occur in up to 30% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients and confer a very poor prognosis. The oncogenic form of FLT3 is an important therapeutic target, and inhibitors specifically targeting FLT3 kinase can induce complete remission; however, relapse after remission has been observed due to acquired resistance with secondary mutations in FLT3, highlighting the need for new strategies to target FLT3-ITD mutations. Recent studies have reported that the aberrant formations of circular RNAs (circRNAs) are biological tumorigenesis-relevant mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets. Herein, we discovered a circRNA, circMYBL2, derived from the cell-cycle checkpoint gene MYBL2. circMYBL2 is more highly expressed in AML patients with FLT3-ITD mutations than in those without the FLT3-ITD mutation. We found that circMYBL2 knockdown specifically inhibits proliferation and promotes the differentiation of FLT3-ITD AML cells in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, we found that circMYBL2 significantly influences the protein level of mutant FLT3 kinase, which contributes to the activation of FLT3-ITD-dependent signaling pathways. Mechanistically, circMYBL2 enhanced the translational efficiency of FLT3 kinase by increasing the binding of polypyrimidine tract-binding protein 1 (PTBP1) to FLT3 messenger RNA. Moreover, circMYBL2 knockdown impaired the cytoactivity of inhibitor-resistant FLT3-ITD+ cells, with a significant decrease in FLT3 kinase expression, followed by the inactivation of its downstream pathways. In summary, we are the first to reveal a circRNA that specifically influences FLT3-ITD AML and regulates FLT3 kinase levels through translational regulation, suggesting that circMYBL2 may be a potential therapeutic target for FLT3-ITD AML.
Intensive use of cytotoxic agents in multimodality therapeutic regimens has resulted in almost 80% five-year disease-free survival and cure in the majority of childhood cancer patients. However, such success has come at the expense of severe acute or delayed toxicities and an increased occurrence of secondary cancers. With an increasing understanding of the genetic changes that underlie transformation in childhood cancer, rational approaches using agents that target these transforming events are being developed. Current and future strategies in developing tumor-selective therapy using inhibitors of signaling pathways dysregulated in leukemias (FLT3, NOTCH1) and solid/brain tumors (ErbB1-4, IGF-IR, PTCH1), and the challenges in developing less toxic, but equally effective treatments in pediatric oncology are presented.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common hematological cancer in the adult population worldwide. Approximately 35% of patients with AML present internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations in the FMS‑like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) receptor associated with poor prognosis, and thus, this receptor is a relevant target for potential therapeutics. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are used to treat AML; however, their molecular interactions and effects on leukemic cells are poorly understood. The present study aimed to gain insights into the molecular interactions and affinity forces of four TKI drugs (sorafenib, midostaurin, gilteritinib and quizartinib) with the wild‑type (WT)‑FLT3 and ITD‑mutated (ITD‑FLT3) structural models of FLT3, in its inactive aspartic acid‑phenylalanine‑glycine motif (DFG‑out) and active aspartic acid‑phenylalanine‑glycine motif (DFG‑in) conformations. Furthermore, the present study evaluated the effects of the second‑generation TKIs gilteritinib and quizartinib on cancer cell viability, apoptosis and proliferation in the MV4‑11 (ITD‑FLT3) and HL60 (WT‑FLT3) AML cell lines. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from a healthy volunteer were included as an FLT3‑negative group. Molecular docking analysis indicated higher affinities of second‑generation TKIs for WT‑FLT3/DFG‑out and WT‑FLT3/DFG‑in compared with those of the first‑generation TKIs. However, the ITD mutation changed the affinity of all TKIs. The in vitro data supported the in silico predictions: MV4‑11 cells presented high selective sensibility to gilteritinib and quizartinib compared with the HL60 cells, whereas the drugs had no effect on PBMCs. Thus, the current study presented novel information about molecular interactions between the FLT3 receptors (WT or ITD‑mutated) and some of their inhibitors. It also paves the way for the search for novel inhibitory molecules with potential use against AML.
Activating mutations of FLT3 contribute to deregulated hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSC/Ps) growth and survival in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), leading to poor overall survival. AML patients treated with investigational drugs targeting mutant FLT3, including Quizartinib and Crenolanib, develop resistance to these drugs. Development of resistance is largely due to acquisition of cooccurring mutations and activation of additional survival pathways, as well as emergence of additional FLT3 mutations. Despite the high prevalence of FLT3 mutations and their clinical significance in AML, there are few targeted therapeutic options available. We have identified 2 novel nicotinamide-based FLT3 inhibitors (HSN608 and HSN748) that target FLT3 mutations at subnanomolar concentrations and are potently effective against drug-resistant secondary mutations of FLT3. These compounds show antileukemic activity against FLT3ITD in drug-resistant AML, relapsed/refractory AML, and in AML bearing a combination of epigenetic mutations of TET2 along with FLT3ITD. We demonstrate that HSN748 outperformed the FDA-approved FLT3 inhibitor Gilteritinib in terms of inhibitory activity against FLT3ITD in vivo.
The cytokine Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FL) is an important regulator of hematopoiesis. Its receptor, Flt3, is expressed on myeloid, lymphoid and dendritic cell progenitors and is considered an important growth and differentiation factor for several hematopoietic lineages. Activating mutations of Flt3 are frequently found in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients and associated with a poor clinical prognosis. In the present review we provide an overview of our current knowledge on the role of FL in the generation of blood cell lineages. We examine recent studies on Flt3 expression by hematopoietic stem cells and its potential instructive action at early stages of hematopoiesis. In addition, we review current findings on the role of mutated FLT3 in leukemia and the development of FLT3 inhibitors for therapeutic use to treat AML. The importance of mouse models in elucidating the role of Flt3-ligand in normal and malignant hematopoiesis is discussed.
Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (Flt3) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (Flt3-TKI) have improved outcomes for patients with Flt3-mutated acute myeloid leukemia (AML) but are limited by resistance and relapse, indicating persistence of leukemia stem cells (LSC). Here utilizing a Flt3-internal tandem duplication (Flt3-ITD) and Tet2-deleted AML genetic mouse model we determined that FLT3-ITD AML LSC were enriched within the primitive ST-HSC population. FLT3-ITD LSC showed increased expression of the CXCL12 receptor CXCR4. CXCL12-abundant reticular (CAR) cells were increased in Flt3-ITD AML marrow. CXCL12 deletion from the microenvironment enhanced targeting of AML cells by Flt3-TKI plus chemotherapy treatment, including enhanced LSC targeting. Both treatment and CXCL12 deletion partially reduced p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38) signaling in AML cells and further reduction was seen after treatment in CXCL12 deleted mice. p38 inhibition reduced CXCL12-dependent and -independent maintenance of both murine and human Flt3-ITD AML LSC by MSC and enhanced their sensitivity to treatment. p38 inhibition in combination with chemotherapy plus TKI treatment leads to greater depletion of Flt3-ITD AML LSC compared with CXCL12 deletion. Our studies support roles for CXCL12 and p38 signaling in microenvironmental protection of AML LSC and provide a rationale for inhibiting p38 signaling to enhance Flt3-ITD AML targeting.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease and remains a therapeutic challenge. Cytogenetics is a well-established prognostic factor. Recent discovery of molecular mutations has gained momentum with some being potential therapeutic targets. FLT3 mutation seen in approximately one third of the cytogenetically normal AML confers high risk of relapse and poor survival. Quizartinib is the first drug developed specifically as a FLT3 inhibitor. It has confirmed safety and efficacy in phase I and II clinical trials and has shown survival benefit over conventional chemotherapy in patients with FLT3 ITD mutated relapsed/refractory AML. Despite such promise, disease relapses are still seen. Besides the complex nature of AML itself, resistance mechanisms blunting the efficacy of quizartinib have been identified and are being investigated including TKD mutations, alternate signaling pathways and the bone marrow microenvironment. Strategies using combination of quizartinib with other TKIs/agents like crenolinib, PIM kinase, and MEK inhibitors should be further explored.
FLT3, a member of the class III receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), is preferentially expressed on the cell surface of hematopoietic progenitors, and the ligand of FLT3 (FL) is expressed as a membrane-bound or soluble form by bone marrow stroma cells. It has been disclosed that FL-FLT3 interaction plays an important role in the maintenance, proliferation and differentiation of hematopoiesis. FLT3 is also expressed in a high proportion of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells. Activating mutations of FLT3 are the most frequent genetic lesions in AML, and AML patients with FLT3 mutations have a worse prognosis than those with normal FLT3. Exploring the mechanism by which FLT3 mutations cause autoactivation and uncontrolled signaling might lead to a better understanding of how FLT3 becomes oncogenic and provide insights for the development of new drugs.
FLT3-ITD (internal tandem duplication) is a key driver of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and several FDA-approved drugs target this mutant kinase. This Viewpoint describes the discovery of inhibitors targeting point mutants and the development of SILA123, a highly potent and selective type II FLT3 inhibitor. In in vivo studies, SILA-123 significantly suppressed tumor growth in allograft models, demonstrating its potential in treating resistant AML.
Internal tandem duplications in the FMS-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3-ITD) are common mutations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) that induce proteasomal degradation of mutated FLT3 emerge as innovative pharmacological approach. Molecular mechanisms that control targeted proteolysis beyond the ubiquitin-proteasome-system are undefined and PROTACs are the only known type of FLT3 degraders. We report that the von-Hippel-Lindau ubiquitin-ligase based FLT3 PROTAC MA49 (melotinib-49) and the FLT3 hydrophobic tagging molecule MA50 (halotinib-50) reduce endoplasmic reticulum-associated, oncogenic FLT3-ITD but spare FLT3. Nanomolar doses of MA49 and MA50 induce apoptosis of human leukemic cell lines and primary AML blasts with FLT3-ITD (p < 0.05-0.0001), but not of primary hematopoietic stem cells and differentiated immune cells, FLT3 wild-type cells, retinal cells, and c-KIT-dependent cells. In vivo activity of MA49 against FLT3-ITD-positive leukemia cells is verified in a Danio rerio model. The degrader-induced loss of FLT3-ITD involves the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein BIM and a previously unidentified degrader-induced depletion of protein-folding chaperones. The expression levels of HSP90 and HSP110 correlate with reduced AML patient survival (p < 0.1) and HSP90, HSP110, and BIM are linked to the expression of FLT3 in primary AML cells (p < 0.01). HSP90 suppresses degrader-induced FLT3-ITD elimination and thereby establishes a mechanistically defined feed-back circuit.
FLT3 is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) expressed by immature hematopoietic progenitor cells. The ligand for FLT3 is a transmembrane or soluble protein and is expressed by a variety of cells including hematopoietic and marrow stromal cells; in combination with other growth factors, the ligand stimulates proliferation and development of stem cells, myeloid and lymphoid progenitor cells, dendritic cells and natural killer cells. Activation of the receptor leads to tyrosine phosphorylation of various key adaptor proteins known to be involved in different signal transduction pathways that control proliferation, survival and other processes in hematopoietic cells. FLT3 is not only of utmost interest regarding physiological processes of hematopoietic cells but also with regard to pathological aspects, namely leukemogenesis and diagnosis, prognosis and therapy of leukemia. Activating mutations of the receptor have been recognized as the most common genetic abnormality in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), occurring in about 30% of adult cases. AML patients with FLT3 mutations tend to have a poor prognosis, thus FLT3 is an attractive target of therapy, for instance using kinase inhibitors.
Flt3 ligand (FL) is a recently identified cytokine having a central role in the proliferation, survival and differentiation of early murine and human hematopoietic precursor/stem cells. FL acts synergistically in vitro with a number of other hematopoietic growth factors such as IL-3, IL-6, IL-11, IL-12, KIT Ligand and GM-CSF. Recently, it has been shown the in vivo administration of FL results in a significant alteration of hematopoiesis in murine bone marrow (BM), spleen, peripheral blood, liver and lymph nodes. In addition, treatment with FL resulted in a significant accumulation of functionally active dendritic cells within murine lymphoid tissues. The possible applications of FL in dendritic cell-based immunotherapies are discussed.
Fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3) mutations occur in approximately 30% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cases, suggesting FLT3 as an attractive target for AML treatment. Early FLT3 inhibitors enhance antileukemia efficacy by inhibiting multiple targets, and thus had stronger off-target activity, increasing their toxicity. Recently, a number of potent and selective FLT3 inhibitors have been developed, many of which are effective against multiple mutations. This review outlines the evolution of AML-targeting FLT3 inhibitors by focusing on their chemotypes, selectivity and activity over FLT3 wild-type and FLT3 mutations as well as new techniques related to FLT3. Compounds that currently enter the late clinical stage or have entered the market are also briefly reported.
FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is the most frequently mutated gene in AML. Thirty percent of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) harbor activating mutations in FLT3, either internal tandem duplication mutations in the juxtamembrane domain (FLT3-ITD) or point mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain (FLT3 TKD). Small molecule FLT3 inhibitors have emerged as an attractive therapeutic option in patients with FLT3 mutations; however, the clinical activity of early inhibitors was limited by a lack of selectivity, potency and unfavorable pharmacokinetic properties. Newer agents such as quizartinib have improved potency and selectivity associated with much higher bone marrow response rates; however, response duration is limited by the development of secondary resistance. We will review here a number of FLT3 inhibitors that have been evaluated in clinical trials and discuss challenges facing the use of these agents in AML.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease caused by several gene mutations and cytogenetic abnormalities affecting differentiation and proliferation of myeloid lineage cells. FLT3 is a receptor tyrosine kinase commonly overexpressed or mutated, and its mutations are associated with poor prognosis in AML. Although aggressive chemotherapy often followed by hematopoietic stem cell transplant is the current standard of care, the recent approval of FLT3-targeted drugs is revolutionizing AML treatment that had remained unchanged since the 1970s. However, despite the dramatic clinical response to targeted agents, such as FLT3 inhibitors, remission is almost invariably short-lived and ensued by relapse and drug resistance. Hence, there is an urgent need to understand the molecular mechanisms driving drug resistance in order to prevent relapse. In this review, we discuss FLT3 as a target and highlight current understanding of FLT3 inhibitor resistance.
