Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as a cell-surface receptor for VEGFC and VEGFD, and plays an essential role in adult lymphangiogenesis and in the development of the vascular network and the cardiovascular system during embryonic development. Promotes proliferation, survival and migration of endothelial cells, and regulates angiogenic sprouting. Signaling by activated FLT4 leads to enhanced production of VEGFC, and to a lesser degree VEGFA, thereby creating a positive feedback loop that enhances FLT4 signaling. Modulates KDR signaling by  [...] 
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) represents a growth factor with important pro-angiogenic activity, having a mitogenic and an anti-apoptotic effect on endothelial cells, increasing the vascular permeability, promoting cell migration, etc. Due to these effects, it actively contributes in regulating the normal and pathological angiogenic processes. In humans, the VEGF family is composed of several members: VEGF-A (which has different isoforms), VEGF-B, VEGF-C, VEGF-D, VEGF-E (viral VEGF), VEGF-F (snake venom VEGF), placenta growth factor (PlGF), and, recently, to this family has been added endocrine gland-derived vascular endothelial growth factor (EG-VEGF). VEGF binds to tyrosine kinase cell receptors (VEGFRs): VEGFR-1 [Fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (Flt-1)], VEGFR-2 [kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) in human; fetal liver kinase 1 (Flk-1) in mouse] and VEGFR-3 [Fms-like tyrosine kinase 4 (Flt-4)]. While VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2 are expressed predominantly on vascular endothelial cells, VEGFR-3 is expressed especially on lymphatic endothelial cells. VEGFR-2 has the strongest pro-angiogenic activity and a higher tyrosine kinase activity than VEGFR-1. Endothelial cells also express co-receptors, such as neuropilin-1 (NP-1) and neuropilin-2 (NP-2), which modulate tyrosine kinase receptor activity. Both VEGF and VEGFRs are expressed not only on endothelial cells, but also on non-endothelial cells. This article aims to highlight the most recent data referring to the VEGF family and its receptors, as well as its implications in the angiogenesis process. At present, blocking angiogenesis in cancer or in other pathological processes, using anti-VEGF and anti-VEGFRs therapies, is considered to be extremely important.
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of mortality from birth defects. Here, exome sequencing of a single cohort of 2,871 CHD probands, including 2,645 parent-offspring trios, implicated rare inherited mutations in 1.8%, including a recessive founder mutation in GDF1 accounting for  approximately 5% of severe CHD in Ashkenazim, recessive genotypes in MYH6 accounting for  approximately 11% of Shone complex, and dominant FLT4 mutations accounting for 2.3% of Tetralogy of Fallot. De novo mutations (DNMs) accounted for 8% of cases, including  approximately 3% of isolated CHD patients and  approximately 28% with both neurodevelopmental and extra-cardiac congenital anomalies. Seven genes surpassed thresholds for genome-wide significance, and 12 genes not previously implicated in CHD had >70% probability of being disease related. DNMs in  approximately 440 genes were inferred to contribute to CHD. Striking overlap between genes with damaging DNMs in probands with CHD and autism was also found.
Macrophages rapidly undergo glycolytic reprogramming in response to macroautophagy/autophagy, inflammasome activation and pyroptosis for the clearance of bacteria. Identification the key molecules involved in these three events will provide critical potential therapeutic applications. Upon S. typhimurium infection, FLT4/VEGFR3 and its ligand VEGFC were inducibly expressed in macrophages, and FLT4 signaling inhibited CASP1 (caspase 1)-dependent inflammasome activation and pyroptosis but enhanced MAP1LC3/LC3 activation for elimination of the bacteria. Consistently, FLT4 mutants lacking the extracellular ligand-binding domain increased production of the proinflammatory metabolites such as succinate and lactate, and reduced antimicrobial metabolites including citrate and NAD(P)H in macrophages and liver upon infection. Mechanistically, FLT4 recruited AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and phosphorylated Y247 and Y441/442 in the PRKAA/alpha subunit for AMPK activation. The AMPK agonist AICAR could rescue glycolytic reprogramming and inflammasome activation in macrophages expressing the mutant FLT4, which has potential translational application in patients carrying Flt4 mutations to prevent recurrent infections. Collectively, we have elucidated that the FLT4-AMPK module in macrophages coordinates glycolytic reprogramming, autophagy, inflammasome activation and pyroptosis to eliminate invading bacteria.Abbreviations: 3-MA: 3-methyladenine; AICAR: 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide1-beta-D-ribofuranoside; AMP: adenosine monophosphate; AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase; ATP: adenosine triphosphate; BMDM: bone marrow-derived macrophage; CASP1: caspase 1; CFUs: colony-forming units; FLT4/VEGFR3: FMS-like tyrosine kinase 4; GFP: green fluorescent protein; LDH: lactate dehydrogenase; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; PEM: peritoneal exudate macrophage; PRKAA1/AMPKalpha1: protein kinase, AMP-activated, alpha 1 catalytic subunit; PYCARD/ASC: PYD and CARD domain containing; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; TLR4: toll-like receptor 4; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; VEGFC: vascular endothelial growth factor C; WT: wild type.
Neoadjuvant PD-1 blockade may be efficacious in some individuals with high-risk, resectable oral cavity head and neck cancer. To explore correlates of response patterns to neoadjuvant nivolumab treatment and post-surgical recurrences, we analyzed longitudinal tumor and blood samples in a cohort of 12 individuals displaying 33% responsiveness. Pretreatment tumor-based detection of FLT4 mutations and PTEN signature enrichment favors response, and high tumor mutational burden improves recurrence-free survival. In contrast, preexisting and/or acquired mutations (in CDKN2A, YAP1, or JAK2) correlate with innate resistance and/or tumor recurrence. Immunologically, tumor response after therapy entails T cell receptor repertoire diversification in peripheral blood and intratumoral expansion of preexisting T cell clones. A high ratio of regulatory T to T helper 17 cells in pretreatment blood predicts low T cell receptor repertoire diversity in pretreatment blood, a low cytolytic T cell signature in pretreatment tumors, and innate resistance. Our study provides a molecular framework to advance neoadjuvant anti-PD-1 therapy for individuals with resectable head and neck cancer.
Lymphatic vessels are established by differentiation of lymphendothelial progenitors during embryogenesis. Lymphangiogenesis, the formation of new lymphatic vessels from pre-existing ones is rare in the healthy adult but takes place during pathological conditions such as inflammation, tissue repair and tumor growth. Conditions of dysfunctional lymphatics exist after surgical interventions or in certain genetic diseases. A key lymphangiogenic stimulator is vascular endothelial growth factor-C (VEGFC) acting on VEGF receptor-3 (VEGFR3) expressed on lymphendothelial cells. Other cytokines may act directly to regulate lymphangiogenesis positively or negatively, or indirectly by inducing expression of VEGFC. This review describes different known lymphangiogenic cytokines, their mechanism of action and role in lymphangiogenesis in health and disease.
BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is a common type of lung cancer with a high risk of metastasis, but the exact molecular mechanisms of metastasis are not yet understood. METHODS: This study acquired single-cell transcriptomics profiling of 11 distal normal lung tissues, 11 primary LUAD tissues, and 4 metastatic LUAD tissues from the GSE131907 dataset. The lung multicellular ecosystems were characterized at a single-cell resolution, and the potential mechanisms underlying angiogenesis and metastasis of LUAD were explored. RESULTS: We constructed a global single-cell landscape of 93,610 cells from primary and metastatic LUAD and found that IGF2BP2 was specifically expressed both in a LUAD cell subpopulation (termed as LUAD_IGF2BP2), and an endothelial cell subpopulation (termed as En_IGF2BP2). The LUAD_IGF2BP2 subpopulation progressively formed and dominated the ecology of metastatic LUAD during metastatic evolution. IGF2BP2 was preferentially secreted by exosomes in the LUAD_IGF2BP2 subpopulation, which was absorbed by the En_IGF2BP2 subpopulation in the tumor microenvironment. Subsequently, IGF2BP2 improved the RNA stability of FLT4 through m(6)A modification, thereby activating the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, and eventually promoting angiogenesis and metastasis. Analysis of clinical data showed that IGF2BP2 was linked with poor overall survival and relapse-free survival for LUAD patients. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these findings provide a novel insight into the multicellular ecosystems of primary and metastatic LUAD, and demonstrate that a specific LUAD_IGF2BP2 subpopulation is a key orchestrator promoting angiogenesis and metastasis, with implications for the gene regulatory mechanisms of LUAD metastatic evolution, representing themselves as potential antiangiogenic targets.
Although benign hemangiomas are among the most common diagnoses amid connective tissue tumors, sarcomas showing endothelial differentiation (ie, angiosarcoma and epithelioid hemangioendothelioma) represent under 1% of all sarcoma diagnoses, and thus it is likely that fewer than 500 people in the United States are affected each year. Differential diagnosis of malignant vascular tumors can be often quite challenging, either at the low end of the spectrum, distinguishing an epithelioid hemangioendothelioma from an epithelioid hemangioma, or at the high-grade end of the spectrum, between an angiosarcoma and a malignant epithelioid hemangioendothelioma. Within this differential diagnosis both clinico-radiological features (ie, size and multifocality) and immunohistochemical markers (ie, expression of endothelial markers) are often similar and cannot distinguish between benign and malignant vascular lesions. Molecular ancillary tests have long been needed for a more objective diagnosis and classification of malignant vascular tumors, particularly within the epithelioid phenotype. As significant advances have been recently made in understanding the genetic signatures of vascular tumors, this review will take the opportunity to provide a detailed update on these findings. Specifically, this article will focus on the following aspects: (1) pathological and molecular features of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, including the more common WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion, as well as the recently described YAP1-TFE3 fusion, identified in a morphological variant of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma; (2) discuss the heterogeneity of angiosarcoma clinical, morphological and genetic spectrum, with particular emphasis of MYC and FLT4 gene amplification in radiation-induced angiosarcoma; and (3) provide a practical guide in the differential diagnosis of epithelioid vascular tumors using molecular testing.
EphrinB2 (erythropoietin-producing hepatoma interactor B2) is a key Eph/ephrin family member, promoting angiogenesis, vasculogenesis, and lymphangiogenesis during embryonic development. However, the role of EphrinB2 in cardiac lymphangiogenesis following myocardial infarction (MI) and the potential molecular mechanism remains to be demonstrated. This study revealed that EphrinB2 prevented ischemic heart post-MI from remodeling and dysfunction by activating the cardiac lymphangiogenesis signaling pathway. Deletion of EphrinB2 impaired cardiac lymphangiogenesis and aggravated adverse cardiac remodeling and ventricular dysfunction post-MI. At the same time, overexpression of EphrinB2 stimulated cardiac lymphangiogenesis which facilitated cardiac infiltrating macrophage drainage and reduced inflammation in the ischemic heart. The beneficial effects of EphrinB2 on improving clearance of inflammatory response and cardiac function were abolished in Lyve1 knockout mice. Mechanistically, EphrinB2 accelerated cell cycling and lymphatic endothelial cell proliferation and migration by activating CDK5 and CDK5-dependent ISL1 nuclear translocation. EphrinB2 enhanced the transcriptional activity of ISL1 at the VEGFR3 (FLT4) promoter, and VEGFR3 inhibitor MAZ51 significantly diminished the EphrinB2-mediated lymphangiogenesis and deteriorated the ischemic cardiac function. We uncovered a novel mechanism of EphrinB2-driven cardiac lymphangiogenesis in improving myocardial remodeling and function after MI.
The beta-secretase beta-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE1) is a central drug target for Alzheimer's disease. Clinically tested, BACE1-directed inhibitors also block the homologous protease BACE2. Yet little is known about physiological BACE2 substrates and functions in vivo. Here, we identify BACE2 as the protease shedding the lymphangiogenic vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR3). Inactivation of BACE2, but not BACE1, inhibited shedding of VEGFR3 from primary human lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) and reduced release of the shed, soluble VEGFR3 (sVEGFR3) ectodomain into the blood of mice, nonhuman primates, and humans. Functionally, BACE2 inactivation increased full-length VEGFR3 and enhanced VEGFR3 signaling in LECs and also in vivo in zebrafish, where enhanced migration of LECs was observed. Thus, this study identifies BACE2 as a modulator of lymphangiogenic VEGFR3 signaling and demonstrates the utility of sVEGFR3 as a pharmacodynamic plasma marker for BACE2 activity in vivo, a prerequisite for developing BACE1-selective inhibitors for safer prevention of Alzheimer's disease.
Zebrafish have been widely used to study vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, and the vascular system is one of the most intensively studied organ systems in teleosts. It is a little surprising, therefore, that the development of the zebrafish lymphatic network has only been investigated in any detail for less than a decade now. In those last few years, however, significant progress has been made. Due to favorable imaging possibilities within the early zebrafish embryo, we have a very good understanding of what cellular behavior accompanies the formation of the lymphatic system and which cells within the vasculature are destined to contribute to lymphatic vessels. The migration routes of future lymphatic endothelial cells have been monitored in great detail, and a number of transgenic lines have been developed that help to distinguish between arterial, venous, and lymphatic fates in vivo. Furthermore, both forward and reverse genetic tools have been systematically employed to unravel which genes are involved in the process. Not surprisingly, a number of known players were identified (such as vegfc and flt4), but work on zebrafish has also distinguished genes and proteins that had not previously been connected to lymphangiogenesis. Here, we will review these topics and also compare the equivalent stages of lymphatic development in zebrafish and mice. We will, in addition, highlight some of those studies in zebrafish that have helped to identify and to further characterize human disease conditions.
BACKGROUND: The accumulation of visceral and ectopic fat comprise a major cause of cardiometabolic diseases. However, novel drug targets for reducing unnecessary visceral and ectopic fat are still limited. Our study aims to provide a comprehensive investigation of the causal effects of the plasma proteome on visceral and ectopic fat using Mendelian randomization (MR) approach. METHODS: We performed two-sample MR analyses based on five large genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary statistics of 2656 plasma proteins, to screen for causal associations of these proteins with traits of visceral and ectopic fat in over 30,000 participants of European ancestry, as well as to assess mediation effects by risk factors of outcomes. The colocalization analysis was conducted to examine whether the identified proteins and outcomes shared casual variants. RESULTS: Genetically predicted levels of 14 circulating proteins were associated with visceral and ectopic fat (P < 4.99 x 10(- 5), at a Bonferroni-corrected threshold). Colocalization analysis prioritized ten protein targets that showed effect on outcomes, including FST, SIRT2, DNAJB9, IL6R, CTSA, RGMB, PNLIPRP1, FLT4, PPY and IL6ST. MR analyses revealed seven risk factors for visceral and ectopic fat (P < 0.0024). Furthermore, the associations of CTSA, DNAJB9 and IGFBP1 with primary outcomes were mediated by HDL-C and SHBG. Sensitivity analyses showed little evidence of pleiotropy. CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified candidate proteins showing putative causal effects as potential therapeutic targets for visceral and ectopic fat accumulation and outlined causal pathways for further prevention of downstream cardiometabolic diseases.
AIMS: Rare, deleterious genetic variants in FLT4 are associated with Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), the most common cyanotic congenital heart disease. The distinct genetic variants in FLT4 are also an established cause of Milroy disease, the most prevalent form of primary hereditary lymphoedema. The phenotypic features of these two conditions are non-overlapping, implying pleiotropic cellular mechanisms during development. METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, we show that FLT4 variants identified in patients with TOF, when expressed in primary human endothelial cells, cause aggregation of FLT4 protein in the perinuclear endoplasmic reticulum, activating proteostatic and metabolic signalling, whereas lymphoedema-associated FLT4 variants and wild-type (WT) FLT4 do not. FLT4 TOF variants display characteristic gene expression profiles in key developmental signalling pathways, revealing a role for FLT4 in cardiogenesis distinct from its role in lymphatic development. Inhibition of proteostatic signalling abrogates these effects, identifying potential avenues for therapeutic intervention. Depletion of flt4 in zebrafish caused cardiac phenotypes of reduced heart size and altered heart looping. These phenotypes were rescued with coinjection of WT human FLT4 mRNA, but incompletely or not at all by mRNA harbouring FLT4 TOF variants. CONCLUSION: Taken together, we identify a pathogenic mechanism for FLT4 variants predisposing to TOF that is distinct from the known dominant negative mechanism of Milroy-causative variants. FLT4 variants give rise to conditions of the two circulatory subdivisions of the vascular system via distinct developmental pleiotropic molecular mechanisms.
Endothelial cell markers are membrane-bound or cytoplasmic molecules expressed by endothelial cells, which help their easier identification and discrimination from other cell types. During vasculogenesis, endothelial cells differentiate from hemangioblasts to form new blood vessels. With the discovery of endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) and their ability to form new blood vessels, the term vasculogenesis is not only reserved for the embryonic development. Possibility of de novo blood vessel formation from EPC is now widely explored in different ischemic conditions, especially in cardiovascular medicine. Numerous clinical trials have tested enhancing tissue vascularization by delivering hematopoietic cells that expressed endothelial markers. This therapeutic approach proved to be challenging and promising, particularly for patients who have exhausted all conventional therapeutic modalities. Angiogenesis, which refers to the formation of new blood vessels from existing vasculature, is indispensable process during tumor progression and metastasis. Blockage of tumor angiogenesis by targeting and inhibiting endothelial cell has emerged as novel safe and efficacious method to control many advanced malignant diseases. Numerous clinical studies are currently testing new antiangiogenic drugs which target and inhibit endothelial cell markers, receptors or molecules which transmit receptor-mediated signals, therefore inhibiting endothelial cell proliferation, migration and vascular tube formation. Many of these drugs are now widely used in clinical settings as first- or second-line chemotherapy in advanced malignant conditions. So far, these therapeutic approaches gave modest, yet encouraging clinical improvements, prolonging survival and improving functional capacity and quality of life for many terminally ill patients. Here we present the most commonly used endothelial cell markers along with their applicability in contemporary clinical practice.
The lymphatic system is lined by endothelial cells and part of the vasculature. It is essential for tissue fluid homeostasis, absorption of dietary fats, and immune surveillance in vertebrates. Misregulation of lymphatic vessel formation and dysfunction of the lymphatic system have been indicated in a number of pathological conditions including lymphedema formation, obesity or chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. In zebrafish, lymphatics were discovered about 10years ago, and the underlying molecular pathways involved in its development have since been studied in detail. Due to its superior live cell imaging possibilities and the broad tool kit for forward and reverse genetics, the zebrafish has become an important model organism to study the development of the lymphatic system during early embryonic development. In the current review, we will focus on the key players during zebrafish lymphangiogenesis and compare the roles of these genes to their mammalian counterparts. In particular, we will focus on novel findings that shed new light on the molecular mechanisms of lymphatic cell fate specification, as well as sprouting and migration of lymphatic precursor cells.
Vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs) are part of the evolutionarily conserved VEGF signalling pathways that regulate the development and maintenance of the body's cardiovascular and lymphovascular systems. VEGFR3, encoded by the FLT4 gene, has an indispensable and well-characterized function in development and establishment of the lymphatic system. Autosomal dominant VEGFR3 mutations, that prevent the receptor functioning as a homodimer, cause one of the major forms of hereditary primary lymphoedema; Milroy disease. Recently, we and others have shown that FLT4 variants, distinct to those observed in Milroy disease cases, predispose individuals to Tetralogy of Fallot, the most common cyanotic congenital heart disease, demonstrating a novel function for VEGFR3 in early cardiac development. Here, we examine the familiar and emerging roles of VEGFR3 in the development of both lymphovascular and cardiovascular systems, respectively, compare how distinct genetic variants in FLT4 lead to two disparate human conditions, and highlight the research still required to fully understand this multifaceted receptor.
A number of standard molecules are used for the molecular and histological characterization of lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs), including lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor 1 (LYVE1), Podoplanin (D2-40), VEGFR3, Prospero homeobox protein 1 (PROX1), and CD31. The number of molecules whose mutations cause lymphatic malformations or primary congenital lymphedema is considerable, but the majority of these diseases have not yet been characterized at the molecular level. Therefore, there is still considerable scope for molecular and functional studies of the lymphatic vasculature. Using RNASeq, we have previously characterized lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. We used this information to compare it with immunohistochemical data. We carried out some of the immunohistology ourselves, and systematically studied the Human Protein Atlas, a cell and tissue database based in Sweden. Here we describe molecules that are expressed at RNA and protein levels in LECs, hoping to stimulate future functional studies of these molecules.
Lymphatic vessels drain excess tissue fluids to maintain the interstitial environment. Lymphatic capillaries develop during the progression of tissue fibrosis in various clinical and pathological situations, such as chronic kidney disease, peritoneal injury during peritoneal dialysis, tissue inflammation, and tumor progression. The role of fibrosis-related lymphangiogenesis appears to vary based on organ specificity and etiology. Signaling via vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C, VEGF-D, and VEGF receptor (VEGFR)-3 is a central molecular mechanism for lymphangiogenesis. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a key player in tissue fibrosis. TGF-beta induces peritoneal fibrosis in association with peritoneal dialysis, and also induces peritoneal neoangiogenesis through interaction with VEGF-A. On the other hand, TGF-beta has a direct inhibitory effect on lymphatic endothelial cell growth. We proposed a possible mechanism of the TGF-beta(-)VEGF-C pathway in which TGF-beta promotes VEGF-C production in tubular epithelial cells, macrophages, and mesothelial cells, leading to lymphangiogenesis in renal and peritoneal fibrosis. Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) is also involved in fibrosis-associated renal lymphangiogenesis through interaction with VEGF-C, in part by mediating TGF-beta signaling. Further clarification of the mechanism might lead to the development of new therapeutic strategies to treat fibrotic diseases.
Transcriptionally active fusions of ESR1 (ESR1-TAF) and somatic mutations in the estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) ligand-binding domain (LBD) cause endocrine therapy resistance in breast cancer. In searching for therapeutic target kinase(s) in these breast cancers, Gou and colleagues identified FLT4, RET, JAK1, and IGF1R as the top upregulated kinases induced by ESR1-TAFs and ERalpha LBD mutants in breast cancer cells. Among them, inhibition of RET by pralsetinib suppressed ESR1-TAF-driven and ERalpha LBD mutant-driven cell proliferation and patient-derived xenograft growth. Pralsetinib is an inhibitor of the RET protein tyrosine kinase that is approved for treating oncogenic RET mutation-positive and RET fusion-positive thyroid cancers and non-small cell lung cancer. The work by Gou and colleagues reinforces the knowledge of RET as an ESR1 target gene and highlights that RET interacts with ERalpha to promote breast cancer tumorigenesis and antiestrogen resistance. It also raises the prospect of repositioning pralsetinib to target wildtype RET in ER-positive breast cancer. See related article by Gou et al., p. 3237.
The transcription factor TBX1 is the major gene involved in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS). Using mouse models of these diseases, we have previously shown that TBX1 activates VEGFR3 in endothelial cells (EC), and that this interaction is critical for the development of the lymphatic vasculature. In this study, we show that TBX1 regulates brain angiogenesis. Using loss-of-function genetics and molecular approaches, we show that TBX1 regulates the VEGFR3 and DLL4 genes in brain ECs. In mice, loss of TBX1 causes global brain vascular defects, comprising brain vessel hyperplasia, enhanced angiogenic sprouting and vessel network disorganization. This phenotype is recapitulated in EC-specific Tbx1 conditional mutants and in an EC-only 3-dimensional cell culture system (matrigel), indicating that the brain vascular phenotype is cell autonomous. Furthermore, EC-specific conditional Tbx1 mutants have poorly perfused brain vessels and brain hypoxia, indicating that the expanded vascular network is functionally impaired. In EC-matrigel cultures, a Notch1 agonist is able to partially rescue microtubule hyperbranching induced by TBX1 knockdown. Thus, we have identified a novel transcriptional regulator of angiogenesis that exerts its effect in brain by negatively regulating angiogenesis through the DLL4/Notch1-VEGFR3 regulatory axis. Given the similarity of the phenotypic consequences of TBX1 mutation in humans and mice, this unexpected role of TBX1 in murine brain vascularization should stimulate clinicians to search for brain microvascular anomalies in 22q11.2DS patients and to evaluate whether some of the anatomical and functional brain anomalies in patients may have a microvascular origin.
