Prostaglandin G/H synthase 2; Converts arachidonate to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), a committed step in prostanoid synthesis. Constitutively expressed in some tissues in physiological conditions, such as the endothelium, kidney and brain, and in pathological conditions, such as in cancer. PTGS2 is responsible for production of inflammatory prostaglandins. Up-regulation of PTGS2 is also associated with increased cell adhesion, phenotypic changes, resistance to apoptosis and tumor angiogenesis. In cancer cells, PTGS2 is a key step in the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which plays imp [...] 
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a growth factor receptor that induces cell differentiation and proliferation upon activation through the binding of one of its ligands. The receptor is located at the cell surface, where the binding of a ligand activates a tyrosine kinase in the intracellular region of the receptor. This tyrosine kinase phosphorylates a number of intracellular substrates that activates pathways leading to cell growth, DNA synthesis and the expression of oncogenes such as fos and jun. EGFR is thought to be involved the development of cancer, as the EGFR gene is often amplified, and/or mutated in cancer cells. In this review we will focus on: (I) the structure and function of EGFR, (II) implications of receptor/ligand coexpression and EGFR mutations or overexpression, (III) its effect on cancer cells, (IV) the development of the malignant phenotype and (V) the clinical aspects of therapeutic targeting of EGFR.
As targets for the immunosuppressive drugs cyclosporin A and FK506, transcription factors of the NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells) family have been the focus of much attention. NFAT proteins, which are expressed in most immune-system cells, play a pivotal role in the transcription of cytokine genes and other genes critical for the immune response. The activity of NFAT proteins is tightly regulated by the calcium/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase calcineurin, a primary target for inhibition by cyclosporin A and FK506. Calcineurin controls the translocation of NFAT proteins from the cytoplasm to the nucleus of activated cells by interacting with an N-terminal regulatory domain conserved in the NFAT family. The DNA-binding domains of NFAT proteins resemble those of Rel-family proteins, and Rel and NFAT proteins show some overlap in their ability to bind to certain regulatory elements in cytokine genes. NFAT is also notable for its ability to bind cooperatively with transcription factors of the AP-1 (Fos/Jun) family to composite NFAT:AP-1 sites, found in the regulatory regions of many genes that are inducibly transcribed by immune-system cells. This review discusses recent data on the diversity of the NFAT family of transcription factors, the regulation of NFAT proteins within cells, and the cooperation of NFAT proteins with other transcription factors to regulate the expression of inducible genes.
PARP7 was reported to promote tumor growth in a cell-autonomous manner and by repressing the antitumor immune response. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism of how PARP7-mediated ADP-ribosylation exerts these effects in cancer cells remains elusive. Here, we identified PARP7 as a nuclear and cysteine-specific mono-ADP-ribosyltransferase that modifies targets critical for regulating transcription, including the AP-1 transcription factor FRA1. Loss of FRA1 ADP-ribosylation via PARP7 inhibition by RBN-2397 or mutation of the ADP-ribosylation site C97 increased FRA1 degradation by the proteasome via PSMC3. The reduction in FRA1 protein levels promoted IRF1- and IRF3-dependent cytokine as well as proapoptotic gene expression, culminating in CASP8-mediated apoptosis. Furthermore, high PARP7 expression was indicative of the PARP7 inhibitor response in FRA1-positive lung and breast cancer cells. Collectively, our findings highlight the connected roles of PARP7 and FRA1 and emphasize the clinical potential of PARP7 inhibitors for FRA1-driven cancers.
Calcium (Ca(2+)) ion microdomains are subcellular regions of high Ca(2+) concentration that develop rapidly near open Ca(2+) channels in the plasma membrane or internal stores and generate local regions of high Ca(2+) concentration. These microdomains are remarkably versatile in that they activate a range of responses that differ enormously in both their temporal and spatial profile. In this review, we describe how Ca(2+) microdomains generated by store-operated calcium channels, a widespread and conserved Ca(2+) entry pathway, stimulate different signaling pathways, and how the spatial extent of a Ca(2+) microdomain can be influenced by Ca(2+) ATPase pumps.
A key question in human genetics and evolutionary biology is how mutations in different genes combine to alter phenotypes. Efforts to systematically map genetic interactions have mostly made use of gene deletions. However, most genetic variation consists of point mutations of diverse and difficult to predict effects. Here, by developing a new sequencing-based protein interaction assay - deepPCA - we quantified the effects of >120,000 pairs of point mutations on the formation of the AP-1 transcription factor complex between the products of the FOS and JUN proto-oncogenes. Genetic interactions are abundant both in cis (within one protein) and trans (between the two molecules) and consist of two classes - interactions driven by thermodynamics that can be predicted using a three-parameter global model, and structural interactions between proximally located residues. These results reveal how physical interactions generate quantitatively predictable genetic interactions.
Nuclear intermediate filaments formed by A- and B-type lamins are central components of the nucleoskeleton and are required for the architecture and integrity of the nucleus. There is growing evidence that lamins are also involved in regulatory pathways controlling cell proliferation and differentiation. Lamins affect the activity of several transcription factors, such as retinoblastoma protein and c-Fos, and signalling pathways, such as the ERK1/2 (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2) and Notch pathways, which are key regulators of cell-cycle progression and differentiation. During mitosis, lamins are dynamically reorganized and play active roles in spindle matrix formation and in post-mitotic nuclear reassembly. Several of the cell-cycle-regulating functions of lamins may be impaired in the diseases linked to mutations in lamins and lamin-associated proteins, including striated muscle diseases, lipodystrophies and premature aging syndromes, and contribute to the tissue-specific disease pathologies.
Uncontrolled inflammation contributes significantly to the mortality in acute respiratory infections. Our previous research has demonstrated that maize bran feruloylated oligosaccharides (FOs) possess notable anti-inflammatory properties linked to the NF-kB pathway regulation. In this study, we clarified that the oral administration of FOs moderately inhibited H1N1 virus infection and reduced lung inflammation in influenza-infected mice by decreasing a wide spectrum of cytokines (IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-23) in the lungs. The mechanism involves FOs suppressing the transduction of the RIG-I/MAVS/TRAF3 signaling pathway, subsequently lowering the expression of NF-kappaB. In silico analysis suggests that FOs have a greater binding affinity for the RIG-I/MAVS signaling complex. This indicates that FOs have potential as promising targets for immune modulation. Moreover, in MAVS knockout mice, we confirmed that the anti-inflammatory function of FOs against influenza depends on MAVS. Comprehensive analysis using 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metabolite profiling techniques showed that FOs have the potential to restore immunity by modulating the gut microbiota. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that FOs are effective anti-inflammatory phytochemicals in inhibiting lung inflammation caused by influenza. This suggests that FOs could serve as a potential nutritional strategy for preventing the H1N1 virus infection and associated lung inflammation.
The promoters of many genes whose transcription is rapidly and transiently induced following growth factor or mitogen stimulation of susceptible cells contain a common regulatory element, the serum response element (SRE). As the transcription factors that bind the SRE and the signalling molecules that affect its activity are characterized in more detail, the major challenge is to elucidate the signalling pathways that link cell-surface receptors to the SRE, and to determine the mechanism by which signalling events modulate transcription factor activity.
The transcription factor FOSL1 plays an important role in cell differentiation and tumorigenesis. Primarily, FOSL1 is crucial for the differentiation of several cell lineages, namely adipocytes, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts. In solid tumors, FOSL1 controls the progression of tumor cells through the epithelial-mesenchymal transformation. In this review, we summarize the available data on FOSL1 expression, stabilization, and degradation in the cell. We discuss how FOSL1 is integrated into the intracellular signaling mechanisms and provide a comprehensive analysis of FOSL1 influence on gene expression. We also analyze the pathological changes caused by altered Fosl1 expression in genetically modified mice. In addition, we dedicated a separate section of the review to the role of FOSL1 in human cancer. Primarily, we focus on the FOSL1 expression pattern in solid tumors, FOSL1 importance as a prognostic factor, and FOSL1 perspectives as a molecular target for anticancer therapy.
Recurrent apneas are characterized by transient repetitive cessations of breathing (two breaths duration or longer) resulting in periodic decreases in arterial blood PO2 or chronic intermittent hypoxia (IH). Patients with recurrent apneas and experimental animals exposed to chronic IH exhibit cardio-respiratory morbidities. The purpose of this article is to highlight the current information on the transcriptional mechanisms associated with chronic IH. Studies on rodents and cell cultures have shown that IH activates a variety of transcription factors including the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), c-fos (immediate early gene), nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT), and nuclear factor kB (NF-kB). The signaling pathways associated with transcriptional activation associated with IH differ from continuous hypoxia (CH). Compared to same duration and intensity of CH, IH is more potent in activating HIF-1 and c-fos and also results in long-lasting accumulation of HIF-1alpha and c-fos mRNA, a phenomenon that was not seen with CH. IH-evoked transcriptional activation by HIF-1, c-fos as well as the resulting activator protein-1 (AP-1) requires reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated signaling and involves complex feed forward interactions between HIF-1 and ROS. Chronic IH-evoked cardio-respiratory responses are absent in Hif-1alpha+/- mice, and hypertension elicited by chronic IH is absent in mice lacking NFAT3c. These studies indicate that cardiorespiratory responses to chronic IH depend on complex interactions between various transcription factors resulting in alterations in several down stream genes and their protein products.
In mammals, the regulation of the cell fate to either proliferate, differentiate, arrest cell growth, or initiate programmed cell death is the most fundamental mechanism for maintaining normal cell function and tissue homeostasis. Under multiple signaling pathways, Jun and Fos family proteins are known to play important roles as components of an AP-1 (activator protein-1) complex, to regulate the transcription of various genes involved in cell proliferation, differentiation and programmed cell death. DeltaFosB, one of the AP-1 subunits encoded by alternatively spliced fosB mRNA, triggers one round of proliferation in quiescent rat embryo cell lines, followed by a different cell fate such as morphological alteration or delayed cell death. As one of the downstream targets of the DeltaFosB in rat3Y1 cell line, we identified rat galectin-1 and its novel variant, galectin-1beta, and demonstrated that the expression of galectin-1 is required for the proliferative activation of quiescent rat1A cells by DeltaFosB, thus indicating that galectin-1 is one of functional targets of DeltaFosB. The expression of DeltaFosB is highly inducible in the adult brain in response to various insults such as ischemic reperfusion injury, seizure induced by electric stimulation or cocaine administration. On the other hand, galectin-1 has also been shown to be involved in the regeneration of damaged axons in the peripheral nerve, as well as in neurite outgrowth or synaptic connectivity in the olfactory system during development. We herein propose that DeltaFosB together with galectin-1, may therefore mediate neuroprotection and neurogenesis in response to brain damage.
Studies are reviewed indicating that both increased anxiety and altered hedonic processing accompany protracted withdrawal from opiates. Increased anxiety may be most apparent in response to stress, whereas decreased motivation for natural rewards but increased interest in drugs reveals substantial alterations in hedonic values. Our recent work indicates that increased norepinephrine (NE) release in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) may underlie anxiety associated with protracted withdrawal. Altered plasticity in afferents to the ventral tegmental area (VTA; accumbens, amygdala and lateral hypothalamus), or in the VTA itself, may be involved in the altered hedonic processing that occurs during protracted withdrawal. We hypothesize that conditioned release of NE in the BNST in response to stressors (including drug-associated stimuli) may elevate anxiety which then augments the reward value of drugs by a negative reinforcement mechanism. We also propose that plasticity in VTA neurons and their afferents during chronic drug exposure and protracted withdrawal decreases the valence of natural rewards whereas sensitization occurs to the motivational effects of drugs that increases their motivational valence. The combination of anxiety, decreased valence of natural rewards, and sensitized incentive for drugs make a potent formula for relapse and drug seeking during protracted withdrawal.
FOS, a subunit of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor, has been implicated in various cellular changes. In the human ovary, the expression of FOS and its heterodimeric binding partners JUN, JUNB, and JUND increases in periovulatory follicles. However, the specific role of the FOS/AP-1 remains elusive. The present study determined the regulatory mechanisms driving the expression of FOS and its partners and functions of FOS using primary human granulosa/lutein cells (hGLCs). Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) induced a biphasic increase in the expression of FOS, peaking at 1 to 3 hours and 12 hours. The levels of JUN proteins were also increased by hCG, with varying expression patterns. Coimmunoprecipitation analyses revealed that FOS is present as heterodimers with all JUN proteins. hCG immediately activated protein kinase A and p42/44MAPK signaling pathways, and inhibitors for these pathways abolished hCG-induced increases in the levels of FOS, JUN, and JUNB. To identify the genes regulated by FOS, high-throughput RNA sequencing was performed using hGLC treated with hCG +/- T-5224 (FOS inhibitor). Sequencing data analysis revealed that FOS inhibition affects the expression of numerous genes, including a cluster of genes involved in the periovulatory process such as matrix remodeling, prostaglandin synthesis, glycolysis, and cholesterol biosynthesis. Quantitative PCR analysis verified hCG-induced, T-5224-regulated expression of a selection of genes involved in these processes. Consistently, hCG-induced increases in metabolic activities and cholesterol levels were suppressed by T-5224. This study unveiled potential downstream target genes of and a role for the FOS/AP-1 complex in metabolic changes and cholesterol biosynthesis in granulosa/lutein cells of human periovulatory follicles.
The Jun oncoprotein is a major component of the transcription factor complex AP-1, which regulates the expression of multiple genes essential for cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Constitutive activation of endogenous AP-1 is required for tumor formation in avian and mammalian cell transformation systems, and also occurs in distinct human tumor cells suggesting that AP-1 plays an important role in human oncogenesis. The highly oncogenic v-jun allele capable of inducing neoplastic transformation in avian fibroblasts and fibrosarcomas in chicken as a single oncogenic event, was generated by mutation of the cellular c-jun gene during retroviral transduction. Hence, avian cells represent an excellent model system to investigate molecular mechanisms underlying jun-induced cell transformation. Approaches aimed at the identification of genes specifically deregulated in jun-transformed fibroblasts have led to the identification of several genes targeted by oncogenic Jun. Some of the activated genes represent direct transcriptional targets of Jun encoding proteins, which are presumably involved in cell growth and differentiation. Genes suppressed in v-jun-transformed cells include several extracellular proteins like components of the extracellular matrix or proteins involved in extracellular signalling. Due to aberrant regulation of multiple genes by the Jun oncoprotein, it is assumed that only the combined differential expression of Jun target genes or of a subset thereof contributes to the conversion of a normal fibroblast into a tumor cell displaying a phenotype typical of jun-induced cell transformation. It has already been shown that distinct activated targets exhibit partial transforming activity upon over-expression in avian fibroblasts. Also, distinct target genes silenced by v-Jun inhibit tumor formation when re-expressed in v-jun-transformed cells. The protein products of these transformation-relevant genes may thus represent potential drug targets for interference with jun-induced tumorigenesis.
O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is an essential and dynamic post-translational modification that is presented on thousands of nucleocytoplasmic proteins. Interrogating the role of O-GlcNAc on a single target protein is crucial, yet challenging to perform in cells. Herein, we developed a nanobody-fused split O-GlcNAcase (OGA) as an O-GlcNAc eraser for selective deglycosylation of a target protein in cells. After systematic cellular optimization, we identified a split OGA with reduced inherent deglycosidase activity that selectively removed O-GlcNAc from the desired target protein when directed by a nanobody. We demonstrate the generality of the nanobody-fused split OGA using four nanobodies against five target proteins and use the system to study the impact of O-GlcNAc on the transcription factors c-Jun and c-Fos. The nanobody-directed O-GlcNAc eraser provides a new strategy for the functional evaluation and engineering of O-GlcNAc via the selective removal of O-GlcNAc from individual proteins directly in cells.
Rationale: Overexpression of NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) is associated with tumor cell proliferation and growth in several human cancer types. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the activity of NQO1 in cell cycle progression are currently unclear. Here, we report a novel function of NQO1 in modulation of the cell cycle regulator, cyclin-dependent kinase subunit-1 (CKS1), at the G2/M phase through effects on the stability of c‑Fos. Methods: The roles of the NQO1/c-Fos/CKS1 signaling pathway in cell cycle progression were analyzed in cancer cells using synchronization of the cell cycle and flow cytometry. The mechanisms underlying NQO1/c-Fos/CKS1-mediated regulation of cell cycle progression in cancer cells were studied using siRNA approaches, overexpression systems, reporter assays, co-immunoprecipitation, pull-down assays, microarray analysis, and CDK1 kinase assays. In addition, publicly available data sets and immunohistochemistry were used to investigate the correlation between NQO1 expression levels and clinicopathological features in cancer patients. Results: Our results suggest that NQO1 directly interacts with the unstructured DNA-binding domain of c-Fos, which has been implicated in cancer proliferation, differentiation, and development as well as patient survival, and inhibits its proteasome-mediated degradation, thereby inducing CKS1 expression and regulation of cell cycle progression at the G2/M phase. Notably, a NQO1 deficiency in human cancer cell lines led to suppression of c-Fos-mediated CKS1 expression and cell cycle progression. Consistent with this, high NQO1 expression was correlated with increased CKS1 and poor prognosis in cancer patients. Conclusions: Collectively, our results support a novel regulatory role of NQO1 in the mechanism of cell cycle progression at the G2/M phase in cancer through effects on c‑Fos/CKS1 signaling.
Synbiotic supplements contain pre- and probiotics and are used to modulate gut microbiota composition. This study aimed to investigate effects of two synbiotic mixtures on human faecal bacteria in vitro. Short chain fructooligosaccharides (FOS) (1% w/v) combined with either Bifidobacterium lactis Bb12 or Bifidobacterium lactis HN019 (10(6) colony-forming units (CFU)/mL)] were added to pH-controlled anaerobic batch cultures inoculated with human faeces. Maltodextrin (1% w/v), FOS (1% w/v) and the probiotic strains were also tested individually. Effects on bacteria, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and branched-chain fatty acids (BCFAs) were assessed over 48 h. With maltodextrin, FOS and the synbiotic mixtures, there was a significant increase in total bacteria and bifidobacteria numbers, compared to the negative control or probiotics alone. Increases in Atopobium cluster and Clostridium coccoides-Eubacterium rectale group occurred with FOS and maltodextrin, respectively. Additionally, maltodextrin, FOS and synbiotics resulted in a greater production of acetate and butyrate (SCFAs) compared to the negative control and probiotics alone, whereas concentrations of iso-valerate (BCFA) were lower with these treatments. In conclusion, synbiotic-induced in vitro bacterial changes and changes in SCFAs concentrations were not different from those observed with FOS alone. These data suggest that metabolic effects of these synbiotics are largely driven by the prebiotic component.
Aged skeletal muscle is markedly affected by fatty muscle infiltration, and strategies to reduce the occurrence of intramuscular adipocytes are urgently needed. Here, we show that fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) not only stimulates muscle growth but also promotes intramuscular adipogenesis. Using multiple screening assays upstream and downstream of microRNA (miR)-29a signaling, we located the secreted protein and adipogenic inhibitor SPARC to an FGF-2 signaling pathway that is conserved between skeletal muscle cells from mice and humans and that is activated in skeletal muscle of aged mice and humans. FGF-2 induces the miR-29a/SPARC axis through transcriptional activation of FRA-1, which binds and activates an evolutionary conserved AP-1 site element proximal in the miR-29a promoter. Genetic deletions in muscle cells and adeno-associated virus-mediated overexpression of FGF-2 or SPARC in mouse skeletal muscle revealed that this axis regulates differentiation of fibro/adipogenic progenitors in vitro and intramuscular adipose tissue (IMAT) formation in vivo. Skeletal muscle from human donors aged >75 y versus <55 y showed activation of FGF-2-dependent signaling and increased IMAT. Thus, our data highlights a disparate role of FGF-2 in adult skeletal muscle and reveals a pathway to combat fat accumulation in aged human skeletal muscle.
Immediate early genes (IEG) are rapidly but transiently induced directly by intracellular signaling cascades to alter patterns of gene expression. It has been proposed that histone modifications could be the key to the quick alteration of chromatin structure, as this spread occurs too rapidly to be the consequence of passage of RNA polymerase II. In this review, we will discuss the different modifications on histones and the chromatin remodeling enzymes, allowing the promoter regions of two IEGs, c-fos and c-jun, to be accessed.
Leptin is well acknowledged as an anorexigenic hormone that plays an important role in feeding control. Hypothalamic GABA system plays a significant role in leptin regulation on feeding and metabolism control. However, the pharmacological relationship of leptin and GABA receptor is still obscure. Therefore, we investigated the effect of leptin or combined with baclofen on the food intake in fasted mice. We detected the changes in hypothalamic c-Fos expression, hypothalamic TH, POMC and GAD67 expression, plasma insulin, POMC and GABA levels to demonstrate the mechanisms. We found that leptin inhibit fasting-induced increased food intake and activated hypothalamic neurons. The inhibitory effect on food intake induced by leptin in fasted mice can be reversed by pretreatment with baclofen. Baclofen reversed leptin's inhibition on c-Fos expression of PAMM in fasted mice. Therefore, these results indicate that leptin might inhibit fasting-triggered activation of PVN neurons via presynaptic GABA synaptic functions which might be partially blocked by pharmacological activating GABA-B. Our findings identify the role of leptin in the regulation of food intake.
