Gamma-aminobutyric acid type B receptor subunit 2; Component of a heterodimeric G-protein coupled receptor for GABA, formed by GABBR1 and GABBR2. Within the heterodimeric GABA receptor, only GABBR1 seems to bind agonists, while GABBR2 mediates coupling to G proteins. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase, stimulates phospholipase A2, activates potassium channels, inactivates voltage-depend [...] 
Epilepsy is a paroxysmal brain disorder that results from an imbalance between neuronal excitation and inhibition. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the most important inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain and plays an important role in the occurrence and development of epilepsy. Abnormalities in all aspects of GABA metabolism, including GABA synthesis, transport, genes encoding GABA receptors, and GABA inactivation, may lead to epilepsy. GABRA1, GABRA2, GABRA5, GABRB1, GABRB2, GABRB3, GABRG2 and GABBR2 are genes that encode GABA receptors and are commonly associated with epilepsy. Mutations of these genes lead to a variety of epilepsy syndromes with different clinical phenotypes, primarily by down regulating receptor expression and reducing the amplitude of GABA-evoked potentials. GABA is metabolized by GABA transaminase and succinate semi aldehyde dehydrogenase, which are encoded by the ABAT and ALDH5A1 genes, respectively. Mutations of these genes result in symptoms related to deficiency of GABA transaminase and succinate semi aldehyde dehydrogenase, such as epilepsy and cognitive impairment. Most of the variation in genes associated with GABA metabolism are accompanied by developmental disorders. This review focuses on advances in understanding the relationship between genetic variation in GABA metabolism and epilepsy to establish a basis for the accurate diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy.
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) is a group of conditions characterized by the co-occurrence of epilepsy and intellectual disability (ID), typically with developmental plateauing or regression associated with frequent epileptiform activity. The cause of DEE remains unknown in the majority of cases. We performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) in 197 individuals with unexplained DEE and pharmaco-resistant seizures and in their unaffected parents. We focused our attention on de novo mutations (DNMs) and identified candidate genes containing such variants. We sought to identify additional subjects with DNMs in these genes by performing targeted sequencing in another series of individuals with DEE and by mining various sequencing datasets. We also performed meta-analyses to document enrichment of DNMs in candidate genes by leveraging our WGS dataset with those of several DEE and ID series. By combining these strategies, we were able to provide a causal link between DEE and the following genes: NTRK2, GABRB2, CLTC, DHDDS, NUS1, RAB11A, GABBR2, and SNAP25. Overall, we established a molecular diagnosis in 63/197 (32%) individuals in our WGS series. The main cause of DEE in these individuals was de novo point mutations (53/63 solved cases), followed by inherited mutations (6/63 solved cases) and de novo CNVs (4/63 solved cases). De novo missense variants explained a larger proportion of individuals in our series than in other series that were primarily ascertained because of ID. Moreover, these DNMs were more frequently recurrent than those identified in ID series. These observations indicate that the genetic landscape of DEE might be different from that of ID without epilepsy.
OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the yield of systematic analysis and/or reanalysis of whole exome sequencing (WES) data from a cohort of well-phenotyped pediatric patients with epilepsy and suspected but previously undetermined genetic etiology. METHODS: We identified and phenotyped 125 participants with pediatric epilepsy. Etiology was unexplained at the time of enrollment despite clinical testing, which included chromosomal microarray (57 patients), epilepsy gene panel (n = 48), both (n = 28), or WES (n = 8). Clinical epilepsy diagnoses included developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE), febrile infection-related epilepsy syndrome, Rasmussen encephalitis, and other focal and generalized epilepsies. We analyzed WES data and compared the yield in participants with and without prior clinical genetic testing. RESULTS: Overall, we identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 40% (50/125) of our study participants. Nine patients with DEE had genetic variants in recently published genes that had not been recognized as epilepsy-related at the time of clinical testing (FGF12, GABBR1, GABBR2, ITPA, KAT6A, PTPN23, RHOBTB2, SATB2), and eight patients had genetic variants in candidate epilepsy genes (CAMTA1, FAT3, GABRA6, HUWE1, PTCHD1). Ninety participants had concomitant or subsequent clinical genetic testing, which was ultimately explanatory for 26% (23/90). Of the 67 participants whose molecular diagnoses were "unsolved" through clinical genetic testing, we identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 17 (25%). SIGNIFICANCE: Our data argue for early consideration of WES with iterative reanalysis for patients with epilepsy, particularly those with DEE or epilepsy with intellectual disability. Rigorous analysis of WES data of well-phenotyped patients with epilepsy leads to a broader understanding of gene-specific phenotypic spectra as well as candidate disease gene identification. We illustrate the dynamic nature of genetic diagnosis over time, with analysis and in some cases reanalysis of exome data leading to the identification of disease-associated variants among participants with previously nondiagnostic results from a variety of clinical testing strategies.
BACKGROUND: The association between diabetes mellitus (DM) and the increased risk and progression of cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) has been reported with unclear underlying mechanisms. Previous studies showed that gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) B2 receptor (GABBR2) was upregulated in CCA cells cultured in high glucose (HG) conditions. Roles of GABA receptors in CCA progression have also been studied, but their association with DM and hyperglycemia in CCA remains unclarified. AIM: To investigate the effects of hyperglycemia on GABBR2 expression and the potential use of GABBR2 as a CCA therapeutic target. METHODS: CCA cells, KKU-055 and KKU-213A, were cultured in Dulbecco Modified Eagle's Medium supplemented with 5.6 mmol/L (normal glucose, NG) or 25 mmol/L (HG) glucose and assigned as NG and HG cells, respectively. GABBR2 expression in NG and HG cells was investigated using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot. Expression and localization of GABBR2 in CCA cells were determined using immunocytofluorescence. GABBR2 expression in tumor tissues from CCA patients with and without DM was studied using immunohistochemistry, and the correlations of GABBR2 with the clinicopathological characteristics of patients were analyzed using univariate analysis. Effects of baclofen, a GABA-B receptor agonist, on CCA cell proliferation and clonogenicity were tested using the MTT and clonogenic assays. Phospho-kinases arrays were used to screen the affected signaling pathways after baclofen treatment, and the candidate signaling molecules were validated using the public transcriptomic data and western blot. RESULTS: GABBR2 expression in CCA cells was induced by HG in a dose- and time-dependent manner. CCA tissues from patients with DM and hyperglycemia also showed a significantly higher GABBR2 expression compared with tumor tissues from those with euglycemia (P < 0.01). High GABBR2 expression was significantly associated with a poorer non-papillary histological subtype but with smaller sizes of CCA tumors (P < 0.05). HG cells of both tested CCA cell lines were more sensitive to baclofen treatment. Baclofen significantly suppressed the proliferation and clonogenicity of CCA cells in both NG and HG conditions (P < 0.05). Phospho-kinase arrays suggested glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), beta-catenin, and the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) as candidate signaling molecules under the regulation of GABBR2, which were verified in NG and HG cells of the individual CCA cell lines. Cyclin D1 and c-Myc, the common downstream targets of GSK3/beta-catenin and STAT3 involving cell proliferation, were accordingly downregulated after baclofen treatment. CONCLUSION: GABBR2 is upregulated by HG and holds a promising role as a therapeutic target for CCA regardless of the glucose condition.
During latent infection, the HSV-1 virus generates only a single transcript, LAT, which encodes six miRNAs. The GABAergic pathway signaling system is an essential cell signaling pathway influenced by various therapeutic targets and some brain disorders, such as epilepsy. This study found that miRNAs encoding LAT might target the STXBP1 and GABBR2 genes, which are among the significant genes in the GABAergic pathway. Bioinformatic analysis utilizing TargetScan version 5.2 and the RNA22 tools uncovered miRNAs encoding LAT that can influence STXBP1 and GABBR2 transcripts. To evaluate the targeting effect of candidate microRNAs encoding LAT, namely, miR-H3 and miR-H4, LAT constructs were transfected into HEK 293T cells. The expression levels of microRNAs encoding LAT, as well as STXBP1 and GABBR2, were assayed by real-time PCR. Finally, the targeting potential of STXBP1 and GABBR2 3'UTR by LAT-encoded microRNAs was evaluated by the luciferase assay. In the current study, the bioinformatic tool TargetScan demonstrated that miR-H3 has the potential to target the transcripts of the STXBP1 and GABBR2 genes, whereas miR-H4 solely targeted GABBR2. On the other hand, the bioinformatic tool RNA22 validated the potential targeting of STXBP1 and GABBR2 by miR-H3 and miR-H4. Our findings showed that overexpression of miR-H4, miR-H3, or LAT significantly decreased STXBP1 gene expression by an average of 0.0593-fold, 0.237-fold, and 0.84-fold, respectively. Similarly, overexpression of miR-H3 or miR-H4 decreased GABBR2 expression by an average of 0.055- or 0.687-fold, respectively. Notably, targeting the GABBR2 3'UTR with the LAT transcript had no detectable effect. The evaluation of the targeting potential of STXBP1 and GABBR2 3'UTR by microRNAs encoded by LAT was conducted with a luciferase assay. Our results showed that miR-H3 overexpression reduces Renilla expression in psiCHECK2 plasmids with STXBP1 or GABBR2 3'UTR genes by 0.62- and 0.55-fold, respectively. miR-H4 reduced Renilla gene expression regulated by GABBR2's 3'UTR plasmid but had no effect on the Renilla gene expression regulated by STXBP1's 3'UTR. When the LAT transcript was overexpressed, there was a decrease in Renilla expression by 0.44-fold because of the regulation of STXBP1's 3'UTR. However, there was no significant effect observed through the control of GABBR2's 3'UTR.
We aim to develop a formula based on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to predict whether the propofol target-controlled infusion (TCI) concentration would be over 4 mug mL(-1) at the time of loss of consciousness (LOC). We recruited 184 patients undergoing thyroid or breast surgeries with propofol anaesthesia. A total of 48 SNPs of CYP2B6, CYP2C9, UGT1A9, HNF4A, ABCB1, ABCC4, ABCG2, GABRA2, GABRA4, GABRB1, GABRB3, GABRG2, GABBR2, GAD1, SLC1A3, BDNF, and NRXN1, previously associated with propofol metabolic and pharmacology pathway, were genotyped. The formula was developed in the training cohort using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator logistic regression model, and then validated in the testing cohort. The SNPs, GABBR2 rs1167768, GABBR2 rs1571927, NRXN1 rs601010, BDNF rs2049046, GABRA4 rs1512135, UGT1A9 rs11692021, GABBR2 rs2808536, HNF4A rs1884613, GABRB3 rs2017247, and CYP2B6 rs3181842 were selected to construct the SNP-based formula, which was used to calculate the risk score for over 4 mug mL(-1) TCI concentration of propofol at the time of LOC. Patients in the high-risk group were more likely to require a propofol concentration higher than 4 mug mL(-1) and presented a longer LOC latency. The SNP-based formula may significantly improve the safety and effectiveness of propofol-induced anaesthesia.
The precise molecular mechanisms responsible for resistance to cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with bladder cancer remain elusive, while we have indicated that androgen receptor (AR) activity in urothelial cancer is associated with its sensitivity. Our DNA microarray analysis in control vs. AR-knockdown bladder cancer sublines suggested that the expression of a GABA B receptor GABBR2 and AR was correlated. The present study aimed to determine the functional role of GABBR2 in modulating cisplatin sensitivity in bladder cancer. AR knockdown and dihydrotestosterone treatment considerably reduced and induced, respectively, GABBR2 expression, and the effect of dihydrotestosterone was at least partially restored by an antiandrogen hydroxyflutamide. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay further revealed the binding of AR to the promoter region of GABBR2 in bladder cancer cells. Meanwhile, GABBR2 expression was significantly elevated in a cisplatin-resistant bladder cancer subline, compared with control cells. In AR-positive bladder cancer cells, knockdown of GABBR2 or treatment with a selective GABA B receptor antagonist, CGP46381, considerably enhanced the cytotoxic activity of cisplatin. However, no additional effect of CGP46381 on cisplatin-induced growth suppression was seen in GABBR2-knockdown cells. Moreover, in the absence of cisplatin, CGP46381 treatment and GABBR2 knockdown showed no significant changes in cell proliferation or migration. These findings suggest that GABBR2 represents a key downstream effector of AR signaling in inducing resistance to cisplatin treatment. Accordingly, inhibition of GABBR2 has the potential of being a means of chemosensitization, especially in patients with AR/GABBR2-positive bladder cancer.
BACKGROUND: Several monogenic causes for isolated dystonia have been identified, but they collectively account for only a small proportion of cases. Two genome-wide association studies have reported a few potential dystonia risk loci; but conclusions have been limited by small sample sizes, partial coverage of genetic variants, or poor reproducibility. OBJECTIVE: To identify robust genetic variants and loci in a large multicenter cervical dystonia cohort using a genome-wide approach. METHODS: We performed a genome-wide association study using cervical dystonia samples from the Dystonia Coalition. Logistic and linear regressions, including age, sex, and population structure as covariates, were employed to assess variant- and gene-based genetic associations with disease status and age at onset. We also performed a replication study for an identified genome-wide significant signal. RESULTS: After quality control, 919 cervical dystonia patients compared with 1491 controls of European ancestry were included in the analyses. We identified one genome-wide significant variant (rs2219975, chromosome 3, upstream of COL8A1, P-value 3.04 x 10(-8) ). The association was not replicated in a newly genotyped sample of 473 cervical dystonia cases and 481 controls. Gene-based analysis identified DENND1A to be significantly associated with cervical dystonia (P-value 1.23 x 10(-6) ). One low-frequency variant was associated with lower age-at-onset (16.4 +/- 2.9 years, P-value = 3.07 x 10(-8) , minor allele frequency = 0.01), located within the GABBR2 gene on chromosome 9 (rs147331823). CONCLUSION: The genetic underpinnings of cervical dystonia are complex and likely consist of multiple distinct variants of small effect sizes. Larger sample sizes may be needed to provide sufficient statistical power to address the presumably multi-genic etiology of cervical dystonia. (c) 2021 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
GABA(B) receptors are obligatory heterodimers responsible for prolonged neuronal inhibition in the central nervous system. The two receptor subunits are encoded by GABBR1 and GABBR2. Variants in GABBR2 have been associated with a Rett-like phenotype (MIM: 617903), epileptic encephalopathy (MIM: 617904), and milder forms of developmental delay with absence epilepsy. To date, however, no phenotypes associated with pathogenic variants of GABBR1 have been established. Through GeneMatcher, we have ascertained four individuals who each have a monoallelic GABBR1 de novo non-synonymous variant; these individuals exhibit motor and/or language delay, ranging from mild to severe, and in one case, epilepsy. Further phenotypic features include varying degrees of intellectual disability, learning difficulties, autism, ADHD, ODD, sleep disorders, and muscular hypotonia. We functionally characterized the four de novo GABBR1 variants, p.Glu368Asp, p.Ala397Val, p.Ala535Thr, and p.Gly673Asp, in transfected HEK293 cells. GABA fails to efficiently activate the variant receptors, most likely leading to an increase in the excitation/inhibition balance in the central nervous system. Variant p.Gly673Asp in transmembrane domain 3 (TMD3) renders the receptor completely inactive, consistent with failure of the receptor to reach the cell surface. p.Glu368Asp is located near the orthosteric binding site and reduces GABA potency and efficacy at the receptor. GABA exhibits normal potency but decreased efficacy at the p.Ala397Val and p.Ala535Thr variants. Functional characterization of GABBR1-related variants provides a rationale for understanding the severity of disease phenotypes and points to possible therapeutic strategies.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the gamma-aminobutyric acid type B (GABA(B)) receptor plays an essential role in modulating neurotransmitter release and regulating the activity of ion channels and adenyl cyclase. However, whether the naturally occurring polymorphisms in the two GABA(B) receptor subunit genes interact with each other to alter susceptibility to nicotine dependence (ND) remains largely unknown. In this study, we genotyped 5 and 33 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for GABA(B) receptor subunit 1 and 2 genes (GABBR1, GABBR2), respectively, in a sample of 2037 individuals from 602 nuclear families of African- American (AA) or European-American (EA) origin. We conducted association analyses to determine (1) the association of each subunit gene with ND at both the individual SNP and haplotype levels and (2) the collective effect(s) of SNPs in both GABA(B) subunits on the development of ND. Several individual SNPs and haplotypes in GABBR2 were significantly associated with ND in both ethnic samples. Two haplotypes in AAs and one haplotype in EAs showed a protective effect against ND, whilst two other haplotypes in AAs and three haplotypes in EAs showed a risk effect for developing ND. Interestingly, these significant haplotypes were confined to two regions of GABBR2 in the AA and EA samples. Additionally, we found two minor haplotypes in GABBR1 to be positively associated with Heaviness of Smoking Index (HSI) in the EA sample. Finally, we demonstrated the presence of epistasis between GABBR1 and GABBR2 for developing ND. The variants of GABBR1 and GABBR2 are significantly associated with ND, and the involvement of GABBR1 is most likely through its interaction with GABBR2, whereas GABBR2 polymorphisms directly alter susceptibility to ND. Future studies are needed with more dense SNP coverage of GABBR1 and GABBR2 to verify the epistatic effects of the two subunit genes.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a periodic psychiatric disorder with high prevalence in women of childbearing age, seriously affecting patients' work and life. Currently, the international first-line drugs for PMDD have low efficiency and increased side effects. Paeonol, a major component of the traditional Chinese medicine Cortex Moutan, has been applied in treating PMDD in China with satisfactory results, but the therapeutic mechanism is not fully understood. This study aims to evaluate the therapeutic effects and pharmacological mechanisms of paeonol on the main psychiatric symptoms and hippocampal damage in PMDD. We established a premenstrual irritability rat model by the resident-intruder paradigm and performed elevated plus maze and social interactions. And we employed the HE and Nissl staining techniques to observe the therapeutic effect of paeonol on hippocampal damage in PMDD rats. Subsequently, Elisa, qRT-PCR Array, Western Blotting, and cell models were utilized to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms through which paeonol intervenes in treating PMDD. In this study, we demonstrated the therapeutic effects of paeonol on irritability, anxiety, and social withdrawal behaviors in rats. In addition, we found that paeonol significantly reduced the serum corticosterone (CORT) level, improved hippocampal morphological structure and neuron number, and reduced hippocampal neuron apoptosis in PMDD rats. Paeonol reduced GRM5, GABBR2, beta-arrestin2, and GRK3 expression levels in hippocampal brain regions of PMDD rats and activated the cAMP/PKA signaling pathway. Inhibitor cell experiments showed that paeonol specifically ameliorated hippocampal injury by modulating the beta-arrestin2/PDE4-cAMP/PKA signaling pathway. The present study demonstrates, for the first time, that paeonol exerts a therapeutic effect on periodic psychotic symptoms and hippocampal injury in PMDD through inhibiting GRM5/GABBR2/beta-arrestin2 and activating cAMP-PKA signaling pathway. These findings enhance our understanding of the pharmacological mechanism underlying paeonol and provide a solid scientific foundation for its future clinical application.
Both nicotine and alcohol addictions are common chronic brain disorders that are of great concern to individuals and society. Although genetics contributes significantly to these disorders, the susceptibility genes and variants underlying them remain largely unknown. Many years of genome-wide linkage and association studies have implicated a number of genes and pathways in the etiology of nicotine and alcohol addictions. In this communication, we focus on current evidence, primarily from human genetic studies, supporting the involvement of genes and variants in the GABAergic signaling system in the etiology of nicotine dependence and alcoholism based on linkage, association, and gene-by-gene interaction studies. Current efforts aim not only to replicate these findings in independent samples, but also to identify which variant contributes to the detected associations and through what molecular mechanisms.
Metastatic lesions leading causes of the majority of deaths in patients with the breast cancer. The present study aimed to provide a comprehensive analysis of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the brain (MDA-MB-231 BrM2) and lung (MDA-MB-231 LM2) metastatic cell lines obtained from breast cancer patients compared with those who have primary breast cancer. We identified 981 and 662 DEGs for brain and lung metastasis, respectively. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis revealed seven shared (PLCB1, FPR1, FPR2, CX3CL1, GABBR2, GPR37, and CXCR4) hub genes between brain and lung metastasis in breast cancer. Moreover, GNG2 and CXCL8, C3, and PTPN6 in the brain and SAA1 and CCR5 in lung metastasis were found as unique hub genes. Besides, five co-regulation of clusters via seven important co-expression genes (COL1A2, LUM, SPARC, THBS2, IL1B, CXCL8, THY1) were identified in the brain PPI network. Clusters screening followed by biological process (BP) function and pathway enrichment analysis for both metastatic cell lines showed that complement receptor signalling, acetylcholine receptor signalling, and gastric acid secretion pathways were common between these metastases, whereas other pathways were site-specific. According to our findings, there are a set of genes and functional pathways that mark and mediate breast cancer metastasis to the brain and lungs, which may enable us understand the molecular basis of breast cancer development in a deeper levele to the brain and lungs, which may help us gain a more complete understanding of the molecular underpinnings of breast cancer development.
GABABRs are key membrane proteins that continually adapt the excitability of the nervous system. These G-protein coupled receptors are activated by the brain's premier inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. They are obligate heterodimers composed of GABA-binding GABABR1 and G-protein-coupling GABABR2 subunits. Recently, three variants (G693W, S695I, I705N) have been identified in the gene (GABBR2) encoding for GABABR2. Individuals that harbour any of these variants exhibit severe developmental epileptic encephalopathy and intellectual disability, but the underlying pathogenesis that is triggered in neurons remains unresolved. Using a range of confocal imaging, flow cytometry, structural modelling, biochemistry, live cell Ca2+ imaging of presynaptic terminals, whole-cell electrophysiology of human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293 T cells and neurons and two-electrode voltage clamping of Xenopus oocytes, we have probed the biophysical and molecular trafficking and functional profiles of G693W, S695I and I705N variants. We report that all three point mutations impair neuronal cell surface expression of GABABRs, reducing signalling efficacy. However, a negative effect evident for one variant perturbed neurotransmission by elevating presynaptic Ca2+ signalling. This is reversed by enhancing GABABR signalling via positive allosteric modulation. Our results highlight the importance of studying neuronal receptors expressed in nervous system tissue and provide new mechanistic insights into how GABABR variants can initiate neurodevelopmental disease whilst highlighting the translational suitability and therapeutic potential of allosteric modulation for correcting these deficits.
Potassium channel tetramerization domain containing 12 (KCTD12), the auxiliary GABA(B) receptor subunit, is identified as a susceptibility gene for bipolar I (BPI) disorder in the Han Chinese population. Moreover, the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs17026688 in glutamate decarboxylase-like protein 1 (GADL1) is shown to be associated with lithium response in Han Chinese BPI patients. In this study, we demonstrated for the first time the relationship among lithium, GADL1, and KCTD12. In circulating CD11b(+) macrophage cells, BPI patients showed a significantly higher percentage of KCTD12 expression than healthy controls. Among BPI patients, carriers of the 'T' allele (i.e., CT or TT) at site rs17026688 were found to secrete lower amounts of GADL1 but higher amounts of GABA b receptor 2 (GABBR2) in the plasma. In human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, lithium treatment increased the percentage of KCTD12 expression. Through inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), lithium induced cyclic AMP-response element binding protein (CREB)-mediated KCTD12 promoter activation. On the other hand, GADL1 overexpression enhanced GSK-3 activation and inhibited KCTD12 expression. We found that lithium induced, whereas GADL1 inhibited, KCTD12 expression. These findings suggested that KCTD12 may be an important gene with respect to neuron excitability and lithium response in BPI patients. Therefore, targeting GSK-3 activity and/or KCTD12 expression may constitute a possible therapeutic strategy for treating patients with BPI disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous characteristics. A simulation study demonstrated that attempts to categorize patients with a complex disease into more homogeneous subgroups could have more power to elucidate hidden heritability. We conducted cluster analyses using the k-means algorithm with a cluster number of 15 based on phenotypic variables from the Simons Simplex Collection (SSC). As a preliminary study, we conducted a conventional genome-wide association study (GWAS) with a data set of 597 ASD cases and 370 controls. In the second step, we divided cases based on the clustering results and conducted GWAS in each of the subgroups vs controls (cluster-based GWAS). We also conducted cluster-based GWAS on another SSC data set of 712 probands and 354 controls in the replication stage. In the preliminary study, which was conducted in conventional GWAS design, we observed no significant associations. In the second step of cluster-based GWASs, we identified 65 chromosomal loci, which included 30 intragenic loci located in 21 genes and 35 intergenic loci that satisfied the threshold of P < 5.0 x 10(-8). Some of these loci were located within or near previously reported candidate genes for ASD: CDH5, CNTN5, CNTNAP5, DNAH17, DPP10, DSCAM, FOXK1, GABBR2, GRIN2A5, ITPR1, NTM, SDK1, SNCA, and SRRM4. Of these 65 significant chromosomal loci, rs11064685 located within the SRRM4 gene had a significantly different distribution in the cases vs controls in the replication cohort. These findings suggest that clustering may successfully identify subgroups with relatively homogeneous disease etiologies. Further cluster validation and replication studies are warranted in larger cohorts.
BACKGROUND: De novo mutations in the GABBR2 (Gamma-Aminobutyric acid Type B Receptor Subunit 2) gene have recently been reported to be associated with a form of early-infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE59; OMIM# 617904), as well as a Rett syndrome (RTT)-like disorder defined as a neurodevelopmental disorder with poor language and loss of hand skills (NDPLHS; OMIM# 617903). METHODS: We describe a pediatric case carrying a de novo GABBR2 pathogenic variant and showing a phenotype encompassing RTT, epilepsy, generalized hypotonia with a paroxysmal limb dystonia. RESULTS: A 11-year-old girl, born to non-consanguineous parents after an uneventful pregnancy, had developmental delay and generalized hypotonia. At age 3.5 months she presented with infantile spasms with an electroencephalographic pattern of hypsarrhythmia. After treatment with clonazepam and prednisolone, she became seizure-free with a slow background electrical activity. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was normal. Paroxysmal dystonic posturing of the extremities, especially the upper limbs, have been observed since the age of 3 years. Motor stereotypies, non-epileptic episodes of hyperventilation and breath-holding were also reported. The girl suffered from feeding difficulties requiring gastrostomy at the age of 8. Exome sequencing (ES) revealed a de novo GABBR2 pathogenic variant (NM_005458:c.G2077T:p.G693W). CONCLUSION: Paroxysmal limb dystonias, especially in the context of neurodevelopmental disorder featuring epilepsy, generalized hypotonia and RTT-like features should lead to the suspect of GABBR2 mutations.
The etiopathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases is characterized by the death of neurons. Human periodontal ligament stem cells (hPDLSCs), coming from neuronal crest, can potentially become neuronal cells because of their embryologic origin. In this study, we performed an RNA-seq analysis of hPDLSCs in order to determine whether their transcriptomic profile revealed genes encoded for ion channel receptors. Next, each found gene was enriched by the information of pathways stored in the Reactome database. Our results show that the hPDLSCs express GABBR1 and GABBR2, CHRNA1, GRINA genes, respectively associated with GABA(B), NMDA and nACh receptors. In particular, the two subunits of GABA(B) receptor are expressed in hPDLSCs. Further, the proteic extract for GABA(B)R1, GABA(B)R2 and AChRalpha1 confirmed their expression in hPDLSCs. Our results show that hPDLSCs express physiologically genes associated with ion channel receptors maintaining multipotent features which are useful for neurogenesis.
