Gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor subunit beta-1; Component of the heteropentameric receptor for GABA, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the vertebrate brain. Functions also as histamine receptor and mediates cellular responses to histamine. Functions as receptor for diazepines and various anesthetics, such as pentobarbital; these are bound at a separate allosteric effector binding site. Functions as ligand-gated chloride channel.
Epilepsy is a paroxysmal brain disorder that results from an imbalance between neuronal excitation and inhibition. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the most important inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain and plays an important role in the occurrence and development of epilepsy. Abnormalities in all aspects of GABA metabolism, including GABA synthesis, transport, genes encoding GABA receptors, and GABA inactivation, may lead to epilepsy. GABRA1, GABRA2, GABRA5, GABRB1, GABRB2, GABRB3, GABRG2 and GABBR2 are genes that encode GABA receptors and are commonly associated with epilepsy. Mutations of these genes lead to a variety of epilepsy syndromes with different clinical phenotypes, primarily by down regulating receptor expression and reducing the amplitude of GABA-evoked potentials. GABA is metabolized by GABA transaminase and succinate semi aldehyde dehydrogenase, which are encoded by the ABAT and ALDH5A1 genes, respectively. Mutations of these genes result in symptoms related to deficiency of GABA transaminase and succinate semi aldehyde dehydrogenase, such as epilepsy and cognitive impairment. Most of the variation in genes associated with GABA metabolism are accompanied by developmental disorders. This review focuses on advances in understanding the relationship between genetic variation in GABA metabolism and epilepsy to establish a basis for the accurate diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy.
OBJECTIVE: Epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures (EIMFS) is one of the most severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. We delineate the genetic causes and genotype-phenotype correlations of a large EIMFS cohort. METHODS: Phenotypic and molecular data were analyzed on patients recruited through an international collaborative study. RESULTS: We ascertained 135 patients from 128 unrelated families. Ninety-three of 135 (69%) had causative variants (42/55 previously reported) across 23 genes, including 9 novel EIMFS genes: de novo dominant GABRA1, GABRB1, ATP1A3; X-linked CDKL5, PIGA; and recessive ITPA, AIMP1, KARS, WWOX. The most frequently implicated genes were KCNT1 (36/135, 27%) and SCN2A (10/135, 7%). Mosaicism occurred in 2 probands (SCN2A, GABRB3) and 3 unaffected mothers (KCNT1). Median age at seizure onset was 4 weeks, with earlier onset in the SCN2A, KCNQ2, and BRAT1 groups. Epileptic spasms occurred in 22% patients. A total of 127 patients had severe to profound developmental impairment. All but 7 patients had ongoing seizures. Additional features included microcephaly, movement disorders, spasticity, and scoliosis. Mortality occurred in 33% at median age 2 years 7 months. INTERPRETATION: We identified a genetic cause in 69% of patients with EIMFS. We highlight the genetic heterogeneity of EIMFS with 9 newly implicated genes, bringing the total number to 33. Mosaicism was observed in probands and parents, carrying critical implications for recurrence risk. EIMFS pathophysiology involves diverse molecular processes from gene and protein regulation to ion channel function and solute trafficking. ANN NEUROL 2019;86:821-831.
Routine diagnostics is biased towards genes and variants with satisfactory evidence, but rare disorders with only little confirmation of their pathogenicity might be missed. Many of these genes can, however, be considered relevant, although they may have less evidence because they lack OMIM entries or comprise only a small number of publicly available variants from one or a few studies. Here, we present 89 individuals harbouring variants in 77 genes for which only a small amount of public evidence on their clinical significance is available but which we still found to be relevant enough to be reported in routine diagnostics. For 21 genes, we present case reports that confirm the lack or provisionality of OMIM associations (ATP6V0A1, CNTN2, GABRD, NCKAP1, RHEB, TCF7L2), broaden the phenotypic spectrum (CC2D1A, KCTD17, YAP1) or substantially strengthen the confirmation of genes with limited evidence in the medical literature (ADARB1, AP2M1, BCKDK, BCORL1, CARS2, FBXO38, GABRB1, KAT8, PRKD1, RAB11B, RUSC2, ZNF142). Routine diagnostics can provide valuable information on disease associations and support for genes without requiring tremendous research efforts. Thus, our results validate and delineate gene-disorder associations with the aim of motivating clinicians and scientists in diagnostic departments to provide additional evidence via publicly available databases or by publishing short case reports.
PURPOSE: Idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGEs) are a common group of genetic generalized epilepsies with high genetic heterogeneity and complex inheritance. However, the genetic basis is still largely unknown. This study aimed to explore the genetic etiologies in IGEs. METHODS: Trio-based whole-exome sequencing was performed in 60 cases with IGEs. The pathogenicity of candidate genetic variants was evaluated by the criteria of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), and the clinical causality was assessed by concordance between the observed phenotype and the reported phenotype. RESULTS: Seven candidate variants were detected in seven unrelated cases with IGE (11.7%, 7/60). According to ACMG, a de novo SLC2A1 (c.376C>T/p.Arg126Cys) variant identified in childhood absence epilepsy was evaluated as pathogenic with clinical concordance. Six variants were assessed to be uncertain significance by ACMG, but then considered causative after evaluation of clinical concordance. These variants included CLCN4 hemizygous variant (c.2044G>A/p.Glu682Lys) and IQSEC2 heterozygous variant (c.4315C>T/p.Pro1439Ser) in juvenile absence epilepsy, EFHC1 variant (c.1504C>T/p.Arg502Trp) and CACNA1H (c.589G>T/p.Ala197Ser) both with incomplete penetrance in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, and GRIN2A variant (c.2011C>G/p.Gln671Glu) and GABRB1 variant (c.1075G>A/p.Val359Ile) both co-segregated with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Among them, GABRB1 was for the first time identified as potential novel causative gene for IGE. SIGNIFICANCE: Considering the genetic heterogeneity and complex inheritance of IGEs, a comprehensive evaluation combined the ACMG scoring and assessment of clinical concordance is suggested for the pathogenicity analysis of variants identified in clinical screening. GABRB1 is probably a novel causative gene for IGE, which warrants further studies.
Understanding the genetic variation in GABA(A) receptor subunit genes (GABRs), GABRA1-6, GABRB1-3, GABRG1-3 and GABRD, in individuals affected by epilepsy may improve the diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy syndromes through identification of disease-associated variants. However, the lack of functional analysis and validation of many novel and previously reported familial and de novo mutations have made it challenging to address meaningful gene associations with epilepsy syndromes. GABA(A) receptors belong to the Cys-loop receptor family. Even though GABA(A) receptor mutant residues are widespread among different GABRs, their frequent occurrence in important structural domains that share common functional features suggests associations between structure and function.
The GABRB1 gene encodes the beta 1 subunit of the gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptor (GABA A receptor), which is responsible for mediating inhibitory neurotransmission in the thalamus. Potential relationships between the GABRB1 gene, thalamus volume, and intelligence have been suggested by previous clinical studies, but have not been directly examined among nonclinical samples. The current study collected structural MRI, genetic, and behavioral data from 316 healthy Chinese adults (including 187 females and 129 males), and examined associations between GABRB1 variants, thalamus volume, and intelligence (measured by the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Revised). After controlling for intracranial volume, sex, and age, GABRB1 genetic polymorphism at the SNP rs7435958 had the strongest association with thalamus volume (p = 0.002 and 0.00008 for left and right thalamus volumes, respectively), with GG homozygotes having smaller bilateral thalamus volumes than the other genotypes. Furthermore, there were positive correlations between bilateral thalamus volumes and intelligence, especially for GABRB1 rs7435958 GG female homozygotes (r's = 0.31 and 0.29, p < 0.01, for the correlations of intelligence with left and right thalamus volumes, respectively). This study provides the first evidence for the involvement of the GABRB1 gene in the thalamus structure and their interactive effects on intelligence. Future studies of the thalamus-intelligence associations should consider genetic factors as potential moderators.
Alcohol dependence is a common, complex and debilitating disorder with genetic and environmental influences. Here we show that alcohol consumption increases following mutations to the gamma-aminobutyric acidA receptor (GABAAR) beta1 subunit gene (Gabrb1). Using N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis on an alcohol-averse background (F1 BALB/cAnN x C3H/HeH), we develop a mouse model exhibiting strong heritable preference for ethanol resulting from a dominant mutation (L285R) in Gabrb1. The mutation causes spontaneous GABA ion channel opening and increases GABA sensitivity of recombinant GABAARs, coupled to increased tonic currents in the nucleus accumbens, a region long-associated with alcohol reward. Mutant mice work harder to obtain ethanol, and are more sensitive to alcohol intoxication. Another spontaneous mutation (P228H) in Gabrb1 also causes high ethanol consumption accompanied by spontaneous GABA ion channel opening and increased accumbal tonic current. Our results provide a new and important link between GABAAR function and increased alcohol consumption that could underlie some forms of alcohol abuse.
AIM: Propofol and opioids are commonly used in anaesthesia, but are highly susceptible to haemodynamic instability, thereby threatening the patient's surgical safety and prognosis. The purpose of this study was to investigate the predictors of haemodynamic instability and establish its predictive model. METHODS: A total of 150 Chinese patients undergoing thyroid or breast surgery participated in the study, with target-controlled infusion concentrations of propofol, opioids dosage, heart rate (HR), mean arterial pressure (MAP) and Narcotrend Index recorded at key points throughout the procedure. The Agena MassARRAY system was used to genotype candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms related to pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of propofol and opioids. RESULTS: Among nongenetic factors, baseline HR (R = -.579, P < .001) and baseline MAP (R = -.725, P < .001) had a significant effect on the haemodynamic instability. Among genetic factors, the CT/CC genotype of GABRB1 rs4694846 (95% confidence interval [CI]: -11.309 to -3.155), AA/AG of OPRM1 rs1799971 (95%CI: 0.773 to 10.290), AA of CES2 rs8192925 (95%CI: 1.842 to 9.090) were associated with higher HR instability; the AA/GG genotype of NR1I2 rs6438550 (95%CI: 0.351 to 7.761), AA of BDNF rs2049046 (95%CI: -9.039 to -0.640) and GG of GABBR2 rs1167768 (95%CI: -10.146 to -1.740) were associated with higher MAP instability. The predictive models of HR and MAP fluctuations were developed, accounting for 45.0 and 59.2% of variations, respectively. CONCLUSION: We found that cardiovascular fundamentals and genetic variants of GABRB1, GABBR2, OPRM1, BDNF, CES2 and NR1I2 are associated with cardiovascular susceptibility, which can provide a reference for haemodynamic management in clinical anaesthesia.
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy 45 (DEE45) is a neurogenetic disorder caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants of GABRB1, encoding the beta1 subunit of the GABA type A receptor. Only three infants with DEE45 have been reported so far, and a detailed description of the disease history of these patients is still lacking. We describe the clinical and genetic findings of a 21-year-old woman with DEE45 carrying a novel de novo GABRB1 mutation (c.841A>G, p.T281A). The patient presented at birth with hypotonia and focal apneic seizures evolving in a phenotype of epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures that were refractory to antiseizure medications. Epileptic spasms partially responsive to steroid therapy appeared in the second year of life. Acquired microcephaly, profound mental retardation, and tetraparesis became evident with development. During childhood and adolescence, the epileptic phenotype evolved toward a Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome. Atypical absence status and clusters of tonic seizures occurred, often triggered by respiratory infections. The main strengths of this work are the identification of a novel pathogenic GABRB1 variant localized in the same transmembrane domain of a previously described mutation and the detailed description of the clinical trajectory of GABRB1-related encephalopathy along 21 years of disease history.
AIM: In order to administer antipsychotic medication with the most beneficial outcome, the appropriate drug and dose needs to be identified. Though often not considered in pharmacogenetic studies, dosage plays an important role in treatment outcome. This study set out to analyze the association between 109 SNPs and antipsychotic dosage among schizophrenia patients. In a previous study, we tested 134 SNPs in regards to antipsychotic dosage. In the current study, we tested additional markers in the same candidate genes that we investigated in the previous study to confirm our previous findings. METHODS: We included 263 participants with schizophrenia spectrum disorders between the ages of 18-75. Each participant was assessed cross-sectionally to collect clinical and antipsychotic treatment information through a semi-structured interview. The antipsychotic dosage for each individual was standardized according to chlorpromazine equivalents (CPZe), defined daily dose, and the percentage of maximum dosage (PM%). For each participant, 109 SNPs from 29 candidate genes were imputed or genotyped using a Customized Illumina Chip. RESULTS: Polymorphisms in the GABRB1 gene were significantly associated with higher antipsychotic dosage according to CPZe and PM% standardization. CONCLUSION: Our analysis suggests that variation in the GABRB1 gene may be significantly associated with antipsychotic dosage according to CPZe and PM% standardization. Antipsychotic dosage remains an integral measure for treatment response that warrants future pharmacogenetic testing and studies with larger sample sizes.
BACKGROUND: The gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) type A receptor (GABA(A)R) contains the recognition sites for a variety of agents used in the treatment of brain disorders, including anxiety and epilepsy. A better understanding of how receptor expression is regulated in individual neurons may provide novel opportunities for therapeutic intervention. Towards this goal we have studied transcription of a GABA(A)R subunit gene (GABRB1) whose activity is autologously regulated by GABA via a 10 base pair initiator-like element (beta(1)-INR). METHODS: By screening a human cDNA brain library with a yeast one-hybrid assay, the Polycomblike (PCL) gene product PHD finger protein transcript b (PHF1b) was identified as a beta(1)-INR associated protein. Promoter/reporter assays in primary rat cortical cells demonstrate that PHF1b is an activator at GABRB1, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays reveal that presence of PHF1 at endogenous Gabrb1 is regulated by GABA(A)R activation. RESULTS: PCL is a member of the Polycomb group required for correct spatial expression of homeotic genes in Drosophila. We now show that PHF1b recognition of beta(1)-INR is dependent on a plant homeodomain, an adjacent helix-loop-helix, and short glycine rich motif. In neurons, it co-immunoprecipitates with SUZ12, a key component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) that regulates a number of important cellular processes, including gene silencing via histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). CONCLUSIONS: The observation that chronic exposure to GABA reduces PHF1 binding and H3K27 monomethylation, which is associated with transcriptional activation, strongly suggests that PHF1b may be a molecular transducer of GABA(A)R function and thus GABA-mediated neurotransmission in the central nervous system.
PURPOSE: The underlying cause of myasthenia gravis (MG) is unknown, although it likely involves a genetic component. However, no common genetic variants have been unequivocally linked to autoimmune MG. We sought to identify the genetic variants associated with an increased or decreased risk of developing MG in samples from a Korean Multicenter MG Cohort. MATERIALS AND METHODS: To determine new genetic targets related to autoimmune MG, a whole genome-based single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) analysis was conducted using an Axiom Genome-Wide ASI 1 Array, comprising 598375 SNPs and samples from 109 MG patients and 150 neurologically normal controls. RESULTS: In total, 641 SNPs from five case-control associations showed p-values of less than 10(-)(5). From regional analysis, we selected seven candidate genes (RYR3, CACNA1S, SLAMF1, SOX5, FHOD3, GABRB1, and SACS) for further analysis. CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that a few genetic polymorphisms, such as in RYR3, CACNA1S, and SLAMF1, might be related to autoimmune MG. Our findings also encourage further studies, particularly confirmatory studies with larger samples, to validate and analyze the association between these SNPs and autoimmune MG.
Over the years, indigenous cattle have not only played an essential role in securing primary food sources but have also been utilized for labor by humans, making them invaluable genetic resources. The Zhaotong cattle, a native Chinese breed from the Yunnan province, possess excellent meat quality and resistance to heat and humidity. Here we used whole genome sequencing data of 104 animals to delve into the population structure, genomic diversity and potential positive selection signals in Zhaotong cattle. The findings of this study demonstrate that the genetic composition of Zhaotong cattle was primarily derived from Chinese indicine cattle and East Asian cattle. The nucleotide diversity of Zhaotong cattle was only lower than that of Chinese indicine cattle, which was much higher than that of other taurine cattle. Genome-wide selection scans detected a series of positive candidate regions containing multiple key genes related to bone development and metabolism (CA10, GABRG3, GLDN and NOTUM), meat quality traits (ALG8, LINGO2, MYO5B, PRKG1 and GABRB1), immune response (ADA2, BMF, LEF1 and PAK6) and heat resistance (EIF2AK4 and LEF1). In summary, this study supplies essential genetic insights into the genome diversity within Zhaotong cattle and provides a foundational framework for comprehending the genetic basis of indigenous cattle breeds.
We aim to develop a formula based on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to predict whether the propofol target-controlled infusion (TCI) concentration would be over 4 mug mL(-1) at the time of loss of consciousness (LOC). We recruited 184 patients undergoing thyroid or breast surgeries with propofol anaesthesia. A total of 48 SNPs of CYP2B6, CYP2C9, UGT1A9, HNF4A, ABCB1, ABCC4, ABCG2, GABRA2, GABRA4, GABRB1, GABRB3, GABRG2, GABBR2, GAD1, SLC1A3, BDNF, and NRXN1, previously associated with propofol metabolic and pharmacology pathway, were genotyped. The formula was developed in the training cohort using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator logistic regression model, and then validated in the testing cohort. The SNPs, GABBR2 rs1167768, GABBR2 rs1571927, NRXN1 rs601010, BDNF rs2049046, GABRA4 rs1512135, UGT1A9 rs11692021, GABBR2 rs2808536, HNF4A rs1884613, GABRB3 rs2017247, and CYP2B6 rs3181842 were selected to construct the SNP-based formula, which was used to calculate the risk score for over 4 mug mL(-1) TCI concentration of propofol at the time of LOC. Patients in the high-risk group were more likely to require a propofol concentration higher than 4 mug mL(-1) and presented a longer LOC latency. The SNP-based formula may significantly improve the safety and effectiveness of propofol-induced anaesthesia.
Ethanol (EtOH) exposure during embryonic development causes dysfunction of the central nervous system (CNS). Here, we examined the effects of chronic EtOH on gene expression during early stages of neuronal differentiation. Human embryonic carcinoma (NCCIT) cells were differentiated into neuronal precursors/lineages in the presence or absence of EtOH and folic acid. Gene expression profiling and pathway analysis demonstrated that EtOH deregulates many genes and pathways that are involved in early brain development. EtOH exposure downregulated several important genes, such as PCDHB14, GABRB1, CTNND2, NAV3, RALDH1, and OPN5, which are involved in CNS development, synapse assembly, synaptic transmission, and neurotransmitter receptor activity. GeneGo pathway analysis revealed that the deregulated genes mapped to disease pathways that were relevant to fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD, such as neurotic disorders, epilepsy, and alcohol-related disorders). In conclusion, these findings suggest that the impairment of the neurological system or suboptimal synapse formation resulting from EtOH exposure could underlie the neurodevelopmental disorders in individuals with FASD.
Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder of complex genetics, characterized by impairment in social interaction and communication, as well as repetitive behavior. Multiple lines of evidence, including alterations in levels of GABA and GABA receptors in autistic patients, indicate that the GABAergic system, which is responsible for synaptic inhibition in the adult brain, may be involved in autism. Previous studies in our lab indicated association of noncoding single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within a GABA receptor subunit gene on chromosome 4, GABRA4, and interaction between SNPs in GABRA4 and GABRB1 (also on chromosome 4), within Caucasian autism patients. Studies of genetic variation in African-American autism families are rare. Analysis of 557 Caucasian and an independent population of 54 African-American families with 35 SNPs within GABRB1 and GABRA4 strengthened the evidence for involvement of GABRA4 in autism risk in Caucasians (rs17599165, p=0.0015; rs1912960, p=0.0073; and rs17599416, p=0.0040) and gave evidence of significant association in African-Americans (rs2280073, p=0.0287 and rs16859788, p=0.0253). The GABRA4 and GABRB1 interaction was also confirmed in the Caucasian dataset (most significant pair, rs1912960 and rs2351299; p=0.004). Analysis of the subset of families with a positive history of seizure activity in at least one autism patient revealed no association to GABRA4; however, three SNPs within GABRB1 showed significant allelic association; rs2351299 (p=0.0163), rs4482737 (p=0.0339), and rs3832300 (p=0.0253). These results confirmed our earlier findings, indicating GABRA4 and GABRB1 as genes contributing to autism susceptibility, extending the effect to multiple ethnic groups and suggesting seizures as a stratifying phenotype.
To determine the role of genes in the chromosomal regions 11p15 and 4p12 in the development of alcohol dependence, a sample of alcoholics (n = 133) and normal controls (n = 89) were screened using polymorphisms in the dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and GABA receptor beta1 (GABRbeta1) genes. Comparison of total alcoholics with normal controls for GABRbeta1 gene was highly significant (p = 0.004). The difference between type II alcoholics and normal controls for the same allele frequencies was also significant (p = 0.029). The allele distributions of the polymorphisms in the DRD4 and TH genes in alcoholics and normal controls were similar and their differences were not significant. Our association studies indicate that the GABRbeta1 gene may play a role in the development of alcoholism. Therefore, it is important to screen a sample of well-characterized alcoholics with functional polymorphisms in all of the GABAalpha receptor subunit genes and determine their relationship with alcoholism phenotypes. Results with TH and DRD4 genes indicate that these two genes may not play major roles in the development of alcoholism.
Men with prostate cancer are at increased risk of developing cognitive decline by the use of second-generation androgen signaling inhibitors. To date, reliable and sensitive biomarkers that could distinguish men at high risk of cognitive dysfunction under androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) have not been characterized. We used high-throughput transcriptional profiling utilizing human prostate cancer cell culture models mimicking ADT, biomarker selection using minimal common oncology data elements-cytoscape, and bioinformatic analyses employing Advaita(R) iPathwayGuide and DisGeNET for identification of disease-related gene associations. Validation analysis of genes was performed on brain neuronal and glial cells by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction assay. Our systematic analysis of androgen deprivation-associated genes involved multiple biological processes, including neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, axon guidance, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and metabolic and cancer signaling pathways. Genes associated with neuroreceptor ligand interaction, including gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A and B receptors and nuclear core proteins, were identified as top upstream regulators. Functional enrichment and protein-protein interaction network analysis highlighted the role of ligand-gated ion channels (LGICs) and their receptors in cognitive dysfunction. Gene-disease association assigned forgetfulness, intellectual disability, visuospatial deficit, bipolar disorder, and other neurocognitive impairment with upregulation of type-1 angiotensin II receptor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, GABA type B receptor subunit 2 (GABBR2), GABRA3, GABRA5, GABRB1, glycine receptor beta, glutamate ionotropic receptor N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDA) type subunit 1, glutamate ionotropic receptor NMDA type subunit 2D, 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1D, interferon beta 1, and nuclear receptor subfamily 3 group C member 1 as top differentially expressed genes. Validation studies of brain glial cells, neurons, and patients on ADT demonstrated the association of these genes with cognitive decline. Our findings highlight LGICs as potential biomarkers for ADT-mediated cognitive decline. Further validation of these biomarkers may lead to future practical clinical use.
Low-grade dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (DNTs) are a frequent cause of drug-refractory epilepsy. Molecular mechanisms underlying seizure generation in these tumors are poorly understood. This study was conducted to identify altered genes in nonneoplastic epileptogenic cortical tissues (ECTs) resected from DNT patients during electrocorticography (ECoG)-guided surgery. RNA sequencing (RNAseq) was used to determine the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in these high-spiking ECTs compared to non-epileptic controls. A total of 477 DEGs (180 upregulated; 297 downregulated) were observed in the ECTs compared to non-epileptic controls. Gene ontology analysis revealed enrichment of genes belonging to the following Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways: (i) glutamatergic synapse; (ii) nitrogen metabolism; (iii) transcriptional misregulation in cancer; and (iv) protein digestion and absorption. The glutamatergic synapse pathway was enriched by DEGs such as GRM4, SLC1A6, GRIN2C, GRM2, GRM5, GRIN3A, and GRIN2B. Enhanced glutamatergic activity was observed in the pyramidal neurons of ECTs, which could be attributed to altered synaptic transmission in these tissues compared to non-epileptic controls. Besides glutamatergic synapse, altered expression of other genes such as GABRB1 (synapse formation), SLIT2 (axonal growth), and PROKR2 (neuron migration) could be linked to epileptogenesis in ECTs. Also, upregulation of GABRA6 gene in ECTs could underlie benzodiazepine resistance in these patients. Neural cell-type-specific gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed transcriptome of ECTs to be predominantly contributed by microglia and neurons. This study provides first comprehensive gene expression profiling of nonneoplastic ECTs of DNT patients and identifies genes/pathways potentially linked to epileptogenesis.
