Gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor subunit gamma-1; GABA, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the vertebrate brain, mediates neuronal inhibition by binding to the GABA/benzodiazepine receptor and opening an integral chloride channel.
Brain metastasis is a major cause of poor prognosis and death in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD); however, the understanding of therapeutic strategies and mechanisms for brain metastases from LUAD (BM-LUAD) remains notably limited, especially at the proteomics levels. To address this issue, we conducted integrated proteomic and glycoproteomic analyses on 49 BM-LUAD tumors, revealing two distinct subtypes of the disease: BM-S1 and BM-S2. Whole exome sequencing analysis revealed that somatic mutations in STK11 and KEAP1, as well as copy number deletions on chr19p13.3, such as STK11, UQCR11, and SLC25A23, were more frequently detected in BM-S2. In BM-S1 tumors, we observed significant infiltration of GFAP + astrocytes, as evidenced by elevated levels of GFAP, GABRA2, GABRG1 and GAP43 proteins and an enrichment of astrocytic signatures in both our proteomic data and external spatial transcriptomic data. Conversely, BM-S2 tumors demonstrated higher levels of PD-1 immune cell infiltration, supported by the upregulation of PD-1 and LAG-3 genes. These findings suggest distinct microenvironmental adaptations required by the different BM-LUAD subtypes. Additionally, we observed unique glycosylation patterns between the subtypes, with increased fucosylation in BM-S1 and enhanced sialylation in BM-S2, primarily affected by glycosylation enzymes such as FUT9, B4GALT1, and ST6GAL1. Specifically, in BM-S2, these sialylation modifications are predominantly localized to the lysosomes, underscoring the critical role of N-glycosylation in the tumor progression of BM-LUAD. Overall, our study not only provides a comprehensive multi-omic data resource but also offers valuable biological insights into BM-LUAD, highlighting potential mechanisms and therapeutic targets for further investigation.
Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is a severe facial pain disease of unknown cause and unclear genetic background. To examine the existing knowledge about genetics in TN, we performed a systematic study asking about the prevalence of familial trigeminal neuralgia, and which genes that have been identified in human TN studies and in animal models of trigeminal pain. MedLine, Embase, Cochrane Library and Web of Science were searched from inception to January 2021. 71 studies were included in the systematic review. Currently, few studies provide information about the prevalence of familial TN; the available evidence indicates that about 1-2% of TN cases have the familial form. The available human studies propose the following genes to be possible contributors to development of TN: CACNA1A, CACNA1H, CACNA1F, KCNK1, TRAK1, SCN9A, SCN8A, SCN3A, SCN10A, SCN5A, NTRK1, GABRG1, MPZ gene, MAOA gene and SLC6A4. Their role in familial TN still needs to be addressed. The experimental animal studies suggest an emerging role of genetics in trigeminal pain, though the animal models may be more relevant for trigeminal neuropathic pain than TN per se. In summary, this systematic review suggests a more important role of genetic factors in TN pathogenesis than previously assumed.
Understanding the genetic variation in GABA(A) receptor subunit genes (GABRs), GABRA1-6, GABRB1-3, GABRG1-3 and GABRD, in individuals affected by epilepsy may improve the diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy syndromes through identification of disease-associated variants. However, the lack of functional analysis and validation of many novel and previously reported familial and de novo mutations have made it challenging to address meaningful gene associations with epilepsy syndromes. GABA(A) receptors belong to the Cys-loop receptor family. Even though GABA(A) receptor mutant residues are widespread among different GABRs, their frequent occurrence in important structural domains that share common functional features suggests associations between structure and function.
Epileptic encephalopathies (EEs) are severe brain disorders with excessive ictal (seizure) and interictal (electrographic epileptiform discharges) activity in developing brain which may result in progressive cognitive and neuropsychological deterioration. In contrast to regular epilepsy where the treatment goal is to prevent the seizure (ictal) recurrence, in patients with EE the goal is to treat both ictal as well as interictal activity to prevent further progression. With the introduction of genetic sequencing technologies over the past 20 years, there is growing recognition of the genetic basis of EE, with the majority due to monogenic causes. Monogenic etiologies of EE include pathogenic variants in the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor (GABA-A) encoding gene family. We present a 2-year-old patient with EE, hypotonia, and global developmental delays. Clinical trio exome sequencing showed a novel, de novo variant in GABRG1. GABRG1 encodes the gamma1 subunit of the GABA-A receptor. To date, there has not been an association of EE with pathogenic variants in GABRG1. This variant is predicted to be damaging to protein structure and function, and the patient's phenotype is similar to those with pathogenic variants in other members of the GABA-A receptor encoding gene family.
Overweight and obese are risk factors for various diseases. In Taiwan, the combined prevalence of overweight and obesity has increased dramatically. Here, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on four adiposity traits, including body-mass index (BMI), body fat percentage (BF%), waist circumference (WC), and waist-hip ratio (WHR), using the data for more than 21,000 subjects in Taiwan Biobank. Associations were evaluated between 6,546,460 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and adiposity traits, yielding 13 genome-wide significant (GWS) adiposity-associated trait-loci pairs. A known gene, FTO, as well as two BF%-associated loci (GNPDA2-GABRG1 [4p12] and RNU6-2-PIAS1 [15q23]) were identified as pleiotropic effects. Moreover, RALGAPA1 was found as a specific genetic predisposing factor to high BMI in a Taiwanese population. Compared to other populations, a slightly lower heritability of the four adiposity traits was found in our cohort. Surprisingly, we uncovered the importance of neural pathways that might influence BF%, WC and WHR in the Taiwanese (East Asian) population. Additionally, a moderate genetic correlation between the WHR and BMI (gammag = 0.52; p = 2.37x10-9) was detected, suggesting different genetic determinants exist for abdominal adiposity and overall adiposity. In conclusion, the obesity-related genetic loci identified here provide new insights into the genetic underpinnings of adiposity in the Taiwanese population.
The chromosome 4 cluster of GABA(A) receptor genes is predominantly expressed in the brain reward circuitry and this chromosomal region has been implicated in linkage scans for alcoholism. Variation in one chromosome 4 gene, GABRA2, has been robustly associated with alcohol use disorders (AUD) although no functional locus has been identified. As HapMap data reveal moderate long-distance linkage disequilibrium across GABRA2 and the adjacent gene, GABRG1, it is possible that the functional locus is in GABRG1. We genotyped 24 SNPs across GABRG1 and GABRA2 in two population isolates: 547 Finnish Caucasian men (266 alcoholics) and 311 community-derived Plains Indian men and women (181 alcoholics). In both the Plains Indians and the Caucasians: (1) the GABRG1 haplotype block(s) did not extend to GABRA2; (2) GABRG1 haplotypes and SNPs were significantly associated with AUD; (3) there was no association between GABRA2 haplotypes and AUD; (4) there were several common (>or=0.05) haplotypes that spanned GABRG1 and GABRA2 (341 kb), three of which were present in both populations: one of these ancestral haplotypes was associated with AUD, the other two were more common in non-alcoholics; this association was determined by GABRG1; (5) in the Finns, three less common (<0.05) extended haplotypes showed an association with AUD that was determined by GABRA2. Our results suggest that there are likely to be independent, complex contributions from both GABRG1 and GABRA2 to alcoholism vulnerability.
BACKGROUND: GABRG1 and GABRA2, genes that encode the gamma1 and alpha2 subunits, respectively, of the GABA-A receptor, are located in a cluster on chromosome 4p. Association of alcohol dependence (AD) with markers located at the 3' region of GABRA2 has been replicated in several studies, but recent studies suggested the possibility that the signal may be attributable to the adjacent gene, GABRG1, located 90 kb distant in the 3' direction. Owing to strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) in European Americans (EAs), the origin, or origins, of the association signal is very difficult to discern, but our previous population-based study suggested that decreased LD across the GABRG1-GABRA2 region in African Americans (AAs) may be useful for fine mapping and resolution of the association signal in that population. METHODS: To examine these associations in greater detail, we genotyped 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning GABRG1 and GABRA2 in 380 AAs with AD and in 253 AA controls. RESULTS: Although there was no association between any individual SNP and AD, a highly significant difference was shown between AD subjects and controls in the frequency of a 3-SNP GABRA2 haplotype (global p = 0.00029). A similar level of significance was obtained in 6-SNP haplotypes that combined tagging SNPs from both genes (global p = 0.00994). High statistical significance was also shown with a 6-SNP haplotype (T-G-C-G-T-A), p = 0.0033. The T-G-C-G-T-A haplotype contains the most significant GABRA2 3-SNP haplotype (p = 0.00019), G-T-A. CONCLUSIONS: These findings reflect the interrelationship between these 2 genes and the likelihood that risk loci exist in each of them. Study of an AA population allowed evaluation of these associations at higher genomic resolution than is possible in a EA population, owing to the much lower LD across these loci in AAs.
The susceptibility of different individuals to anesthetics varies widely, and sevoflurane is no exception. We hypothesized that polymorphisms in genes involved in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics may explain this variation. A total of 151 individuals undergoing otorhinolaryngology surgery were included. The influence of genetic polymorphisms on sevoflurane sensitivity were investigated through SNaPshot technology. Individuals carrying KCNK2 rs6686529 G > C, MTRR rs3733784 TT, rs2307116 GG, or rs1801394 AA polymorphisms had a higher sensitivity to the sedative effect of sevoflurane than those without those polymorphisms. The univariate linear regression analysis indicated that MTRR rs3733784 TT, rs2307116 GG, and rs1801394 AA were potentially significant predictors of higher sensitivity to the sedative effect of sevoflurane. Moreover, CYP2E1 rs3813867 G > C and rs2031920 C > T, GABRG1 rs279858 T > C, KCNK3 rs1275988 CC, GRIN2B rs1806201 GG, MTRR rs2307116 G > A, and rs1801394 A > G were associated with a higher sensitivity to the cardiovascular effect of sevoflurane. Our results suggested that 9 single nucleotide polymorphisms in genes involved in metabolizing enzymes, transport proteins, target proteins of sevoflurane and folate metabolism may help to explain individual differences in the susceptibility to the sedative or cardiovascular effect of sevoflurane.
Increasing evidence supports the involvement of both heritable and environmental risk factors in major depression (MD) and suicidal behavior (SB). Studies investigating gene-environment interaction (G x E) may be useful for elucidating the role of biological mechanisms in the risk for mental disorders. In the present paper, we review the literature regarding the interaction between genes modulating brain functions and stressful life events in the etiology of MD and SB and discuss their potential added benefit compared to genetic studies only. Within the context of G x E investigation, thus far, only a few reliable results have been obtained, although some genes have consistently shown interactive effects with environmental risk in MD and, to a lesser extent, in SB. Further investigation is required to disentangle the direct and mediated effects that are common or specific to MD and SB. Since traditional G x E studies overall suffer from important methodological limitations, further effort is required to develop novel methodological strategies with an interdisciplinary approach.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies of the genetics of alcoholism have focused on a cluster of genes encoding for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA(A)) receptor subunits, which is thought to play a role in the expression of addiction phenotypes. This study examined allelic associations between 2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the GABRG1 gene (rs1391166 and rs1497571) and alcohol phenotypes, namely level of response to alcohol, alcohol use patterns, and alcohol-related problems. METHOD: Participants were non-treatment-seeking seeking hazardous drinkers (n = 124) who provided DNA samples, participated in a face-to-face interview for level of response to alcohol, and completed a series of drinking and individual differences measures. RESULTS: Analyses revealed that a SNP of the GABRG1 gene (rs1497571) was associated with level of response to alcohol and drinking patterns in this subclinical sample. Follow-up mediational analyses were also conducted to examine putative mechanisms underlying these associations. DISCUSSION: These findings replicate and extend recent research suggesting that genetic variation at the GABRG1 locus may underlie the expression of alcohol phenotypes, including level of response to alcohol.
AIM: To identify genetic variants associated with greater tobacco consumption in a Mexican population. PATIENTS & METHODS: Daily smokers were classified as light smokers (LS; n = 742), heavy smokers (HS; n = 601) and nonsmokers (NS; n = 606). In the first stage, a genotyping microarray that included 347 SNPs in CHRNA2-CHRNA7/CHRNA10, CHRNB2-CHRNB4 and NRXN1 genes and 37 ancestry-informative markers was used to analyze 707 samples (187 HS, 328 LS and 192 NS). In the second stage, 14 SNPs from stage 1 were validated in the remaining samples (HS, LS and NS; n = 414 in each group) using real-time PCR. To predict the role of the associated SNPs, an in silico analysis was performed. RESULTS: Two SNPs in NRXN1 and two in CHRNA5 were associated with cigarette consumption, while rs10865246/C (NRXN1) was associated with high nicotine addiction. The in silico analysis revealed that rs1882296/T had a high level of homology with Hsa-miR-6740-5p, which encodes a putative miRNA that targets glutamate receptor subunits (GRIA2, GRID2) and GABA receptor subunits (GABRG1, GABRA4, GABRB2), while rs1882296/C had a high level of homology with Hsa-miR-6866-5p, which encodes a different miRNA that targets GRID2 and GABRB2. CONCLUSION: In a Mexican Mestizo population, greater consumption of cigarettes was influenced by polymorphisms in the NRXN1 and CHRNA5 genes. We proposed new hypotheses regarding the putative roles of miRNAs that influence the GABAergic and glutamatergic pathways in smoking addiction.
Conditions such as small for gestational age (SGA), which is defined as birthweight less than 10(th) percentile for gestational age can predispose to neurodevelopmental abnormalities compared to babies with normal birthweight. Fetal growth and birthweight depend on placental function, as this organ transports substrates to the developing fetus and it acts as a source of endocrine factors, including steroids and prolactins that are required for fetal development and pregnancy maintenance. To advance our knowledge on the aetiology of fetal growth disorders, the vast majority of the research has been focused on studying the transport function of the placenta, leaving practically unexplored the contribution of placental hormones in the regulation of fetal growth. Here, using mice and natural variability in fetal growth within the litter, we compared fetuses that fell on or below the 10(th) percentile (classified as SGA) with those that had adequate weight for their gestational age (AGA). In particular, we compared placental endocrine metabolism and hormone production, as well as fetal brain weight and expression of developmental, growth and metabolic genes between SGA and AGA fetuses. We found that compared to AGA fetuses, SGA fetuses had lower placental efficiency and reduced capacity for placental production of hormones (e.g. steroidogenic gene Cyp17a1, prolactin Prl3a1, and pregnancy-specific glycoproteins Psg21). Brain weight was reduced in SGA fetuses, although this was proportional to the reduction in overall fetal size. The expression of glucose transporter 3 (Slc2a3) was reduced despite the abundance of AKT, FOXO and ERK proteins were similar. Developmental (Sv2b and Gabrg1) and microglia genes (Ier3), as well as the pregnancy-specific glycoprotein receptor (Cd9) were lower in the brain of SGA versus AGA fetuses. In this mouse model of SGA, our results therefore demonstrate that placental endocrine dysfunction is associated with changes in fetal growth and fetal brain development.
Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers causing a high mortality worldwide. This study aimed to identify differential methylation and expression genes with prognostic value in breast cancer. DNA methylation and gene expression profiles (GSE60185, GSE42568, GSE21653, GSE58812, and GSE52865) were downloaded from TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) and GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) databases. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differential methylation genes were identified between breast cancer samples and normal samples. Functional analysis was performed using DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery) tool. Furthermore, functional epigenetic modules (FEM) were analyzed to identify critical genes with prognostic values. A large amount of DEGs and aberrant methylation genes were identified between breast cancer samples and normal samples. These genes were mainly associated with several GO (Gene Ontology) terms and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways, such as neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, alcoholism, gamma-aminobutyric acid signaling pathway, and G-protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway. Additionally, 10 DEGs with differential methylation levels were significantly correlated with survival outcomes in breast cancer patients. FEM analysis revealed that several DEGs (e.g., GABRA4, GABRG1, and GABRA1) in module GABRA4 were identified as potential biomarkers in breast cancer patients. Several DEGs identified were associated with breast cancer prognosis. These DEGs might act as prognostic and diagnostic markers in breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Operant responding paradigms quantify a subject's motivation for reward, but such studies employing ingested alcohol cannot assure the same incremental increase in brain exposure to alcohol across subjects because of substantial variability in absorption kinetics. We developed a human progressive ratio (PR) paradigm using the computer-assisted self-infusion of ethanol (CASE) system that overcomes such variability and conducted a pilot study to assess its utility for detecting an interaction of subjects' GABRA2 or GABRG1 genotype and pretreatment with 1 mg of lorazepam (LZ) vs. placebo on their willingness to work for alcohol rewards. METHODS: Twenty healthy, nondependent drinkers, aged 21 to 27, were balanced on rs279871 and rs2350439 single nucleotide polymorphisms in the GABRA2 and GABRG1 genes, respectively. Subjects worked for alcohol, with water as an alternative reinforcer (AR), using a progressive schedule of a task that required constant attention and adapted to both fatigue and drug effects. Testing began 1 hour after pretreatment with 1 mg LZ or placebo in a crossover design. RESULTS: The CASE system performed well, and the constant attention task was perceived as work by all subjects. GABRA2 homozygosity did not significantly predict either breakpoint or cumulative work, whereas a significant GABRG1 genotype by LZ pretreatment interaction for cumulative work was detected (p = 0.04). Breakpoint revealed a weak trend toward pretreatment drug effects (p = 0.11), and a somewhat stronger interaction of LZ pretreatment with GABRG1 genotype (p = 0.06). GABRG1 status revealed a more complex relationship with respect to motivation for alcohol with and without LZ pretreatment; AG and GG individuals worked more for alcohol under both pretreatment conditions, while AA individuals worked more for the AR. CONCLUSIONS: The CASE PR paradigm shows promise as a laboratory method for use in drug development and phenotyping studies.
BACKGROUND: Neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK) gene fusions are oncogenic drivers. Using the Auria Biobank in Finland, we aimed to identify and characterize patients with these gene fusions, and describe their clinical and tumor characteristics, treatments received, and outcomes. MATERIAL AND METHODS: We evaluated pediatrics with any solid tumor type and adults with colorectal cancer (CRC), non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), sarcoma, or salivary gland cancer. We determined tropomyosin receptor kinase (TRK) protein expression by pan-TRK immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of tumor samples from the Auria Biobank, scored by a certified pathologist. NTRK gene fusion was confirmed by next generation sequencing (NGS). All 2,059 patients were followed-up starting 1 year before their cancer diagnosis. RESULTS: Frequency of NTRK gene fusion tumors was 3.1% (4/127) in pediatrics, 0.7% (8/1,151) for CRC, 0.3% (1/288) for NSCLC, 0.9% (1/114) for salivary gland cancer, and 0% (0/379) for sarcoma. Among pediatrics there was one case each of fibrosarcoma (TPM3::NTRK1), Ewing's sarcoma (LPPR1::NTRK2), primitive neuroectodermal tumor (DAB2IP::NTRK2), and papillary thyroid carcinoma (RAD51B::NTRK3). Among CRC patients, six harbored tumors with NTRK1 fusions (three fused with TPM3), one harbored a NTRK3::GABRG1 fusion, and the other a NTRK2::FXN/LPPR1 fusion. Microsatellite instability was higher in CRC patients with NTRK gene fusion tumors versus wild-type tumors (50.0% vs. 4.4%). Other detected fusions were SGCZ::NTRK3 (NSCLC) and ETV6::NTRK3 (salivary gland cancer). Four patients (three CRC, one NSCLC) received chemotherapy; one patient (with CRC) received radiotherapy. CONCLUSION: NTRK gene fusions are rare in adult CRC, NSCLC, salivary tumors, sarcoma, and pediatric solid tumors.
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) and Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) are the most common comorbid conditions associated with childhood epilepsy. The co-occurrence of an epilepsy/autism phenotype or an epilepsy/ADHD phenotype has a complex and heterogeneous pathogenesis, resulting from several altered neurobiological mechanisms involved in early brain development, and influencing synaptic plasticity, neurotransmission and functional connectivity. Rare clinically relevant chromosomal aberrations, in addition to environmental factors, may confer an increased risk for ASDs/ADHD comorbid with epilepsy. The majority of the candidate genes are involved in synaptic formation/remodeling/maintenance (NRX1, CNTN4, DCLK2, CNTNAP2, TRIM32, ASTN2, CTNTN5, SYN1), neurotransmission (SYNGAP1, GABRG1, CHRNA7), or DNA methylation/chromatin remodeling (MBD5). Two genetic disorders, such as Tuberous sclerosis and Fragile X syndrome may serve as models for understanding the common pathogenic pathways leading to ASDs and ADHD comorbidities in children with epilepsy, offering the potential for new biologically focused treatment options.
OBJECTIVE: Epidemiological estimates suggest that nearly half of individuals diagnosed with alcohol use disorder will be diagnosed with another mental health disorder, with strong associations involving other externalizing disorders. Molecular genetic studies investigating the relation between alcohol use disorder and externalizing behaviors (e.g., antisocial behavior) have focused on a cluster of chromosome 4 gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor genes (GABRG1-A2-A4-B1) but have generated varying results. METHOD: The current study examined associations between common and rare variation in this region with alcohol use disorder and antisocial behavior using genetic sequencing data. Specifically, the University of California at San Francisco Family Alcoholism Sample (n = 1,610; 62% female) was used to conduct common and rare variant association tests in the GABRG1-A2-A4-B1 cluster with DSM-5 alcohol use disorder symptom counts, antisocial behavior, and a product term representing their interaction. RESULTS: Gene-based analyses of rare variation resulted in a significant association between rare GABRA2 variation and the interaction term. Single-variant analysis yielded only nominally significant associations. The strongest association for alcohol use disorder (rs3756007) was located in GABRA2, the strongest association for antisocial behavior (rs11941860) was located in GABRG1, and the interaction term yielded top associations in GABRA2 (rs2119183) and the intergenic region between GABRA2 and GABRG1 (rs536599). Common and rare variant associations for the interaction remained similar when covarying for the effects of the other type of variation, suggesting that the significant rare variant signal is independent of common variant contributions. CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that both rare and common variant associations in GABRA2 confer risk for alcohol use disorder and antisocial behaviors, indicating a potential liability toward externalizing behavior more broadly.
GABRA2 and GABRG1, which encode the alpha-2 and gamma-1 subunits, respectively, of the GABA(A) receptor, are located in a cluster on chromosome 4p. The GABRA2 locus has been found to be associated with alcohol dependence in several studies, but no functional variant that can account for this association has been identified. To understand the reported associations, we sought to understand the linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns and haplotype structures of these genes. With close intergenic distance, approximately 90 kb, it was anticipated that some markers might show intergenic LD. Variation in 13-SNP haplotype block structure was observed in five different populations: European American, African American, Chinese (Han and Thai), Thai, and Hmong. In the Hmong, a 280-kb region of considerably higher LD spans the intergenic region, whereas in other populations, there were two or more LD blocks that cross this region. These findings may aid in understanding the genetic association of this locus with alcohol dependence in several populations.
Little is known about genetic influences on the relationship between alcohol consumption and mental distress in the general population, where the majority report consumption and distress far below diagnostic thresholds. This study investigated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from candidate gene studies on alcohol use disorder and depressive disorders, for association with alcohol consumption and with mental distress in a population-based sample from the Cohort of Norway (n = 1978, 49% women). The relationship between alcohol consumption and mental distress was further examined for genotype modification. There was a positive correlation between mental distress and alcohol consumption in men, as well as an association between SNPs and mental distress in men (GABRG1, GABRA2, DRD2, ANKK1, MTHFR) and women (CHRM2, MTHFR) and between SNPs and alcohol consumption in women (GABRA2, MTHFR). No modification by SNP genotype was found on the relationship between alcohol consumption and mental distress. The association between mental distress and GABRG1 in men remained significant after correcting for multiple comparisons. The results indicate that alcohol consumption and mental distress are associated in the general population even at levels below clinical thresholds and point to SNPs in genes related to GABAergic signalling for level of mental distress in men.
OBJECTIVE: Alcoholism arises from combined effects of multiple biological factors including genetic and non-genetic causes with gene/environmental interaction. Intensive research and advanced genetic technology has generated a long list of genes and biomarkers involved in alcoholism neuropathology. These markers reflect complex overlapping and competing effects of possibly hundreds of genes which impact brain structure, function, biochemical alcohol processing, sensitivity and risk for dependence. METHOD: We compiled a tabular list of clinically relevant genetic biomarkers for alcoholism targeting expression disturbances in the human brain through an extensive search of keywords related to alcoholism, alcohol abuse, and genetics from peer reviewed medical research articles and related nationally sponsored websites. Gene symbols were then placed on high resolution human chromosome ideograms with gene descriptions in tabular form. RESULTS: We identified 337 clinically relevant genetic biomarkers and candidate genes for alcoholism and alcohol-responsiveness from human brain research. Genetic biomarkers included neurotransmitter pathways associated with brain reward processes for dopaminergic (e.g., DRD2, MAOA, and COMT), serotoninergic (e.g., HTR3A, HTR1B, HTR3B, and SLC6A4), GABAergic (e.g., GABRA1, GABRA2, and GABRG1), glutaminergic (GAD1, GRIK3, and GRIN2C) and opioid (e.g., OPRM1, OPRD1, and OPRK1) pathways which presumably impact reinforcing properties of alcohol. Gene level disturbances in cellular and molecular networks impacted by alcohol and alcoholism pathology include transketolase (TKT), transferrin (TF), and myelin (e.g., MBP, MOBP, and MOG). CONCLUSIONS: High resolution chromosome ideograms provide investigators, physicians, geneticists and counselors a convenient visual image of the distribution of alcoholism genetic biomarkers from brain research with alphabetical listing of genes in tabular form allowing comparison between alcoholism-related phenotypes, and clinically-relevant alcoholism gene(s) at the chromosome band level to guide research, diagnosis, and treatment. Chromosome ideograms may facilitate gene-based personalized counseling of alcohol dependent individuals and their families.
