Gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor subunit rho-2; GABA, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the vertebrate brain, mediates neuronal inhibition by binding to the GABA/benzodiazepine receptor and opening an integral chloride channel. Rho-2 GABA receptor could play a role in retinal neurotransmission.
Kava is a South Pacific plant-based medicine with anxiolytic properties, but little is known about the impact kava has on gene expression or whether gene expression can serve as a marker of kava response. This study aimed to determine whether kava treatment alters the expression of genes with physiological relevance to anxiety pathophysiology and whether the baseline expression of these physiologically relevant genes modifies the efficacy of kava treatment. In this post hoc analysis, we examined the expression of 48 genes relevant to the pathophysiology of anxiety collected from a double-blind randomized controlled trial that assessed the efficacy of kava treatment in generalized anxiety disorder. Peripheral blood gene expression was measured in 71 (34 kava, 37 placebo) adults at baseline and in 40 (19 kava, 21 placebo) after 8 weeks of treatment by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Results revealed that kava decreased the expression of a subunit of the GABA(A) -rho receptor gene (GABRR2) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), a gene related to catecholamine metabolism. Kava efficacy was not found to be modified by baseline (pretreatment) expression of relevant genes. Although these results did not withstand statistical correction for multiple comparisons and require external validation, they support the notion that kava's mechanism of action includes interaction with GABAergic and catecholaminergic systems.
The genes encoding several GABA-A receptor subunits, including GABRA2, have been associated with alcoholism, suggesting that variations in gaba signaling contribute to risk. Therefore, as part of a comprehensive evaluation of the GABA receptor genes, we evaluated the potential association of GABRR1 and GABRR2, which encode the rho1 and rho2 subunits of the pentameric GABA-A/GABA-C receptors. GABRR1 and GABRR2 lie in a head to tail orientation spanning 137 kb on chromosome 6q14-16. We genotyped 73 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), covering both genes and extending 31 kb upstream of GABRR2 and 95 kb downstream of GABRR1, in a sample of 1923 European Americans from 219 multiplex alcohol-dependent families. Family-based association analyses demonstrated that SNPs in both GABRR1 and GABRR2 were significantly associated with alcohol dependence. Among the associated SNPs was rs282129, a coding SNP (Met430Thr) in GABRR2. Secondary analysis using a median split for age of onset suggests that the association is strongest when the analysis is focused upon those with earlier onset of alcohol dependence. Haplotypes in each gene were significantly overtransmitted to family members who did not meet criteria for alcohol dependence (P < 0.04), and a haplotype in GABRR2 was significantly overtransmitted to family members who met a broader definition of alcoholism (P = 0.002) as well as DSM-IV dependence (P = 0.04).
Previous studies have indicated that the cognitive impairment or deficit is associated with GABAergic signaling in central nervous system. Inspired by the finding that receptor GABRR2 modulates concentration of GABA and phasic inhibitory GABAergic transmission in brain. This study investigated to what extent a genetic variant (c.1423C>T, rs282129) of GABRR2 gene modulates individuals' general cognitive ability in 987 Chinese Han people. Results showed a significant influence of GABRR2 gene polymorphism on individuals' Raven's Standard Progressive Matrices (RSPM) performance (F = 3.58, P = .028 by ANOVA and chi (2) = 9.35, P = .009 by K-W test, respectively), even if non-genetic factors were partialed out (gender, major, types of birthplace, and socioeconomic index) (B = -.67, SE = .26, t = 2.63, P = .009). The finding provided a strong evidence, to our knowledge, for the view that genetic variant of GABRR2 gene may contribute to the difference of individuals' general cognitive ability, independently.
BACKGROUND: Most gene-environment interaction studies (G x E) have focused on single candidate genes. This approach is criticized for its expectations of large effect sizes and occurrence of spurious results. We describe an approach that accounts for the polygenic nature of most psychiatric phenotypes and reduces the risk of false-positive findings. We apply this method focusing on the role of perceived parental support, psychological control, and harsh punishment in depressive symptoms in adolescence. METHODS: Analyses were conducted on 982 adolescents of Caucasian origin (M(age) (SD) = 13.78 (.94) years) genotyped for 4,947 SNPs in 263 genes, selected based on a literature survey. The Leuven Adolescent Perceived Parenting Scale (LAPPS) and the Parental Behavior Scale (PBS) were used to assess perceived parental psychological control, harsh punishment, and support. The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) was the outcome. We used gene-based testing taking into account linkage disequilibrium to identify genes containing SNPs exhibiting an interaction with environmental factors yielding a p-value per single gene. Significant results at the corrected p-value of p < 1.90 x 10(-4) were examined in an independent replication sample of Dutch adolescents (N = 1354). RESULTS: Two genes showed evidence for interaction with perceived support: GABRR1 (p = 4.62 x 10(-5) ) and GABRR2 (p = 9.05 x 10(-6) ). No genes interacted significantly with psychological control or harsh punishment. Gene-based analysis was unable to confirm the interaction of GABRR1 or GABRR2 with support in the replication sample. However, for GABRR2, but not GABRR1, the correlation of the estimates between the two datasets was significant (r (46) = .32; p = .027) and a gene-based analysis of the combined datasets supported GABRR2 x support interaction (p = 1.63 x 10(-4) ). CONCLUSIONS: We present a gene-based method for gene-environment interactions in a polygenic context and show that genes interact differently with particular aspects of parenting. This accentuates the importance of polygenic approaches and the need to accurately assess environmental exposure in G x E.
The possible role of gammaaminobutyric acid (GABA) in the pathophysiology of restless legs syndrome (RLS) is suggested by the symptomatic improvement achieved with GABAergic drugs. Thalamic GABA levels have shown positive correlation with periodic limb movements indices and with RLS severity. We tried to investigate the possible association between the most common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the GABA receptors (GABR) genes rho1, 2, and 3 (GABRR1, GABRR2, GABRR3), alpha4 (GABRA4), epsilon (GABRE), and theta (GABRQ) with the risk of developing RLS. We studied the genotype and allelic variant frequencies of the most common SNPs in the GABRR1(rs12200969, rs1186902), GABRR2(rs282129), GABRR3(rs832032), GABRA4(rs2229940), GABRE(rs1139916), and GABRQ(rs3810651) genes in 205 RLS patients and 230 age- and gender-matched healthy controls using specific TaqMan assays. The frequencies of the GABRR3 rs832032TT genotype and the allelic variant GABRR3 rs832032T were significantly higher in RLS patients than in controls (odds ratio [95% confidence intervals] 7.08[1.48-46.44] and 1.66[1.16-2.37], respectively), although only the higher frequency of the rs832032T allele remained as significant after multiple comparison analysis, both in the whole series and in the female gender. The frequencies of the other genotypes of allelic variants did not differ significantly between RLS patients and controls. RLS patients carrying the GABRA4 rs2229940TT genotype showed a significantly younger age at onset of RLS symptoms than those with the other two genotypes. These results suggest association between GABRR3rs832032 polymorphism and the risk for RLS, and a modifier effect of GABRA4 rs2229940 on the age of onset of RLS.
A study of the gene expression levels in the blood of individuals with schizophrenia in the beginning of the disease, such as first-episode psychosis (FEP), is useful to detect gene expression changes in this disorder in response to treatment. Although a large number of genetic studies on schizophrenia have been conducted, little is known about the effects of antipsychotic treatment on gene expression. The aim of the present study was to examine differences in the gene expression in the blood of antipsychotic-naive FEP patients before and after risperidone treatment (N = 44) and also to verify the correlation with treatment response. In addition, we determined the correlations between differentially expressed genes and clinical variables. The expression of 40 neurotransmitter and neurodevelopment-associated genes was assessed using the RT2 Profiler PCR Array. The results indicated that the GABRR2 gene was downregulated after risperidone treatment, but no genes were associated with response to treatment and clinical variables after Bonferroni correction. GABRR2 downregulation after treatment can both suggest an effect of risperidone treatment or processes related to disease progression, either not necessarily associated with the improvement of symptoms. Despite this change was observed in blood, this decrease in GABRR2 mRNA levels might be an effect of changes in GABA concentrations or other systems interplay consequently to D2 blockage induced by risperidone, for example. Thus, it is important to consider that antipsychotics or the progression of psychotic disorders might interfere with gene expression.
INTRODUCTION: Use of the antiepileptic drug (AED) vigabatrin is severely limited by irreversible visual field constriction, an adverse reaction to the drug reported in approximately 40% of patients. Given the evidence suggesting an idiosyncratic drug response, we set out to detect genetic variation of strong, clinically relevant effect that might guide clinicians in the safe, controlled prescribing of this otherwise usefuldrug. METHODS: Patients with a history of at least 1-year exposure to vigabatrin were enrolled at two independent referral centers. Using Goldmann perimetry, visual fields and the extent of constriction were calculated for each patient. We examined the correlation between the extent of vigabatrin induced visual field constriction and genetic variation across six candidate genes (SLC6A1, SLC6A13, SCL6A11, ABAT, GABRR1 and GABRR2). We availed of HapMap data and used a tagging SNP technique in an effort to efficiently capture all common variation within these genes. We attempted to replicate any positive associations before drawing conclusions from our results. RESULTS: The degree of visual field constriction correlated with three SNPs and one haplotype in a cohort of 73 patients. However we were unable to replicate these findings in a second independent cohort consisting of 58 patients, suggesting the initial results were possibly false positives, or variants of weak effect. CONCLUSION: Common variants of strong, clinically relevant effect do not appear to reside in the candidate genes studied here. This does not rule out the presence of genetic variants of weak effect in these genes, nor of variants of strong effect in other genes.
BACKGROUND: GABA(A) receptors influence the susceptibility to seizures, and variations in the receptor genes can contribute to antiepileptic drug resistance also. METHODS: We investigated the possible associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) present in GABRA6 c. 1512 T>C, GABRB2 c. 1412 C>T, and GABRR2 c. IVS2C>G genes of GABA(A) receptors in epilepsy susceptibility and drug resistance in northern Indian patients with epilepsy. After screening a total of 202 healthy controls and 401 epilepsy patients were enrolled in study. The genotyping was done by PCR-RFLP methods. RESULTS: The GABRA6 c. 1512 T>C, polymorphism was conferring risk for epilepsy susceptibility for TC (P=0.018), CC (P=0.0001) genotype and for C allele (P=0.0002). Another polymorphism GABRB2 c. 1412 C>T was also conferring high risk for epilepsy susceptibility CT (P=0.012), TT (P=0.778) genotype and for variant T allele (P=0.034) but was not associated with drug resistance. No association was found with epilepsy susceptibility or with drug resistance in case of GABRR2 c. IVS2C>G gene polymorphism. CONCLUSION: Overall, our findings suggest significant involvement of alpha (GABRA6) and beta (GABRB2) subunits of GABA(A) receptor in epilepsy susceptibility in north Indian population.
BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The possible role of gammaaminobutyric acid (GABA) in the pathogenesis of migraine has been suggested by a number of biochemical, pharmacological, neurophysiological and experimental data. We investigated the possible association between the most common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the GABA receptor rho1, 2, and 3 genes (GABRR1, GABRR2, and GABRR3) and the risk of developing migraine. METHODS: The frequency of GABRR1 rs12200969, GABRR1 rs1186902, GABRR2 rs282129, and GABRR3 rs832032 genotypes and allelic variants were studied in a case-control association study involving 197 patients with migraine and 278 healthy controls by means of a TaqMan-based qPCR Assay. We also studied the possible influence of gender, age at onset of migraine, positive family history of migraine, presence or absence of aura, and triggering of migraine by ethanol on the frequency of the genotypes. RESULTS: The frequencies of the genotypes and allelic variants of the 4 SNPs were similar in migraine patients and controls. Gender, positive family history of migraine, presence or absence of aura, and triggering of migraine attacks by ethanol did not influence the frequency of these genotypes. Carriers of the minor allele of the rs1186902 SNP showed a trend towards later onset of migraine. CONCLUSION: The most common polymorphisms in the GABRR genes seemed to be not associated with the risk for migraine in Caucasian Spanish people, although one of them (GABRR1 rs1186902) shows a statistically significant association with the age of onset of migraine.
Some clinical and experimental data suggest a possible role of gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA)-ergic mechanisms in the pathophysiology of essential tremor (ET), such as the improvement of ET with some GABAergic drugs and the development of an experimental model of ET in GABA A receptor alpha-1 knockout mice (postural and kinetic tremor and motor incoordination similar to human ET). To investigate the possible association between the GABA receptor subtype rho1, rho2, and rho3 (GABRR1, GABRR2, and GABRR3) genotypes and allelic variants of the single nucleotide polymorphisms GABRR1-M26V (Met26Val, rs12200969), GABRR1-H27R (His26Arg, rs1186902), GABRR2-T455M (Thr55Met, rs282129), and GABRR3-Y205X (Tyr205X, rs832032), and the risk for ET, we studied the frequency of the previously mentioned GABRR genotypes and allelic variants in 200 patients with ET and 250 healthy controls using TaqMan genotyping. The frequencies of the GABBR1 genotypes and allelic variants of the studied polymorphisms did not differ significantly between patients with ET and controls, and were unrelated with the age at onset of tremor, gender, localization of tremor, and response of tremor to ethanol. These data suggest that the single nucleotide polymorphisms studied in the GABBR genes are not related to the risk for ET.
Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder both have strong inherited components. Recent studies have indicated that schizophrenia and bipolar disorder may share more than half of their genetic determinants. In this study, we performed a meta-analysis (combined analysis) for genome-wide association data of the Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP array 6.0 to detect genetic variants influencing both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder using European-American samples (653 bipolar cases and 1034 controls, 1172 schizophrenia cases and 1379 controls). The best associated SNP rs11789399 was located at 9q33.1 (p=2.38 x 10(-6), 5.74 x 10(-4), and 5.56 x 10(-9), for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and meta-analysis of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, respectively), where one flanking gene, ASTN2 (220kb away) has been associated with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and schizophrenia. The next best SNP was rs12201676 located at 6q15 (p=2.67 x 10(-4), 2.12 x 10(-5), 3.88 x 10(-8) for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and meta-analysis, respectively), near two flanking genes, GABRR1 and GABRR2 (15 and 17kb away, respectively). The third interesting SNP rs802568 was at 7q35 within CNTNAP2 (p=8.92 x 10(-4), 1.38 x 10(-5), and 1.62 x 10(-7) for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and meta-analysis, respectively). Through meta-analysis, we found two additional associated genes NALCN (the top SNP is rs2044117, p=4.57 x 10(-7)) and NAP5 (the top SNP is rs10496702, p=7.15 x 10(-7)). Haplotype analyses of above five loci further supported the associations with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. These results provide evidence of common genetic variants influencing schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. These findings will serve as a resource for replication in other populations to elucidate the potential role of these genetic variants in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Autism is a common neurodevelopmental disorder with a significant genetic component. Existing research suggests that multiple genes contribute to autism and that epigenetic effects or gene-gene interactions are likely contributors to autism risk. However, these effects have not yet been identified. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in the adult brain, has been implicated in autism etiology. Fourteen known autosomal GABA receptor subunit genes were studied to look for the genes associated with autism and their possible interactions. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were screened in the following genes: GABRG1, GABRA2, GABRA4, and GABRB1 on chromosome 4p12; GABRB2, GABRA6, GABRA1, GABRG2, and GABRP on 5q34-q35.1; GABRR1 and GABRR2 on 6q15; and GABRA5, GABRB3, and GABRG3 on 15q12. Intronic and/or silent mutation SNPs within each gene were analyzed in 470 white families with autism. Initially, SNPs were used in a family-based study for allelic association analysis--with the pedigree disequilibrium test and the family-based association test--and for genotypic and haplotypic association analysis--with the genotype-pedigree disequilibrium test (geno-PDT), the association in the presence of linkage (APL) test, and the haplotype family-based association test. Next, with the use of five refined independent marker sets, extended multifactor-dimensionality reduction (EMDR) analysis was employed to identify the models with locus joint effects, and interaction was further verified by conditional logistic regression. Significant allelic association was found for markers RS1912960 (in GABRA4; P = .01) and HCV9866022 (in GABRR2; P = .04). The geno-PDT found significant genotypic association for HCV8262334 (in GABRA2), RS1912960 and RS2280073 (in GABRA4), and RS2617503 and RS12187676 (in GABRB2). Consistent with the allelic and genotypic association results, EMDR confirmed the main effect at RS1912960 (in GABRA4). EMDR also identified a significant two-locus gene-gene effect model involving RS1912960 in GABRA4 and RS2351299 in GABRB1. Further support for this two-locus model came from both the multilocus geno-PDT and the APL test, which indicated a common genotype and haplotype combination positively associated with disease. Finally, these results were also consistent with the results from the conditional logistic regression, which confirmed the interaction between GABRA4 and GABRB1 (odds ratio = 2.9 for interaction term; P = .002). Through the convergence of all analyses, we conclude that GABRA4 is involved in the etiology of autism and potentially increases autism risk through interaction with GABRB1. These results support the hypothesis that GABA receptor subunit genes are involved in autism, most likely via complex gene-gene interactions.
Screening of a genomic DNA library with a portion of the cDNA encoding the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor subunit rho1 identified two distinct clones. DNA sequencing revealed that one clone contained a single exon from the rho1 gene (GABBR1) while the second clone encompassed an exon with 96% identity to the rho1 gene. Screening of a human retina cDNA library with oligonucleotides specific for the exon in the second clone identified a 3-kb cDNA with an open reading frame of 1395 bp. The predicted amino acid sequence of this cDNA demonstrates 30 to 38% similarity to alpha, beta, gamma, and delta GABA receptor subunits and 74% similarity to the GABA rho1 subunit suggesting that the newly isolated cDNA encodes a new member of the rho subunit family, tentatively named GABA rho2. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of rho1 and rho2 gene sequences from DNA of three somatic cell hybrid panels maps both genes to human chromosome 6, bands q14 to q21. Tight linkage was also demonstrated between restriction fragment length variants (RFLVs) from each rho gene and the Tsha locus on mouse chromosome 4, which is homologous to the CGA locus on human chromosome 6q12-q21. These two lines of evidence confirm that GABRR1 and newly identified GABRR2 map to the same region on human chromosome 6. This close physical association and high degree of sequence similarity raises the possibility that one rho gene arose from the other by duplication.
Little is known about how genes expressed in blood relate to schizophrenia or antipsychotic use. We analyzed gene expression in 10 first-episode psychosis patients and nine controls using PCR Arrays. GABRR2 and CHRNA3 were found to be differentially expressed after risperidone treatment. These genes may be regulated by antipsychotic use.
GABA(C) receptors mediate rapid inhibitory neurotransmission in retina. We have mapped, in detail, the human genes which encode the three polypeptides that comprise this receptor: rho1 (GABRR1), rho2 (GABRR2) and rho3 (GABRR3). We show that GABRR1 and GABRR2 are located close together, in a region of chromosome 6q that contains loci for inherited disorders of the eye, but that GABRR3 maps to chromosome 3q11-q13.3. Our mapping data suggest that the rho polypeptide genes, which are thought to share a common ancestor with GABA(A) receptor subunit genes, diverged at an early stage in the evolution of this gene family.
BACKGROUND: Serum creatinine (S CR) is the most important biomarker for a quick and non-invasive assessment of kidney function in population-based surveys. A substantial proportion of the inter-individual variability in S CR level is explicable by genetic factors. METHODS: We performed a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies of S CR undertaken in five population isolates ('discovery cohorts'), all of which are part of the European Special Population Network (EUROSPAN) project. Genes showing the strongest evidence for an association with SCR (candidate loci) were replicated in two additional population-based samples ('replication cohorts'). RESULTS: After the discovery meta-analysis, 29 loci were selected for replication. Association between SCR level and polymorphisms in the collagen type XXII alpha 1 (COL22A1) gene, on chromosome 8, and in the synaptotagmin-1 (SYT1) gene, on chromosome 12, were successfully replicated in the replication cohorts (p value = 1.0 x 10(-6) and 1.7 x 10(-4), respectively). Evidence of association was also found for polymorphisms in a locus including the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor rho-2 (GABRR2) gene and the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2-J1 (UBE2J1) gene (replication p value = 3.6 x 10(-3)). Previously reported findings, associating glomerular filtration rate with SNPs in the uromodulin (UMOD) gene and in the schroom family member 3 (SCHROOM3) gene were also replicated. CONCLUSIONS: While confirming earlier results, our study provides new insights in the understanding of the genetic basis of serum creatinine regulatory processes. In particular, the association with the genes SYT1 and GABRR2 corroborate previous findings that highlighted a possible role of the neurotransmitters GABAA receptors in the regulation of the glomerular basement membrane and a possible interaction between GABAA receptors and synaptotagmin-I at the podocyte level.
The GABA(B) receptor is a G-protein linked metabotropic receptor that is comprised of two major subunits, GABA(B)R1 and GABA(B)R2. In this study, the cellular distribution of the GABA(B)R1 and GABA(B)R2 subunits was investigated in the normal human basal ganglia using single and double immunohistochemical labeling techniques on fixed human brain tissue. The results showed that the GABA(B) receptor subunits GABA(B)R1 and GABA(B)R2 were both found on the same neurons and followed the same distribution patterns. In the striatum, these subunits were found on the five major types of interneurons based on morphology and neurochemical labeling (types 1, 2, 3, 5, 6) and showed weak labeling on the projection neurons (type 4). In the globus pallidus, intense GABA(B)R1 and GABA(B)R2 subunit labeling was found in large pallidal neurons, and in the substantia nigra, both pars compacta and pars reticulata neurons were labeled for both receptor subunits. Studies investigating the colocalization of the GABA(A) alpha(1) subunit and GABA(B) receptor subunits showed that the GABA(A) receptor alpha(1) subunit and the GABA(B)R1 subunit were found together on GABAergic striatal interneurons (type 1 parvalbumin, type 2 calretinin, and type 3 GAD neurons) and on neurons in the globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata. GABA(B)R1 and GABA(B)R2 were found on substantia nigra pars compacta neurons but the GABA(A) receptor alpha(1) subunit was absent from these neurons. The results of this study provide the morphological basis for GABAergic transmission within the human basal ganglia and provides evidence that GABA acts through both GABA(A) and GABA(B) receptors. That is, GABA acts through GABA(B) receptors, which are located on most of the cell types of the striatum, globus pallidus, and substantia nigra. GABA also acts through GABA(A) receptors containing the alpha(1) subunit on specific striatal GABAergic interneurons and on output neurons of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata.
BACKGROUND: The Epilepsy Genetics (EPIGEN) Consortium was established to undertake genetic mapping analyses with augmented statistical power to detect variants that influence the development and treatment of common forms of epilepsy. METHODS: We examined common variations across 279 prime candidate genes in 2717 case and 1118 control samples collected at four independent research centres (in the UK, Ireland, Finland, and Australia). Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and combined set-association analyses were used to examine the contribution of genetic variation in the candidate genes to various forms of epilepsy. FINDINGS: We did not identify clear, indisputable common genetic risk factors that contribute to selected epilepsy subphenotypes across multiple populations. Nor did we identify risk factors for the general all-epilepsy phenotype. However, set-association analysis on the most significant p values, assessed under permutation, suggested the contribution of numerous SNPs to disease predisposition in an apparent population-specific manner. Variations in the genes KCNAB1, GABRR2, KCNMB4, SYN2, and ALDH5A1 were most notable. INTERPRETATION: The underlying genetic component to sporadic epilepsy is clearly complex. Results suggest that many SNPs contribute to disease predisposition in an apparently population-specific manner. However, subtle differences in phenotyping across cohorts, combined with a poor understanding of how the underlying genetic component to epilepsy aligns with current phenotypic classifications, might also account for apparent population-specific genetic risk factors. Variations across five genes warrant further study in independent cohorts to clarify the tentative association.
Mecp2 is a transcriptional repressor protein that is mutated in Rett syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder that is the second most common cause of mental retardation in women. It has been shown that the loss of the Mecp2 protein in Rett syndrome cells alters the transcriptional silencing of coding genes and microRNAs. Herein, we have studied the impact of Mecp2 impairment in a Rett syndrome mouse model on the global transcriptional patterns of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). Using a microarray platform that assesses 41,232 unique lncRNA transcripts, we have identified the aberrant lncRNA transcriptome that is present in the brain of Rett syndrome mice. The study of the most relevant lncRNAs altered in the assay highlighted the upregulation of the AK081227 and AK087060 transcripts in Mecp2-null mice brains. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated the Mecp2 occupancy in the 5'-end genomic loci of the described lncRNAs and its absence in Rett syndrome mice. Most importantly, we were able to show that the overexpression of AK081227 mediated by the Mecp2 loss was associated with the downregulation of its host coding protein gene, the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor subunit Rho 2 (Gabrr2). Overall, our findings indicate that the transcriptional dysregulation of lncRNAs upon Mecp2 loss contributes to the neurological phenotype of Rett syndrome and highlights the complex interaction between ncRNAs and coding-RNAs.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the most common inherited retinal dystrophy, with extensive allelic and nonallelic genetic heterogeneity. Autosomal recessive RP (arRP) is the most common form of RP worldwide, with at least nine loci known and accountable for approximately 10%-15% of all cases. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the major inhibitory transmitter in the CNS. Different GABA receptors are expressed in all retinal layers, and inhibition mediated by GABA receptors in the human retina could be related to RP. We have selected chromosomal regions containing genes that encode the different subunits of the GABA receptors, for homozygosity mapping in inbred families affected by arRP. We identify a new locus for arRP, on chromosome 6, between markers D6S257 and D6S1644. Our data suggest that 10%-20% of Spanish families affected by typical arRP could have linkage to this new locus. This region contains subunits GABRR1 and GABRR2 of the GABA-C receptor, which is the effector of lateral inhibition at the retina.
