Gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor subunit alpha-6; GABA, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the vertebrate brain, mediates neuronal inhibition by binding to the GABA/benzodiazepine receptor and opening an integral chloride channel.
OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the yield of systematic analysis and/or reanalysis of whole exome sequencing (WES) data from a cohort of well-phenotyped pediatric patients with epilepsy and suspected but previously undetermined genetic etiology. METHODS: We identified and phenotyped 125 participants with pediatric epilepsy. Etiology was unexplained at the time of enrollment despite clinical testing, which included chromosomal microarray (57 patients), epilepsy gene panel (n = 48), both (n = 28), or WES (n = 8). Clinical epilepsy diagnoses included developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE), febrile infection-related epilepsy syndrome, Rasmussen encephalitis, and other focal and generalized epilepsies. We analyzed WES data and compared the yield in participants with and without prior clinical genetic testing. RESULTS: Overall, we identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 40% (50/125) of our study participants. Nine patients with DEE had genetic variants in recently published genes that had not been recognized as epilepsy-related at the time of clinical testing (FGF12, GABBR1, GABBR2, ITPA, KAT6A, PTPN23, RHOBTB2, SATB2), and eight patients had genetic variants in candidate epilepsy genes (CAMTA1, FAT3, GABRA6, HUWE1, PTCHD1). Ninety participants had concomitant or subsequent clinical genetic testing, which was ultimately explanatory for 26% (23/90). Of the 67 participants whose molecular diagnoses were "unsolved" through clinical genetic testing, we identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 17 (25%). SIGNIFICANCE: Our data argue for early consideration of WES with iterative reanalysis for patients with epilepsy, particularly those with DEE or epilepsy with intellectual disability. Rigorous analysis of WES data of well-phenotyped patients with epilepsy leads to a broader understanding of gene-specific phenotypic spectra as well as candidate disease gene identification. We illustrate the dynamic nature of genetic diagnosis over time, with analysis and in some cases reanalysis of exome data leading to the identification of disease-associated variants among participants with previously nondiagnostic results from a variety of clinical testing strategies.
The GABA receptor is an important epilepsy-associated candidate gene, and has always been a focus in etiology and in the treatment of epilepsy. This study explores the genetic association between GABA receptor gene polymorphisms and epilepsy in a cohort of the Pakistani population. A case-control study was conducted on 150 patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) and 150 controls. Blood samples were collected, and genomic DNA was extracted and amplified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The amplified products were subsequently genotyped by Sanger sequencing and the results were analyzed using the chi-square test. Among the five mutational sites observed, two GABRA1 (rs2279020 and novel c.1016_1017insT) and two GABRA6 (rs3219151 and novel c.1344C>G) were found to be significantly associated with IGE. Amino acid alignment showed that a novel insertion mutation, c.1016_1017insT, in GABRA1 disrupted the reading frame and was possibly damaging, whereas c.1344C>G in GABRA6 was responsible for a synonymous mutation. Therefore, both the GABA receptor genes may play critical roles in the development of epilepsy in Pakistani patients.
BACKGROUND: Stress exposure during Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) stay may have long-lasting effects on neurodevelopmental outcomes in extremely preterm infants. Altered DNA methylation of stress-related and neurodevelopmentally relevant genes may be an underlying mechanism. AIMS: This exploratory study aimed to investigate the association between neonatal stress exposure and DNA methylation in these genes at two different time points: early during the NICU stay (7-14 days after birth) and later, at discharge from the NICU. SUBJECTS: We included 45 extremely preterm infants in this prospective cohort study, gestational age 24-30 weeks. OUTCOME MEASURES: We collected fecal samples at days 7-14 (n = 44) and discharge (n = 28) and determined DNA methylation status in predefined regions of NR3C1, SLC6A4, HSD11B2, OPRM1, SLC7A5, SLC1A2, IGF2, NNAT, BDNF and GABRA6 using pyrosequencing. Because of low DNA concentrations in some fecal samples, we could do so in 25-50 % of collected samples. We prospectively quantified daily neonatal stress exposure using the Neonatal Infant Stressor Scale (NISS) and explored associations between cumulative NISS scores and average DNA methylation status. RESULTS: Rates of methylation of most genes were not statistically different between day 7-14 and discharge, except for OPRM1. We found moderately high and mostly negative correlation coefficients upon discharge with the cumulative NISS for the NR3C1, SLC6A4, SLC1A2, IGF2, BDNF and OPRM1 genes, albeit not statistically significant. CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that expression of stress-related and neurodevelopmentally relevant genes may be differently regulated following higher neonatal stress exposure. Larger studies should challenge the findings of this study and ideally test the effects on gene expression.
The development of personality traits united by the notion of conscientiousness, should promote, along with reduction of anxiety, the physical and mental health. In order to detect the sources of conscientiousness and neuroticism formation, we evaluated associations between polymorphic markers of 5-HTT, 5-HTR2A, and GABRA6 genes and relevant scores of TCI questionnaire in a group of 369 volunteers. Associations of markers VNTR and LPR of 5-HTT gene and marker T1521C of GABRA6 gene with "self-directedness" and the effects of 5-HTR2A gene marker T102C and its interactions with the GABRA6 gene on the "harm avoidance" were detected.
Schizophrenia is a complex disorder, where family, twin and adoption studies have been demonstrating a high heritability of the disease and that this disease is not simply defined by several major genes but rather evolves from addition or potentiation of a specific cluster of genes, which subsequently determines the genetic vulnerability of an individual. Linkage and association studies suggest that a genetic vulnerablility, is not forcefully leading to the disease since triggering factors and environmental influences, i.e. birth complications, drug abuse, urban background or time of birth have been identified. This has lead to the assumption that schizophrenia is not only a genetically defined static disorder but a dynamic process leading to dysregulation of multiple pathways. There are several different hypothesis based on several facets of the disease, some of them due to the relatively well-known mechanisms of therapeutic agents. The most widely considered neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia integrates environmental influences and causative genes. The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia is based on the fact that all common treatments involve antidopaminergic mechanisms and genes such as DRD2, DRD3, DARPP-32, BDNF or COMT are closely related to dopaminergic system functioning. The glutamatergic hypothesis of schizophrenia lead recently to a first successful mGlu2/3 receptor agonistic drug and is underpinned by significant findings in genes regulating the glutamatergic system (SLC1A6, SLC1A2 GRIN1, GRIN2A, GRIA1, NRG1, ErbB4, DTNBP1, DAAO, G72/30, GRM3). Correspondingly, GABA has been proposed to modulate the pathophysiology of the disease which is represented by the involvement of genes like GABRA1, GABRP, GABRA6 and Reelin. Moreover, several genes implicating immune, signaling and networking deficits have been reported to be involved in the disease, i.e. DISC1, RGS4, PRODH, DGCR6, ZDHHC8, DGCR2, Akt, CREB, IL-1B, IL-1RN, IL-10, IL-1B. However, molecular findings suggest that a complex interplay between receptors, kinases, proteins and hormones is involved in schizophrenia. In a unifying hypothesis, different cascades merge into another that ultimately lead to the development of symptoms adherent to schizophrenic disorders.
The gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor type A (GABAA receptor) is a ligand-gated chloride channel that mediates major inhibitory functions in the central nervous system. GABAA receptors function mainly as pentamers containing alpha, beta, and either gamma or delta subunits. A number of antiepileptic drugs have agonistic effects on GABAA receptors. Hence, dysfunctions of GABAA receptors have been postulated to play important roles in the etiology of epilepsy. In fact, mutations or genetic variations of the genes encoding the alpha1, alpha6, beta2, beta3, gamma2, or delta subunits (GABRA1, GABRA6, GABRB2, GABRB3, GABRG2, and GABRD, respectively) have been associated with human epilepsy, both with and without febrile seizures. Epilepsy resulting from mutations is commonly one of following, genetic (idiopathic) generalized epilepsy (e.g., juvenile myoclonic epilepsy), childhood absence epilepsy, genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures, or Dravet syndrome. Recently, mutations of GABRA1, GABRB2, and GABRB3 were associated with infantile spasms and Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. These mutations compromise hyperpolarization through GABAA receptors, which is believed to cause seizures. Interestingly, most of the insufficiencies are not caused by receptor gating abnormalities, but by complex mechanisms, including endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation, nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, intracellular trafficking defects, and ER stress. Thus, GABAA receptor subunit mutations are now thought to participate in the pathomechanisms of epilepsy, and an improved understanding of these mutations should facilitate our understanding of epilepsy and the development of new therapies.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate the association of transmembrane protein 132D (TMEM132D), catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor alpha 6 subunit (GABRA6) genotypes with cingulate, frontal cortex and hippocampal emotional processing in panic disorder (PD) and major depressive disorder (MDD). METHOD: The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TMEM132D, COMT, and GABRA6 were examined in patients with MDD, PD, and healthy controls. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was performed in patients with MDD, PD, and healthy controls. RESULTS: rs4680 in COMT and rs3219151 in GABRA6 showed positive associations with PD and MDD. A dynamic fearful face was shown to the participants during fMRI scanning. In PD patients, responses in the bilateral anterior cingulate were stronger in carriers of the AA genotype of SNP rs11060369 in TMEM132D compared with carriers of the AC + CC genotype, and stronger in CT + TT genotype carriers of SNP rs3219151 in GABRA6 compared with carriers of the CC genotype. The response in the medial orbital frontal cortex was stronger in carriers of the CT + TT genotypes of SNP rs3219151 in PD. In MDD patients, the response in the right parahippocampus of carriers of the GG genotype of rs4680 in COMT was stronger than that of carriers of the AA + AG genotype. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that TMEM132D, GABRA6, and COMT variants may increase vulnerability to panic.
Human disease-associated genetic variations often map to long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) genes; however, elucidation of their functional impact is challenging. We previously identified a new genetic variant rs4454083 (A/G) residing in exon of an uncharacterized lncRNA ARBAG that strongly associates with plasma levels of C-peptide, a hormone that regulates insulin bioavailability. On the opposite strand, rs4454083 also corresponds to an intron of a cerebellum-specific GABA receptor subunit gene GABRA6 that mediates strengthening of inhibitory synapses by insulin. Here, we show that alleles of rs4454083 modulate transcript levels of the antisense gene, ARBAG, which then controls the expression of the sense gene, GABRA6. Predisposing to low C-peptide, GG (a minor allele genotype across ethnicities) stabilizes ARBAG lncRNA causing higher transcript levels in cerebellum. ARBAG lncRNA abundance leads to cleavage of GABRA6 mRNA at the complementary region, resulting in a dysfunctional GABRA6 protein that would not be recruited for synapse strengthening. Together, our findings in human cerebellar cell-line and induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs) demonstrate biological role of a novel lncRNA in determining the ratio of mRNA isoforms of a protein-coding gene and the ability of an embedded variant in modulating lncRNA stability leading to inter-individual differences in protein expression.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: Polymorphisms of GABA(A)alpha6 (GABRA6)-1521 and IL-1beta-511 have been linked with susceptibility to stress and gastric acid secretion. The aim of this study was to assess psychiatric profiles and GABRA6 and IL-1beta genotypes in functional heartburn, an important esophageal reflux condition. METHODS: Psychological symptoms were assessed with a Brief Symptom Rating Scale and personality traits with a short-form Maudsley Personality Inventory. DNA from 452 healthy controls, 80 controls with neurosis, and 122 patients with functional heartburn was genotyped with PCR-RFLP technique. RESULTS: Symptom-scale parameters (except hostility) were significantly higher in patients with functional heartburn than in healthy controls; their neuroticism scores were also higher, but extroversion scores were lower. Distribution of GABRA6 genotypes in patients with functional heartburn showed more heterozygotes than among healthy controls and neurotic subjects, but distributions of IL-1beta genotypes were similar. Multiple logistic regression analysis showed GABRA6 heterozygosity was significantly associated with functional heartburn (odds ratio, 2.37; 95% confidence interval, 1.36-4.12; P < 0.01) even after adjustment for age, sex, Helicobacter pylori infection, General Symptom Index, and score of neuroticism. CONCLUSIONS: Chinese patients with certain psychiatric characteristics and GABRA6 heterozygosity are probably predisposed to functional heartburn, providing insight into this condition's psychopathology and genetics.
We previously performed a genome-wide linkage scan in Portuguese schizophrenia families that identified a risk locus on chromosome 5q31-q35. This finding was supported by meta-analysis of 20 other schizophrenia genome-wide scans that identified 5q23.2-q34 as the second most compelling susceptibility locus in the genome. In the present report, we took a two-stage candidate gene association approach to investigate a group of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor subunit genes (GABRA1, GABRA6, GABRB2, GABRG2, and GABRP) within our linkage peak. These genes are plausible candidates based on prior evidence for GABA system involvement in schizophrenia. In the first stage, associations were detected in a Portuguese patient sample with single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes in GABRA1 (P=0.00062-0.048), GABRP (P=0.0024-0.042), and GABRA6 (P=0.0065-0.0088). The GABRA1 and GABRP findings were replicated in the second stage in an independent German family-based sample (P=0.0015-0.043). Supportive evidence for association was also obtained for a previously reported GABRB2 risk haplotype. Exploratory analyses of the effects of associated GABRA1 haplotypes on transcript levels found altered expression of GABRA6 and coexpressed genes of GABRA1 and GABRB2. Comparison of transcript levels in schizophrenia patients and unaffected siblings found lower patient expression of GABRA6 and coexpressed genes of GABRA1. Interestingly, the GABRA1 coexpressed genes include synaptic and vesicle-associated genes previously found altered in schizophrenia prefrontal cortex. Taken together, these results support the involvement of the chromosome 5q GABAA receptor gene cluster in schizophrenia, and suggest that schizophrenia-associated haplotypes may alter expression of GABA-related genes.
Canavan disease (CD) is an inherited leukodystrophy, caused by aspartoacylase (ASPA) deficiency, and accumulation of N-acetylaspartic acid (NAA) in the brain. The gene for ASPA has been cloned and more than 40 mutations have been described, with two founder mutations among Ashkenazi Jewish patients. Screening of Ashkenazi Jews for these two common mutations revealed a high carrier frequency, approximately 1/40, so that programs for carrier testing are currently in practice. The enzyme deficiency in CD interferes with the normal hydrolysis of NAA, which results in disruption of myelin and spongy degeneration of the white matter of the brain. The clinical features of the disease are macrocephaly, head lag, progressive severe mental retardation, and hypotonia in early life, which later changes to spasticity. A knockout mouse for CD has been generated, and used to study the pathophysiological basis for CD. Findings from the knockout mouse indicate that this monogenic trait leads to a series of genomic interaction in the brain. Changes include low levels of glutamate and GABA. Microarray expression analysis showed low level of expression of GABA-A receptor (GABRA6) and glutamate transporter (EAAT4). The gene Spi2, a gene involved in apoptosis and cell death, showed high level of expression. Such complexity of gene interaction results in the phenotype, the proteome, with spongy degeneration of the brain and neurological impairment of the mouse, similar to the human counterpart. Aspartoacylase gene transfer trial in the mouse brain using adenoassociated virus (AAV) as a vector are encouraging showing improved myelination and decrease in spongy degeneration in the area of the injection and also beyond that site.
OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study were to test the individual association of the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4), the brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene (BDNF) and the GABA(A) alpha(6) receptor subunit gene (GABRA6) with anxiety-related traits and to explore putative gene-gene interactions in a Spanish healthy sample. METHOD: A sample of 937 individuals from the general population completed the Temperament and Character Inventory questionnaire to explore Harm Avoidance (HA) dimension; a subsample of 553 individuals also filled in the Big Five Questionnaire to explore the Neuroticism dimension. The whole sample was genotyped for the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism (SLC6A4 gene), the Val66Met polymorphism (BDNF gene) and the T1521C polymorphism (GABRA6 gene). RESULTS: Homozygous individuals for the T allele of the T1512C polymorphism presented slightly higher scores for HA than C allele carriers (F = 2.96, P = 0.019). In addition, there was a significant gene-gene interaction on HA between the 5-HTTLPR and Val66Met polymorphisms (F = 3.4, P = 0.009). CONCLUSION: GABRA6 emerges as a candidate gene involved in the variability of HA. The effect of a significant gene-gene interaction between the SLC6A4 and BDNF genes on HA could explain part of the genetic basis underlying anxiety-related traits.
Male and female human subjects show contrasting propensities to misuse drugs of addiction, including alcohol. These differences lead to different psychological and neurological consequences, such as the likelihood of developing dependence. The pattern and extent of brain damage in alcohol-use disorder cases also varies with comorbid disease. To explore mechanisms that might underlie these outcomes, we used autopsy tissue to determine mRNA transcript expression in relation to genotype for two GABA(A) receptor subunit genes. We used quantitative Real-Time PCR to measure GABRA6 and GABRA2 mRNA concentrations in dorsolateral prefrontal and primary motor cortices of alcohol-use disorder subjects and controls of both sexes with and without liver disease who had been genotyped for these GABA(A) receptor subunit genes. Cirrhotic alcohol-use disorder cases had significantly higher expression of GABRA6 and GABRA2 transcripts than either controls or non-cirrhotic alcohol-use disorder cases. Differences were observed between sexes, genotypes and brain regions. We show that sex differences in subjects with GABRA6 and GABRA2 variants may contribute to differences in susceptibility to alcohol-use disorder and alcohol-induced cirrhosis.
Telomere length (TL) is considered a biomarker of aging, and short TL in leukocytes is related to age and stress-related health problems. Cumulative lifetime stress exposure has also been associated with shorter TL and age-related health problems, but the mechanisms are not well understood. We tested in 108 individuals whether shorter TL in leukocytes is observed in individuals with the GABRA6 TT genotype, which has been associated with dysregulation of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity (the main biological stress system) compared to the CC genotype. We also investigated if individuals carrying the TT genotype show higher stress-induced and diurnal cortisol secretion and if cortisol explains the interindividual variability in TL. The analysis pipeline of this study was pre-registered, and the results showed that GABRA6 TT carriers had shorter TL in CD8+CD28+ cells (Bonferroni corrected). In contrast to previous studies, no differences between groups in cortisol secretion were observed, and TL and cortisol did not show significant associations. This study shows, for the first time, shorter TL in CD8+CD28+ cells in TT carriers for GABRA6 compared to CC carriers, suggesting accelerated cellular aging. Although this difference could be linked to an increased susceptibility to stress in the TT carriers, this could not be attributed to the direct influence of cortisol, suggesting the involvement of other mechanisms.
BACKGROUND: GABA(A) receptors influence the susceptibility to seizures, and variations in the receptor genes can contribute to antiepileptic drug resistance also. METHODS: We investigated the possible associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) present in GABRA6 c. 1512 T>C, GABRB2 c. 1412 C>T, and GABRR2 c. IVS2C>G genes of GABA(A) receptors in epilepsy susceptibility and drug resistance in northern Indian patients with epilepsy. After screening a total of 202 healthy controls and 401 epilepsy patients were enrolled in study. The genotyping was done by PCR-RFLP methods. RESULTS: The GABRA6 c. 1512 T>C, polymorphism was conferring risk for epilepsy susceptibility for TC (P=0.018), CC (P=0.0001) genotype and for C allele (P=0.0002). Another polymorphism GABRB2 c. 1412 C>T was also conferring high risk for epilepsy susceptibility CT (P=0.012), TT (P=0.778) genotype and for variant T allele (P=0.034) but was not associated with drug resistance. No association was found with epilepsy susceptibility or with drug resistance in case of GABRR2 c. IVS2C>G gene polymorphism. CONCLUSION: Overall, our findings suggest significant involvement of alpha (GABRA6) and beta (GABRB2) subunits of GABA(A) receptor in epilepsy susceptibility in north Indian population.
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in mammalian brain. GABA receptor are involved in a number of complex disorders, including substance abuse. No variants of the commonly studied GABA receptor genes that have been associated with substance dependence have been determined to be functional or pathogenic. To reconcile the conflicting associations with substance dependence traits, we performed a meta-analysis of variants in the GABAA receptor genes (GABRB2, GABRA6, GABRA1, and GABRG2 on chromosome 5q and GABRA2 on chromosome 4p12) using genotype data from 4739 cases of alcohol, opioid, or methamphetamine dependence and 4924 controls. Then, we combined the data from candidate gene association studies in the literature with two alcohol dependence (AD) samples, including 1691 cases and 1712 controls from the Study of Addiction: Genetics and Environment (SAGE), and 2644 cases and 494 controls from our own study. Using a Bonferroni-corrected threshold of 0.007, we found strong associations between GABRA2 and AD (P=9 x 10(-6) and odds ratio (OR) 95% confidence interval (CI)=1.27 (1.15, 1.4) for rs567926, P=4 x 10(-5) and OR=1.21 (1.1, 1.32) for rs279858), and between GABRG2 and both dependence on alcohol and dependence on heroin (P=0.0005 and OR=1.22 (1.09, 1.37) for rs211014). Significant association was also observed between GABRA6 rs3219151 and AD. The GABRA2 rs279858 association was observed in the SAGE data sets with a combined P of 9 x 10(-6) (OR=1.17 (1.09, 1.26)). When all of these data sets, including our samples, were meta-analyzed, associations of both GABRA2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms remained (for rs567926, P=7 x 10(-5) (OR=1.18 (1.09, 1.29)) in all the studies, and P=8 x 10(-6) (OR=1.25 (1.13, 1.38)) in subjects of European ancestry and for rs279858, P=5 x 10(-6) (OR=1.18 (1.1, 1.26)) in subjects of European ancestry. Findings from this extensive meta-analysis of five GABAA receptor genes and substance abuse support their involvement (with the best evidence for GABRA2) in the pathogenesis of AD. Further replications with larger samples are warranted.
GABAA receptors are hetero-oligomeric ion-channel complexes that are composed of combinations of alpha, beta, gamma, and delta subunits and play a major role in inhibitory neuro-transmission in the mammalian brain. We report here a microsatellite polymorphism within the human alpha 6-subunit gene (GABRA6). Mapping of this marker in a human-hamster hybrid cell-line panel and typing of the repeat in the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Human (CEPH) reference families enabled the localization of this gene to chromosome 5q and established its linkage to the GABAA receptor alpha 1-subunit gene (GA-BRA1) with a maximum lod score (Zmax) of 39.87 at a theta of 0.069 (males) and 0.100 (females). These results reveal the clustering of GABRA6, GABRA1, and the GABAA receptor gamma 2-subunit gene (GABRG2) on distal chromosome 5q.
GABA(A) (gamma-aminobutyric acid type A) receptors are ligand-gated ion channels composed of five subunits, generally two alphas, two betas, and a gamma2. Recent research in which sets of subunits containing alpha1 or alpha6 subunits were artificially linked has revealed the importance of subunit position in determining GABA(A) receptor function. Sensitivity to benzodiazepines depended on juxtaposition of an alpha1 subunit with the gamma2 subunit, whereas sensitivity to furosemide depended only on the presence of an alpha6 subunit and not on its specific location. The major utility of the linked subunit approach is to provide a mechanism for discovering the functional signatures of defined subunit arrangements, and thus a route to identifying such arrangements in vivo.
The family of GABA-A receptors contains nineteen mammalian subunits from which pentameric, GABA gated anion channels are assembled. The subunit encoded by the GABRA6 gene is highly expressed in the cerebellum and the receptors to which it contributes have recently been demonstrated to be a promising candidate as a novel drug target. Here we examined a series of loreclezole derivatives for potentially selective action at alpha6beta3gamma2 receptors with the help of computational methods and functional testing with the two-electrode voltage clamp technique. The synthetic routes to some previously published ligands were improved, and a new derivative was synthesized based on computational docking results. This new loreclezole derivative, [3-(2-chloro-4-methylphenyl)-3-methylbutanenitrile (40)], was shown to display stronger modulatory action in concatenated alpha6beta3gamma2 receptors compared to their alpha1beta3gamma2 counterpart. The hypothetical bound state structure provides valuable guidance for future design of selective therapeutics.
Understanding how specific genes contribute to risk for addiction remains challenging. This study tests whether childhood temperament and externalizing behavior in early adolescence account for a portion of the association between specific genetic variants and substance use problems in late adolescence. The sample consisted of 487 adolescents from the Michigan Longitudinal Study, a high-risk sample (70.2% male, 81.7% European American ancestry). Polymorphisms across serotonergic (SLC6A4, 5-HTTLPR), dopaminergic (DRD4, u-VNTR), noradrenergic (SLC6A2, rs36021), and GABAergic (GABRA2, rs279858; GABRA6, rs3811995) genes were examined given prior support for associations with temperament, externalizing behavior, and substance use problems. The temperament traits behavioral control and resiliency were assessed using interviewer ratings (ages 9-11), and externalizing behavior (ages 12-14) was assessed using teacher ratings. Self-reported substance use outcomes (ages 15-17) included maximum alcoholic beverages consumed in 24 hours, and frequency of past year cigarette and marijuana use. Behavioral control, resiliency, and externalizing behavior accounted for the associations between polymorphisms in noradrenergic and GABAergic genes and substance use in late adolescence. Individual differences in emotional coping and behavioral regulation represent nonspecific neurobiological underpinnings for an externalizing pathway to addiction. (PsycINFO Database Record
