Gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor subunit rho-1; GABA, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the vertebrate brain, mediates neuronal inhibition by binding to the GABA/benzodiazepine receptor and opening an integral chloride channel. Rho-1 GABA receptor could play a role in retinal neurotransmission.
According to the International Diabetes Federation, the number of adults (age of 20-79) being diagnosed with diabetes mellitus (DM) have increased from 285 million in year 2009 to 463 million in year 2019 which comprises of 95% type 2 DM patient (T2DM). Research have claimed that genetic predisposition could be one of the factors causing T2DM complications. In addition, T2DM complications cause an incremental risk to mortality. Therefore, this article aims to discuss some complications of T2DM in and their genetic association. The complications that are discussed in this article are diabetic nephropathy, diabetes induced cardiovascular disease, diabetic neuropathy, diabetic foot ulcer (DFU) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). According to the information obtained, genes associated with diabetic nephropathy (DN) are gene GABRR1 and ELMO1 that cause injury to glomerular. Replication of genes FRMD3, CARS and MYO16/IRS2 shown to have link with DN. The increase of gene THBS2, NGAL, PIP, TRAF6 polymorphism, ICAM-1 encoded for rs5498 polymorphism and C667T increase susceptibility towards DN in T2DM patient. Genes associated with cardiovascular diseases are adiponectin gene (ACRP30) and apolipoprotein E (APOE) polymorphism gene with xi2 allele. Haptoglobin (Hp) 1-1 genotype and mitochondria superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) plays a role in cardiovascular events. As for genes related to diabetic neuropathy, janus kinase (JAK), mutation of SCN9A and TRPA1 gene and destruction of miRNA contribute to pathogenesis of diabetic neuropathy among T2DM patients. Expression of cytokine IL-6, IL-10, miR-146a are found to cause diabetic neuropathy. Besides, A1a16Va1 gene polymorphism, an oxidative stress influence was found as one of the gene factors. Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is believed to have association with monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1). Over-expression of gene ENPP1, IL-6 pro-inflammatory cytokine, ARHGAP22's protein rs3844492 polymorphism and TLR4 heterozygous genotype are contributing to significant pathophysiological process causing DR, while research found increases level of UCP1 gene protects retina cells from oxidative stress. DFU is manifested by slowing in re-epithelialization of keratinocyte, persistence wound inflammation and healing impairment. Re-epithelialization disturbance was caused by E2F3 gene, reduction of Tacl gene encoded substance P causing persistence inflammation while expression of MMp-9 polymorphism contributes to healing impairment. A decrease in HIF-1a gene expression leads to increased risk of pathogenesis, while downregulation of TLR2 increases severity of wound in DFU patients. SNPs alleles has been shown to have significant association between the genetic dispositions of T<inf>2</inf>DM and AD. The progression of AD can be due to the change in DNA methylation of CLOCK gene, followed with worsening of AD by APOE4 gene due to dyslipidemia condition in T2DM patients. Insulin resistance is also a factor that contributes to pathogenesis of AD.
The differential expression of a featured set of genes may serve as a diagnostic biomarker in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. The aim of this study was to identify prognostic biomarkers for the diagnosis and survival of HCC based on the analysis of a large cohort of patients. Clinical and RNA‑seq data were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. A transcriptomics analysis was conducted to detect differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Samples from 53 tumors and 20 normal tissues of HCC patients were obtained to further analyze the connection between overall survival (OS) and DEG levels. Based on the OS and progression‑free survival (PFS), 4 DEGs (GABRR1, SOX11, COL24A1 and MYLK2) were identified from the TCGA dataset. Using gene ontology (GO) analysis, it was demonstrated that the DEGs were associated with several biological processes, including multicellular organismal and single‑multicellular organism processes, which are involved in the development and migration of HCC. In addition, the four genes were significantly upregulated in tumor tissues. Notably, the mRNA expression of the four genes had a negative association with OS and PFS in HCC patients determined using a Kaplan‑Meir analysis. The four‑gene signature is a potential novel biomarker for the prediction of HCC patient survival.
The genes encoding several GABA-A receptor subunits, including GABRA2, have been associated with alcoholism, suggesting that variations in gaba signaling contribute to risk. Therefore, as part of a comprehensive evaluation of the GABA receptor genes, we evaluated the potential association of GABRR1 and GABRR2, which encode the rho1 and rho2 subunits of the pentameric GABA-A/GABA-C receptors. GABRR1 and GABRR2 lie in a head to tail orientation spanning 137 kb on chromosome 6q14-16. We genotyped 73 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), covering both genes and extending 31 kb upstream of GABRR2 and 95 kb downstream of GABRR1, in a sample of 1923 European Americans from 219 multiplex alcohol-dependent families. Family-based association analyses demonstrated that SNPs in both GABRR1 and GABRR2 were significantly associated with alcohol dependence. Among the associated SNPs was rs282129, a coding SNP (Met430Thr) in GABRR2. Secondary analysis using a median split for age of onset suggests that the association is strongest when the analysis is focused upon those with earlier onset of alcohol dependence. Haplotypes in each gene were significantly overtransmitted to family members who did not meet criteria for alcohol dependence (P < 0.04), and a haplotype in GABRR2 was significantly overtransmitted to family members who met a broader definition of alcoholism (P = 0.002) as well as DSM-IV dependence (P = 0.04).
The possible role of gammaaminobutyric acid (GABA) in the pathophysiology of restless legs syndrome (RLS) is suggested by the symptomatic improvement achieved with GABAergic drugs. Thalamic GABA levels have shown positive correlation with periodic limb movements indices and with RLS severity. We tried to investigate the possible association between the most common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the GABA receptors (GABR) genes rho1, 2, and 3 (GABRR1, GABRR2, GABRR3), alpha4 (GABRA4), epsilon (GABRE), and theta (GABRQ) with the risk of developing RLS. We studied the genotype and allelic variant frequencies of the most common SNPs in the GABRR1(rs12200969, rs1186902), GABRR2(rs282129), GABRR3(rs832032), GABRA4(rs2229940), GABRE(rs1139916), and GABRQ(rs3810651) genes in 205 RLS patients and 230 age- and gender-matched healthy controls using specific TaqMan assays. The frequencies of the GABRR3 rs832032TT genotype and the allelic variant GABRR3 rs832032T were significantly higher in RLS patients than in controls (odds ratio [95% confidence intervals] 7.08[1.48-46.44] and 1.66[1.16-2.37], respectively), although only the higher frequency of the rs832032T allele remained as significant after multiple comparison analysis, both in the whole series and in the female gender. The frequencies of the other genotypes of allelic variants did not differ significantly between RLS patients and controls. RLS patients carrying the GABRA4 rs2229940TT genotype showed a significantly younger age at onset of RLS symptoms than those with the other two genotypes. These results suggest association between GABRR3rs832032 polymorphism and the risk for RLS, and a modifier effect of GABRA4 rs2229940 on the age of onset of RLS.
GABRR1 is a rho subunit receptor of GABA, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the mammalian brain. While most investigations of its function focused on the nervous system, its regulatory role in hematopoiesis has not been reported. In this study, we found GABRR1 is mainly expressed on subsets of human and mouse hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and megakaryocyte progenitors (MkPs). GABRR1-negative (GR-) HSCs led to higher donor-derived hematopoietic chimerism than GABRR1-positive (GR+) HSCs. GR+ but not GR- HSCs and MkPs respond to GABA in patch clamp studies. Inhibition of GABRR1 via genetic knockout or antagonists inhibited MkP differentiation and reduced platelet numbers in blood. Overexpression of GABRR1 or treatment with agonists significantly promoted MkP generation and megakaryocyte colonies. Thus, this study identifies a link between the neural and hematopoietic systems and opens up the possibility of manipulating GABA signaling for platelet-required clinical applications.
BACKGROUND: Tardive dyskinesia (TD) develops in 20-30% of schizophrenia patients and up to 50% in patients > 50 years old. DNA methylation may play an important role in the development of TD. OBJECTIVE: DNA methylation analyses in schizophrenia with TD. METHODS: We conducted a genome-wide DNA methylation analysis in schizophrenia with TD using methylated DNA immunoprecipitation coupled with next-generation sequencing (MeDIP-Seq) in a Chinese sample including five schizophrenia patients with TD and five without TD (NTD), and five healthy controls. The results were expressed as the log(2)FC, fold change of normalized tags between two groups within the differentially methylated region (DMR). For validation, the pyrosequencing was used to quantify DNA methylation levels of several methylated genes in an independent sample (n = 30). RESULTS: Through genome-wide MeDIP-Seq analysis, we identified 116 genes that were significantly differentially methylated in promotor regions in comparison of TD group with NTD group including 66 hypermethylated genes (top 4 genes are GABRR1, VANGL2, ZNF534, and ZNF746) and 50 hypomethylated genes (top 4 genes are DERL3, GSTA4, KNCN, and LRRK1). Part of these genes (such as DERL3, DLGAP2, GABRR1, KLRG2, LRRK1, VANGL2, and ZP3) were previously reported to be associated with methylation in schizophrenia. Gene Ontology enrichment and KEGG pathway analyses identified several pathways. So far, we have confirmed the methylation of 3 genes (ARMC6, WDR75, and ZP3) in schizophrenia with TD using pyrosequencing. CONCLUSIONS: This study identified number of methylated genes and pathways for TD and will provide potential biomarkers for TD and serve as a resource for replication in other populations.
BACKGROUNDS: The pandemic of overweight and obesity (quantified by body mass index (BMI) >/= 25) has rapidly raised the patient number of non-alcoholic fatty hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and several clinical trials have shown that BMI is associated with the prognosis of HCC. However, whether overweight/obesity is an independent prognostic factor is arguable, and the role of overweight/obesity-related metabolisms in the progression of HCC is scarcely known. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present study, clinical information, mRNA expression profile, and genomic data were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) as a training cohort (TCGA-HCC) for the identification of overweight/obesity-related transcriptome. Machine learning and the Cox regression analysis were conducted for the construction of the overweight/obesity-associated gene (OAG) signature. The Kaplan-Meier curve, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and the Cox regression analysis were performed to assess the prognostic value of the OAG signature, which was further validated in two independent retrospective cohorts from the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Subsequently, functional enrichment, genomic profiling, and tumor microenvironment (TME) evaluation were utilized to characterize biological activities associated with the OAG signature. GSE109211 and GSE104580 were retrieved to evaluate the underlying response of sorafenib and transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) treatment, respectively. The Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) database was employed for the evaluation of chemotherapeutic response. RESULTS: Overweight/obesity-associated transcriptome was mainly involved in metabolic processes and noticeably and markedly correlated with prognosis and TME of HCC. Afterward, a novel established OAG signature (including 17 genes, namely, GAGE2D, PDE6A, GABRR1, DCAF8L1, DPYSL4, SLC6A3, MMP3, RIBC2, KCNH2, HTRA3, PDX1, ATHL1, PRTG, SHC4, C21orf29, SMIM32, and C1orf133) divided patients into high and low OAG score groups with distinct prognosis (median overall survival (OS): 24.87 vs. 83.51 months, p < 0.0001), and the values of area under ROC curve (AUC) in predicting 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-year OS were 0.81, 0.80, 0.83, and 0.85, respectively. Moreover, the OAG score was independent of clinical features and also exhibited a good ability for prognosis prediction in the ICGC-LIHC-JP cohort and GSE54236 dataset. Expectedly, the OAG score was also highly correlated with metabolic processes, especially oxidative-related signaling pathways. Furthermore, abundant enrichment of chemokines, receptors, MHC molecules, and other immunomodulators as well as PD-L1/PD-1 expression among patients with high OAG scores indicated that they might have better responses to immunotherapy. However, probably exclusion of T cells from infiltrating tumors resulting in lower infiltration of effective T cells would restrict immunotherapeutic effects. In addition, the OAG score was significantly associated with the response of sorafenib and TACE treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study comprehensively disclosed the relationship between BMI-guided transcriptome and HCC. Moreover, the OAG signature had the potential clinical applications in the future to promote clinical management and precision medicine of HCC.
PURPOSE: To describe the clinical findings and to identify the genetic locus in a Dutch family with autosomal dominant benign concentric annular macular dystrophy (BCAMD). METHODS: All family members underwent ophthalmic examination. Linkage analysis of candidate retinal dystrophy loci and a whole genome scan were performed. Five candidate genes from the linked locus were analyzed for mutations by direct sequencing. RESULTS: The BCAMD phenotype is initially characterized by parafoveal hypopigmentation and good visual acuity, but progresses to a retinitis pigmentosa-like phenotype. Linkage analysis established complete segregation of the BCAMD phenotype (maximum multipoint LOD score, 3.8) with DNA markers at chromosome 6, region p12.3-q16. Recombination events defined a critical interval spanning 30.7 cM at the long arm of chromosome 6 between markers D6S269 and D6S300. This interval encompasses several retinal dystrophy loci, including the ELOVL4 gene, mutated in autosomal dominant Stargardt disease, and the RIM1 gene, mutated in autosomal dominant cone-rod dystrophy, as well as the retinally expressed GABRR1 and -2 genes. Mutation screening of these four genes revealed no mutations. Sequence analysis of the interphotoreceptor matrix proteoglycan 1 gene IMPG1, also residing in the BCAMD locus, revealed a single base-pair change (T-->C) of nucleotide 1866 in exon 13, resulting in a Leu579Pro amino acid substitution. This mutation was absent in 190 control individuals. CONCLUSIONS: Significant linkage was found for the BCAMD defect with chromosomal 6, region p12.3-q16. A Leu579Pro mutation in the IMPG1 gene may play a causal role.
BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The possible role of gammaaminobutyric acid (GABA) in the pathogenesis of migraine has been suggested by a number of biochemical, pharmacological, neurophysiological and experimental data. We investigated the possible association between the most common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the GABA receptor rho1, 2, and 3 genes (GABRR1, GABRR2, and GABRR3) and the risk of developing migraine. METHODS: The frequency of GABRR1 rs12200969, GABRR1 rs1186902, GABRR2 rs282129, and GABRR3 rs832032 genotypes and allelic variants were studied in a case-control association study involving 197 patients with migraine and 278 healthy controls by means of a TaqMan-based qPCR Assay. We also studied the possible influence of gender, age at onset of migraine, positive family history of migraine, presence or absence of aura, and triggering of migraine by ethanol on the frequency of the genotypes. RESULTS: The frequencies of the genotypes and allelic variants of the 4 SNPs were similar in migraine patients and controls. Gender, positive family history of migraine, presence or absence of aura, and triggering of migraine attacks by ethanol did not influence the frequency of these genotypes. Carriers of the minor allele of the rs1186902 SNP showed a trend towards later onset of migraine. CONCLUSION: The most common polymorphisms in the GABRR genes seemed to be not associated with the risk for migraine in Caucasian Spanish people, although one of them (GABRR1 rs1186902) shows a statistically significant association with the age of onset of migraine.
INTRODUCTION: Use of the antiepileptic drug (AED) vigabatrin is severely limited by irreversible visual field constriction, an adverse reaction to the drug reported in approximately 40% of patients. Given the evidence suggesting an idiosyncratic drug response, we set out to detect genetic variation of strong, clinically relevant effect that might guide clinicians in the safe, controlled prescribing of this otherwise usefuldrug. METHODS: Patients with a history of at least 1-year exposure to vigabatrin were enrolled at two independent referral centers. Using Goldmann perimetry, visual fields and the extent of constriction were calculated for each patient. We examined the correlation between the extent of vigabatrin induced visual field constriction and genetic variation across six candidate genes (SLC6A1, SLC6A13, SCL6A11, ABAT, GABRR1 and GABRR2). We availed of HapMap data and used a tagging SNP technique in an effort to efficiently capture all common variation within these genes. We attempted to replicate any positive associations before drawing conclusions from our results. RESULTS: The degree of visual field constriction correlated with three SNPs and one haplotype in a cohort of 73 patients. However we were unable to replicate these findings in a second independent cohort consisting of 58 patients, suggesting the initial results were possibly false positives, or variants of weak effect. CONCLUSION: Common variants of strong, clinically relevant effect do not appear to reside in the candidate genes studied here. This does not rule out the presence of genetic variants of weak effect in these genes, nor of variants of strong effect in other genes.
OBJECTIVE: Ovarian cancer is one of the most common causes of cancer-related deaths in women. Many studies show that dysregulated gene expression plays a key role in tumorigenesis and development. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma survival prognosis is needed. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A large number of high-dimensional RNA-sequencing files and clinical datasets collected from the Genomic Data Commons Data Portal were utilized to identify novel potential biomarkers for determining the prognosis of patients with ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma (OVSC). We adopted a new strategy to identify these biomarkers by integrating co-expression network analysis and the Kaplan-Meier estimation with a non-parametric bootstrapping procedure. RESULTS: Functional enrichment analysis of gene modules of interest revealed several dysregulated genes in OVSC, suggesting a close relationship between hormones and angiogenesis. In combination with this comprehensive approach, 14 genes, including ABCA10, DCX, LRRC30, ALX4, DKK4, SGCZ, ANKS4B, FHL5, SPRR2F, CHRNG, GABRR1, STMN2, CRHBP, and GSTM5, were shown to serve as candidate biomarkers for predicting the prognosis of patients with OVSC. CONCLUSIONS: The current study identified several valuable prognostic biomarkers and several potential therapeutic targets for treating OVSC.
Neuroblastoma (NB) is a huge threat to children's health. Adipose-derived stem cells-derived extracellular vesicles (ADSC-Evs) can regulate tumor progression. This study aimed to identify the role of ADSC-Evs in NB. Following ADSC-Ev isolation and identification, PKH26-labeled ADSC-Evs were cocultured with NB cells to observe the internalization of ADSC-Evs. ADSC-Ev effects on NB cell proliferation, invasion, and migration were assessed. The regulatory molecules related to NB development were predicted. The expressions of and relations among LINC00622, transcriptional factor androgen receptor (AR), and gamma-aminobutyric acid B-type receptor 1 (GABRR1) were detected and verified. LINC00622 was inhibited in ADSCs to evaluate ADSC-Ev effects on NB cells. Xenograft tumor experiment in nude mice was further performed to evaluate the effects of ADSC-Evs-carried LINC00622 on NB in vivo. ADSC-Evs inhibited NB cell proliferation, invasion, and migration. ADSC-Evs increased GABBR1 expression in NB cells. ADSC-Evs-carried LINC00622 mediated AR to promote GABBR1 expression. Silencing LINC00622 in ADSCs weakened the inhibition of ADSC-Evs on NB cell malignant behaviors. ADSC-Evs reduced tumor growth in nude mice, which was restored after inhibiting LINC00622 expression in ADSCs. We highlighted that ADSC-Evs carried LINC00622 into NB cells to inhibit transcription factor AR and promote GABBR1 expression, thus inhibiting NB cell growth.
Identification of sequence variants robustly associated with predisposition to diabetic kidney disease (DKD) has the potential to provide insights into the pathophysiological mechanisms responsible. We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of DKD in type 2 diabetes (T2D) using eight complementary dichotomous and quantitative DKD phenotypes: the principal dichotomous analysis involved 5,717 T2D subjects, 3,345 with DKD. Promising association signals were evaluated in up to 26,827 subjects with T2D (12,710 with DKD). A combined T1D+T2D GWAS was performed using complementary data available for subjects with T1D, which, with replication samples, involved up to 40,340 subjects with diabetes (18,582 with DKD). Analysis of specific DKD phenotypes identified a novel signal near GABRR1 (rs9942471, P = 4.5 x 10(-8)) associated with microalbuminuria in European T2D case subjects. However, no replication of this signal was observed in Asian subjects with T2D or in the equivalent T1D analysis. There was only limited support, in this substantially enlarged analysis, for association at previously reported DKD signals, except for those at UMOD and PRKAG2, both associated with estimated glomerular filtration rate. We conclude that, despite challenges in addressing phenotypic heterogeneity, access to increased sample sizes will continue to provide more robust inference regarding risk variant discovery for DKD.
BACKGROUND: Most gene-environment interaction studies (G x E) have focused on single candidate genes. This approach is criticized for its expectations of large effect sizes and occurrence of spurious results. We describe an approach that accounts for the polygenic nature of most psychiatric phenotypes and reduces the risk of false-positive findings. We apply this method focusing on the role of perceived parental support, psychological control, and harsh punishment in depressive symptoms in adolescence. METHODS: Analyses were conducted on 982 adolescents of Caucasian origin (M(age) (SD) = 13.78 (.94) years) genotyped for 4,947 SNPs in 263 genes, selected based on a literature survey. The Leuven Adolescent Perceived Parenting Scale (LAPPS) and the Parental Behavior Scale (PBS) were used to assess perceived parental psychological control, harsh punishment, and support. The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) was the outcome. We used gene-based testing taking into account linkage disequilibrium to identify genes containing SNPs exhibiting an interaction with environmental factors yielding a p-value per single gene. Significant results at the corrected p-value of p < 1.90 x 10(-4) were examined in an independent replication sample of Dutch adolescents (N = 1354). RESULTS: Two genes showed evidence for interaction with perceived support: GABRR1 (p = 4.62 x 10(-5) ) and GABRR2 (p = 9.05 x 10(-6) ). No genes interacted significantly with psychological control or harsh punishment. Gene-based analysis was unable to confirm the interaction of GABRR1 or GABRR2 with support in the replication sample. However, for GABRR2, but not GABRR1, the correlation of the estimates between the two datasets was significant (r (46) = .32; p = .027) and a gene-based analysis of the combined datasets supported GABRR2 x support interaction (p = 1.63 x 10(-4) ). CONCLUSIONS: We present a gene-based method for gene-environment interactions in a polygenic context and show that genes interact differently with particular aspects of parenting. This accentuates the importance of polygenic approaches and the need to accurately assess environmental exposure in G x E.
Myopia is the most common human eye disorder and it results from complex genetic and environmental causes. The rapidly increasing prevalence of myopia poses a major public health challenge. Here, the CREAM consortium performs a joint meta-analysis to test single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) main effects and SNP x education interaction effects on refractive error in 40,036 adults from 25 studies of European ancestry and 10,315 adults from 9 studies of Asian ancestry. In European ancestry individuals, we identify six novel loci (FAM150B-ACP1, LINC00340, FBN1, DIS3L-MAP2K1, ARID2-SNAT1 and SLC14A2) associated with refractive error. In Asian populations, three genome-wide significant loci AREG, GABRR1 and PDE10A also exhibit strong interactions with education (P<8.5 x 10(-5)), whereas the interactions are less evident in Europeans. The discovery of these loci represents an important advance in understanding how gene and environment interactions contribute to the heterogeneity of myopia.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Knowledge of interactions between genetic variants and near-work activities at the onset of myopia can facilitate health education regarding myopia. BACKGROUND: To investigate the interactions between genetic variants (PDE10A, AREG and GABRR1) and near-work activities in the onset of myopia in southeastern Chinese school children. METHODS: A total of 458 non-myopic, grade 1 children aged 6-7 years were included in a 4-year follow-up examination; 409 children were assessed further. Manifest (non-cycloplegic) refraction and axial length (AL) were measured every year, and questionnaires were administered annually to assess information regarding the demographic characteristics of children, near-work activities, outdoor exposure and parental myopia. Oral mucosa was collected in the last year of follow-up, and Sanger sequencing was used to genotype single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA. RESULTS: The cumulative change in the spherical equivalent refraction (SER) over 4 years was -1.20 +/- 1.00 D, and the proportion of children with incident myopia was 42.9%. Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that an increased amount of time spent doing homework (>2 h/d) was an independent risk factor for incident myopia. The PDE10A rs12206610CT genotype and spending > 5 h/d on near-work activities showed an interaction for incident myopia (OR = 4.29, 95% CI: 1.27-14.53; P(i)nteraction = 0.02); moreover, the rs12206610CT genotype carriers who used electronic devices for > 1 h/d displayed an increased risk of incident myopia (OR = 3.43, 95% CI: 1.07-11.01; P(interaction) = 0.043). CONCLUSIONS: The rs2206610CT genotype carriers with near-work activities of >5 h/d were more likely to show incident myopia, especially those who used electronic devices >1 h/d. However, interactions between the rs12206610 SNP and near-work activities require further verification in animal models and larger sample cohorts.
rho-type gamma-aminobutyric acid-A (GABA(A)) receptors are widely distributed in the retina and brain, and are potential drug targets for the treatment of visual, sleep and cognitive disorders. Endogenous neuroactive steroids including beta-estradiol and pregnenolone sulfate negatively modulate the function of rho1 GABA(A) receptors, but their inhibitory mechanisms are not clear. By combining five cryo-EM structures with electrophysiology and molecular dynamics simulations, we characterize binding sites and negative modulation mechanisms of beta-estradiol and pregnenolone sulfate at the human rho1 GABA(A) receptor. beta-estradiol binds in a pocket at the interface between extracellular and transmembrane domains, apparently specific to the rho subfamily, and disturbs allosteric conformational transitions linking GABA binding to pore opening. In contrast, pregnenolone sulfate binds inside the pore to block ion permeation, with a preference for activated structures. These results illuminate contrasting mechanisms of rho1 inhibition by two different neuroactive steroids, with potential implications for subtype-specific gating and pharmacological design.
Some clinical and experimental data suggest a possible role of gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA)-ergic mechanisms in the pathophysiology of essential tremor (ET), such as the improvement of ET with some GABAergic drugs and the development of an experimental model of ET in GABA A receptor alpha-1 knockout mice (postural and kinetic tremor and motor incoordination similar to human ET). To investigate the possible association between the GABA receptor subtype rho1, rho2, and rho3 (GABRR1, GABRR2, and GABRR3) genotypes and allelic variants of the single nucleotide polymorphisms GABRR1-M26V (Met26Val, rs12200969), GABRR1-H27R (His26Arg, rs1186902), GABRR2-T455M (Thr55Met, rs282129), and GABRR3-Y205X (Tyr205X, rs832032), and the risk for ET, we studied the frequency of the previously mentioned GABRR genotypes and allelic variants in 200 patients with ET and 250 healthy controls using TaqMan genotyping. The frequencies of the GABBR1 genotypes and allelic variants of the studied polymorphisms did not differ significantly between patients with ET and controls, and were unrelated with the age at onset of tremor, gender, localization of tremor, and response of tremor to ethanol. These data suggest that the single nucleotide polymorphisms studied in the GABBR genes are not related to the risk for ET.
OBJECTIVE: The function of high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) may better reflect their atheroprotective role, compared with HDL-cholesterol levels. The association between DNA methylation and HDL function has not yet been established. APPROACH AND RESULTS: We designed an epigenome-wide association study including 645 individuals from the REGICOR study (Registre Gironi del Cor). We determined DNA methylation from peripheral blood cells using the HumanMethylation450 array. We analyzed HDL functionality by determining HDL cholesterol efflux capacity and HDL inflammatory index. We discovered 3 methylation sites located in HOXA3, PEX5, and PER3 related to cholesterol efflux capacity and 1 located in GABRR1 related to HDL inflammatory index. Using a candidate gene approach, we also found 2 methylation sites located in CMIP related to cholesterol efflux capacity. CONCLUSIONS: We identified 6 potential loci associated with HDL functionality in HOXA3, PEX5, PER3, CMIP, and GABRR1. Additional studies are warranted to validate these findings in other populations.
GABA(C) receptors mediate rapid inhibitory neurotransmission in retina. We have mapped, in detail, the human genes which encode the three polypeptides that comprise this receptor: rho1 (GABRR1), rho2 (GABRR2) and rho3 (GABRR3). We show that GABRR1 and GABRR2 are located close together, in a region of chromosome 6q that contains loci for inherited disorders of the eye, but that GABRR3 maps to chromosome 3q11-q13.3. Our mapping data suggest that the rho polypeptide genes, which are thought to share a common ancestor with GABA(A) receptor subunit genes, diverged at an early stage in the evolution of this gene family.
