Galanin receptor type 3; Receptor for the hormone galanin. Receptor for the hormone spexin-1.
BACKGROUND: G protein-coupled receptors play a critical role in atrial fibrillation (AF). Spexin is a novel ligand of galanin receptors (GALRs). In this study, we investigated the regulation of spexin and GALRs on AF and the underlying mechanisms. METHODS: Global spexin knockout (SPX-KO) and cardiomyocyte-specific GALRs knockout (GALR-cKO) mice underwent burst pacing electrical stimulation. Optical mapping was used to determine atrial conduction velocity and action potential duration. Atrial myocyte action potential duration and inward rectifying K(+) current (I(K1)) were recorded using whole-cell patch clamps. Isolated cardiomyocytes were stained with Fluo-3/AM dye, and intracellular Ca(2+) handling was examined by CCD camera. A mouse model of AF was established by Ang-II (angiotensin II) infusion. RESULTS: Spexin plasma levels in patients with AF were lower than those in subjects without AF, and knockout of spexin increased AF susceptibility in mice. In the atrium of SPX-KO mice, potassium inwardly rectifying channel subfamily J member 2 (KCNJ2) and sarcolipin (SLN) were upregulated; meanwhile, I(K1) current was increased and Ca(2+) handling was impaired in isolated atrial myocytes of SPX-KO mice. GALR2-cKO mice, but not GALR1-cKO and GALR3-cKO mice, had a higher incidence of AF, which was associated with higher I(K1) current and intracellular Ca(2+) overload. The phosphorylation level of CREB (cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein 1) was upregulated in atrial tissues of SPX-KO and GALR2-cKO mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed the recruitment of p-CREB to the proximal promoter regions of KCNJ2 and SLN. Finally, spexin treatment suppressed CREB signaling, decreased I(K1) current and decreased intracellular Ca(2+) overload, which thus reduced the inducibility of AF in Ang-II-infused mice. CONCLUSIONS: Spexin reduces atrial fibrillation susceptibility by inhibiting CREB phosphorylation and thus downregulating KCNJ2 and SLN transcription by GALR2 receptor. The spexin/GALR2/CREB signaling pathway represents a novel therapeutic avenue in the development of agents against atrial fibrillation.
Spexin (SPX), a novel peptide coevolved with the galanin/kisspeptin family, was first identified by bioinformatics prior to its protein purification/functional studies. Its mature peptide is highly conserved among different vertebrate classes. Based on the studies in mammals and fish models, SPX was found to be widely distributed at tissue level, secreted into systemic circulation, identified at notable levels in central nervous system and peripheral tissues, and has been confirmed/implicated in multiple functions in different tissues/organs, suggesting that SPX may serve as a neuroe​ndocrine signal with pleotropic functions. In this article, different isoforms of SPX and their binding with their cognate receptors GalR2 and GalR3, the biological functions of SPX reported in mammals including GI tract movement, energy balance and weight loss, fatty acid uptake, glucose homeostasis, nociception and cardiovascular/renal functions, as well as the recent findings in fish models regarding the role of SPX in reproduction and feeding control will be reviewed with interesting questions for future investigations.
INTRODUCTION: Galanin is a 29/30 amino acid long neuropeptide that is widely expressed in the brains of many mammals. Galanin exerts its biological activities through three different G protein-coupled receptors, GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3. The widespread distribution of galanin and its receptors in the CNS and the various physiological and pharmacological effects of galanin make the galanin receptors attractive drug targets. AREAS COVERED: This review provides an overview of the role of galanin and its receptors in the CNS, the involvement of the galaninergic system in various neurological diseases and the development of new galanin receptor-specific ligands. EXPERT OPINION: Recent advances and novel approaches in migrating the directions of subtype-selective ligand development and chemical modifications of the peptide backbone highlight the importance of the galanin neurochemical system as a potential target for drug development.
Galanin, a neuropeptide widely expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems and in the endocrine system, has been shown to regulate numerous physiological and pathological processes through interactions with three G-protein-coupled receptors, GalR1 through GalR3. Over the past decade, some of the receptor subtype-specific effects have been elucidated through pharmacological studies using subtype selective ligands, as well as through molecular approaches involving knockout animals. In this chapter, we summarize the current data which constitute the basis of targeting GalR1, GalR2, and GalR3 for the treatment of various human diseases and pathological conditions, including seizure, Alzheimer's disease, mood disorders, anxiety, alcohol intake in addiction, metabolic diseases, pain and solid tumors.
BACKGROUND: Galanin (GAL) constitutes a family of neuropeptides composed of four peptides: (i) galanin (GAL), (ii) galanin-message associated peptide (GAMP), (iii) galanin-like peptide (GALP), and (iv) alarin. GAL contains 29/30 amino acids, and its biological action occurs through the interactions with its various receptors (GALR1, GALR2, and GALR3). The neuropeptide GAL regulates several physiological and pathophysiological functions in the central nervous system, the peripheral nervous system, and the peripheral organs. GAL is secreted mainly by oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and the gastrointestinal tract, and its effect depends on the interaction with its different receptors. These receptors are expressed mainly in the central, peripheral nervous systems and the intestines. OBJECTIVE: The present review evaluates the role of GAL family in inflammatory diseases. An overview is given of the signaling and pharmacological effects due to the interaction between GAL and GALR in different cell types. The potential use of GAL as a therapeutic resource is critically discussed. CONCLUSION: GAL is suggested to have an anti-inflammatory function in some situations and a proinflammatory function in others. The literature on GAL is controversial and currently not conclusive. This could be due to the complexity of the metabolic network signaling induced by the interactions between GAL and GALR. In the next future, GAL might be a promising therapeutic resource for several diseases, but its practical use for disease control is presently not advisable.
Galanin, a neuropeptide widely expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems and in the endocrine system, has been shown to regulate numerous physiological and pathological processes through interactions with three G-protein-coupled receptors, GalR1 through GalR3. Over the past decade, some of the receptor subtype-specific effects have been elucidated through pharmacological studies using subtype selective ligands, as well as through molecular approaches involving knockout animals. In the present review, we summarize the current data which constitute the basis of targeting GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3 for the treatment of various human diseases and pathological conditions, including seizure, Alzheimer's disease, mood disorders, anxiety, alcohol intake in addiction, metabolic diseases, pain and solid tumors.
Spexin (SPX) is a newly identified neuropeptide, a natural ligand for the galanin receptors (GALR) 2/3, which is involved in maintaining physiological functions including female reproduction. One of the most common endocrine disorder in reproductive system is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), however the role of SPX in PCOS is still unknown. The objective of this study was to determine the expression of mRNA and peptide levels of SPX and its receptors GALR2/3 in the hypothalamus and ovary (by real time PCR and Western blot) as well as plasma levels of SPX (ELISA) in letrozole - induced PCOS rats. We observed that SPX plasma level does not change in PCOS rats. In the hypothalamus transcript level of Spx and Galr3 were significantly higher in PCOS rats compared to the control, while mRNA of Galr2 and protein expression of GALR2/3 were lower. Moreover, expression of Spx and Galr2/3 mRNA as well as GALR2/3 peptide production were lower in the ovary of PCOS rats. In summary, while our results did not show differences in plasma SPX levels, we observed tissue-dependent significant differences in the SPX/GALR2/3 levels between PCOS and control rats, what indicates possible new mechanisms of PCOS neuroendocrinology.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common cause of cancer in women and the third in men. The postoperative pathomorphological evaluation of patients with CRC is extremely important for future therapeutic decisions. Although our previous studies demonstrated high galanin (GAL) presence within tumor tissue and an elevated concentration of GAL in the serum of CRC patients, to date, there is a lack of data regarding GAL receptor (GalR) protein expression in CRC cells. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the presence of all three types of GalRs (GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3) within epithelial cells of the human colon and CRC tissue with the use of the immunohistochemical method and to correlate the results with the clinical-pathological data. We found stronger immunoreactivity of GalR1 and GalR3 in CRC cells compared to epithelial cells of the unchanged mucosa of the large intestine. No differences in the GalR2 protein immunoreactivity between the studied tissues were noted. We also found that the increased immunoexpression of the GalR3 in CRC tissue correlated with the better prognosis and longer survival (p < 0.0079) of CRC patients (n = 55). The obtained results suggest that GalR3 may play the role of a prognostic factor for CRC patients. Based on data from the TCGA-COAD project deposited in the GDC Data Portal, we also found that GalR mRNA in cancer samples and the adjacent normal tissue did not correlate with immunoexpression of the GalR proteins in CRC cells and epithelial cells of the unchanged mucosa.
The neuropeptide galanin is widely expressed in the periphery and the central nervous system and mediates diverse physiological processes and behaviors including alcohol abuse, depression and anxiety. Four genes encoding galanin and its receptors have been identified (GAL, GALR1, GALR2 and GALR3). Recently we found that GAL haplotypes were associated with alcoholism, raising the possibility that genetic variation in GALR1, GALR2 and GALR3 might also alter alcoholism risk. Tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified by genotyping SNP panels in controls from five populations. For the association study with alcoholism, six GALR1, four GALR2 and four GALR3 SNPs were genotyped in a large cohort of Finnish alcoholics and non-alcoholics. GALR3 showed a significant association with alcoholism that was driven by one SNP (rs3,091,367). Moreover, the combination of the GALR3 rs3,091,367 risk allele and GAL risk haplotypes led to a modestly increased odds ratio (OR) for alcoholism (2.4) as compared with the effect of either GAL (1.9) or GALR3 alone (1.4). Likewise, the combination of the GALR3 and GAL risk diplotypes led to an increased OR for alcoholism (4.6) as compared with the effect of either GAL (2.0) or GALR3 alone (1.6). There was no effect of GALR1 or GALR2 on alcoholism risk. This evidence suggests that GALR3 mediates the alcoholism-related actions of galanin.
The pathophysiology of depression remains unclear, but involves disturbances in brain monoaminergic transmission. Current antidepressant drugs, which act by enhancing this type of neurotransmission, have limited therapeutic efficacy in a number of patients, and also cause serious side-effects, which limits their compliance. Increasing evidence suggests that neuropeptides, including galanin, can be of relevance in mood disorders. Galanin is co-expressed with and modulates noradrenaline and serotonin transmission, both implicated in depression. Pharmacological and genetic studies suggest a role for galanin in depression-like behaviour in rodents, involving specific receptor subtypes. Thus, stimulation of GalR1 and/or GalR3 receptors results in depression-like phenotype, while activation of the GalR2 receptor reduces depression-like behaviour in the rat. These findings suggest that galanin receptor subtypes may represent novel targets for the development of antidepressant drugs.
The neuropeptide galanin has been implicated in the regulation of processes such as nociception, cognition, feeding behavior, and hormone secretion. Multiple galanin receptors are predicted to mediate its effects, but only two functionally coupled receptors have been reported. We now report the cloning of a third galanin receptor distinct from GALR1 and GALR2. The receptor, termed GALR3, was isolated from a rat hypothalamus cDNA library by both expression and homology cloning approaches. The rat GALR3 receptor cDNA can encode a protein of 370 amino acids with 35% and 52% identity to GALR1 and GALR2, respectively. Localization of mRNA by solution hybridization/RNase protection demonstrates that the GALR3 transcript is widely distributed, but expressed at low abundance, with the highest levels in the hypothalamus and pituitary. We also isolated the gene encoding the human homologue of GALR3. The human GALR3 receptor is 90% identical to rat GALR3 and contains 368 amino acids. Binding of porcine 125I-galanin to stably expressed rat and human GALR3 receptors is saturable (rat KD = 0.98 nM and human KD = 2.23 nM) and displaceable by galanin peptides and analogues in the following rank order: rat galanin, porcine galanin approximately M32, M35 approximately porcine galanin-(-7 to +29), galantide, human galanin > M40, galanin-(1-16) > [D-Trp2]galanin-(1-29), galanin-(3-29). This profile resembles that of the rat GALR1 and GALR2 receptors with the notable exception that human galanin, galanin-(1-16), and M40 show lower affinity at GALR3. In Xenopus oocytes, activation of rat and human GALR3 receptors co-expressed with potassium channel subunits GIRK1 and GIRK4 resulted in inward K+ currents characteristic of Gi/Go-coupled receptors. These data confirm the functional efficacy of GALR3 receptors and further suggest that GALR3 signaling pathways resemble those of GALR1 in that both can activate potassium channels linked to the regulation of neurotransmitter release.
The pathophysiology of depression remains unclear, but involves disturbances in brain monoaminergic transmission. Current antidepressant drugs, which act by enhancing this type of transmission, have limited therapeutic efficacy in a number of patients, and not rarely serious side-effects. Increasing evidence suggests that neuropeptides, including galanin, can be of relevance in mood disorders. Galanin is coexpressed with and modulates noradrenaline and serotonin systems, both implicated in depression. Pharmacological and genetic studies have suggested a role for galanin in depression-like behaviour in rodents, whereby the receptor subtype involved appears to play an important role. Thus, stimulation of GalR1 and/or GalR3 receptors results in depression-like phenotype, while activation of the GalR2 receptor attenuates depression-like behaviour. These findings suggest that galanin receptor subtypes represent targets for development of novel antidepressant drugs.
Galanin (GAL) is an important neurotransmitter released by the enteric nervous system (ENS) neurons located in the muscularis externa and submucosa enteric plexuses that acts by binding to GAL receptors 1, 2 and 3 (GALR1, 2 and 3). In our previous studies, the GAL immunoexpression was compared in colorectal cancer (CRC) tissue and the adjacent parts of the large intestine wall including myenteric and submucosal plexuses. Recently we have also found that expression levels of GALR1 and GALR3 proteins are elevated in CRC tissue as compared with their expression in epithelial cells of unchanged mucosa. Moreover, higher GALR3 immunoreactivity in CRC cells correlated with better prognosis of CRC patients. To understand the distribution of GALRs in enteric plexuses distal and close to CRC invasion, in the present study we decided to evaluate GALRs expression within the myenteric and submucosal plexuses located proximally and distally to the cancer invasion and correlated the GALRs expression levels with the clinico-pathological data of CRC patients. The immunohistochemical and immunofluorescent methods showed only slightly decreased immunoexpression of GALR1 and GALR3 in myenteric plexuses close to cancer but did not reveal any correlation in the immunoexpression of all three GAL receptors in myenteric plexuses and tumour progression. No significant changes were found between the expression levels of GALRs in submucosal plexuses distal and close to the tumour. However, elevated GALR1 expression in submucosal plexuses in vicinity of CRC correlated with poor prognosis, higher tumour grading and shorter overall survival. When myenteric plexuses undergo morphological and functional alterations characteristic for atrophy, GALRs maintain or only slightly decrease their expression status. In contrast, the correlation between high expression of GALR1 in the submucosal plexuses and overall survival of CRC patients suggest that GAL and GALRs can act as a components of local neuro-paracrine pro-proliferative pathways accelerating the invasion and metastasis of cancer cell. The obtained results suggest an important role of GALR1 in submucosal plexuses function during the progression of CRC and imply that GALR1 expression in submucosal plexuses of ENS could be an important predictive factor for CRC progression.
Galanin is a 29- or 30-amino acid peptide with wide-ranging effects on hormone release, feeding behavior, smooth muscle contractility, and somatosensory neuronal function. Three distinct galanin receptor (GALR) subtypes, designated GALR1, 2, and 3, have been cloned from the rat. We report here the cloning of the human GALR2 and GALR3 genes, an initial characterization of their pharmacology with respect to radioligand binding and signal transduction pathways, and a profile of their expression in brain and peripheral tissues. Human GALR2 and GALR3 show, respectively, 92 and 89% amino acid sequence identity with their rat homologues. Radioligand binding studies with 125I-galanin show that recombinant human GALR2 binds with high affinity to human galanin (K(D) = 0.3 nM). Human GALR3 binds galanin with less affinity (IC50 of 12 nM for porcine galanin and 75 nM for human galanin). Human GALR2 was shown to couple to phospholipase C and elevation of intracellular calcium levels as assessed by aequorin luminescence in HEK-293 cells and by Xenopus melanophore pigment aggregation and dispersion assays, in contrast to human GALR1 and human GALR3, which signal predominantly through inhibition of adenylate cyclase. GALR2 mRNA shows a wide distribution in the brain (mammillary nuclei, dentate gyrus, cingulate gyrus, and posterior hypothalamic, supraoptic, and arcuate nuclei), and restricted peripheral tissue distribution with highest mRNA levels detected in human small intestine. In comparison, whereas GALR3 mRNA was expressed in many areas of the rat brain, there was abundant expression in the primary olfactory cortex, olfactory tubercle, the islands of Calleja, the hippocampal CA regions of Ammon's horn, and the dentate gyrus. GALR3 mRNA was highly expressed in human testis and was detectable in adrenal gland and pancreas. The genes for human GALR2 and 3 were localized to chromosomes 17q25 and 22q12.2-13.1, respectively.
Neuropeptides are auxiliary messenger molecules that always co-exist in nerve cells with one or more small molecule (classic) neurotransmitters. Neuropeptides act both as transmitters and trophic factors, and play a role particularly when the nervous system is challenged, as by injury, pain or stress. Here neuropeptides and coexistence in mammals are reviewed, but with special focus on the 29/30 amino acid galanin and its three receptors GalR1, -R2 and -R3. In particular, galanin's role as a co-transmitter in both rodent and human noradrenergic locus coeruleus (LC) neurons is addressed. Extensive experimental animal data strongly suggest a role for the galanin system in depression-like behavior. The translational potential of these results was tested by studying the galanin system in postmortem human brains, first in normal brains, and then in a comparison of five regions of brains obtained from depressed people who committed suicide, and from matched controls. The distribution of galanin and the four galanin system transcripts in the normal human brain was determined, and selective and parallel changes in levels of transcripts and DNA methylation for galanin and its three receptors were assessed in depressed patients who committed suicide: upregulation of transcripts, e.g., for galanin and GalR3 in LC, paralleled by a decrease in DNA methylation, suggesting involvement of epigenetic mechanisms. It is hypothesized that, when exposed to severe stress, the noradrenergic LC neurons fire in bursts and release galanin from their soma/dendrites. Galanin then acts on somato-dendritic, inhibitory galanin autoreceptors, opening potassium channels and inhibiting firing. The purpose of these autoreceptors is to act as a 'brake' to prevent overexcitation, a brake that is also part of resilience to stress that protects against depression. Depression then arises when the inhibition is too strong and long lasting - a maladaption, allostatic load, leading to depletion of NA levels in the forebrain. It is suggested that disinhibition by a galanin antagonist may have antidepressant activity by restoring forebrain NA levels. A role of galanin in depression is also supported by a recent candidate gene study, showing that variants in genes for galanin and its three receptors confer increased risk of depression and anxiety in people who experienced childhood adversity or recent negative life events. In summary, galanin, a neuropeptide coexisting in LC neurons, may participate in the mechanism underlying resilience against a serious and common disorder, MDD. Existing and further results may lead to an increased understanding of how this illness develops, which in turn could provide a basis for its treatment.
Galanin is a 29/30 amino acid peptide neurotransmitter that is widely distributed throughout the central nervous system and periphery. There are three well-characterized G-protein coupled galanin receptors subtypes (GalR1-3). A more recently discovered 60 amino acid galanin-like peptide (GALP) shares amino acid sequence homology with galanin (1-13) in position 9-21 and has high binding affinity for GalR1-3, with highest affinity for GalR3. Considerable evidence has accumulated that implicates both galanin and GALP as playing important roles in regulating food and water intake behavior and related neuroendocrine functions. Pharmacological tools are emerging that will allow dissociation of specific roles for the peptides and their associated receptor subtypes in mediating the homeostatic processes of energy and fluid balance.
The neuropeptide galanin (GAL) is widely distributed within intrinsic and extrinsic sources supplying the eye. It is involved in regulation of the vascular tone, thus important for ocular homeostasis. Since the presence/distribution of its receptors is unknown, we here screen for the presence of the various GAL receptors in the human eye. Meeting the Helsinki-Declaration, human eyes (n = 6; 45-83 years of age, of both sex, post mortem time 10-19 h) were obtained from the cornea bank and prepared for immunohistochemistry against GAL receptors 1-3 (GALR1-GALR3). Over-expressing cell assays served as positive controls and confocal laser-scanning microscopy was used for documentation. Cell assays reliably detected immunoreactivity for GALR1-3 and cross-reactions between antibodies used were not observed. In the cornea, GALR1-3 were detected in basal layers of the epithelium, stroma, endothelium, as well as in adjacent conjunctiva. In the iris, GALR1-3 were detected in iris sphincter and dilator, while iris vessels displayed immunoreactivity for GALR1 and GALR3. In the ciliary body, GALR1 was exclusively found in the non-pigmented epithelium while GALR3 was detected in the ciliary muscle and vessels. In the retina, GALR1 was present in fibers of the IPL, OPL, NFL, many cells of the INL and few cells of the ONL. GALR2 and GALR3 were present in few neurons of the INL, while GALR2 was also found surrounding retinal vessels. RPE displayed weak immunoreactivity for GALR2 but intense immunoreactivity for GALR3. In the choroid, GALR1-3 were detectable in intrinsic choroidal neurons and nerve fibers of the choroidal stroma, and all three receptors were detected surrounding choroidal blood vessels, while the choriocapillaris was immunoreactive for GALR3 only. This is the first report of the various GALRs in the human eye. While the presence of GALRs in cornea and conjunctiva might be relevant for wound healing or inflammatory processes, the detection in iris vessels (GALR1, 2) and choroidal vessels (GALR1-3) highlights the role of GAL in vessel dynamics. Presence of GALR1 in ciliary body epithelium and GALR3 in ciliary vessels indicates involvement in aqueous humor production, whereas retinal GALR distribution might contribute to signal transduction.
The multitalented neuropeptide galanin was first discovered 30 years ago but initially no biologic activity was found. Further research studies discovered the presence of galanin in the brain and some peripheral tissues, and galanin was identified as a modulator of neurotransmission in the central and peripheral nervous system. Over the last decade there were performed very intensive studies of the neuronal actions and also of nonneuronal actions of galanin. Other galanin family peptides have been described, namely galanin, galanin-like peptide, galanin-message associated peptide and alarin. The effect of these peptides is mediated through three galanin receptors subtypes, GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3 belonging to G protein coupled receptors, and signaling via multiple transduction pathways, including inhibition of cyclic AMP/protein kinase A (GalR1, GalR3) and stimulation of phospholipase C (GalR2). This also explains why one specific molecule of galanin can be responsible for different roles in different tissues. The present review summarizes the information currently available on the relationship between the galaninergic system and known pathological states. The research of novel galanin receptor specific agonists and antagonists is also very promising for its future role in pharmacological treatment. The galaninergic system is important target for current and future biomedical research.
Galanin is a regulatory 30- or 29-amino acid peptide, widely distributed in the nervous system and gut, that acts via three subtypes of G protein-coupled receptors, named GAL-R1, GAL-R2 and GAL-R3. Findings have been accumulated that galanin regulates neuroendocrine hypothalamic axes, including the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) one. Galanin and its receptors are expressed in the hypothalamic paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei, anterior pituitary and adrenal medulla. Adrenal cortex does not express galanin, but is provided with GAL-R1 and GAL-R2. The bulk of evidence indicates that galanin stimulates the activity of the central branch of the HPA axis (i.e. the release of corticotropin-releasing hormone and ACTH), thereby enhancing glucocorticoid secretion from the adrenal cortex. Investigations carried out in the rat show that galanin is also able to directly stimulate corticosterone (glucocorticoid) secretion from adrenocortical cells, through GAL-R1 and GAL-R2 coupled to the adenylate cyclase-protein kinase A signaling cascade, and nor-epinephrine release from adrenal medulla. There is indication that galanin may also enhance corticosterone release via an indirect paracrine mechanism involving the local release of catecholamines, which in turn activate beta-adrenoceptors located on adrenocortical cells. The physiological relevance in the rat of the glucocorticoid secretagogue action of galanin is suggested by the demonstration that the blockade of galanin system significantly lowers basal corticosterone secretion. There is also evidence that galanin plays a role in the modulation of HPA-axis response to stress, as well as in the pathogenesis of pituitary adenomas and perhaps of pheochromocytomas.
BACKGROUND: Galanin participates in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis (AP). The galanin receptor (GALR) sub-types involved, however, are unclear. We aimed to determine GALRs messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in mouse pancreas, describe their localization, and ascertain if GALR2 and GALR3 are involved in AP. METHODS: Galanin receptor expression in murine whole pancreas, acinar, and islet cells was quantified by polymerase chain reaction amplification of reverse-transcribed RNA for mRNA, Western blot analysis for protein and in situ hybridization for GALR localization. Isolated acinar cells were used to determine galanin's effect on amylase secretion. Acute pancreatitis was induced in mice by caerulein injections. Mice, with and without AP, were treated with the highly selective GALR2 antagonist M871, or the specific GALR3 antagonist SNAP-37889. Indices of AP were measured at 12 h. KEY RESULTS: Murine pancreas expresses mRNA for GALRs. In islets the expression of all GALR are comparable, whereas in acinar cells GALR3 is predominantly expressed. Western blot analysis confirmed that the GALR proteins are expressed by acinar cells. In situ hybridization analysis confirmed that GALR3 mRNA is present in islet and acinar cells, while mRNA for GALR1 and 2 is confined to islets. Galanin did not influence basal and caerulein-stimulated amylase release from acinar cells. M871 treatment reduced some, whereas SNAP-37889 treatment reduced all indices of AP (by 40-80%). CONCLUSIONS & INFERENCES: Galanin receptor mRNA and protein are expressed in mouse pancreas, with GALR3 mRNA predominating. GALR3 antagonism reduced the severity of AP whereas GALR2 antagonism was less effective. GALR3 is a potential target for treatment of AP.
