Galanin receptor type 2; Receptor for the hormone galanin and GALP. Receptor for the hormone spexin-1. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins that activate the phospholipase C/protein kinase C pathway (via G(q)) and that inhibit adenylyl cyclase (via G(i)).
BACKGROUND: G protein-coupled receptors play a critical role in atrial fibrillation (AF). Spexin is a novel ligand of galanin receptors (GALRs). In this study, we investigated the regulation of spexin and GALRs on AF and the underlying mechanisms. METHODS: Global spexin knockout (SPX-KO) and cardiomyocyte-specific GALRs knockout (GALR-cKO) mice underwent burst pacing electrical stimulation. Optical mapping was used to determine atrial conduction velocity and action potential duration. Atrial myocyte action potential duration and inward rectifying K(+) current (I(K1)) were recorded using whole-cell patch clamps. Isolated cardiomyocytes were stained with Fluo-3/AM dye, and intracellular Ca(2+) handling was examined by CCD camera. A mouse model of AF was established by Ang-II (angiotensin II) infusion. RESULTS: Spexin plasma levels in patients with AF were lower than those in subjects without AF, and knockout of spexin increased AF susceptibility in mice. In the atrium of SPX-KO mice, potassium inwardly rectifying channel subfamily J member 2 (KCNJ2) and sarcolipin (SLN) were upregulated; meanwhile, I(K1) current was increased and Ca(2+) handling was impaired in isolated atrial myocytes of SPX-KO mice. GALR2-cKO mice, but not GALR1-cKO and GALR3-cKO mice, had a higher incidence of AF, which was associated with higher I(K1) current and intracellular Ca(2+) overload. The phosphorylation level of CREB (cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein 1) was upregulated in atrial tissues of SPX-KO and GALR2-cKO mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed the recruitment of p-CREB to the proximal promoter regions of KCNJ2 and SLN. Finally, spexin treatment suppressed CREB signaling, decreased I(K1) current and decreased intracellular Ca(2+) overload, which thus reduced the inducibility of AF in Ang-II-infused mice. CONCLUSIONS: Spexin reduces atrial fibrillation susceptibility by inhibiting CREB phosphorylation and thus downregulating KCNJ2 and SLN transcription by GALR2 receptor. The spexin/GALR2/CREB signaling pathway represents a novel therapeutic avenue in the development of agents against atrial fibrillation.
Neuropathic pain is a chronic and debilitating condition characterised by episodes of hyperalgesia and allodynia. It occurs following nerve damage from disease, inflammation or injury and currently impacts up to 17% of the UK population. Existing therapies lack efficacy and have deleterious side effects that can be severely limiting. Galanin receptor 2 (GalR2) is a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) implicated in the control and processing of painful stimuli. Within the nervous system it is expressed in key tissues involved in these actions such as dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Stimulation of GalR2 is widely reported to have a role in the attenuation of inflammatory and neuropathic pain. Several studies have indicated GalR2 as a possible drug target, highlighting the potential of specific GalR2 agonists to both provide efficacy and to address the side-effect profiles of current pain therapies in clinical use. A strong biological target for drug discovery will be well validated with regards to its role in the relevant disease pathology. Ideally there will be good translational models, sensitive probes, selective and appropriate molecular tools, translational biomarkers, a clearly defined patient population and strong opportunities for commercialisation. Before GalR2 can be considered as a drug target suitable for investment, key questions need to be asked regarding its expression profile, receptor signalling and ligand interactions. This article aims to critically review the available literature and determine the current strength of hypothesis of GalR2 as a target for the treatment of neuropathic pain.
Spexin, also identified as neuropeptide Q (NPQ), is a 14 amino acid peptide discovered by bioinformatic methods. It has a conserved structure in many species and is widely expressed in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues. It has an associated receptor, galanin receptor 2/3 (GALR2/3). Mature spexin peptides can exert various functions by activating GALR2/3, such as inhibiting food intake, inhibiting lipid absorption, reducing body weight, and improving insulin resistance. Spexin is expressed in the adrenal gland, pancreas, visceral fat, and thyroid, with the highest expression in the adrenal gland, followed by the pancreas. Physiologically, spexin and insulin interact in pancreatic islets. Spexin may be one of the regulators of endocrine function in the pancreas. Spexin is a possible indicator of insulin resistance and it has a variety of functional properties, here we review its role in energy metabolism.
Spexin (SPX), a novel peptide coevolved with the galanin/kisspeptin family, was first identified by bioinformatics prior to its protein purification/functional studies. Its mature peptide is highly conserved among different vertebrate classes. Based on the studies in mammals and fish models, SPX was found to be widely distributed at tissue level, secreted into systemic circulation, identified at notable levels in central nervous system and peripheral tissues, and has been confirmed/implicated in multiple functions in different tissues/organs, suggesting that SPX may serve as a neuroe​ndocrine signal with pleotropic functions. In this article, different isoforms of SPX and their binding with their cognate receptors GalR2 and GalR3, the biological functions of SPX reported in mammals including GI tract movement, energy balance and weight loss, fatty acid uptake, glucose homeostasis, nociception and cardiovascular/renal functions, as well as the recent findings in fish models regarding the role of SPX in reproduction and feeding control will be reviewed with interesting questions for future investigations.
The heteroreceptor complexes present a novel biological principle for signal integration. These complexes and their allosteric receptor-receptor interactions are bidirectional and novel targets for treatment of CNS diseases including mental diseases. The existence of D2R-5-HT2AR heterocomplexes can help explain the anti-schizophrenic effects of atypical antipsychotic drugs not only based on blockade of 5-HT2AR and of D2R in higher doses but also based on blocking the allosteric enhancement of D2R protomer signaling by 5-HT2AR protomer activation. This research opens a new understanding of the integration of DA and 5-HT signals released from DA and 5-HT nerve terminal networks. The biological principle of forming 5-HT and other heteroreceptor complexes in the brain also help understand the mechanism of action for especially the 5-HT hallucinogens, including putative positive effects of e.g., psilocybin and the indicated prosocial and anti-stress actions of MDMA (ecstasy). The GalR1-GalR2 heterodimer and the putative GalR1-GalR2-5-HT1 heteroreceptor complexes are targets for Galanin N-terminal fragment Gal (1-15), a major modulator of emotional networks in models of mental disease. GPCR-receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) heteroreceptor complexes can operate through transactivation of FGFR1 via allosteric mechanisms and indirect interactions over GPCR intracellular pathways involving protein kinase Src which produces tyrosine phosphorylation of the RTK. The exciting discovery was made that several antidepressant drugs such as TCAs and SSRIs as well as the fast-acting antidepressant drug ketamine can directly bind to the TrkB receptor and provide a novel mechanism for their antidepressant actions. Understanding the role of astrocytes and their allosteric receptor-receptor interactions in modulating forebrain glutamate synapses with impact on dorsal raphe-forebrain serotonin neurons is also of high relevance for research on major depressive disorder.
INTRODUCTION: Galanin is a 29/30 amino acid long neuropeptide that is widely expressed in the brains of many mammals. Galanin exerts its biological activities through three different G protein-coupled receptors, GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3. The widespread distribution of galanin and its receptors in the CNS and the various physiological and pharmacological effects of galanin make the galanin receptors attractive drug targets. AREAS COVERED: This review provides an overview of the role of galanin and its receptors in the CNS, the involvement of the galaninergic system in various neurological diseases and the development of new galanin receptor-specific ligands. EXPERT OPINION: Recent advances and novel approaches in migrating the directions of subtype-selective ligand development and chemical modifications of the peptide backbone highlight the importance of the galanin neurochemical system as a potential target for drug development.
Dementia conditions and memory deficits of different origins (vascular, metabolic and primary neurodegenerative such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases) are getting more common and greater clinical problems recently in the aging population. Since the presently available cognitive enhancers have very limited therapeutical applications, there is an emerging need to elucidate the complex pathophysiological mechanisms, identify key mediators and novel targets for future drug development. Neuropeptides are widely distributed in brain regions responsible for learning and memory processes with special emphasis on the hippocampus, amygdala and the basal forebrain. They form networks with each other, and also have complex interactions with the cholinergic, glutamatergic, dopaminergic and GABA-ergic pathways. This review summarizes the extensive experimental data in the well-established rat and mouse models, as well as the few clinical results regarding the expression and the roles of the tachykinin system, somatostatin and the closely related cortistatin, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and pituitary adenylate-cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), neuropeptide Y (NPY), opioid peptides and galanin. Furthermore, the main receptorial targets, mechanisms and interactions are described in order to highlight the possible therapeutical potentials. Agents not only symptomatically improving the functional impairments, but also inhibiting the progression of the neurodegenerative processes would be breakthroughs in this area. The most promising mechanisms determined at the level of exploratory investigations in animal models of cognitive disfunctions are somatostatin sst4, NPY Y2, PACAP-VIP VPAC1, tachykinin NK3 and galanin GALR2 receptor agonisms, as well as delta opioid receptor antagonism. Potent and selective non-peptide ligands with good CNS penetration are needed for further characterization of these molecular pathways to complete the preclinical studies and decide if any of the above described targets could be appropriate for clinical investigations.
The presence of Galanin and Neuropeptide Y and/or their receptors in several areas of the brain involved in memory, mood, cardiovascular control and food intake indicates that Galanin, and Neuropeptide Y could equilibrate the physiological actions of each other. There is evidence for the existence of interactions between Galanin Receptor and Neuropeptide Y Receptor in the nucleus of the solitarii tract (NTS), hypothalamus and dorsal raphe nucleus probably taking place with the formation of heteromers between Galanin Receptor and Neuropeptide Y Y1 Receptor. The galanin fragment (Gal 1-15) preferring receptors may instead be formed by the GalR1-GalR2 heteromer which in the NTS may interact with Neuropeptide Y Y2 receptors. These receptor heteromers may be one key molecular mechanism for Galanin and its N-terminal fragment (Galanin 1-15) to modulate the function of different types of glia-neuronal networks in the CNS, especially the emotional, metabolic and cardiovascular networks.
Galanin, a neuropeptide widely expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems and in the endocrine system, has been shown to regulate numerous physiological and pathological processes through interactions with three G-protein-coupled receptors, GalR1 through GalR3. Over the past decade, some of the receptor subtype-specific effects have been elucidated through pharmacological studies using subtype selective ligands, as well as through molecular approaches involving knockout animals. In this chapter, we summarize the current data which constitute the basis of targeting GalR1, GalR2, and GalR3 for the treatment of various human diseases and pathological conditions, including seizure, Alzheimer's disease, mood disorders, anxiety, alcohol intake in addiction, metabolic diseases, pain and solid tumors.
Galanin, a neuropeptide widely expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems and in the endocrine system, has been shown to regulate numerous physiological and pathological processes through interactions with three G-protein-coupled receptors, GalR1 through GalR3. Over the past decade, some of the receptor subtype-specific effects have been elucidated through pharmacological studies using subtype selective ligands, as well as through molecular approaches involving knockout animals. In the present review, we summarize the current data which constitute the basis of targeting GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3 for the treatment of various human diseases and pathological conditions, including seizure, Alzheimer's disease, mood disorders, anxiety, alcohol intake in addiction, metabolic diseases, pain and solid tumors.
BACKGROUND: Galanin (GAL) constitutes a family of neuropeptides composed of four peptides: (i) galanin (GAL), (ii) galanin-message associated peptide (GAMP), (iii) galanin-like peptide (GALP), and (iv) alarin. GAL contains 29/30 amino acids, and its biological action occurs through the interactions with its various receptors (GALR1, GALR2, and GALR3). The neuropeptide GAL regulates several physiological and pathophysiological functions in the central nervous system, the peripheral nervous system, and the peripheral organs. GAL is secreted mainly by oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and the gastrointestinal tract, and its effect depends on the interaction with its different receptors. These receptors are expressed mainly in the central, peripheral nervous systems and the intestines. OBJECTIVE: The present review evaluates the role of GAL family in inflammatory diseases. An overview is given of the signaling and pharmacological effects due to the interaction between GAL and GALR in different cell types. The potential use of GAL as a therapeutic resource is critically discussed. CONCLUSION: GAL is suggested to have an anti-inflammatory function in some situations and a proinflammatory function in others. The literature on GAL is controversial and currently not conclusive. This could be due to the complexity of the metabolic network signaling induced by the interactions between GAL and GALR. In the next future, GAL might be a promising therapeutic resource for several diseases, but its practical use for disease control is presently not advisable.
This special issue is based on a mini-symposium in the area of neurosciences with the title "Understanding the role of heteroreceptor complexes in the central nervous system" held at the Nobel Forum, Karolinska Institutet on December 17th, 2012, organized by Kjell Fuxe, Dasiel O. Borroto-Escuela and Luigi F. Agnati. It consists of seven mini-reviews in the field receptor heteromers. The early work on negative cooperativity and neuropeptide-monoamine receptor-receptor interactions in the central nervous system gave the first indications of the existence of homomers and heteromers of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR), respectively, and the GPCR field began to expand from monomers into dimers and receptor mosaics (higher-order dimers). It was underlined that the existence of receptor heteromers with allosteric receptor-receptor interactions increases the diversity and bias of GPCR recognition and signalling. The molecular phenomenon of allosteric receptor-receptor interactions is proposed to give a better understanding of brain function through molecular integration of signals. An alteration in specific receptor-receptor interactions is in fact considered to play a role in pathogenic mechanisms leading to several diseases, inter alia Parkinson's disease, hypertension, schizophrenia, addiction and depression. It is a new principle in molecular medicine. Therefore, pharmacological targeting of receptor-receptor interactions in heteromers will become an important area for developing more selective drugs with reduced side-effects including heterobivalent compounds and optimal types of combined treatments. In other words , it will lead to novel strategies for treatment, and finally novel drugs for treatment of disease. The first mini-review by Dr. Tena-Campus and colleagues introduces the field of GPCR oligomerization as emerging signalling units with new opportunities for drug design and discusses the technologies involved for detection of receptor heteromers. Then the issue moves into examples of receptor-receptor interactions in the DA and neuropeptide field. Dr. Van Craenenbroeck and colleagues presents an article on the role of dimerization in the biogenesis of DA D4 receptors and thus in their maturation. Dr. Zaida Diaz-Cabiale and colleagues describe the existence of galanin receptor-neuropeptide Y receptor interactions in the brain including galanin receptor-neuropeptide Y Y1 interactions in the brain stem. Indications are obtained that the receptor target for galanin fragment 1-15 is instead a GalR1-GalR2 heteromer. Then the special issue enters into the role of receptor-receptor interactions in putative striatal GPCR heteromers in Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. Dr. Beggiato and colleagues discuss the role of antagonistic adenosine A2A-D2 receptorreceptor interactions in the striato-pallidal GABA neurons and their relevance for treatment of Parkinson's disease. They give the rationale for the introduction of A2A receptor antagonists in clinical trials in this disease based on these antagonistic receptor- receptor interactions which become even more strongly developed in animal models of Parkinson's disease. Dr. Luca Ferraro and colleagues instead discuss in detail the antagonistic Neurotensin NTS1-dopamine D2 receptor-receptor interactions in putative receptor heteromers in the dorsal and ventral striatum. Their involvement in striato-pallidal GABA and mesocorticolimbic DA communication is discussed with focus on their relevance for Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia and their treatments. Dr. Di Liberto and colleagues deal with the role of receptor-receptor interactions in brain trophism and plasticity with focus on interactions between G protein-coupled receptor-Receptor Tyrosine Kinase, specially the cholinergic and fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1). mAChR-FGFR1 interactions are indicated leading to transactivation of FGFR1 with potential relevance for cognition. Luigi Agnati and colleagues in the last paper of this special issue suggest a unified perspective for integrative brain actions through " neurosemeiotics" and " free energy minimization". Especially the Bio-semeiotics concept of "adaptor" may involve the receptor-receptor interactions in heteroreceptor complexes. Through such "adaptors" a code may be produced that give meaning to the sensory stimuli reaching the cortical regions of the brain . We hope the readers will find the articles in this special issue of interest and may give some inspiration to enter this exciting field of receptor research in the CNS which opens up a novel understanding of the molecular events that may lead to neurological and mental diseases and offer novel strategies for their treatments. The editors are grateful to the authors for their fine contributions to this special issue.
Spexin (SPX) is a newly identified neuropeptide, a natural ligand for the galanin receptors (GALR) 2/3, which is involved in maintaining physiological functions including female reproduction. One of the most common endocrine disorder in reproductive system is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), however the role of SPX in PCOS is still unknown. The objective of this study was to determine the expression of mRNA and peptide levels of SPX and its receptors GALR2/3 in the hypothalamus and ovary (by real time PCR and Western blot) as well as plasma levels of SPX (ELISA) in letrozole - induced PCOS rats. We observed that SPX plasma level does not change in PCOS rats. In the hypothalamus transcript level of Spx and Galr3 were significantly higher in PCOS rats compared to the control, while mRNA of Galr2 and protein expression of GALR2/3 were lower. Moreover, expression of Spx and Galr2/3 mRNA as well as GALR2/3 peptide production were lower in the ovary of PCOS rats. In summary, while our results did not show differences in plasma SPX levels, we observed tissue-dependent significant differences in the SPX/GALR2/3 levels between PCOS and control rats, what indicates possible new mechanisms of PCOS neuroendocrinology.
Diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain (DPNP) is a distal spontaneous pain, caused by lesion of sensory neurons and accompanied by depression and anxiety frequently, which reduce life quality of patients and increase society expenditure. To date, antidepressants, serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors and anticonvulsants are addressed as first-line therapy to DPNP, alone or jointly. It is urgently necessary to develop novel agents to treat DPNP and its complications. Evidences indicate that neuropeptide galanin can regulate multiple physiologic and pathophysiological processes. Pain, depression and anxiety may upregulate galanin expression. In return, galanin can modulate depression, anxiety, pain threshold and pain behaviors. This article provides a new insight into regulative effects of galanin and its subtype receptors on antidepressant, antianxiety and against DPNP. Through activating GALR1, galanin reinforces depression-like and anxiogenic-like behaviors, but exerts antinociceptive roles. While via activating GALR2, galanin is referred to as anti-depressive and anti-anxiotropic compounds, and at low and high concentration facilitates and inhibits nociceptor activity, respectively. The mechanism of the galanin roles is relative to increase in K(+) currents and decrease in Ca(2+) currents, as well as neurotrophic and neuroprotective roles. These data are helpful to develop novel drugs to treat DPNP and its complications.
The pathophysiology of depression remains unclear, but involves disturbances in brain monoaminergic transmission. Current antidepressant drugs, which act by enhancing this type of neurotransmission, have limited therapeutic efficacy in a number of patients, and also cause serious side-effects, which limits their compliance. Increasing evidence suggests that neuropeptides, including galanin, can be of relevance in mood disorders. Galanin is co-expressed with and modulates noradrenaline and serotonin transmission, both implicated in depression. Pharmacological and genetic studies suggest a role for galanin in depression-like behaviour in rodents, involving specific receptor subtypes. Thus, stimulation of GalR1 and/or GalR3 receptors results in depression-like phenotype, while activation of the GalR2 receptor reduces depression-like behaviour in the rat. These findings suggest that galanin receptor subtypes may represent novel targets for the development of antidepressant drugs.
The pathophysiology of depression remains unclear, but involves disturbances in brain monoaminergic transmission. Current antidepressant drugs, which act by enhancing this type of transmission, have limited therapeutic efficacy in a number of patients, and not rarely serious side-effects. Increasing evidence suggests that neuropeptides, including galanin, can be of relevance in mood disorders. Galanin is coexpressed with and modulates noradrenaline and serotonin systems, both implicated in depression. Pharmacological and genetic studies have suggested a role for galanin in depression-like behaviour in rodents, whereby the receptor subtype involved appears to play an important role. Thus, stimulation of GalR1 and/or GalR3 receptors results in depression-like phenotype, while activation of the GalR2 receptor attenuates depression-like behaviour. These findings suggest that galanin receptor subtypes represent targets for development of novel antidepressant drugs.
The design of new drugs for treatment of cardiovascular diseases based on endogenous peptide hormones is of undoubted interest and stimulates intensive experimental research. One of the approaches for development in this area is synthesis of the short bioactive peptides that mimic effects of the larger peptide molecules and have improved physicochemical characteristics. In recent years, it has been found that the N-terminal fragments of the neuropeptide galanin reduce metabolic and functional disorders in the experimental heart damage. The review presents literature data and generalized results of our own experiments on the effects of the full-size galanin and its chemically modified N-terminal fragments (2-11) and (2-15) on the heart in normal conditions and in modeling pathophysiological conditions in vitro and in vivo. It has been shown that the spectrum of the peptide actions on the damaged myocardium includes decrease in the necrotic death of cardiomyocytes, decrease in the damage of sarcolemma, improvement in the metabolic state of myocardium, decrease in the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and lipid peroxidation (LPO) products. Mechanisms of the protective action of the modified galanin fragments associated with activation of the GalR2 receptor subtype and manifestation of antioxidant properties are discussed. The data summarized in the review indicate that the molecular design of pharmacological agonists of the GalR2 receptor is a promising approach, because they can serve as a basis for the development of cardioprotectors influencing processes of free radical oxidation and metabolic adaptation.
In mammals, the neuropeptide galanin exerts a variety of physiological roles in the neuroendocrine system through its interactions with three galanin receptor subtypes (GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3). However, little is known about the characteristics of galanin receptors in birds, and it is only recently that avian GalR1 and a novel GalR1-like receptor were first identified in chickens. In this study, we report the cDNA cloning and characterization of the other two chicken galanin receptors, the galanin type II receptor (cGalR2) and a novel GalR2-like receptor (GalR2-L), which share high degrees of similarity in sequence identity, gene structure and signaling properties. cGalR2 and cGalR2-L cDNAs encode two putative receptors of 371 and 370 amino acids, in which they show considerable amino acid sequence identities (65-67%, and 53-55%, respectively) with the mammalian GalR2. RT-PCR assays revealed that cGalR2 and cGalR2-L mRNA were widely expressed in the adult chicken tissues including the whole brain, intestine, lung, ovary, pituitary and different regions of the oviduct. As assayed with different luciferase reporter systems, chicken galanin (cGal 1-29) and human galanin-like peptide (hGALP 1-60) were demonstrated to stimulate the luciferase activities in Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing cGalR2 and cGalR2-L through the activations of cAMP/PKA, Ca(2+)/calcineurin and MAPK/ERK signaling pathways, hence suggesting that both receptors are functionally coupled to the G(s) and G(q) proteins. Furthermore, the previously identified cGalR1 and cGalR1-L were found to be solely coupled to the G(i/o) proteins, and the hGALP (1-60) exhibited only a low potency to cGalR1, cGalR1-L, cGalR2 and cGalR2-L activations.
Galanin was first isolated 15 years ago. Diversity of galanin receptors has been suspected from the study of native tissues and functional responses to galanin and galanin-like peptides in vitro and in vivo. The recent application of molecular biologic techniques to clone galanin receptors has extended this diversity. So far, three galanin receptor subtypes, GALR1, GALR2, and GALR3, have been cloned from both human and rat. Their molecular structure, pharmacologic profiles, tissue distribution, and signal transduction properties have been partially elucidated.
One of the main underlying etiologies of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) is insulin resistance, which is most frequently caused by obesity. Notably, the deregulation of adipokine secretion from visceral adiposity has been identified as a crucial characteristic of type 2 diabetes and obesity. Spexin is an adipokine that is released by many different tissues, including white adipocytes and the glandular stomach, and is negatively connected with the state of energy storage. This peptide acts through GALR2/3 receptors to control a wide range of metabolic processes, including inflammation, browning, lipolysis, energy expenditure, and eating behavior. Specifically, spexin can enter the hypothalamus and regulate the hypothalamic melanocortin system, which in turn balances energy expenditure and food intake. This review examines recent advances and the underlying mechanisms of spexin in obesity and T2DM. In particular, we address a range of topics from basic research to clinical findings, such as an analysis of the possible function of spexin in the hypothalamic melanocortin response, which involves reducing energy intake and increasing energy expenditure while also enhancing insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance. Gaining more insight into the mechanisms that underlie the spexin system's control over energy metabolism and homeostasis may facilitate the development of innovative treatment approaches that focus on combating obesity and diabetes.
