Galanin receptor type 1; Receptor for the hormone galanin. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins that inhibit adenylate cyclase activity; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
BACKGROUND: G protein-coupled receptors play a critical role in atrial fibrillation (AF). Spexin is a novel ligand of galanin receptors (GALRs). In this study, we investigated the regulation of spexin and GALRs on AF and the underlying mechanisms. METHODS: Global spexin knockout (SPX-KO) and cardiomyocyte-specific GALRs knockout (GALR-cKO) mice underwent burst pacing electrical stimulation. Optical mapping was used to determine atrial conduction velocity and action potential duration. Atrial myocyte action potential duration and inward rectifying K(+) current (I(K1)) were recorded using whole-cell patch clamps. Isolated cardiomyocytes were stained with Fluo-3/AM dye, and intracellular Ca(2+) handling was examined by CCD camera. A mouse model of AF was established by Ang-II (angiotensin II) infusion. RESULTS: Spexin plasma levels in patients with AF were lower than those in subjects without AF, and knockout of spexin increased AF susceptibility in mice. In the atrium of SPX-KO mice, potassium inwardly rectifying channel subfamily J member 2 (KCNJ2) and sarcolipin (SLN) were upregulated; meanwhile, I(K1) current was increased and Ca(2+) handling was impaired in isolated atrial myocytes of SPX-KO mice. GALR2-cKO mice, but not GALR1-cKO and GALR3-cKO mice, had a higher incidence of AF, which was associated with higher I(K1) current and intracellular Ca(2+) overload. The phosphorylation level of CREB (cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein 1) was upregulated in atrial tissues of SPX-KO and GALR2-cKO mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed the recruitment of p-CREB to the proximal promoter regions of KCNJ2 and SLN. Finally, spexin treatment suppressed CREB signaling, decreased I(K1) current and decreased intracellular Ca(2+) overload, which thus reduced the inducibility of AF in Ang-II-infused mice. CONCLUSIONS: Spexin reduces atrial fibrillation susceptibility by inhibiting CREB phosphorylation and thus downregulating KCNJ2 and SLN transcription by GALR2 receptor. The spexin/GALR2/CREB signaling pathway represents a novel therapeutic avenue in the development of agents against atrial fibrillation.
The three galanin receptor subtypes (GalR1-3) belong to the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. The widespread distribution of galanin and its receptors in the CNS and PNS and the numerous physiological and pharmacological effects of galanin (for review, cf. Vrontakis, 2002) render the three galanin receptors attractive drug targets. The industrial efforts, however, have not yet resulted in a wealth of receptor subtype specific agonists or antagonists with high affinity and selectivity. The present paper summarizes the properties of the galanin ligands used at the end of 2004 in the ca. 2000 publications and complements their pharmacological characterization with new data.
The heteroreceptor complexes present a novel biological principle for signal integration. These complexes and their allosteric receptor-receptor interactions are bidirectional and novel targets for treatment of CNS diseases including mental diseases. The existence of D2R-5-HT2AR heterocomplexes can help explain the anti-schizophrenic effects of atypical antipsychotic drugs not only based on blockade of 5-HT2AR and of D2R in higher doses but also based on blocking the allosteric enhancement of D2R protomer signaling by 5-HT2AR protomer activation. This research opens a new understanding of the integration of DA and 5-HT signals released from DA and 5-HT nerve terminal networks. The biological principle of forming 5-HT and other heteroreceptor complexes in the brain also help understand the mechanism of action for especially the 5-HT hallucinogens, including putative positive effects of e.g., psilocybin and the indicated prosocial and anti-stress actions of MDMA (ecstasy). The GalR1-GalR2 heterodimer and the putative GalR1-GalR2-5-HT1 heteroreceptor complexes are targets for Galanin N-terminal fragment Gal (1-15), a major modulator of emotional networks in models of mental disease. GPCR-receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) heteroreceptor complexes can operate through transactivation of FGFR1 via allosteric mechanisms and indirect interactions over GPCR intracellular pathways involving protein kinase Src which produces tyrosine phosphorylation of the RTK. The exciting discovery was made that several antidepressant drugs such as TCAs and SSRIs as well as the fast-acting antidepressant drug ketamine can directly bind to the TrkB receptor and provide a novel mechanism for their antidepressant actions. Understanding the role of astrocytes and their allosteric receptor-receptor interactions in modulating forebrain glutamate synapses with impact on dorsal raphe-forebrain serotonin neurons is also of high relevance for research on major depressive disorder.
INTRODUCTION: Galanin is a 29/30 amino acid long neuropeptide that is widely expressed in the brains of many mammals. Galanin exerts its biological activities through three different G protein-coupled receptors, GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3. The widespread distribution of galanin and its receptors in the CNS and the various physiological and pharmacological effects of galanin make the galanin receptors attractive drug targets. AREAS COVERED: This review provides an overview of the role of galanin and its receptors in the CNS, the involvement of the galaninergic system in various neurological diseases and the development of new galanin receptor-specific ligands. EXPERT OPINION: Recent advances and novel approaches in migrating the directions of subtype-selective ligand development and chemical modifications of the peptide backbone highlight the importance of the galanin neurochemical system as a potential target for drug development.
As one of the most important elements in our body, zinc plays a part in both the pathophysiology of depression and the antidepressant response. Patients suffering from major depression show significantly reduced zinc levels, which are normalized following successful antidepressant treatment. Recent studies have shown the interaction between zinc, GPR39 and neuropeptides, including galanin and neuropeptide Y (NPY). The zinc-sensing receptor GPR39 forms heterotrimers with 5-HT(1A) and the galanin receptor GalR(1) upon their co-expression in mammalian cells. The oligomerization of these heterotrimers is regulated by the zinc concentration, and this may have an influence on depressive-like behavior. The antidepressant-like effect of zinc is linked to elevated levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in brain structures associated with emotion, such as the hippocampus and the amygdala. BDNF regulates neuropeptides, including NPY, cholecystokinin (CCK), and substance P or galanin, which are also implicated in mood disorders. This review focuses for the first time on the interaction between zinc, the GPR39 zinc receptor, BDNF and selected neuropeptides in terms of depression in order to determine its possible role in the neuropharmacology of that illness.
The presence of Galanin and Neuropeptide Y and/or their receptors in several areas of the brain involved in memory, mood, cardiovascular control and food intake indicates that Galanin, and Neuropeptide Y could equilibrate the physiological actions of each other. There is evidence for the existence of interactions between Galanin Receptor and Neuropeptide Y Receptor in the nucleus of the solitarii tract (NTS), hypothalamus and dorsal raphe nucleus probably taking place with the formation of heteromers between Galanin Receptor and Neuropeptide Y Y1 Receptor. The galanin fragment (Gal 1-15) preferring receptors may instead be formed by the GalR1-GalR2 heteromer which in the NTS may interact with Neuropeptide Y Y2 receptors. These receptor heteromers may be one key molecular mechanism for Galanin and its N-terminal fragment (Galanin 1-15) to modulate the function of different types of glia-neuronal networks in the CNS, especially the emotional, metabolic and cardiovascular networks.
This special issue is based on a mini-symposium in the area of neurosciences with the title "Understanding the role of heteroreceptor complexes in the central nervous system" held at the Nobel Forum, Karolinska Institutet on December 17th, 2012, organized by Kjell Fuxe, Dasiel O. Borroto-Escuela and Luigi F. Agnati. It consists of seven mini-reviews in the field receptor heteromers. The early work on negative cooperativity and neuropeptide-monoamine receptor-receptor interactions in the central nervous system gave the first indications of the existence of homomers and heteromers of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR), respectively, and the GPCR field began to expand from monomers into dimers and receptor mosaics (higher-order dimers). It was underlined that the existence of receptor heteromers with allosteric receptor-receptor interactions increases the diversity and bias of GPCR recognition and signalling. The molecular phenomenon of allosteric receptor-receptor interactions is proposed to give a better understanding of brain function through molecular integration of signals. An alteration in specific receptor-receptor interactions is in fact considered to play a role in pathogenic mechanisms leading to several diseases, inter alia Parkinson's disease, hypertension, schizophrenia, addiction and depression. It is a new principle in molecular medicine. Therefore, pharmacological targeting of receptor-receptor interactions in heteromers will become an important area for developing more selective drugs with reduced side-effects including heterobivalent compounds and optimal types of combined treatments. In other words , it will lead to novel strategies for treatment, and finally novel drugs for treatment of disease. The first mini-review by Dr. Tena-Campus and colleagues introduces the field of GPCR oligomerization as emerging signalling units with new opportunities for drug design and discusses the technologies involved for detection of receptor heteromers. Then the issue moves into examples of receptor-receptor interactions in the DA and neuropeptide field. Dr. Van Craenenbroeck and colleagues presents an article on the role of dimerization in the biogenesis of DA D4 receptors and thus in their maturation. Dr. Zaida Diaz-Cabiale and colleagues describe the existence of galanin receptor-neuropeptide Y receptor interactions in the brain including galanin receptor-neuropeptide Y Y1 interactions in the brain stem. Indications are obtained that the receptor target for galanin fragment 1-15 is instead a GalR1-GalR2 heteromer. Then the special issue enters into the role of receptor-receptor interactions in putative striatal GPCR heteromers in Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. Dr. Beggiato and colleagues discuss the role of antagonistic adenosine A2A-D2 receptorreceptor interactions in the striato-pallidal GABA neurons and their relevance for treatment of Parkinson's disease. They give the rationale for the introduction of A2A receptor antagonists in clinical trials in this disease based on these antagonistic receptor- receptor interactions which become even more strongly developed in animal models of Parkinson's disease. Dr. Luca Ferraro and colleagues instead discuss in detail the antagonistic Neurotensin NTS1-dopamine D2 receptor-receptor interactions in putative receptor heteromers in the dorsal and ventral striatum. Their involvement in striato-pallidal GABA and mesocorticolimbic DA communication is discussed with focus on their relevance for Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia and their treatments. Dr. Di Liberto and colleagues deal with the role of receptor-receptor interactions in brain trophism and plasticity with focus on interactions between G protein-coupled receptor-Receptor Tyrosine Kinase, specially the cholinergic and fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1). mAChR-FGFR1 interactions are indicated leading to transactivation of FGFR1 with potential relevance for cognition. Luigi Agnati and colleagues in the last paper of this special issue suggest a unified perspective for integrative brain actions through " neurosemeiotics" and " free energy minimization". Especially the Bio-semeiotics concept of "adaptor" may involve the receptor-receptor interactions in heteroreceptor complexes. Through such "adaptors" a code may be produced that give meaning to the sensory stimuli reaching the cortical regions of the brain . We hope the readers will find the articles in this special issue of interest and may give some inspiration to enter this exciting field of receptor research in the CNS which opens up a novel understanding of the molecular events that may lead to neurological and mental diseases and offer novel strategies for their treatments. The editors are grateful to the authors for their fine contributions to this special issue.
Galanin, a neuropeptide widely expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems and in the endocrine system, has been shown to regulate numerous physiological and pathological processes through interactions with three G-protein-coupled receptors, GalR1 through GalR3. Over the past decade, some of the receptor subtype-specific effects have been elucidated through pharmacological studies using subtype selective ligands, as well as through molecular approaches involving knockout animals. In this chapter, we summarize the current data which constitute the basis of targeting GalR1, GalR2, and GalR3 for the treatment of various human diseases and pathological conditions, including seizure, Alzheimer's disease, mood disorders, anxiety, alcohol intake in addiction, metabolic diseases, pain and solid tumors.
BACKGROUND: Galanin (GAL) constitutes a family of neuropeptides composed of four peptides: (i) galanin (GAL), (ii) galanin-message associated peptide (GAMP), (iii) galanin-like peptide (GALP), and (iv) alarin. GAL contains 29/30 amino acids, and its biological action occurs through the interactions with its various receptors (GALR1, GALR2, and GALR3). The neuropeptide GAL regulates several physiological and pathophysiological functions in the central nervous system, the peripheral nervous system, and the peripheral organs. GAL is secreted mainly by oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and the gastrointestinal tract, and its effect depends on the interaction with its different receptors. These receptors are expressed mainly in the central, peripheral nervous systems and the intestines. OBJECTIVE: The present review evaluates the role of GAL family in inflammatory diseases. An overview is given of the signaling and pharmacological effects due to the interaction between GAL and GALR in different cell types. The potential use of GAL as a therapeutic resource is critically discussed. CONCLUSION: GAL is suggested to have an anti-inflammatory function in some situations and a proinflammatory function in others. The literature on GAL is controversial and currently not conclusive. This could be due to the complexity of the metabolic network signaling induced by the interactions between GAL and GALR. In the next future, GAL might be a promising therapeutic resource for several diseases, but its practical use for disease control is presently not advisable.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is a devastating cerebrovascular disease. Neuronal apoptosis plays an important pathological role in early brain injury after SAH. Galanin receptor 1 (GalR1) activation was recently shown to be anti-apoptotic in the setting of ischemic stroke. This study aimed to explore the anti-neuronal apoptosis effect of GalR1 activation after SAH, as well as the underlying mechanisms. GalR1 CRISPR and GalR1 selective agonist, M617, was administered, respectively. Extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) inhibitor (U0126) and glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK3-beta) CRISPR were administered to investigate the involvement of the ERK/GSK3-beta pathway in GalR1-mediated neuroprotection after SAH. Outcome assessments included neurobehavioral tests, western blot, and immunohistochemistry. The results showed that endogenous ligand galanin (Gal) and GalR1 were markedly increased in the ipsilateral brain hemisphere at 12 h and 24 h after SAH. GalR1 were expressed mainly in neurons, but expression was also observed in some astrocytes and microglia. GalR1 CRISPR knockdown exacerbated neurological deficits and neuronal apoptosis 24 h after SAH. Moreover, activation of GalR1 with M617 significantly improved short- and long-term neurological deficits but decreased neuronal apoptosis after SAH. Furthermore, GalR1 activation dysregulated the protein levels of phosphorylated ERK and GSK-3beta, but downregulated the phosphorylated Tat-interactive protein 60 (TIP60) and cleaved caspase-3 at 24 h after SAH. GalR1 CRISPR, U0126, and GSK-3beta CRISPR abolished the beneficial effects of GalR1 activation at 24 h after SAH in rats. Collectively, the present study demonstrated that activation of GalR1 using M617 attenuated neuronal apoptosis through the ERK/GSK-3beta/TIP60 pathway after SAH in rats. GalR1 may serve as a promising therapeutic target for SAH patients.
Knowledge gaps that limit the development of therapies for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) concern various environmental factors that impact clinical characteristics. Circadian dysrhythmia contributes to glycometabolic and reproductive hallmarks of PCOS. Here, we illustrated the amelioration of Limosilactobacillus reuteri (L. reuteri) on biorhythm disorder-ignited dyslipidemia of PCOS via a microbiota-metabolite-liver axis. A rat model of long-term (8 weeks) darkness treatment was used to mimic circadian dysrhythmia-induced PCOS. Hepatic transcriptomics certified by in vitro experiments demonstrated that increased hepatic galanin receptor 1 (GALR1) due to darkness exposure functioned as a critical upstream factor in the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B pathway to suppress nuclear receptors subfamily 1, group D, member 1 (NR1D1) and promoted sterol regulatory element binding protein 1 (SREBP1), inducing lipid accumulation in the liver. Further investigations figured out a restructured microbiome-metabolome network following L. reuteri administration to protect darkness rats against dyslipidemia. Notably, L. reuteri intervention resulted in the decrease of Clostridium sensu stricto 1 and Ruminococcaceae UCG-010 as well as gut microbiota-derived metabolite capric acid, which could further inhibit GALR1-NR1D1-SREBP1 pathway in the liver. In addition, GALR antagonist M40 reproduced similar ameliorative effects as L. reuteri to protect against dyslipidemia. While exogenous treatment of capric acid restrained the protective effects of L. reuteri in circadian disruption-induced PCOS through inhibiting GALR1-dependent hepatic lipid metabolism. These findings purport that L. reuteri could serve for circadian disruption-associated dyslipidemia. Manipulation of L. reuteri-capric acid-GALR1 axis paves way for clinical therapeutic strategies to prevent biorhythm disorder-ignited dyslipidemia in PCOS women.
The neuropeptide galanin is reported to attenuate opioid withdrawal symptoms, potentially by reducing neuronal hyperactivity in the noradrenergic locus coeruleus (LC) via galanin receptor 1 (GalR1). We evaluated this mechanism by using RNAscope in situ hybridization to characterize GalR1 mRNA distribution in the dorsal pons and to compare galanin and GalR1 mRNA expression in tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (TH+) LC cells at baseline and following chronic morphine or precipitated withdrawal. We then used genetically altered mouse lines and pharmacology to test whether noradrenergic galanin (NE-Gal) modulates withdrawal symptoms. RNAscope revealed that, while GalR1 signal was evident in the dorsal pons, 80.7% of the signal was attributable to TH- neurons outside the LC. Galanin and TH mRNA were abundant in LC cells at baseline and were further increased by withdrawal, whereas low basal GalR1 mRNA expression was unaltered by chronic morphine or withdrawal. Naloxone-precipitated withdrawal symptoms in mice lacking NE-Gal (Gal(cKO-Dbh) ) were largely similar to WT littermates, indicating that loss of NE-Gal does not exacerbate withdrawal. Complementary experiments using NE-Gal overexpressor mice (NE-Gal OX) and systemic administration of the galanin receptor agonist galnon revealed that increasing galanin signaling also failed to alter behavioral withdrawal, while suppressing noradrenergic transmission with the alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonist clonidine attenuated multiple symptoms. These results indicate that galanin does not acutely attenuate precipitated opioid withdrawal via an LC-specific mechanism, which has important implications for the general role of galanin in regulation of somatic and affective opioid responses and LC activity.
Diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain (DPNP) is a distal spontaneous pain, caused by lesion of sensory neurons and accompanied by depression and anxiety frequently, which reduce life quality of patients and increase society expenditure. To date, antidepressants, serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors and anticonvulsants are addressed as first-line therapy to DPNP, alone or jointly. It is urgently necessary to develop novel agents to treat DPNP and its complications. Evidences indicate that neuropeptide galanin can regulate multiple physiologic and pathophysiological processes. Pain, depression and anxiety may upregulate galanin expression. In return, galanin can modulate depression, anxiety, pain threshold and pain behaviors. This article provides a new insight into regulative effects of galanin and its subtype receptors on antidepressant, antianxiety and against DPNP. Through activating GALR1, galanin reinforces depression-like and anxiogenic-like behaviors, but exerts antinociceptive roles. While via activating GALR2, galanin is referred to as anti-depressive and anti-anxiotropic compounds, and at low and high concentration facilitates and inhibits nociceptor activity, respectively. The mechanism of the galanin roles is relative to increase in K(+) currents and decrease in Ca(2+) currents, as well as neurotrophic and neuroprotective roles. These data are helpful to develop novel drugs to treat DPNP and its complications.
The pathophysiology of depression remains unclear, but involves disturbances in brain monoaminergic transmission. Current antidepressant drugs, which act by enhancing this type of neurotransmission, have limited therapeutic efficacy in a number of patients, and also cause serious side-effects, which limits their compliance. Increasing evidence suggests that neuropeptides, including galanin, can be of relevance in mood disorders. Galanin is co-expressed with and modulates noradrenaline and serotonin transmission, both implicated in depression. Pharmacological and genetic studies suggest a role for galanin in depression-like behaviour in rodents, involving specific receptor subtypes. Thus, stimulation of GalR1 and/or GalR3 receptors results in depression-like phenotype, while activation of the GalR2 receptor reduces depression-like behaviour in the rat. These findings suggest that galanin receptor subtypes may represent novel targets for the development of antidepressant drugs.
Galanin, a neuropeptide widely expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems and in the endocrine system, has been shown to regulate numerous physiological and pathological processes through interactions with three G-protein-coupled receptors, GalR1 through GalR3. Over the past decade, some of the receptor subtype-specific effects have been elucidated through pharmacological studies using subtype selective ligands, as well as through molecular approaches involving knockout animals. In the present review, we summarize the current data which constitute the basis of targeting GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3 for the treatment of various human diseases and pathological conditions, including seizure, Alzheimer's disease, mood disorders, anxiety, alcohol intake in addiction, metabolic diseases, pain and solid tumors.
The pathophysiology of depression remains unclear, but involves disturbances in brain monoaminergic transmission. Current antidepressant drugs, which act by enhancing this type of transmission, have limited therapeutic efficacy in a number of patients, and not rarely serious side-effects. Increasing evidence suggests that neuropeptides, including galanin, can be of relevance in mood disorders. Galanin is coexpressed with and modulates noradrenaline and serotonin systems, both implicated in depression. Pharmacological and genetic studies have suggested a role for galanin in depression-like behaviour in rodents, whereby the receptor subtype involved appears to play an important role. Thus, stimulation of GalR1 and/or GalR3 receptors results in depression-like phenotype, while activation of the GalR2 receptor attenuates depression-like behaviour. These findings suggest that galanin receptor subtypes represent targets for development of novel antidepressant drugs.
Cerebral cortex contains few if any galanin neurons, but receives galanin-ergic inputs from subcortical areas. Apart from our earlier study on the response to cortical spreading depression, little is known about the presence and function of galanin in normal or injured cortex and to gain more insight into its possible roles, we investigated the temporal effects of focal ischemia on the expression of galanin and galanin receptors (GalRs). Focal ischemia induced in the rat by unilateral middle cerebral artery occlusion increased galanin and GalR1 mRNAs in penumbral/undamaged areas on the first and second day post-ischemia, while increased GalR2 mRNA was observed in the same regions only on the second day. Immunohistochemical studies revealed galanin immunoreactive neurons in the frontal/ cingulate cortex and abundant galanin-immunoreactivity in nerve axons/fibres within the penumbral areas, between the third and the seventh day after ischemia. Galanin mRNA and immunoreactivity was also increased in a population of small cells thought to be NG2-positive oligodendrocyte precursors. Up-regulation of galanin and GalRs in various cell populations following severe ischemic injury further demonstrates the marked plasticity of galanin and GalR1/2 expression after brain injury, and together with data reported elsewhere in this volume, suggests a functional role for galanin signalling in such pathophysiological conditions.
Many tumours of neuroendocrine origin, and also an increasing number of non-neuroendocrine cancers, have been shown to express neuropeptides and/or their corresponding receptors. These peptides and receptors represent the molecular basis for in vivo diagnostic or therapeutic targeting of cancer with radiolabelled or cytotoxic peptide analogues. Galanin is a classical neuropeptide that functions in diverse physiological processes such as food intake, nociception, and blood pressure regulation, and it can also act as a growth factor for neurons. Expression of galanin peptide has been detected in pheochromocytoma, pituitary adenoma, neuroblastic tumours, gastrointestinal cancer, squamous cell carcinoma, brain tumours, melanoma, breast cancer and embryonal carcinoma. In several cancers and tumour cell lines expression of galanin receptors--three are known (GalR1, 2 and 3)--has been shown as well. Expression of peptide or receptors has been correlated with tumour stage or subtypes of pituitary adenoma, neuroblastic tumours, colon carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. Galanin treatment has tumour-reducing effects in murine models of gastrointestinal cancer, whereas in animal experiments on adenoma formation, galanin seems to act as a growth factor, promoting both proliferation and tumour formation. In cell culture experiments on tumour cell lines, galanin has shown growth promoting or inhibiting effects. Activation of GalR1 is generally anti-proliferative, whereas activation of GalR2 can have pro- or anti-proliferative effects. Therefore, galanin and its receptors are promising targets for diagnosis and treatment of several types of tumours.
The significance of transient neuropeptide expression during postnatal brain development is unknown. Here, we show that galanin expression in the ventrobasal thalamus of infant mice coincides with whisker map development and modulates subcortical circuit wiring. Time-resolved neuroanatomy and single-nucleus RNA-seq identified complementary galanin (Gal) and galanin receptor 1 (Galr1) expression in the ventrobasal thalamus and the principal sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve (Pr5), respectively. Somatodendritic galanin release from the ventrobasal thalamus was time-locked to the first postnatal week, when Gal(1)R(+) Pr5 afferents form glutamatergic (Slc17a6(+)) synapses for the topographical whisker map to emerge. RNAi-mediated silencing of galanin expression disrupted glutamatergic synaptogenesis, which manifested as impaired whisker-dependent exploratory behaviors in infant mice, with behavioral abnormalities enduring into adulthood. Pharmacological probing of receptor selectivity in vivo corroborated that target recognition and synaptogenesis in the thalamus, at least in part, are reliant on agonist-induced Gal(1)R activation in inbound excitatory axons. Overall, we suggest a neuropeptide-dependent developmental mechanism to contribute to the topographical specification of a fundamental sensory neurocircuit in mice.
Neuropeptides are auxiliary messenger molecules that always co-exist in nerve cells with one or more small molecule (classic) neurotransmitters. Neuropeptides act both as transmitters and trophic factors, and play a role particularly when the nervous system is challenged, as by injury, pain or stress. Here neuropeptides and coexistence in mammals are reviewed, but with special focus on the 29/30 amino acid galanin and its three receptors GalR1, -R2 and -R3. In particular, galanin's role as a co-transmitter in both rodent and human noradrenergic locus coeruleus (LC) neurons is addressed. Extensive experimental animal data strongly suggest a role for the galanin system in depression-like behavior. The translational potential of these results was tested by studying the galanin system in postmortem human brains, first in normal brains, and then in a comparison of five regions of brains obtained from depressed people who committed suicide, and from matched controls. The distribution of galanin and the four galanin system transcripts in the normal human brain was determined, and selective and parallel changes in levels of transcripts and DNA methylation for galanin and its three receptors were assessed in depressed patients who committed suicide: upregulation of transcripts, e.g., for galanin and GalR3 in LC, paralleled by a decrease in DNA methylation, suggesting involvement of epigenetic mechanisms. It is hypothesized that, when exposed to severe stress, the noradrenergic LC neurons fire in bursts and release galanin from their soma/dendrites. Galanin then acts on somato-dendritic, inhibitory galanin autoreceptors, opening potassium channels and inhibiting firing. The purpose of these autoreceptors is to act as a 'brake' to prevent overexcitation, a brake that is also part of resilience to stress that protects against depression. Depression then arises when the inhibition is too strong and long lasting - a maladaption, allostatic load, leading to depletion of NA levels in the forebrain. It is suggested that disinhibition by a galanin antagonist may have antidepressant activity by restoring forebrain NA levels. A role of galanin in depression is also supported by a recent candidate gene study, showing that variants in genes for galanin and its three receptors confer increased risk of depression and anxiety in people who experienced childhood adversity or recent negative life events. In summary, galanin, a neuropeptide coexisting in LC neurons, may participate in the mechanism underlying resilience against a serious and common disorder, MDD. Existing and further results may lead to an increased understanding of how this illness develops, which in turn could provide a basis for its treatment.
