Glicentin-related polypeptide; Glucagon plays a key role in glucose metabolism and homeostasis. Regulates blood glucose by increasing gluconeogenesis and decreasing glycolysis. A counterregulatory hormone of insulin, raises plasma glucose levels in response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia. Plays an important role in initiating and maintaining hyperglycemic conditions in diabetes. GLP-2 stimulates intestinal growth and up-regulates villus height in the small intestine, concomitant with increased crypt cell proliferation and decreased enterocyte apoptosis. The gastrointestinal tract, fro [...] 
OBJECTIVE: Pharmacological strategies that engage multiple mechanisms-of-action have demonstrated synergistic benefits for metabolic disease in preclinical models. One approach, concurrent activation of the glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP), and glucagon (Gcg) receptors (i.e. triagonism), combines the anorectic and insulinotropic activities of GLP-1 and GIP with the energy expenditure effect of glucagon. While the efficacy of triagonism in preclinical models is known, the relative contribution of GcgR activation remains unassessed. This work aims to addresses that central question. METHODS: Herein, we detail the design of unimolecular peptide triagonists with an empirically optimized receptor potency ratio. These optimized peptide triagonists employ a protraction strategy permitting once-weekly human dosing. Additionally, we assess the effects of these peptides on weight-reduction, food intake, glucose control, and energy expenditure in an established DIO mouse model compared to clinically relevant GLP-1R agonists (e.g. semaglutide) and dual GLP-1R/GIPR agonists (e.g. tirzepatide). RESULTS: Optimized triagonists normalize body weight in DIO mice and enhance energy expenditure in a manner superior to that of GLP-1R mono-agonists and GLP-1R/GIPR co-agonists. CONCLUSIONS: These pre-clinical data suggest unimolecular poly-pharmacology as an effective means to target multiple mechanisms contributing to obesity and further implicate GcgR activation as the differentiating factor between incretin receptor mono- or dual-agonists and triagonists.
The preproglucagon gene (Gcg) is expressed by specific enteroendocrine cells (L-cells) of the intestinal mucosa, pancreatic islet alpha-cells, and a discrete set of neurons within the nucleus of the solitary tract. Gcg encodes multiple peptides including glucagon, glucagon-like peptide-1, glucagon-like peptide-2, oxyntomodulin, and glicentin. Of these, glucagon and GLP-1 have received the most attention because of important roles in glucose metabolism, involvement in diabetes and other disorders, and application to therapeutics. The generally accepted model is that GLP-1 improves glucose homeostasis indirectly via stimulation of nutrient-induced insulin release and by reducing glucagon secretion. Yet the body of literature surrounding GLP-1 physiology reveals an incompletely understood and complex system that includes peripheral and central GLP-1 actions to regulate energy and glucose homeostasis. On the other hand, glucagon is established principally as a counterregulatory hormone, increasing in response to physiological challenges that threaten adequate blood glucose levels and driving glucose production to restore euglycemia. However, there also exists a potential role for glucagon in regulating energy expenditure that has recently been suggested in pharmacological studies. It is also becoming apparent that there is cross-talk between the proglucagon derived-peptides, e.g., GLP-1 inhibits glucagon secretion, and some additive or synergistic pharmacological interaction between GLP-1 and glucagon, e.g., dual glucagon/GLP-1 agonists cause more weight loss than single agonists. In this review, we discuss the physiological functions of both glucagon and GLP-1 by comparing and contrasting how these peptides function, variably in concert and opposition, to regulate glucose and energy homeostasis.
Unimolecular triple incretins, combining the activity of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), and glucagon (GCG), have demonstrated reduction in body weight and improved glucose control in rodent models. We developed SAR441255, a synthetic peptide agonist of the GLP-1, GCG, and GIP receptors, structurally based on the exendin-4 sequence. SAR441255 displays high potency with balanced activation of all three target receptors. In animal models, metabolic outcomes were superior to results with a dual GLP-1/GCG receptor agonist. Preclinical in vivo positron emission tomography imaging demonstrated SAR441255 binding to GLP-1 and GCG receptors. In healthy subjects, SAR441255 improved glycemic control during a mixed-meal tolerance test and impacted biomarkers for GCG and GIP receptor activation. Single doses of SAR441255 were well tolerated. The results demonstrate that integrating GIP activity into dual GLP-1 and GCG receptor agonism provides improved effects on weight loss and glycemic control while buffering the diabetogenic risk of chronic GCG receptor agonism.
Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that gene alterations play a crucial role in LUAD development, progression, and prognosis. The present study aimed to identify the hub genes associated with LUAD. In the present study, we used TCGA database to screen the hub genes. Then, we validated the results by GEO datasets. Finally, we used cBioPortal, UALCAN, qRT-PCR, HPA database, TCGA database, and Kaplan-Meier plotter database to estimate the gene mutation, gene transcription, protein expression, clinical features of hub genes in patients with LUAD. A total of 5930 DEGs were screened out in TCGA database. Enrichment analysis revealed that DEGs were involved in the transcriptional misregulation in cancer, viral carcinogenesis, cAMP signaling pathway, calcium signaling pathway, and ECM-receptor interaction. The combining results of MCODE and CytoHubba showed that ADCY8, ADRB2, CALCA, GCG, GNGT1, and NPSR1 were hub genes. Then, we verified the above results by GSE118370, GSE136043, and GSE140797 datasets. Compared with normal lung tissues, the expression levels of ADCY8 and ADRB2 were lower in LUAD tissues, but the expression levels of CALCA, GCG, GNGT1, and NPSR1 were higher. In the prognosis analyses, the low expression of ADCY8 and ADRB2 and the high expression of CALCA, GCG, GNGT1, and NPSR1 were correlated with poor OS and poor PFS. The significant differences in the relationship of the expression of 6 hub genes and clinical features were observed. In conclusion, 6 hub genes will not only contribute to elucidating the pathogenesis of LUAD and may be potential therapeutic targets for LUAD.
Glucose homeostasis, regulated by glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucagon (GCG) is critical to human health. Several multi-targeting agonists at GIPR, GLP-1R or GCGR, developed to maximize metabolic benefits with reduced side-effects, are in clinical trials to treat type 2 diabetes and obesity. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which tirzepatide, a GIPR/GLP-1R dual agonist, and peptide 20, a GIPR/GLP-1R/GCGR triagonist, manifest their multiplexed pharmacological actions over monoagonists such as semaglutide, we determine cryo-electron microscopy structures of tirzepatide-bound GIPR and GLP-1R as well as peptide 20-bound GIPR, GLP-1R and GCGR. The structures reveal both common and unique features for the dual and triple agonism by illustrating key interactions of clinical relevance at the near-atomic level. Retention of glucagon function is required to achieve such an advantage over GLP-1 monotherapy. Our findings provide valuable insights into the structural basis of functional versatility of tirzepatide and peptide 20.
Autosomal dominant oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an adult-onset disease with worldwide distribution. It usually presents in the fifth or sixth decades with progressive dysphagia, eyelid ptosis, and proximal limb weakness. Unique intranuclear filament inclusions in skeletal muscle fibers are its morphological hallmark. Surgical correction of the ptosis and cricopharyngeal myotomy are the only therapies available. Autosomal dominant OPMD is caused by short (GCG)8-13 riplet-repeat expansions in the polyadenylation binding protein 2 (PABP2) gene, which is localized in chromosome 14q11. Autosomal recessive OPMD is caused by a double dose of a (GCG)7 PABP2 allele. The GCG expansions cause lengthening of a predicted polyalanine tract in the protein. The expanded polyalanine domains may cause polyalanine nuclear toxicity by accumulating as nondegradable nuclear filaments.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is a product of the Gip gene and acts as an incretin hormone in mammals. Gip is most closely related to the proglucagon (Gcg) and Exendin genes and diverged from these very early in vertebrate evolution. In mammals, GIP acts through its specific receptor, encoded by the Gipr gene, which belongs to a subfamily of 7-transmembrane G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) genes that also includes those for the proglucagon-derived peptides (Gcgr, Glp1r, and Glp2r), and the receptor for Exendin (Grlr). Gip, Gipr, Exendin, and Grlr genes are found in species from most vertebrate classes. While most species that have a Gip gene also have a Gipr gene, two classes of vertebrates, cartilaginous fish and birds, retain conserved Gip genes but lack Gipr genes. This raises the possibility the GIP signals through other receptors in some vertebrates. Exendin genes and the gene for its receptor, Grlr, are also found in diverse vertebrates, with the notable exception of mammals. Both GIP and Exendin likely have important roles in vertebrate physiology, but their roles are either dispensable or can be replaced by other hormones.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)-based drugs have been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and are widely used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and obesity. More recent developments of unimolecular peptides targeting multiple incretin-related receptors ("multi-agonists"), including the glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) receptor (GIPR) and the glucagon (Gcg) receptor (GcgR), have emerged with the aim of enhancing drug benefits. In this study, we utilized human and mouse microglial cell lines, HMC3 and IMG, respectively, together with the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell line as cellular models of neurodegeneration. Using these cell lines, we studied the neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory capacity of several multi-agonists in comparison with a single GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonist, exendin-4. Our data demonstrate that the two selected GLP-1R/GIPR dual agonists and a GLP-1R/GIPR/GcgR triple agonist not only have neurotrophic and neuroprotective effects but also have anti-neuroinflammatory properties, as indicated by the decreased microglial cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) expression, nitrite production, and pro-inflammatory cytokine release. In addition, our results indicate that these multi-agonists have the potential to outperform commercially available single GLP-1R agonists in neurodegenerative disease treatment.
2022 corresponds to the 100th anniversary of the discovery of glucagon. This TimeCapsule aims to recall the main steps leading to the discovery, characterisation, and clinical importance of the so-called second pancreatic hormone. We describe the early historical findings in basic research (ie, discovery, purification, structure, alpha-cell origin, radioimmunoassay, glucagon gene [GCG], and glucagon receptor [GLR]), in which three future Nobel Prize laureates were actively involved. Considered as an anti-insulin hormone, glucagon was rapidly used to treat insulin-induced hypoglycaemic coma episodes in people with type 1 diabetes. A key step in the story of glucagon was the discovery of its role and the role of alpha cells in the physiology and pathophysiology (ie, paracrinopathy) of type 2 diabetes. This concept led to the design of different strategies targeting glucagon, among which GLP-1 receptor (GLP1R) agonists were a major breakthrough, and combination of inhibition of glucagon secretion with stimulation of insulin secretion (both in a glucose-dependent manner). Taking advantage of the glucagon-induced increase in energy metabolism, biased coagonists were developed. Besides the GLP-1 receptor, these coagonists also target the glucagon receptor to further promote weight loss. Thus, the 100-year story of glucagon has most probably not come to an end.
AIMS: Human epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) plays a crucial role in the development and progression of coronary artery disease, atrial fibrillation, and heart failure. Microscopically, EAT is composed of adipocytes, nerve tissues, inflammatory, stromovascular, and immune cells. Epicardial adipose tissue is a white adipose tissue, albeit it also has brown fat-like or beige fat-like features. No muscle fascia divides EAT and myocardium; this allows a direct interaction and crosstalk between the epicardial fat and the myocardium. Thus, it might be a therapeutic target for pharmaceutical compounds acting on G-protein-coupled receptors, such as those for glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), glucagon (GCG), and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), whose selective stimulation with innovative drugs has demonstrated beneficial cardiovascular effects. The precise mechanism of these novel drugs and their tissue and cellular target(s) need to be better understood. We evaluate whether human EAT expresses GIP, GCG, and GLP-1 receptors and whether their presence is related to EAT transcriptome. We also investigated protein expression and cell-type localization specifically for GIP receptor (GIPR) and glucagon receptor (GCGR). METHODS AND RESULTS: Epicardial adipose tissue samples were collected from 33 patients affected by cardiovascular diseases undergoing open heart surgery (90.9% males, age 67.2 +/- 10.5 years mean +/- SD). Microarray and immunohistochemistry analyses were performed. Microarray analysis showed that GIPR and GCGR messenger ribonucleic acids (mRNAs) are expressed in EAT, beyond confirming the previously found GLP-1 [3776 +/- 1377 arbitrary unit (A.U.), 17.77 +/- 14.91 A.U., and 3.41 +/- 2.27 A.U., respectively]. The immunohistochemical analysis consistently indicates that GIPR and GCGR are expressed in EAT, mainly in macrophages, isolated, and in crown-like structures. In contrast, only some mature adipocytes of different sizes showed cytoplasmic immunostaining, similar to endothelial cells and pericytes in the capillaries and pre-capillary vascular structures. Notably, EAT GIPR is statistically associated with the low expression of genes involved in free fatty acid (FFA) oxidation and transport and those promoting FFA biosynthesis and adipogenesis (P < 0.01). Epicardial adipose tissue GCGR, in turn, is related to genes involved in FFA transport, mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation, and white-to-brown adipocyte differentiation, in addition to genes involved in the reduction of fatty acid biosynthesis and adipogenesis (P < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Having reported the expression of the GLP-1 receptor previously, here, we showed that GIPR and GCGR similarly present at mRNA and protein levels in human EAT, particularly in macrophages and partially adipocytes, suggesting these G-protein-coupled receptors as pharmacological targets on the ongoing innovative drugs, which seem cardiometabolically healthy well beyond their effects on glucose and body weight.
Abnormal increases in glucagon (GCG) are the primary cause of type II diabetes mellitus. When GCG interacts with a glucagon receptor (GCGR), GCG can increase the blood glucose level. In this paper, a compound that could interfere with the binding of GCG and GCGR to inhibit the increase of blood glucose was investigated. First, molecular docking was used to conduct preliminary screening of compounds whose active components could combine with GCGR by AutoDock Vina. The binding of the receptor-ligand complex was analyzed by PyMOL. Results showed that dauricine could tightly bind to the receptor pocket. Second, the plasmid pcDNA3.1(+)-GCGR containing the target gene was transfected into HEK293 cells for expression, which was the cell model established to screen GCGR antagonist. Dauricine, the lead compound of glucagon receptor antagonist (GRA), was screened using the GRA screening model in vitro. Finally, using [Des-His1, Glu9]-Glucagon amide as the positive control, flow cytometry was used to express the antagonistic effect of the compound. Consequently, dauricine can antagonize the GCGR.
AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Protein kinase CK2 acts as a negative regulator of insulin expression in pancreatic beta cells. This action is mainly mediated by phosphorylation of the transcription factor pancreatic and duodenal homeobox protein 1 (PDX1). In pancreatic alpha cells, PDX1 acts in a reciprocal fashion on glucagon (GCG) expression. Therefore, we hypothesised that CK2 might positively regulate GCG expression in pancreatic alpha cells. METHODS: We suppressed CK2 kinase activity in alphaTC1 cells by two pharmacological inhibitors and by the CRISPR/Cas9 technique. Subsequently, we analysed GCG expression and secretion by real-time quantitative RT-PCR, western blot, luciferase assay, ELISA and DNA pull-down assays. We additionally studied paracrine effects on GCG secretion in pseudoislets, isolated murine islets and human islets. In vivo, we examined the effect of CK2 inhibition on blood glucose levels by systemic and alpha cell-specific CK2 inhibition. RESULTS: We found that CK2 downregulation reduces GCG secretion in the murine alpha cell line alphaTC1 (e.g. from 1094+/-124 ng/l to 459+/-110 ng/l) by the use of the CK2-inhibitor SGC-CK2-1. This was due to a marked decrease in Gcg gene expression through alteration of the binding of paired box protein 6 (PAX6) and transcription factor MafB to the Gcg promoter. The analysis of the underlying mechanisms revealed that both transcription factors are displaced by PDX1. Ex vivo experiments in isolated murine islets and pseudoislets further demonstrated that CK2-mediated reduction in GCG secretion was only slightly affected by the higher insulin secretion after CK2 inhibition. The kidney capsule transplantation model showed the significance of CK2 for GCG expression and secretion in vivo. Finally, CK2 downregulation also reduced the GCG secretion in islets isolated from humans. CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These novel findings not only indicate an important function of protein kinase CK2 for proper GCG expression but also demonstrate that CK2 may be a promising target for the development of novel glucose-lowering drugs.
Peptide hormones encoded by the proglucagon (Gcg) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (Gip) genes are evolutionarily related glucagon-like sequences and act through a subfamily of G-protein-coupled receptors. A better understanding of the evolutionary history of these hormones and receptors should yield insight into their biological functions. The availability of a large number of near-complete vertebrate genome sequences is a powerful resource to address questions concerning the evolution of sequences; here, we utilize these resources to examine the evolution of glucagon-like sequences and their receptors. These studies led to the discovery of novel genes for a glucagon receptor-like receptor (Grlr) and a glucagon-like sequence (exendin) in vertebrates. Both exendin and GRLR have ancient origins, early in vertebrate evolution, but have been lost on the ancestral lineage leading to extant mammals. We also show that exendin and GRLR are both expressed in the brain of the chicken and Xenopus tropicals, results that suggest that the products of these genes function in this tissue. The lack of exendin or Grlr genes in mammals suggests that other genes may have acquired the functions of exendin and Grlr during mammalian evolution.
Mitophagy formed the basis of the original description of autophagy by Christian de Duve when he demonstrated that GCG (glucagon) induced macroautophagic/autophagic turnover of mitochondria in the liver. However, the molecular basis of liver-specific activation of mitophagy by GCG, or its significance for metabolic stress responses in the liver is not understood. Here we show that BNIP3 is required for GCG-induced mitophagy in the liver through interaction with processed LC3B; an interaction that is also necessary to localize LC3B out of the nucleus to cytosolic mitophagosomes in response to nutrient deprivation. Loss of BNIP3-dependent mitophagy caused excess mitochondria to accumulate in the liver, disrupting metabolic zonation within the liver parenchyma, with expansion of zone 1 metabolism at the expense of zone 3 metabolism. These results identify BNIP3 as a regulator of metabolic homeostasis in the liver through its effect on mitophagy and mitochondrial mass distribution.Abbreviations: ASS1, arginosuccinate synthetase; BNIP3, BCL2/adenovirus E1B interacting protein 3; CV, central vein; GCG - glucagon; GLUL, glutamate- ammonia ligase (glutamine synthetase); HCQ, hydroxychloroquine; LIR, LC3-interacting region; MAP1LC3B/LC3B, microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; mtDNA:nucDNA, ratio of mitochondrial DNA to nuclear DNA; PV, periportal vein; TOMM20, translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane protein 20.
cGMP controls many cellular functions ranging from growth, viability, and differentiation to contractility, secretion, and ion transport. The mammalian genome encodes seven transmembrane guanylyl cyclases (GCs), GC-A to GC-G, which mainly modulate submembrane cGMP microdomains. These GCs share a unique topology comprising an extracellular domain, a short transmembrane region, and an intracellular COOH-terminal catalytic (cGMP synthesizing) region. GC-A mediates the endocrine effects of atrial and B-type natriuretic peptides regulating arterial blood pressure/volume and energy balance. GC-B is activated by C-type natriuretic peptide, stimulating endochondral ossification in autocrine way. GC-C mediates the paracrine effects of guanylins on intestinal ion transport and epithelial turnover. GC-E and GC-F are expressed in photoreceptor cells of the retina, and their activation by intracellular Ca(2+)-regulated proteins is essential for vision. Finally, in the rodent system two olfactorial GCs, GC-D and GC-G, are activated by low concentrations of CO2and by peptidergic (guanylins) and nonpeptidergic odorants as well as by coolness, which has implications for social behaviors. In the past years advances in human and mouse genetics as well as the development of sensitive biosensors monitoring the spatiotemporal dynamics of cGMP in living cells have provided novel relevant information about this receptor family. This increased our understanding of the mechanisms of signal transduction, regulation, and (dys)function of the membrane GCs, clarified their relevance for genetic and acquired diseases and, importantly, has revealed novel targets for therapies. The present review aims to illustrate these different features of membrane GCs and the main open questions in this field.
Nitric oxide, bicarbonate, natriuretic peptides (ANP, BNP and CNP), guanylins, uroguanylins and guanylyl cyclase activating proteins (GCAPs) activate a family of enzymes variously called guanyl, guanylyl or guanylate cyclases that catalyze the conversion of guanosine triphosphate to cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and pyrophosphate. Intracellular cyclic GMP is a second messenger that modulates: platelet aggregation, neurotransmission, sexual arousal, gut peristalsis, blood pressure, long bone growth, intestinal fluid secretion, lipolysis, phototransduction, cardiac hypertrophy and oocyte maturation. This review briefly discusses the discovery of cGMP and guanylyl cyclases, then nitric oxide, nitric oxide synthase and soluble guanylyl cyclase are described in slightly greater detail. Finally, the structure, function, and regulation of the individual mammalian single membrane-spanning guanylyl cyclases GC-A, GC-B, GC-C, GC-D, GC-E, GC-F and GC-G are described in greatest detail as determined by biochemical, cell biological and gene-deletion studies.
Strong efforts have been placed on understanding the physiological roles and therapeutic potential of the proglucagon peptide hormones including glucagon, GLP-1 and GLP-2. However, little is known about the extent and magnitude of variability in the amino acid composition of the proglucagon precursor and its mature peptides. Here, we identified 184 unique missense variants in the human proglucagon gene GCG obtained from exome and whole-genome sequencing of more than 450,000 individuals across diverse sub-populations. This provides an unprecedented source of population-wide genetic variation data on missense mutations and insights into the evolutionary constraint spectrum of proglucagon-derived peptides. We show that the stereotypical peptides glucagon, GLP-1 and GLP-2 display fewer evolutionary alterations and are more likely to be functionally affected by genetic variation compared to the rest of the gene products. Elucidating the spectrum of genetic variations and estimating the impact of how a peptide variant may influence human physiology and pathophysiology through changes in ligand binding and/or receptor signalling, are vital and serve as the first important step in understanding variability in glucose homeostasis, amino acid metabolism, intestinal epithelial growth, bone strength, appetite regulation, and other key physiological parameters controlled by these hormones.
The sustainability of groundwater usage faces quality problem caused by anthropogenic activity as well as geogenic contamination. With varied climate zones, geomorphology and geological background, China faces a variety of geogenic contaminated groundwater (GCG) reported known as high TDS, Fe, Mn, As, F, I, NH(4)(+), U, Cr and low I, Se, etc., may still exist some others not fully known yet. The problem of GCG is more significant in northern China due to extensive groundwater usage, arid climate and widespread Holocene strata. High salinity groundwater is mainly distributed in semi-arid/arid northwestern inland basins and coastal areas. Elevated Fe and Mn are frequently concomitant and controlled by redox potential, prevailing in the Sanjiang Plain, Yellow River Basin, and middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River Basin. High As groundwater occurs in reducing aquifer is mainly distributed in the Yellow River, Yangtze River and Huai River Basins as well as the Songnen Plain and Xinjiang. Fluoride is characterized by its areal distribution in northern China in comparison with scatter occurrence in the south. The dissolution of F-bearing minerals as well as evaporation effect both contribute to elevated F. High iodine groundwater mainly distributed in the Yellow-Huai-Hai River Basin and low iodine prevailing in piedmont areas both pose health issues. Iodine is related to decomposition of organic matter (OC) as well as marine origin. Contributed by OC mineralization naturally-occurring NH(4)(+) was found in reducing aquifers. The GCG triggers endemic disease in addition to reduce groundwater resource. The co-occurrence like high TDS and F, As and F are frequently observed posing major challenges for mitigation. Anthropogenic influence like abstraction and pollutant infiltration would alter groundwater flow and the redox condition causing the further evolution of GCG. Identification of GCG should be made in rural areas where private wells prevail to ensure resident's health.
GLP-1 was described as an incretin over 30 years ago. GLP-1 is encoded by the preproglucagon gene (Gcg), which is expressed in the intestine, the pancreas, and the central nervous system. GLP-1 activates GLP-1 receptors (GLP-1r) on the beta-cell to induce insulin secretion in a glucose-dependent manner. GLP-1 also inhibits alpha-cell secretion of glucagon. As few, if any, GLP-1r are expressed on alpha-cells, indirect regulation, via beta- or delta-cell products has been thought to be the primary mechanism by which GLP-1 inhibits glucagon secretion. However, recent work suggests that there is sufficient expression of GLP-1r on alpha-cells for direct regulation as well. Although the predominant source of circulating GLP-1 is the intestine, the alpha-cell becomes a source of GLP-1 when the islet is metabolically stressed. Recent work suggests the possibility that this source of GLP-1 is also be important in regulating nutrient-induced insulin secretion in a paracrine fashion. More work is also accumulating regarding the role of glucagon, another Gcg-derived protein produced by the alpha-cell, in stimulating insulin secretion by acting on GLP-1r. Altogether, these data clearly demonstrate the important role of Gcg-derived peptides in regulating insulin secretion. Because of GLP-1's important role in glucose homeostasis, it has been implicated in the success of bariatric surgery and has been successfully targeted for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. (c) 2020 American Physiological Society. Compr Physiol 10:577-595, 2020.
Characterization of gene expression in pancreatic islets and its alteration in type 2 diabetes (T2D) are vital in understanding islet function and T2D pathogenesis. We leveraged RNA sequencing and genome-wide genotyping in islets from 188 donors to create the Islet Gene View (IGW) platform to make this information easily accessible to the scientific community. Expression data were related to islet phenotypes, diabetes status, other islet-expressed genes, islet hormone-encoding genes and for expression in insulin target tissues. The IGW web application produces output graphs for a particular gene of interest. In IGW, 284 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in T2D donor islets compared with controls. Forty percent of DEGs showed cell-type enrichment and a large proportion significantly co-expressed with islet hormone-encoding genes; glucagon (&lt;i&gt;GCG&lt;/i&gt;, 56%), amylin (&lt;i&gt;IAPP&lt;/i&gt;, 52%), insulin (&lt;i&gt;INS&lt;/i&gt;, 44%), and somatostatin (&lt;i&gt;SST&lt;/i&gt;, 24%). Inhibition of two DEGs, &lt;i&gt;UNC5D&lt;/i&gt; and &lt;i&gt;SERPINE2&lt;/i&gt;, impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and impacted cell survival in a human beta-cell model. The exploratory use of IGW could help designing more comprehensive functional follow-up studies and serve to identify therapeutic targets in T2D.
