Growth hormone secretagogue receptor type 1; Receptor for ghrelin, coupled to G-alpha-11 proteins. Stimulates growth hormone secretion. Binds also other growth hormone releasing peptides (GHRP) (e.g. Met-enkephalin and GHRP-6) as well as non-peptide, low molecular weight secretagogues (e.g. L-692,429, MK- 0677, adenosine).
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Ghrelin is a multifaceted gut hormone that activates its receptor, growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHS-R). Ghrelin's hallmark functions are its stimulatory effects on growth hormone release, food intake and fat deposition. Ghrelin is famously known as the 'hunger hormone'. However, ample recent literature indicates that the functions of ghrelin go well beyond its role as an orexigenic signal. Here, we have reviewed some of the most recent findings on ghrelin and its signalling in animals and humans. RECENT FINDINGS: Ghrelin regulates glucose homeostasis by inhibiting insulin secretion and regulating gluconeogenesis/glycogenolysis. Ghrelin signalling decreases thermogenesis to regulate energy expenditure. Ghrelin improves the survival prognosis of myocardial infarction by reducing sympathetic nerve activity. Ghrelin prevents muscle atrophy by inducing muscle differentiation and fusion. Ghrelin regulates bone formation and metabolism by modulating proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts. SUMMARY: In addition to ghrelin's effects on appetite and adiposity, ghrelin signalling also plays crucial roles in glucose and energy homeostasis, cardioprotection, muscle atrophy and bone metabolism. These multifaceted roles of ghrelin make ghrelin and GHS-R highly attractive targets for drug development. Ghrelin mimetics may be used to treat heart diseases, muscular dystrophy/sarcopenia and osteoporosis; GHS-R antagonists may be used to treat obesity and insulin resistance.
The a 28-amino acid peptide ghrelin was discovered in 1999 as a growth hormone (GH) releasing peptide. Soon after its discovery, ghrelin was found to increase body weight and adiposity by acting on the hypothalamic melanocortinergic system. Subsequently, ghrelin was found to exert a series of metabolic effects, overall testifying ghrelin a pleiotropic nature of broad pharmacological interest. Ghrelin acts through the growth hormone secretagogue-receptor (GHS-R), a seven transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor with high expression in the anterior pituitary, pancreatic islets, thyroid gland, heart and various regions of the brain. Among ghrelins numerous metabolic effects are the most prominent the stimulation of appetite via activation of orexigenic hypothalamic neurocircuits and the food-intake independent stimulation of lipogenesis, which both together lead to an increase in body weight and adiposity. Ghrelin effects beyond the regulation of appetite and GH secretion include the regulation of gut motility, sleep-wake rhythm, taste sensation, reward seeking behaviour, and the regulation of glucose metabolism. The latter received recently increasing recognition because pharmacological inhibition of ghrelin signaling might be of therapeutic value to improve insuin resistance and type 2 diabetes. In this review we highlight the multifaceted nature of ghrelin and summarize its glucoregulatory action and discuss the pharmacological value of ghrelin pathway inhibition for the treatment of glucose intolerance and type 2 diabetes.
Ghrelin is a peptide hormone that was originally isolated from the stomach as the endogenous ligand for the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR). Ghrelin has many functions, including the regulation of appetite and gut motility, growth hormone release from the anterior pituitary and roles in the cardiovascular and immune systems. Ghrelin and its receptor are expressed in a number of cancers and cancer cell lines and may play a role in processes associated with cancer progression, including cell proliferation, apoptosis, and cell invasion and migration.
Small synthetic molecules called growth-hormone secretagogues (GHSs) stimulate the release of growth hormone (GH) from the pituitary. They act through GHS-R, a G-protein-coupled receptor for which the ligand is unknown. Recent cloning of GHS-R strongly suggests that an endogenous ligand for the receptor does exist and that there is a mechanism for regulating GH release that is distinct from its regulation by hypothalamic growth-hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH). We now report the purification and identification in rat stomach of an endogenous ligand specific for GHS-R. The purified ligand is a peptide of 28 amino acids, in which the serine 3 residue is n-octanoylated. The acylated peptide specifically releases GH both in vivo and in vitro, and O-n-octanoylation at serine 3 is essential for the activity. We designate the GH-releasing peptide 'ghrelin' (ghre is the Proto-Indo-European root of the word 'grow'). Human ghrelin is homologous to rat ghrelin apart from two amino acids. The occurrence of ghrelin in both rat and human indicates that GH release from the pituitary may be regulated not only by hypothalamic GHRH, but also by ghrelin.
Ghrelin is a small peptide with 28 amino acids, and has been characterized as the ligand of the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR). In addition to its original function in stimulating pituitary growth hormone release, ghrelin is multifunctional and plays a role in the regulation of energy balance, gastric acid release, appetite, insulin secretion, gastric motility and the turnover of gastric and intestinal mucosa. The discovery of ghrelin and GHSR expression beyond normal tissues suggests its role other than physiological function. Emerging evidences have revealed ghrelin's function in regulating several processes related to cancer progression, especially in metastasis and proliferation. We further show the relative GHRL and GHSR expression in pan-cancers from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), suggesting the potential pathological role of the axis in cancers. This review focuses on ghrelin's biological function in cancer progression, and reveals its clinical significance especially the impact on cancer patient outcome.
Ghrelin is a 28-amino acid (aa) stomach-derived peptide discovered in 1999 as the endogenous ligand for growth hormone secretagogue-receptor (GHS-R). Ghrelin-producing cells constitute a distinct group of endocrine cells dispersed throughout the gastric mucosa and to a lesser extent in the small intestine and the endocrine pancreas. Ghrelin plasma levels rise during fasting and chronic caloric restriction to stimulate food intake and fat storage and to prevent life-threatening falls in blood glucose. Plasma ghrelin levels decrease after a meal is consumed and in conditions of energy surplus (such as obesity). Ghrelin has emerged as a key player in the regulation of appetite and energy homeostasis. Ghrelin achieves these functions through binding the ghrelin receptor GHS-R in appetite-regulating neurons and in peripheral metabolic organs including the endocrine pancreas. Ghrelin levels are negatively correlated with body mass index (BMI) and insulin resistance. In addition, ghrelin secretion is impaired in obesity and insulin resistance. Several studies highlight an important role for ghrelin in glucose homeostasis. Genetic, immunological, and pharmacological blockade of ghrelin signaling resulted in improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Furthermore, exogenous ghrelin administration was shown to decrease glucose-induced insulin release and increase glucose level in both humans and rodents. GHS-R was shown to be expressed in pancreatic beta-cells and ghrelin suppressed insulin release via a Ca2+-mediated pathway. In this review, we provide a detailed summary of recent advances in the field that focuses on the role of insulin and insulin resistance in the regulation of ghrelin secretion and on the role of ghrelin in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS).
Hunger is defined as a craving or urgent need for food. Abundant evidence now indicates that homeostatic and cognitive mechanisms promote the sensation of hunger. Communication between the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and the central nervous system (CNS) regulate both homeostatic and cognitive mechanisms to control feeding behavior. In this context the GI derived feeding peptide ghrelin, targets the CNS to promote food anticipation, learning, hedonic feeding and motivation for food. Importantly meal expectation following nutrient deprivation or satiation is associated with elevation of plasma ghrelin, highlighting the propensity of each mechanism to stimulate GI ghrelin secretion. It is well established that multiple physiological processes control ghrelin secretion from the GI tract. For example activation of descending sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways, GI feeding peptides, metabolic factors and endocannabinoid signaling mechanisms all regulate ghrelin secretion. In parallel, activation of the CNS ghrelin receptor (GHSR-1a) controls food anticipation, food-based learning, spatial learning and the rewarding properties of food. Notably GHSR-1a is expressed within a network of CNS regions that regulate diverse aspects of feeding behavior. These examples suggest a redundancy regarding mechanisms that control GI ghrelin secretion and complexity for GHSR-1a-mediated regulation of food intake. Based on this collective data, we suggest that learned information linked to the receipt of food is transmitted from the CNS to the GI tract to stimulate ghrelin release. We further postulate that GI ghrelin release and ghrelin-GHSR-1a interactions adapt over time, metabolic status and environment to direct feeding behavior.
Feeding is a highly complex behavior that is influenced by learned associations between external and internal cues. The type of excessive feeding behavior contributing to obesity onset and metabolic deficit may be based, in part, on conditioned appetitive and ingestive behaviors that occur in response to environmental and/or interoceptive cues associated with palatable food. Therefore, there is a critical need to understand the neurobiology underlying learned aspects of feeding behavior. The stomach-derived "hunger" hormone, ghrelin, stimulates appetite and food intake and may function as an important biological substrate linking mnemonic processes with feeding control. The current review highlights data supporting a role for ghrelin in mediating the cognitive and neurobiological mechanisms that underlie conditioned feeding behavior. We discuss the role of learning and memory on food intake control (with a particular focus on hippocampal-dependent memory processes) and provide an overview of conditioned cephalic endocrine responses. A neurobiological framework is provided through which conditioned cephalic ghrelin secretion signals in neurons in the hippocampus, which then engage orexigenic neural circuitry in the lateral hypothalamus to express learned feeding behavior.
Intracellular changes in immune cells lead to metabolic dysfunction, which is termed immunometabolism. Chronic inflammation is a hallmark of aging; this phenomenon is described as inflamm-aging. Immunometabolism and inflamm-aging are closely linked to obesity, insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes (T2D), cardiovascular diseases, and cancers, which consequently reduce life span and health span of the elderly. Ghrelin is an orexigenic hormone that regulates appetite and food intake. Ghrelin's functions are mediated through its receptor, growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHS-R). Ghrelin and GHS-R have important roles in age-associated obesity, insulin resistance, and T2D. In this chapter, we have discussed the roles of ghrelin signaling in diet-induced obesity and normal aging as it relates to energy metabolism and inflammation in key metabolic tissues and organs. The new findings reveal that ghrelin signaling is an important regulatory mechanism for immunometabolism and inflamm-aging. Ghrelin signaling offers an exciting novel therapeutic strategy for treatment of obesity and insulin resistance of the elderly.
Autophagy is associated with several diseases. In recent years, accumulating evidence has suggested that ghrelin pathway exerts a protective effect by regulating autophagy. This review aims to assess the potential role and use of ghrelin as a new treatment for obesity, cardiovascular diseases, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NFALD), neurodegenerative diseases, and tissue damage associated with autophagy. Ghrelin reduces the basal expression of autophagy-related genes in obesity-associated type 2 diabetes and ghrelin level changes in obesity, heart failure, and NFALD as well as altered autophagy. Ghrelin and its receptor GHSR-1 activation induce the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and the induction of PI-3 kinase (PI3 K) and phosphorylation of Akt. In the myocardium and hypothalamic NPY/AgRP neurons, ghrelin increases levels of the intracellular energy sensor AMPK and enhances autophagy, protecting cardiac ischemia and inducing neural stem cells. Nonetheless, ghrelin activates the PI3 K/Akt/Bcl-2 pathway and inhibits the activation of autophagy, such as tissues injured by sepsis or doxorubicin. In conclusion, endogenous ghrelin system could be considered as a new target or treatment for metabolism disorders, cardiac diseases, neurodegenerative diseases, and tissue injuries.
Ghrelin, an endogenous brain-gut peptide, is secreted in large quantities, mainly from the stomach, in humans and rodents. It can perform the biological function of activating the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR). Since its discovery in 1999, ample research has focused on promoting its effects on the human appetite and pleasure-reward eating. Extensive, in-depth studies have shown that ghrelin is widely secreted and distributed in tissues. Its role in neurohumoral regulation, such as metabolic homeostasis, inflammation, cardiovascular regulation, anxiety and depression, and advanced cancer cachexia, has attracted increasing attention. However, the effects and regulatory mechanisms of ghrelin on obesity, gastrointestinal (GI) inflammation, cardiovascular disease, stress regulation, cachexia treatment, and the prognosis of advanced cancer have not been fully summarized. This review summarizes ghrelin's numerous effects in participating in a variety of biochemical pathways and the clinical significance of ghrelin in the regulation of the homeostasis of organisms. In addition, potential mechanisms are also introduced.
Ghrelin is a protein hormone secreted from the gastric mucosa, but is also expressed in a variety of tissues. The biological function of ghrelin is widely known, including regulation of food intake, body weight, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, reproductive, immune functions, cell proliferation and hormone secretion. The growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHS-R) mediates the effect of ghrelin. Depending on cell type, ghrelin either induces apoptosis or has anti-apoptotic effect. Apoptosis is a physiological process that plays an important role in many biological actions such as proliferation, development or differentiation and regulation of physiological function in many cells. Dysfunction or dysregulation of apoptosis leads to pathology conditions. The action of ghrelin on cell apoptosis is reviewed in this paper.
As allosteric complexes, G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) respond to extracellular stimuli and pleiotropically couple to intracellular transducers to elicit signaling pathway-dependent effects in a process known as biased signaling or functional selectivity. One such GPCR, the ghrelin receptor (GHSR(1a)), has a crucial role in restoring and maintaining metabolic homeostasis during disrupted energy balance. Thus, pharmacological modulation of GHSR(1a) bias could offer a promising strategy to treat several metabolism-based disorders. Here, we summarize current evidence supporting GHSR(1a) functional selectivity in vivo and highlight recent structural data. We propose that precise determinations of GHSR(1a) molecular pharmacology and pathway-specific physiological effects will enable discovery of GHSR(1a) drugs with tailored signaling profiles, thereby providing safer and more effective treatments for metabolic diseases.
Ghrelin was originally identified as a growth hormone secretagogue, but later studies suggested that it plays an important role in the regulation of appetite and body weight. The implication of genetic variants of the ghrelin-ghrelin receptor axis in the determination of stature, appetite, body weight, glucose metabolism and eating disorders has been the focus of numerous small and larger studies. More recently, several studies have shown some involvement of ghrelin and growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR) genetic variants in some cancers, or their role in the genetics of immune diseases or addictive behaviour. The overall results suggest that the effects of common genetic variants are lacking or modest, while rare sequence alteration may lead to disease status in individual patients. In this review we summarize the available data on the genetics of ghrelin axis in humans.
Ghrelin, a 28-aminoacid peptide, was isolated from the human and rat stomach and identified in 1999 as an endogenous ligand for the growth hormone secretagogue-receptor (GHS-R). In addition to stimulating appetite and regulating energy balance, ghrelin and its receptor GHS-R1a have a direct effect on the cardiovascular system. In recent years, it has been shown that ghrelin exerts cardioprotective effects, including the modulation of sympathetic activity and hypertension, enhancement of the vascular activity and angiogenesis, inhibition of arrhythmias, reduction in heart failure and inhibition of cardiac remodeling after myocardial infarction (MI). The cardiovascular protective effect of ghrelin may be associated with anti-inflammation, anti-apoptosis, inhibited sympathetic nerve activation, regulated autophagy, and endothelial dysfunction. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of ghrelin on the cardiovascular system have not been fully elucidated, and no specific therapeutic agent has been established. It is important to further explore the pharmacological potential of ghrelin pathway modulation for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases.
BACKGROUND: Ghrelin, a unique 28 amino acid peptide hormone secreted by the gastric X/A like cells, is an endogenous ligand of the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR). Ghrelin-GHSR signaling has been found to exert various physiological functions, including stimulation of appetite, regulation of body weight, lipid and glucose metabolism, and increase of gut motility and secretion. This system is thus critical for energy homeostasis. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this review is to highlight the strategies of ghrelin-GHSR based intervention for therapy of obesity and its related metabolic diseases. RESULTS: Therapeutic strategies of metabolic disorders targeting the ghrelin-GHSR pathway involve neutralization of circulating ghrelin by antibodies and RNA spiegelmers, antagonism of ghrelin receptor by its antagonists and inverse agonists, inhibition of ghrelin O-acyltransferase (GOAT), as well as potential pharmacological approach to decrease ghrelin synthesis and secretion. CONCLUSION: Various compounds targeting the ghrelin-GHSR system have shown promising efficacy for the intervention of obesity and relevant metabolic disorders in animals and in vitro. Further clinical trials to validate their efficacy in human beings are urgently needed.
The growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR) has emerged as one of the most fascinating molecules from the perspective of neuroendocrine control. GHSR is mainly expressed in the pituitary and the brain, and plays key roles regulating not only growth hormone secretion but also food intake, adiposity, body weight, glucose homeostasis and other complex functions. Quite atypically, GHSR signaling displays a basal constitutive activity that can be up- or downregulated by two digestive system-derived hormones: the octanoylated-peptide ghrelin and the liver-expressed antimicrobial peptide 2 (LEAP2), which was recently recognized as an endogenous GHSR ligand. The existence of two ligands with contrary actions indicates that GHSR activity can be tightly regulated and that the receptor displays the capability to integrate such opposing inputs in order to provide a balanced intracellular signal. This article provides a summary of the current understanding of the biology of ghrelin, LEAP2 and GHSR and discusses the reconceptualization of the cellular and physiological implications of the ligand-regulated GHSR signaling, based on the latest findings.
Ghrelin, a 28-amino acid octanoylated peptide predominantly produced by the stomach, has been discovered to be a natural ligand of the type 1a growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR1a). Ghrelin has recently attracted the interest as a new GH-releasing and orexigenic factor. However, ghrelin exerts several other activities, including regulation of tissue growth and development and control of neoplastic cell proliferation. Several endocrine and nonendocrine cancer cells (pituitary adenomas; gastroenteropancreatic and pulmonary carcinoids; colorectal neoplasms, thyroid tumors; lung, breast, and pancreatic carcinomas) as well as their related cell lines have been shown able to express ghrelin both at mRNA and at protein level. Many of the above-listed tumors express GHSR1a and/or alternative GHS receptor subtypes such as the type 1b GHSR, a truncated isoform of GHSR1a, and binding sites able to recognize ghrelin independently of its acylation. Evidence that ghrelin and multiple ghrelin/GHS receptors are coexpressed in cancer cell lines and tumoral tissues from organs, such as the breast, that do not express these receptors in physiological conditions suggests that the ghrelin system is likely to play an important autocrine/paracrine role in some cancers. This chapter highlights the evidence for the expression of ghrelin and its receptors in one of the most frequent human malignancies, the prostate cancer, and information regarding their potential functional role in related cell lines.
Ghrelin was first identified as an endogenous ligand of the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR) in 1999, with the function of stimulating the release of growth hormone (GH), while nesfatin-1 was identified in 2006. Both peptides are secreted by the same kind of endocrine cells, X/A-like cells in the stomach. Compared with ghrelin, nesfatin-1 exerts opposite effects on energy metabolism, glucose metabolism, gastrointestinal functions and regulation of blood pressure, but exerts similar effects on anti-inflammation and neuroprotection. Up to now, nesfatin-1 remains as an orphan ligand because its receptor has not been identified. Several studies have shown the effects of nesfatin-1 are dependent on the receptor of ghrelin. We herein compare the effects of nesfatin-1 and ghrelin in several aspects and explore the possibility of their interactions.
Ghrelin is a 28-amino acid acylated hormone, highly expressed in the stomach, which binds to its cognate receptor (GHSR1a) to regulate a plethora of relevant biological processes, including food intake, energy balance, hormonal secretions, learning, inflammation, etc. However, ghrelin is, in fact, the most notorious component of a complex, intricate regulatory system comprised of a growing number of alternative peptides (e.g. obestatin, unacylated ghrelin, and In1-ghrelin, etc.), known (GHSRs) and, necessarily unknown receptors, as well as modifying enzymes (e.g. ghrelin-O-acyl-transferase), which interact among them as well as with other regulatory systems in order to tightly modulate key (patho)-physiological processes. This multiplicity of functions and versatility of the ghrelin system arise from a dual, genetic and functional, complexity. Importantly, a growing body of evidence suggests that dysregulation in some of the components of the ghrelin system can lead to or influence the development and/or progression of highly concerning pathologies such as endocrine-related tumors, inflammatory/cardiovascular diseases, and neurodegeneration, wherein these altered components could be used as diagnostic, prognostic, or therapeutic targets. In this context, the aim of this review is to integrate and comprehensively analyze the multiple components and functions of the ghrelin system described to date in order to define and understand its biological and (patho)-physiological significance.
