Adenosine receptor A2b; Receptor for adenosine. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase.
Incretin peptides, principally GLP-1 and GIP, regulate islet hormone secretion, glucose concentrations, lipid metabolism, gut motility, appetite and body weight, and immune function, providing a scientific basis for utilizing incretin-based therapies in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Activation of GLP-1 and GIP receptors also leads to nonglycemic effects in multiple tissues, through direct actions on tissues expressing incretin receptors and indirect mechanisms mediated through neuronal and endocrine pathways. Here we contrast the pharmacology and physiology of incretin hormones and review recent advances in mechanisms coupling incretin receptor signaling to pleiotropic metabolic actions in preclinical studies. We discuss whether mechanisms identified in preclinical studies have potential translational relevance for the treatment of human disease and highlight controversies and uncertainties in incretin biology that require resolution in future studies.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Various gut hormones interact with the brain through delicate communication, thereby influencing appetite and subsequent changes in body weight. This review summarizes the effects of gut hormones on appetite, with a focus on recent research. RECENT FINDINGS: Ghrelin is known as an orexigenic hormone, whereas glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), cholecystokinin (CCK), postprandial peptide YY (PYY), and oxyntomodulin (OXM) are known as anorexigenic hormones. Recent human studies have revealed that gut hormones act differently in various systems, including adipose tissue, beyond appetite and energy intake, and even involve in high-order thinking. Environmental factors including meal schedule, food contents and quality, type of exercise, and sleep deprivation also play a role in the influence of gut hormone on appetite, weight change, and obesity. Recently published studies have shown that retatrutide, a triple-agonist of GLP-1, GIP, and glucagon receptor, and orforglipron, a GLP-1 receptor partial agonist, are effective in weight loss and improving various metabolic parameters associated with obesity. SUMMARY: Various gut hormones influence appetite, and several drugs targeting these receptors have been reported to exert positive effects on weight loss in humans. Given that diverse dietary and environmental factors affect the actions of gut hormones and appetite, there is a need for integrated and largescale long-term studies in this field.
The incretin effect, the amplification of insulin secretion occurring when glucose is taken in orally as compared to infused intravenously, is one of the factors that help the body to tolerate carbohydrate/glucose ingestion. These include 1) amount and type of carbohydrates; 2) gastric emptying rate; 3) digestion and absorption of the carbohydrates; 4) secretion and effect of the incretin hormones; 5) disposition of absorbed nutrients/glucose. The incretin effect can also be viewed as the fraction of the ingested glucose load handled via gastrointestinal mechanisms (including the incretin effect); it is calculated by comparison of the amount of glucose required to copy, by intravenous infusion, the oral load. Typically, for 75 g of oral glucose, about 25 g are required. This means that the GastroIntestinal Glucose Disposal (GIGD) is 66%. Both the GIGD and the incretin effect depend on the amount of glucose ingested: for higher doses the GIGD may amount to 80%, which shows that this effect is a major contributor to glucose tolerance. The main mechanism behind it is stimulation of insulin secretion by a proportional secretion of the insulinotropic hormones GIP and GLP-1. Recently it has become possible to estimate their contributions in healthy humans using specific and potent receptor antagonists. Both hormones act to improve glucose tolerance (i.e. the antagonists impair tolerance) and their effects are additive. GIP seems to be quantitatively the most important, particularly regarding insulin secretion, whereas the action of GLP-1 is mainly displayed via inhibition of glucagon secretion.
Uncertainty exists as to whether the glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptor (GIPR) should be activated or inhibited for the treatment of obesity. Gipr was recently demonstrated in hypothalamic feeding centers, but the physiological relevance of CNS Gipr remains unknown. Here we show that HFD-fed CNS-Gipr KO mice and humanized (h)GIPR knockin mice with CNS-hGIPR deletion show decreased body weight and improved glucose metabolism. In DIO mice, acute central and peripheral administration of acyl-GIP increases cFos neuronal activity in hypothalamic feeding centers, and this coincides with decreased body weight and food intake and improved glucose handling. Chronic central and peripheral administration of acyl-GIP lowers body weight and food intake in wild-type mice, but shows blunted/absent efficacy in CNS-Gipr KO mice. Also, the superior metabolic effect of GLP-1/GIP co-agonism relative to GLP-1 is extinguished in CNS-Gipr KO mice. Our data hence establish a key role of CNS Gipr for control of energy metabolism.
OBJECTIVE: Pharmacological strategies that engage multiple mechanisms-of-action have demonstrated synergistic benefits for metabolic disease in preclinical models. One approach, concurrent activation of the glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP), and glucagon (Gcg) receptors (i.e. triagonism), combines the anorectic and insulinotropic activities of GLP-1 and GIP with the energy expenditure effect of glucagon. While the efficacy of triagonism in preclinical models is known, the relative contribution of GcgR activation remains unassessed. This work aims to addresses that central question. METHODS: Herein, we detail the design of unimolecular peptide triagonists with an empirically optimized receptor potency ratio. These optimized peptide triagonists employ a protraction strategy permitting once-weekly human dosing. Additionally, we assess the effects of these peptides on weight-reduction, food intake, glucose control, and energy expenditure in an established DIO mouse model compared to clinically relevant GLP-1R agonists (e.g. semaglutide) and dual GLP-1R/GIPR agonists (e.g. tirzepatide). RESULTS: Optimized triagonists normalize body weight in DIO mice and enhance energy expenditure in a manner superior to that of GLP-1R mono-agonists and GLP-1R/GIPR co-agonists. CONCLUSIONS: These pre-clinical data suggest unimolecular poly-pharmacology as an effective means to target multiple mechanisms contributing to obesity and further implicate GcgR activation as the differentiating factor between incretin receptor mono- or dual-agonists and triagonists.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) are the known incretin hormones in humans, released predominantly from the enteroendocrine K and L cells within the gut. Their secretion is regulated by a complex of integrated mechanisms involving direct contact for the activation of different chemo-sensors on the brush boarder of K and L cells and several indirect neuro-immuno-hormonal loops. The biological actions of GIP and GLP-1 are fundamental determinants of islet function and blood glucose homeostasis in health and type 2 diabetes. Moreover, there is increasing recognition that GIP and GLP-1 also exert pleiotropic extra-glycaemic actions, which may represent therapeutic targets for human diseases. In this review, we summarise current knowledge of the biology of incretin hormones in health and metabolic disorders and highlight the therapeutic potential of incretin hormones in metabolic regulation.
BACKGROUND: Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) is one of two incretin hormones that communicate nutrient intake with systemic metabolism. Although GIP was the first incretin hormone to be discovered, the understanding of GIP's biology was quickly outpaced by research focusing on the other incretin hormone, glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1). Early work on GIP produced the theory that GIP is obesogenic, limiting interest in developing GIPR agonists to treat type 2 diabetes. A resurgence of GIP research has occurred in the last five years, reinvigorating interest in this peptide. Two independent approaches have emerged for treating obesity, one promoting GIPR agonism and the other antagonism. In this report, evidence supporting both cases is discussed and hypotheses are presented to reconcile this apparent paradox. SCOPE OF THE REVIEW: This review presents evidence to support targeting GIPR to reduce obesity. Most of the focus is on the effect of singly targeting the GIPR using both a gain- and loss-of-function approach, with additional sections that discuss co-targeting of the GIPR and GLP-1R. MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: There is substantial evidence to support that GIPR agonism and antagonism can positively impact body weight. The long-standing theory that GIP drives weight gain is exclusively derived from loss-of-function studies, with no evidence to support that GIPR agonisms increases adiposity or body weight. There is insufficient evidence to reconcile the paradoxical observations that both GIPR agonism and antagonism can reduce body weight; however, two independent hypotheses centered on GIPR antagonism are presented based on new data in an effort to address this question. The first discusses the compensatory relationship between incretin receptors and how antagonism of the GIPR may enhance GLP-1R activity. The second discusses how chronic GIPR agonism may produce desensitization and ultimately loss of GIPR activity that mimics antagonism. Overall, it is clear that a deeper understanding of GIP biology is required to understand how modulating this system impacts metabolic homeostasis.
Ambiguity regarding the role of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) in obesity arises from conflicting reports asserting that both GIP receptor (GIPR) agonism and antagonism are effective strategies for inhibiting weight gain. To enable identification and manipulation of Gipr-expressing (Gipr) cells, we created Gipr-Cre knockin mice. As GIPR-agonists have recently been reported to suppress food intake, we aimed to identify central mediators of this effect. Gipr cells were identified in the arcuate, dorsomedial, and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus, as confirmed by RNAscope in mouse and human. Single-cell RNA-seq identified clusters of hypothalamic Gipr cells exhibiting transcriptomic signatures for vascular, glial, and neuronal cells, the latter expressing somatostatin but little pro-opiomelanocortin or agouti-related peptide. Activation of G(q)-DREADDs in hypothalamic Gipr cells suppressed food intake in vivo, which was not obviously additive with concomitant GLP1R activation. These data identify hypothalamic GIPR as a target for the regulation of energy balance.
Among the more promising treatments proposed for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are those reducing brain insulin resistance. The antidiabetics in the class of incretin receptor agonists (IRAs) reduce symptoms and brain pathology in animal models of AD and PD, as well as glucose utilization in AD cases and clinical symptoms in PD cases after their systemic administration. At least 9 different IRAs are showing promise as AD and PD therapeutics, but we still lack quantitative data on their relative ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) reaching the brain parenchyma. We consequently compared brain uptake pharmacokinetics of intravenous (125)I-labeled IRAs in adult CD-1 mice over the course of 60 min. We tested single IRAs (exendin-4, liraglutide, lixisenatide, and semaglutide), which bind receptors for one incretin (glucagon-like peptide-1 [GLP-1]), and dual IRAs, which bind receptors for two incretins (GLP-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide [GIP]), including unbranched, acylated, PEGylated, or C-terminally modified forms (Finan/Ma Peptides 17, 18, and 20 and Holscher peptides DA3-CH and DA-JC4). The non-acylated and non-PEGylated IRAs (exendin-4, lixisenatide, Peptide 17, DA3-CH and DA-JC4) had significant rates of blood-to-brain influx (Ki), but the acylated IRAs (liraglutide, semaglutide, and Peptide 18) did not measurably cross the BBB. The brain influx of the non-acylated, non-PEGylated IRAs were not saturable up to 1 mug of these drugs and was most likely mediated by adsorptive transcytosis across brain endothelial cells, as observed for exendin-4. Of the non-acylated, non-PEGylated IRAs tested, exendin-4 and DA-JC4 were best able to cross the BBB based on their rate of brain influx, percentage reaching the brain that accumulated in brain parenchyma, and percentage of the systemic dose taken up per gram of brain tissue. Exendin-4 and DA-JC4 thus merit special attention as IRAs well-suited to enter the central nervous system (CNS), thus reaching areas pathologic in AD and PD.
The available data show that GIP is at present the strongest candidate for the insulin-secreting factor of the gut named incretin. Its release is triggered by the absorption of ingested nutrients. GIP acts on the B-cells of the pancreas by potentiating glucose-induced insulin secretion. The role of GIP as an enterogastrone is less well established. The release of GIP from the gut cells seems to be regulated by the composition and the amount of the ingested food, by the rate of absorption of nutrients by neural factors (vagal), and by feedback control mediated by insulin. In addition, the adaptation of the intestine to individual eating habits influences the response of the GIP cells. It is suggested that an overactive enteroinsular axis, i.e. enhanced GIP secretion, participates in the development of the hyperinsulinaemia of obesity and maturity onset diabetes mellitus. In gastrointestinal diseases accompanied by malabsorption the GIP response is diminished. In gastrointestinal disorders with rapid gastric emptying (duodenal ulcer) or with accelerated passage of the nutrients through the intestine, hypersecretion of GIP and insulin occurs. This may be significant for the reactive hypoglycaemia of these conditions.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is a product of the Gip gene and acts as an incretin hormone in mammals. Gip is most closely related to the proglucagon (Gcg) and Exendin genes and diverged from these very early in vertebrate evolution. In mammals, GIP acts through its specific receptor, encoded by the Gipr gene, which belongs to a subfamily of 7-transmembrane G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) genes that also includes those for the proglucagon-derived peptides (Gcgr, Glp1r, and Glp2r), and the receptor for Exendin (Grlr). Gip, Gipr, Exendin, and Grlr genes are found in species from most vertebrate classes. While most species that have a Gip gene also have a Gipr gene, two classes of vertebrates, cartilaginous fish and birds, retain conserved Gip genes but lack Gipr genes. This raises the possibility the GIP signals through other receptors in some vertebrates. Exendin genes and the gene for its receptor, Grlr, are also found in diverse vertebrates, with the notable exception of mammals. Both GIP and Exendin likely have important roles in vertebrate physiology, but their roles are either dispensable or can be replaced by other hormones.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP1R) agonists and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptor (GIPR) agonists may help treat metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH). However, their definitive effects are still unclear. Our study aims to clarify this uncertainty. METHODS: We utilised conventional Mendelian randomisation (MR) analysis to explore potential causal links between plasma GLP-1/GIP concentrations and MASLD and its related traits. Next, we conducted drug-target MR analysis using highly expressed tissue data to assess the effects of corresponding drug perturbation on these traits. Finally, mediation analysis was performed to ascertain whether the potential causal effect is direct or mediated by other MASLD-related traits. RESULTS: Circulating 2-h GLP-1 and GIP concentrations measured during an oral glucose tolerance test showed hepatoprotective effects on MASLD risk (OR(GLP-1) = 0.168 [95% CI 0.033-0.839], p = 0.030; OR(GIP) = 0.331 [95% CI 0.222-0.494], p = 6.31 x 10(-8)). GLP1R expression in the blood had a minimal causal effect on MASLD risk, whereas GIPR expression significantly affected MASLD risk (OR = 0.671 [95% CI 0.531-0.849], p = 9.07 x 10(-4)). Expression levels of GLP1R or GIPR in the blood significantly influenced MASLD-related clinical traits. Mediation analysis revealed that GIPR expression protected against MASLD, even after adjusting for type 2 diabetes or body mass index. CONCLUSIONS: GLP-1/GIP receptor agonists offer promise in lowering MASLD/MASH risk. GIP receptor agonists can exert direct and indirect effects on MASLD mediated by weight reduction or glycemic control improvement.
Bone resorption follows a circadian rhythm, with a marked reduction in circulating markers of resorption (such as carboxy-terminal telopeptide region of collagen type I in serum) in the postprandial period. Several gut hormones, including glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) and GLP2, have been linked to this effect in humans and rodent models. These hormones are secreted from enteroendocrine cells in the gastrointestinal tract in response to a variety of stimuli and effect a wide range of physiological processes within and outside the gut. Single GLP1, dual GLP1-GIP or GLP1-glucagon and triple GLP1-GIP-glucagon receptor agonists have been developed for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity. In addition, single GIP, GLP1 and GLP2 analogues have been investigated in preclinical studies as novel therapeutics to improve bone strength in bone fragility disorders. Dual GIP-GLP2 analogues have been developed that show therapeutic promise for bone fragility in preclinical studies and seem to exert considerable activity at the bone material level. This Review summarizes the evidence of the action of gut hormones on bone homeostasis and physiology.
The chemistry, localisation, release and effects of gastrointestinal hormones and some related peptides are surveyed. Their main presumed physiologic actions are: gastric acid and pepsin secretion are stimulated by gastrin and to a less degree by secretin. Acid secretion is inhibited by bulbo-enterogastrone and GIP. Biliary water and electrolytes are augmented by gastrin, CCK-PZ, secretin and VIP and inhibited by Substance P. Pancreatic bicarbonate and enzyme secretions are stimulated by secretin and CCK-PZ, especially in combination. Lower oesophageal and antral motility and tonus are elevated following gastrin and motilin; the gallbladder and small intestine empty following CCK. Gastrin regulates gastrointestinal, and CCK pancreatic, tissue growth. Somatostatin inhibits all gut hormones. All peptides are vasoactive within the splanchnic area, each one in a specific manner.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)-based drugs have been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and are widely used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and obesity. More recent developments of unimolecular peptides targeting multiple incretin-related receptors ("multi-agonists"), including the glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) receptor (GIPR) and the glucagon (Gcg) receptor (GcgR), have emerged with the aim of enhancing drug benefits. In this study, we utilized human and mouse microglial cell lines, HMC3 and IMG, respectively, together with the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell line as cellular models of neurodegeneration. Using these cell lines, we studied the neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory capacity of several multi-agonists in comparison with a single GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonist, exendin-4. Our data demonstrate that the two selected GLP-1R/GIPR dual agonists and a GLP-1R/GIPR/GcgR triple agonist not only have neurotrophic and neuroprotective effects but also have anti-neuroinflammatory properties, as indicated by the decreased microglial cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) expression, nitrite production, and pro-inflammatory cytokine release. In addition, our results indicate that these multi-agonists have the potential to outperform commercially available single GLP-1R agonists in neurodegenerative disease treatment.
Surprisingly, agonists, as well as antagonists of the glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptor (GIPR), are currently being used or investigated as treatment options for type 2 diabetes and obesity - and both, when combined with glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonism, enhance GLP-1-induced glycemia and weight loss further. This paradox raises several questions regarding not only the mechanisms of actions of GIP but also the processes engaged during the activation of both the GIP and GLP-1 receptors. Here, we provide an overview of studies of the properties and actions of peptide-derived GIPR antagonists, focusing on GIP(3-30)NH(2), a naturally occurring N- and C-terminal truncation of GIP(1-42). GIP(3-30)NH(2) was the first GIPR antagonist administered to humans. GIP(3-30)NH(2) and a few additional antagonists, like Pro3-GIP, have been used in both in vitro and in vivo studies to elucidate the molecular and cellular consequences of GIPR inhibition, desensitization, and internalization and, at a larger scale, the role of the GIP system in health and disease. We provide an overview of these studies combined with recent knowledge regarding the effects of naturally occurring variants of the GIPR system and species differences within the GIP system to enhance our understanding of the GIPR as a drug target.
OBJECTIVE: Glucose dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is well established as an incretin hormone, boosting glucose-dependent insulin secretion. However, whilst anorectic actions of its sister-incretin glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) are well established, a physiological role for GIP in appetite regulation is controversial, despite the superior weight loss seen in preclinical models and humans with GLP-1/GIP dual receptor agonists compared with GLP-1R agonism alone. METHODS: We generated a mouse model in which GIP expressing K-cells can be activated through hM3Dq Designer Receptor Activated by Designer Drugs (DREADD, GIP-Dq) to explore physiological actions of intestinally-released GIP. RESULTS: In lean mice, Dq-stimulation of GIP expressing cells increased plasma GIP to levels similar to those found postprandially. The increase in GIP was associated with improved glucose tolerance, as expected, but also triggered an unexpected robust inhibition of food intake. Validating that this represented a response to intestinally-released GIP, the suppression of food intake was prevented by injecting mice peripherally or centrally with antagonistic GIPR-antibodies, and was reproduced in an intersectional model utilising Gip-Cre/Villin-Flp to limit Dq transgene expression to K-cells in the intestinal epithelium. The effects of GIP cell activation were maintained in diet induced obese mice, in which chronic K-cell activation reduced food intake and attenuated body weight gain. CONCLUSIONS: These studies establish a physiological gut-brain GIP-axis regulating food intake in mice, adding to the multi-faceted metabolic effects of GIP which need to be taken into account when developing GIPR-targeted therapies for obesity and diabetes.
The use of incretin agonists for managing metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) is currently experiencing considerable interest. However, whether these compounds have a direct action on MASH is still under debate. This study aims to investigate whether GLP-1R/GIPR agonists act directly in hepatocytes and hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). For this, human hepatocyte and HSCs lines, as well as primary human hepatocytes and HSCs treated with Liraglutide, Acyl-GIP or the GLP-1/GIP dual agonist (MAR709) were used. We show that the concentrations of each compound, which were effective in insulin release, did not induce discernible alterations in either hepatocytes or HSCs. In hepatocytes displaying elevated fatty acid content after the treatment with oleic acid and palmitic acid, none of the three compounds reduced lipid concentration. Similarly, in HSCs activated with transforming growth factor-beta (TGFb), Liraglutide, Acyl-GIP and MAR709 failed to ameliorate the elevated expression of fibrotic markers. The three compounds were also ineffective in phosphorylating CREB, which mediates insulinotropic actions, in both hepatocytes and HSCs. These findings indicate that incretin agonists have no direct actions in human hepatocytes or hepatic stellate cells, suggesting that their beneficial effects in patients with MASH are likely mediated indirectly, potentially through improvements in body weight, insulin resistance and glycemic control.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is a gut hormone impacting glucose, lipid and bone metabolism through the GIP receptor (GIPR). The GIP system has key species differences complicating the translation of findings from rodent to human physiology. Furthermore, the effects of endogenous GIP in humans have been difficult to tease out due to the lack of a suitable GIPR antagonist. The naturally occurring GIP(3-30)NH(2) has turned out to constitute a safe and efficacious GIPR antagonist for rodent and human use. To study GIP physiology, it is recommended to use the species-specific GIP(3-30)NH(2) peptide sequence, and for human intravenous infusions, an antagonist:agonist ratio of a minimum of 600 with a 20min infusion time before the intervention of interest is recommended. Several studies using GIP(3-30)NH(2) are coming, hopefully providing new insights into the physiology of GIP, the pathophysiologic involvement of GIP in several diseases and the therapeutic potential of the GIPR.
A physiological role for GIP as an insulinotropic hormone involved in the enteroinsular axis has been established and ingestion of glucose, fatty acids and certain amino acids will produce an increase in circulating IR-GIP levels. The insulinotropic action of GIP is glucose concentration dependent in normal animals. A role for GIP in NIDDM is equivocal although several studies have demonstrated elevated serum levels. Animal models have indicated a disturbance of GIP receptor function associated with hyperinsulinaemia, i.e. lowering of the minimum glucose concentration at which GIP is insulinotropic.
