Gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptor; This is a receptor for GIP. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 2 family.
Incretin hormones, principally glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide-1(GLP-1), potentiate meal-stimulated insulin secretion through direct (GIP + GLP-1) and indirect (GLP-1) actions on islet beta-cells. GIP and GLP-1 also regulate glucagon secretion, through direct and indirect pathways. The incretin hormone receptors (GIPR and GLP-1R) are widely distributed beyond the pancreas, principally in the brain, cardiovascular and immune systems, gut and kidney, consistent with a broad array of extrapancreatic incretin actions. Notably, the glucoregulatory and anorectic activities of GIP and GLP-1 have supported development of incretin-based therapies for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and obesity. Here we review evolving concepts of incretin action, focusing predominantly on GLP-1, from discovery, to clinical proof of concept, to therapeutic outcomes. We identify established vs uncertain mechanisms of action, highlighting biology conserved across species, while illuminating areas of active investigation and uncertainty that require additional clarification.
Obesity is a major public health crisis. Multi-specific peptides have emerged as promising therapeutic strategies for clinical weight loss. Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) are endogenous incretins that regulate weight through their receptors (R). AMG 133 (maridebart cafraglutide) is a bispecific molecule engineered by conjugating a fully human monoclonal anti-human GIPR antagonist antibody to two GLP-1 analogue agonist peptides using amino acid linkers. Here, we confirm the GIPR antagonist and GLP-1R agonist activities in cell-based systems and report the ability of AMG 133 to reduce body weight and improve metabolic markers in male obese mice and cynomolgus monkeys. In a phase 1, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study in participants with obesity ( NCT04478708 ), AMG 133 had an acceptable safety and tolerability profile along with pronounced dose-dependent weight loss. In the multiple ascending dose cohorts, weight loss was maintained for up to 150 days after the last dose. These findings support continued clinical evaluation of AMG 133.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) exhibit incretin activity, meaning that they potentiate glucose-dependent insulin secretion. The emergence of GIP receptor (GIPR)-GLP1 receptor (GLP1R) co-agonists has fostered growing interest in the actions of GIP and GLP1 in metabolically relevant tissues. Here, we update concepts of how these hormones act beyond the pancreas. The actions of GIP and GLP1 on liver, muscle and adipose tissue, in the control of glucose and lipid homeostasis, are discussed in the context of plausible mechanisms of action. Both the GIPR and GLP1R are expressed in the central nervous system, wherein receptor activation produces anorectic effects enabling weight loss. In preclinical studies, GIP and GLP1 reduce atherosclerosis. Furthermore, GIPR and GLP1R are expressed within the heart and immune system, and GLP1R within the kidney, revealing putative mechanisms linking GIP and GLP1R agonism to cardiorenal protection. We interpret the clinical and mechanistic data obtained for different agents that enable weight loss and glucose control for the treatment of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus, respectively, by activating or blocking GIPR signalling, including the GIPR-GLP1R co-agonist tirzepatide, as well as the GIPR antagonist-GLP1R agonist AMG-133. Collectively, we update translational concepts of GIP and GLP1 action, while highlighting gaps, areas of uncertainty and controversies meriting ongoing investigation.
Large-scale human exome sequencing can identify rare protein-coding variants with a large impact on complex traits such as body adiposity. We sequenced the exomes of 645,626 individuals from the United Kingdom, the United States, and Mexico and estimated associations of rare coding variants with body mass index (BMI). We identified 16 genes with an exome-wide significant association with BMI, including those encoding five brain-expressed G protein-coupled receptors (CALCR, MC4R, GIPR, GPR151, and GPR75). Protein-truncating variants in GPR75 were observed in ~4/10,000 sequenced individuals and were associated with 1.8 kilograms per square meter lower BMI and 54% lower odds of obesity in the heterozygous state. Knock out of Gpr75 in mice resulted in resistance to weight gain and improved glycemic control in a high-fat diet model. Inhibition of GPR75 may provide a therapeutic strategy for obesity.
Tirzepatide is the first dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor co-agonist approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes in the USA, Europe, and the UAE. Tirzepatide is an acylated peptide engineered to activate the GIP and GLP-1 receptors, key mediators of insulin secretion that are also expressed in regions of the brain that regulate food intake. Five clinical trials in type 2-diabetic subjects (SURPASS 1-5) have shown that tirzepatide at 5-15 mg per week reduces both HbA(1c) (1.24 to 2.58%) and body weight (5.4-11.7 kg) by amounts unprecedented for a single agent. A sizable proportion of patients (23.0 to 62.4%) reached an HbA(1c) of < 5.7% (which is the upper limit of the normal range indicating normoglycaemia), and 20.7 to 68.4% lost more than 10% of their baseline body weight. Tirzepatide was significantly more effective in reducing HbA(1c) and body weight than the selective GLP-1 RA semaglutide (1.0 mg per week), and titrated basal insulin. Adverse events related to tirzepatide were similar to what has been reported for selective GLP-1RA, mainly nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, and constipation, that were more common at higher doses. Cardiovascular events have been adjudicated across the whole study program, and MACE-4 (nonfatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke, cardiovascular death and hospital admission for angina) events tended to be reduced over up to a 2 year-period, albeit with low numbers of events. For none of the cardiovascular events analysed (MACE-4, or its components) was a hazard ratio > 1.0 vs. pooled comparators found in a meta-analysis covering the whole clinical trial program, and the upper bounds of the confidence intervals for MACE were < 1.3, fulfilling conventional definitions of cardiovascular safety. Tirzepatide was found to improve insulin sensitivity and insulin secretory responses to a greater extent than semaglutide, and this was associated with lower prandial insulin and glucagon concentrations. Both drugs caused similar reductions in appetite, although tirzepatide caused greater weight loss. While the clinical effects of tirzepatide have been very encouraging, important questions remain as to the mechanism of action. While GIP reduces food intake and body weight in rodents, these effects have not been demonstrated in humans. Moreover, it remains to be shown that GIPR agonism can improve insulin secretion in type 2 diabetic patients who have been noted in previous studies to be unresponsive to GIP. Certainly, the apparent advantage of tirzepatide, a dual incretin agonist, over GLP-1RA will spark renewed interest in the therapeutic potential of GIP in type 2 diabetes, obesity and related co-morbidities.
BACKGROUND: Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) is one of two incretin hormones that communicate nutrient intake with systemic metabolism. Although GIP was the first incretin hormone to be discovered, the understanding of GIP's biology was quickly outpaced by research focusing on the other incretin hormone, glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1). Early work on GIP produced the theory that GIP is obesogenic, limiting interest in developing GIPR agonists to treat type 2 diabetes. A resurgence of GIP research has occurred in the last five years, reinvigorating interest in this peptide. Two independent approaches have emerged for treating obesity, one promoting GIPR agonism and the other antagonism. In this report, evidence supporting both cases is discussed and hypotheses are presented to reconcile this apparent paradox. SCOPE OF THE REVIEW: This review presents evidence to support targeting GIPR to reduce obesity. Most of the focus is on the effect of singly targeting the GIPR using both a gain- and loss-of-function approach, with additional sections that discuss co-targeting of the GIPR and GLP-1R. MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: There is substantial evidence to support that GIPR agonism and antagonism can positively impact body weight. The long-standing theory that GIP drives weight gain is exclusively derived from loss-of-function studies, with no evidence to support that GIPR agonisms increases adiposity or body weight. There is insufficient evidence to reconcile the paradoxical observations that both GIPR agonism and antagonism can reduce body weight; however, two independent hypotheses centered on GIPR antagonism are presented based on new data in an effort to address this question. The first discusses the compensatory relationship between incretin receptors and how antagonism of the GIPR may enhance GLP-1R activity. The second discusses how chronic GIPR agonism may produce desensitization and ultimately loss of GIPR activity that mimics antagonism. Overall, it is clear that a deeper understanding of GIP biology is required to understand how modulating this system impacts metabolic homeostasis.
The incretin system is an essential metabolic axis that regulates postprandial metabolism. The two incretin peptides that enable this effect are the glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and the glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), which have cognate receptors (GIPR and GLP-1R) on islet beta cells as well as in other tissues. Pharmacologic engagement of the GLP-1R is a proven strategy for treating hyperglycemia in diabetes and reducing body weight. Tirzepatide is the first monomeric peptide with dual activity at both incretin receptors now available for clinical use, and in clinical trials it has shown unprecedented effects to reduce blood glucose and body weight. Here, we discuss the foundational science that led to the development of monomeric multi-incretin receptor agonists, culminating in the development of tirzepatide. We also look to the future of this field and comment on how the concept of multi-receptor agonists will continue to progress for the treatment of metabolic disease.
Uncertainty exists as to whether the glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptor (GIPR) should be activated or inhibited for the treatment of obesity. Gipr was recently demonstrated in hypothalamic feeding centers, but the physiological relevance of CNS Gipr remains unknown. Here we show that HFD-fed CNS-Gipr KO mice and humanized (h)GIPR knockin mice with CNS-hGIPR deletion show decreased body weight and improved glucose metabolism. In DIO mice, acute central and peripheral administration of acyl-GIP increases cFos neuronal activity in hypothalamic feeding centers, and this coincides with decreased body weight and food intake and improved glucose handling. Chronic central and peripheral administration of acyl-GIP lowers body weight and food intake in wild-type mice, but shows blunted/absent efficacy in CNS-Gipr KO mice. Also, the superior metabolic effect of GLP-1/GIP co-agonism relative to GLP-1 is extinguished in CNS-Gipr KO mice. Our data hence establish a key role of CNS Gipr for control of energy metabolism.
Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP-1R) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptor (GIPR) are two class B1 G protein-coupled receptors, which are stimulated by the gastrointestinal hormones GLP-1 and GIP, respectively. In the pancreatic beta cells, activation of both receptors lead to increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and glucose-dependent insulin secretion. Marketed GLP-1R agonists such as dulaglutide, liraglutide, exenatide and semaglutide constitute an expanding drug class with beneficial effects for persons suffering from type 2 diabetes and/or obesity. In recent years another drug class, the GLP-1R-GIPR co-agonists, has emerged. Especially the peptide-based, co-agonist tirzepatide is a promising candidate for a better treatment of type 2 diabetes by improving glycemic control and weight reduction. The mechanism of action for tirzepatide include biased signaling of the GLP-1R as well as potent GIPR signaling. Since the implications of co-targeting these closely related receptors concomitantly are challenging to study in vivo, the pharmacodynamic mechanisms and downstream signaling pathways of the GLP-1R-GIPR co-agonists in general, are not fully elucidated. In this review, we present the individual signaling pathways for GLP-1R and GIPR in the pancreatic beta cell with a focus on the shared signaling pathways of the two receptors and interpret the implications of GLP-1R-GIPR co-activation in the light of recent co-activating therapeutic compounds.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) receptor (GIPR) has been identified in multiple genome-wide association studies (GWAS) as a contributor to obesity, and GIPR knockout mice are protected against diet-induced obesity (DIO). On the basis of this genetic evidence, we developed anti-GIPR antagonistic antibodies as a potential therapeutic strategy for the treatment of obesity and observed that a mouse anti-murine GIPR antibody (muGIPR-Ab) protected against body weight gain, improved multiple metabolic parameters, and was associated with reduced food intake and resting respiratory exchange ratio (RER) in DIO mice. We replicated these results in obese nonhuman primates (NHPs) using an anti-human GIPR antibody (hGIPR-Ab) and found that weight loss was more pronounced than in mice. In addition, we observed enhanced weight loss in DIO mice and NHPs when anti-GIPR antibodies were codosed with glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonists. Mechanistic and crystallographic studies demonstrated that hGIPR-Ab displaced GIP and bound to GIPR using the same conserved hydrophobic residues as GIP. Further, using a conditional knockout mouse model, we excluded the role of GIPR in pancreatic beta-cells in the regulation of body weight and response to GIPR antagonism. In conclusion, these data provide preclinical validation of a therapeutic approach to treat obesity with anti-GIPR antibodies.
The incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) has received enormous attention during the past three decades as a therapeutic target for the treatment of obesity and type 2 diabetes. Continuous improvement of the pharmacokinetic profile of GLP-1R agonists, starting from native hormone with a half-life of ~2-3 min to the development of twice daily, daily and even once-weekly drugs highlight the pharmaceutical evolution of GLP-1-based medicines. In contrast to GLP-1, the incretin hormone glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) received little attention as a pharmacological target, because of conflicting observations that argue activation or inhibition of the GIP receptor (GIPR) provides beneficial effects on systemic metabolism. Interest in GIPR agonism for the treatment of obesity and diabetes was recently propelled by the clinical success of unimolecular dual-agonists targeting the receptors for GIP and GLP-1, with reported significantly improved body weight and glucose control in patients with obesity and type II diabetes. Here we review the biology and pharmacology of GLP-1 and GIP and discuss recent advances in incretin-based pharmacotherapies.
Ambiguity regarding the role of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) in obesity arises from conflicting reports asserting that both GIP receptor (GIPR) agonism and antagonism are effective strategies for inhibiting weight gain. To enable identification and manipulation of Gipr-expressing (Gipr) cells, we created Gipr-Cre knockin mice. As GIPR-agonists have recently been reported to suppress food intake, we aimed to identify central mediators of this effect. Gipr cells were identified in the arcuate, dorsomedial, and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus, as confirmed by RNAscope in mouse and human. Single-cell RNA-seq identified clusters of hypothalamic Gipr cells exhibiting transcriptomic signatures for vascular, glial, and neuronal cells, the latter expressing somatostatin but little pro-opiomelanocortin or agouti-related peptide. Activation of G(q)-DREADDs in hypothalamic Gipr cells suppressed food intake in vivo, which was not obviously additive with concomitant GLP1R activation. These data identify hypothalamic GIPR as a target for the regulation of energy balance.
OBJECTIVE: Pharmacological strategies that engage multiple mechanisms-of-action have demonstrated synergistic benefits for metabolic disease in preclinical models. One approach, concurrent activation of the glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP), and glucagon (Gcg) receptors (i.e. triagonism), combines the anorectic and insulinotropic activities of GLP-1 and GIP with the energy expenditure effect of glucagon. While the efficacy of triagonism in preclinical models is known, the relative contribution of GcgR activation remains unassessed. This work aims to addresses that central question. METHODS: Herein, we detail the design of unimolecular peptide triagonists with an empirically optimized receptor potency ratio. These optimized peptide triagonists employ a protraction strategy permitting once-weekly human dosing. Additionally, we assess the effects of these peptides on weight-reduction, food intake, glucose control, and energy expenditure in an established DIO mouse model compared to clinically relevant GLP-1R agonists (e.g. semaglutide) and dual GLP-1R/GIPR agonists (e.g. tirzepatide). RESULTS: Optimized triagonists normalize body weight in DIO mice and enhance energy expenditure in a manner superior to that of GLP-1R mono-agonists and GLP-1R/GIPR co-agonists. CONCLUSIONS: These pre-clinical data suggest unimolecular poly-pharmacology as an effective means to target multiple mechanisms contributing to obesity and further implicate GcgR activation as the differentiating factor between incretin receptor mono- or dual-agonists and triagonists.
Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1R) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIPR) receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors involved in glucose homeostasis. Diabetogenic conditions decrease beta-arrestin 2 (ARRB2) levels in human islets. In mouse beta cells, ARRB2 dampens insulin secretion by partially uncoupling cyclic AMP (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling at physiological doses of GLP-1, whereas at pharmacological doses, the activation of extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK)/cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) requires ARRB2. In contrast, GIP-potentiated insulin secretion needs ARRB2 in mouse and human islets. The GIPR-ARRB2 axis is not involved in cAMP/PKA or ERK signaling but does mediate GIP-induced F-actin depolymerization. Finally, the dual GLP-1/GIP agonist tirzepatide does not require ARRB2 for the potentiation of insulin secretion. Thus, ARRB2 plays distinct roles in regulating GLP-1R and GIPR signaling, and we highlight (1) its role in the physiological context and the possible functional consequences of its decreased expression in pathological situations such as diabetes and (2) the importance of assessing the signaling pathways engaged by the agonists (biased/dual) for therapeutic purposes.
Obesity is a chronic, multifactorial, relapsing disease. Despite multicomponent lifestyle interventions, including pharmacotherapy, maintaining bodyweight loss is challenging for many people. The pathophysiology of obesity is complex, and currently approved pharmacotherapies only target a few of the many pathways involved; thus, single-targeting agents have limited efficacy. Proglucagon-derived peptides, glucagon, and the incretin hormones glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), represent attractive targets for managing obesity and metabolic disorders because they may have direct roles in multiple mechanisms including satiety, energy homeostasis, and lipolytic activity. Unimolecular dual and triple agonists targeting glucagon and incretin hormone receptors have been shown to promote bodyweight loss, lower glucose levels, and reduce food intake in animal models of obesity. Multiple dual receptor agonists are in clinical development for the treatment of obesity, including GLP-1/GIP and GLP-1/glucagon receptor agonists. The extent to which glucagon contributes to treatment effects remains to be understood, but it may promote bodyweight loss by reducing food intake, while concomitant GLP-1 receptor agonism ensures normal glucose control. Further research is required to fully understand the molecular mechanisms of action and metabolic effects of both dual and triple receptor agonists.
The incretins glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) mediate insulin responses that are proportionate to nutrient intake to facilitate glucose tolerance(1). The GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) is an established drug target for the treatment of diabetes and obesity(2), whereas the therapeutic potential of the GIP receptor (GIPR) is a subject of debate. Tirzepatide is an agonist at both the GIPR and GLP-1R and is a highly effective treatment for type 2 diabetes and obesity(3,4). However, although tirzepatide activates GIPR in cell lines and mouse models, it is not clear whether or how dual agonism contributes to its therapeutic benefit. Islet beta cells express both the GLP-1R and the GIPR, and insulin secretion is an established mechanism by which incretin agonists improve glycemic control(5). Here, we show that in mouse islets, tirzepatide stimulates insulin secretion predominantly through the GLP-1R, owing to reduced potency at the mouse GIPR. However, in human islets, antagonizing GIPR activity consistently decreases the insulin response to tirzepatide. Moreover, tirzepatide enhances glucagon secretion and somatostatin secretion in human islets. These data demonstrate that tirzepatide stimulates islet hormone secretion from human islets through both incretin receptors.
The prevalence of obesity is rising, creating an urgent need for efficacious therapies. Recent clinical trials show that tirzepatide, a dual agonist of receptors for the incretin hormones glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), yields more weight loss than selective GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonists. Incretin receptors in the central nervous system (CNS) may contribute to these effects. Yet exactly how each receptor regulates body weight from within the CNS is not clearly understood. It remains especially unclear how GIP receptor (GIPR) signalling contributes to the effects of tirzepatide because both stimulation and inhibition of CNS GIPRs yield weight loss in preclinical models. We summarise current knowledge on CNS incretin receptor pharmacology to provide insight into the potential mechanisms of action of dual GIPR/GLP-1R agonists, with tirzepatide as the exemplar. In addition, we discuss recent developments in incretin-based dual- and tri-agonism for inducing weight loss in obese individuals.
Tirzepatide, a glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide/glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GIPR/GLP-1R) agonist, has, in clinical trials, demonstrated greater reductions in glucose, body weight, and triglyceride levels compared with selective GLP-1R agonists in people with type 2 diabetes (T2D). However, cellular mechanisms by which GIPR agonism may contribute to these improved efficacy outcomes have not been fully defined. Using human adipocyte and mouse models, we investigated how long-acting GIPR agonists regulate fasted and fed adipocyte functions. In functional assays, GIPR agonism enhanced insulin signaling, augmented glucose uptake, and increased the conversion of glucose to glycerol in a cooperative manner with insulin; however, in the absence of insulin, GIPR agonists increased lipolysis. In diet-induced obese mice treated with a long-acting GIPR agonist, circulating triglyceride levels were reduced during oral lipid challenge, and lipoprotein-derived fatty acid uptake into adipose tissue was increased. Our findings support a model for long-acting GIPR agonists to modulate both fasted and fed adipose tissue function differentially by cooperating with insulin to augment glucose and lipid clearance in the fed state while enhancing lipid release when insulin levels are reduced in the fasted state.
SignificanceTirzepatide is a dual agonist of the glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptor (GIPR) and the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1R), which are incretin receptors that regulate carbohydrate metabolism. This investigational agent has proven superior to selective GLP-1R agonists in clinical trials in subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Intriguingly, although tirzepatide closely resembles native GIP in how it activates the GIPR, it differs markedly from GLP-1 in its activation of the GLP-1R, resulting in less agonist-induced receptor desensitization. We report how cryogenic electron microscopy and molecular dynamics simulations inform the structural basis for the unique pharmacology of tirzepatide. These studies reveal the extent to which fatty acid modification, combined with amino acid sequence, determines the mode of action of a multireceptor agonist.
OBJECTIVES: Tirzepatide, a dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist, delivered superior glycemic control and weight loss compared to selective GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonism in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D). These results have fueled mechanistic studies focused on understanding how tirzepatide achieves its therapeutic efficacy. Recently, we found that treatment with tirzepatide improves insulin sensitivity in humans with T2D and obese mice in concert with a reduction in circulating levels of branched-chain amino (BCAAs) and keto (BCKAs) acids, metabolites associated with development of systemic insulin resistance (IR) and T2D. Importantly, these systemic effects were found to be coupled to increased expression of BCAA catabolic genes in thermogenic brown adipose tissue (BAT) in mice. These findings led us to hypothesize that tirzepatide may lower circulating BCAAs/BCKAs by promoting their catabolism in BAT. METHODS: To address this question, we utilized a murine model of diet-induced obesity and employed stable-isotope tracer studies in combination with metabolomic analyses in BAT and other tissues. RESULTS: Treatment with tirzepatide stimulated catabolism of BCAAs/BCKAs in BAT, as demonstrated by increased labeling of BCKA-derived metabolites, and increases in levels of byproducts of BCAA breakdown, including glutamate, alanine, and 3-hydroxyisobutyric acid (3-HIB). Further, chronic administration of tirzepatide increased levels of multiple amino acids in BAT that have previously been shown to be elevated in response to cold exposure. Finally, chronic treatment with tirzepatide led to a substantial increase in several TCA cycle intermediates (alpha-ketoglutarate, fumarate, and malate) in BAT. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that tirzepatide induces a thermogenic-like amino acid profile in BAT, an effect that may account for reduced systemic levels of BCAAs in obese IR mice.
