Guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit alpha-14; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as modulators or transducers in various transmembrane signaling systems.
Extra-axial cavernous hemangiomas (ECHs) are complex vascular lesions mainly found in the spine and cavernous sinus. Their removal poses significant risk due to their vascularity and diffuse nature, and their genetic underpinnings remain incompletely understood. Our approach involved genetic analyses on 31 tissue samples of ECHs employing whole-exome sequencing and targeted deep sequencing. We explored downstream signaling pathways, gene expression changes, and resultant phenotypic shifts induced by these mutations, both in vitro and in vivo. In our cohort, 77.4% of samples had somatic missense variants in GNA14, GNAQ, or GJA4. Transcriptomic analysis highlighted significant pathway upregulation, with the GNAQ c.626A>G (p.Gln209Arg) mutation elevating PI3K-AKT-mTOR and angiogenesis-related pathways, while GNA14 c.614A>T (p.Gln205Leu) mutation led to MAPK and angiogenesis-related pathway upregulation. Using a mouse xenograft model, we observed enlarged vessels from these mutations. Additionally, we initiated rapamycin treatment in a 14-year-old individual harboring the GNAQ c.626A>G (p.Gln209Arg) variant, resulting in gradual regression of cutaneous cavernous hemangiomas and improved motor strength, with minimal side effects. Understanding these mutations and their pathways provides a foundation for developing therapies for ECHs resistant to current therapies. Indeed, the administration of rapamycin in an individual within this study highlights the promise of targeted treatments in treating these complex lesions.
The objective of this study is to form a cancer stem cell index-based model to stratify HCC risk and predict survival. After screening the Tumor Genome Atlas (TCGA) of liver and normal liver tissue samples, we obtained differentially expressed genes (DEGs). We employed a weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) and differentially expressed genes were studied in HCC to find the modules most associated with cancer stem cells (mRNAsi). At the same time, gene ontology and Kyoto Genome Encyclopedia (KEGG) were used for functional annotation and combined with LASSO, univariate, and multivariate COX regression analyses, a prediction model of key module genes of cancer stem cells was developed. The model's clinical efficacy was measured using the C index, calibration curve, multiindex ROC curve, and clinical decision curve. WGCNA found that black modules were most correlated with tumour stem cell index. Seven genes (CSDC2, GNA14, LGI2, MMRN1, PDE2A, SELP, and STK32B) were filtered by univariate, LASSO, and multivariate Cox regression analyses to establish the primary HCC model. The survival analysis and ROC curve in the TCGA training and validation cohort showed good performance. The independent prognostic factor of primary HCC was risk score, according to univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses. It is found that the stem cell index model of 7 genes could predict factors independently, indicating that signatures of the stem cell will play a significant role in liver cancer survival prediction and risk stratification.
G-proteins mediate cellular function upon interaction with G-protein coupled receptors. Of the 16 mammalian G-protein alpha subunits identified, G-protein subunit alpha-11 (GNA11) and -14 (GNA14) have been implicated in modulating hypertension and endothelial function. However, little is known about their expression and roles in human placentas. Here, we examined GNA11 and GNA14 protein expression in first trimester (FT), normal term (NT), and severe preeclamptic (sPE) human placentas as well as in NT human umbilical cords. We found that GNA11 and GNA14 were immunolocalized primarily in trophoblasts, villous stromal cells, and endothelial cells in placentas as well as in endothelial and/or smooth muscle cells of the umbilical cord artery and vein. Western blotting revealed that the GNA14, but not GNA11, protein levels were increased (2.5-2.9 fold; p<0.01) in sPE vs. NT placentas. GNA11 protein was detected only in NT, but not FT, placentas, whereas GNA14 protein levels were increased (7.7-10.6 fold; p<0.01) in NT vs. FT placentas. Thus, GNA11 and GNA14 may mediate the function of several cell types in placentas. Moreover, the high expression of GNA14 in sPE placentas may also imply its importance in sPE pregnancies as in the other hypertension-related disorders.
Anastomosing hemangioma (AH) is a distinct benign vascular tumor that may be histologically confused with an angiosarcoma. Recently, recurrent GNAQ and GNA14 mutations were identified in AH. GNA11, another paralogue of GNAQ and the one that shows the highest degree of homology to GNAQ, has not yet been found to be mutated in AH. In this study, we investigated the clinicopathological and molecular features of 26 AHs. By Sanger sequencing and MassARRAY analysis, mutually exclusive mutations in exon 5 of GNAQ, GNA11, and GNA14 were identified in 10, 5, and 5 tumors, respectively, of the 22 investigated tumors, with an overall mutation rate of 91%. No notable differences in the clinicopathological features were observed between GNAQ-, GNA11-, or GNA14-mutated tumors. Our results implicated GNA11 mutations, as well as previously known mutations of its paralogues GNAQ and GNA14, as essential drivers in the pathogenesis of AH.
Galpha(12) and Galpha(13) are ubiquitous members of the heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein) family that play central and integrative roles in the regulation of signal transduction cascades within various cell types in the kidney. Galpha(12)/Galpha(13) proteins enable the kidney to adapt to an ever-changing environment by transducing stimuli from cell surface receptors and accessory proteins to effector systems. Therefore, perturbations in Galpha(12)/Galpha(13) levels or their activity can contribute to the pathogenesis of various renal diseases, including renal cancer. This review will highlight and discuss the complex and expanding roles of Galpha(12)/Galpha(13) proteins on distinct renal pathologies, with emphasis on more recently reported findings. Deciphering how the different Galpha(12)/Galpha(13) interaction networks participate in the onset and development of renal diseases may lead to the discovery of new therapeutic strategies.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most lethal cancers worldwide, and its specific mechanism has not been fully elucidated. Inactivation of tumor suppressors may contribute to the occurrence, progression, and recurrence of HCC. DNA methylation is a crucial mechanism involved in regulating the occurrence of HCC. Herein, we aimed to identify the key methylation-related tumor suppressors as well as potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets in HCC. Methods: Combined analysis of TCGA and GEO databases was performed to obtain potential methylation-related tumor suppressors in HCC. Methyl-target sequencing was performed to analyze the methylation level of the GNA14 promoter. The diagnostic value of GNA14 as a predictor of HCC was evaluated in HCC tumor samples and compared with normal tissues. The functional role of GNA14 and its upstream and downstream regulatory factors were investigated by gain-of-function and loss-of-function assays in vitro. Subcutaneous tumorigenesis, lung colonization, and orthotopic liver tumor model were performed to analyze the role of GNA14 in vivo.Results: The expression of GNA14 was found to be downregulated in HCC and it was negatively correlated with hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, vascular invasion, and prognosis of HCC. DNA methylation was demonstrated to be responsible for the altered expression of GNA14 and was regulated by HBV-encoded X protein (HBx). GNA14 regulated the RB pathway by promoting Notch1 cleavage to inhibit tumor proliferation, and might inhibit tumor metastasis by inhibiting the expression of JMJD6. Conclusion: GNA14 could be regulated by HBx by modulating the methylation status of its promoter. We identified GNA14 as a potential biomarker and therapeutic target for HCC.
BACKGROUND: Endometrial cancer (UCEC) is one of the most common gynecological malignancies. We previously found that overexpression of G protein alpha subunit 14 (GNA14) promoted UCEC growth. Kruppel-like factor 7 (KLF7) acts as an oncogene in various cancer types, whereas the connection between GNA14 and KLF7 in UCEC is unclear. We herein explored the involvement of GNA14/KLF7 in UCEC development. METHODS: Clinical relevance of GNA14, KLF7 and HAS2 in UCEC was analyzed from TCGA and by immunohistochemical staining. Knockdown and overexpression of indicated genes were conducted by transfecting the cells with siRNAs and lentivirus, respectively. mRNA and protein expression was detected by qRT-PCR and Western blot. CCK8, colony formation, cell cycle, apoptosis, transwell and wound healing were performed to check cell biology function in vitro. Tumor growth in nude mice was conducted to check in vivo function. RNA sequencing was used to determine dys-regulated genes. RESULTS: We demonstrated that GNA14 stimulated the expression of KLF7 in UCEC cells. There was a positive correlation between GNA14 and KLF7 in normal and UCEC tissues. In vitro, KLF7 promoted cell proliferation, colony formation, cell cycle progression, and migration of UCEC cells. Apoptosis was inhibited by KLF7. Xenografted tumorigenesis of UCEC cells was suppressed by KLF7 knockdown. Furthermore, RNA sequencing results showed that KLF7 regulated the expression of a large amount of genes, among which hyaluronan synthase 2 (HAS2) was downregulated in KLF7 knockdown cells. Based on TCGA database and immunoblotting assays, KLF7 positively regulated HAS2 in UCEC cells and tissues. Lastly, knockdown of HAS2 reversed the oncogenic role of KLF7 on UCEC cell proliferation, migration, and xenografted tumor development. CONCLUSION: Taken together, we reveal that GNA14/KLF7/HAS2 signaling cascade exerts tumor promoting function during UCEC development.
While detecting genetic variations underlying brain structures helps reveal mechanisms of neural disorders, high data dimensionality poses a major challenge for imaging genomic association studies. In this work, we present the application of a recently proposed approach, parallel independent component analysis with reference (pICA-R), to investigate genomic factors potentially regulating gray matter variation in a healthy population. This approach simultaneously assesses many variables for an aggregate effect and helps to elicit particular features in the data. We applied pICA-R to analyze gray matter density (GMD) images (274,131 voxels) in conjunction with single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data (666,019 markers) collected from 1,256 healthy individuals of the Brain Imaging Genetics (BIG) study. Guided by a genetic reference derived from the gene GNA14, pICA-R identified a significant SNP-GMD association (r=-0.16, P=2.34x10(-8)), implying that subjects with specific genotypes have lower localized GMD. The identified components were then projected to an independent dataset from the Mind Clinical Imaging Consortium (MCIC) including 89 healthy individuals, and the obtained loadings again yielded a significant SNP-GMD association (r=-0.25, P=0.02). The imaging component reflected GMD variations in frontal, precuneus, and cingulate regions. The SNP component was enriched in genes with neuronal functions, including synaptic plasticity, axon guidance, molecular signal transduction via PKA and CREB, highlighting the GRM1, PRKCH, GNA12, and CAMK2B genes. Collectively, our findings suggest that GNA12 and GNA14 play a key role in the genetic architecture underlying normal GMD variation in frontal and parietal regions.
During pregnancy, a tremendous increase in fetoplacental angiogenesis is associated with elevated blood flow. Aberrant fetoplacental vascular function may lead to pregnancy complications including pre-eclampsia. Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) are crucial regulators of fetoplacental endothelial function. G protein alpha subunit 14 (GNA14), a member of Galphaq/11 subfamily is involved in mediating hypertensive diseases and tumor vascularization. However, little is known about roles of GNA14 in mediating the FGF2- and VEGFA-induced fetoplacental endothelial function. Using human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) cultured under physiological chronic low oxygen (3% O(2) ) as a cell model, we show that transfecting cells with adenovirus carrying GNA14 complementary DNA (cDNA; Ad-GNA14) increases (p < 0.05) protein expression of GNA14. GNA14 overexpression blocks (p < 0.05) FGF2-stimulated endothelial migration, whereas it enhances (p < 0.05) endothelial monolayer integrity (maximum increase of ~35% over the control at 24 hr) in response to FGF2. In contrast, GNA14 overexpression does not significantly alter VEGFA-stimulated cell migration, VEGFA-weakened cell monolayer integrity, and intracellular Ca(++) mobilization in response to adenosine triphosphate (ATP), FGF2, and VEGFA. GNA14 overexpression does not alter either FGF2- or VEGFA-induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2. However, GNA14 overexpression time-dependently elevates (p < 0.05) phosphorylation of phospholipase C-beta3 (PLCbeta3) at S1105 in response to FGF2, but not VEGFA. These data suggest that GNA14 distinctively mediates fetoplacental endothelial cell migration and permeability in response to FGF2 and VEGFA, possibly in part by altering activation of PLCbeta3 under physiological chronic low oxygen.
Galphaq subfamily proteins play critical roles in many biological functions including cardiovascular development, angiogenesis, and tumorigenesis of melanoma. However, the understanding of G Protein Subunit Alpha 14 (GNA14) in diseases, especially in cancers is limited. Here, we revealed that GNA14 was significantly low expression in Human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) samples. Low GNA14 expression was correlated with aggressive clinicopathological features. Moreover, the overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) of high GNA14 expression HCC patients were much better than low GNA14 expression group. Lentivirus-mediated GNA14 knockdown significantly promoted the growth of liver cancer in vitro and in vivo. However, opposing results were observed when GNA14 is upregulated. Mechanistically, We identified receptor for activated C kinase 1 (RACK1) as a binding partner of GNA14 by co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry (MS). Glutathione-S-transferase (GST) pull-down assay further verified the direct interaction between GNA14 and RACK1. RNA-Seq and loss- and gain-of-function assays also confirmed that GNA14 reduced the activity of both MAPK/JNK and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways through RACK1. GNA14 synergized with U73122 (PLC inhibitor) to enhance this effect. Further studies suggested that GNA14 potentially competed with protein kinase C (PKC) to bind with RACK1, consequently reducing the stability of PKC. Moreover, we also showed that GNA14'supression of p-AKT protein level depended on sufficient RACK1 expression. In conclusion, we indicated a different role of GNA14, which acted as a suppressor inhibiting liver cancer progression through MAPK/JNK and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways. Due to this, GNA14 served as a potentially valuable prognostic biomarker for liver cancer.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a challenging disease to evaluate in terms of prognosis, requiring close attention to the prognosis of HCC patients. Exosomes have been shown to play an important role in HCC development and have significant potential in managing HCC patient prognosis, as they are detectable in patients' blood. By using small extracellular vesicular RNA, liquid biopsies can reflect the underlying physiological and pathological status of the originating cells, providing a valuable assessment of human health. No study has explored the diagnostic value of mRNA expression changes in exosomes for liver cancer. The present study investigated establishing a risk prognosis model based on mRNA expression levels in exosomes from blood samples of liver cancer patients and evaluated its diagnostic and prognostic value, providing new targets for liver cancer detection. We obtained mRNA data from HCC patients and normal controls from the TCGA and exoRBase 2.0 databases and established a risk prognostic assessment model using exosomes-related risk genes selected through prognostic analysis and Lasso Cox analysis. The patients were divided into high-risk and low-risk groups based on median risk score values to validate the independence and evaluability of the risk score. The clinical value of the model was further analyzed using a nomograph model, and the efficacy of immunotherapy and cell-origin types of prognostic risk genes were further assessed in the high- and low-risk groups by immune checkpoint and single-cell sequencing. A total of 44 genes were found to be significantly associated with the prognosis of HCC patients. From this group, we selected six genes (CLEC3B, CYP2C9, GNA14, NQO1, NT5DC2, and S100A9) as exosomal risk genes and used them as a basis for the risk prognosis model. The clinical information of HCC patients from the TCGA and ICGC databases demonstrated that the risk prognostic score of the model established in this study was an independent prognostic factor with good robustness. When pathological stage and risk prognostic score were incorporated into the model to predict clinical outcomes, the nomograph model had the best clinical benefit. Furthermore, immune checkpoint assays and single-cell sequencing analysis suggested that exosomal risk genes were derived from different cell types and that immunotherapy in the high-risk groups could be beneficial. Our study demonstrated that the prognostic scoring model based on exosomal mRNA was highly effective. The six genes selected using the scoring model have been previously reported to be associated with the occurrence and development of liver cancer. However, this study is the first to confirm that these related genes existed in the blood exosomes, which could be used for liquid biopsy of patients with liver cancer, thereby avoiding the need for puncture diagnosis. This approach has a high value in clinical application. Through single-cell sequencing, we found that the six genes in the risk model originate from multiple cell types. This finding suggests that the exosomal characteristic molecules secreted by different types of cells in the microenvironment of liver cancer may serve as diagnostic markers.
Cherry hemangioma is the most common hemangioma in adult life. Neoplastic and non-neoplastic theories had both been proposed for its pathogenesis, but its nature is still poorly understood. We noted a significant subset of anastomosing hemangiomas and congenital hemangiomas harbored a population of small capillaries surrounded by a perivascular hyaline layer, reminiscent of the vessels seen in cherry hemangioma. Both anastomosing hemangioma and congenital hemangioma harbor recurrent mutations in exon 5 of GNAQ and its paralogues. In this study, we analyzed 68 cherry hemangiomas and 17 cherry hemangioma-like hemangiomas exhibiting additional non-classical features including markedly dilated, cavernous vessels, and/or a deep component extending to the deep dermis. By Sanger sequencing, GNAQ, GNA11, and GNA14 exon 5 mutations were identified in 12, 4, and 32 cherry hemangiomas, respectively, and 5, 3, and 3 cherry hemangioma-like hemangiomas, respectively. MassARRAY analysis detected mutations (including exon 2 GNAQ(G48V) mutations) in additional 8 cherry hemangiomas and 3 cherry hemangioma-like hemangiomas. Overall, the cherry hemangiomas and cherry hemangioma-like hemangiomas had equal GNA mutation rates (82%), and GNA14 and GNAQ mutations were present in approximately half of cherry hemangiomas and cherry hemangioma-like hemangiomas, respectively. All mutations were mutually exclusive. KRAS(G12V) mutation was also detected in one cherry hemangioma-like hemangioma without GNA mutations. In summary, our study demonstrated recurrent GNA14/GNAQ/GNA11 mutations were present in the majority of this very common hemangioma and established its neoplastic nature. Our results also expanded the morphological spectrum of GNA-mutated hemangiomas to include tumors composed of cavernous-like vessels and indicated GNA14 was the most commonly mutated gene in vascular tumors.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), a progressive and devastating disease, is characterized by abnormal proliferation of pulmonary artery endothelial and smooth muscle cells. GTP-binding protein subunits, GNA11 and GNA14, transmembrane and intracellular signaling molecules, participate in the regulating endothelial function and vascular development. We followed the expression of GNA11 and GNA14 in human lungs in control and PAH patients using immunohistochemical and Western blot analyses. Both GNA11 and GNA14 were expressed in lung tissue, primarily in artery endothelial and smooth muscle cells. Expression was more pronounced in PAH lung tissues compared with controls. Using immunocytochemistry and laser scanning confocal microscopy, the subcellular distribution of GNA11 and GNA14 in human pulmonary arterial endothelial (HPAECs) and smooth muscle (HPASMCs) cells in culture was investigated. GNA11 was predominantly localized in the cytoplasm and nucleus of HPASMCs, but it was only found in the cytoplasm of HPAECs. On the other hand, GNA14 immunolocalized to the nucleus and cytoplasm of both HPAECs and HPASMCs. Based on bioinformatic analyses, nuclear localization signal and transmembrane topology confirm the different subcellular distributions of GNA11 and GNA14. The data suggest that GNA11 and GNA14 are related to PAH pathogenesis, and help further functional studies of these proteins in this severe disease.
Aims: To further understand, detect and treat hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), it is urgent to conduct more in-depth research on the mechanism of sex-associated differences. Materials & methods: We established a ceRNA triple regulatory axis associated with ESR1 in HCC and performed expression, survival and nuclear-cytoplasmic localization analyses. In addition to this, we performed methylation analysis and immune infiltration analysis of the ceRNA axis. Results: We constructed the LINC01018/hsa-miR-197-3p/GNA14 (lncRNA/miRNA/mRNA) ceRNA axis to further explain the mechanism of sex-related prognosis in the development of HCC and to provide new insights into candidate biomarkers for targeted therapies. Conclusion: Our study is an innovative attempt at demonstrating the mechanism underlying the prognosis associated with sex differences in HCC by constructing a ceRNA axis (LINC01018/hsa-miR-197-3p/GNA14).
The Gq class is one subfamily of the G protein alpha subunits multigene family. It comprises four genes: Gnaq, Gna11, Gna14, and Gna15. In mice and humans, the alpha subunit is an essential component of G protein interaction with receptors and effectors. We report here the cloning and characterization of porcine Gnaq, Gna11, and Gna14. We have cloned the full-length coding sequences of porcine Gnaq, Gna11, and Gna14 (1,080, 1,080, and 1,068 bp, respectively) and then mapped them chromosomally to regions 1q21-27, 2q21-24, and 1q21-27 by radiation hybrid mapping. Tissue distribution analysis indicated that Gnaq and Gna11 were coexpressed in liver, heart, muscle, spleen, adipose tissue, brain, and uterus, but Gna14 mRNA was detected only in kidney and lung. The phylogenetic trees reveal that porcine Gnaq, Gna11, and Gna14 are evolutionarily closer to their human homologs. This is the first report of molecular cloning and characterization of porcine Gnaq, Gna11, and Gna14, which will be helpful for further understanding of the physiological role of Gq class genes in pigs.
Mutations in VPS13A cause chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc), an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder. VPS13A is located in a tail-to-tail arrangement with GNA14 on chromosome 9q21. ChAc shows substantial allelic heterogeneity, with no single VPS13A mutation causing the majority of cases. We examined 11 patients in four French Canadian ChAc pedigrees for mutations in VPS13A. Affected members of three families were homozygous for a 37-kb deletion of the four terminal exons of VPS13A (EX70_EX73del). This deletion also encompasses the two terminal exons of GNA14. Two affected females in family 4 were homozygous for the splicing mutation 4242+1G>T. Remarkably, the affected males in this highly consanguineous pedigree were compound heterozygotes for EX70_EX73del and 4242+1G>T. PCR analysis of the deletion breakpoint junction revealed that an additional patient with French Canadian ancestry was heterozygous for the EX70_EX73del allele. The identification of a common 9q21 haplotype associated with EX70_EX73del in at least four apparently unrelated ChAc families implies that ChAc shows a founder effect in French Canadians, and that routine testing for EX70_EX73del in suspected ChAc cases may therefore be worthwhile in this population. The deletion breakpoint PCR described here will enable rapid identification of both homozygous and heterozygous carriers of EX70_EX73del.
BACKGROUND: Capillary malformation is a cutaneous vascular anomaly that is present at birth, darkens over time, and can cause overgrowth of tissues beneath the stain. The lesion is caused by a somatic activating mutation in GNAQ. In a previous study, we were unable to identify a GNAQ mutation in patients with a capillary malformation involving an overgrown lower extremity. We hypothesized that mutations in GNA11 or GNA14, genes closely related to GNAQ, also may cause capillary malformations. METHODS: Human capillary malformation tissue obtained from 8 patients that had tested negative for GNAQ mutations were studied. Lesions involved an extremity (n = 7) or trunk (n = 1). Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) was used to detect GNA11 or GNA14 mutant cells (p.Arg183) in the specimens. Single molecule molecular inversion probe sequencing (smMIP-seq) was performed to search for other mutations in GNA11. Mutations were validated by subcloning and sequencing amplimers. RESULTS: We found a somatic GNA11 missense mutation (c.547C > T; p.Arg183Cys) in 3 patients with a diffuse capillary malformation of an extremity. Mutant allelic frequencies ranged from 0.3 to 5.0%. GNA11 or GNA14 mutations were not found in 5 affected tissues or in unaffected tissues (white blood cell DNA). CONCULSIONS: GNA11 mutations are associated with extremity capillary malformations causing overgrowth. Pharmacotherapy that affects GNA11 signaling may prevent the progression of capillary malformations.
Hepatic small vessel neoplasm (HSVN) is a recently described infiltrative vascular neoplasm of the liver, composed of small vessels. Although the infiltrative nature can mimic angiosarcoma, HSVN are thought to be benign or low-grade neoplasms because they lack cytologic atypia and increased proliferation. To characterize the molecular pathogenesis of HSVN, we performed both targeted panel sequencing and exome sequencing on 18 benign or low-grade vascular neoplasms in the liver including 8 HSVN, 6 classic cavernous hemangioma (CH), and 4 variant lesions (VL) with overlapping features between HSVN and CH. All 18 lesions had simple genomes without copy number alterations. In total, 75% (6/8) of HSVN demonstrated known activating hotspot mutations in GNAQ (2/8, p.Q209H) or GNA14 (4/8, p.Q205L), and the remaining 2 had the same missense mutation in GNAQ, p.G48L, which has not been previously described. 25% (1/4) of VL had a hotspot GNAQ p.Q209H mutation and another VL had a GNAQ p.G48L mutation. Known pathogenic mutations were not identified in any of the 6 CH. These data suggest that HSVN share a similar molecular biology to several other vascular lesions (congenital hemangioma, tufted angioma, anastomosing hemangioma, lobular capillary hemangioma, and kaposiform hemangioendothelioma) recently reported to have GNAQ, GNA11, or GNA14 mutations.
Vascular tumors are among the most common neoplasms in infants and children; 5%-10% of newborns present with or develop lesions within the first 3 months of life. Most are benign infantile hemangiomas that typically regress by 5 years of age; other vascular tumors include congenital tufted angiomas (TAs), kaposiform hemangioendotheliomas (KHEs), and childhood lobular capillary hemangiomas (LCHs). Some of these lesions can become locally invasive and unresponsive to pharmacologic intervention, leading to significant complications. Recent investigation has revealed that activating mutations in HRAS, KRAS, NRAS, GNAQ, and GNA11 can cause certain types of rare childhood vascular tumors, and we have now identified causal recurrent somatic activating mutations in GNA14 by whole-exome and targeted sequencing. We found somatic activating GNA14 c.614A>T (p.Gln205Leu) mutations in one KHE, one TA, and one LCH and a GNA11 c.547C>T (p.Arg183Cys) mutation in two LCH lesions. We examined mutation pathobiology via expression of mutant GNA14 or GNA11 in primary human endothelial cells and melanocytes. GNA14 and GNA11 mutations induced changes in cellular morphology and rendered cells growth-factor independent by upregulating the MAPK pathway. Our findings identify GNA14 mutations as a cause of childhood vascular tumors, offer insight into mechanisms of oncogenic transformation by mutations affecting Gaq family members, and identify potential targets for therapeutic intervention.
The molecular mechanisms of the mammalian gustatory system have been examined in many studies using rodents as model organisms. In this study, we examined the mRNA expression of molecules involved in taste signal transduction in the fungiform papillae (FuP) and circumvallate papillae (CvP) of the rhesus macaque, Macaca mulatta, using in situ hybridization. TAS1R1, TAS1R2, TAS2Rs, and PKD1L3 were exclusively expressed in different subsets of taste receptor cells (TRCs) in the FuP and CvP. This finding suggests that TRCs sensing different basic taste modalities are mutually segregated in macaque taste buds. Individual TAS2Rs exhibited a variety of expression patterns in terms of the apparent level of expression and the number of TRCs expressing these genes, as in the case of human TAS2Rs. GNAT3, but not GNA14, was expressed in TRCs of FuP, whereas GNA14 was expressed in a small population of TRCs of CvP, which were distinct from GNAT3- or TAS1R2-positive TRCs. These results demonstrate similarities and differences between primates and rodents in the expression profiles of genes involved in taste signal transduction.
